CHRIST'S prayer expounded, A Christian Directed, and a Communicant prepared.

The first teaching to pray,

The second (...) live,

The th(...)e the Sacrament of C^

To which is added, a Preface of Prayer, a pithie prayer for Christian families.

A thanks giving for our deliverance from treason by Gunpowder, and learned
Latin verses of that argument.

By Robert Hill, Preacher at Saint Martins in the fields

AT LONDON Printed for William Cotton, and are to be (...) at his shop near
Ludgate 1606

To mine Honorable, Worshipful, and Christian Auditors, at S. Martins in the
Fields. Grace and peace.
To my Honorable good Lord the Bishop of Duresme.
CHristian Auditors. There are 3. things in regard of God, which every good
person must be acquainted withal; the first is how he must talk with God; The
second how he must live before God; The third how he must come to God, when the
seal of his salvation is offered in the sacrament. Of all these three I am
bold at this time to present unto you this little Manuell.

Lycurgus, a law giver amongst the Lacedaemonians, made this one law for
sacrificing to the gods, that they should not be ^sented with many things and
those(...) or no great value. If things are to be esteemed rather by weight,
then worth, I have observed this law in this present gift. I offer unto you
but three things; the first number of which all can be spoken. And I present
unto you but small things; for what can be contained in twelve sheets of
paper? yet if it please you to give these few sheets the reading, you shall
know better how to pray, learn better how to live, and understand better how
to come to Gods table, so long as you shall either pray, live, or receive. And
because I have, concerning the first, preached to you of late many Sermons, I
am willing at this time, The dignity of prayer.
in way of preface, to commend unto you the dignity of Prayer.

By it we confer and talk with God, and by it we procure much good unto
man: By it we do pierce the very clouds, and by it we have whatsoever is meet.
Do we want any thing that is good for us or others? Prayer is the messenger
whom we must send toward God. Have we received any special favor from
hi(...)aier is our Ambassador to give him thanks.

Are we in the morning to begin our work? Clauit diei.
this is the Key to open the day. Are we at evening to shut our selves in?
this is the Claustrum noctis.
lock to seal up the night. If we would bind the Almighty Vinculum in
Deum. Bernard. Ie^ilo^ C^.
to do us none hurt, here is the band by which he is tied Deo sacrificiu
diabolo flagellum oranti succor diu. August. The praise of prayer.
. And if we would untie him to do us good, here is the porter of the gates of
heaven. It is our Aedypus to dissolve our doubts, It is our commentary to
understand Gods word Commentarium scripturae Origin.
. It is a sacrifice to God, a scourge to the devil, and an help to our selves
in all our troubles. Wherefore as the Apostle by examples commended faith, so
may I by examples commend prayer.

By it Abraham's servant obtained a wife for Izaak and by it Moses obtained a
pardon for Israel. By this, the same Moses overcame the Amalekites, and by
this Abraham interceded for the Sodomites. By prayer Jacob was delivered from
Esau; Iosuah from the men of Aie; David from Goliath; The Prophet from Jeroboam;
Elizeus from the Samaritans; Hezechiah from death; Iehosaphat from the
Aramites; Manasses from captivity; Jeremiah from his adversaries; and

Daniel from the Lions, the diseased from his leprosy, the Apostles from
prison, and the Church from persecution. By prayer Hannah obtained a son,
David deliverance, Solomon wisdom, Elias the restoring of a dead child,
Elizaeus the opening of his servants eyes, Nehemiah the kings favor, the
Centurion his servants health, Christ comfort in his agony, the Apostles a
successor to Judas, Stephen pardon for Paul, and Monima the conversion of her
son S. Austin.

Thus true it is which Austin says, Great is the profit of pure prayer, and as
a faithful messenger, delivers her arrand, and pierces thither whether flesh
cannot come. And this it was which made Barnard to say, Brethren let none of us
lightly esteem his prayer, I tell you, that he to whom we pray does not
lightly esteem it: after it is out of our mouth, he writes it in his book:
and one of these two we may doubtless expect, either that he will grant our
petition, or that which he knows to be better for us.

Call upon me, and I will hear says God, ask, and you shall have says
Christ. Before they cry I will hear the^ says Isayah. The Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him, says David, but to such as call upon him in truth.
And if we may believe the Apostle James, the prayer of a righteous man
avails much.

Pray therefore, Why we ought to pray.
and we had need to pray. Satan will devour thee: pray for deliverance. The
world will a lure thee: pray for assistance. The flesh will betray thee: pray
for defense. The wicked will seduce thee: pray for continuance. What beloved?
if God had commanded us a great thing, ought we not to do it, how much more
when he says, Pray and prevail, ask and have, seek and find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you? ask temporal things and have them, seek for
spiritual things and find them, knock for eternal things, and the gates of
heaven shall stand as open to you, as the gates of the prison did to the
Apostle Peter.

By this, with Eliah, you may open and shut the very gates of heaven, and by
this with the Apostle you may shake the foundations of the earth. O precious
prayer, what could not only we, but eue^ the whole world do without thee. Thou
encreasest the earth, calmest the sea, asswagest the fire, purgest the air,
protectest our governors, confoundest our enemy, preseruest our health,
instructest our minds, blessest our actions, encreasest our wealth, exaltest
our honor, speak but the word and we are preserved.

Pray in all places.
Pray we therefore in all places, at all times, for all persons, and for all
things. Pray we in all places, but in every place lifting up pure hands unto
God. Thus, Izaak prayed in the field, Jacob in his bed, Israel in Egypt. Moses
on the Mount, Iosuah at Jericho, Elias in the chamber, Hezechiah on his couch,
Jeremy in the dungeon, Jonah in the Whales belly, Daniel in the Lions den,
Christ in the Garden, the Disciples in a ship, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul
at the Sea side, and the Jews at Jerusalem. Call upon him in thy private
chamber, and cry unto him with thy family in thy parlour. Thou need not to
fall down at some pillar with hypocrites, but praise him especially in the
congregation of Saints: for there many voices are Gods best melody.

Pray also at all times, at evening, Pray at all times.
and morning, and at noone day, will I pray unto thee, yea at midnight will I
rise to call upon thee, nay seven times a day will I praise thee says David.
Daniel did so three times a day, Paul did it day and night, Hannah did it all
the days of her life, and the Psalmographer vows it, I will praise the Lord
as long as I live, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises to my God.
Euchyta.
Pray continually, not as those heretics, who would ever do so, but as
Christians who know when to do so.

With morning prayer, the day begin:
With evening prayer the night shut in.
Without this prayer sit not to eat:
Without Gods praise rise not from me ate.
And forget not to pray for all persons, Pray for person.
for the King as the head, his Senators as the eyes, his Clergy as the mouth,
his Soldiers as the hands, his subjects, of all trades as the feet upon which
the commonwealth does stand. Art thou a Minister? pray for thy flock. An
Auditor? for thy preacher. A father? for thy child: an husband? for thy wife, a
master? for thy servant: or a governor? pray for thy famulie. Is any sick?
pray for his health: Poor? for his wealth: imprisoned? for his liberty:
seduced? for his recovery: confirmed? for his constancy: or in any distress?
for his delivery. Pray for all men, that their bodies may be preserved, souls
saved, estates maintained, that thy, and their thoughts may be sanctified,
your words seasoned, and your actions ordered by the spirit of God.

Will you know now to whom we must pray? To whom we must pray.
not to a Calfe as the Israelites did, nor to Baal as his Priests did, nor to
an image as idolatours did, nor to any Saints, as our fathers did; but as we
are bound to serve God alone, so are we bounden to pray to God alone; for he
alone, knows our wants, hea^th our petitions, has promised to help us is
able to do for us, and is the alone present helper in the needful time of
trouble.

I will draw to an end, How we must pray.
you have seen beloved the necessity of this service, let me show you a
little the qualities of this service. Pray we must in knowledge with
understanding, in faith by believing, in remorse with feeling in zeal without
cooling, in intention without wandering, in reverence without contemning, in
constancy without reuolting, and in love without revenging. Let our eyes be
fastened, hearts fixed, knees bowed, mouths opened, and our hands lifted up as
to the King of Kings. And as Jacob would not let the Angel go till he were
blessed so let not us let him go till we be heard. Let not the woman of Canaan
be more earnest with Christ militant, then we will be with the same Christ
triumpha^t. Let never Queen of Sheba so willingly come to Solomon, as we must
willingly come unto Christ: he loves most, willing and importunate suitors.
Wherefore as David said to Abner, never see my face, unless thou bring Michal
with thee, so say I unto you, never look God in the face unless you bring
prayer with you.

As I have declared to you the duty of prayer, so should I speak somewhat of
giving of thanks. Many can be content to pray in troubles, but few give
thanks for deliverance out of trouble. Multi petentes, pauci promitte^tes,
paucissimi reddentes, says an ancient father, there are many petitioners, few
promisers, most few thanks giuers. Are there not ten cleansed? where are the
nine? there is none returned to give thanks but this one, and he is a
Samaritan. If ever people under the cope of heaven had occasion to praise God,
we are they, especially for his word and gospel, and for many deliverances
showed to our Princes and people.

But because at the end of this treatise, I have set down a form both of
prayer and thanks giving, I refer you to the perusing of those two platformes.

I doubt not of your patience for the length of this preface, because I desire
to leave it as an ocular sermon instructing you continually how to call upon
God, and preparing you to the exposition of the Lords prayer, which of many
through ignorance is as much profaned, as ever God was by saying the
Paternoster in Latin, or repeating other rosaries in an unknown language.

Now having ended as you see these questions and answers, I make question with
my self to whom I may command them; and because for these three years
immediately past, I have lived, and preached amongst you, I am bold in general
to present them to you all. You have I confess known my conversation, bin
acquainted with my ministry, countenanced me in my calling maintained me in
health, comforted me in sickness, and afforded unto me much more kindness, then
can be requited by this paper present. And since it pleases God to dispose of
me still in such uncertain places, as that I could never yet say, here must I
rest: I bless God that ever I came unto you, whose love and larges has been
such unto me, as makes me to say of my late exile, Perijsse^ nisi perijssem, I
had been undone, if others had not sought to undo me.

And therefore though I cannot say to you, as Paul did to the Corinthians, I am
yours to live and die with you: yet this I will say, I am yours to live and
pray for you, that you may so know God, as you may pray to him, so pray to God
that you may live before him, so live, that you may ever be fit to receive his
sacrament, and so both fit to know, pray, live, and receive, that after you
have known him by Christ, prayed to him through Christ, lived before him in
Christ, and received his favor in the seals of Christ, you may in the end dye
in his faith, as you have lived in his fear, and at the last day in bodies and
souls be partakers of eternal glory. To the grace of this GOD I commend
you, to your grace I commend these treatises, doubting not but many of you will
be as ready to read them, as you have been willing to hear them. From your
Parish of S. Martin the fields. Ian. 1. 1606.

Your servant in the Lord, ROBERT HILL.

The Speakers.
Euchedidascalus a teacher of prayer. Phileuches a lover of prayer.
Euch. PHileuches amongst many Sermons which I have preached unto you, you
have heard me expound the Lords prayer; are you bound to give account of that
you have heard?


Phil. Sir doubtless I am, for the Apostle Peter teaches me that I must be
always ready to give an answer to every one that asks me a reason of the
hope that is in me with meekness and reverence. 1. Pet. 3.15



Euch. Repeat then the Lords prayer.


Phil. Our Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come:
thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever, amen.


Euch. Why is this prayer called the Lords prayer?


Phil. 1. Because Christ Jesus our Lord set down the same Math. 6.9.
.

2. Because we cannot pray unless Christ teach us Luke 11.1.
.


Euch. How many parts has this prayer?


Phil. Four. 1. a preface.

2. Petitions.

3. a reason.

4. a Seal.


Euch. Which is the Preface?


Phil. Our father which art in heaven.
Our Father which art in heaven, where God is described by two such properties,
as we must have in our minds when we pray unto him, as 1. That he is our
loving Father. Esa. 63.16


2. That he is our almighty God in heaven Verse. 15.
.


Euch. Do you here pray to the Father only?


Phil. No, but to the whole trinity, yet as the first person is the fountain
of the deity, we pray to the father, by the son, through the holy ghost.


Euch. What does this word Father teach you?


Phil. 1. That I must not call upon him as my Judge but my father Lu. 15.18
.

2. that in Christ I am his son Gal. 3.26
.

3. That he will deny me nothing convenient Mat. 7.7^
.

4. That I may boldly come unto him psalm. 50.1^
.

5. That none can pray unto him but his children. Verse. 16.
.

6. That I must ever behave my self as gods child Ephesians. 5.8.
.

7. That I must pray only to God Mat. 4.10
.

8. And lastly that I must come unto him by Christ. Ioh. 14.13.



Euch. Why do you say our Father and not my father?


Phil. To teach me, 1. that I must hold each member of the church as my
brethren. genesis 13.8.


2. That I must pray as well for others as my self Iam 5 16
.

3. that I must love almen as brethren. 1. Ioh. 4.21.


4. The dignity of each Christian having God to his father. 1. Sam. 18.2^.


5. Gods love to me in making me his child 1. Ioh. 3.1.
.


Euch. Why say you that God is in Heaven?


Phil. Because there he shows him self chiefly to the saints Eccle. 21.24
, and from thence he manifests himself to man. Psalm. 57.3.



Euch. Is not God every where?


Phil. Yes, for his essence is every where, prou. 5.21
and he fills both heaven and earth. Ephesians. 4.10.



Euch. How many heavens are there?


Phil. Three. 1. The air in which we breath Genesis 1.26
. 2. the sky in which are the stars Deu. 1.10
. 3. the heaven of heavens in which Christ, the Angels and Saints departed, are
1. kin. 8.27
.


Euch. What learn you by this that God is in heaven?


Phil. 1. That he is therefore able to grant my requests 1. kin. 8.30


2. That I may pray with confidence unto him psalm. 123.1
.

3. That in prayer my heart must be in heaven 1. king. 8.48. ps. 25.1.
.

4. That I must use all reverence in prayer Eccl. 5.1.2
.

5. That one day I shall come to heaven phil. 3.21.
.

6. That I must look for all graces from heaven Ier. 1.17.
.

7. That by pilgrimages I need not seek to God. psalm. 145.18.



Euch. How many petitions are there in the Lords prayer?


Phil. Six, whereof the first three concern God, the other concern our
selves: and of the last three, one only is for things corporal, the other two
are for things spiritual, 1. Pet. 1.3.


Euch. What learn you out of this order?

I learn 1. Gods great favor to me, who will admit me to ask for my self.

2. His great love, that he will hear me asking for others.

3. My duty that I must desire especially Gods glory.

4. That I must oftener crave things spiritual then corporal.


Euch. Which is the first petition? Hallowed be thy name.



Phil. Hallowed be thy name.


Euch. Why is this set in the first place?


Phil. 1 Because it is first in the intent of the god, who made all for his
own glory. pro. 15.3.


2. Because it is first in the intent of the godly, who do all so Gods glory.
Ioh. 15.8



Euch. What is the use of this order?


Phil. That whether we eat, or drink, or whatsoever we do else, we may do
al to the glory of GOD. 1. Cor. 10.31.


Euch. What mean you by these words, Hallowed be thy name?


Phil. By Gods name I understand his titles as God, Christ, Lord, and such
like, his properties as his Justice, Mercy, Providence and such like, his word,
as the Scriptures read and preached, his Sacraments, as Baptism and the Lords
supper, his Works, as Creation, Preservation and the like. And by Hallowing I
mean that god in all these may have due reverence done unto him of all the
people that belong unto him.


Euch. What wantes do you bewail in this petition?


Phil. First I bewail mine own and others pride of heart, that we labor more
for our own credit then Gods glory. Luke 18.11


2. Our hardness of heart that we cannot as we ought see Gods glory in his
creatures. Mar. 6.52


3. Our unthankfulness that we praise him not as we ought for his many
favors toward mankind above all other creatures. psa* 51.15


4. Our impiety that in our lives we dishonor god. psalm. 119.136.



Euch. What then do you pray for in this petition?


Phileuches. I pray that GOD by me and all men may be glorified, in the
reverend speaking of his name, holy meditation of his properties, diligent
hearing of his words, often receiving of the Sacrament, and daily admiting of
his works: And in a word that we may know in mind, acknowledge in heart,
love in truth, speak with Tongue, do in our actions both natural, civil,
and religious, all such things as God may be glorified by.


Euch. What do you pray against?


Phil. I pray against all ignorance, error, vanity of mind, infidelity,
profanenes, Atheism, worldlines, security and all blasphemous speeches, false
dealing, scoffing, idolatry, superstition, sorcery, sacrilege, simonye,
perjury, persecution, impenitencie, irreverent using of Gods word,
Sacraments or works: and in a word, against all such disorder in man's life,
as may any way obscure the Glory of God.


Euch. What do you here give God thanks for?


Phil. That it has pleased him to glorify his great name in all the former,
and has given me and many others grace of his mere mercy to glorify his
name, in that which before I prayed for.


Euch. Why do you use in this and other petitions this order: First to
bewail. Secondly to pray for. Thirdly to pray against, and lastly to give
thanks.


Phi. Because confession, petition, deprecatio^, and thanks giving, being the
special parts of prayer, 1 Timothy 2.1. I must understand them all to be in
every petition, of this absolute form of prayer.


Euch. Which is the second petition?


Phil. Thy kingdom come. Thy kingdom come.



Euch. Why does it next follow Hallowed be thy name. Math. 5.31.



Phil. 1. Because it is the first means by which Gods name is hallowed.

2. Because next to the hallowing of his name we ought cheifely to pray that
Gods Kingdom may come.


Euch. Why is it set before. Thy will be done?


Phil. Because no man can ever do Gods will in any thing, till such time as
Gods kingdom be erected in his heart.


Euch. How prove you this?


Phil. By these reasons.

1. Because no man can do Gods will that is not Gods subject: Ioh. 1.24.


2. No man can keep Gods law but by Gods grace. Psalm. 119.32.


3. Because without faith we cannot please God. Hebr. 11.6.


4. Because the end of the commandment is Love out of a pure heart, good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.5.



Euch. But may not a bad man do that which is good?


Phil. He may do that which is good in it self, but because he is out of
Christ, Ioh. 15.5
or being in Christ does it to a bad end, it shall not be good to him. 1.
Cor. 13 3.
So to give alms is a good thing, but if our persons be not justified before
God, and this action be not to the glory of God, it will never prove good to
us.


Euch. How many sorts of kingdoms are there?


Phil. 3. The kingdom of Satan, The kingdoms of men, and the kingdom of God.
Ephesians. 6.12



Euch. What is the kingdom of God?


Phil. It is that spiritual rule, which God through Christ does by grace
beeginne in us in this life, and by glory will accomplish in the life to come.
Dan. 2.37. g math. 25.37 6.31. Romans 14.17.



Euch. How many things may we observe in this kingdom?


Phil. Twelve.

1. That Christ is king.

2. The subjects are Christians.

3. The laws are the word.

4. The enemies are satan, sin, death, hell, damnation, the flesh, and the
wicked.

5. The rewards are the good things of this life, and eternal happiness in
the life to come.

6. The Chasticementes are afflictions.

7. The weapons are faith, hope, love, the word, and prayer.

8. The time of it, is to the worlds end.

9. The place is this world and the world to come.

10. The officers are preachers.

11. The vicegerents are governors.

12. It is exercised upon the conscience of man.


Euch. How is the kingdom of God said to come?


Phil. 1. When it is erected where it was not before:

2. When it is increased where it was.

3. When it is repaired from former decaies.

4. When it is perfected and fully accomplished.


Euch. What are the wants you do here bewail?


Phil. 1. I bewail mine own and others bondage unto sin; that the best of us
do but weakly yield to Christ scepter.

2. I bewail the want of the word and Sacraments, by which this kingdom is
erected in men's hearts.

3. I bewail that there be so many hinderers of this Kingdom, as namely, the
flesh to infect, the world to allure, the devil to seduce, Antichrist to
with-drawe, the Turk to withstand, and the wicked to trouble men, that should
be subjects of this Kingdom.


Euch. What do you pray for in this petition?


Phil. 1. For Godly Magistrates, that they may erect, establish, and repair
this Kingdom.

2. For Godly Ministers, that by life and Doctrine they may bring many
Subjects to this Kingdom.

3. That both Magistrates and Ministers may be preserved for the good of this
Kingdom.

4. That by politic Laws, and powerful Preaching, abuses may be reformed,
and they without, converted to live in this Kingdom, consisting in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.15.


5. That in mine and many others hearts, this Kingdom may be erected, that
we may grow in grace and in the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus.

6. That both by the hour of death, and by ye coming of Christ to Judgment,
this Kingdom in me all and Gods chosen may be accomplished.


Euch. What do you here pray against?


Phil. I pray against all things that do, or may hinder this kingdom, as,
want of governors, bloody Laws tolleration of Idolatry, idle and evil
Ministers, false and erroneous doctrine, infidelity, impenitencie, all
reigning sins both in me and others and lastly against all wicked both men
and angels or whatsoever may hinder the kingdom of Christ.


Euch. What do you give thanks for.


Phil. I give thanks for all Godly governors, good Laws, painful
preachers, sound doctrine, and that measure of grace, which is bestowed on me
and many others, and that God suffers not Satan to take away government, to
enact evil laws, to set up evil ministers, but that both I and others living
in the Church, may yield obedience to Christ's scepter, and do grow up in the
graces of Gods spirit.


Euch. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
Which is the third petition?


Phil. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.


Euch. Why does this follow? Thy kingdom come.


Phil. To teach me first to try my self, and secondly to judge of others
whether as yet we be in the state of grace or not; for as many as truly be in
Gods kingdom cannot but immediately do gods will, for obedience to gods will is
an effectual sign that the kingdom of God is in us. 1. Ioh. 3.3.



Euch. But what if you see that men ^o not Gods will may you say that such are
not in the state of grace?


Phil. That such persons as yet are not in ye state of grace I may say, for as
fire is known by heat, the sun by light, a tree by fruit, so is faith known
by works. Show me thy faith by thy works. says S. James Yet must I leave such
to God, and pray for their conversion in their due time.


Euch. What must you judge of an hypocrite who seems to do Gods will? 1.
Chro. 28.11.



Phil. I must judge of such a one that he is in ye state of grace, till such
time as he manifest his hypocrisy, for that sin being inward, except it be by
special revelation, is only known to God, and I must judge of each tree by
the fruits. math. 7.20.



Euch. What do you here mean by Gods will?


Ph. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Gods will is either secret or reveled, his secret will is known only to himself,
as who are elect, who reprobates, and when ye day of judgment shall be; his
reveled will is set down in ye book of god, The same verse.
and in such works as daily, god does discover to man.


Euch. What is it to do Gods will?


Phil. The revealed will of God is done by voluntary 1. These. 5.3.
obeying or patient suffering that which God commands Math. 26.39.
The secret will is done of us by praying that Christ Jesus may come to
Judgment, Col. 22.20.
that Antichrist may more and more be revealed, and that we may patiently
bear all future afflictions.


Euch. What mean you by Earth and heaven in this petition?


Phil. I do not mean by Earth my body, and Heaven my soul, as Tertullian
thought; nor by earth earthly men, and heaven heavenly men as others thought,
but in these words I pray that as the angels in heaven are ready to do
Gods will so men on earth may be ready to do it.


Euch. How do Angels the will of God?


Phil. They do it chearefully without murmuring, speedily without delaying,
generally without omitting, sincerely without dissembling, constantly without
forbearing, and perfectly without halting.


Euch. But is it possible for man to do perfectly Gods will?


Phil. It will be possible in the life to come, it is impossible whilst we
live in this world; for the good which was would do we do not, and the evil
that we would not, that do we. Romans 7.


Euch. How many kinds then of perfections are there?


Phil. There is first a perfection of sincerity which was in Hezekias obedience
Esaias. 38.3
. Secondly a perfection of all parts which was in Zachary and Elizabeth's
obedience Luke 1.6.
: Thirdly a perfection of degrees which was only in the first, and second
Adam, and is now only in the holy Angels, who only can perfectly obeie Gods
will.


Euch. If this obedience be impossible to be performed, why then do we pray
for it?


Phil. Because I must with Paul strive for this perfection, phil. 3.
and pray unto GOD, 1. These. 5 25.
that I may come to this perfection, without whose will I shall never be able
to do his will. Ioh. 15.5.


Euch. What wants do you here bewail?


Phil. 1. I bewail mine own and others rebellious natures, in that we are as
prone to receive sin as a match or tinder is to receive fire.

2. I bewail the sins of the world, as ignorance, schisms, hypocrisy,
pride, ambition, covetousness, and all contempt and all disobedience to the
word of God.

3. Our impacience, that when God lays any crosses upon us we cannot as we
ought endure them patiently.

4. Our slack and imperfect obedience yea privy pride, proud presumption,
deadnes of spirit, secret hypocrisy, and all other weakness which breaks
either in or out upon us, in our best service to our heavenly Father.


Euch. What things do you pray for in this petition?


Phil. 1. I pray that I and all people may in true humiliation, and hatred of
sin be converted to GOD, by putting off the old man and putting on the new,
that we may obey his commandments in our general and particular callings,
and in all afflictions submit our selves to the will of god.

2. That with a speedy resolution, a willing mind, cheerful heart, and
constant purpose we may ever do that which we are commanded.


Euch. What things do you pray against in this petition?


Phil. I pray against all impiety toward God, unrighteousness toward man,
and disobedience in my self. In a word against all rebellious withstanding
Gods revealed will, unfaithfulness in men's callings, all discontented murmuring
at Gods doeings, and all either backwardness or wearines in the service of
God, and ^astly against all hypocrisy which is contrary to an honest and a
sincere heart.


Euch. What things do you here thank God for?


Phil. 1. Here I bless God for mine own and others conversion.

2. For our obedience to Gods will.

3. For our patience in all trialls.

4. That with some cheerfulness we may serve god.

5. That our service is not full of hypocrisy: and that profanenes,
unrighteousness, disobedience, rebellion, unthankfulness, murmuring,
discontentement, backwardnes, wearines, and hypocrisy are so mortified in us,
that in some weak measure we desire to please God.


Euch. Why are these three petitions in the first place?


Phil. Because when we do begin to advance Gods glory, set up Gods kingdom,
and do Gods will, then our daily bread, the forgiveness of sins, and al other
blessings will be given unto us. As on the contrary, if we dishonor God, hinder
his kingdom, and do our own wills, we cannot look for any blessing of this
or a better life: for godliness only has a promise of this life and the life
to come. 1. Tim. 6.6.


Euch. Having spoken thus much of the three, first petitions, we are now come
to the latter three, how do you divide those three last petitions?


Phil. One of them is for things concerning man's body, the other two are
concerning his soul.


Euch. But why are you here taught to pray for things corporal, and after to
pray for things spiritual? does not this cross that commandment of Christ?
Seek first the kingdom of God. Math. 6.32.


Phil. No, it does not: but by this order I am taught. 1. To see the corruption
of man's nature, which ought in the first place to seek things spiritual, but
because we live rather by sense then faith, we do principally desire things
corporal.

Secondly, I am taught Christ's mercy unto man, in that by this order he
descends to our infirmity, who rather depend upon him for the pardon of our
sins, then we can trust him for our provision in this life, which argues
that we are of little faith.

Thirdly I am taught by this to depend upon him for the forgiveness of my
sins, for when I see that he is here so careful for my body, he will
doubtless be more careful to provide for my soul Romans 8.32


Euch. What use can you make of this order?


Phil. 1. That I must principally seek the good of my soul, which will bring
all goodness and goods to my body. mat. 16.26 Psalm 4.6.


2. That I must have care also of my body, for the preservation whereof God
has provided food, apparel, physic and other means. 1. Tim. 5.23


3. That from the blessings on my body, I must ascend by degrees to be
persuaded for my soul, that he who is so provident for the one, will be much
more provident for the other. Eccl. 11.30.31.


4. I must acknowledge mine own corruption, that I am so careful for earthly
things. math. 6.


5. I see that I may use gods creatures, in that he will have me to pray for
them.

6. I must acknowledge the mercy of god to me, in that he yields so much to
mine infirmity, as to permit me to ask these corporal things, before such
things as are spiritual, and of greatest good for the salvation of my soul.


Euch. Which is the fourth petition and the first of the three latter? give us
this day our daily bread.



Phil. Give us this day our daily bread.


Euch. Do you not by bread here understand Christ Jesus the food of the soul?


Phil. Indeed many ancient Fathers and some of our English Protestant writers
have so understood this petition, and I am bound to pray that God will ever
give me this Bread. Ioh 6. But I am taught that this Bread is not meant here.


Euch. By what reasons are you taught the contrary?


Phil. 1. Because I pray for such things in the second petition going before.

2. Because temporal things being to be prayed for, they can have no fitter
place to be desired then in this.

3. Seeing this prayer is a rule of all our prayers, we must in some one
petition crave things temporal of God.

4. Many ancient and the most new writers think so:


Euch. What then do you mean by Bread?


Phil. I mean properly that kind of sustenance which we call Bakers bread, but
figuratively all things which are or may be for the good of my body, and this
natural life, as strength by nourishment, health by physic, warmth by
apparel, sufficiency by labor, and the blessing of God in the use of all
these and such like.


Euch. Why do you ask all these things under the name of bread?


Phil. First because bread is absolutely necessary for man's life.

2. To teach us frugality in using Gods creatures.

3. To make us content with whatsoever God sends.

4. To make us thankful if GOD give more then bread.


Euch. Why do you pray that GOD would give bread?


Phil. To teach me that all riches whether of inheritance or by gift, pains,
trades, office, service, wit, marriage, or any other means, are the gift of
GOD, who only gives man power to get riches. Deutronomie. 8.18.


Euch. What use make you of this, that riches are Gods gift?


Phil. These uses I ought to make.

1. To acknowledge that all that I have comes from God and not by my self or
any other. pro. 10.27.


2. That I must not be proud of them because I have received them. Romans 11.20.


3. To admire Gods favor who has made me rich and others poor? 1. Chro.
29.16.


4. To use them to the glory of God, and the good both of my self, and others.
Tim. 6.17.


5. If I want such things to ask them of God. Geni. 29.20.


6. To teach me to get my substance with a good conscience, that so I may see
they come from God. 1. Sam. 12 6.


7. That I despise not my poor brethren who have not such a larges of Gods
blessings as my self. pro. 17.5


8. To be content if god make me poor. Job. 1.21



Euch. But what need have rich men so make this prayer? It seems this is the
poor man's paternoster.


Phil. You told me that there is a twofold title to riches, Iure fori and Iure
poli.
the one civil in the Courts of men: the other religious in the high Court of
God. Now rich men may have a civil title without praieing, but they must pray
for a religious right to riches, and this is only as they are the sons of
God. Without this title, before God they are usurpers and cannot say that their
riches are their own.


Euch. Why then, good rich men need not to pray thus, for they have a religious
title to riches.


Phil. It is true indeed; yet because it is one thing to have riches, and
another thing to have a blessing upon riches, they must pray that as God has
given unto them riches so those riches may in use be blessed, both to
themselves and also to theirs.


Euch. What then do you pray for in this word, Give?


Phi. 1. I pray that God would give me a civil title to riches.

2. That he would give me a religious title.

3. That he would give me leave to use them.

4. That he would give me and mine comfort by them.


Euch. Why do you say, Give us and not Give me?


Phil. To teach me. 1. To pray especially for the prosperity of the godly.
Psalm. 122.6.


2. To wish as well to others as my self. 1. Ioh. 4.21.


3. To pity the poor estate of my brethren. Luke 10.33.


4. Not to repine at the estate of my betters. math. 20.11.


5. Not to contemn such as are in pouertte. Pro. 17.5



Euch. But what if God give you not riches? what remedies were prescribed you
against the desire of them?


Phil. 1. That God even in famine does quicken and revive them which fear him.
Psalm. 33.18.

2. Godliness is great gain if the mind of man be therewith contented. 1.
Tim. 6.6.

3. We do look for eternal life; therefore we should not care too much for
this life.

4. We are servants in our Fathers house, therefore he will bestow upon us
things convenient.

5. Many are set aloft and afterward have the greater downfall.

6. Adam not contented with his own estate brought himself and his posterity
to destruction.

7. We brought nothing into this world and it is certain we shall carry
nothing out.


Euch. What do you mean by This day? This day.



Phil. By this day I mean the present moment of time, in the which I do live
and wherein especially I stand in need of things for this life.


Euch. Why do you not pray that God would give you bread for a week, or a
month or a year, but for a day?


Phil. 1. Because each day we need both bread it self, and with it the
blessing of God upon bread. Deu. 8.3.


2. To teach me to be content with my present estate, and not to care too much
for the time to come. Math. 6.32.


3. That each day I may see Gods singular providence.


Euch. Because you pray only for bread to day, tell me? Is it not lawful to
pray to be rich?


Phil. It is very inconvenient, if not utterly unlawful to pray to be rich,
as you taught me in your Sermon upon this petition


Euch. By what reasons was this ^oint proved?


Phil. 1. Because riches are snares to ^ntrappe men. 1. Tim. 6.9.


2. Such a prayer argues discontentednesse. psalm. 4.11-12.


3. Covetousness is a most greuious sin. He. 13.5.


4. Jacob, and Agur in the book of the proverbs prayed only for food and
raiment. pro. 31.7
1. Tim. 6.10.


5. In praying to be rich it seems we are not content to depend upon God.

6. It is a sign of exceeding pride that by riches we would be above our
brethren.


Euch. What then must you do in this case?


Phil. I must pray neither for riches nor poverty, but go on in my calling,
with faithful diligence: and waiting for a blessing from the Lord, be
thanckfull for whatsoever he shall send.


Euch. But because you must pray for this days bread, may you not lay up for
the time to come?


Phil. Yes I may. 1. Joseph did for seven years to come. The apostles did
when they heard of a famine by Agabus the Prophet, and Christ did in that he
had a pursebearer and commanded the broken meat to be kept.

2. We are sent by Solomon to the pismire, who provides in summer against
winter. Pro. 6.6.


3. He that provides not for his family is worse then an infidel. 1. Tim.
58.


4. We have precepts of frugalitie and thriftinesse. Tim. 6.18.


5. We must get to do good to others. pro. 32.


6. God has given man foresight and providence.

7. The good huswife is commended in the proverbs who by labor and industry
inricheth her family.


Euch. Yet Christ says lay not up treasure upon earth.


Phil. That is, we must not seek it cheifely, and so as to neglect to lay up
treasure in heaven.


Euch. What rules must you observe in keeping riches?


Phil. 1. That I get them by honest labor.

2. That I put no trust in my riches.

3. That I spare not when I ought to spend them on others.

4. I must not be a niggard to mine own state and person.


Euch. What is the use of all this?


Phil. 1. It commends Christian care and providence.

2. It warranteth the possession of riches.

3. It condemns niggardly parsimonie.

4. It confuteth our swaggering prodigalls, who with the prodigal son so
consume their inheritance, that at last, they are brought to a morsel of bread.

5. That each day I must depend on God.


Euch. What do you mean by daily bread? Daily bread.



Phil. I mean such bread as is fit to nourish the substance of my body, and
that I may be fed with food convenient.


Euch. Why do you pray for daily bread?


Phil. Because my body is daily decaying, and so stands in need of daily
repairing, even as the lamp stands in need of oil.

2. Because no meat can be added to my substance unless God daily give a
blessing unto it, without which I may eat and not be satisfied, earne silver
and yet put it into a bottomless bag. Hag. 1.6.


3. To put me in mind that I must not tempt God by neglecting of means, as
they do who labor not in an honest calling, and such as put an angelical
perfection in fasting, or vowing to the world a voluntary poverty.

4. To condemn such as make an Idol of means, and never crave a blessing
from God upon the means.


Euch. Our daily bread.
How is bread said to be our bread, and how do we pray for it?


Phil. It is said to be ours. 1. As we are in Christ.

2. As we get it by honest labor.

3. As it is fit for our place and calling.

4. As we have a proper title unto it.


Euch. What use make you of this?


Phil. 1. That I must labor to be in Christ.

2. That I may so get riches that I may see they are mine.

3. That I may labor to maintain my estate.

4. That community of goods is an Anabaptisticall fancy.

5. That God would not have all ask rich.

6. That I must impart my goods to the poor.


Euch. What wants do you here bewail?


Phil. 1. I bewail man's great covetousness.

2. Their coffeehouse.

3. Their idleness.

4. Their unfaithfulness.

5. Their unmercifulness in getting and keeping of riches.

6. Mine own and others unthankfulness for that portion which God has allotted
unto us.


Euch. What things do you here pray for?


Phil. 1. I pray here for all means by which I and others may have our daily
bread, as seasonable weather for the fruits of the earth, sympathy of al
creatures that the heavens may hear the earth, the earth the corn and it us.
For godly magistrates for the maintenance of peace, and procuring of plenty.
For valiant soldiers to defend our land, for painful husbandmen and trades
men in all callings, for prudent huswifes, faithful servants, and that even
our beasts may be strong to labor. ps. 144.14


2. I pray for peace in all kingdoms, plenty in our borders, and that the
staff of bread be not taken from us.

3. I pray for humility in acknowledging Gods good gifts, and blessings to me
contentednes in our estates, diligence in our callings, faithfulness in our
dealings, providence to get, frugality to lay up, liberality to give out
magnificence in doing great works, thankfulness for our goods, joy at the
good of others, and that God would give us all that which is fit for us.


Euch. What do you here pray against?


Phil. 1. I pray against unseasonable weather, disorder of creatures, ungodly
laws, cowardly soldiers, and unfit people for their places and callings.

2. I pray against unjust wars, cleannes of teeth, and that the staff of
bread may not be taken from us.

3. I pray against pride in abundance, discontent in want, negligence in men's
callings, unfaithfulness in dealing, improuidence in getting, parsimony in
hoarding, prodigality in spending, and unmercifulness in not giving to the poor.

4. In a word I pray against all unthankfulness for Gods creatures, our much
abusing of such good gifts of God: yea against all such sicknesses as may
hinder us from getting our daily bread.


Euc. what do you here give thanks for?


Phil. I thank God here for seasonable times, godly governors, abounnance of
all things, and for all such things as before I prayed for. And by name I
thank God that he has hitherto provided so bountifully for me and others,
that we have a sufficiency for our present estate, and do see his blessing in
the getting, having, and using of all his creatures. And that in the sweat of
our brows we do eat that bread, which by reason thereof cannot be called
the bread of idleness.


Euch. Which are the two last petitions?


Phil. Forgive us etc. Lead us not etc.
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us: And lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.


Euch. What do you learn out of this order that after our praying for daily
bread we say, and forgive us our trespasses, and lead us not into temptation
etc.


Phil. I do learn here these 6. lessons.

1. By having my daily bread, to lifts up my mind for spiritual blessings to
God. luke 11.13.


2. To seek more earnestly for the pardon of my sins then I do (though alas
I do not) for my daily bread. Act. 2.39.


3. That seeing these two petitions I make for my soul, therefore my care must
be double to do good for my soul. 2. pet. 1.10


4. That if is nothing to have my daily Bread, unless GOD give unto me the
pardon of my sins. Wisd. 5.8


5. That if God give me my daily bread, I had most need to pray for the
forgiveness of my sins, because therein I am most subject to sin against
God. 2. Sam. 11 1.


6. That if I want my daily bread, sin is the cause that I want it and al
blessings. psalm. 107.34.



Euch. What is contained in these two last petitions:


Phil. In the former of them I pray for grace, and in the latter for
perseverance in grace.


Euch. How many things are contained in the fifth petition, forgive us our
trespasses. etc.


Phil. Two things. 1. a prayer in these words, Forgive us our trespasses.
Forgive us our trespasses etc.


2. a condition, as we forgive them that trespass against us.


Euch. What is the sum of this petition?


Phil. That it would please God, for his sons sake to be good to me and al
his children, in the dashing and washing af al our sins as we are ready to
forgive others.


Euch. Unto whom do you pray for the forgiveness of sins?


Phil. Not unto any angel, Saint, creature or man, but I pray only to my Lord
God.


Euch. Why do you pray thus only to him?


Phil. 1. Because be only can forgive sins Mat. 9.2.
.

2. Because I am commanded in to pray. Hos. 14.3.


3. Because against him only I have sinned. psalm. 51.4.


4. Because I must not give his honor to another. Dan. 9.5.


5. Because the Church uses so to pray. ps. 50.10.


6. Because I believe only on him.


Euch. What does this teach you?


Phil. 1. That god alone is to be called upon.

2. That Christ is very god, because of himself he forgiueth sins. Math. 9.2.



Euch. What use can you make of this doctrine?


Phil. 1. That when I have sinned I must come to him for pardon.

2. That their doctrine is an erroneous doctrine which call upon Saints as well
as upon god.

3. That I must be thankful to my gracious GOD who will pardon and forgive
me all my sins.

4. That I must take heed of sin, because I must ever crave pardon for it.


Euch. What do you mean by this word, forgive? Forgive.



Phil. That it would please god so to discharge and cover all my sins, as
that they may never be imputed unto me, either to make me despair in this
life, or to be punished in the life to come.


Euch. How are sins said to be discharged?


Phil. 1. When they are discharged by the person that committed them, so the
devils and the damned discharge their debts by suffering.

2. When they are paid by another, and so are our sins discharged by Christ.


Euch. In what respect may this second satisfaction be called forgiveness?


Phil. 1. In respect of us who neither do nor can confer any thing to this
satisfaction.

2 In regard of Christ who alone does forgive them, and we no way are able to
requite him.

3. In respect of God the father, who in love gives his son, and accepts
his obedience as our satisfaction.


Euch. What learn you by this?


Phil. That as Benadad did to the King of Israel 1. King 20 31.
so I must humble my self to this king of kings.

2. That I must confess my sins to him, because he is ready to forgive my
sins 1. Ioh. 1.7
.

3. That there can be by man no satisfaction for sins, for our merits is Gods
mercy.


Euch. What sins must you confess to God?


Phil. Both known and unknown, known in particular, 2. sam. 12.
unknown in general psa. 19.14.
.


Euch. Ought you not to confess your sins to man?


Phil. Though anricular confession be a doctrine of devils, yet if sins be
so greiuous unto my conscience, that I cannot be persuaded of the pardon of
them, neither can find comfort by confession to God, I am bound to confess
sins, troubling me, to man, especially to my Godly Minister, or to such a
Preacher of Gods word as is able to comfort me in regard of his knowledge, and
flit is comfort me in regard of his secrecy. Act. 16.



Euch. How are you bound to confess your sins?


Phil. Even as a guilty prisoner must do at the bar.

1. I must bring my self before Gods Judgment seat.

2. I must put up an enditement against my self.

3. I must give sentence of condemnation against my self.

4. I must sue for pardon at the hands of my God.


Euch. How many things are required in true confession?


Phil. Five. 1. It must be voluntary without constraint 2. Sam. 12


2. Personal without laying it upon others. Eodem. cap. Ioh. 7.


3. Particular without denial of the fact.

4. Impartial by aggravating each circumstance. 1. Sam. 24


5. Hearty, with all signs of sorrow. 1. Cor. 7.



Euch. Why are you bound to ask God forgiveness?


Phil. 1. Because al men have sinned. Romans 3.


2. Because God hates sinners. Ioh. 9.


3. Because sins seauer man from God. Esa. 59.2.


4. If I conceal these sores they are hardly cured. Psalm. 32.3.


5. The more I like sin, the more with Iaels wife it will kill me. Iud. 4.18.


6. Of all burdens there is none like to the burden of sin. Math. 11.


7. If I confess, God is ready to forgive. 1. Ioh. 1.7


8. Gods servants have done the like. 2. Sam. 12


9. If I feel not sins forgiven in this life, it is to be feared they will
not be forgiven in the life to come.


Euch. Why do you say forgive us? Forgive us.



Phil. Because I must pray that God would not only forgive me but that he
would also forgive all men in the world.


Euch. But you are bound to beeleeue the forgiveness of sins, will you pray
for that which is had already?


Phil. I do it not as mistrusting that God has forgiven them, but that I may
feel in my heart that God has forgiven them, and that I may apply that to my
self, which the Father has purposed, his son purchased, and the holy ghost
sealed.


Euch. Yet to pray thus for pardon, it seems to open a gappe to sin freely.


Phil. Nay rather if I have grace, ye more I pray that my sins may be
pardoned, the more will I hate and detest sin.


Euch. What use do you make of this. Forgive us?


Phil. 1. That as I sue for mine own pardon so must I with the Saints sue for
others.

2. That I must be sorry when men do sin.

3. That I may not uncharitably discover men's sins.

4. That I must not cause any man to sin.

5. That I must not delight in any sin.

6. That I must forgive my brethren.


Euch. May you then pray for all men even the wicked?


Phil. I may, because the Lord alone knows who are his, and in the Judgment
of charity I may pray for the conversion or confusion of the most wicked in
the world.


Euch. What if a man sin against the holy Ghost? may you pray for such a man?


Phil. Few have now the spirits of discerning to know when a man sin
against the holy Ghost, and therefore we must take heed how we censure it.


Euch. Why are sins called debts?


Phil. Because by them we become indebted to God, either to discharge them, or
to be imprisoned for them.


Euch. How many kinds of debt are there in sin?


Phil. Three. 1. A debt of obedience which we owe to God, but have not paid it
through transgression.

2. A debt of punishment because we have transgressed.

3. A debt of purity, which we owe by reason of our corruptions after our
transgressio^. And against al these debts I must seek that I may get my
Quietus est, in this life that I be not tormented in the life to come.


Euch. Why are sins called ours?


Phil. Because they properly proceed from our selves, and we are not by god
compelled to sin.


Euch. What use make you of all this?


Phil. 1. That I must especially labor for pardon of mine own sin.

2. That I must not accuse God as the author of sin.

3. That because I daily must ask forgiveness, therefore even the best men do
sin daily.

4. That as God is patient toward me, so must I be patient toward my brethren.


Euch. In whose name must you get this pardon.


Phil. In the name of Christ, applied to me by a true faith, for he is the
propitiacion for our sins, and without him we cannot appear in the sight of
God.


Euch. What is the condition of this petition?


Phil. As we forgive them that trespass against us.


Euch. Is our forgiving of men^ reason why God should forgive us?


Phil. No it is not. For god for Christ's sake does forgive us; and if it were a
cause, then must the forgiveness of sin proceed from our selves.


Euch. What then is it?


Phil. It is a sign assuring us that God has forgiven us, and a comfort
cheering us that God will forgive us, a promise binding us to pardon our
brethren, and a law teaching us that if we will have God to forgive us, we
also must forgive others.


Euch. But, because sin to man is here called debt, how becomes man thus a
debtor to man, and how is this sin called a debt?


Phil. Not as it is a sin against God, and his righteous law, but as it is a
trespass done to man, either to his body by killing, or hurting it, in h^^ goods
by stealing them, credit by slandering of him, or to his chastity by defiling
his neighbors bed.


Euch. Why is this sin called a debt to man?


Phil. 1. Because we owe love which is now broken.

2. Because we owe punishment for doing wrong.

3. Because we owe satisfaction for the wrong done.


Euch. How is man said to forgive man?


Phil. When he does pardon either the wrong done, or the punishment appointed
for the wrong, or the satisfaction which the offender is bound to make, or all
of them as occasion is offered.


Euch. What things were observed upon this?


Phil. Three.

1. That man may forgive man and yet God will punish him. Acts 7.


2. That though man will not forgive, yet God will if the offender repent. Ioh.
8


3. That though God and man forgive, Ioh. 8.
the party offending is to be punished.


Euch. May a man forgive him that has offended him, and yet sue him at the
law?


Phil. He may not only sue his adversary, but pursue him to death, and yet
forgive him; for unless offenders he punished, Gods glory will be hindered,
justice decayed, the common weal ruined, and all men wronged.


Euch. What rules must you observe in going to law?


Phil. 1. I must do nothing with a revenging mind.

2. I must take heed that I offend not the Church.

3. I must do it for the maintenance of peace.

4. I must labor by it to better mine adversary.

5. I must not sue for each trifling matter.

6. I must use all other good means and make law my last remedy.


Euch. But when the flesh will tell you that you must be revenged, what cautions
were given you to stay your anger?


Phi. You gave me these cautions.

1. That I must consider that it is Gods doing.

2. That I have also wronged God and man.

3. That Christ has forgiven me more,

4. That forgiving is a duty of love.

5. That I must not destroy him for whom Christ dyed.

6. If I do not forgive I incure Gods wrath.

7. That by forgiving I am like unto God.

8. That it is my duty to do nothing through contention.


Euch. What use do you make of this?


Phil. 1. That I am bound to forgive all persons, all sins, and at all times,
when man offends me.

2. That I must live in peace, and labor to make peace.

3. That if I forgive not I curse my self.

4. That they hurt themselves who leave out this condition in the Lords prayer
because they will not forgive.

5. That it is a sign of grace to forgive.

6. That no man living in malice can say the Lords prayer as he ought to do.

7. That it is difficult to believe the forgiveness of sins, because this
petition has a condition to persuade us annexed unto it.


Euch. What do you here beewaile?


Phil. 1. The corruption of my nature prone to sin.

2. The burden of my sin which I my self can never bear.

3. That I feel not the want of Christ who only can forgive sin.

4. That I am not so ready to forgive men, as God is ready to forgive me.


Euch. What things do you here pray for?


Phil. For. 3 things. 1. For humiliation. 2. For Justification. 3. For
reconciliation and love to men.



Euch. In humiliation what do you pray for?


Phil. 1. That I may see my sins.

2. That I may seele them.

3. That I may bewail them.

4. That I may most earnestly crave pardon for them, seeing the burden of sin
is a most heavy burden.


Euch. How do you pray for Justification?


Phil. That Christ's righteousness may be made mine, and my sins may be laid
upon Christ, for his mercy sake.


Euch. How do you pray for reconciliation?


Phil. That God would give me a heart to be reconciled to men, so as I may
pardon them and they me.


Euch. What things do you pray against?


Phil. I pray against blindness of mind, hardness of heart, continuance in
sin, and the least opinion of mine own righteousness, that I should lightly
regard Christ. And lastly against all hatred by which I am kept from loving my
brother.


Euch. What do you give thanks for?


Phil. I thank God that he has given me a sight and sense of sin, and
persuaded me of the pardon and forgiveness of them in his son, and that
howsoever I sustain many wrongs at the hands of men, yet I can be contented to
forgive them, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven me.


Euch. Which is the sixth petition?


Phil. And lead us not into temptation but. The 6. petition.
etc.


Euch. Why is it placed after the fourth petition. Give us etc.


Phil. To teach me that if God give me daily bread, I am subject to be
tempted with pride, and therefore must pray against it: Lead us not into
temptation.
and if he deny me daily bread; I am subject to be tempted with despair and
so must pray against it.


Euch. Why is it set after, Forgive us our debts?


Phil. That by this I may learn, that forgiveness of sins and temptations
are inseparable companions, 2. Cor. 7.
Lu. ^2.31.
and that such as are not acquainted with temptations, Luke 11.21.
are as yet in the power of that strong man who keeps the house of a secure
soul.


Euch. Why are the Godly lead into temptation? 2. Cor. 12.7.



Phil. 1. To keep them under, that they be not proud of Gods grace.

2. To winnow the chafe of sin from Gods corn.

3. That Gods power may appear in manes weakness. 2. Cor. 12 9.


4. That his mercy may be seen in keeping them from a final fall.

5. That they may be like Christ their head.

6. That they may acknowledge that all strength is from God.

7. That by this they may know themselves for Gods children, who alone are so
tempted, that they recover in temptation.


Euch. What else do you learn, that after prayer for pardon of sins you desire
not to be led into temptation?


Phil. I am taught that if I have sinned and obtained pardon, I must take heed
of a relapse into an old sin, or any practice of new. Ioh. 5: 14. 8: 11.


2. That who so has this gracious Pardon he can and shall resist sin in the
end though with David and Peter, he be foiled in the beginning. Tit. 2.11.
Can. 5.3. Iaco 4.7. 1. Cor. 10.3.


3. That forgiveness of sins and grace are inseparable companions, and can
be no more severed, then light from the sun, or fire from heat. Math.
7.25.16.18. 1. Sam. 15.19.



Euch. Were you taught nothing else out of this order?


Phil. Yes, you taught me four other instructions, all which, (as you said)
did arise out of this, that immediately upon the craving pardon for sins, we
do in the next place desire not to be led into temptation.


Euch. Which are they?


Phil. 1. That he that has grace can in some sort resist temptation, though
he be foiled sometime with the same.

2. That forgiveness of sins, and perseverance in grace are inseparable
united together.

3. That whosoever wantteth grace cannot at any time resist temptation, though
he refrain from some sins, to which he is indisposed; for resistance is the
combat between the flesh and the spirit.

4. That he that wants grace, if he be once foiled in temptation, cannot at
al recover himself; for though the righteous fall and rise again, yet the
wicked (says Solomon) shall fall into mischief.


Euch. But if we be persuaded of the pardon of our sins, why need we to
pray. Lead us not into temptation?


Phil. Sir, you taught me that it is needeful for these reasons.

1. Because by nature man is prone to be tempted.

2. Because many are the allurements to tempt us.

3. Because sin is a deceitful temptor.

4. Because Satan is a subtle, cruel, and diligent temptor.

5. Because it is only in the power of God to give man power to resist
temptations.


Euch. What is the sum of this petition?


Phil. That I may be delivered from two maine enemies of Gods grace, whereof
the one, is Temptation, the other is Evil.


Euch. Do you make these words two petitions or one?


Phi. 1. Such as do make. 7. petitions, do divide this petition into two, but
you divided it as the most do into a petition. Lead us not. etc. And an
explanation. But deliver us. etc.


Euch. May you not change these words. Lead us not, into suffer us not, or let
us not be led into temptation?


Phil. Noe, I may not, for as God is said to harden Man's heart, and not to
suffer it to be hardened, to blind man's eyes, and not to suffer them to be
blinded, so is he said to lead man into temptation, and not to suffer him to be
led.


Euch. Show this by some places of scripture?

Exodus 7.3. God hardened Pharoes heart. 2. Sam. 24.1. God moved David to number
the people.

Esaias. 19.14. God mingled among them the spirit of error.

Rom 1.16. God gave them up to vsse affections.

2. These. 2.11. God sent amongst them strong delusions.

In these and such like places, he is not said to suffer to be hardened,
moved, mingled, given, sent, but that he did harden, move, mingle, give up,
and send.


Euch. Tell me now what temptation is?


Phil. It is an inticement or trial of the mind or heart to commit, or to see
whether men will or not commit sin, either by corruption of nature,
enticements of the world, the policies of Satan, the forgetfullnes of Gods
mercies, present afflictions, or the just desertion of the Lord God.


Euch. How is temptation taken in the scriptures?


Phil. It signifies these things:

1. Affliction, by which man is tempted to know what is in him James. 1.2
.

2. Satan's trial which he makes of God Math. 4.7
.

3. Man's trial which he makes of God Psalm. 95.9.
.

4. Satan's trial which he makes of man Mat. 4.4.
.

5. Man's trial which he makes of Man. 1. Cor. 7.5. 1. Th. 3.5.


6. Gods trial which he makes of man. 1. ki. 10.11 Mat. 22.18 genesis 22.1.



Euch. What means does Satan use to tempt man?


Phil. He uses or rather abuses.

1. The corruption of nature.

2. The inticements of the world,

3. The hope of Gods mercies.

4. the neglecting of Gods judgments

5. Examples of the wicked,

6. abundance in prosperity.

7. Want in adversity, by all which he will subdue us in temptation unless God
in his mercy give us power to resist.


Euch. Now tell me how God does lead man into temptation?


Phil. He does this 1. by ceasinge to support, not the nature of man, but his
grace in man. Psalm. 119.8.51.11.


2. by delivering him to his own lusts, when the first grace is not sufficient
to help him. Romans 1.24 Psalm. 107.


3. By giving him into the power of Satan, so as he may tempt him to commit
grievous sins. 2. Sa. 24.


4. By blind folding him and hardening him in such sort, as that he shall make
no conscience of sin. 2. Sam. 12



Euch. Is god then the author of sin?


Phil. God forbid, for thou art a GOD that hate iniquity says the Prophet
David, psa. 5.
and god tempts no man, to wit unto sin, says the Apostle James. Iam. 1.13



Euch. But how is god freed from being the author of sin, seeing he is an
actor in sinning?


Phil. Well every way, if we can learn to distinguish, between the action, it
self, and the ataxie, and disorder that is in the action.


Euch. Is god the author of every action.


Phil. Yes verily, for in him we live, Act. 17.
we move, and have our being.


Euch. And can he work in a sinful action, and not be the author of sin in
that action?


Phil. Doubtless he may, for the doing of a thing it proceeds from the
creator, the evil doing it comes from ye creature.


Euch. Can you show this by some co^parisons.


Phil. I remember you taught me this by these which follow. The sun beams light
upon a carrion, that it smells, the sun is the cause: that it smells ill,
it self is the cause. A man spurreth foreward a lame horse, if the horse goes
on, the rider is the cause, if he limpeth on, himself is the cause. A musition
plays upon an untuned or broken instrument, that it sounds, the Musition is
the cause, that it sounds ill, it self is the cause: and the like may be
said of any other things:


Euch. But why does God tempt some, and they recover in temptation, and does
also tempt others and beats them in temptation.


Phil. Do you a man ask this of me who am but a man? let us both learn the
answer of the Apostle Paul. O man who art thou that disputest with God? He
finds such evil, and beats them so, he is bounden to none to give him grace,
his judgments are unsearchable, his ways past finding out, and we are all as
clay in the hands of the Potter, he may make us of what fashion he will. The
sun does harden the clay, and softens the wax and no man must ask a reason
thereof.


Euch. How may GOD be said to tempt man?


Ph. 1. By afflictions as he did the Isralites. Deu. 9.3. Judge. 2.22.


2. By commandment as he did Abraham. Genesis 2^.1 1. Sam. 11 Genesis 3.


3. by prosperity as he did David.

4. By offering objects as he did Euah, and as masters use to try the
fidelity of servants by laying money in some corner to try them.


Euch. That this may be known the better, show me how you were taught, that
each man is said to harden himself, Satan is said to harden man, and GOD is
said to harden man.


Phil. Man hardens himself when he refuses Grace.

Satan hardens man to presume of grace.

God hardens man when he gives not grace, though he offer unto him all the
means of grace.


Euch. Are not mercies and judgments able to bring man to God, without the
especial grace of God?


Phil. No they are not, but as the highway the more it is trodden upon, the
harder it is, till the rain moysten it; and the Stiddie the more it is beat
upon the harder it is, till the fire soften it: so the heart of man the more it
is trodden and beaten upon by mercies and judgments the worse it is, til God by
the dew of his grace moysten it, and the fire of his spirit soften it.


Euch. Show me some other reasons then you did before, why God does thus tempt
and harden man?


Phil. He does it to these ends.

1. To humble them that they may see themselves.

2. To chastise them for former sins.

3. That his grace in them may appear, as gold in the fire.

4. That they may see their own weakness and impatience.

5. That they may take more heed hereafter.

6. That more earnestly they may pray to God for assistance.


Euch. What uses can you make of this doctrine of temptation.


Phil. I learn first the imcomprehensible purity of God, who can work in
sin with our sins.

2. That Satan can go no further in temptation then God will give him leave.

3. That I must not pray absolutely against temptations, but that I be not
overcome in temptation.

4. That by nature we are all satan's bondmen, til such time as God free us
from temptation.


Euch. Seeing god tempts many ways, tell me how he tempts by prosperity,
and riches.


Phil. By this he tryes man: 1. Whether he will consider how he comes by
them.

2. To whom the continuance of them is promised.

3. To what end it is given unto him.

4. Whether he will think of the mutability of high places.

5. Whether he will meditate of the fearful downefalles of such, as have not
used Prosperity well.

And 6. That it is a part of great felicity, not to be overcome of felicity.


Euch. How does God try us by that late deliverance from that unnatural
conspiracy against our king and country?

1. Whether we will acknowledge it.

2. Whether we will be thankful for it.

3. Whether we will keep a memorial of it.

4. Whether we will pray more earnestly for our King and countries preservation.

5. Whether we will desire the conversion or confusion of those our enemies.

6. Whether we will be more obedient to God then before, least a worse thing
happen to us.

7. Whether we will detest that cruel cacolique religion, which thirsts
after blood especially the blood of princes,

8. Whether we will love and embrace more earnestly our Christian religion,
which teaches obedience and practices it even to such governors as are had,
though their catholic Apology slander us with the contrary.


Euch. How does God tempt men by adversity?


Phil. Whether we will think. 1. That godly men have been so tempted.

2. That it is Gods Furnace to try our faith.

3. That it is Gods medicine to purge our sins.

4. That we must not declame against God.

5. That we must more meditate of heaven.

6. That if we feel not the Sun rising of Gods grace, we must not think
that it is set for ever.

7. That we must endure all kinds of temptations, whether of body by sickness,
or soul by sorrow, or our person by imprisonment, or state by poverty, or
name by contempt, etc.


Euch. But to come to man's temptations: What if man tempt you to Popish
religion, how must you resist this temptation?


Phil. By considering, that that religion ca^ be no good religion, 1. Where the
Scriptures are not known.

2. Where Images are worshipped.

3. Where a piece of bread is adored.

4. Where Saints are innocated.

5. Where ignorance is commended.

6 Where purgatory is maintained.

7. Where Christ's merit is mangled.

8. Where subjects are so freed from allegiance to their sovereign, that if he
be not a Romanist, it shall be meritorious to kill him.


Euch. What if you be tempted to forsake the church, because of some abuses
supposed in the church? how must you resist that temptation?


Phil. By considering, that a child is not to be forsaken because it is sick,
nor a body neglected because it is diseased, and that Christ and his Apostles
did not depart from the Churches, though there were amongst them many abuses,
and the most of them greater then be amongst us, who have the word purely
preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered.


Euch. To come again unto Satan's temptations, what must you do to resist
them?


Phil. I must labor. 1. Not to be ignorant of his enterprises.

2. To watch over my self continually.

3. To resist him by the shield of faith.

4. To subdue him by the sword of the spirit.

5. To be persuaded that he will never cease.

6. To think of my danger if I fall.

7. To consider how I may hurt others if I fall.

8. That by falling I deny my God.

9. That I shall be rewarded if I continue.

10. That by prayer I shall have power to resist him.


Euch. These rules indeed are general, but what if he tempt you to the sin
of Covetousness, what remedies must you use?


Phil. I must meditate. 1. That God has taken upon him to be my careful
protector.

2. That this sin is the root of all evil.

3. That every covetous man is an idolater.

4. That my life stands not in abundance.

5. That Christ and his disciples were poor.

6. That I shall carry nothing with me.

7. That I must give an account of my getting.

8. That it will hinder me in the service of God.

9. That rich men come hardly to heaven.

10. That by riches I am most subject to be spoiled.

11. That they make a man unwilling to die.

12. That they may be taken away from me.

13. That many woes are denounced against rich men.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptation of pride?


Phil. I must meditate. 1. That I must not be proud, because I have all things
of gift.

2. That God resists the proud.

3. That it hinders a greater larges of grace.

4. That I am but dust and ashes.

5. That pride cast Satan out of heaven.

6. That if it be in apparel, I have more occasion to be humbled for my
shameful nakedness.

7. That Christ left me an example of humility.

8. That by this I make others to contemn me.

9. That it argues a son of the devil.

10. That others have more excellent gifts then my self.

11. That pride is the causer of contentions.

12. That proud men are far from reformation: See thou (says Solomon) a
man wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of him: and, a
proud heart is a Palace for the devil.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptations of adultery?


Phil. I must meditate here. 1. That God sees me.

2. That God can punish me.

3. That he will punish me.

4. That I am a member of Christ.

5. That adulterours shall not inherit heaven.

6. That such people seldom repent.

7. That such a thing should not be done in Israel.

8. That it made Solomon to commit Idolatry.

9. That for the whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread.

10. That I do not as I would be done to.

11. That I wrong the Church and commonwealth, by obtruding to both a bastardly
generation.

12. That as by this I endanger my soul, so must I needs decay my body, and
when I am dead, leave a blotte behind me which never can be wiped out.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptation of gluttony and
drunkenness?


Phil. Here I must meditate. 1. That Solomon commands me, at great tables, to
put my knife to my throat.

2. That by these I make mortar of my body by too much drink, and my stomach
but a streiner by too much meat.

3. That I abuse that which might do good to the poor.

4. That I abuse the good creatures of God.

5. That all civil nations have detested these sins.

6. That by them I am unfit for Gods service.

7. That I bring upon my body diseases.

8. That I am unfit to keep any secret.

9. That I am a scorn to the sober.

10. That these sins are the maine instruments of other sins.

11. That I must fall into the Physicians hands.

12. That I may in them commit some such sin, as may cause me to fall into
the censure of God, and governors


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptation of envy.


Phil. I must meditate. 1. That mine eye must not be evil, because Gods eye is
good.

2. That God may dispose of his own as he list.

3. That envy is a note of a bad man.

4. I must be glad at the good of others.

5. Moses and Christ, and other good men, were glad when they heard of others
excellency.

6. God will not have all alike.

7. It is a means to murder our brother.

8. It is a fruit of the flesh.

9. It hinders us from doing good to others.

10. It is the greatest torment to a man's self.

11. Though our brother excel us in one thing, yet we do him in another.

12. God even hates and curses the envious.


Euch. What remedies have you against idleness in your calling?


Phil. I must meditate. 1. That God commands all men to labor.

2. That Euah fell in paradise by idleness.

3. That it was one of the sins of Sodom.

4. That it is a cushion for Satan to sleep in.

5. That labor puts Satan's assaults away.

6. That idleness consumes the body.

7. That a sloathfull hand makes poor, as a diligent hand makes rich.

8. Without diligence we cannot provide for a family, or ye time to come.

9. All creatures even to the pismire, are diligent.

10. GOD our father is ever working.

11. by it we may be able to do good to others.

12. All good men have labored in a calling. And why have people hands, and
wits but to use them, and the more both are used, the better they are.


Euch. What remedies have you against impatience in afflictions?

I must meditate 1. That naked I came into this world, and naked I must return
again.

2. I must remember the afflictions of Job and what end God made of them.

3. That the patient abiding of the righteous, shall be gladness.

4. That God has a stroke in afflictions.

5. That they are nothing to the joys of heaven.

6. That I have deserved more.

7. That they will tend to my good.

8. That in this world we must have tribulations.

9. That murmuring is a sign of bad child.

10. Christ said, not my will, but thine be done.

11. Many of Gods servants have endured more.

12. That Gods children have been ready to suffer.


Euch. But what remedies have you if satan tempt you to despair of Gods mercy?


Phil. I will say unto him avoid satan, and will enter into this meditation.

1. I was by baptism received into the Church, and it has been to me the
lauer of regeneration.

2. I once heard and believed his word, and therefore I shall stand ever by
this faith.

3. Mine election is in Gods keeping, and therefore Satan can never stealt it
away.

4. The calling of God is without repentance, and whom he loves be loves to
the end.

5. I knew by my love of the brethren, that I am translated from death to life.

6. I am sorry that I can be no more sorry for my sins, and this to me is
an argument of faith.

7. I desire to believe in Christ and to run the ways of his commandments.

8. Christ's merits are greater then my sins, and he is the propitiation for
my sins.

9. Though the righteous fall, he shall rise again, for GOD supporteth him with
his hand.

10. The Spirit does, though very weakly, witness to my spirit that I am Gods
child

11. I hate syn with an unfeigned hatred.

12. I love all good things as well as one, and hate al evil as well as one, and
I can be contented to be dissolved and be with Christ, and to say, come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.


Euch. Yet Satan will tempt you to presume of Gods mercies, what remedies must
you here use?


Phil. I must meditate against this syn.

1. that god bids me not be high minded.

2. that security destroys more then any syn.

3. that he is blessed who fears always.

4. That I must work out my salvation with fear and trembling.

5. That as God is a God of mercy, so is he also a god of justice.

6. That the more I presume the more subject I am to fall.

7. That it is satan's main weapon to vanquish me, God is merciful.

8. That even David prayed to be kept from sins of presumption.

9. That the longer I continue in sins the more hardly can I leave them.

10. that if our God call me, I must undo all I have done before.

11. that then I must sheede many a bitter tear for my sins.

12. that by going on I heap to my self wrath, against the day of wrath, and
therefore have we need in this and all the former assaults, of God, men, and
devils to pray, Lord lead us not into temptation.


Euch. Which is the explanation of this petition?


Phil. But deliver us from evil.


Eu. what do you pray for in these words


Phil. But deliver us from evil
that I, and all christians may be freed from the power of satan, sin, the flesh
and the world: that we being thus preserved that we shall, or may not fall or so
be delivered from evil, that we may not fall quite away by any temptation.


Euch. Do you not by evil understand only the devil, who is called that evil
one?


Phil. No I do not, though temptations come principally from him, but by evil
you said, I must understand al my spiritual enemies according to that of the
Apostle John, 1. Ioh. 5.3
The whole world lies in evil?


Euch. How many ways does God deliver us from evil?


Phil. Eleven ways, 1. by preserving us from committing sin.

2. By freeing us from judgments due unto sin.

3. By keeping us from the hurt of sin and afflictions.

4. By turning all those sins which we commit, and the afflictions which we
sustain to our good.

5. By bridling Satan that he cannot subdue us.

6. By giving us his holy spirit that by a lively faith we overcome all evil.

7. by no means.

8. by small means.

9. By ordinary means.

10. By extraordinary means.

11. Contrary to all means.


Euch. Why are these words added as an explanation to this petition?


Phil. To teach me, that when I am delivered from evil, I may be sure not to
be lead into temptation, for evil is the cause of all temptations, which being
taken away the effect cease.


Euch. What must we do to be delivered from the devil?


Phil. We must 1. Put on the whole armor of God.

2. We must know how to use that armor.

3. We must walk warily that he do not circumuent us, and be never out of our
calling.

4. We must ever seek to fear, and serve God.

5. We must know that Christ is our captain and deliverer.

6, We must meditate of the miserable estate of such as are overcome by the
devil.

7. We must pray as Christ teaches us, deliver us from evil.


Euch. What wants do you bewail in this petition?


Phil. 1. The rebellion of our wicked nature, by which we resist the spirit of
God.

2. Our readiness in each little temptation, to yield up our selves to the
committing of sin.

3. That we cannot enough mourn for the remnants of our bondage, by which we
are kept in the power of Satan.

4. That so many fall by Satan's temptation.

5. That we cannot here get maistery over our own corruptions.

6. That we love so this spiritual Babylon, in which we are subject too, and
fall by temptation.

7. The tyranny of Satan our adversary, going about each way to subdue us.


Euch. What things do you here pray against?


Phil. I pray 1. against temptation, as it may be a means to draw men from
GOD, and cause them to commit sin. 2. Cor. 12.7.8


2. Against afflictions, as they are punishments of sin, curses from God,
motives to impacience, or means to make me to take Gods name in vain. Pro.
30.9.


3. Against desertion, that God would not leave me, or if he do, that he would
not leave me over long, by withdrawing from his former, a second grace of the
spirit.

4. Against al future relapse into sin, Gods hardening my heart, blinding of
mine ties: 1. Ti 1.20.
backslyding from the truth either in part or in whole: all sorts of
judgments, temporal or eternal: And what hurt soever may befall me either
by prosperity or aduersitye:

In a word, I pray against the assaults of Satan the enticementes of the
world, and that corruption which may surprise me by mine own flesh.


Euch. May not aman pray for temptations and afflictions?


Phil. Though both of them may be oftentimes good for us, yet because that good
is an accidentiall good, and we know not how we shall bear temptations if
god send them, therefore it is not meet to pray for them. Therefore such as
wish to be poor, that they might love heaven better, or blind to meditate of
heaven better, they have no great warrant out of Gods word. To these we may
add such as pray for death, and will not wait Gods leisure till he take them
out of this world.


Euch. What do you here pray for?


Phil. I pray for grace to resist, and perseverance, when I am tempted; and
that to this purpose, I may put on the whole armore of God, as the girdle of
verity, in soundness of doctrine; Ephesians. 6.16.
the breast plate of righteousness in integrity of life, the shoes of
preparation of the gospel of peace, which are to be worn by patience in
afflictions; the shield of of faith, to resist Satan's assaults; the helmet of
Salvation, which is the life of eternity, and the sword of the spirit; which
is the word of God. I pray also here yt all our afflictions may be turned to
our good; that wisdom may be given us to prevent our persecutors, that I may
be patient in adversity, humble in prosperity, and that our sins may turn to
our good, by revealing our corruption in being ready to fall, discovering our
vnhabilitie of our selves to stand, detesting our nature so prone to impiety,
renouncing all confidence in our own strength, and casting our selves upon
Gods power in temptation: yea that by them we may see Satan's malice in tempting
us, and Gods great mercy in recovering us: and finally that being once
recovered in temptation, we may pity and comfort such as be tempted.


Euch. What things do you give thanks for?


Phil. That in the former things which I have prayed for, GOD has made me able
so to resist, and that neither Satan nor the world, nor my flesh, has so
subdued me, but that I am able to rise again.


Euch. Which is the 3. part of this petition? The 3. part of the lords prayer.



Phil. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever.
Which words are a reason of all the former, by which we are moved to crave
all the former blessings at the hands of our God.


Euch. Why does Luke leave out this clause?


Phil. Either because the Evangelists did not bind themselves to a precise
form of words, or because this prayer was uttered at 2. several times by
Christ in a several manner, leaving out not only this clause, but the third
petition wholly, the explanation of the sixth, and changing some words which are
in Matthew. But we have no warrant to do the like, as the Rhemists do even in
the Gospel of saint Matthew: being bold to mangle the Lords prayer, as they are
to leave out the second commandment.


Euch. Why is this conclusion added?


Phil. To teach. 1. To pray unto him who is able to hear us.

2. To pray in faith to him that will help us.

3. To pray in feruency as desirous to be helped.

4. To pray in humility, because al is of God.

3. To pray in thankfulness, because all is from God.

6. That in every petition we must have this conclusion in our minds.


Euch. What do you mean by these words thine is the kingdom?


Phil. Even that which David meant when he said, 1. Cor. 29.11.
Thine O Lord is greatness, power, and victory and praise, and all that is in
heaven and in earth is thine, thine is the kingdom, and thou excellest over
all.


Euch. Why is the kingdom said to be Gods?


Phil. 1. Because he made all.

2. Because he possesses all.

3. Because he commands all.

4. Because he disposes al.


Euch. What do you learn out of this.


Phil. That I may with confidence pray unto him, because as kings will provide
for the bodies and souls of al their subjects, so God my king will provide for
me.


Euch. But have not other Princes their kingdoms?


Phil. Yes they have, and in them do rule, and for conscience sake must ever be
obeyed, yet they rule by, and in, and through this king. Pro. 8.15 Dan. ^.37.
Revel 20.



Euch. How many properties are there of this kingdom?


Phil. There, it is a powerful kingdom, Thine is power, a glorious kingdom,
Thine is glory, and an everlasting kingdom, it is, For ever and ever.


Euch. Why are these three properties added?


Phil. That when we pray for, or against any thing in the former petitions, we
may be strengthened in the hope of obtaining them, by the consideration of the
Power, Glory, and Eternity of Gods kingdom.


Euch. Why is power attributed to the kingdom of God.

1. To distinguish it from the kingdoms of the world, in which many Princes
are heads of people, but have not power to subdue their enemies.

2. To teach us to give all power unto God.

3. That we must submit our selves unto him.

4. That he being a powerful kings we may in faith pray unto him.


Euch. How great is the power of God? See my book, life everlasting, of gods
providence.



Phil. It is not only of it own nature, in it self, and of it self, but also
in respect of the object upon which it can work, and effects which it can
produce, and of the action by which it can and does work, both infinite and
unmeasurable.


Euch. Can it be communicated to any creature?


Phileu. No, not to the humanity of Christ, for whatsoever is omnipotent is God.


Euchedida. Why then does Christ say, all power is given unto me?


Phil. 1. He speaks of that power which we call Authority, not of that which
is called omnipotency.

2. He says not all power is given to my humanity, but to me, GOD and Man.

3. If it be meant of the humanity, by this power is to be understood, as much
as the creature is capable of.

4. In that word, the humanity may be said to be omnipotent, as the word is
said to suffer, not in it self, but in the the flesh.


Euch. What do you mean by thine is the glory?


Phil. 1. That god has made al things for his glory.

2. Whatsoever we ask, they are means of thy glory.

3. The things which we ask shall be referred to thy glory.

And therefore O Lord grant these things unto us, because thy glory is most
dear to thy self, which will be also performed of us, if we sanctify thy
name, advance thy kingdom, do thy will, have our daily Bread, the
forgiveness of our sins, and he able to resist all evil temptations.


Euch. What is the third property of Christ's kingdom?

For ever and ever. Which is an excellent inducement to strengthen us in
praying.


Euch. Why is Gods kingdom, power, and glory, said to be everlasting?


Phil. 1. Because in themselves they are everlasting.

2. Of us they should never be forgotten.


Euch. To what purpose are all these arguments added here?


Phil. Not to persuade God, who knows our wants before we ask, but to
persuade us, that he who is a king of such power, glory, and eternity, he will
hear our prayers, and grant our requests.


Euch. What use do you make of this conclusion?


Phil. 1. That in our prayers we ever debase our selves, and ascribe all glory
to this King of Kings.

2. In our prayers to be ever persuaded of the power of God, that he can help
us, and the promise of God that he will help us. 2. Cor. 1.20.


3. That prayer and giving of thanks must go together, because this is a
doxologie given to God.

4. Whatsoever we ask, we must in purpose before, and practice after, refer
the same to Gods glory. For the Alpha of this prayer is, Hallowed be thy name,
and the Omega is, Thine is the glory.

5. That all governors must remember that they hold al in caepite, under this
head.

6. That if we be able to do any thing, all that power comes from God.


Euch. Which is the last part of this petition?


Phil. The seal thereof in the word, Amen.


Euch. How is this word Amen, The fourth part of the Lords Prayer.
taken in the Scriptures?


Phil. Three manner of ways: sometimes as a Nowne, signifying Christ himself,
Revel. 1. These things says Amen. Sometimes as an Aduerbe, as John. 3. Amen,
Amen, that is, Verily, verily, I say unto you. And sometimes as a Verb, as in
this place, signifying So be it, or it shall be so.


Euch. What then does this word Amen import, at the end of this petition, and
every prayer?


Phil. More a great deal then man thinks; for it is as much as if we should
say, thus, We have begged many things at thy hands, and we do desire thee to
hear, and are persuaded thou will hear all our requests.


Euch. What are we taught by this seal Amen?


Phil. We are taught. 1. To desire earnestly that we pray for.

2. To be persuaded that we shall receive it, Math. 9.11.
though infidelity be mixed with our faith.

3. Not to use this word Amen, so unadvisedly as we do, but to know what it
is to which we say Amen, least by ignorance we seal a curse to our selves and
others. Many of the like sort are in Daniel, and the Gospels, as Golgotha,
(...) Eli, Eli, Lamma sabach thani. etc.


4. That Latin, Greek, and Hebrew words may be used, when they grow so
common, that other people of a nation do understand them, for here is the
Hebrew word Amen, used in Greek, Latin, and English.


Euch. What now have you to say of all that has been taught you?


Phil. No more but this, that I and many others are bounden exceedingly to
Almighty God, that we live in such a Kingdom, where our children are so
taught in ye trade of their ways, that when they are old, they may follow
it. And thou O Lord to whom Kingdom, power, and glory belongs, keep the
Scepter of thy Gospel long amongst us, that the children to be borne may fear
thy name. Amen.


A short prayer upon the Lords prayer.
O Our Father: high in creation, sweet in love, rich in mercy. Which art in
heaven: the glass of eternity, the crown of incunditie, the treasure of
falicitie. Hallowed be thy name: that if may be Honye to the mouth, Music to
the ear, a fire in the heart. Thy kingdom come: pleasant without mixture,
safe without annoyance, sure without loss. Thy will be done: that we may fly
that thou hate, love that thou love, and by thee do that thou command.
In earth as it is in heaven: willingly, readily, faithfully. Give us this day
our daily bread: necessary for this life, not superfluous for our delights,
nor wanting to our necessities. And forgive us our debts: against thee, our
neighbor, and our self. As we forgive our debtors: who have wronged us in
our body, goods, name. And lead us not into temptation: of the world, flesh,
devil. But deliver us from evil: past, present, to come; spiritual,
corporal, eternal. And this we ask, because thine is the Kingdom, for thou
rulest al: Power, for thou can do all: and glory, for thou give all: now,
whilst we live, and for ever, whilst we shall live. Amen: neither doubt we,
but that we shall certainly obtain these things; because thou art loving as
our father, and powerful in heaven. Thou say Amen, by commanding, art Amen,
by performing; we say Amen, by believing and hoping: say but the word and we
shall be cured.

David tentatur, tentatus orat, orans
Liberatur, liberatus gratias agit.
August. David is tempted, being tempted he prays, praying is delivered, and
being delivered, he gives thanks.

This is the sum both of David's Psalms, and the Lords prayer.

Math. 26.41. Watch and pray that you fall not into temptation.

Errata page 60. lin. 14. and line 20. for beats, read leaves. and page 76.
lin. 9. that David, read even David, lin. 14. our God, read God once, line. 18.
reap read heap.

A Christian Directed.

AT LONDON Printed for William Cotton. 1606.

A Christian directed.
Question.

I See that you remember much concerning Christ's prayer, what must you observe
in your Christian practice?

An. As I am bounden to pray continually, so am I bounden to watch continually,
that neither by Satan's subtilitie, or the worlds vanity, or mine own
security, I be not surprised.

Quest Why ought you thus to watch?

An. 1. Because I walk in the presence of God.

2. Because I walk amongst many occasions of sin.

3. Because of my self I am shiftles to avoid them.

4. Because I can go about no good thing, but either Satan, or my lasts will be
ready to molest me.

5. Because many excellent men, have fallen very greiuousely, for want of
watchfulnes.

6. If I can thus watch without ceasing, I shall get in each action the peace
of a good conscience which is the greatest jewel in the world.

7. I shall be ready for any temptation, especially for death and the day of
judgment.

8. I shall be sure to do no such thing, whereof I can not give an accoumpt to
God.

9. I shall stop the mouths of mine adversaries when they call in question
my righteous dealing.

10. I shall cause my religion to be well spoken of, whylst others observe my
Godly conversation.

Quest. What must you do that you may thus watch?

An. 1. I must ever walk in faith, and to each part of Gods service, it is my
duty to bring it with me.

2. I must have Gods warrant with me, without which faith is no faith.

3. I must see what calling I have to each thing, without which a good thing
may be sin.

4. I must look to my thoughts, my words, mine actions, my gesture, mine
apparel, my diet, my recreations, my gettings, my spendings, and how I may
keep holy the Sabbath day.

Quest. What rules have you learned for your thoughts?

Ans. 1. That I be careful to keep a more narow watch over my thoughts, words,
and deeds, then heretofore I have done, to do them more waryly for Gods
glory, mine own comfort and my bretherens benefit. 1. Cor. 6.20. 1. Pet.
1.15. Proverb. 4.13.

2. That I cleanse my heart from the very first motions of all sinful
thoughts, as of Lust, Anger, Pride, Covetousness, Malice, Stubournenesse,
evil Suspicion, as knowing that the least sin deserves death, and does
deprive me of part of my comfort in my salvation. Ephe. 4.23.31 Math.
15.18.19. Col. 3.2.8.

3. That all my lawful affections be moderate, and without excess, and
greater always upon heavenly then earthly things. Col. 3.1.2. Phil. 3.20.

4. That I fulfill not my mind in all things, for then I shall often sin,
let me consider therefore whether that be lawful I desire, and for the glory
of God. Romans 14.23.

5. That I bestow no more care, and thought on the world then I needs must for
the moderate maintayning of my self, and those that belong to me, left my
thoughts be distracted too much from heavenly things. 1. Tim. 6.8.9. Genesis
24.63.

6. That I suffer not my mind to be occupied with unprofitable, curious, and
vain meditations; for which I cannot give a sufficient reason to God and man,
if I were asked. Pro. 6.14. Zach. 8.17.

7. That I think better of my brethren then of my self, and the more I excel
in any thing, be the more humble before God and man. Romans 12.16. Phil. 2.3.

8. That I take some time every day, to meditate upon, and to mourn for the
miseries and iniquities of the age wherein I live, and pray to God for remedy.
Psalm. 69.9 10. Ezech. 9 4.

9. That I think often of the vanity of my life, upon my departure hence,
daily looking for my Savior in the Clouds and wishing rather a good life,
then a long. Psalm. 90.9.10.15.

10. That I carefully meditate, and remember every good thing I hear or
learn, that I may readily practice it, when time and occasion serves. Act.
17.18.

Quest. What rules have you learned for your words?

Answ. 1. That I remember, such as my speech is, such is my heart, and that
both my heart, and mouth go together, but in holy manner. Ephesi. 4.29. Col.
4.6.

2. That my speech be gracious to the edification, good, and benefit of them,
with whom I speak, not to their evil and sinning. Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29. and
5.4.

5. That my speech be always more and more earnest, joyful, and comfortable,
when I speak of heavenly then earthly matters. Ephesians. 5.4. and 4.6. Psalm. 1.2.

4. That I remember I shall answer for every idle word, which passes out of
my mouth, to God or to man. Math. 12.36.

5. That multitude of words be often sinful, let me speak therefore as
few as I may, yea be rather silent then speak unprofitably. Prou. 17.27. and
10.19. Iam. 1.19.

6. That my words be no greater, or more then my master deserves, nor bear
a show of vice in me or any excessive affection. Psa. 34.13. 1. Peter. 4.11.

7. That as I believe not all that is told me, so I tell not all I hear, but
tell the truth only though not al nor always. Eccles. 3.7. Luke. 2.19. 1 Samuel
10.16. and 16.1.2.5.

8. That I delight not to speak of others infirmities, especially behind
their backs, and speaking before them, speak with grief and wisdom. Psalm.
15.3. 2. Tim. 3.3. Mat. 18.15.

9. That I speak not of GOD but with reverence, knowing I am not worthy to
take his name in my mouth. Leuit. 19.12. Romans 9.5. Deuteronomy. 28.18.

10. That in praising I be discret, in saluting courteous, in admonition
brotherly. Prou. 27.2. 1. Sa^. 10.4, Romans 16.16.

Question. What rules have you learned for your actions toward God?

Ans. 1. That I use daily prayer to God, every morning, and evening, that he
would guide me and mine affairs, for his glory and mine own comfort. Dan.
6.10. Psa. 55.17.

2. That I register up all my sins committed against him in every matter, and
with grief bewail them at fit time, craving pardon and strength against
them. Psalm. 51.3.

3. That every day something of Gods word be read and meditated upon, that
I may increase in knowledge and in godliness. Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 6.6.

4. That whatsoever I take in hand I first take counsel at Gods word whether
it be lawful or no, be it for my profit or pleasure, and then that I do it
with peace at least in my heart. 2. Sam. 30.8.

5. That I give thanks to God for every benefit that I have received, and then
dedicate the same for the promoting of his glory, and the good of his church.
1. These. 5.10.

6. That I sanctify Gods Sabbath daily, in using holy exercises of prayer,
preaching, meditating, and sacraments at the time. Exo. 20.8.

7. That any means God has appointed for any matter be nor more relied upon
then God himself, but he be first prayed unto, for the prosperous use of
them. 2. Chr. 16.12.

8. That I stick to God as well in adversity, as in prosperity, knowing the one
to be as necessary form as the other, yet let me pray for my necessities, be
humble when I have them, that I use them well, and that I loose them not. Iam.
1.2.3

9. That I mark my profiting in religion, prepare my self to hear Gods word,
attend when I am there, confer, and meditate about it after, 1. Cor. 15.10.
1. Cor. 11.28.

10. That I love all things for Gods sake, and God only for his own: that I
make God my friend, and nothing can be mine enemy, and accoumpt all things
vain to serve God sincerely. Philip. 3.8. Romans. 8.34.

Quest. What rules have you learned for actions toward your self?

Ans. 1. That I refrain my ears from hearing, mine eyes from seeing, my
hands from doing, and every part of my soul and body, from fulfilling any
thing vain or wicked. Job. 31.1. Psalm. 119.37.

2. That my meat, apparel and recreations be lawful, needful and moderate.
Luke 21.34. Ro^. 13.13. 1. Tim. 2.9. Tit. 2.3. 1. Tim. 5.23. 1. Cor. 10.31.

3. That withal care I redeem the time, knowing I shall answer for every idle
hour. Ephesians. 5.16. 1. Pet. 4 3.

4. That I be as sorrowful for the good deeds that I have omitted, as I am
joyful for the good deeds I have fulfilled. Romans 7.8.9.

5. That my especial sins and corruptions be inquired into, thought upon
with grief, whether they are weakened in me or remain in their old strength,
and that I resist them withal faithfulness, every day more and more, 1. Cor.
11.28.

6. That I remember with humility, all the good motions and actions God works
in me, that they may be pledges of my salvation, spurs to godliness, and
comforts against temptations. 2. Cor. 6.4.5. Romans 7.15.

7. That I suffer not my self to be pleased with mine unprofitableness, that
is with unfitness or unwillingness to serve God. Romans 12.11.

8. That I follow my lawful calling so carefully for the good of Gods church,
as feeling the trouble thereof, I be put in mind of my misery by Adam, and be
humbled thereby. Romans 12 7. Genesis 3.10. Eccle. 1.13.

9. That I take revenge of my self for my slipery sinning, beating down my
body that I sin not again. 1. Cor. 9.27.

10. That I never make more show of outward holiness, then I have inward in my
heart. Esaias. 58.5.6.

Quest. What rules do you learn for your actions toward others:

Ans. 1. That I remember that what soever I have that may be used toward
others, God has bestowed it on me for others benefit. Romans 12.6. and 1.11.

2. That I coumpt it not sufficient that my self serve God only, unless I
cause all within my charge by all means to do the same. Genesis 14.14. and 18.19.
Psalm. 101.1.2.3. and Josh. 24, 15. Ester. 4.15.

3. That I consider I am but Gods steward in all his benefits I have, let me
therefore employ them wisely to those that need, heartily, and in time. 1. Pet.
4.10.

4. That I behave my self toward them so sincerely that I may win the weak,
comfort the strong and make ashamed the wicked. 1. Cor. 10.32. Col, 4.5

5. That as I receive good in company, so always I do them some good to my
power, Romans 1.12. and 14.19.

6. That when I know others is sin, I mourn for it, and amend it if I may,
by brotherly admonition. 1. Cor. 5.2. Math. 18.15. Leuit. 19.17.

7. That I rejoice and praise the Lord for any good thing the Lord sends unto
men, knowing that it is for mine and others Godliness sake, that God vpholds
the work. 1. These. 5.18. Romans 12.15. Luke 1.58.

8. That I strive not whether other should do good to me, or I to them first,
but that I benefit even mine enemies, knowing my reward is with God. 1. These.
5.15. Mat. 5.39. Romans 12.20.

9. That I be careful to use the good I can receive by any man, knowing that I
am but a member of the body, and stand in need of other. Romans 12.16. and 1.12.

10. That I carefully crave the prayers of other brethren, and their prayers
to God for the gifts I have received, so I shall seal my fellowship in that
body more effectually. Romans 15.30. 2. Cor. 1.11.

11. These holy exercises I must not make common for the time, or use them for
fashion sake, but use them daily.

Quest. Seeing you have precepts for your actions, what must you observe in
your gesture and behavior?

Answ. For my gesture I must take heed. 1. That mine eyes be not haughty.

2. That my countenance be not impudent.

3. That my face be neither laughing nor lowering.

4. That mine hands be neither spread out nor cloesd in.

5. That I be not Apish in imitation.

6. That my gate be not too slow nor swift.

7. That I give place and reverence to my betters.

8. That I sit not before I am placed.

9. That I speak not before I am asked.

10. That I be not solemn when I ought to be cheerful, nor cheerful when
I should be sorrowful: but in all things behave my self as the child of God.

Quest. What rules are you to observe in apparel?

An. 1. For the matter, it must not be too good or too mean.

2. For the fashion not too new or too old.

3. For the color not too light or too sad.

4. For the wearing not too effeminate nor too sordide, and in a word my
apparel must be such as argues sobriety and holiness of mind, considering
the ends of apparel, which are.

1. For necessity that our bodies may be kept from the weather.

2. For honesty that our nakedness may be covered.

3. For commodity that we may labor in our callings.

4. For frugalitie according to our state.

5. For distinction both of men from women, young from old, magistrates from
subjects, the Clergy from the laity, and the Rich from the Poor.

And in wearing of apparil I must not look so much what I am able to do, as
what is fit for me to be done, to imitate the most grave and sober sort of my
rank, and to keep my self rather under then above my degree; which if I do
not, I do but wast Gods benefits, wear a badge of a proud heart, give
testimony of idleness, procure suspicion of leuitie by diverse fashions:
labor to confound degrees, and by the lightness of mine apparel provoke many
not only to suspect me of evil, but also by it to commit evil.

Quest. What rules are you to observe in diet?

An. 1. That I sit not down before I pray.

2. That I rise not before I give thanks.

3. That I feed only to satisfy honger.

4. That I cut not at the table of my betters before I am carved.

5. That I feed not of too many dishes.

6. That I desire not too much dainty meats.

7. That my supper be less then my dinner.

8. That I beware of too much strong drink.

9. That I rise with an appetite.

10. That in eating I remember the poor, and that this body which I feed
shall be worms meat.

Quest. What rules must you observe for recreation?

Ans. 1. That they be of good report, and of whose lawfulness there is least
question.

2. That I make not an occupation of them.

3. That I use them as recreations, not to trouble my body or mind.

4. That I stay not long at them.

5. That I loose not much at any recreation.

6. That I use no such recreations as I am ashamed that good people should see
me.

7. I must not give offense by abusing my liberty to any man.

8. After exercise I must return to my calling.

9. I must use such exercises as are of little cost, least loss of time, and
fit for me to use.

10. I must not then play when I should be at work, nor be merry in time of
mourning.

Quest. What rules are you to remember for getting riches.

Answ. 1. That my calling be such an honest calling, as that I be not ashamed
of the very name thereof, as usurers are to be called usurers.

2. That I get my wealth by honest labor.

3. That in buying and selling I defraud no man.

4. That I enrich not my self by the labor of the poor.

5. That to get, I leave not Gods service.

6. That I lie not, nor forswear my self.

7. That my weights, wares, and measures be good.

That I consider that it is hard to be rich and religious.

9. That I do as I would be done to.

10. That I commend not my servants for deceiving any.

Quest. What rules must you observe in spending?

Answ. 1. That I spend not above mine estate.

2. That I spare not when I ought to spend.

3. That I buy not that which is needless for me.

4. That especially I must give to the godly.

5. That I have a regard to my kindered.

6. That I give not too much to the rich.

7. That I observe times, places, and persons in giving and spending.

8. That I give not to the poor with reproching them.

9. That I boast not too much of my liberality.

10. That I be not liberal of another man's purse,

Quest. What rules are you to observe for the sanctifying of the Sabbath?

Answ. 1. I must rise early to sanctify my self, and all that belong to me,
for Gods service that day.

2. I must keep it from morning til evening.

3. I must frequent the exercises of religion and be present with all
reverence of prayer and preaching.

4. I must not so go from sermon to sermon, that I conter not of Gods word
which I hear, especially with such as belong unto me.

5. I must meditate of al Gods mercies, especially of such are given me in
Christ.

6. I must not make that day, a day of feasting, sporting, or visiting, as the
most do of friends abroad.

7. I must do no work upon that day, which might have been done the day
before, or may be don the day after.

8. I must labor to be at Gods house with the first, that so I may be
partaker of the whole service.

9. I must visit such as are comfortles, if I know or imagine they stand in
need of mine help.

10. I must be careful to provide something, which I may distribute to the
necessity of the saiutes.

These rules must I observe least it be lovely said of me, which was falsely
said of Christ, this man is not of God, for be keeps not the sabbath.

Quest. Now as you have learned these general rules of piety, come we even
to particulars; say that you intend to be married, what rules must you use in
choosing a wife?

Ans. I must look 1. That she be of good religion:

2. Of honest parentage.

3. Of good report.

4. Of civil carriage.

5. Of contenting personage.

6. A lover of godly company.

7. Of provident circumspection.

8. Of stayed years.

9. Of few words.

10. Of an honest nature.

Quest. When you are married what duties owe you to your wife?

Ans. I owe unto her: 1. Love to her person. 2. Chastity to her bed. 3.
Maintenance to her estate. 4. Cohabitation to her content. 5. Patient
forbearing of her infirmities 6. Admonition and commendation rather then
correction. 7. instruction in piety. 8. Due benevolence. 9. Kindness to her
kindred. 10. Cherishing in sickness.


Quest. And what duties must you look for from your wife?

Ans. These duties.

1. Reverence as to her head.

2. Chastity as to a part of her body.

3. Providence in getting and spending.

4. Nourcing of her own children.

5. Silence in keeping secrets, without declaiming against every domestical
unkindness?

6. Obedience to my lawful commandments.

7. Cherefulnes of countenance, and speech.

8. Diligent staying at home in some honest calling.

9. Gravity in her domestical behavior.

10. Sobriety in her apparel and gesture.

Qu. if God send you children what duties owe you to them?

Ans. I am bounden to perform these duties. 1. To bring them up in the fear
of the Lord.

2. To look that they may live in some calling.

3. To fit their callings according to their natures.

4. To teach them such civil behavior as savors of piety.

5. To give good example unto them in each thing.

6. To teach them at the least to read.

7. To correct them, doing amiss.

8. To commend them when they do well.

9. To apparel them rather comely then costly.

10. To deny them in many things their wills.

11. To leave them all some fit portion of my goods.

12. And lastly in due time to look to their marriage.

Que. What duties are your children to perform to you, and your wife?

Ans. They ought. 1. To obey us in things lawful.

2. To reverence us, as the authors of their being.

3. To acknowledge us, be we never so poor.

4. To endure our corrections patiently

5. To be content with our provision for them.

6. To seek all means by which they may please us.

7. To behave themselves so as they may credit us.

8. To be sorry when we are disgraced.

9. To follow us in the practice of piety.

10. To stay till we provide for them in marriage.

Quest. Now if to wife and children, God send you servant, what duties do you
owe to them?

An. For my servants I must be careful

1. That they be fit to do such business as I keep them for.

2. That I impose not too much upon them.

3. That they neither play nor work on the Lords day.

4 That they go and come with me to and from the Church.

5. That I examine them of such things as were taught.

(...) An. 1. I owe unto him. 1. Reverence as Gods angel.

2. Audience as Gods ambassador.

3. Obedience of Gods shepherd.

4. Maintenance as Gods labourer.

5. Countenance as Gods Minister.

6. Confession as he is a comforter.

7. Love as he is mine instructor.

8. Fear as he is my father.

9. Patience as he is my corrector.

10. Prayer as he is to break to me the bread of life.

Quest. I know by this my Ministers duty, and my duty toward the Minister;
but be it that I come to hear a sermon, what rules can you give me for
profitable hearing?

Answ. Surely these.

1. That you prepare for hearing.

2. That you be diligent in hearing.

3. That you be careful after hearing.

Quest. What rules must I observe before?

Ans. 1. That I leave al wordly cares at home.

2. That I pray for the preacher, people, and my self.

3. That I make my self not unfit by banqueting.

4. That I read his text before I come, if he follow an ordinary course.

5. That I come not with prejudice of the Minister.

6. That as I come, I consider whither I go.

7. That I carry my famuly with me.

8. That I inuit others to come.

9. That I bring a mind desirous to hear.

10. That I so come as I may hear the whole sermon.

Quest. What must you do in hearing the word?

An. 1. I must settle my self to hear.

2. Mine eyes must be bent upon the preacher only.

3. I must not offend the congregation by any noise.

4. I must read nothing in the time of the sermon unless I turn to places
alleged.

5. I must take heed I talk not with others.

6. I must remember I come to learn.

7. If the doctrine be good, neither voice, nor gesture must offend me.

8. I must rejoice most in mine own teacher.

9. I must observe the preachers methods.

10. I must note that which most concerns me, and then think that he speaks
to, and of me.

11. I must not be weary, if the sermon be long.

12. I must write the sermon if I can.

Quest. What must you do when you have heard?

An. 1. I must not depart before all be ended, nor before the administration
of baptism, if there be any.

2. As I go home I must think what I have heard, and talk of it as I go.

3. When I am come home I must confer of the sermon, and see that each of my
famulie have learned somewhat.

4. If I doubt of any thing I must ask the preacher, or some other.

5. I must not immediately after hearing go about my private affairs.

6. If the sermon be ended before dinner or supper, the best table talk is of
the sermon.

7. I must not so much censure the minister, as see what good things I have
learned.

8. It is not enough to say it was a good sermon, but I must know for what I
commend it.

9. If any of my people have been negligentlie forgetful, I must reprove them.

10. I must labor to turn Gods word into good works.

Quest. Thus I see how you shall not take Gods word in vain by hearing, tell
me how you may not take Gods name in vain by swearing?

An. Here I must observe.

1. Gods commandment that I must not swear.

2. His curse upon such as have blasphemed.

3. If I lie little, I shall swear less.

4. I must refrain pety oaths.

5. I must labor to forbear for a time.

6. I must bind my self from it.

7. I must consider before I name God.

8. I must meditate of the Majesty, presence, goodness, and justice of God.

9. I must get some to admonish me.

10. I must not be greedy of gain.

11. I must know that the more I swear, the less I am believed in a truth.

12. I must avoid the company of swearers.

13. I may note that there is neither profit, nor pleasure in an oath.

14. It is an argument of an Atheist.

15. Men dare not abuse she name of a King.

16. I take it in ill part when my own name is disgraced.

17. I must take away all occasions of swearing.

18. I must look to the practices of best men.

19. I must read, hear, meditate on Gods word.

20. I must give an accoumpt of every idle word.

Now to the end that al men may think of their end, and live well, I have
inserted here, in love to him, certain prophetical verses, found in the
pocket of a most religious young Gentleman, one Master Henry Morris, son to
M. Morris Attorney of the court of Wards, who thinking ever of sudden
death, died suddenly in Milforde Lane, Sep. 12. 1604. at the age of 23 years.

Twice twelve years not fully told, a wearied breath
I have exchanged for an happy death:
My course was short, the longer is my rest:
God takes them soonest whom he loves best*
For he that's borne to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some days of rest, but months of sorrow,
Why fear we death, that cures all sicknesses,
Author of rest and end of all distresses?
Other misfortunes often come to grieve us, us.
Death striks but once, and that stroke does relieve us.
He that thus thought of death in life's vncerte^ty
Has doubtless now a life that brings eternity.
Live for to learn that die thou must.
And after come to judgment just.
A Communicant instructed.

AT LONDON Printed for William Cotton. 1606.

A Communicant prepared to the Lords Table.
Question.

MY good auditor, after all these instructions concerning prayer and piety,
are you not desirous to receive the Lords supper?

Answ. Yea sir, I am desirous with all mine heart, if you shall think me fit
for so holy a banquet.

Quest. What must you do to be a fit guest? 1. Sam. 16.6. Psalm. 27. 1. Cor.
21.


Ans. Samuel bids me to santifie my self, David bids me to wash mine hands in
innocence, and Paul bids me to examine my self, and so to eat of that
bread, and after to drink of that cup.

Quest. How do you prove this examination to be needful?

Ans. 1. If the Jews durst not eat the pascall Lamb without it, I must not
eat of the Lambs Supper without it.

2. I must neither pray nor hear Gods word, before I see in what estate I am.

3. I come in the best sort I can to the feast of any great man in this world.

4. He that came without his wedding garment was examined how he came thither.
Math. 22.12.

5. If I eat and drink unworthily, I eat and drink mine own damnation. 1.
Cor. 11.29.

Quest. What things are required of him that will come a fit guest to the Lords
table?

Ans. Three things.

The first what I must do before I come.

2. What I must do when I am come.

3. What I must do after I have bin partaker of that holy supper.

Quest. What things are required of you before you come?

Ans. Two things.

First I am bound to examine my self.

2. I am bound to pray and meditate of diverse things.

Quest. What is examination?

An. It is a trial of my self how I stand in the grace of God.

Quest. What learn you out of this, that a man must examine himself before he
come to this table?

An. First that children are not capable of this banquet.

2. That ignorant persons must not approach to this table.

3. That mad people are not to be admitted to this feast.

4. That such as intend to live in their sins must not dare to approach unto
this communion.

Quest. Wherein stands this examination?

An. In five things.

1. I must examine what knowledge I have.

2. What faith I have.

3. What repentance I have.

4. What obedience I have.

5. What love I bear to my brethren.

Quest. Wherein stands the examination of your knowledge?

An. In two things.

1. What general knowledge I have

2. What knowledge I have in particular.

Quest. Wherein consists general knowledge?

Ans In three things whereof the 1. is What knowledge I have of God.

2. What knowledge I have of my self.

3. What knowledge I have of the covenant of grace.

Quest. what knowledge must you have of God?

Ans. I must know him to be such an one as he has revealed himself in his
word, to wit, one invisible and indivisible essence, and three truly distinct
persons, namely the Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the holy ghost
proceeding from the father and the son.

Quest. Must you know nothing else of God?

Answ. Yes I must know that he is creator and governor of all things, a most
wise understander and knower of all thoughts, most holy, just, and merciful to
his creatures, that he is eternal without either beginning or end, and that
he is present in all places.

Quest. What must you know concerning your self?

Ans. That by nature I am stained wholly with original sin: so that my mind
is full of blindness, will of frowardnes, affections of peruersenes, my
conscience of guiltines, so that thereby by I am subject to the curse of God in
life, in death, and after death.

Quest. What things are you subject to in life?

Ans. By reason of this sin, in my soul I am subject to madness, in my body
to diseases, in my goods to loss, (...) in my name to reproach.

Quest. What are you subject to in death?

Ans. To the separation of the soul from the body?

Quest. What are you subject to after death?

An. To be tormented for ever with the devil and his angels, and to be cast
away from the presence of God.

Que. What must you know concerning the covenant of grace?

An. That Christ Jesus has delivered me from this misery who being very God,
became man to die for my sins and rose again for my justification.

Quest. What particular knowledge is required of you?

An. I must know the nature and use of this sacrament.

Quest. What then is the Lords Supper?

An. It is a Sacrament wherein by the use of bread and wine, those that are
ingrafted into Christ are nourished to life.

Quest. What learn you out of this definition?

An. 1. That he cannot eat the Lords body, who is not of the Lords body.

2. That a man must come withal cheerfulness to this banquet and not to
fear it, as a man would do poison.

Quest. Tell me now what is the outward matter of this sacrament?

An. Bread, and wine, by which are signified Christ's body crucified, and his
blood powered out.

Quest. Is not the bread and wine turned into the body and blood of Christ?

Ans. No, for these reasons.

1. Christ instituted this supper before he was crucified.

2. Then he must have given his dead body with his living hands.

3. The bread after consecration (...) distributed into parts: but the whole
body of Christ is received of every several communicant,

4. The bread is the communion o^ Christ's body, and therefore not the very body.

5. This were to make the body o^ Christ of bakers bread.

6. The bread and wine will corrupt being kept after consecration.

7. We see and taste only bread and wine.

8. Else the wicked should eat Christ's body, and so must have eternal life.

9. This takes away the nature of a sacrament, wherein there must be a sign
and the thing signified.

10. It destroys the nature of Christ's body, making it alive and dead, in
hea^uen and upon earth, glorified and vilified, and in many places at one time.

Quest. But yet may not this be done by a miracle?

An. Priests have no promise to work miracles now a days, and that it can be
no miracle, it may appear by this unanswerable reason.

Every miracle is sensible, as when Moses rod was turned into a serpent, and
Christ turned Water into Wine.

But this miracle is not sensible, for I see bread and taste bread, I see wine,
and taste wine even after consecration.

Therefore it is no miracle.

Quest. May you not receive the bread without the wine?

An. No, for these reasons.

1. This were to cross Christ's institution.

2. It does dispriuiledge Christ's people.

3. It makes Christ's feast a dry feast.

4. It takes away the remembrance of Christ's blood shed.

5. The wine signifies not Christ's blood in his veins, but that blood which
was powered out.

Quest. What is the form of this sacrament?

An. The conjunction of the thing signified with the sign, the action of God
with the action of the Minister, and the action of faith, with the action of
the receiver.

Quest. What does the action of the minister signify?

An. His taking of bread and wine, into his hands, does signify Gods sealing
of Christ to bear the office of a mediator. Ioh. 6.27. His blessing of the
bread, the sending of Christ to be a mediator: his breaking of bread and
pouring out of wine, the execrable passion of Christ, and effusion of his
blood: the giving of bread and wine to the receiver: the offering of Christ to
al, even hypocrites, but the giving him only to true Christians.

Qu. What does the action of the receauer signify?

Answ. His taking of bread and wine into his hand, does signify his
apprehending of Jesus Christ by faith.

His eatinge of bread and drinking of wine, for the nourishment of his body,
his applying of Christ unto him self, that his true communion with him may be
more increased.

Quest. What is the end of this Sacrament?

Ans. 1. The assurance of Gods favor.

2. The increasing of my faith.

3. Fellowship with Christ.

4. Communion with the saints.

Quest. You said in the second place that you must examine your faith, tell me
therefore what this faith is?

An. It is a miraculous work of God, wrought in the heart of a regenerate man,
by the preaching of the gospel, whereby he does apprehend and apply to
himself particularly, Christ Jesus, withal his benyfites to the pardon and
forgiveness of all his sins.

Quest. How may a man know, whether be have this faith?

An. by these signs.

First if we can from our hearts renounce our false supposed goodness, and
can wholly rely upon Christ in the matter of our salvation: this nature cannot
do.

2. If we have peace of conscience arysing from the apprehension of Gods love
in Christ, and our reconciliation with him.

Quest. Which are the wantes of faith?

Ans. 1. Doubting and distrust of Gods mercy.

2. Presumption and vain confidence in our selves.

Quest. To come to the third part of our examination, tell me what repentance
is?

An. 1. It is a work of grace, arysing of a Godly sorrow, whereby a man turns
from all his sins to God, and brings forth fruit worthy amentement of life.

Quest. How shall you know whether you have this repentance or not*

Answ. By these marks.

1. If I have a Godly sorrow, whereby I am displeased with my self because by
sin I have displeased God.

2. If there be in me a changing of the mind and a purpose to forsake sin
and ever after to please God.

3. If I do daily more and more break off my sins, and abstain from inward
practice; keeping under my corruptions and ungodly thoughts.

4. If I can mourn for the present corruption of my nature.

5. If I have bin grieved, and craved pardon for my late sins, even sithence I
was last partaker of the Lords table.

Quest. You said that obedience was the forth part of our examination, can you
tell me what obedience is?

An. It is a free, hearty, universal, personal, and perpetual keeping of
Gods commandments.

Quest. How many properties are there of this obedience?

An. Five. 1. It must be free, without constraint. Psalm. 110 3.

2. Sincere, without hipocrysie. 2. Tim. 1.5.

3. Universal, not to some but to all the commandments. Psa. 119.6. Ia 2.10.

4. Perpetual, till the hour of our death. Math. 24.13.

5. Personal, in regard of our personal (...) 1. Pet. 5.1.

Quest. Which is the last part of examination?

Ans. Our reconciling one selves unto our brethren if we have made them any
offense. Math. 5.24.

Que. When are we fit to receive the sacrament in regard of reconciliation?

Answ. Even then when we are fit to say in the Lords prayer, forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And therefore many
inda^ger there own consciences in refusing to receive, lest they should leave
their sins and be reconciled to men. Now ye Lord grant that I may after this
sort examine my self, that at all times I may be fit to come to Gods table.

Quest. I hope you are well Instructed in examination. Tell me what
premeditation the second part of prepara^ is?

Answ. It is a consideration of those graces which we do receive by the death
of Christ, signified in the sacrament of the Lords supper.

Quest. Which are those graces that (...) must consider of?

An. Our redemption from hell, our deliverance from death, damnation, and (...)
of the law.

2. The remission of our sins, whereby we receive freedom from sin and
acceptance to life. Psalm. 103. 3.4. ps. 32: 1.2.

3. Which is a fruit of the former reconciliation with God, when we are made
friends with him. Col. 1.20.

4. Our communion and fellowship with Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.

5. Interest and title to eternal life by Christ, in whom we are sons. Ioh.
1.12. Romans 8.13.

Quest. What fruit arises out of these two?

Answ. A spiritual hunger after Christ and his benefits: for when a nian has
examined his wants, and has considered the riches of Christ, his heart longes
after the same. Ioh. 7.37.

Quest. You have well said all that you have yet said, how must you be disposed
in the action of receiving?

An. I must seriously think of these five points.

1. First when I see the minister sake bread and wine, I must consider the
action of God, whereby he sent Christ to work my redemption.

2. When I see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, I must consider, 1.
the bitter passion of Christ for me in so suffering. 2. Gods infinite love to
me, who sent Christ coredeeme me his enemy. 3* Gods wrath toward me for my
sin, which nothing could satisfy but the death of christ.

4, I must detest those sins of mine, which caused Christ thus to suffer. --

5. When the minister distributes bread and wine, I must consider, that as it
is truly offered unto me by man: so Christ is truly offered unto me by god.

4. In receiving bread and wine, I must apprehend Christ by faith.

5, In eating that bread and drinking that wine, I must apply christ
particulerly to my self, and be persuaded that as that bred and wine is made
the nourishment of my body, so Christ's body and blood is made the nourishmente
of my soul. Yea I must feel the power of christ to mortify the corruption of
my nature by his death, to quicken me in newnes of life by his resurrection,
and to give me power to fight against my dedly adversaries, the world, the
flesh, and the devil.

Is there nothing to do for you, after you have received this holy sacrament,

Yes I must observe these three things First I must give god thanks for so
great a benefyt 1 cor. 11.^6.

2. I must look to receive by it, increase of faith, and repentance, to rise
from sin, and to receive power against the devil.

3. If I feel this present comfort, to be thankful for it: if not, I must
know that it is because I have not prepared my self, or because my faith is
weak, or because I live in some secret sin: wherefore I must go to god,
acknowledge my fault and desire paron and comfort for the same: Now the Lord
grant me this grace, so to be partaker of his sacramental table, that I may be
partaker of his heavenly table, through Jesus christ my lord, and alone blessed
savior, Amen.

Ille non edit Corpus Christi, qui non est de corpore christi. August:

He cannot eat the body of Christ, that is not of the body of christ.

Accede, panis est, non venenu^: mala res non est, sed malus accipit, Idem.

Come, it is bread not poison; the thing is not evil, but an evil person
receives it.

A godly prayer for morning, or Evening.
MOst high and mighty God, and in thy son Christ Jesus our merciful, loving,
and gracious father, thou have commanded us to come unto thee, and upon the
knees of our hearts we do come unto thee, humbly entreating thee, before we
begin, to remove far from us, all such impediments, as usually Satan, casts
upon: this exercise; and so to quicken us up, by the spirit of supplication,
that in fear, and reverence of thy great name in faith, and confidence of thy
gracious assistan^, and in a seeking desire of the supplye of our wants, we
may put up, and power out our supplications unto thee: that as the messengers
of our souls, they may signify our wants, as the petitioners of mercy they
may sue for our pardon, and as proclaimers of thy grace, they may declare our
thankfulness, for all those mercies which we have received, and al those
judgments which we have escaped.

O Lord our God, we do here in thy prefence, and blessed are we that we may
come to thy presence) acknowledge and confess, that we are of our selves most
woeful, wicked, and cursed creatures. The corruption of our natures, the
iniquities of our lives do generally bear witness against us. But more
particularly we confess, that our hearts are full of infidelity by reason
whereof, we do not as we ought, either depend upon thy providence for the
things of this life, or believe thy promises for the life to come. Do thou
visit us? we are impatient: do thou deny us our desires in this world? we are
never contented with our estate. We are full of doubt for the life to come,
and full of distrust for the things of this life. We are glued too much to this
wicked world and as though we said in our hearts there is no god, our minds are
greatly estranged from thee. And alas miserable wretches that we are, we delight
in doing our own wills, it is not meat and drink to us to do thy will. In
the pride of our hearts, we exalte our selves above thee, and our brethren,
and boaste our selves as though we had receued nothing from thee. We put away
from us the evil day, and live as though we should never die. We walk on in
the hardness of our hearts, and by reason of the abundance of vainglory, we
rather seek praise of men then thy glory. Our souls are so filled with love
to our selves, that we prefer our own pleasure, peace, and liberty, before
thy majesty, or the love of our brethren, yea, hypocrisy is so rooted in our
souls that we content our selves with a profession of piety, and labor not for
the power of Gdlinesse,

And as for our lives they abound with actual transgressions against every
one of thy ten commandments having broken the same ten thousand times we Lord
have lived in contempt of thy providence, committing Idolatry with thy
creatures, taking thy glorious name in vain, and prophaninge of thy most holy
sabaths, we even we who sho^ have been upright, have disregarded our betters,
envied our brethren, defiled our souls with unchaste desires, labored to be
rich by unlawful means disgraced our neighbors, and Iduged after that which
was none of ours. We have herd thy word O Lord, but we have not believed
it, we have known thy words but have not practiced it. We have come to thine
house without reverence, approached to thy table without repentance, and
practiced many sins without remorse. Do we any good? we please our selves
too much: do we any evil? we fear thee too little: we are weary of praying,
when we talk with thee, we are careless in hearing, when thou speak to
us. If we read thy sacred and holy word, it is not sweet unto us as the honey
comb, but we delight more even in ungodly books. Yea O Lord, the pampering
of our bellies, the pride of our apparel, the negligence in our calling, the
mispending of our time, our vain conference at tables; our wandering eyes, our
wanton lusts, our ambitious minds, our covetous desires, our ungodly
speeches, our lascivious ears, our censuring of our brethren, our sin in
recreations, our unwillingness to labor; our unfaithfulness in life, our
forgetfulness of death, and our abuse of thy mercies, especialy in Christ, do
testify against us, that we have sinned against heaven and against thee; and
are no more worthy to be called thy children; Are we ashamed at this, and
reclaimed from it? no Lord, we are not ashamed. But howsoever it has pleased
thee to use many means, as partly by thy word, and partly by thy spirit: and
partly by thy mercies, and partly by thy judgments, to the end we might be
reclaimed from our crooked ways, yet we have contemned thy word, the ministry
of salvation; grieved thy spirit, the earnest of our inheritance; abused thy
mercies, the pledges of thy love; and forgotten thy judgments, the messengers
of thy wrath. Enter not into judgment with us thy servants O lord, for then
shall no flesh living be justified in thy sight. Be merciful unto us in
forgiving sins past, and be gracious unto us in preventing sins to come,
Correct us O Lord, but with mercy, not in thy judgment, for then shall we be
consumed, and brought to naught. Open our blind eyes, that we may come to a
particular knowledge of our particular sins, especially such as we are most
given unto. Soften our hard and stony hearts, that we may sigh and groan under
the burden of them: make us, good god, displeased with our selves, because by
sin we have dishonored thy majesty. Stir up our dead and dull hearts, that we
may hunger after Christ and his righteousness, and after every drop of his
precious blood. In that son of thine look on us thy servants: and for his
merits, and righteousness, vouchsafe good God, mercifully and freely to do
away all our offenses. Wash them away in his blood, and, by the purity of his
spirit, cleanse our hearts from the pollution, and impuritie of them all, say
unto our souls thou art our salvation, let thy spirit in our hearts cry Abba
Father: Teach us O Lord thy way, and we shall walk in thy truth, O knit our
hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy name. And because, through corruption
in our hearts, and sin in our lives, our faith is feeble, and our confidence
small: we do humbly beseech thee, to strengthen our faith, by the daily
meditation, and particular application of thy merciful promises, made unto us
in thy son Christ, that neither in the dangers of this world, nor the trobles
of conscience, nor in the hour of death, we may fall from thee. Gracious
father, expel out of our hearts all carnal confidence, the underminer of our
faith, and teach us in the spirit of true humility, to deny our selves, and to
rely only upon thee, and the merit of christ in the matter of our salvation. And
because it is not enough to com unto thee by prayer, and to sue unto thee for
pardon, but all that ar in christ must be new creatures therefore we call upon
thee, for the spirit of regeneration; mortify thereby the corruptions of our
flesh; and quicken us thereby in the inner man. By the power of Christ's death let
us die unto sin, and by the power of his resurrection, let us rise to
righteousness and newnes of life, let the one as a corrosiue, eat up ye dead
flesh of ungodliness, and the other, as a spur, stir us up to holiness.
Illuminatour minds, that we may know thy will: give us spiritual understanding,
to discern good and evil. Sanctify our memories, to tresure up good things:
purify our consciences to have peace in thee: reform our wills to do thy will,
and let al our affections be ordered aright. Teach us to fear thee continually
whersoeuer we are, to neglect al things, in regard of christ to love thee and
our brethren for thy sake, to be zealus of thy glory, to be grieved at our and
other sins, and joyful when we ca^pleas thee. Let our bodies the instruments of
sin be ever hereafter cleansed by thy spirit that they may be temples for that
spirit to dwell in, keep our eyes from beholding vanity, our ears from
harkning to variety, our mouths from speking blasphemy, our hands from
committing of iniquity, and our bodies from the action of adultery. Let our
light so shine before me^ that they seeing our good works may glorify thee our
heavenly father. Make us to remember, that as we are sons, we must depend upon
thee, as we are servants, we must obey thee, and as we are christians, we ought
to walk worthy of our vocation and calling. And because we have al some
particular calling, either of rule or service, or trust, or favor, make us from
the highest to the lowest, Faithful in our callings, and to remember that a day
will come in which we must give an account unto thee of all our actions done in
this flesh whether they be good or evil. Take away from us all opportunity of
sinning, and make us ever thankful that we live so, as we want allurementes to
many sins. Cause us to see how deformed sin is in it self, and to what
confusion it is like to bring us: Lord make us to fly the very occasions of
sin, and to resist the beginnings of al temptation: let not a night pas over
our heads in which we examine not how we have spent the day: never let us come
into any company, wherein we may not not do, or receive some good. Keep us that
we fashion not ourselves to this world, but rather imitate the fashion of the
most godly in our callings. Let us never count any sin to be a little one,
because that our savior died for the least. And because we live in dangerous
times, wherein many ar withdrawn from the profession of thy truth, Lord give
us hearts never to entertain any such doctrine, which cannot be warranted out of
thy word: nor to admit of any such teachers, as go about to withdraw us from
obedience to our governors: and if any one fall into any sin, let us restore
such an one with the spirit of meeknes, considering our selves, yt we also may be
tempted We further acknowledge most gracious God, yt our life is a war-fare
upon earth our enemies are sin, Satan, and the flesh. Lord help us in this
spitituall combat: are we weak? be thou strong: ar we tempted: with the
temptation give an issue; may we be ouercom? tech us to watch over our own
hearts and ways? is there any one ^une which we are weak to resist? in the act
of temptation give us power to resist it: that by this means we may have as
just cause to praise thee in our co^quests, as we have many reasons to humble
our selves in our foyles. We see also, most all seeing God, yt none ca^ live
godly in this world, but they must suffer persecutions: either Ismaell will
revile them with a reproachful tongue, or Esau will pursue them with a blody sword
what now must we do in these days of trial? whether shall we come for help but
to thee? To thee therefore must we come O Lord our god: craving wisdom to
forsee, providence to prevent, patience to bear and hearts to be prepared for
this fierytrial: yt by the denial of our selves, distasting the world, and
liking of heaven and heavenly things we may make a good use even of the least
affliction. Confound in every on of us the cursed works of the devil: Increase
in us daily the gifts of thy spirit. Fit us for such calings in which thou
have or wilt place us; and make us to refer the strength of our bodies, the
gifts of our mind, our credit in this world, and what so ever grace thou have
already or wilt hereafter bestow upon us, to the glory of thy name, the good of
thy church, and the eternal salvation of our own souls. And how soever we live
here in this Babylon of the world, lord let our conversation be ever in heaven,
yt whether we eat or drink, or what soever we do else, we may hear always
this voice sou^ding in our ears, arise you dead and come unto judgment. Many
other things have we to beg for our selus; yt our ignorance knows not to
ask, or forgetfulness reme^bers not to ask, hear us for the^ in thy beloved
son. And give us leave now good god to pray to thee for others. There ar no
christian people at any time assembled, but they are ready to pray for us, and
therefore it is our duty to pray for the^, We therefore commend to thee thy whole
church, and each member of the same: be good and gracius to these churches of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland give ye Gospel a free passage every wh^;
and put on the means by which it may be published where it is not, or maintained
where it is. Deuid not O thou indivisible go^, deuid not Ephraim against
Manasses, nor Manasses against Ephraim, nor both of them against Judah. The
coat of thy son was without seam, let ye church of thy son be without seame. Our
adversaries get ground, and work upon our division, knit us so together, that
there work may be as the confusion of Babel. Ar there any means to hinder the
curra^t of thy gospel? stop them in the head, poison them in the stream, stay
the^ in the time, and let their labor he like his that would repair Jericho To
this end be good to the light of our eyes, the breathe of our nostrils, the
procurer of our happiness, thy Solomon, our King: preserve his body in health,
his soul in soundnes, his heart in thy truth, his life in honor, his honor
from under miners, and his ears from flatterers, the have of each kingdom Keep
him, that he may ever maintain thy truth. Defend him against the insinuation of
practicing papists, who will never wish well unto him, unless they see we do
wish well unto thee Let thy good spirit he with Io^ do^ prince, season his
young years with the knowledge of thy will that as he grows in years, so
he may grow in sta^ favor both with god and men. Be good unto them that have
the ^ition of him; and make them instruments of much good, yt may be done by
him: Preserve with these our gracious Queen, let us see her as a fruitful vine
about the Kings house, and her children like to olive plants, round about his
table. And because where many counselors are, there is peace, O Lord bless
his honorable counsel in all things let them take counsel at thy word, and in
every consultation aim at thy glory. The peers of our land, the pillars of
our kingdom, we commend unto thee, make them contented with their present
honors, and to continue loyal to their undoubted sovereign. And because the
preachers of thy word, are the pillars of thy church, bless them all from the
highest to the lowest, that both by life and doctrine they may set out thy most
holy word. Take from the great, the spirit of ambition, and from the mean,
the spirit of contention, that both may labor as much as they may, to oppose
themselves against the common adversary, and not to advantage him by intestine
division Bless the people of this la^d; such as are called confirm them, such
as are not convert them: and to that purpose send and faithful pastor into
each congregation, who may speak a word in due season unto the^ Couch all our
hearts from the highest to the lowest with true repentance, that thy
judgments present and imminent may be prevented and removed, thy mercies still
continued to us, and our posterity after us, especially in the true ministry
of ye word and sacraments, that such as survive us may praise thy name. Be
merciful to all thine afflicted ones, be they sick in bed distressed in
conscience, pinched with poverty, disgraced for thy truth, or kept in prison,
and delivered to death: relieve them in their necessity, strengthen them in
their weakness, comfort them in there distress, mitigate their sorrows, and
turn al their troubles to thy glory and their good. To this end, give thy
servants comfort by thy word, sufficiency of things needful for them, bles the
fruits of the earth, disappoint both Turk and Pope, from incroching upon thine
inheritance, let all such prosper as sight thy battails: and let thy gospel be
preached from the one end of the world unto the other. In thy good time let
the sun of thy gospel shine upon Jews Turks, Infidels, Atheists and papists
belonging to thee.

Be good to our kinsfolks in the flesh, our friends in the spirit, and them
to whom we are any wise bounden, or desire to be commended to thee in these
our prayers and supplications.

Have mercy upon us now calling upon thy name, forgive our sins and manifold
deffects in this holy duty accepting at our hands this our obedience in
Christ.

And because thou have bin good unto us many ways, make us thankful unto thee
for all thy mercies: as our election in thy love, our redemption in thy son,
our sanctification by thy spirit, our preservation by thy providence; our
health in body, peace of conscience, our life in thy church, our gracious
Governors, our painful Preachers, our christian friends, our desire to please
thee; and that we have the ministration of thy word and sacraments, and can
show love even to our enemies. We thank thee O Lord, for all graces of thy
spirit, as faith in thy promises, hope of eternal life, fear of thy name,
love to thy majesty, zeal to thy glory, affection to our brethren, patience
under the cross, strength against our several temptations, humility,
gentleness, meekenes, forbearing, with many other gifts and graces of thy
spirit: all which we acknowledge, have proceeded from thy mere mercy. O let
us not he negligent in the use of all good means by which thy grace may daily
grow up in us. We do also, with all thankfulness, remember all the blessings
of this life, our deliverance from our enemies in 88. our preservation from the
pestilence in 93. our protection from Gunpowder in 95. as all other favors
which we do enjoy under the blessed government of our gracious Prince, and for
all thy goodness under our lase noble Queen. We thank thee, that thou have
sustained us in great weakness, releiued us in much necessity, comforted us in
much distress, resolved us in many doubts, delivered us from many dangers,
preserved us from many sins, made us willing to desire to do thy will, and
bestowed upon us such a larges of thy good creatures, that we are more fit to
give then receive. Bless us now and ever hereafter, keep us and all ours,
and all that are nere about us from all dangers whatsoever, and grant us all,
such a portion of thy grace, that whether we stay at home, or go abroad, watch
or sleep, rate or drink, buy or sell, be in labor or recreation, we may
ever labor to glorify thy high and great name in the works of such callings,
as thou shall call us unto, and fit us for, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, in whose name and in whose words we further call upon thee, saying
Our Father which art etc.

O LOrd bless us and keep us, O Lord make thy face shine upon us O Lord
grant unto us thy sweet and everlasting peace, especially that peace of
conscience which the world cannot give, with the pardon and forgiveness of all
our sins, this day at this time, and heretofore committed against thee, with
a blessing upon thy church and children every where, as well as though we had
named them, thorough Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

A thanksgiving for our late deliverance from that unnatural conspiracy
against our King and State.
ALmighty Lord GOD father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our most
Gracious and merciful Father, many are thy mercyes toward us, and that our
souls know right well. And as we cannot be ignorant of them unless we be
senseless, so we may not be forgetful unless we be thankelesse. By thee our
lot is fallen into a good soil; and by thee we have a goodly inheritance; by
thee are our bodies delivered from sickness, and by thee are our souls
delivered from sin; by thee our names are not a reproach unto our enemies; and
by thee our estates are not a prey unto the Idolatrous. Thou even thou have don
great things in our land, and thy right hand amongst us have brought mighty
things to pass. What is it O Lord, that thou have not done unto this vine of
thine English Israel? and what could thou do more for it then thou have?
Thou have planted it by thy hand, placed it in thy vineard, hedged it by thy
providence, guarded it by thine Angels, watered it by thy spirit, pruyned it by
thy rodds, supported it by thy power, committed it to thy husbandmen,
beautified it by thy mercies, and fructified it by thine abundance, not of
sower, but sweet grapes. The wild boore of the woods can never root it up;
the beasts of the forest shall never devour it. Lord continue still to visit
this vine, which without thy visitation, must be fruitles and strengthlesse.
Thou have cast out the heathen, and planted us in; thou have subdued our
enemies, and made us the mirror of the whole world: Thou have given us thy
Son to be our Savior, thy word, to be our instructor, thy Spirit, to be our
sanctifier, thy preachers to be our monitors, thy sacraments to be our seals,
and Kings to be our nursing Fathers, and Queens to be our nursing Mothers.
When our enemies came against us, thou subduest them; when our light was
extinguished, thou oldest set up a greater, 1588. Q. Elizabeth. K. James. 1603.
when the plague was amongst us, thou calmest it, and when our Country was to
be betrayed, thou wast our deliverer. What shall we render unto thee for all
these favors? or what can we render for all these mercies? O our souls,
praise the Lord, and all that is within us praise his holy name. O our souls
praise the Lord, and let us never forget his benefitts. We Lord had bin blown
up with the powder of rebellion, had not the power of thy providence watched
over us. We therefore, our Princes, Nobles, Clergy Commons, our Wifes,
Children, Servants and al, are here before thy Majesty this day, and now
render unto thee (for more we cannot, and more thou desire not) the sacrifice
of praise, the calves of our lipp^, for this wonderful deliverance, showed
unto our Gracious King and Country. Lord teach us thereby to be thankful unto
thee, obedient to our governors frequent in prayer, fervent in the spirit, and
zealous in good works, least a worse thing hereafter happen unto us. Make us
to detest Popery the poison of Authority, Jesuits the bellows of sedition,
Papists the plotters of rebellion, and to think better of our Christian
Brethren, and this, not new, but most ancient religion of ours, by which we
are taught Piety to God, Loialty to Governors, Peace to the Church, reverence
of superiority, charity to our inferiors, amity to our equals, love to our
enemies, patience in tribulation, thankfulness in prosperity faithfulness in
our calling and honesty to al. And seeing of late thou have delivered our backs
from whipping, our liberty from serving, our souls from dying, our country
from consuming, and our King and Estate from a sudden blowing up, Lord we
pray thee that the meditation of this mercy may never depart out of our minds,
but that we may be thankful unto thee for mercies received, and fearful of
thee, for judgments escaped. Teach us to pray unto thee alone, who can hear
and grant our requests, to keep our country from invasion, our Church from
dissension, our houses from infection, our State from alteration, and people
from the cruel mercies of the Italian Popedom, whose faith is fancy, whose
force is fraud, whose trust is treason, whose obedience is hypocrisy, whose
laws are traditions, whose pardo^ers are priests, whose savior is the Pope,
whose god is an Idol, whose service is ceremonies whose glory is their shame,
and whose end is damnation, except they repent. Let the Sun of the Gospel
be never eclipsed, the Light of thine Israel never be extinguished, the hope of
our happiness never be subverted. Nor the branches of our vine ever cut off.
Thus we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall have just occasion to
praise thy great name, in the face of thy congregation from this time forth
foreuermore. Lord keep in our King the Spirit of Majesty, in our Queen the
Spirit of Chastity, in our Prince the Spirit of Piety, in our Nobles the
Spirit of Loialtie, in our Councellers the Spirit of Prudencie, in our Clergy
the Spirit of Vigilancie, and in us all the Spirit of Fidelytie, and as for
such as wish evil to this Sion of ours, the Honor of thy name, the Palace of
thy pleasure, the Place of thy protection, and the Wounder of the world, if
they beelong to thee, give them hearts to repent and to return to us, if not,
or ever their pottes be hot with thorns, let indignation vex them as a
thing that is raw. Even so let all thine Enemies perish O Lord. And unless
their Children be better then the Parents, as the Prophet prays, deliver
them up to famine, let them drop by the force of the sword, let their wives
be robbed of their children, and be widows, and let their husbands be put to
death: let their confederate young men be slain by the sword, let them be
overthrown in the day of thine anger, and let none be left to make lamentation
for them, and to say, O my brother O my sister. Lord root all Cananites out of
this land of the living, that such as fear thee may dwell safely. Blessed be
the Lord God of our salvation for ever and ever, and let all the people say
Amen, Amen.

1. Sam. 12.24.25. Now therefore fear ye the Lord and serve him in the truth
withal you hearts, and consider how great thing he has done for you.

But if you do wickedly ye shall perish both ye and your King.

He that eats and drinks,
and lets grace pass,
Sits down like an Ox,
and rises like an Ass.
Grace before meat.
WE acknowledge and confess this favor of thine, eternal God and gracious
Father, that it pleases thy majesty to give unto us so many oportunities to
meet together, we beseech thee to bless us, and our meeting at this time, and
all thy good creatures provided for us, and grant that we may use them
soberlie, as in thy presence, and receive them thankfully as from thine hand,
to the glory of thy name, the good of our bodies, and the future salvation of
our souls, through Christ our Lord and alone blessed Savior. Amen.

Grace before meat.
ALmighty Lord God, and our merciful Father, we beseech thy Majesty to be
good unto us, in the pardon and forgiveness of our sin past, and by the
assistance of thy good and holy Spirit to prevent all them that are to come: to
watch over us as thou have done by thy special providence, to direct us
continually by thy holy word, to bless us in the use of all thy good
creatures, that now we shall receive from thy bountiful hand, giving strength
to them to nourish us, and giving hearts unto us to be thankful unto thee
for the same. And grant that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do
else, we may do all to the glory of thy most holy name, through Christ thy
Son, and our only Savior. Amen.

Grace after meat.
WE beseech thy Majesty, eternal God and gracious Father, to make us truly
and unfeignedly thankful unto thee, for all those mercies that we have received,
and for all those judgments that we have escaped, both temporal concerning
this life, and eternal concerning that life to come: for thy gracious
providence this day past, for our comfortable, and peaceable, and cheerful
meeting together in thy fear at this time, and for all thy good creatures
bestowed upon us, for the comforting and refreshing of these feeble and weak
bodies of ours. Now we humbly entreat thee, that as thou have fed them with
that food which is convenient and necessary for the same, so it would please
thee to feed our souls with that food which perishes not, but endures to
eternal and everlasting salvation; so as we may seek so to pass through
these things temporal, that finally we loose not things eternal. Bless
with us thine universal Church, our Kings and Queens Majesty, the Prince and
their Realms: O Lord continue thy truth and peace among us, with the pardon
and forgiveness of all our sins this day, at this time, and heretofore
committed against thee, through Christ our Lord and blessed Savior. Amen.

Another after meat.
O Lord of eternal glory, who half elected us in the love of a Father,
redeemed us by the obedience of thy Son, sanctified us by the operation of
thy spirit, preserved us hitherto by thy gracious providence, instructed us
many times by thy good and holy word, and now at this present and often
heretofore, most graciously and bountifully refreshed and comforted us with thy
good creatures, and with the mutual society and comfort one of another, and
have bestowed many other good blessings and benefits upon us, as health of
body, peace of conscience, and abundance of thy good creatures, which thou have
denied to many of thy servants and dear children, which deserve the same as
well as our selves: thy majesty's name be blessed and praised of us and thy
whole church both now and for evermore. Amen.

Serenissimo Regi Iacobo Franciscj Bertj Carmen gratulatorium.
PApa quid effrendis? quid frendis Roma? superba^
Quod nunc te faciat, dic mihi, nunc quid habes?
Bella quid? Arma? Minae? quid Bellarmine tonasti?
Quid nostros sic tu mordicus ore premis?
Quid parsone canis? tu personale Britanne,
Siccine relligio fulta cruore tua?
Sanguine placari diuos, animisque litandum
Anglorum stulti creditis: vnde fides?
Vana fides, and falsa fides, hac luditur art
Nescia plebs vera religione f^ui,
Sperastis sine spe, sed spem deusipse fefellit,
Etquam sperastis, non fuit atra dies.
Non fuit atra dies quam fex haec vestra papalis
Stuxerat, in vestrum concidit illa caput,
Nil ficti, factique dei, nil lignea virgo,
Et nil sanctorum saxea turba valet.
Non ea nostra voco: vis haec Romana; valete
Nil mihi vobiscum, ludite vos alios.
Ludite vos alios, non hijs deludimur Angli,
Relligio vestra est san guinolenta nimis.
Aspicite o ciues, et vos generosa propago,
Dicite, non veros credilis esse lupos?
Credimus, (et mentes si non dementia fallat)
Hic iterum talis non metuenda dies.
Sum animum, gladiumque tibi, viresque Iacobe,
Pugnabit pro te (qui titus) ipse deus.
Sum animos, gladios, and nostras accipe vires,
Quod magis est, nostram sum Iacobe fidem
Same animos, animasque simul, tesospite, nostrum
Quicquid erit, nostrum non erit: omne tuum.
Omne tuum: pia vota, preces, adiungimus istis
(Qua possis multo fortior esse) fidem.
His fortis satis esse potes: his vtere pennis,
Ne te decipiat Roma cruenta, cave.
FINIS.

