THE MOST pleasant Art of the Interpretation of Dreams, whereun to is
annexed sundry Problemes with apt aunsweares near agreeing to the matter, and
very rare examples, not the like extant in the English tongue.

GATHERED BY THE former Auctour Thomas Hill Londoner: and now newly Imprinted.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate near to S. Dun stones Church by Thomas
Marsh.

ANNO 1576.

To the right worshipful Master George Keabel Esquier, Thomas Hill wishes all
health and felicity.
AFter I had increased this treatise of mine (right worshipful) and waighing
how profitable this Art to be of the interpretation of dreams, in that the
same shows to us rather comfortable warninge then any vain and unfruitful
matter. And that none also but the wise and discret parsons, may rightlye
discern and Judge of Dreams, seeinge it is thought a rash matter to Judge of
unknown matters, (...) those which a man understands not.

Yet how Dreams may be known to ^m, which never had true dream, in ^at
they only happen to such, whose spirits are occupied with no irrational
imaginatio^s, nor ouercharged with the burden of meat or drinckes, or
superfluous humors, nor given to any other bodelie pleasures. For those which
are contrary to this order, are not properly dreams, but be named vain
dreams, no true signifiers of matters to come but rather shewers of the
present affections and desiers of the body. And yet dreams seen by grave and
sober persons, do signify matters to come, and a spirit undoubtedly shewinge
to them, which by her nature is a Prophetess, that se^deth forth such a
motion and workemanshippe, through which the body as in her proper dwelling,
may either be defended from the instant euiles and perils, or moved to the
attayninge of good things to come and that with diligence workinge the same,
that as it were into loking Glasses of the body placed, it might so behold and
foreshewe al matters imminent. Therefore this difference of true dreams from
the vayn ought diligently to be noted. Further who that knows rightlye to
judge these, understands a great part of wisdom, and they which judge of the
same, have a sure and perfect Art. Besides Hippocrates and Galen do write,
how that the Phisitionnes by the Dreams of the sick) may the redyar and
aptlyar appoint a perfect diet and due medecines, also for the recovery of the
sick: wherefore I see not now that the rash judgment of the ignorante, can
rightlye condemn the knowledge of this Art, seeing the learned, yea and holy
Scriptures, do both allow and witness of Dreams. As the same I may here
aptlye apply out of the Prophet Joel. xi. where God says I will breathe
down of my spiry^^on all the earth, so that your sons and daughters shall
Prophecy and your old me^ dream dreams, and your young men see visions.
Also in sundry places of the new testamente we read how that the Apostles
and other holy men, were taught and warned by dreams. Besides the learned
Trogus writes, that Joseph the son of Jacob, first found out this laudable
Art of the interpretation of dreams, although Philo attribute the this
inue^tio^ unto Abraham his great gra^dfather. And after him did the Godly
Daniel and wise Salamo^ leave in wrytinge of this art, as their Pamphlettes
extant at this day do manifestly show. But to be brief we learn that this
art of the interpretation of Dreams, does especially consiste of wisdom, and
by conjecture in that he which coniectureth cunninglye, is counted a natural
Prophet. So that the interpreters of Dreams (as witnesses Quintilia^) are
named coniecturers. Yet for that there be so few parsons that see true Dreams,
and fewer which understand or observe them, yea and most few which can
interpret them, therefore of this, is the art now come into a contempt with
most persons. And although^ I might here write sundry examples (for
confirmation of this art) both of kings, Princes, and others, which vver^
warned by their dreams what to do o^ avoid or what vvoulde succeade after
yet for that I mind to be brief, and no to seem tedious unto your vvorshipp
in so small a treatise, therefore I omitt^ them, crauinge pardon of this my
rud^ attempt unto you. And to conclude, I s^al perceive this Treatise to be
thankfullye accepted at your hands, it sha^ encourage me shortly to set forth
my little Treatise of Probleames with their apt aunsvveares, under your
worshippes name.

Thus leauinge to trouble your worship any longer, I commit you to God who
send you a godly increase, and happy success in this life.

Your most bounden Thomas Hill.

The Preface to the Reader.
IF it be superstitious (gentle Reader) and therefore denied of some men, to
have a foresyghte and iudgmente in things to come, why is not then denied to
learned Phisitio^s, sklfull warriors, weary husbandemen, and polytycke
Captains, to have knowledge in the Arts of divination? If they be condemned
which be of such antiquitye, so generallye received, and so often confirmed by
the sundry works of learned me^, who then shall dare presume to open the
secreates of dreams, where in is contained so high, and so many mysteries. But
great pittyie were that so noble a knowledge, so necessary to all men be
trode^ under foot, and so lightly esteemed. At Arts of forknowledge has been
of long^time had in great price and estimation. I times past the noble
warriors, the grave Senators, the mighty Princes, and almost every private
man, did direct al their doings, and wayghty affairs, by co^iectures and
diuinations.

The worthy Romans, seldom took ^nye great matter in hand, before their
southsayers or wise men brought them good or badde tydinges. The Grecians, ^he
Arabians, the Chaldes and the Egipti^ns, did also the like: where upon what
through the great credit it grue unto, and what through the commodity and
pleasure ^he found thereby: many bente their minds to invent mo such
studies, which ^s they increased in nombre, so were their operations diverse,
and their judgments several. Of the which number many may worthily be cut of,
some as most detestable and wicked, some as vain and frivolous and many as
mere foolish, only those are so reserved and excepted, wherein any wit,
wisdom, or reason is contained, among this sort, the divination by dreams
does occupy as a Mistress (...) of the chiefest roumes, for that in it
besides certain and infallible rules, besides quicknes of wit, there must be
adjoined dexterity in learning, gravity in debating the matters and moderation
in indgeme^t without the which neither ca^ this art nor any other be used in
their right kinds, but al erroneous, no profit shall rise to yt Dreamer, no
honestye to the deuinoure, nor no praise to the art it self. Let not the
misvsage of some me^, take away or deminish the comme^datio^, that is incide^t
to so good an Art. Let not the rashness of some in lightly credityng every
ignorante and unlearned professors of the same, be a discredit to that which in
it self is grounded on certain and sure precepts, but rather when such
errors do happen, let us return them on the parson, and not on the Art. For
if through the mysuage of some men, good things should be condemned: what Art
so good should not be misliked of? what doctrine so wholesome for the people, so
profitable for the common wealth and so necessary for man's use, should not be
clean banished Then should Physic because under some men's hands, their
pacientes prosper not, be rejected. Law, for that sometimes judgment is given
amiss be abolished, and the use of Surgery because the Chirurgia^ does often
keep the wounded in longer pains then he needs, be cast out of a Common
wealth. But as these knowledges are never a whyt ye less esteemed, thought the
unskillfulness and rashenes of the practisers, put ofte^tymes the patients and
clyents in great hasard, peril and mischief, no more ought this Act of
divination to be eschewed, whereby dangers may be foreseen, and yet it self
void of all danger and peril. What haz^rde of life: what loss of
substance? or what danger of lim ca^ a dream put ye dreamer unto? ene^ so
much as when he awaketh, he wondereth how such imagination or fancy crept into
his mind. Be his dream never so terrible or fearful, as falling into the
hands of thieves, werewou^ded by the^, fightinge in bloody battles, or on
every side beset with enemies, in such manner as it would make a stout man to
quake, yet when he awaketh no skin is broken, he has no ache in his bones,
he is still in his quiet bed, as whole and as safe, as when he went to rest
nothing so nor so, it was only a dream. If now he have his knowledge of
divination, what a comfort will it be to him? that examining the cyrcumstances
in their due time and order, shall prognosticate what such things portende. And
thereby may solace himself with good happes, and labor to prevent or hinder
the imminent mysfortune, or at the least arm himself so stronglye with
patience as quietly to bear them: for a mischief known of before, and
diligently looked for, is not so grievous as when it comes on a sudden. It is
a wonderful thing and almost incredible that dreams should have such virtue in
them, were it not that God has revealed it unto us: When he himself, as a
mean, often used them, to open unto his people of Israel, his secret will and
pleasure. Were it not that we have red of the wonderful chau^ces in old time
foretold by them: and were it not again that we daily se the effect of
dreams. But alas, our ignorance makes us so blind, that we know them not,
until they be paste. For a man beholdinge in his sleep the top or end of an
house fallinge down, hearing a dog to bark or houle, seeing a hare to
chase a hound, or a byrd to fly without wings will seek no further, but
esteem it as a vain dream, laughinge at his own conceate, having more regard
to the present spectacle, then to the cyrcumstaunces to come making no more
account of them, then of things casual, natural, or impossible. For a house
to fall down is casual, a dog to barcke natural, the hare to persecute the
hound, is against nature, and a foul to fly without wings sounds
impossible. Yet al these by cyrcumstances signify such eue^tes, as may be for
the profitte or hinderance of the dreamer. It seems a thing against nature,
and a thing most strange for a woman to be delivered of a firebrande: if
Hecuba had left here, and sought no further, then had she not known how her
son Paris with who^ she then went, should be the destruction of his own
country Troy. It is monstrous for a Uyne to spring out of a woman's bowels,
and for the Branches to cover or shadow the great country of Asia, yet this
foreshewes Astiages, that of his daughter should be borne such a child, as
should grow to a mighty Prince and unnaturally should drive him out of his
kingdom.

For a Cignet to hane feethers sone grown out and flyinge into the element
fil-filing there the air with most sweet tunes and sound seems incredible,
and b^yonde man's expectation. But having ^ further eye, it may well signifye
some excellent learned man, for his learning wisdom, and virtue. These few
examples gentle Reader of an infinite number, I have set forth to show thee
what notable destinies, chau^ges of fortune, notable ^llucke, and notable good
luck, what honor, what shame, what singularitye in learning and wisdom,
have been it aunciente times by dreams signified and foreshewed. And in this
my treatice smal^ in comparison to the number I could se^forth, I will manifest
such strange happes as have chanced in later years, and also teach the
further how thou may vs^ and behave thy self in expounding suc^ as hereafter
are to come, And hear I^ crave at thy hands gentle Reader to vs^ good
descretion, to believe nothing rashlye, nor to pronounce any thing without
good judgment but first to practice i^ with thy self secretlye and then if
thy judgments fall out right, thou mais^ the bolder communicate it with
other ^f not, co^demn it not, but leave it to their ^udgementes, whose learning
being mo^e profounde, or knowledge more parfitte can better and more sincerelye
interpret the same. Thou know well enoughe, that if one stringe be out of
tune, it causes a^ vnpleasa^t sound of all the rest, or if the Physician
preparinge remedies ageynste poisons making rough things gentle medecines, do
myxe the^ untoward ^y and out of season, shall rather further the disease, then
cure the sick, even so it is with dreams. If they being somtymes obscure and
hard shall not be applied in their due order, but shall be negligentlye
waighed, over curious in some thing and rash in other, nothing is by them
known, nothing can be by them prevented and helped.

Thus gentle Reader, I take my leave of thee at this time, ceassinge to trouble
thee any longer, and I trust I have spoken sufficientlye to utter my meaning,
and to give thee warning, how to deal. If thou can attain to the knowledge
there of, I will be glad of it if thou can not, yet blame not me. that wishes
it with all my^ heart. I can do no more but teach, thyn^ it is to learn,
farewell and God prospethy doings.

Qui been co^iectat, vates (...) hic optimus extat.
The distinction of Dreams.
THe cause why Auerrois does rather attribute this passion of Dreamyng to the
Imaginatiue part, is that like as the motion of waking begins from the
outward senses, and ends at the memoratiue, even so does the motion of
sleep contrary begin from this, and Ends at the outward motions.
Wherefore seeing the same ^s a passion of the inner parts, and not of ^he
memoratiue, nor cogitatiue. For that as he writes, the woorkynge of ^hese, is
not manifested in the sleep, therefore the same shall be of the Imaginatiue
which only consists in the mouinge and continual dooyng and may also
recyue forms of the Memoratiue, when ^s the dream is of insensible matters
co^^eiued. And of both the like, when as the Dream is mix^^^ and of the
outewarde ^oinge also, like as of the hearing, or of ^^e understanding And he
further writes that when they happen true, the same then does somewhat
declare of that which was in the hour of knowledge, and yet this for the more
part not present being, for if this would happen in the present and instaunte
doing, that then the same should not forshewe things to come but rather
matters present. In that al^ things to come move and work according to
their causes. But how so ever the same be. yet Aristotle affirms, that
dreams may be caused by the sheadinge of forms, which proceade from those
things workinge in the act. Yet he perhaps means, that the same
signification of the dream, is not caused in the moving of it. Wherefore how
soever be doubted, that the understanding abstracted, may minister
Imaginatiuelye the^ knowledge of the particular indiuiduate when as the same is
of the general things by the which it does manifestlye appear that certain
are indiuiduates of the simple substances and certain of the mixte. So that
either they be ^uinge and as the mineralles, or have life woorking as the
plants, or otherwise sensitive as the Beasts, or of understanding as men.

And of the accidents also, certain are in the Symples, certain in the Myxte
and certain in Beasts, and of these besides, certain are of nature, and
certain by Art, and of it self also, or of hap. So that these not
otherwise mente, but only by accidente. Wherefore all the indiuiduates of the
simple and comp^^be by substaunces, and of all other Acciden^es by theymselues
have terminate causes, which although they may be understood by our
conceiuinge of them, yet ^^n they not be understood of theyms^lues, in that
these happen not under the se^^es, nor as things to come

But to be brief, like as the Physician by twooe propositions of which the
one general, and intelligible conceived by art, and that other particular and
sensible invented of some what, may prognostic^^e upon sicknesses and health,
even so the knowledge or dreams, may proceade of two causes the one of the
vniuersail, that is by the vnders^^^dinge, which does illuminat the
Imaginatiue, and the other of the particular under that. In that dreams for
the more part are caused of those matters, which be known to the dreamer.
And of this he concludes that y^ knowledge of the imaginatiue, is rather ended
at the similitude or kind of the indiuiduate, then at the indiuiduate it
self. Because that if the same be illuminated by the understanding, then is
that continually procured to be caused like it, with the kind whithe is more
spiritual then the indiuiduat. And a man also does more comprehend in his
dream then wakinge in the day time, because in a dream i^ more resolved the^
that in the day which is troubled through the doings of the outward
senses. And he concludes also, that a dream is none other, then a
fantastical appearaunce, which the person sleapynge conceiueth. For if they
are of those affections which be in us, the^ is the same either of the part of
the spirit^ and in such sort are they rather causes o^ the part of the body,
and are signs, bu^ those which are causes of them being without us seeing
by no manner they man be in our power, therefore are they name ^ accidents. And
a like example may her^ ^e applied of the Eclipse of the Sun, whose cause is
the Moon. which runs ^etwene. But the sign, is a star appea^inge in the
day time, running under the ^ight of the Sun, or as the roughnes of ^he
tongue, which declares the sign of a ^euer. So that a dream is the only
cause ^n that which imagines the venerall act ^n so much as fantasy does move
the drea^er to that act, which afterward he exer^iseth wakinge. Also the sign
may only ^e, as when we be moved and led unto the ^nowledge of any matter as
the like exa^^^le is written of a certain person, which ^reamed that himself
was thrown into a ^ost boat fat of pitche, in the which he ^hought himself
to be scalded, and wakinge upon the fear thereof did after vomit up much a
dust or brent choler. So that this ^ream was the^ a sign of the matter
pre^ent, and not the accide^t or cause why this ^ente before. And even the like
example, ^s he which dreameth these matters, that ^re not in our power, like as
those which ^re caused in the East, grau^ting that they may happen, yet was not
the dream the cause nor the sign like as he which speaks of any matter
wakinge and in the day time, although that may after happen in the dream, the
same ensued not altogether of the talk, in that not always nor oftentimes
happens the divisions but those, which are caused of the others, And for a
further knowledge to be understood, that although dreams forshewe rather
matters to com-Yet be many of them paste which help to the remembringe of
those wroughte in the day, and to the understanding of the others, and
perhaps to give warninge of harms that may happen. And yet these (after the
mind of Aristotle) do not of necessitye happen, because if any has dreamed
to be sick, and has in him self the cause of a sickness, yet may the
sickness be stayed by an other stronger motion of nature. For that in the
air do often times appear signs of rain, which after enseweth not, and
much like to this do certain conclude that there are such which before the
execution do cha^nge their determination Also dreams are much varied, which
do happen through the doings wrought before in the day time, in that not al
are solicited nor delighted in those, nor the vapoures do move in the same
sex, nor the ways of the common sense to the Imaginatiue and memory are
carried the like in one as in another nor there is not the self same manner
disposed in one time as in an other. Also to sick persons do some fearful
dreams happen, when as the spirits cariynge the virtues of life be aflicted by
some evil vapor. And the like when any fearing is moved to cry out, then is
sicknesses prognosticated to ensewe.

But of the interpreter of dreams be ought to be such a one wh^che has
perfict knowledge to distinguish the simitude of al matters and to be skillful
in the manners and conditions of the most people. Besides it isirequisite that
he be a person which leadethe an honest life. For although he may happelye
touch every kind of cause, yette is the same difficill to make apparaunte
how so ever the same may be reduced to the Act.

Which is the chief and principal purpose. And further headde the of the
interpreter, that he ought to be a most arteficiall iudger, which well
knows similitudes, in that all dreams fall not out right, for in this case
every one may easelye indge those dreams as the same happneth of the notes.
For that like as one beholding a far of two sundry things of like
distaunce, and the one of them he well knows, then through this be comes
the better and easelyer unto the understanding and knowledge of the other.
Also he ought to know how to discuss from like to like. For like as the
poets, which also are named natural prophets, do further pass by a small
similitude of any matter unto another like as in speaking of the nature of
Venus do thereby proceade to discuss the caulmnes of the air, and so like in
many others. Yet that person is apter to interpret dreams, which otherwise
is not occupied about other matters. And that men sumtimes, do dream in the
one they apply with the other, so that ye one for the other, they sometime
declare. And it is also written of Hercules, that he dreamed such dreams at
the first, which no person could expound, but dreaminge afterward the like
was then declared to him, as it after succeeded. Also it behouethe the expounder
not to be ignorant, how that the doings and business of me^ do daily alter
through the one, and through the other by the disposition of the blood and
spirits. For these when they be many and clear, do dispose the person unto
mirth. And the same is named a sign, because men beecome sad being in the
dark, unto which the humor very subtle and distemperate does the^ dispose
them. For otherwise being clear they dispose the person to behold and see
hid matters. But the subtle bumors over heated, do dispose the person unto
Ire, in that these be engendered of the burning and great heat of the blood,
easily and apt to be in^amed.

But the gross and clear, unto sports and the bodilye acts of mirth. And
often those persons in whom these are mul^iplyed, seem to laughe without
cause, and yett as the common proverb, is that ^othinge under heaven but
reioyseth, al^hough the same sometime may be covered (...) us. And the same also
they declare by the motion of them. For when they be moved vehemently from
the heart toward the outward part of the breaste, then do they cause Ire, and
toward the part downewarde shamefastnes, but when the mocion succedeth
outward, then does it cause joy and myrthe. And through the lack also of
them either in the quantitye or qualitye are the sensitive powers forced to
work either corruptly or dimynishedlye, even in the dream, especialye when
the ways and passages between the Imaginatiue and Cogitatiue, by which they
pass, be hiunred or trowbled, for then the powers are often deceived. Also
the disposition of blood through whoose subtiller part the spyrites are
engendered, does alter the workings both wakyng and a sleep. For when the
blood is clear, not gross nor subtyle then does it ingendre y^ like
spirits, which dispose unto joy and myrthe, eue^ like as the distempered,
blood woorketh un, to that kind of Ice which long lasts, and contrary wise
the thin and hot does work unto that which is sone kindled and sone qualifyed,
and the waterye, in contrary manner does work unto fear. But the gross
blood distempered in heat, does work unto the sturdim^sse of will, sadness,
wherefore it behooves the expounder of dreams to inquite orderlye, whether the
dream appeared pleasant or otherwise vnpleasante for the knowledge of those
does give great understanding to him. And it shall be necessary for the
interpretoure to consider and know what the person tradeth or occupyeth, and
of what birth he is and what possessions he has and what state he is in for
the health of body and of what age he is also which sees y^ dream. Also a
drea^e ought exactly to be told as either without any addinge to of matter or
taking fro, For yt these do cause great error unto the understanding of a
truth. Also if any shall doubt or be deceived in yt tellinge of his dream, then
must the interpreter needs be deceived, in the declaring of the true meaning
thereof. And in all dreams also which have not a manifest cause, it behooves
diligenty to mark, whether they be seen either in ye night or day time so yt we
may not think to make different of the night before, from the day, or ye night
evening from the morning spring, if so be he has moderatly eaten before
sleep. For that immoderate feedinge does not permit matters to be truly
decerned unto the morninge.

Of them which interpret dreams by the colors of the Stars, and by other
accidents.
ANd now some affirminge the art of deuining by dreams, do teach yt things
which appear in the proper nature do forshe we good: like as dreaming to
see the earth which of her nature is cold and dry, and of this shows the
dominion of the Melancholy humor in that person. And the like whereas they
write, that to see dry trees or cleft, does after signify peril of life,
which if that should be true, the^ many husbandme^ and fellers of trees should
die, because they often dream of such businesses which they earnestlye go
about and busy them selves in. And in the like sort this is not true, that to
see in the sleep deformed things, that the same foresheweth a sickness to
come, neither is this also true, if that a thing deformed of nature does then
appear far to the dreamer, that the farrenes does forshewe an evil, for
that some do think to see artificial garments should signify a deceit, in
that under these is the truethe often covered. Nor it disagreeth not that to se
filthye things in the sleep, that the same does declare corrupt humors,
because the stincke may proceeade of the outward means or be represented by
the kinds reserved and then should it rather argue the goodness of smelling.
And although the body grieved, may be said to argue many humors, yet may it
declare that the expulsive matter is shed forth to the caryringe down of the
grounds, or that the sinews or mouinge powers of the spirit are hindered and
stopped through some vapor or humor greuing, whereof it fails not under the
propre working that it may be attributed to one cause, with depends of many.
But well consideringe that the ^ayre is the outward cause of dreams, because
in the first it receives the impressio^ of the stars, and after touchethe
the bodies of men and beasts, which are alt^red of it yea in the day time,
like as appearethe in the night Raven and Owl, which (as most men affirm)
by his synginge over the chamber of the sick, is prognosticated shortly after
death, because as men say these, like as many other beasts are more easelye
changed in the respec^e of men, for that those are not occupied with earnest
cares, but that the air in this case does not only touch outwardlye, but by
the passages or poores the sense enterethe. And where that others say, that to
see in the sleep clear and brighte forms does signify that the bodies not
to be altered, this also is untrue because this may happen, when the
melancholy humor like to the sand, does purge and cause clear visible
spirits, and then although the clearenes of the forms, does declare the
goodness of these senses, yet is the cause evil in it self, because it
declares the dominion of that humor. Nor it is to be doubted, when
similytudes appear darklye, or shadowed with clouds, but that they may
declare a troublinge of the visible spirits, and when those tend unto a
witness, then do they signifye mattery humors, and when the shadow appears
small, then does the harm soon cease, and when it shows to the sight as
water or earth, then the harm shall be the greuousser, and the flower apt to
be resoined. But where some affirm, when the sleeaper dreameth to see stars
shadowed with fire or by a thynne cloud, that the same does argue the dominion
of choler, which rather may declare an indisposition of the eyes either
present or to come. And where they also afirme, that when the stars appear to
the dreamer that they are so busted, that they can not be decerned of him,
that the same is a note of death, especially if the person then dreamynge the
like should be sick as though the stars could not then help him. But this
truly is rather a matter to be laughed at, that to prognosticate death of the
impedimente of fight. Yet certain do allow when the stars seame to the
dreamer to move swiftlye, that the^ they prognosticate great Ire or madness to
ensew and that the inordinate motions also of them, to declare sadness and
heaviness to ensue. For the self same doothe the inordinat motion of any matter
argewe. And grant that the order should declare the goodness of the organe,
yet rather does it express the disposition of the powers of the sensitive
spirit, or of natural heat. Wherefore in the like matters, are the other
qualityes and proporc^ions of things, referred to the dreamer, considered.

Certain demaundes and their answers both of sleep and of those matters,
through which, some time we dream
ANd first why old men do not so well sleep, and dream the like as young
men do seeinge they take more rest. Unto which Auerrois thus answearethe, that
for so much as old men are of could complexion, although they may feed
sufficiently, yet have they natural heat over weak in them, so that they can
not well digeste the same and of this the fumes of the meat in the stomach are
not sent upward. But the young men have natural heat intensed, through which
they diggest their meat well, and of this send up much fume out of the stomach
unto the brain which cause them so to dream. Why is it, when in the dream
appears some fearful matter. that then the person sweateth, and waketh
upon the same. Unto which the philospher thus answers, that to the man
appears then that terrible matter to be present, and with enemies And nature
also being careful of y^ health of man, does both send forth heat and spirits
from the heart unto the outward members. So that nature judges it such a
ferefull matter, disagreeing to the man, that through the concourse of the
spirits about the heart, the heart of this is wrong together, and the man
thereby weakened of the same.

Why men commonly are not wont to dream in the beginning of the night. To
which the Philosopher thus answers, that the first digestion is then
occupied, in which the sumes of the meat much engrossed are sent up, that
mightily stop, and so cause the person that he cannot the^ dream. And those
also stop the passages, not only to the outward senses, but unto ^he organe
the keeper of times.

Why affirms Aristole thar a wicked person often foreseethe evil dreams, To
which is thus answered, that as the condition of the wickedness does incline
and dispose the person unto the often co^siderynge of the same, even so is be
moved to dream those things which were a good whiles together thought upon
in the day time, in that they sooner come to mind. So that the luxuriouse
person is often m^oued to dream of women, the drunkarde of sundry wives, and
y^ thief of sundry thefts. Why dreams which are caused in the morning, be
parfiter^ and to more reason, then the others in the night time. To which the
philosopher answeereth that in the morning the middle division between y^
common se^ce and the Organe reseruatiue is sufficient quiet, through which
the fumes of the meat elevated then, are sufficient weak, and of thi^s cause
trewer, and parfytter dreams

Why it is tht at to a man being a sleep appear he that he flies or
falls from an high place. To which the philosopher thus answer the, that
the same proceadethe of the indisposition of the humors of certain spyrites
and vapoures. Whereof in the body sometimes ^^che fumes are very light, and of
this ^use the man to think that he flies. But sometimes the fumes are over
gross and cooled by the brain, and do then disend to the heart and through
this it see^eth then to the man that he falls from high very deep

Why is it that a man sometimes dreameth of those things, which in all his
^yfe he never possessed nor saw, To which ^he philosopher thus answers, that
in ^he sleep is a certain compositio^ of fan^asies, through which composition
such ^ppearance is called. Like as when any ^haunge the kind of gold on a
hill, then ^o him appears in his sleep to have seen ^ golden hill

Why is it that the similitudes of ^hinges sometimes in the sleep do
appear broken, and sometimes defouremed. The reasone of this is in that the
^otte vapor is hindered to be shed forth that seeks the Uentricle or Organe
in which the similitudes are, wherefore of y^ troubled, they are then not
perceived under a proper form, and for that they may ^omtymes be caused of
those which were never perceived or decerned, and that heauelye sleapyng they
dream nothing, (...) that the powers of the spyrite or the imaginatiue is
hindered to pass unto the act^

And by the same reasone in a manner some dream nothing al their life tym
becaue the plenty or abundance of moi^stures causes the grosser spirits, and
(...) confounds the similitudes. But A^^stotle does attribute this to a
drines an^ coldness of complexion, for these as the philosopher affirms do
hinder the asc^^ding of vapors, which like happene^^ to old persons, by
reason of age.

Why is it that some persons neu^^ dream, nor dreamed all their life time
The philosopher thus aunsweareth, th^^ such persons are either over moiste
(...) quality, and the brain to much running so that the kinds cannot abide,
or such are over dry that the kinds in them ca^ not be imprinted. So that in
both sorts the Organe is over much unquieted.

Why does it sometme appear to us that the sight may be changed from the
one sensible and yet altered from the other. To which the philosopher
aun^^^ereth, that the same happens when (...) that alters, that the other
should be ^t to change, like as the mouinge of a ^rge or ship, which then
causethe to ^ppeare that the earth moves withal, cause this motion is like to
that which ^e earth should cause, if the earth did ^oue, yet the error may
be corrected, ^rough the upper power.

Why do some persons begin firste^^ dream, when they come unto old age. ^o
which the philosopher thus aunswe^th, that they throughoute their whole ^me of
youth are over much moving and occupied, so that they can not all (...) at
seasone dream. And this procea^th through the inward heat, which
continuallye resolved of the nourishe^ente. For in old age such euapora^^ons
begin to cease, through the wea^nes of heat, and hereof beeginne they (...)
dream.

Why is it that it appears often to (...) in sleep, both to see and hear
matters. ^o which the philosopher Aristotle thus ^unswereth, that to the motion
ceassing ^y which the forms are troubled, the similitude then of the matter
which was seen does represente the act of seeing, and heard, the act of
hearing, by which they were caused.

Why is yt that the virtuous men and studiouse, have often plesaunter dreams
then the wicked and vicious persons. T^ which the Philosopher Aristotle thus
aunswerethe, that the virtuous bestow^ them selves in dooynge good works and
of this the kinds of the good works are reserved and such virtuous persons
do dream of such like matters, which appear to them as very delectable.
But the evil persons which doo^ wicked works, the kyndnesse of thos^ evil
are reserved, through which they often dream, wicked dreams.

Why is it that such wakened out^ of sleep, be myndefull of their dreams,
and not of the works done in their sleep. To which the Philosopher thus
answers, for that whether the form^ of the dream remayninge imprynted i^
the Immaginatiue part, or for that the woorkinge of them was caused by the
Organes shut of them selves, an^ dissolved by accidente. Therefore the
simylitudes of the matters caused, could not be differred or carried unto the
common sense or ymmagination, in that the particulers wear bound. Yet are they
sometimes stirred up and moved forward, for that unto a strong motion in
the Orgaue, the sense may ensewe the motions of the moving spyrites

And a strong motion I mean, in that this may heat and resolve the moisture
stoppinge the commone sense. Nor it is not necessary, that for that time they
should be depryued by a voluntarye motion in that although the senses may
be harmed through the distemperatenes and diminution of the spirits, yet is
not in that season the sense of fantasye taken away, which is only cause of
the same.

Why is it that persons hoate by nature or eating hoate meats and
vaporouse, do dream much. The reasone of this is for that very much hoate
vapoure doothe sharpen the spyrites which placed in the Motion do move
forward the kinds restinge in the memory, so that the dream is caused of the
representing of them. And Aristotle writes, that through the boathe humors,
dreams are caused of matters a long time reserved, for although these may
abide in the Organs* quieter, yet through a strong motion of heat brought
back, may so cause dreams, or to dream after. Why appears it to the man
dreaminge that the dream is somtymes true, and sometime aunsweareth not the
like at al. The cause of this is, in that it some tyms happens that in such a
dream the judgment or knowledge of the virtue intellectiue co^curreth with a
sensitive virtue but sometimes the same does not concur: therefore when it does
concur, the man judges the dream to be false and the reason is in that the
intellectiue virtue does correct the sensityue. But when it does not concur
or accord then does it appear to the man that the dream is true. Why is it
that certain sleapynge do exercise the works of persons waking. The reason
is, for that not simplye they do sleep, nor properly be wakinge although the
vapor in the time of sleep does stop the Organe of the common sense, and
repelleth the heat and spyrits toward the heart. Yet sometimes with that
vapoure does some pe^mixte kind of be he mente concupiscence, or fear. or
boldness remain. For this when it moves the only Organe of fealyng in this
beginning, if then from that kind ^f his fantasy also is moved seeing it is
the beginning of the local motion, therefore sleapynge it is moved by it
self, and when the foresaid causes be base and weak, that is to say, not
moving out of the place, and when they be strong, then do they move from
place to place. And because the spirits and Organe are distinct senses from
the Organes, the motions therefore of them are for the more-parte not reasoned
of, but seeing they be not much distaunt, for that cause is not speech
hyndered in them, so that the Organes be not occupied or indisposed, for then
do they show foolishenes much like unto the condition of the sick. And
because the lower members which be the instruments of motion are less
hindered in respect of the upper which obey to the sense therefore those are
lowsed unto the motion, and not unto the sense, and because the qualitye of the
eyes is of the nature of water, therefore are they slower opened to see abroad
then the other members to move. But although such walk with the eyes shut,
and that rather by a hap, yet sometimes by Fortune or by Custom they come
unto the place in the day time immagined, not by sight in that the eyes are
then shut but of the inward fantasy by which they walk in the dark, like
as in the light or day time or rather this by a hap. And although they be
then without feelynge, yet the other senses do obaye in as much as they may to
the mouinge powers. But sometimes they think to kill a man, and sometimes that
they them selves are dead, because the fantasye doothe yagine that which
either it conueytethe or fears.

Why is it that such having bygge heads be lovers of sleep. The reason is
for that they easelye receive and retain the vaporous fumes of them, also the
moister brains are apter to sleep, whose near workinge is a vapoure without
doubt. Why is it that wine does sometimes cause sleep, and sometimes to wake.
The reason is for that when it is druncke moderatly, it does then cause sleep,
in that the vapoures of the wine do not trouble but easelye moysten and stop
the ways by which the spyrites and hear pass whereas waking, it doethe
otherwise. But when the person drinks much, or y^ the wine is strong, then
does it dulle and vex the powers, and instruments of the spyryt, which at
that time placed in the motion, do force the person to wake. And although

Nature troubled sometimes, these do cause astonishement, yet do they not then
perfitelye sleep.

Why is sleep caused moore and longer, by lyinge on the right side then on
the left. The reasone is, for that as Aristotle wrytethe, we do more wake
lyinge on the right side, yet sleep is caused of the contrary causes. Or for
that the right side is more wearied in (...) day time, which of these need
the the more rest, nor upon this side also, does the heart labor.

Why is it that only man whiles he sleapeth, boweth down in his sleapyng.
The reason is, for that the powers and spirits gyuing sense and motion drawn
inward, do not then suffer the body to be stayed upright or for that the
vprightnes of the fourm in man may cause of the same that the foresaid powers
and heat by their own nature may be carried upward or determined by the
proper kind yet by drawinge down those from the members, it behooves that
they fall as to the heads of beasts, of their own nature goo not upright. And
for that the ascending of those in the beasts is not so easily caused, therefore
the members in the^ seeing they remayn not altogether destitute of helps, they
stay up themselves the surer and better.

Why do beasts sleep a lesser time then they do wake. The reason is, for yt
the superfluityes multiplied by perfect digestion can not aptlye be sent of
nature without the body by one only expulsion. And, seeing we may often rise
to put away those, therefore is sleep oftentimes broken. Or rather for that the
greater part of the woorkings necessary to life, and in which man's perfection
consists, is performed in the day time, and not in sleep, in which man
differethe not from plants or beasts, and whom nature finds unto the end
of waking, for that we sleep quieter, and wake with more delight.

Why do me^ affirm, that sleep much helps to digestion. The reason is, for
that the same happenethe not to every thing, but rather in that which is
caused for the comfort of the whole body, as of the stomach and liver, upon
which the powers and heat more united do convert themselves, and be shorter
lines for they be in a manner in the middle of the creature. But to the other
particular members is the food digested sense, and if that lacks any thing
then the heat engendered suffiseth them, which may as well be caused in the day
time as in sleep.

Why do some write that the marishe or watery places cause sleep. The reason
is, for that from these are vapors ingrossinge and coelynge the air caused,
which breathed in or drawn in with the breath that spirits refuse, as
contrary to Nature it self which is clear and pure, so that through the
drawinge in of these, sleep enseweth. Or rather for that the gross air
brethed or entered in by the pores of the body, does by his grossenes grieve
at the first the brain, and after carried unto the common sense, does of the
same compel sometimes to sleep.

Why do the tellinge or hearing of tales sometimes cause, and sometimes put
away sleep. The reason is as yt is said that in some parsones the gross
moisture abounds, which if it so happens that through labor in the
hearing it is resolved into a vapor, then are they taken with sleep or rather
moved to sleep but the humor subtle in lean or chollericke persons, do moore
sharpen, and of this in the prickinge compel the person rather to wake: Why
affyrmeth the philosopher, that sleeping he thinks some times or through a
small noise to hear thunder, or through a little fleume sweet stillinge to the
tongue doothe then think to taste or eat milk, and so like in many others.
The reason of these is, that as they say by night, the outward senses bound
in the respect of the motions from without do perceive the inward far bigger,
whereof the common sense or other virtue dreamynge is deceived, in that he
judges those to be of other sensible matters, then in deed they be. And
Aristotle writes that the small motiones in sleep do appear bigger the^ in
the day time, because the senses in this occupied about many matters, either
perceive not those, or else discern the^ far lesser. And for that he thinks
those sometimes to be rather as honnye then milk, happens either through
the indisposition of the spyrites or life of the dreamer or of an other cause,
so that of particular matters, no firm rule can be given.

Or when the same should happen that Nature expelled from any principal
member any moisture like as ^^ewme in purpose as unto taste, or wyndye Humor
as unto hearing, and if now by reason of the first that which sheddeth forth
unto the Organe of taste is small in respect, yet the senses which perceived
and do retain the cause of the former motion to have been big in his
beginning or parhappes with a big and strong enforcement of nature expelled,
therefore the imaginatiue coveting to express y^ troublesomnes which it
perceyueth as big does so move other customed forms to represente inward
tastes, as of Milk.

And the self same iudgmente is of the small noise in respect of hearing,
which through the foresaid causes thinkethe ye same bygge, and so mouethe the
kind of thunder otherwise meant or thought before.

And why do some write, that such deuisinge or unknown matters, do often
falla sleep. The reason is, for that the daily beholdinge of matters, does
hinder the disgestion of nourishment, but vndygested, the humors then do
easily, euaporate up to the head and cause the dream to appear otherwise,
Then as they understand and be delighted, Because the diligente marking, and
considering of the matter, doothe then cause the parson to wake. And of this
when any reads not understanding the matter, he therevppon does often
times fall a sleep.

Because the spirits and power through the endeavor and agitation weakened
do return inward, that they may rest, after which ensewethe sleep,
rather through y^ labor, which also does often convert the humor into a
vapor

Why do the sick and dronken parsons give somtymes in their sleep angry and
froward words and sometyms gentle and honest words. The reason of this is
for that the spyrites vexed by an evil or obscure humor do then cause fear
after which then ensuethe hatred, that so forces the person to speak
frowardlye especially being a babbler by nature. But when the spirits be
cleared, then do they dispose that person unto a hope, and so to talk quietlye
and gentlye

Why is it that certain beasts sleep with the eyes oppen, like as the Hare
and fyshes. The reason is, for that the fyshes do lack eye liddes, which
very nature has denied them, in that they lightlye waked may sone succor
and defend them selves. And the hare when she is pursued or hunted after doothe
at no time hyde her self* in the wood among bushes, least her eyes always
open and uncovered, might so be harmed with briars and thorns.

Why is it, that the remembrance of the evil past, does not take away sleep,
like as otherwise of matters to come. The reason is, for if the same should
be true and both laborious, yet of that to come by reason of the fear
annexed, is the same with carefulnes. so that this lets him to sleep,
whereas of the known, it troubles him little or nothing at all. Why do some
sometimes declare to see or to have seen in their sleep Devils, and sometimes
saints or Angels. The reason is, for that although devils of their propper
nature have no color at all, yet because by this especialye as bye the black,
they are manifested to the people, therefore when it so happens that the
adust humor or fume does occupye the spirits and and passages, then the
cogitatyue ruled by the^, does cause the dreamers to belene y^ y^ similitudes
or black kinds to be very diuils in that they are then caused corruptlye to
decerne. And al though there can not be caused one only dream of all the
kinds which are reserved in the remembrance, yet are there ymagined many
diuills, in that they are comprehended under a certain vnicye of blackenes
imagined. And even like, when the foresaid similitudes and ways are affected
with the red couloure of bloudde mixed with flewme which for that the same
is white and the other redd therefore through, the worthiness of the colors,
they think the^ those to be either Angels or saints in yt both these were wo^t to
be so painted. And that y^ blood also does dispose the sick to gladness,
appears in the swan, which drawinge nere to death sings, because her
subtle blood is then dispersed in the ventricles of the heart. Yet sometimes
those be true deuilles, which show themselves sodeinlye, before the soul
departethe out of the man's body unto a greater pain, or rather parhappes that
God will, that such call to remembrance their wicked deeds, and that the sick
in conscience may thereof repent, and amend before death.

Of the opinions of physicians iu dreams.
THe phisicions also do observe, that dreams in a manner do declare y^
disposicion of our bodies, as either to health or sickness, which parhappes
ought rather to be searched out and learned by Art. Yet say they, that when
sleapynge men see black visiones, like as the dry earth obscure or dead
men, these they and such like, do forshewe customed sickenesses to be caused of
the melancholy humor, and they also warn us then to consider whether that
visione towched the whole body in that the sickness follows universal, like
as of the agewe or leaprye, for if in any part alone the partyculer shall be and
that it has nothing touched that it signifies upon the indisposition of the
spyrites, through which some sadness is wont to happen in the spirit and the
self same they declare of the blood For when it does offend in the like or in
as much, then does he think to see read and ayeryal matters, and what soever
is pleasant to behold so that a hot and moist qualitye is prognosticated
upon the motion or indisposition of the same, and then does it in like sort
either touch the whole body, or but part, And the like is to be said of
choler, when as it seems to him to see cytrene or fyerye matters, or
contentions. And the flewme in like sort, when as it seems to him to see the
white, watrye, glass, or clammye, and other like proportioned matters to that
humor, with the foresaid consideration. And allthoughe these may perhaps
yield to the place of the signs yet by them may not the bodily or inward nor
premitiue causes be found, out of these, as by the same appears. in that
they do depend of the gouermente of the six natural things by which they be
known without the dreams, and of the first also, in that seldom when we do
dream, we do then see those touched, except, that when they do foreshew
the hard expressions or properly the nightmare by which are wont to be
prognosticated the sickness named Apoplexiae. And many also of these which as
they say do commonly happen to health full parsons, without sickness following
Neither do the sayings declare the cause for somuche as it is manifest that the
subtle vapor of blood, or flewme ever heated by labor or sickness may cause
dreams to show of choler, with in deed bears not sway in the body, or else is
sone resolved or fumeth away.

But if you demand why they do foreshewe choler, when as a man in sleep
fears to fall, or thinks to have fallen?

The reason is, for that when the same is subtle and of a swift motion, does
then in dispose the spirits. and lets the motive spirits to proporcionate
the space between the bound, from which, and unto which. But the falling
either is a disco^tinuation, or not without these, for that wakinge a man does
not only fall, but throw himself headlong down, which regards not to
discende by the ordinarye steps.

Also other phisicions do reduce men's dreams, unto the inward or bodily cause
but these rather do happen of the effects or cares of the spirit begone in the
day time, and they are besides diverse in diverse persons, because, not al
persons occupied about the same, like as y^ occupyer and idle person, the
smith, or hus^andman, whereof the self same form does show one thing to
one person as to the couetouse man, an other thing to the lyberal person, or
Musician, another thing to the healthful, and an other thing to the sick.
Wherefore if it should be so granted, that the physician by the argument of the
humor rulyng may argu the temperatnes or diste^peratenes of nature, and unto
the more which either trouble or help, but these contrary of beasts in y^ by
time do diverse desires arise of which ca^ no firm or certain rule be given
but are wo^t as it is said to be aplied unto those which either we are by
nature, or custom, or by immoderat desire inclined but if those should have
an outewarde cause, then might they signifye many matters upon the issue of the
business of ye hap to come, but the sign of this is, as when dreaming he
remains after wandringe and amassed because the significations the^ do not
lack which also may be applied to the having inward cause of humors. But the
cause of the admiration, is either proceedinge through the new access of the
outward kind because they happen not customably, or else when the humor over
much rules or excedeth in the body.

Of the cause of Dreams.
THe causes of all dreams be on this wise, first those which are caused of
meats and drinckes, as in surfeytes are wont to be is the cause of the mocion
which properlye is caused of the vapoures breathing out of the fo^e. But the
sleep is the rest of the spyrites, and the wakinge, the vehemente motione of
them* and the vain dream is a certain tremblinge and imperfect motion of
them. Therefore al are vain dreams caused through the spirits lightlye
moved. Whereof whiles we soundly sleep, we then dream nothing at all.

So that all kinds of vain dreams in this point, do agree with the light
motion of ye spirits, and all do agree in the matter, for y^ the matter of ach
is the remembrance of y^ seen or heard, for no vain dreams are caused, but
through them. As y^ like for example, when a man in his sleep thinks to se a
monster with three heads, which he either heard of by the description of some
or saw painted in the like sort, which heads he remembered to be on this
wise, as the one like a Lion, the other a serpente or Dragon and the other a
Goat. That if any other strange matter also a man shall see in his sleep, or
some unknown thing, or deformed Plant then are those none other then
vnparfite things or transposed.

For an unknown man is none other, then when a man is vnparfitlye found.

And the knowledge of this is, that all men, yea the most known being seen
far of, are unknown. Therefore through the imperfect knowledge and tra^sposing,
and mixinge of sightes, are all dreams caused. So that it appears that al
dreams to agree booth in the efficiente cause and in the matter, for the
efficyente cause, is the moderate motion of the spirits, but the matter is the
memory of things seen, either whole or vnparfit. For as it is manifest that
there be diverse kinds of dreams, even so it behooves y^ the causes be diverse
for that through them, those are alwais caused.

This moderate motion ought not always to be thought so perfect, that this
moderation is exquisitely an indiuiduat.

But if the mocion be vehementer, and troublesomer, although it may be
moderated in the kind, yet are they called vain dreams, troubled, imperfect,
and confused. And in this manner do two kinds of them, arise, the one which
is of meat, and is the more confused and imperfect, yet more fayntly. For that
from the meat and drink the vapors are not so parfytelye carried as from the
humors, which so cause dreams more imperfect and lame, yea and more obscure,
in that the vapor is fatter, if the parson drinks wine, then of humors

Yet are the kinds not so stable, do. move with such a force, as those
which are caused by the humors. Wherefore the dreams caused of meat are less
parfyte less agreeynge, and in order, so that they appear more troubled,
confused and diverse, then those which are caused of the humors, as are
contrary, those which are caused of the humors be more stable in order and
agreeing, yet lesser troubled and diverse, and with less force, then those
which are caused of meat. And those which are caused with a lesser troublinge,
and be clearer, but caused as they were compounde through many remembraunces
conjoined, do affecte more by the sleep through that, which agrees that by
wakyng in the day time little. Also they agree for the more part to those
things either seen, or hard, or imagined the day before or but a few days
before, or else a long time before. And the^ do they show y^ order as it were
of the whole matter. But those which are in an order, and be with the least
motyon of the spyrites caused gentle, and that without any agitacion of the
upper causes procured, do yet more affecte the soul, that waking be may
then be holden with a certain admiration. And seeing a man may through the
effects, proceed unto each causes therefore ought a trau^ce to be ineche
kinds.

For if dreams by a great mocion may appear troubled, diverse obscure, and
imperfect, and that they seem a little to agree then shall we s^ye, that
either meat, or drink, or such like matter, was the causer of these.

Of the division of Dreams and order of interpretyng of the^
IT must needs ensue, that some causes of effect, to be true of all dreams
and of the others which are caused, and therefore those causes, are either
bodilye, or not bodilye, and hoth also either new, or before wrought. So that
it must uedes ensew, that there be four kinds of dreams. Now the new and
bodily causes, are meat and drink, like as the heads of Garlike, the
Coleworts, the Onyones, the Beans, and what soever ascend to the head, and
especially those which engender melancholye. Further yealowe choler doothe
cause to appear in sleep, both fyers and fighting, and Melancholye causethe
to appear in sleep claye, myer, or dirte, Burialles, graves, imprisonmente,
and fear, and blood causethe to appear spor^es, fair places, blood and
purple color: and the flewme causethe to appear waters, showers of rain and
snow, for that the same is a moist cold qualitye. But the vncorporate causes
precedent are cares cogitations, matter as committed to memory, fear, hope,
gladness, heaviness or sadness of mind hatred and love. But the new are those
which frame the superior cause come unto the soul. For of all the other
members all the causes of the divisions do so agree that many endeavor to place
this last under some of the three foresaid. And it behooves first ^o seek out
which may be of every kind, and therefore which true and which false, for
that none do show matters to come, but those which are sent from the
superioure cause, and those also which are caused of humors. And hereof why
those may be true it behouethe to show, and what truth also may be found in all the kinds.

And after that which be forms, that may be interpreted. And to conclude
the whole tretise as it euidentelye appears doothe either consiste of the
difference of things seen, or of the manner of seeing, or difference of the
dreaminges. For that by nature men see true dreams, which dream but seldom,
and false dreams which dayelye dream. Also such as be occupied in great
actions, and businesses, and greatly abstain from meat and drink nor are
troubled with fear nor sadness, do see and have true dreams, but such
affected in the contrary manner, do see false dreams. And for that cause the
dreams of Princes, are commonly true.

And such of honest manners true faithful, and godly, have for the more
part true dreams. And such which are not so godly, but cruel, yet no
deceivers, see commonly true dreams, and the supersticious parsons, do see
very few true dreams. Also he which is accustomed to see true dreams, to
his dreams is more credyte to be given, then to those which are of a
contrary manner. And men have truer dreams in the Summer and the Winter then
in the Spring, and the Harueste, for that in those times they often alter.
Also quiet seasons, do cause true dreams, but the wind, and boystrouse
weather, do work contrary, and the more boysterouse, the rather falser.
Besides short dreams and in order, are truer and moore euydente, and of a
cause more constante are caused. And dreams moved or cansed in the rysinge of
the Son, and, before or after unto the third hour, be for the more part
true. But those dreams at the noone time of the day and at the setting of
the Son, be not so true. For that the son is the author of the true and
constante things. So that when he shall be nere the angels, be does then cause
the truer dreams. And the terror or fear of things mouynge a man out of
bed do often follow true as the like happened to Caesar, the day before he
was slain. And the condition also which is fullfylled by and by of the sleep,
when it shall be without cogitation does the reason show true and most certain
dreams. be much before, or after the rising of the Sun, it shall then
signifye the cause to deginne, or else shall then be accomplished or discovered.
Therefore that space shall be referred unto the whole dream, as unto the whole
year. And now as to the qualityes of things seen, it is manifest that
whatsoever are presentlye begone, are sp^dylier accomplished, yea and that
very swiftlye those which presently through y^ proper course are near the
end, but those contrary, do slowly ensue. So that a man must consider the
nature of the dreamer, the age, and the rest needful, like as the wealthye
persons, and men in aucthority. And whosoever also have a constitute time, as
Magistrates for a year, like as the self samh custom is used in London, by
the yearly chosinge of the Mayre. And to be brief, the times of dreams are
either present or shortly after, or a long time after to come or paste, or
else a time appointed for that no man can number the years, months, nor
days, exept that when the words or peculiar signs declaringe the nombers
shall come. And besides these, whatsoever dreams shall be caused in the Kalendes
of Januarye, or on Christmas day, come to pass within a year after. And if
in the Kale^des of any month, or in the entrance of y^ Son into any sign
then within a month. And if in the same day of the Suns enteraunce, either
into the Solstice or Equinoctial, then shall the effect ensue within three
months. And if in the hour of the full Moon or Change, the^ within xv.
days after. And if at the Sunrysinge on the Sunday, then within seven days
after. And if at the new entrance of an office of gouernmente, or entrance of
a new house, or of the new dwellinge in an other country, or new enteringe
of a ship, or in any other beginning to speak generally before the end of
that bus^^^sse, shall the effect be accomplished.

Also dreams happeninge on Christmas day, and on the day of the salutation of
the virgin Marye, show marvelous matters to follow, and do also extend their
good happes unto the return of the next year. And the day of yt
resurrection, for that the same is a mouable feast does, signify the like, yet
chaunginge the form of things, as that the parson shall pass out of one
condition of life into an other, or else it declares that mutation to come in
the same year. And that no new hap besides of increase, for the present life,
is after promised of the same. And seeing in all matters, some one may be
better and worse, and which profits and harmeth even so must it happen in
the like wherefore whatsoever do remove impedimentes do cause dreams the
truer, for some impediments are of the mind, others of the body, and others
which hinder and trouble dreams. For the dreams art troubled of these, which
declare dreams of an other kind, like as meats and wine, and the veneral
act excessiuely used, and troubles of y^ mind and sorrow of which a man must
beware

Of the Authors proper opmio^ about the manner of interpreting Dreams, which
come by an outward cause.
AND to eschew the long, circumstances and prolizites of cerayne, and that
the readers of these may not be wearied about so diverse, as vain practices
which be written and declared by many, about the interpretation of Dreams.
Therefore we will follow and use a surer and easyer way, into these which
shall bring with it some wonted reason of others happeninge to come by the
which manner many have been invented. For many truly with these, co^ceyue to
direct of the particular doings in the day time: For how much y^ kinds moved
and altered be in the cause of remembrance, and oftentimes also with
similitudes perceived in the sleep or rather with the experience of them
which after followed, we saw to declare much. And many also when they see or
perceive, that it has otherwise happened or, come to pass, then as it is
wont oftentimes to them, to succeade and follow as to some good. And
contrariwyse, when it so meets, that it has otherwise hurted, then they be
stricken with a feate, which is the expectation of the evil, And semblably,
whe^the imaginatiue in a dream of himself, or rather with the hel^e of
another inward virtue does perceive some what from the outward that he
thinks to adioyne and apply like, and the dreamer also has experienced to
have otherwise come to pass then it moves again the similitudes or forms of
those matters, which in the like, or in some have happened, with the which
prosperous dreams he caused. And contrarywyse when he is myndfull that it
hurted, then he provoke them again, of which otherwise he received harm.
For not by one ha^ or hurt only, a man may conclude tha^ it may like succeed,
like as not one spring alon, works and multiplyeth the swallow, but by the
often coming of him, ^ that also somewhat contrarying the mig^tyer shall not
hinder, as the Philosophe says, which is, that oftentimes present signs of
rayue be at hand which succeed nor fall not after. So that not al things are
to be sought out by the causes. For it is truly as Aristotle says, that the
learned to earnestlye enquire and search out that which comes to pass or
performed in every kind, and how much the nature of that matter works, and
geeueth also a similitude, which appears by the Mathemathicane persuading to
prove by the orator to demonstrate.

Wherefore those are not to be denied, which by a long time have been observed
and found true, forasmuch as in their kind they be near to the terms of
the first principles. And if therefore deuining by this art, a man sometimes
may be deceived, it is no maruayle, because that no man hitherto has affirmed
that assuritye, that of dreams he may have such certayntye which he has of
the sciences and others, which we work wakyng in the day time in the which
also error happens. For both the Gramarian, does sometimes harberouslye
write and the Physician also harmeth in his cures.

Of the observation of the Autentiks in deuining or pronouncinge by similitudes
ANd they witness to this opynion, which the auncietne men did observe, in
deuininge or pronouncinge by them, for when as they saw and marked a certain
animal like to fly to go out of certain appels, they pronosticated the^
battle to ensue taking paraduenture their knowledge or perseuera^ce by this,
forasmuch as flies be in continual motion, and move or stir too and fro,
and be also of a deceytfull and importunate nature, like as to me^ of war.
Also they pronounced rain to ensue, of the eger bytynge of them for that
through the ele^ation of the vapoure one high they lacked the fode, with the
which before they were nourished, whereof they recurre to hard matters which
when they suck, by a greater inforcemente and might, they then byte. But
those beasts which cannot suck or byte, like as be frogs, and such like,
the which do sing or chirpe that they may the better draw the air to them,
for as much as they may not otherwise be nourished and live. And others
besides seeing worms very why^ to come out of the earth, pronosticated
plentye of corn to ensue, for as much as the whiteness of them proceeded not
but of the fatness of the earth. And others also markinge little spyders to go
out of certain fruetes, did pronounce pestilence to ensue, and paraduenture
the reason was because the spider is an animal of the nature of Saturn, which
oftentimes is y^ cause of the death of beasts, or else because she spinnethe or
weauethe her webbes which be in a manner like to that matter in which the dead
bodies to be buried is inuolued. And further by y^ similitude of a Serpent
they pronounced a secret^ enemy and by that similitude also of a wolf, they
pronounced a tyrant. And albeit now that this place is not the self same with
that before by effect, because that either is of the latter, and for that cause
in procedyng of the better known to us it swarued not much from the matter to
prosecute this way the which although that, in many it may be attained by
knowledge, yet he may have or come to it by the instinct or inward moving of
nature, for according to this truly, the lamb ^yethe the wolf, and the bird
also the hawk, and follow their dammes. For in the end life and the
continuance be not reserved, without the prosecu^ion of the conferences, and
es^hewing also of them. which may hurt and harm.

Of those Dreamess which were reported to have been proved
COnsideringe there is no other credit to be given to dreams, farther than
their nature requires, yet being requested or rather enforced by my fre^des. I
will therefore recyte certain of those which we have taken and known as true.
For although that many of them for the most part and especially those which be
caused by an outward manner, the reason or cause of them cannot be assigned or
given: yet had we rather satis^ye the requests of our friends, then by
wrytinge nothing, to avoid the slanders of malicious persons.

And first to dream that he sees* water altered in color, and substance,
albeit it may declare the evil disposition of the eyes, either present or to
come, yet if the color chau^gethe to rednes or darkness argues very whot
humors. And when the color is diverse and variable, argues the diversity of
the humors and that spyrites troubled and disquieted much, and outward
sorrows also. For these give or imprinte sometime into our minds some
similitude or sadness, but yet in a secret manner when as we be not intentive or
stable when we receive the same, for then we be not ve^ed by it, either
because we think not thereon, or be occupied before hand with other matters.
But when these impedimentes cease although the man thinks not on them, yet
the former similitude commethe again, and represents it self co^fusedly,
because it made not an impression before.

Wherefore when it is fearful he sorroweth, and the cause knows not, but the
same may happen of some inward humor which before rested, and after vexes
by it self, or by a vapoure or fume. But to come to the matter, whenne we
dream that we see the water troubled and much in quantity and permanent,
declares the abundance of many humors. If it appears that it runs:
sygnifyeth the caterre to come or present. He which dreameth that he sees
missing and light rain and the firmament clear argeweth a good disposition of
the spirits, with a little humiditye of the eyes: but the firmament to be
cloudye and bent to rain, signifies the abou^dance of these, and the
indisposition of them. And when to the sick person in a fever appears y^ he
swimmeth in the water, is then anotyce that nature contendeth against the
matter of the sickness, and that the paciente shall escape because the
resistance and fight argues the strength of him. And when one dreameth that be
feels himself much grieved as he were pressed or wrong together in the
body, is a notyce of benummynge or the night mare as we name it. For it
demonstrateth or declares the quality wherewyth the sleaper is vexed, rather
then any outward thing.

To dream that he sees himself carried as though he flyed, declares the
subtilnes of humors, like as to dream that he sees or touches snow or
hayle declares crude and raw flewme.

And dreams signifye evil, when the spirits and heat renewed in the sleep
transpose them upon those evil humors, which before rested, for as much as
then through these the like vapors be elevated and stirred up, and these by
their ill nature, cause men to fear. And universally all things seen or
appearing in the sleep otherwise t^en their proper nature, do argue an
indisposition or dystemperaunce of the powers or spirits, of the organes, or
humors, or of natural heat. Like as dreaminge to walk by narrow places,
declarethe a sickness to come of the lunges or lights, because he is
prohibited and let to breathe or draw necessary or congruente air, and
the reason wherefore is, because their passages and ways be stopped. And
^ccordinge to this sense, it is said that Physicians commonly help by dreams.

To dream that he sees menye Citizenes and Towns men gathered in the
Church, well apparelled, with mearye countenance and smylinge cheer: it is
found by experience, that he (...) happy marriage to be with good suck in
the end, if he myndeth the taking of a wife. And otherwise when they appear
sad of countenance, yrefull or ill fa^oured, then if that he that so (...)
be sick, it declares as has been experienced the death of the dreamer near
at hand, especially when they that are of his affinitye seem to associate or
company from others: for it disagreeth not, y^ one similitude with diverse
cyrcu^stances and respects may signyfie many things, like as sometime for
the lack of words, and signifies many things, yet the word or name is for
y^ more part at pleasure of the namer, but the thing it self is of nature. And
in all dremes the more good cyrcu^stances there are like as when they seem to
be in a pleasant, fair, good lie, green, and fruit^fu^^place, or in a
Church, or before ^ friend, and so of the others, so much the certainer
shall be the interpretation upon, prosperitye, and contrary wise upon
infortu^nacye: like as to dream that he sees himself in a barren place,
desert, or rude, or rough with stone, or troublesome, pronosticateth evil. And
when also he who dreameth is fortunate already, although the prosperouse
vision may have fewer testimonies, yet by reason of his own fortune, the
signification is enlarged in prosperytie and goodness: and when one being
unfortunate already so dreamethe, then with fewer testimonies may be
pronounced upon the evil end. And generallye to say when the vision appears
in the proper syte and due place, not defourmed nor troubled, not ^loked,
dissembled, nor cou^terfeyted, argewetth goodness of the operacions: and
te^peratnes of humors. But here must be made a distinc^ion, because with them
is associated somewhat appertayning to affairs or busynesses but with these to
the natures of the eleme^tes or mixtures. For when one dreamynge thinks that
he seethe or heerethe clearly and quickly declarethe the clerenes of the
animal or visible spyrites.

And to dream that he runs swiftly allthoughe it signifies that the powers
of our mouinges be tree and well, yet may it also pronounce the expedicion
of some business.

To dream that he meets women in black garments, with their head covered
declares privy deceytes intended against him as has been found true,
which thing booth the kind of them and also the color of the garments
persuades so to be. To dream that he seeyth a harlotte, or commoneth with
he, signifies deception or variances, which among y^ others be two
propertyes of them.

To dream that he smites or kills an enemy with the sword, is a sign ^
token of victory to ensue, as has been^ experienced, and if he were in suit
wyt^ him, yt declares that he shall have the sentence pronounced on his
behalf, o^ on his side,

To dream that he seethe a fryende, or priest of an honest and godly life
lokyng cheerful in countinaunce, declares a good hap to follow, for the
people use not to hurt us, when we are awake, but to dream that he has,
foul or pityfull face, signifies heuines of mind

To dream that he sees a man accustomed to, lie declares that it shall
contrarywyse happen in his business, then he hoped and looked for. But the
contrary is signified in seeing him that uses to speak true. To dream that
he sees himself put or thruste into prison, declares as has been proved,
that the business of which he is vexed about, shall sone be ended by agreement
or by sentence or the cause shall remain and ^reste as boyde and dead, for
imprisonmentes be the extremity and uttermost in civil controversies. To dream
that he seethe the Judge or Justice his face, altered in color or place,
declares that he will not perform that which he promised, for the
countenance, in latyne is named Vultus, because what a man willethe it
expresses and declares. To dream that he sees a Prince long a gone dead,
with a merry countenance or lokynge merely, signifies a vain hope to follow,

To dream that he talks with a dead parson, which he thinks to be a
live, signifies that some deception or wily deceyt shall be opened or
manifested, unto him. To dream that he sees a field or close of green
wheat, with ears not spronge out, declares joy without profit, or very
small, because the profit of the wheat consists in the ear. To dream that
he sees the air (which for the obscurytye and darkness thereof) he can not
discern, declares that some wicked fact by him committed, shall remain
uncovered and unknown.

If he, which is in love with a woman, dreameth to have found abirdes neaste,
and that he reaching or puttyng his hand into the neast, feels it could, it
is a toke^ of hasty or sudden sadness, and sorrow, for she shall either marry
to another man, or else shall dye, and he shall depart sone from that city or
abydyng place, into another town. For yt neast signified and is in ye place of
birth, and coldness expresses death.

And to dream or think that he has sound young ones there it declares joy
of wantonness or luxurye, and to take those birds, signifies a certain gain.

To dream that he sees a small ship entringe into his house and after going
out of his house, declares the death of the principal or head of the house,
especially when to him apeareth that in the house is water, for that
betokenethe the tears and the ship signifies the bear whereon the dead
bodies be carried.

And many things are spoken of the seeing of sundry beasts, as to dream that
he sees many horses, declares a hope of gain to follow, but if they walk
confusedly, declares the disquietnes and trouble of mind. If he thinks
himself to ride upon a fat horse and beautyfull* and in a pleasant place,
declares gain, with out controversy. If the horse be read it shall be with
strife and variaunce, and if cole black, with heaviness of mind, and if white
uncertain. To dream that he seethe lea^e asses, or wild beasts, that live
in woods, declares labors with ^eauines of mind. And lea^e oxen and lack
declares incommoditye and damage, ^fat and white, gladness and gain of the
proper industrye and if they be under an others care or keeping, it shall come by
an outward manner: And if they feed in a pleasant place it declares
abundance and quietness of mind, and if they be in continual chaunginge of
place, declares the gain not to be certain. To dream that he is bytte^ of a
Serpente, declares that he has a sharp humor, or that he shall be laid
inwayte for, and his humor shall be impaired and if he leaves a wound he shall
sustepne damage, and if the Serpent appears great the damage shall happen or
come to him by his superior if a small serpent, by a private or wicked person,
if it wear a venomous Serpent by a tyrant. And if it should some a Lion that
byt, he should be endamaged by a prince, if by a wolse, by a secret enemy.

To dream that he tatchethe fatt birds, signifies gain, but to hear birds
chatteringe which cannot be caught, signifies contention, and if they lyghtlye
and sone ^^ye away that it shall sone be ended and quieted, and if they fly
over his head, declares a heap of honors y^ he thinks he has them in
his hands, declares assured gain. If he which loves a woman, should dream
that he speaks in a strange tongue, declares that in few days after, he
shall speak and commune with her in secret, or else by letters. To dream that
he gooeth up to a ch^yre and in it declare doubts, arguethe that it shall sone
be reputed as true which he shall openly speak in the face of the people. To
dream that he sees himself clothed with a garmente which extendethe nor
passethe the middle of the leg, declares the expedition of a doubtful
business, which yet shall not be done and ended wtoute his shame or check. To
dream that the fruit which he gathreth, sauoureth sweet and pleasauntly
declares a good disposition of the humor and if of a stin^kinge, full, ome or
filthy savor, that they be corrupted, or those praises, and these rebukes.

To dream that he sees his debtoure clothed in a black garmente, declares
that he shall get nothing of him.

To dream that he wears two cappes on his head, the one upon the other,
declares that he shall soon after be infamed or slaunderes of a crime or
reputed y^ he has obtained some grace or favor with filthye gain, because
with the second crime, he shall hyde and cloak the brute or fame of the
first. To dream that he is in the palace of a king or bishop and that his
face appears cherefull, and in the accustomed haby^e, to get favor and
thanks, some say, that a man may prognosticate upon some co^moditye to come
and follow specially if he appear to smyle on him. To dream that he sees
his aduersarye or him that sueth for that, which he sueth for, upon a fat
or fair horse, declares that his adversary is apt to overcome, but if it
appear that he him self also riding, out rydeth him or out runs him, that
he shall obtain his suit, but with difficulty.

To dream that he which touches in aucthority in a common weal, is highest
his hand or any part of his body by which he shall feel him self warmed or
heated, declares that very shortly after he shall be hope^ by hy him in some
great business or affairs, for y^ touching more certifyeth and verifieth the
truth, then words alone spoken by them. To dream that he takes alms from
the altar signifies gain unthought upon.

To dream that he shows some cofer or cheste open, declares that shortly
after, he shall utter secrets to come.

To dream that he gathreth two or three green apples from the top of the
tree declares that he shall shortly after, be advanced in the face and sigh
of the worshipful and worthy persons. To dream that he is led or brought to
a gardeyn or pleasant place and after brought to a another barrayne or stony
place, declares that he shall within few days after betaken with a sickness
and if it may appear that there he should be distroyed, it signifies that he
shall dye of ye disease.

To dream that he is entered into religion or become religious that he shall
soon after be sick, and if it appearethe that he has published the
profession the^ that he shall dye for they that profess are counted dead to
the world.

To dream that he sees those things, which be wont to lie hid under the earth
as bones, or carcasses of the dead, or monstrous fourmes, declares that
thereof shall succeed straungenes and troubles, because they be contrary to the
course of nature, and they be also as diuinations and threatenings of
infirmityes.

To dream that he sees one coming and casting stones against him, declares
that shortly after he shall be damaged, and wrong done to him by words, or
that some man shall go about or endeavor to do him injury. And if any
executour of a will, shall dream that the man buried cries or calls him,
declares that he regards not, or negleceth the charge which he ought to
look upon and that soon after the inheritance or succession shall be wastfully
or ryotously spent away and consumed. If a woman dreameth, that her lover
comes to present her a swynes head as a friendly gift, declares that she shall
after hate her lover, and forsake him for that the hog is ungrateful to
Venus works.

To dream that he has eaten unaccustomed meat, which he labors and
streineth what he may to vomit up, and cannot: is a token of unlawful gain,
which he would restore, and shall not restore. To dream that he puts or
lays stones in diverse corners of the wyndow for a defense: y^ sone after a
chance or misfortune shall fall to him through which he shall need the
aid of many parsons and if he thinks they be laid upon a common wall,
that then the ^^fortune or ill chance shall come by the malignity and
enuoy^s^es of a neyghebour. To dream that a secret enemy first talks with
him, and after plays or deliuerethe carsts to him to play: declares that
he shall deceive, or shall do what he may to deceive him.

To dream that he hat^ three priuye members standin^e together: declares
that he was a pren^^ce or hired servant and now a free man, and that he has
atteyned three names for one as two of the names to come, by his freemanship.

To dream that he has ears of cornegrowen or spr^ng out of his breast, and
after comes to one to have them plucked away as unseemly to him there to
grow: declarethe that he shall have two men children, and through an evil
calamitye and myshappe, shall be slain, and thieves also shall besette his
house and break thereinto, and besides spoil his houses or barnes standinge
in the fields. For the ears of corn signifye the men children that shall
come and proceade of his seed, and the pluckinge away of the ears, declares
the occation of the children and the robbery of his goods. When a poor man
having a rich father, dreamethe that he seethe his fathers head plucked up by
a Lion and to be dead, declares as it is very lykely that his father shall
dye, and he left to be his beyre and by this mean he shall put away careful^es
and heaviness of mind and grow, rich. For then his father, shall over charge
or lay him noe moore nor be pressed by poverty. For the head, signifies the
father and the plucking or drawing away the privation or death of the father,
the Lion, the sickness, by which the father sickninge shall dye of. And the
death the exchange and alteracion of life and that through the falling and
coming of riches to him, he shall never be poor and nedie after. To dream
that he has no feet, or no soles of feet, declarethe that he shall be
burned. And a woman to dream that her eyes be soredeclareth that her children
shall be sick after. And to dream also that her children be sick, declares
that her eyes shabe sore and greueous.

If the master of a ship dreameth that he has lost the fore part of the
ship, declares that shortly after his governor of the fore part or deck
shall dye, And to dream also that he caryeth forth the gouernoure of the deck
to bury, him declares that the master shall lose the face or forepart of that
ship,

And if one dream that he sees his father sick, declares that he shall have
y^ headache, or be fore payned in the head. And one to dream that he has no
nose, declares that through a false crime and naughty deed done, ^e shall
fly, and forsake his proper country. For the lack of any member, or part of
the face, makes it loathsome to see to.

And who that dreameth that he drinks soft or thynne mustarde, shall after
as has been experienced be accused of murder, for y^ no man is accustomed to
drink mustarde, but of force, seeing that it is no customable drink to be
druncke, and it is rather to be said of that which commonly is said, that
is, who ever drank mustarde. And therefore it may be said that it is contrary
to the nature of drink, as vyolent death, is to the nature of man.

And if one dream that he lightethe a candell at the moon, shall in short
time after fall or become blind, as has been found true. And the reason is,
for that he seems to take light there, where it is in possible to take. And
besides the Moon, as it is said has no light of her own light.

A certain woman there was, who dreamed that she saw three proper images or
forms in the Moon and was delivered of three women children, which dyed in
the same month also, that they were borne. For those three images signified
the daughters, which one circle compassed and contained. For that in one
thynne skin named a second, the physicians say the infants and yonglinges to
be contained in the mothers womb.

And they lived no longer because the Moon perfourmeth her course in a
months space. A certain rich woman dreamed that she saw three ravens come
and sit on her, and that dishonestly to behoulde her besides the one of them
to say with a hoarce voice, I will take ^hy life from the and after these
ravens had flowen thrice about her, they departed away. The which woman the
nynthe day followinge dyed, ryghtlye and by good reasone. For where he said I
will take thy life from the, was like as if he had said I will deprive the of
thy life, that is I will kill thee. And that they flewe thrice about her,
did signifye the nine days followinge

A certain woman dreamed, that she saw her self to have done Hercules
laborues, who not long after being hastily or suddenly taken with fire, so
ended myserablye her life,

And one dreamed that he saw his face in the moon: who not long after
traueiled into far countries and there continued a long time forth in
wandringe about those regions, for the continual and swyft mocion of the moon,
declared that he should like wander here and there about.

A certain man there was, who dreamed that be thought himself to have an
iron yard: which not long after had a child by whom he was slain for that
iron by rust, which grows on the same is so wasted away.

And one dreamed that he went from home into a strange country, and lost
the keye of his house, and when he came home again, he found his daughter to
have lost her maide^head. Which dream declared to him that al things at home
could not be in safety, when the kaye so lost was ready for another to take
up, for either it signified as it is thought the misusage of his familye, or
else that his wife, daughters, or maidens, were entyced to follye in his house,
or else otherwise that his servants brybed and pylfred away from him.

And one dreamed y^ he thought he rose with the Son, and ran also with
the moon: who after was strangled, and so booth the Son and the Moon
arysinge saw him hanginge on high for he had the Son in y^ morninge in his
face and the Moon in his back at night so that he had the one good morrow
and the other good night.

A certain man there was, who dreamed that he thought his servant whom he
loved about all others, was turned and become a Fire brande which
afterterwarde fell blind, and by his servant he was led so that in this
manner in his servant was a light to him, to show him the way.

And one dreamed that he thought he saw a starrefall from heaven: and another
star to ascend from the earth unto heaven. Who then was a servant but
after his master dyed. After whose death, he thought he had been free and
without a master, but in the end he found that he was compelled to serve
his time with his mysters' son. So that the Star falling signified the
death of his master, and the star ascendinge up, signified the son to
be his master, under whom he should serve. And one dreamed that he thought
he crepte out of his own flesh like as the serpente being ^u^de, does cast
his slough, which person the next day followinge, dyed For the soul myndinge
or rather being forced to leave the body, gave to him such ymaginations, and
to dream the like. And one dreamed being in a strange country, that he was
borne again of his mother, who after returned from thence into his own country
and found his mother greeuouslye sick, and he after succeeded as heir to her.

And this was signified to be borne again of his mother that is to say, from
pouertye to become rich by his mother for in great need and pouertye he was
before. And one dreamed y^ he thought his bearde to burn in a light and clear
fire, without smoke: who had a son which after was in great estimation and
honored for his knowledge. And yet they lived not long together but that by a
certain incommoditye and mishappe were separated, and dwelt or lived a sunder.
So that the bearde burninge, signified y^ son to become excellent and had in
reputation: for the son was an ornament of the fathers, like as the beard to
y^ face. But because fire is wont to deminish and wast every matter therefore it
signified that the sone not to abide or dwell with the father: And the son
also was separated from him, and not dyed, because the fire burned clear
without smoke.

A certain man dreamed that he heard one say to him, thy staff is broken,
who after fell sick, and was brought to a palseye. For fyrmenes of the body
is declared by the staff that is to say the strength and good health thereof.
And the same man being long vexed and troubled with the palsy, thought in his
dream that his staff was broken, who very shortly after recovered his
health. For it declared that to him being so sick neaded not an outward stay
or staff: and that he also should recover his bealt, so y^ he should not after
neade a staff to walk wi^h.

And one dreamed that he thought he would have turned the head to look on
his shoulder, and could not: who not long after became blind of the one eye,
so that he could never after see that shoulder on the same side that the eye
was.

And one dreamed that he thought he was carried on a black Ox, and that y^
Ox bare him whether he would or no^, as to do him some other harm. Who not
long after took a iourneye by Sea, and was in great peril of life and not
many days after the ship brake and the shipp so perishing, he could hardlye
escape with life. And one dreamed that thought be saw a darte fall from Heaven,
which wounded one of his fee^e who after was bitten of a Serpente, and the
byte so rotted and wasted his foot that he died thereof. And one thought in
his sleep, to have a Barbours glass, and to stand with the same in the
streate near to the markette place and there to occupye himself as much as
he might with the glass, and after possessinge the glass after his mind did
therein behold himself, and saw al his Image filled with spots, who the^
loved a concubyne, and without good will and agremente of friends, did after
mary her, by whom he had a dishonest child not only for the fact, but for y^
the child had crooked and ill shapen eyes. So that the Barbers glass signified
a common woman, who lightly was alured to any person, to use her body
wickedly, and for that let by friends so much as in them lay, to mary her.
And where he saw his Image, signified his sone after borne, like to himself
in all parts, yet irreprehe^sible, for that the glass had spots.

And one thought in his sleep, that he brought his own wife into the
Bu^^hery to be killed, and there to cut forth her flesh into pe^es to sell,
and to make ^ great gain thereof, in so much that ^e seemed to rejoice
greatly thereat, and ^bat he after carefullye labored, where ^t might saflye
bestow and hyde the m^^ey received of her flesh sold, that he ^ight so
avoyde the envy grown ther^boute, who afterward carried forth his ^ife to be
dishonest with many persons, ^^d so made her a great gain to him by ^^at
means, which of reason moved him ^at he should hyde the fact.

And one dreamed, that he thought he carried a great substance of bright gold
on his shoulders, who after fell blind through the brightness of gold* for
as it is very like a truth, that gold darckned his sight.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he hard one say to him, fear not
death, albeit thou can not live. Who after lost his sight, and this ryghtlye
hapeninge to him by reason. And he dyed not insomuch as he lived still, and yet
again he lived not, insomuch as he had lost the comfort of the light, that
is, he saw not

And one dreamed that he thought he eat bread dipped in honnye, who after
attained unto such eloquence and wisdom by the study of Philosophye, that
he got thereby much riches: For the honnye signified the obtaynynge of
eloquence and wisdom, as very like it is* and the bread the great riches
which he got. A certain woman dreamed, that she thought she had her husbands
priuityes cut from the rest of the body in he^ hands and that she took great
care, an^ much foresight how to keep them: wh^ after bare her husband a
son, whych^ she brought up her self. For the husbands priuityes, signified
the son which was got by him: and that it was taken or cut away from the
rest of the body, signified her brynginge up of her son, but her husband
was after bereft of life by death.

A certain man dreamed, that he thought he saw an Olive tree spri^ge out of
his head: Who after followed earnestly the studies of Philosophye, and used
consequently the doctrine and exercise thereof. For the plant or tree is
thought always green and lustye in it self, and thereof dedicated to Minerua:
which is feigned to be the Lady or goddess of wisdom.

And on dreamed that he thought he fleeyd of the skin of his own son, and
to make a bag thereof, to carye wine or suchlike matter therein. Whose son
the next day followinge fell into a river and was drowned. For they make
bags with the skins drawn of dead flesh or carcases, in the which they are
wont to put wynes, oils, and other like licours.

And one dreamed, that he thought he saw his lover in an earthen pitcher, or
pot or such like vessel burning: whose lover after was dead, and slain of a
common or hired seruau^te at will. For it signified with good cause death to
the woman because she was seen in an earthen vessel: and of a common
servant because it was also a common pitcher or pot, serio^ge to every body.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he dwelt out of his own
country, and there builded an hearth for fire: Who not long after dyed out of
his country where he thought he builded or made the hearth. For it signifies
ye place where the fire dissolueth and wastes to naught: and the buildinge of
it out of his country, signified there the end of his life.

And one dreamed, that he thought dwellinge out of his proper country, to
build an hearth and for the stones he mo^^red his own books and then
playstred together: but after changinge his mind* he threw down that he had
built, and s^ceased of buildynge. Who not long after fell sick, and was vexed
with a grievous sickness, which sickness so handled him, that he was brought to
deaths door, bu^ in the end he recovered to health again

And the manifest causes of these, be superfluous to recyte.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he was persecuted of a woman,
which he had known of a long time which did put on clokes to knit about
him, and that loose hanged in the middle without pleates or seames: and that
at the last against his will, compelled thereto. After which a woman louinge
this man did mary him against his will, and he within few years after dyed,
for that y^ clokes were vnparfit and not sewed together, it so signified. And a
certain woman being sick, dreamed y^ she thought she was with child, and
that shortly after to labor of her child, and to be near the time of her
deliuerye: but further she thought that a certain woman vnexperte about these
matters to touch her and to say: that now truly she shall not be delivered
but after.7.months she shall be delivered of a fair child and amiable, or
worthy to be loved who after fell into a dangerous sickness y^ no man thought
her to escape and live, and yet the sickness leauinge her nothing at all
whereby she should come to health, died within seven months after. For by
good reasone, it was the discharge of the burden and cares after the seven
months: but the fair child, was or signifies death, which was worthier to
be beloved and chosen before the rest, because he takes away the sicknesses
and sorrows, or cares of this life.

And a certain man dreamed, that he thought he threw out his ringe, with the
which he sealed all things, and after seking it, found that the stone which
was in it cleft in two small parts or pieces, y^ it co^lde not after serve to
any purpose whereof ensued that al his business auayled not, or came to no
purpose, for five and siftye days after.

And a certain man dreamed, having a rich sister and being also sick, that
before the sisters door was a fig tree spro^g up, and that he plucked of the
tree seven black figs, and eat them: which sister after died, and left him
as heir which so dreamed, within seven days after, and the reason of these
be evident.

And a certain woman dreamed: that she thought she had an eye in her right pap
or breast: who had a son that she dearelye loved, which not long after lost,
she much wayled for. Which reason may like be applied to that when a person
at any time dreameth to have an eye in his shoulder, that lost the shoulder:
for in a certain manner is said by the dream, regard the shoulder, and have
concideration thereof: So that by the same reason the woman lost not her breast
but the like to the breast, her son.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he eat his own dounge with
bread, and to be delighted therewith: who after was made a ruler, besides the
law amittyng, and that without blame: for yt it seemed to him to be delighted
with that banquet and yet not without suspi^ion, because of the dounge. For very
like it was that this gain to be full of filthiness, and dishonestlye.

And a certain man thought, being sent into a strange country on message,
that in his dream he was returned home again: and that his wife after standing
by him to say the little sweetynge is dead Who not long after received letters
from his wife, that the youngest child he had was dead, which was a sweet
child, and to be disyred and loved of every body.

And a certain man dreamed, having a brother dwelling in a strange country
that it was told him y^ his brother was come home and that he thought his
brother saw him become blind: who after died which saw the dream. And by
good reason it was, for as much as it was impossible that the brother should
see him being so far of.

And a certain man dreamed that he thought he fed his privy membre with
bread and cheese like as it wear a certain beast, who after died shamefullye.
For ye meat which he should have offered to the mouth, he did give to the
priuye membre as it were darckly signifying and in a figure, that he should
have neither mou^h nor face. And a certain woman dreamed that she thought,
that out of her breaste sprange ears of wheat, and that the ears after brast
open into her nature to be drowned again. Which woman after by a certain
hap vnknowledge to her, did coeate with her own son, and after slew her
self, and so ^yed vnhappelye.

For the ears signified the son, and the drowninge of them into her nature
signified the coeatynge. But the death of her signified the seeds sprung out
of her body: because that out of the earth, and not out of living bodies
they spring up.

And one thought in his dream, to find in his iacket or cote very many and
great stinking worms and to abhor them: and that also would shake them of,
but could not. Who the next day following learned or understood, that his wife
had her accustomed fellowship carnaliye with an other man and understanding the
same became very pensive and perplexed of mind, in somuche that be would have
departed from her, but did not because he was otherwise prohibited, or stayed
by a certain let. For the iackette or coote signified the wife gyrte or
wrapped about him and the stinkinge woormes her pollution. And where as he
could not pluck and cast them away at his will: signified y^ he could neither
after his desire and purpose, depart from his wife.

And one thought in his dream, that he had a mouth in his foundamente, and
great and fair teeth, and to speak by it, and to eat meat, and whatsoever
also are wont to be done by the mouth, it to have al like: who after through
his light and foolish talk, ^ledde his country, and was banished for a long
time after. For very like and to reason were the happes but the causes be here
omitted.

And a certain man dwellinge in Rome, thought in his dream, that he flewe
about the City and near the tops of the houses, and to rejoice in the
sucesse of his flyinge, and to be maruayled at with al ye lokers on, but by a
certain pain and bytynge or gnawing of the heart, he was forced to cease from
flying, and for shame sake to hyde himself: Who after was a marvelous man,
excelente, and a noble or famous Prophet, and dwelling in Rome got together
much riches, insomuch that he was greatly maruayled at of all the people, but
in the end, he received no profit, neither of his coniecturynge, nor riches,
for his wife betraying, and deceiving him, turned al to the contrary part
toward him, so that he could not for shame but depart the City, and dwell
in some other place.

And one thought in his dream, that preparynge himself and ready to fly, he
was stayed of a certain friend of his, and holden by the right foot, and the
name also of his friend was Julius. Which man after was ready to depart from
Rome, and to dwell in another place, and had prepared also all those
necessaryes, which be required for a departure or moving. But it happened that
in the present month of Iulye he was stayed and made to abide through a
certain incommoditye and mishappe that fell that time. And that caryinge or
abydyng endured not to the end of his life, because he was friend, of who^ he
was stayed and holden of.

And one thought in his sleep, that he was entered into a schole in his own
countreye, and that he saw his Image there hanginge within. And that further
beholdynge, thought ^e saw that all the outward edge or bordour of the Image
was loused, and afer thought he asked one what had happened unto the Image,
and thought also he said thus unto him, my Image remaynethe whole, but the
border is louse. Who after became lame of both feet and that by good reason:
For that the schole was a note of the good habitude of y^ whole house. But the
Image signified those things, which are about the face: and the outward
bou^der, weer the outward members of the body.

And one thought in his sleep, that his bolster or Bed ticke, was stuffed
with wheat in the stead of floxe. Who then had a wife which never before bare
child and the same year conceuinge, brought forth a ma^child, For the bolster
orbedde signified the conception of the woman, and the wheat a man child,

And on thought in his dream, that he was accused of certain injuries, and
that to have lost the wrytings and hooks of his justification, who the next
day having the matter in rehearsal was then cleared of al accions, and this was
y^ which the dream signifies to him. That is to say, the artians being
remited, he needed not afterward his books of iustifycation.

And one thought in is sleeape, having two maidens to his daughters, that the
elder had on her head a golden Garla^d, and the younger a Garlan^e of the ^yne
branches green spronge. Now the elder of these two was shortly after
married, and the other dyed. For the beutyfull Garland, was a note both of the
co^ceyuing of children, and of marriage, and the preciousnes also of the matter,
signyfyed the joy in marriage. But the Garland of the vine tree, was a note of
death immine^t to the other daughter, because it grew out of the earth for
that bodies put into the earth are after resolved. And for that the vine also
is the longest season without fruit. And one dreamed having three sons, y^
two of them cut him into pieces and eat him and that the younger knowinge of
the matter waxed sad and disdayned them and refusinge also y^ sh^meful
matter, said, I will not eat of my father. After which it hppened that his
yo^ger soune dyed: for it signified by not eating of the father, that he should
not possess of the fathers goods, and he also died before the father. But the
other two which seemed to eat him did after death enjoy his goods.

And one thought in his sleep, that a man took away his sister from his
father by force, and martyed her unto another man. Woo after dyed, that saw
the dream: for the father did rightlye signifye God, y^ Authoure of life to
the dreamer, And the sister by the like reason signified yt soul, and taken
away by force of the man, signifies that separation of the soul, from the
body.

And a certain great wrastler thought in his sleep to ve great with child,
and after to be delivered of two black women children, Who after became
blind, and the balls of his eyes shed forth and were after black.

And a certain woman thought in her sleep, that her maid had gotten from
her both her own Image which she caused to be painted in a table, and her
garments with the which she apparelled her self as one ready to go unto a
triumph which maiden shortly after, caused her husband to be separated from
her through false accusations uttered by her. And by that means was she both
a cause of damage, and iniurye to her of the triumph* A certain man dreamed,
that an Eagle drawinge fourth his bowels, flyed along the city unto the Burse
or such like place where much people were gathered together, and to show them
to the behoulders in that place. After which ensued, that the father having
then no children, should have a son of great report and fame in that City
For the eagle signified the present year in which the child should be borne,
and the bowels signified the son, and the carriage also of the^ unto the place
of the assembly of the people, signified, the worthiness and fame of the son.

And one thought in his sleep, to be thrust into a yooke, and to be yooked
to gether with his brother, which was long before dead and that he thought
also his mother so yooked him, and to force him to draw like an Ox, she
rulynge their collores. Who after so dreaminge came sick to his mothers house
and there died, and after was buried with his brother, and thus the sorrowful
mother cowpled these two drawinge beasts together.

A certain woman thought in her sleep (which wished to have children) that
she saw certain midwyues stoles in which women use to sit, at the
travail of child, swymminge on the Sea who then happened to be with child,
yet not made a mother by this, for that she brought forth seven children, one
after the other and none of them lived but dyed in their swathing clothes.

A certain person thought in his sleep that he saw a large clefte tree, and
that the one half to be a white Popler, and the other half, a Pyne tree.

And that on the Poplare tree sat all kinds of birds, but on the Pyneaple
sat gulles, and all kind of Sea fowls. After which ensewed, that he had
two Sons, of which the one led the life of a common Wrastler, and bearer of
heavy burdens, like to a Porter, which the Poplare signified, and trauaylynge
into many countries, was hired of many strangers to labor and travail,
hither and thither. But the other although he were a husbandmans son became
the master of a ship and a skillful Mariner. and he which saw the dream
lived unto a very old age, and ended his life happily.

A certain souldyar sleepynge in his captains chamber, in the night cried
out in his sleep. To whom the captain called, demaundinge what he ayled to
whom the dreamer aunsweared that he thought one gave him a deadlye wound on
the head that he was near dead with all, and for fear of the same so awaked
out of sleep. Which his captain thus bearing, that loved him very well,
willed yea and straightly commanded, that he should not go forth of the
house that day. But his fellows the next day followinge, prepared to fight
with their enemies, went forth, and he forgettinge his dream went also with
the^. At the last they setting on their enemies, were in the end forced
toflye, and in the return and flyinge away, was he deep cut one the head and
their slain.

Augustus on a time being sick, lying then in Camp amongeste his Souldiars,
was warned by that worthy Philippe his physician in a dream, which he saw
that night in his pauilion, that he should be set upon and murdered of his
enemies, who privily upon the same was conveyed from thence. And the souldyers
of Brutus, the next day followyng, entered into his pauilion and made many
hooles with their swords through his couche or bed, supposing that he had
been there.

And one thought in his sleep that he kept his mothers funeral and that he
be wayled, and sighed bitterly for her, insomuch that he waked out of sleep
for fear of the same. And the next morrow, when he had told his dream unto
his friend he noted that day, and within afewe days after he received letters
that the day before the same day he had his dream at night the mother whom
he supposed to be alive dyed.

And one thought in his sleep, that he saw himself drowned in the water, and
that he minded to refrain from swimming y^ day following. Who on the morrow
forgettyng his dream, went to swimmynge and there was drowned ye same day.

A certain person having his wife d^ad alitle before, and leauinge a chyl^e^
behind her, thought in his sleep, that she said to him, I will have my
daughter with me, who thought he often denied her in so much as he
thought she said to him, do what you will, for I will have the maiden with me.

After which followed, that within ten days after the maiden dyed without
grief or any complayninge.

A certain standerde bearer being of fame, thought in his sleep, that he
was grenouslye pulled and racked with his fellows. Who in the morninge after
he had showed the same to his fellows, laughed him to scorn. And the same
morninge all were bidden by the gouernoure of the Cittye unto a feast, unto
which all went sauinge the dreamer, which priuelye conveyed himself from
the^. And after dinner they were all thrown into prisone, where they were
examined one by one on the rack, and the captain also with them, so that one
of the inferior soldiers at the length, was openly drawn and torn in
pieces, and the rest of the company dispoyled, and so let go.

A certain man thought in his sleep, that after a Tyraunte of that City, had
slain two of his Children, the one of them said he should give no heed to
the dream. And that it would come to pass, that in the day folowinge, he
should be made prince of the City.

Who awaked (in that hope) a rose, and set upon the Tyrant, and slew him.
For the which good turn done he was after made Gouernoure or Prince of the
City. A certain person being troubled for a certain debte which his father
should owe in his life time, and contynuinge very sad for the same, thought
he saw in his sleep, the shadow of his Father, which then instructed him
of the money paid, and where the obligation was laid. Who when he arose out
of sleep, found the obligation in the same place, where the Fathers shadow
had taught him which by that means cleared that unjust debte demanded of
him.

A certain manne being the Son of a philosopher, after his fathers death
sought a certain book of his, and could not find the same for the which he
became very sad. After which in a certain night his father appeared to
him in a sleep, who showed to him the place where the book lay hid. Who
awakinge in the morninge sought the book there and there as he showed him he
found it, that by the same help, the book might come and serve unto all
ages hereafter.

Before the battle against the Philippians, a certain soldier thought in
his sleep, that Julius Caesar spoke to him, saying show as he thought unto
Octauius that he shall fight the happyer and luckyer, if so be he take
some of these things with him, which I, whiles I was head governor, was
accustomed to wear and carry about me. Which Octauius understanding, got
after the ring to wear, with the which Caesar had accustomed to seal
letters, and the same he woore not only before the battle, but many times
afterward.

The day before that Henry the french king was wounded in the eye, Queen
Margaret his wife as men report, saw sort as the dream foreshewed.

And two familiar friends on a time went a journey unto Megara, where they both
lodged that night, but the one iodged in a Tavern and the other man Inn. Who
after they had supped went to bed and sleepynge in their bed, he which lay
in the Inn thought in his dream that he prayed the other that he would
come help him that he were not slain by his host, who awaked with his
fearful dream arose up, and after he had well looked about, and considered
the matter with himself, and perceived also the sight no further showed of the
matter, he then laid him down again to sleep. And then to him sleapynge, be
thought again that the selfsame sight to desire him that seeing would not
help him when be was alive, yet that he would not suffer his death
unrevenged, and that he also slain, was conveyed into a Carte by the host of
the house, and dounge subtyllye thrown upon him, besides that the sight as
he thought to require him that timely in the morninge he would watch at
the Gate, before the dounge-Carte, went forth of the town.

Whoo greatelye moved with the fear and care of this dream, arose tymelye
and came unto the Gate of the Town, where he found the dunge Carte there
waiting to go forth, by which stood a herd man that drove the Cart, and of
the herd man he demanded what he there carried in the dounge carte but he
being feared with his words ran away. And he in the mean whiles drew the
dead body out of the carte, after which the host was examined and confessinge
the deed had the law.

A certain person having sundry children and none lived with him.

At the last his wife being with child thought then in his sleep, that it
was said unto him, that his Son shortly after borne should be named
Iouinianus.

After which the Father died, and the child living still was made Emperor.

And one John Marya a gentilman of Venice being then a ruler at Dalmatia
thought that he saw in sleep, another of his brothers which he dearlye loved,
named Donatus, to embrace him, and to say farewell because he must depart
out of men's company. And that John maria after he had followed him a whiles
weepinge as he thought awaked for the fear out of sleep, fyndinge himself
all wette with tears, and thus amassed feared the life of his brother being
then at Venice.

After which about the third day before were letters brought from his house
which signified or declared the same, that that Donatus died that night and in
the same hour that he dreamed the like.

And yt three days also before his death, he had lain sick of the plague.

And a certain woman thought in her sleeape, that her husbands first wife
rebuked the second marriage, and that warninge her as she thought that shortly
after she would take her away with her. Who indeed dyed within a short time
after.

And acertayne parson thought in his sleep, that he saw the Son shyninge
on the earth, who endeavored with his hands to catch the son, but it
seemed to slip from him. And this he proved in y^ order three times together,
after which he demanded of certain wise me^ what the same might signifye, who
told him that he should raygne after.rxx* years. For the Son signified him
to be a King, but if it had determined the king dome'onely for three years,
then had it not been needful why he should see this. For no king of fame
as only one like as the son is, could escape danger, for so short a time.
Yet it ended otherwise by broofe for that he raygned from the.xl. years of
his age, unto threscore and ten.

A certain person thought in his sleep that he was alone in a Cockebote on
a tempestuouse Sea, and that the wind blewe boysterouslye, and the air also
seemed so dark, that he was without hope of escapynge to land with lif* And
being in this perplexitye, he catched hold as he thought of a Tree, and hanged
by the hands on the same, through the Boot mounted or carried up to the
same, and fo remained he there alive as he thought without further succoure.

After which followed that he ever after lived a careful life and never
could have good success in his businesses and requests, nor obtain his
desire.

Besides it further signified, the alteration of his kind of life, and that
through a sorrow near at hand, he should fall into a desperation; which
person besides lived twenty years after he had this dream, but yet oppressed
with many griues and sorrows.

And a woman named Accia which was the mother of Octauius, being the^ with
child with him dreamed that her bowels were carried up to heaven, and that they
were also made manifest and throughlye known unto all the earth, and heaven
above. After which followed, that the bowelles signified the Son, which she
then bare in her body that through his great power on earth his brute and
report should after reach unto the stars.

And Octauius the father of Augustus dreamed, that he saw the brightness of
the son arisinge out of the womb of his mother Accia. After which succeeded,
that the deeds of Augustus did like shine and appear amongst the me^ of his
age, as the brightness of the son, in the world.

A certain Lumbard dreamed, that he saw an Angel discendynge from heaven
clothed in yellowe, and making wide steps on the ground, but he hadd no
wings. Which sight so feared the dreamer coniecturyng that the same
signified some fear full matter that he hid himself as he thought in a very
darcke hole nere by, and covering himself over with the leaves of trees,
whereby he might so lie hyd out of sight. And the Angel after he was
descended, called the dreamer by his name; but he lyinge hy^ as he thought
aunsweared not. In so much, that after the Angel had called him thryse,
said he will not come, and so departed. Who after for fear, awakyng out of
sleep, thought the same signified some great peril to happen to him that day
following.

Wheruppon he caused the outward door of his house to be fast shutt and that
none to go out, but the key he gave to the maiden to keep. Who after
forgettinge her masters commandment let in a familyer friend of the
dreamers that came to his presence unawares to him, which infected with the
pestillente air about him, many of his household, but the dreamer upon the
sight got out priuilye by the roof of the house. After which died xii. of
the plague, for that the same happened in such a contagious season.

But he escaped through his skillful practyse, which for that he could hyde
him self in the den or hoole the same signified by the dream.

C. Fannius after that he had written three books against the life of Nero,
thought in his sleep, that he lay apparayled on his bed as he was wont to
do like to other studientes, and that Nero came to him and, plucked forth ye
books out of his bosom. And that he also diligently looked on the first,
after on the second and then on the third which he turned to and fro not
uttering or speaking any word, but shutryng up the books so departed. Whereby
Fannius learned, y^ before he should finishe any more books to these, that he
should end his life with ye work, who within a short time after died.

Sylla a head officer in Rome, thought in his sleep, he saw the devil, and
that he called him, who after he awaked, although he were then in health sent
for his friends who after they were come together, caused in their presence his
will to be written with all speed, and after signed the same, fearing death to
be at hand. Who in the night following was taken with an ague, of which he
dyed wtin few days after. But some write that he was eaten with lyce: And
others write that he died of a great anger which he took against a Burgeys
of that Cittye through which he castinge up much blood dyed thereof.

And one Rinaldus Villanoua a Physician writes that a certain parson often
saw in his sleep that a black Catte did bite or gnaw his little finger: Who
shortly after was taken with the eating Cankar in that finger of which he
died.

And one Arianus thought in his sleep that his father ministered a sleapynge
drink to him, who not long after dyed For the dead sleep signified death
which afterward ensued.

And when a certain person dispaired, that he should not attain the
Garlande for the lack of knowledge, his brother then dreamed, that he had
lost his fathers ringe, and seekynge a long whiles for it, found it at ye
last as he thought, fallen into a deep hole, and that he reached and got
the same forth with a long staff. Which the interpreter thus expounded yt his
brother undoubtedly should attain the Garlande and that through the help of
a taule man, which accordingly did so happen, to the wonder of many.

And a certain woman of the country showed unto the wife of the kings heard
man, that she thought in her sleep, that she brought forth or was delivered of
the Moon, which shyned over al Britayne. After which the woman being
delivered of a maiden child, the wife of the kings heardman nursing then the
kings Son, brought up the child with hers, as her own. Who after grown to
elder years the kingest son fell in love with her, through the familiaritye
in youth and of this married her, of whom he begat Echelstane who after
flourished and accounted the worthiest king, for his virtue and fortune.

And one Ecelinus a Romayne, in the first night after marriage, thought in his
sleep that he saw a hill on which Rome was s^ituated, an yt the same rose
heigher and higher to an exceadynge heighte, after which he thought it shronke
away like the meltyng of snow, that at the last there seemed nothing to remain.

Which dream of his like succeaded by the fortune of his children. For
Ecelinus the elder son after his name, through a small fortune attained
Verona, Vince^tia, padua Feltrius and the Region of Tarnisina and Marchia. And
Albericus the younger brother, obtained Ternisius it self and sundry other
places. But after certain years, this Ecelinus losing his kingdom was wounded
and taken and near to Soncinus dyed. And Albericus at the losing of Tarnisius,
fled unto the Castle of Zeno, where of his own me^, he was betrayed, after
which he saw. 6 of his sons slain before him, and his wife with two
daughters burned. And him self through diverse kinds of torments butcherly
dealt wythall, yielded up a lamentable spyrite. And now on this wise was the
whole stock as the father had foreseen with power utterly extincted.

A certain person came to one Hyburis Aebaneus an Interpreter of Dreams and
said I dreamed this night past that I had corns of Barlye in my hand which I
did cast into my mouth to eat them: to whom the expounder thus answea^ed well
be it unto you. And after he was departed, the expounder asked the sta^ders by,
whether any there were, that knew him: to who^ one answered, that he knew him
very well and where he dwelled. Well said ye enterpreter, mark and have
regard after him, for that shortly he shall dye, in that he thus eat up his
nourishemente. Who in very deed according to his saiynge died within four
days after.

Alexander the Philosopher thought in his sleep, that he was judged to dye,
and for all means and excuses yt he could show, he could scarcelye he
delivered from sufferynge. Who after feared no such matter for that he only
applied himself to the study of Philosophy, yet the next day followinge when
he came to reasoninge with another philosopher very hotlye, he was theere
stricken on the head with a staff, and hardlye escaped death.

And the wife of Diognosta dreamed, to have half a bearde, who after lived
separate from her husband, so that if she had thought to have a whole bearde,
then after to be a wydowe.

A certain Lumbarde so often as he should wyn, dreamed in the night before,
that he did eat white grapes. For the white grapes do protende a plentiful,
and easy increase of labor. But the black grapes do signify a small gain,
and that with tedions travail. Now such a custom of his endured for twelve
years, and after decayed.

A certain learned Physician there was who so often as he dreamed, that he
saw his mother being dead, very sad, the next day followinge he fell
sick, and that by good reason, for that son is most dear to the mother, and
that her sadness also signifies the calamityes to the child, and not the like
to the father. For fathers are not like moved to mourn for the sicknesses of
their sons, except those sicknesses are deadly, in that me^ are stouter of
mind and stomach, then women. And he was also sickly by nature, so that he
dreamed the like many years.

A certain gentleman, as Mattheus Ferrarius wrytethe, that how often he
thought that he did eat in his sleep, and so often in the day following he
was payned with ye stone. And if so be he thought that he didd eat hard
things of digestion, then the pain continued many days after. So that by
good reason we say that we so well taste of sorrows, as meats.

And to Valentinianus Emperor the day before he dyed, being yet not sick,
for that he dyed suddenly, appeared his wife clothed in mourning apparel, and
standinge a far of with her hear shed abroad. Which well declared the
former fortune, that then had left him in so lamentable cause.

And one Policrates Samius a tyraunte whiles he was in prosperitye, his
daughter on a time thought in her sleep, that she saw her father hanginge on
high, whom Iup^ter washed, and the Sun anointed. After which followed that
he being oueecome of Orotes, and hanged on a gibbite happened the like so that
he was after washed with the rain fallinge and anointed of the Sun, by
meltyng of his fat, which so seemed to anoynte him.

And one thought in his steape, that he saw his house on fire, who after
received letters that his brother lay greuouslye sick, and whiles he prepared
himself to journey, a messenger came declaring him to be dead. Who after
counted the time, from that hour which he saw the dream, conceived that his
brother then dyed. But commonly this dream does threaten death either to the
dreamer, or some principaller of the house. himself to be with child, if so be
he has been poor, he shall after possess much substance and shall gather
and keep and heap together abundance of money: but if he be rych, it
signifies that he shall be in torments and cares or troubles of the mind: And
he which shall have a wife, that he shall loose her, for it signifies, y^ she
shall not after bear him more children but he which shall have no wife, that he
shall after marrye such a kind and gentle wife, that he may find in his heart
to wysh to bear and suffer that pain, that his wife susteneth in the traueile
of child. And to others this dream does signifye sickness. To be with child
and after to be delivered thereof, is evil, for it declares that the person
being sick, shall shortly after dye. For every body ^earyng, sends forth
a spyrite: and like as the infant by ioyninge himself with the body is
delivered, and departs from it even so the soul does from the body: and to
a poor man, hired servant, or to any which is in calamitye or misery: it
signifyethe a deliuerye of the present euilles or mysery, and that cause is
manifest or apparaunte, but to rich men, usurers, and other occuppers and to
such also as be in authority and power it harmeth. For they which had before,
shall after lack, and loose much. And to merchants, pylottes, masters, and
owners of ships, it signifies good luck after, but to many it happe^eth
that also should lose by this dream, as kinsfolk, because the infant in his
birth, is rejected and separated from the blood.

If any in the manner of babes dreameth that he thinks himself to be swadled
like a child, and to suck of a woman that he knows, does portend after a
long sickness, except he has a wife with child. For the^ shall be borne a son
like to himself, which in the same manner shallbee fed, and brought up.
But if a woman shall see this dream, it does signyfy that she shall be
delivered of a daughter like to her self: and if any woman thinks in her
dream to have milk in her breasts, to a young woman it promises conception,
and perfect fruit, and birth also, but to an old woman being poor, it
signifies riches, and to a rich woman, it signifies expenses and charges:
And to a maid mariageable, this dream promisethe to her marriage, for
notwythout the venerall act of coactyng, milk in the breasts cannot at any
time be had, but if the maiden be young, that she cannot be married of a long
time for her age and making the^ this dream portendeth to her death. Also to a
poor and needye man, this dreamepromiseth plentye both of monye and
possessions, that he may also be able to feed others. And further to him
which is unmarried, this dream promises a wife: and to him having a wife,
which lacks or has no children: this dream promises also children, as
has been found true in both.

For the one had after such a kind and gentle wife, that he did wish to suffer
al her travails and pains. And the other had children after, which he fed and
brought up: And to wrastlers, warriars, and such as exercise the strength of
the body it thretneth sickness: For that effeminat bodies have milk: and any
also having a wife, and children in his dream is depryued of his wife, for he
after brings up his children, and ministrynge to them the equal use, both of
the father and mother.

To dream that he thinks himself to have a great or bigg head signifies
good to a rich man, which as yet is no Magistrate or high officer. And to a
poor man, warrior, usurer, and that keeps a bancke of monye. to them it
signifies both good luck, and the gatheryng together of much money, but to a
rich man which is in authority. And to a Rhetoritian, Judge or Legate, yt
denounces both slanders of the people, and loss of dignitye and honor. And
to a sick person, this dream signifies beuynes and pain of the head: and
to dream that he thinks himself to have long and fair hear and to be
proud of it, signifyethe good especially to a woman, for women oftentimes use
for bewties sake, to deck and set forth their heads with others hear:
besides, this dream signifies good, to a Philosopher, King, Prince, Priest
and Religious, and to all those also whose profession byndethe them to wear
their hear long. But to have much hear on the head, rufled and out of
order, like to those which we name bushe naturalles, signifies to all such
persons, heaviness and loss. As the like was experienced in one, who dreamed
that he had his hear snarled and rufled together, much like to a pycked
torche. and he after was deprived of his living, to his great sorrow and
heaviness. And further to have bristled here like a Swine, does portende
violente perilles, by some ill fortune: But to have horse here signifies
bondages, painful labors and cares of mind with heaviness: and to
iourneymen or such like, imprisonmente. And to dream also that he has wolle
growinge on his head, in the stead of hear to him that so dreameth it
promises long sickness and both ye P^hisick, and consumptio^ of the body. And
besides if any dreameth that his face to be round about, bare and naked of
hear, it portendeth presentlye a mock or gyle and an unhappy success. But
if any dreameth y^ the hinder part of the head to be on such wise to him that
so dreameth, it signifies in his old age poverty and great mise- For the
hinder part of the head, is contrarywyse signifier of the time to come. And
again who that dreameth that the right side of his head is balde or bare o^
here, signifies that he shall loose al his male kynue that be nigh unto him
and if he shall have no kynne alive, then it signifies damage or harm to him
self.

And if ye left side of the head be bare it signifies that he shall lose his
nyghe kinswomen, if he shall have any one alive, but if not, the^ he shall
incur damage to himself. For the head has the signifycatio^ of the
kindredes, as the right sides of it the males, and the left sides the females.
And who that dreameth that he has either side of ye head naked or bare of
here, shall after ^ee condemned unto an open work or labor adjudged
thereto. To dream yt he thinks al his whole head to be shaven signifies
evil: for that this dream portendeth good to none but such as be accustomed
to be shaven, as friars, monckes, abbottes, fools, and such like: to sailors
and mariners on the sea* this dream threatens shipwreck, and to sick
persons to be near deaths door but yet not death.

And to dream that he clippeth his own heir, signifies sudden bewayling,
or calamity, threatened by great evils.

But to dream that a barber clyppeth his hear does promise a like to him and
to all persons good luck and joy for that it has the signification, both
of joy and the exception of other causes. And truly there is none being in any
evil or woeful case, or else in any calamitye, that clippeth the hear of his
head: but such as be free from these, and has somewhat to take to. Therefore
this dream promises delivery out of trouble, to such as be in thraldom, and
good luck also to all persons. To dream that the foorheade is whole without
crasinge or disease, and sleshye is good to all persons and signifies the
liberty of speakinge, and fortitude. But to dream that he thinks himself
to have a forhead of brass, Iron, or stone signifyethire, hatred, and
enemies: But to ruffians, and those yt keep^ brothel houses and baudes, and to
such also as I^ade their lives without shame it signifies good.

And to dream that he thinks himself to have many ears, signifies good
to him which would attain any to be obedient to him, as wife, children, or
servant. But to a rych man this dream signifies a great name, and good
also, if the ears shall be fair and co^ly: but if the ears shall appear
deformed and out of fashion it signifies slander of the people: and this
dream is evil to a servant, and to one also having a cause or matter in
judgment or before a judge, for either he must sue or trouble another by
action, or else be called by another into judgment, for it signifies to him
obedience, of a long time. And besides like as he sueth this man by action it
so shall be done, the like again by him: But if the cause or matter be called or
brought into the trial of the law, then shall he hear many more faults or
crimes to be objected against him, the^ which be manifest or apparau^t that in
a certain manner he may need many ears, but to a handye crafts man this
dream signifies good for he shall hear many persons, which do require and
desire his work: but to lease thy ears also which thou have signifies
contrary to those aforesaid. And to purge or cleanse the ears of filthe or
matter, signifies y^ he shall hear from some place good news or tydinges,
but, if any dreameth that he thinks to beat his own ears, it portendeth
the hearing of ill news from some place.

And to dream that he thinks pysmiers to creep into his ears, signifies
good alonly to dissemblers of wisdom which we name Sophisters. And the like
the pismiers signify to young men, that go to hear such persons, but to
others, this dream denounced death. For that they be the daughters of the
earth, in which they harbor and dwell. And if any dreameth that he thinks
to have ears like an ass, signifies good to philosophers alone, for that the
ass month not his ears lightlye or quickly: But to other persons, this
dream signifies bondage, and paynufll labors or cares of the mind with
heaviness. And if any dreamethe, that he thinks to have eyes in his ears,
signifyethe that he shall after be blind, and shall come to knowledge o^
those things by his hearing and ears, which he saw before with his eyes.

And if any dreameth that he has a quick sharp fight of the eyes:
sygnifyeth good by right to all persons but to dream that he thinks
himself blind, does indicate neadines of money, and to him which has
children, it signyfyeth that his children shall be sick. And to dream also
that he think the himself blind of both the eyes signifies to his children
with sees the dream, the loss both of brethren father and mother. And to ye
children because the eyes be like to them.

But to the brethren, because the eyes also in themselves be like brethren: and
to the parents, because the eyes be the cause that we see the light like as
the father and mother also be. Wherefore the loss of the eyes signifies the
loss of the like but to him which is in prison, if he thinkethe himself to be
blind, it signifies good and a notyce y^ his misery is at an end. And this
dream also signifies good, to those that be very indigente, and poor: but to
a man of war, this dream signyfieth evil and greuouse, for that ^his ill
success, and to such also as live in the court: but yet to men of arms or
champions, this dream promysethe victory: As the like happened to a certain
cha^pion that should have co^bat or fought in the honor of his country, who
dreamed that he thought he was blind. which after wan the victory. Also this
dream to masters and pylottes of ships, signify heaviness and sorrow: and to
such which be occupied with the contemplation of celestiall^matters, which,
has often been observed. And if any seekinge any thing lost shall se this
dream, shall after se that thing lost no more: nor following after a fugitive
or that runs away shall take him: but to sick persons, this dream does
always portende death: for the privation of their light.

And one thought in his dream, that a certain credible man said to him, thy
father is not dead but sleapeth, whose father was then become presentlye blind
and not long after one brought him word of the same matter. And if any shall
dream yt he thinks himself blind of the twone eye* shall have those
things happen to him which be signified of that part: For this is to be
considered and noted that the right eye, both signifies the son, brother,
and father. And the left eye, both the daughter sister and mother

That if any have two sons, or two daughters, or two brethren, or two
sisters: then the right eye signifies the elder son, or brother, or father
or else the elder daughter. But the left eye signyfyeth the younger daughter, or
brother, or else younger son. And besides to dream that he thinks to have
three or four eyes, to him which has purposed to marye a wife, and to him
also which lackethe or has no children it signifies good* For to the one a
wife shall happen, and to the other children and so about one body shall be
many eyes. And one thought in his dream to have three eyes, who after became
blind. For the third, which sygnifyed the need and lack of the other light
because ye proper light suffyced not. And further to a naughty and wicked man,
and to beutifull women: many eyes signifye evil. For many eyes shall way on
him and about this woman shall many apparaunte auoutries be wrought, and found
or taken. And further if any dreameth that he thinks to have eyes in his
fingers ends, or in his feet: signifies that he shall after become blind.
And a certain man dreamed, that he thought to have eyne about each finger of
the hands, who after fell blind.

And if any dreameth that he thinkethe to have a great and fair nose, and
comlye in form, signifies good to all persons: for it signifies a great
subtillitye of senses, and a foresight in doing matters.

And he that dreameth to have no nose, does portende to him, and to all
parso^s the loss and lack of senses, and hatred of his betters, and to a
sick person death. For that the sculles of dead persons, be found without
nose: And if any thinks in his dream to have two noses, it signifies to
have variaunce or dsicorde with his betters in house.

And to dream to have fat or full cheeks, signifies good to al persons and
especially to women, but to have thin or lean or else scabbed cheeks
signifies heaviness or wailynge for the lean cheakes signifies heaviness and
sorrow, and the blistered or scabbed cheeks, signifies waylinge and mourning:
For that in mourninges, men are wont to tear and scrache their cheeks.

And he that dreameth to have a great heard, both thick and rough, being a
learned man it signifies good and to a philosopher also. And if a woman
thinks in her dream to have a bearde, if she shall be a wydow she shall then
find and have a husband which shall be so gentle a man, that he may seem to
be of a myngled nature: but if she shall be married she shall then lose her
husband, or shall depart from him and shall govern her house, like as she
were husband and wife except she be with child, or has a cause which is to
be judged, but if she be with child she shall then bring forth a son which
after earnestly beholding, shall think her self to have a beard. And to a man
child, or very young stripling, this dream portendeth death, because a bearde
to a child, does prevent his age. And if one thinks in his dream yt his
heard falls away, or else shaven of, or violentlye plucked away of any: does
portende not only the loss of kinsfolk but also both damage, and a soul
confusion that shall happen to him.

And the loss of teeth, or else fallinge or violently pluckinge out of them,
does for the more part signify, the loss or death of kinsfolks, or else
one of the same family or household, or else the loss of substance: For the
like is to be applied between the house, family, and substance therein, as is
between the mouth, and the teath. And besides the right teeth signifye the men,
and the left teethe the woe: men: except it so happen, that in on house be all
women, and in another house all men: for then in those houses, the right teeth
signify the elder, and the left teeth the younger persons. And further the
foor teeth signify very young persons, and the sharp teeth like to dogs
teth, signifye parsons of middle age: and the cheke teeth, old persons.

And therefore who that dreameth co leese any too^e, shall lose such a friend,
as that tooth signifleth: but when not only men, but also the losinge
possessions be signified: then is it thought or supposed, that the cheke teeth
to signify treasures or riches laid up orels hid. And ye sharp teeth to
signify those things which be of no great momente or value.

And the foreteeth signifye simple^ householde stuff, or else other moneables
within the house. Therefore very like it is y^ some of them fallinge out, to
signifye the loss of money, riches, and facultyes: and further the teeth also
signifye necessary matters to life, and of these the cheek teeth, signify
secret and privy matters. And the sharp teethe signifye those things,
which be not manifest to many, and the fooreteeth, signify most manifest, and
open matters, and these things which be compared by the talk and word. And
therefore the teeth fallinge out, be, or signifye the hynderaunce or loss of
the like matters, to them belonginge, also all the teeth falling out together,
signify a desert house left and forsaken by all the persons departinge
together from it. And further teathe fallinge out to those that be sick do
signify a long sickness and the scabbes or blistrings: but yet they give them
not to dye. For of the dead bodies, none after leaseth a tooth. Wherefore what
so ever happens not to dead folks, is a notice of health to sick persons
yet better it is that sick persons to lose all their tethe, for so the come yt
s^ner to health

And to a servant to lose his teethe, signifies after liberty and freedom.
And to merchants this dream signifies the spedy provision a desposition of
packes and other goods, and especially if they shall be in that journey with
them. Allo certain of the teeth waxinge above the others so that the on
exceadeth the other in bygnes, or else that be louse and fall not out,
signifye sedicion or variaunce in his house which sees the dream. And who
that thinks in his dream to have black, rotten, worm eaten, or broken
teath, and to lease them, signifies the deliuerye from al trouble, and
misery: and yet some, as often times the elder men, have lost by this dream:
besides he that thinkethe in his dream to have Juorye teeth, signifies good
to all persons: but be that thinkethe in his dream, to have golden teeth,
signifies especially good to eloquence and learned speakers: as it were of
the golden teethe prono^cinge the talke^ but to others this dream after
threatens fire and burning of the house which se this dream, and to certain
also this dream signifies sickness, coming and being of the multitude of
choler. And he yt thinks in his dream to have teeth of wax, signifies
that he shall come to a speedy death, for such cannot chew meat with them: and
to have teethe of lead or tynne sygnifyeth reproach or infamy and shame to
ensue: And to have teethe of glass or wood, doothe portende violente death:
and he that thinks in his dream to have silver teethe, signifies to him
that is learned, to get money by his talk, and eloquence: but to rich men this
dream porte^deth, the expense of money into food, and meats. And if any
thinkethe in his dream that his foreteeth fall out and the other grow in their
places does por^tend the change of life, into a better state If so be the
second teeth shall be better and fayrer, then yt other before: but into a worser
state, if they shall be worser and fouler.

And he that thinks in his dream to have a reasonable tongue and congruent
to the mouth, and to speak freelye and clearly with out impediment,
signifies good to al persons: but to dream that he cannot speak, or to
have the tongue, bound or tied in the mouth: does porte^d the impedimente of
actions or doings, and also poverty. For as much as pouertye does take away,
and prohibit the lybertye of talk, and speakinge. And he yt thinks in his
dream, that his tongue is swolen does protende sickness to his wife, which
sees the dream, if he truly has a wife: if not, then sickness to him self,
But if any thinks in his dream, to have hears sprung out of his tongue
whether they be white or else back, signifies sickness and sorrow: but yet the
black hears cause these sooner, and the white hears later.

And he that thinks in his dream, to vomit much blood, and of good color,
and not corrupt, signifies good to a pore man for it portendeth the coming
to riches and the abundance of monye. And this dream is good to him which
has no children, and to him also, which has a kinsman out of his contrye:
For the twone after shall have a son borne him and the other his kinsman came
home again for booth be of one kind of blood, but if the blood shall run
forth into a vessel, the child notwythstanding shall be brought up: and
the kynsman shall live dwelling in a straung: country or out of his
country, which also after his coming home shall dye. But if it shall run
down on the ground, then both shortly after shall dye: and he which dwelt out
of his country, shall go into his own for the blood that is in his ground
which truly in his country. And he that thinks in his dream, to carry or
bear blod, is both foolish and to no purpose to him which would be hid, for
he shall be manifested and openly known. And he that thinks is his dream, to
vomitte black or corrupt blood, does signifye by good reason sickness, to all
persons. And he that thinks to vomit a little blood in so much yt not by
vomittyng, but by spitting it may seem to be cast up, does portende sedition
as has been observed.

And to vomit choler, or flewme, to him which is in calemity or misere or else
in any perplexitye of mind or sickness, does signify the flakyng and ceassing
of the present evils: For all the refuses of such like, do not molest or grieve
any more.

And he that thinks in his dream to vomit up his meat, or whosoever it be
signifies loss and trouble of that, that the body feleth not the sustenances
or fode. And who also that thinks to cast up or vomit out by the mouth, the
great guts or bowels, does portend the death of children, both to the man
and wife: but to them which have noe children, this dream signifies the
loss of the best and most precions thing which they have in their goods,
or that they set most store by. And to a like person also, this dream
portendeth death.

And to hauet woo or three heads, to a poor man it signifies riches, and
besides for that he shall possess and have many heads y^ he shall gather
together great abundance of goods and riches: and his wife and children
also shall happen well and prosperous. But to a rich man this dream
signifies adversity and loss by kynsfolkes to a warrior this dream
signifies good luck,

And who that thinks in his dream to have his head strycken of, either by
judgment condemned thereto, or of thieves, or else in a tryumphe or turnemente,
or in any other manner signifies good: But to him having parents, this
dream, signifies evil, or the less of them and to him also having children,
this dream signifies the like. For the head is compared like to the parents,
because they be authors of life: but the head to the children, for the. face
and Image sake. And a certain man also having a house, dreamed the like: who
after lost the same. And by this dream also it signified, the loss both of
wife, and friend.

Besides to the kepers of banckes of monye and to usurers, masters of ships
and marchaunts, and to al others also that gather up money: this dream
signifies the loss of great sums of money: but he which dwells out of
his country that he shall after return home: and he also which is in
peril of life by the law, that he shall escape the danger. And further, if
any sailing on the Sea sees this dream, it signifies the loss of the top
of a mast of the shipp, except he be any of the mariners, which sees or saw
the dream.

And in these like truly have been observed, to signify death to princes. And
a certain Greek dreamed yt he thought his head was stricken of, who after
came to Rome, and so lost his former name and dignitye. And he that thinks in
his dream, to have a head like to a Lion, Wolf, Panther or Elephante, shall
obtain after the victory and ouerhande over his enemies, and adversaries, also
which he is in suite with. But he that thinks in his dream, to have a
head like to a dog, horse, ass, or any other four footed beast, does protende
servitude, bondage, and care of mind with heaviness: and he also yt dreameth
to have a head like any kind of bird: is a notice of peregrination, and
iourninge about.

And further he that thinkethe in his dream, to have his head in his hands,
signifies good hap to him which has no children nor has a wife and to him
also lokinge for any dwelling out of his proper country. And if any also
thinks in his dream, to have horns like an Ox or any other violente
beast, does portende vyolente death: but yet for the more part it signifies
headynge to him which sees the dream: For this like is wont to happen to all
horned beasts.

And the breaste whole, and sound without any hurt signifies good, but the
breast rough although it shall be thick of hear, to men truly this dream
signifies good, and lucratyue: but to women this dream signifies,
wydoweheade or the loss of her husband, and if the pappes appear greater
then they wont to be, and keepynge a comlines or fashion, signifye both the
obtayninge of children, and possessions or goods, but if the pappes appear
sore, and as they wear blystred: do portende sickness to him, which seethe
the dream. And the pappes falling from the breast, signifies death to
children and to his children which sees ye dream: and if not children then
they promise nedines Also they oftentimes signify waylinges especially to
women. For these in their weepyng and wayling, do pull or rent their papes. And
who that thinks to be wounded on the breast of a certain familiar, and one
well known to him, signifies to old men hearing of sad or heavy news
from some place: but to young men, and men of middle age, and women this dream
promises love.

And he that thinks in his dream to have hard and fair hands: signifies
felicitye or good hap: especially to handie crafts men, which get their
substance and lyuinge, by giving out wares, and receyuinge in others too
work. But to a person fearyng or being in fear, this dream portendeth
bynding, and bonds or fetters: for not without fear this dream is. And
further the one hand is prepared to take things, and the other fear to keep
them. And besides the right hand, signifies the son, father, friend or
kynsman. And the left hand the wife, mother, sister, daughter maiden servant
and manseruaunt. And therefore which of the hands any shall think to lack,
shall lease one of those, which be signified by that hand. But to maryners,
dauncers, or tomblers, and i^glers, to have no hands, is not good forasmuch as
it is impossible. to work and do most things without them, as it is manifest.

And further to loose the fingers of his hands, signifies damage or loss and
to dettours, to pay more then they owe: and to usurers, to be deceived or
begyled of their vsurye.

And he that thinks in his dream, to have hear grown out of his hands,
and out of his joints of the fingers of the hands, signifies Imprisonment.

And who that thinks in his dream to be pained or disseased in the great
guts, or about the bottom of the bellye, do denounce truly sickness to
the body and nedines or barenes of living.

And if any shall think himself payened about the nauill part: does either
portende the loss of parents, or the privation of country.

And if any thinks in his dream to see his body cut open and to see his
inward parts after nature, and each decentlye lyinge, signfyeth good to him
which has no children, and to a poor man. For the one shall after have
natural children, and the other possessions or riches. For the children be
named the bowels, like as also ye intrales or inward parts. And like as the
possessions or goods be in the house, even so within the great guts, be the
bowels: but if any dream that he is cut open, and that he sees nothing
of his inward parts left within him, signifies that his house shall after be
desolate and forsaken, and the loss also of children and to a sick parson,
death: but this dream signifies good to those, which be in troubles or
imprisoned, for they shall soon after tread them under their feet. And
besides the former spoken, must here be considered and applied like as the
heart in the body, sygnifyeth the wife of the man which sees y^ dream, and
the husband of the wife which sees the like. Also the lunges or lyghtes, the
like. But ye liver signifies the son sustenaunce and cares. And the gaul
the chollericke humor, monye, and women. And the mylte, signifies pleasures,
laughter and householde stuff: An^ the bellye and great guts, signifye
children.

And the kydneis signifye brethren, and kynsfolkes: and therefore when any of
these shall be diseased, they portende the like to that, that the membre
signifies: also if any member seems lackinge, it signifies loss of the
like member. And if any thinks in his dream to se a plant spro^g out of his
knees, does portende that he shall after be stayed or hindered of the use of
his knees, but if a sick person shall see this dream be shall dye: For out of
the earth al plants do spring.

Also a certain man there was, who dreamed yt he saw a reed or ca^e grow
out of his right knee, which after had a fistula engendered in that knee.

And to have many fete signifies good to marchaunts and masters of ships,
for they shall rule and govern servant with many feet and this dream also
signifies good to al those which nourysheth and maintains servants by
byinge and sellinge, and to a pylote or gouernoure of a ship. this dream
signifies ease, rest, and quietness: for that he shall use many feet, in
runninge and girdinge forward the ship with owers, or else otherwise by
sailing. And to a poor man this dream signifies good, for he shall attain
servants but this dream to a rich man does portend sickness, for y^ not
with his own feet, but by the help and use of a stay he may so seem to
have many feet. And further, to see the feet burninge, signifies evil to all
persons, and both loss, and decaying of goods and also of children and
servants.

And who that thinks in his dream to become bygger then any man: does
portende death to him, which seethe the dream, and if any having a litlte
young senne, shall think him to become a man or at a man's stature, does
portende tha^ his son shall dye: and this dream is grievous to an old man,
to think hymself^ changed into a young man, and a young man into a child, for
both of them passes and i^ changed into the worser and simpler state* But
good it is a child to be changed i^ to a young man: and to a man to be
changed into an old man, for both of the^ passes, into the better and
honowrable estate. But if a young man shall be chau^^ged into an oulde man, he
shall not dy^^like as the child, but shall be sick. And if a man shall also be
changed into a child behauinge himself vnwyselye, in doing matters shall
sustain damage. And further the qualitye of chaunginge is thus: that if any
shall think himself also changed into a woman, which before was a man:
signifies both good to a poor man and servant: for the one shall after have
such a person which shall nourishe him up, like as a woman: and the other shall
serve after, with lesser labor. For the lesser be women's labors, which they
do: but to a rich man this dream signifies evil, and especialy, to an
officer or one ruling a Common weal for that women for the most part bekepers
of the house and occupyinge themselves within that house, wherefore to every
maiestrate, ruler, or officer, this dream does damage and deprive him, which
sees it. But if a woman shall be changed into a man, if she shall then be
unmarried, shall after obtayn a husband, and if she be married and shall lack
children, that she shall be delivered of a son, and so she shall pass into
a very ill nature: but if she has a hand, and son, she shall after be a
wydowe. For that a man needs not a man but a woman. And besides if any man or
woman, shall think himself, to become gold or silver, if he shall be a
servant, shall after be sold, by which truly he is made both gold and
silver: but if a poor man shall see this dream he shall after become rich
that such a matter thereby may be about him.

And this dream to every sick parso^ does prote^de death, like as to think
him self to become brass, except it be to a warrior or servant, but to be
changed into Iron does signifye intolerable calamityes and miseryes, enduryng
to old age, to him which sees the dream.

And he that thinks himself to become clay or to an earthen matter does
declare death to all persons except to those which get their living by the
earth or by clay.

And to become also a stone signifies wounds and cuttes, to him which sees
the dream: and so in the same manner aman must judge of any other matter like.

And he that thinks in his dream, to exerise husbandrye, as either to sow,
or plow or else plant, signifies good to the^ which seek a wife and have no
children for the fallowe fyelde is none other then the woman, and the seeds
and plants, the children: but the wheat the sons, and the barley the
daughters and abortyues. Also to others this dream signifies sickness, and
troubles of mind: and if any be sick in his house which sees the dream,
shall after dye.

And he that thinks in his dream, to govern a ship well, and wyselye,
signifies good to all persons For not without fear and labor it is
governed and brought to any port. But if they be vexed with tempests or come
to shyppewracke, it does portende a mighty evil or harm to ensue which has
often been observed.

And to dye lether, signifies evil to al persons, but to see a^y Uisions in
thy dream, signifies a most great and dangerous evil of all.

And good it is to him, that goes into a brothel house and commothe not again
For a certain man there was, which dreamed that he thought he entered into a
brothelhouse, and could not go out again, and so not many a day after dyed.

And this by good reason happening to him, for that the place is named common,
like as that also is, which receives the dead and besides in this place
happens ye corruption of many men's seeds: Wherefore that place is worthi
lickned to death, although those women have or be nothing like of signification
with ye place common. For they signify good for the moore part, but the place
is and signifyethe evil and harm: whereof these harlottes that wa^der about,
be commodiouser, to be seen in the dream then the others. And if any thinks
in his dream, to have carnally to do with a strange or unknown woman, if
she shall appear to him fair and gentle, and to have one soft and sweet
apparel, and Jewels of gold about her, and that she shall also proffer
herself to him signifies good to him which sees the dream, nor promises
the small happ of actions: but if she shall be an old or foul, or defourmed
woman, and wearinge on vnclenlye and ragged apparel does denounce that he
which sees the dream shall after lead his life in heauynes and sorrow. And
again if the woman aforesaid, shall not offer herself to him, then it
signifies the contraries to the former.

For a man must suppose that women's unknown Images to be of the actions,
happening to him which sees ye dream. And if a master thinks in his
dream, that he has to do with his servant, it is not good, for it signifies
despyte, and damage by that servant: which signifycation also is of the
brother, whether it be the younger which he companieth carnally with, or the
elder. And the like judgment, it is to be given of an enemy.

And to lie with a woman familiarly known and well acquaynted, if he shall
earnestlye love her, and shall also desire her carnallye: does portende
nothing to him which sees the dream, for his intentyue or fixed
concupiscence, but if he shall not in his dream earnestlye desire her, it
signifies good to him, if the woman shall be rych: for he shall always after get
or obtain of her some profit to him, or at the least by that woman which the
man sees. And if any thinks in his dream to lie with a married wife, is not
good for the law sake. And to be moved of a certain familiar friend to a
woman truly, it is both ioyoufe and profitable, whosoever be, the earnest
desire shall be, But to be moved thereto of a richer or elder man signifies good,
for that the manner is to take of such. And to be moved of a younger and needye
person, is evil for to such the manner is to give. And the fame signifycation
also if the elder shallbe the mouer or procurer, and a beggar. And a certain
person being a servant dreamed that he thought he handled his masters
priuitye: who after was made schole master, and bringer up of his children,
for he had then in his hands the masters priuityes, being signified of the
proper children of his master.

And if any thinks in his dream to wrestle with an unknown person it does
induce dangers through a sickness: For like as the wrastler coueteth to
handle his aduersarye, even so the sickness, the sick person as to bring him
to the earth. And further that a man to wrestle with a child, signifies also
evil. For if he shall overthrow or cast the child, he shall then bury some
body. And to a child to wrestle with a man, signifies good, for there shall
follow after great matters, besides his expectation. And to wrestle with a
dead person signifies sickness, or contencion and variance, with some of the
children or heirs, of that dead parso^. And besides in wrestling, it is
always better to overthrow or cast down an enemy for thereof ensues
victory, to him which sees the dream.

And to eat brown bread to a poor man it signifies good, for that they
most commonly feed there upon But to eat white bread to poor men it
signifyethe sickness: for the contrary cause. And to rich men to eat brown
bread, it signyfyethe desperation: or that those things which be presently
hoped after shall not be performed or accomplished. And if any thinks in
his dream, to eat barlye bread, it signifies both good to him, and to al
persons.

And if any thinks in his dream, that no stranger, but his own household
do see him dance, signifies both good to him and to all persons: But both his
wife and children and some of his kinsefolkes to see him daunsinge, does
portend good: for it signifies gladness and joy, and the great abundance of
goods of riches: but yet to a person being sick as well to a man, as woman,
this dream signifies evil. And for the much motion also of daunting, it
signifies deceyuing and dotage. Also this dream signifies evil to him
which is vexed or has any sickness on him. But if any shall dream that he
dau^ceth in some high place does portende that he shall after fall suddenly
into a fear or other perils. And if he be an offender, he shall after be
greuouslye punished, for the reason of the highness, and stretching out of the
hands.

And he that thinks in his dream, to singe songs or Ballates, and that well
and trimlye, signifies good as well to syngers, as musitions, and to al other
perso^nes, but to singe euillye, and out of order is a notice of yt
unprosperous or vnluckelye success of matters, and, actions, and po^ertye.

But when those songs any shall remember, then by those songs he must make
his judgment: and to singe in the way as he goes signifies good, to him
which follows a wayne or cart: but to singe in a bayne or hot house,
signifies evil to him, which so dreameth. And further to dream that he
sings songs in the market place or streats, to rych men truly it does
portende dishonestye or rebuke and derisions: hut to a poor manne this dream
signifies either peuishnes or do ^age.

And he that thinks in his dream to hate a garlande of violettes on his
head if it be in the season of the year for them, does portende good hap:
but being out of their florishinge time and season, it signifies evil. And of
those truly which be made with white violettes, do signifye manifest add
notable incommodityes, and those which be made of yeallow violettes, do
signifye less incommodityes and harms and those also which be made of
purple violets do signifye death: For that the purple color has a certain
agreement to death.

And Garlands made of rooses, after the seasonable time of them: do signify
good to al versonnes, except chose being sick and to those which go about to
hide the^.

For those sick, they slay because rooses do lightlye wyther and rotte, and
these which hyde them they do manifest, for yt sauoure and smell. And to wear
a garlande trimmed with lyllyes, that they differ and put of matters unto a
hope.

And the flower of Mallows in a Garlande, signifies good to gardners, and
husbandeme^: but to others, it portendeth labors and wandringe about. And the
same signification is of Time, Sauerye, and Melilote, except to Physicians, to
whom they portende good, but a Garla^d made of smalach, or else our common
parceley, does slay sick persons, and in a waver those which be vexed with
water ru^ninge between the skin and flesh, for the coldness and moisture.

And a Garlande of wax signifies evil to all persons, but especially to
the sick: for as much as it is commonly occupied about burialls, but those
Garlandes truly which be made of wolle, for the variety do signify poisons
and imprisonment. And to wear a garlande of gold, signifies evil both to a
poor man and servant. And to wear a garland made of the vine and Juie
leaves, does portend to some imprisonment and sickness also, for the windinges
about of the Juye, but to offendoures of the Law, it does portende headinge for
that they be cut of with such a kind of instrument to the bigness.

And he that thinks in his dream to speak to an adversary or enemy and
to kiss either does* portende the solucio^ of enmitye between them. But to
kiss dead persons to a person being sick, it does portende death.

Also to a sick person to have or wear on white garments, doothe promise
death, for that dead bodies, be carried forth in white clothes. And to wear
on a black garmente, it doothe promise for the more part, health to a sick
persan for that not dead persons, but such as mourn for the dead, do use
to be clothed in black. But yet certain persons there were, as well poor
men servants, and prisoners being sick, that dreamed to be clothed in
black, who notwithstanding after died. For very like it was, that those weere
not carried forth to burying in white, for their great poverty sake. And
therefore it may be said, that to be clothed in black, is in a manner evil to
al persons. And to have on a garmente of dyuers^ colors or purple, does
portende sorrows or trouble, and perilles, and reuealeth also hyd secrets:
but to sick persons, it signifies to be vexed by sharp humors, and much
choler: but a purple garment, to rych men, and servants signifyethe good:
for to the one it promises aduauncemente, estate, and honor, and to the
other freedom, and liberty. Also it sleethe the sick person, and to a poor
man it is a dangerous dream. Besides to many, this dream portendeth
imprisonmente: for none lightly wears on purple but suchas be in regal
authority, or in high office. And to wear on a soft and costlye garmente,
signifies good to rich and poor men: for to those, the present dely^es and
wealth shall continue, but to these, shall be after greater increase of riches:
but to servants and very needye persons this dream threatens sickness.

Also broken and vncomlye apparel, do signifye damage and unprosperous
success of doing matters.

And besides he that thinks in his dream, to wash his own or an other
bodies clothes, do promise the putting away and delyuerye of some hurt or
incommodity about life, For that the clothes thereby: leave and cast of their
filthe. Also it makes a man to learn and know hyd matters: for to them, which
fear to be known or perceived, and reproved: it is dangerous, to carry and
see clothes washed.

And to stand at a glass. and to see his own image in the glass: signifies
good both to the man, and woman which will mary. For the glass to the man
signifies a wife, but the glass to the woman, signifies a husband. for
as much as the face shewethe or expresses even like as these again show the
children, the one to the other. But yt takes away sick persons, for that the
glass is of earth, of whatsoever matter it shall be made. And to see an Image or
figure in the Glass, unlike to himself: does portende yt some person to be
named or called, the father of bastardes or of strange children.

But to see an Image, fouler or deformeder in the Glass then himself:
signifies evil, for that it portendeth sicknesses and sorrows or heaviness of
mind. And like as also to see: or behold himself in the w^ter, does
pronounce death to him which sees the dream, or else to some most near or
familiar friend to him.

And to see the air fair and clear, promyseth good to all persons: and
especyally to those which do seek things lost, and which will go into
strange countries: for all things, in a clear air be made apparent, but y^
air dark or darkish or else cloudy, signifies besides y^ hindrau^ce of
actions sorrows and heaviness of mind.

And into what matter soever, the air shall be changed, is good to them which
occupy the fame matter: but ^uto others, it is euel. And the air become quiet,
signifies good to Astronomers alone and prophecyers. But to others, it
geeuethe a quiet life.

And rain to fall without tempest and much wind is good to al persons, except
to those which be sent to strange me^ or strangers, for to these it
sygnyfyethe hindraunce. And myslinge rain, drops, and frostes, do siguifye
only good to husbandmen, but to others, this dream portendeth small gain
and profit. But showers of rain and bail, and thick clouds, and tempests,
do pronounce to al persons, troubles, peryls, and harms and hurtes, But to
servants alone, and nedy persons, and those which be vexed with some
incommodity and danger do promise the alterations, and delyuery from the
present evils. For after great storms and tempests, fair weather does
incontinently ensue.

And for snow and yse if they be seen in their proper time, they signifye
nothing

For that the sha^pe cold day before caused to repeat it in the s^^epe. But
if they be seen out of season, the signify good to husbandmen, but to others
they pronounce cold attemptes, and p^r^osed accions to be, and prohi^^t also
to go a journey. And hayle doothe indicate, troubles, and heaviness or
sorrows, and reueleth also hid matters, for yt couloure. And thonder without
lightninge, does portende to servants, troubles, and wyles to entrap them
unawares, for the sudden unlooked for, but lightninge with out thunder,
signifies vain fear. For after lightning, to look again for thunder, does
demonstrate the fear, for it is none other then vain threatninges. And
therefore when thunder ensues not, yt causes a vain fear. And further to se
fire in the sky, clear pure, and, little: does signify threatenings of some
noble estates. But to many, this dream porte^deth the incursion of enemies,
pouertye, and honger. And besides wheresoever the fire shall be or where it is
carried up, as from ye North, South, West, or East, and from thense enemies
come, or else near those regions or countries, dearth shall be. But worst of
all shall be, to see fire to be carried or showed openly: and the same also
signifye fire like to torche light falling from heaven, also to see wood and
burninge trees, which altogether threaten peril or danger, about his head
which sees the dream. And lightninge without tempeste passinge near by, and
not touching the body, that person which sees it shall after be driven out
of those places in which he dwelte. For no man can sustain and abide, the
lightenynge coming near him. But if the lyghtninge, shall seem to fall before
any, it does prohibit him utterly to go forth. And to be stricken with
lightninge does promise to him which lackethe a wife, to marrye one, whether
he be poor, or else rich. But being married, it declares the separation of
his wife, from him, and the like also of brethren, friends, kynsfolkes, and
acquayntance, to become enemies to him. For lightning does not ioin together,
but they joined together in one it seperateth. And further having children, it
does depryue or take away children in as much as they dye: if he be sick to
this yt he is smytten with lyghtninge, or otherwise they fall, if he be not
sick. For trees where they be stricken with lightning they die and lease their
branches. And like as the branches be the children of the trees, even so be
the children the branches of men. And a certain man there was, who thought
in his dream, that the outward post or pillor of the bed, was smytten and
consumed with lyghtening and not long after dyed his wife.

And he that thinks in his dream, to se usual fire, small clear, and soft
burninge, signifies good, but to see a much and over great fire, does
portende evil.

Therefore the best fire is that which on the earth is seen to burn pure and
clear, for this signifies much ric^es: because a ready fire in the hearth, is
chieflye occupied about dressing of meats but the same fire put out does
threate^ poverty, and if any be sick in that house, it does pronounce death
to him. And good it is to think himself to have Torches or like lights
burninge, and especially this, to young men. For it signifies for the more
part joyous loves to them, and promyseth also pleasant actions. But to see
himself having one torche, is evil, that coueteth to hyde him. And the
lantern light, clear burning in the house, is good for it signifies to all
persons, the attayninge to wealth and riches, and to those unmarried, it
promises marriage, and to sick persons health. But not clear burninge but
darkely signifies sorrows, and heaviness of mind, and sick persons not long
after it flees and the light put out, it recouereth and amendeth them for that
afterward it shall be lighted again. And any lantern light, seen in a bark or
ship, does portend after a great quietness and calm of the wind. And
further the gates of the house burning, do signify the death of the wise, and
his life also to be in a hasard or in danger which sees the dream.

And he that thinks in his dream, to se greehoundes huntyng or taking what,
or already taken, and going out to hunt, signifies good for they be signifyers
of the actions but those which return unto the cytty or town, do signify the
hyndraunce of actions, for the^ they cesse of their labor. And masty dogs, or
others yt only keep the house, do signifye the wives and servants and
other goods gotten together. Wherefore they being lusty, and fawning upon do
porte^d a good keeping of yt house as well of the wife, as of the household the
water dies.

And to see great flyinge birds, signifye more prophet to rich me^ the^ to
the pore. But the small, and fatt birds, be most profitable to poor men. And
further to se an Egle sitting on a stone, or tree, or else in a most high
place, is good to them goinge forth to do a deed, but to such fearing this
dream evil, and a strayer away also it brings back again.

And an Egle sittyng on his head which sees the dream, does pronounce death
to him. For what ever it has seasoned on with the calons, it sleeth.

And to be carried on an Eagle, doothe promise death, boothe to kings nobles of
a realm, and rich men. And the Egle threatninge what, does signifye the
thretninges of a man of power. But gentle of look, and going to or greeting
what and calling in his own voice doothe signify good, as has been observed.
And to see an Egle dead signifies only good to a servant and to him which
fears any, for it threatens both death to the threatner, and to the
master, and to others, it signifies the hyndraunces of actions. Also the Egle
does signifye the present year, for after the difference of the Egles, be
also judged the differences, and diverse happes to come. And grippes, both to
potters, and curryers of lethers, do portend good, for that they dwell in the
edge of the Town, but to physicians and sick persons evil, for that they joy
and feed on dead bodies.

Also they signifye wicked and cursed enemies, not dwellinge in the town, and
besides incommodious to al others. And the hawk and kyte do sygnyfye vyolente
catchers or takers and robbers of cou^ters. For the hawk signify open enemies,
and openly inuadinge or setting upon, and the kite, does portende enemies
pryuyly setting on. And the raven may be likened to an adnouterer and thief
and both for the color, and yt he often alters his voice.

And the crow, signifies much or long time and the delay of doing matters.

And the company of Jayes, does signifye both nedy men and vain trouble. And
wood coluers, and doves, do signifye Women, but the wood Coluers, always
signifye harlotes. And the doves also do somtymes signify honest women, and
matrones. And doves also do signyfye delectation in doing matters, for that
they be dedicated to Venus, and they be also good to al frendshippes, and
feloweshippes, and all consiliations, for that they dwell and live together.
And the companies of cranes and storkes, if they be seen, do signifye the
invasion and meetynge of robbers and thieves, and the coming of enemies. And
the swanne, sygnifyethe a musitio^, and music also yt self: and reuealeth
hid things, for the color. And to sick persons being seen, it portendeth
health, but hard singinge, doothe promise death, for that the swanne sings
not, until he be near dying. And bees to husbandmen, and to those which get
a living by them, signifi good, but to others they prononoce troubles, for the
sound and noise yt they make and wounds, for their stinge. Also they threaten
sickness, for the hounye and wax.

And sittinge on the dreamers head, to a Captain of a band, and to an
Emperor shall be, signified, good but to others, evil, and besides they
portend for the more part that he to be slain of a company, or souldiars,
which sees the dream. For they be like to a company or band. for that they
be ready and obey, to their king and Captain, and to enclose or shut in bees,
signifies good, and good it is also to al persons to kyl them except to
husband men only. But waspes signify evil to al persons, for they signifye
that some shall fall into evil and cruel men's handlinges.

And if any saylyng thinks himself to sail well, is good to al persons,
but to happen or fall sodaynlye into a tempeste, does signifye sorrows and
peril, but to come or to make a ship wreke, or the ship overthrown, or
rotten, or dryeuen on stones, is daungerouse to all parsons, except to those
which be holden and kept by force of some, and to servants, for those it
delivers from the dangers. For the ship is like to them, which so keep them.
And always it is better to think to sail in a great ship and which has
heavy ladynge, for as much as small ships, although any shall sail well
in them, yet they bring not goods home and to their port without fear.

And that is also better to think to sail by the sea, then by land, for to
sail by land, does signifye goods, the slowelier and hardliar to come, and
that scarcelye shall come at all. But worser is that any sailing by sea, does
suddenly fall or happen into a tempeste, then if by the land. And if any
would sail and cannot, or is by force holden or stayed back by some does
signify hindraunces and stayinges or withholdings of goinges to and forth.

And the like so sail by land, trees and stones being laid against and in
the middle set, does signify witholdinges or stayings back and hindraunces.

But to see barks sailing from the shore and land on the sea or well
perfourming their course, is good to al persons, and both a signifier of
wandringe, and return home from some strange countries.

And also it pronounces, messages messengers by sea, and Ships or barks
brought out of the haven unto an high place do make goods the ^lower to come,
for then truly they begin saylynge. But of an high place, and the barks into
an Haven returninge and arryuinge, do signifye goods the sooner to come, for
then they shall come to an end of saylinge.

And the havens, do always signifye well doers and friends, and all those
also which be Artificial practisers. And the anchors uses, do signifye
necess^tye and safetye and prohibit to wander forth.

And the mast of the ship, signifies the master of the ship or house, and
the fore part of the ship, signifies the ruler of the foorshipe or beck.
But a ship performinge his course, and not resting, does portende very great
peril to be about the self same part, and the ship bruised or thrust
together by a violent tempest.

And from whence soever fyet is carried into the ship, from thence it
foorsheweth the tempest to come.

And the sun from the East rising up clear and fair, and settinge the like
in the Weste, is good to all persons, and to others also it portendeth
actions, and to others the generation of children. But hurts those, which
go^ about to hide themself, for it reuealeth and brings to light al
things. And the Son out of the West arysinge, reueyleth hid things, and of
those which they thought to hid themself, and the sick person very low
brought it recouereth and amendeth, and the person being dim of sight not
to be blind it promises, for of much darcknesse he shall se light. And
^^bringeth again the person dwelling in a strange country although he be in
hope never to be. Also good it is to him which has purposed to go Westwarde,
for it promises return to him from thence. And to him which looks for any
to come from yt West, it signifies that he is then ready to return and come.
And to others it is contrary, to every attempt and hope, and that which we
have purposed it lets to be done or ended.

And the Sun darcke or somewhat bloody for heat making a noise, is evil and
harm to all persons, partelye indicating hindrances of actions, and partlye
to the dreamer, it portendeth sickness or otherwise peril, or else sickness or
disease in his eyes.

And to those which will hide what, and to persons also fearing is observed
profitable, for the twone shall well hid, and the others shall suffer or
sufteyne no evil and harm. For the Sun dark, does the less b^^ne. And it
is always better to se the light and brightness of the Sunn, entringe into the
house, then to see the Sun it self, for the light, because it makes the
house the lighter, it p^^^endeth the attayning of goods. And further the sun
thought to be apparelled like a Carter, is good to warriors, and to those
which covet to wa^der abroad, and to Carters, but to sick persons, it is
petillous and dangerous.

And the Moon signifies the wife of the dreamer, and the mother also for
nourse she is thought to be: and both daughter and sister. For when any
thinks to see his own Image or shadow in the Moon, to him truly which has
no children, it portendeth to him the birth of a Sun, but to the woman so
dreaminge, it porte^deth the birth of a daughter. For every one perceyueth y^
like Image of himself (...) daughter.

And this dream is good to keepers of banks of money and usurers, for they
shall after attain much gain and profitte and good it is also to them which
would be seen, but parsonnes hid it reuayleth. But parsonnes being sick,
and sailing ou the sea, it sleeth, and those truly being vexed with a
sickness of water runnig between the skin and the flesh, for as much as
the nature is moist, but these to fall and come unto shypwrake. And what good
things the Sun promisethe, the same also the Moon signifies, and the like
what euilles, but yet the euilles always lesser, for that she is lesser of
heat then the Sun. The stars seen all clear and fair, signifies good
unto such ion^neyinge and unto other accions, and unto secrets. For these show
not the like which the Sun and Moon do, for that these show the brighter
and fayrer they being not above the earth, and the dimmer and darcker when
either is above the earth: For that every star is known priuatelye, either
by his couloure, bigness, motion, or form of motion. And now each star, does
cause like hap according to his fortitude, which when they appear
troubled, do then signifye sorrows, and both perilles and troubles to the
dreamer. But appearing bright and fair do then promise a happynes,
prosperitye, and good increase to the dreamer.

The stars seen to fall from heauer, do threaten to rich men much pouertye
and sorrow to ensue for that heaven, is applied to the house of the dreamer,
and the stars to the possessions, riches and men in the house. But this
dream to the pore foresheweth destruction. And one thought that he saw all the
stars fall from heaven, after which ensued that he became wholly balde: For
like reason as heaven has to all the earth, even the same has the head to the
body. And again, what reason the stars have to heaven, and the same have
the hears to the head. So yt the stars neither fallinge on the earth nor
darcke appearinge do promise good. But rather forshewe danger and hurt to
many persons. And evil it is to see the stars under the rooffe of an house
for that it signifies the house to become destitute, uncovered and burned, or
else yt the Master of the house shall dye, in that the stars appeared within
the house.

The raynbowe seue of the dreamer on the right side, promises good to him,
but seeue on the left side, threatens evil. But this right and left side, is
not hearement as to heaven, but as to the Sun. And howsoever it shall
appear, yet it always signifies good to those in great pouertye or in any
misfortune. For that such in decay, and oppress^d with any calamitye, shall
after amend of their estate.

The white clouds be signifyers of a happier estate, and drawinge from the
earth upward toward heaven do signifye for the more part a long journey: and
that such lying out of their proper cou^treye,, shall after return home, and
that secrets to be reueyled. But the yealowe clouds seen do signify an
unprosperous ^uccesse of matter. And dark clouds seen, do signifye sorrows,
and cares to ensue: but the black clouds seen, do threaten a tempest, or
heaviness to ensue. To think him self to be dead, and that carried forth, and
buried, to a servant, to whom the affairs and house of the Master is not
committed, it sygnifieth liberty. For that the dead being a seruaunce, has
then no master, and finds at that time the rest both of labors and
service. But to that servant to who^ the goods of the master are committed,
death takes away that credit. And to a man not having a wife, it forshewethe
Marriage to ensue. For that marriages and death, be thought both as the ends to
men, and do always show a like together. So that to sick persons to marry
a wife, and to keep the Brydale, signifies death to ensue. For that the same
happen to both, in that feasts be kept as well at the Burialles, as at the
Marriages. And to that manne dreaminge the like, which has a wife that he
shall after dye, leauinge both brethren, and kinsefolke. For that the dead do
not after keep company with the living, nor the living with the dead: But
this dream signifies good to the well learned, and fathers. For that to the
fathers, children, and to the learned, the wrytinges, and Books of their
wisdom.

And this has been observed, that to the sad, and such in fear, that death
signified good to them. For that the dead be then free both of fear, and
heaviness. And this dream to them, which he in a controversy for land and
would buy land, signifies a good success. For that the Lords of such
land are dead. But in other variances to dream to be dead, signifies loss
and sorrow For yt in causing and workynge matters, the dead be then unable to
do, besides are fallen in the power of the living. But if any beeinge sick
seems to be dead, does after signifye that he shall be delivered from the
sickness or grief, for that the dead do not then feel grief: nor be
sick. And if rny thinks to be buried alive, the same promises good to no
body, for that it signifies for the more yarte imprisonment or to be fettered
with chains. And he that thinks to be strangled and to hang himself,
signifies after tribulations and sorrows for that to them that are strangeld,
we se the like to happen. And if the dead seem meerye and gentle they signifye
good, and that he shall pass the present time luckely: But if not, then
contrarywyse. And if the dead seems to take away such thing, which he
enjoyed in his life time, promises evil to follow. But most dangerous of all
others are these, which seem to take away garments, money, or meat: For
they either signifye death to the dreamer or to some of his kyndred or
acquaintance. Besides if the dead seem to give somewhat, do also signify
evil: unless they some to give meat, silver, or garments.

And if any thinks to dig up treasure, findinge there little stoare of
money, does signifye the lesser harm or evil to ensue: but seeminge a
treasure of much money does signifye sorrows and cares, and foresheweth
death, for that Treasure is not found, without the digging up of the earth,
nor the dead laid into it without the openinge of the earth.

And this for a truth has been observed, that when a certain person was
sometimes in heaviness, thought in flepe that he saw himself to have very
small money in a little basket, and that he entered into a certain shop, where
thought, he lost the same coin conveyed by theft. After which followed, yt
certain lucky tydinges came to him the same day followinge, of matters which
he took great care for, and through the same was delivered, and became meerye
again. And an other which sent his son sometimes out of his countreye to
gather up money, and being then not come home, thought in sleep that he was
returned, and said to him: I have brought thee home three Thousand and 80.
Crowns, who awakyng, showed this dream unto ^n interpreter, who answered
that his Son should shortly return with loss of his money which the like
happened to him

To mary a maiden signifies death to the sick parson, for that like things be
used in marriage, as happily in the Burial: yet the same signifies good to him
which purposes to go a new journey and message, for that it signifies he
shall attain his purpose. And to that person hoping after any thing of
commodity, shall after attain the same. For yt some profit does always ensue,
at the new marr^ing of a wife. And yet to some parsons, this dream signifies
troubles and shame, for that maryages are not performed, without trouble. And
if any thinks to marye a wydowe, shall after compass no ne^e, but some old
business, without care and trouble. But if any shall thinck to see his wife
married to another man, does after signifye the alteration of actions, or
separation. And if a woman having a husband seems to be married unto
another man, like as many write, does after signify that she shall either bury
her husband, or other wise in some manner shall be separated, and live from him.
Yet this not always happens true.

Certain brief Dreams gathered out of the Pamphlettes of the wise Solomon
holy Joseph, and Daniell the Prophet, with others now newlye added.
IF a Prince or his wife shall seem to have ringes on the fingers, declare
after so many parsons sons as there appeared ringes. To talk with the earth,
signifies to Princes victory. If it seem to a Prince to have received poisoned
drink, or meat, that his hears seem to fall of: shall after overcome enemies
by policy.

If it seem to a Prince to pluck up any trees by the root, that he shall
subdewe some of his nobles. But if those trees fall of their own accord, then
those nobles shall dye without trespass or fact of the Prince. If from the
foot of Trees ships seem to arise then the Princes people shall increase.

If a Prince seems to have the Sun in his hand, signifies that he shall
have a Prince captyue. If this seems to a noble parson, that he shall be a
rebel: if to a private parson, that he shall be delivered from the heaviness of
cares. To worship the stars, or before them to weep, sygnifyeth a good turn
or grace to be had at the Princes hands. If to a Prince seem Tapestrye clothes
to be banged abroad, signifies a glad tydinges or message But if they seem
decayed and torn, then a short life: and if but old, then that he shall
retain a good end only of the matter hoped after. To a private sick parso^,
good savors and Music signifye health, but to a Prince death. A rich pomp
or triumph to a Prince sick declares death but to a private man, the deliuerye
from that sickness. To a person in dignity to sit in the Clouds, declares a
hasti ruin to follow: to be whipped or scourged of a Maiestrate, and not of a
Bedell or other officer without crime, signifies that the sentence of law
shall be given against him, to his hinderance. And if the same be a friend, then
this shall be profitable and with ^ut damage.

And if any seems to raygne; declares to him a public death, but to a
servant it is good for it signifies liberty. To see the Prince ireful, is
evil to al parso^s, but especially to subjects.

To worship the king is to worship Religion and God. To take a cloak,
Crown, or sword of a Prince, signifies good. to contend with a king or some
parson in Authority, that he shall aco^plishe all his businesses, that he
would with either of them. And the like wha^ he overcomes them in cause of
the law. To minister meat to a king, receives a gift according to the manner
of ye meat. To be kissed of an Emperor or king, or to talk with him,
signifies gain with joy. to seem to put on golden garments declares envy
or heaviness. If any sees an Eagle or done sittinge on him, signifies honor.
If any seems to break down altars in sleep signifies death to follow. If
any thinks to see or fight with Bees, signifies ire. If any thinks to carry
armoure, declares safegardes or honor. To loose or break Armoure, signifies
damage. To seek Tree with fruit in sleep signifies gain. To think himself
to be a tree, signifies a sickness. To clyme trees, signifies good tidings or
some promotion. To fall out of a tree, signifies to fall from a great hope. To
see trees grow in thy house, signifies strangers to dwell and keep fellowship
with thee. The leaves of plants to fall on the sleaper, declares deceytes and
wyles to be forged against him. And to see pla^tes without root, signifies
vain thoughts and men of small trust and vtility. If a woman seems to
bring forth a peach tree, shall after bring forth a son of worthy manners,
but of short life. To bend a bow or shoot arrows, signifies sorrow or
labor. To loose or break a bow, signifies honor. To gather to gether
arrows, signifies wicked deceates to be intended unto some one. To find a
how signifies to take a journey. If any thinks in his sleep, to plowe,
signifies abundance with labor.

And seeminge to plowe is good to such desirous to have children, but to the
sick, the same is perilous. And one seemed to plowe, and sow wheat, after
which the dreamers wife and his children beyngthen out of the country,
returned home. To think he handled silver, signifies gain. To see a big
Tree, signifies honor. To plant a Tree with Arms or branches, or to hear
boughs, declares gain to ensue. And be that thinks to see a broken Tree,
signifies gain out of doubt. To see a Tree bearyng fruit, signifyeeh gayue
or joy to ensue: to see a most huge Tree, declares death to ^ollowe. To lead
or handle a Boar, declares a happy expectation.

To find either gold or silver, declares envy or hatred to ensue. To see
gold or any gilden matter, declares happy times to ensue. To see silver, and
not to handle it, declares great strife to follow. And sometimes to se
silver and handle it signifies a grievous sadness. To seem much higher then
he is, declares that he shall after be very sick. To take any thing from a
woman signifies damage. To see a field ^ull of thorns, declares
ple^tifulnes to follow. To se birds boylinge, signifies the evil talk of
enemies. To see birds and to fight with them signifies damage. To see
birds without feathers, signifies trouble. To se the stars in sleep,
signifies a great gladness to follow. To see and talk with an Angel,
declares a happiness to follow. To clyme to heaven or to pray to God
signifies a great tradition. That he goes to church to pray, or executes
the office of a minister, signifiethe great gladness to follow. That he
catches hastily at birds, signifies damage. To se birds, hang in sleep,
declares gain. That abyrde fights against him, declares the anger of some
man toward him. To see a bird with her young, declares joy to ensue. Tol
loose or let go birds, signyfieth damage. To have birds with their young,
declarethe gain to follow. To see bees upon him, signifies enemies to hurt
him.

That bees stinge and hurt him, signifies to be hurt by the wiles and
deceyts of men. To crepe into a be hyue, declares dissolution. To see a
swarm of Bees signifies damage. To dream that he sees bees fight within
themselves, sig, nifyeth the hurt of parsons. That a be smyteth angarlye,
signifies the sedition of enemies. To see or have Lambs or kyds, signifies
consolation or increase.

To see a goose, declares great honor. To se lambs feadinge or sleapynge,
signifies deterimente. And to see an ass in sleep, signifies the tediousnes
of a sickness. And to think himself caught or taken hold of the devil,
signifies gain. To be taken of a bear, signifies gain. To fly to heaven,
signifies peregrination. To give any thing into the hands of an other,
signifies gain. And to think himself taken or houlde of a wolf signifies to
be oppressed of enemies. To take roasted eggs, signifies gain, To drink hot
water in sleep, signifies a sickness. To drink cold water in sleep,
signifies health and long life. And to fall from a tree, signifies dead
near hand. To be crouned of an Emperor, signifies joy. To be crowned of
a dead parson, signifies securitye. To be carried forth of a River,
signifies the discord of enemies To sit at the table of a man of power,
signifies joy and gladness. To see the air clear, signifies gain or
expedicio^. To see the air troubled or cloudy, signifies a deceit or
petition. To see or eat roasted flesh, signifies damage To clyme to heaven or
pray unto god, signifies a great tradition. To think himself drawn of the
dead, declares no good luck. To be vexed of a devil, signifies happy gain. To
think himself bound, signifies a certain hindrau^ce. To take meat or some
other thing of the dead, or to talk with him, signifies honor: that armed to be
set upon or smitten with a weapon, signifies to be oppressed of a mighty
parson. To lose a bracellet or ryng, signifyethe a greuouse deceyte. To take an
iron ryng, signifies security. To give a ring or vracellet, signifies a gift
and honor. To take or receive a ring, ^ignifyeth gladness. To see a ram
running declares the anger, or falling out of thy neighbor. To see asses
fighting or sttiuinge one with another or to run mourning, signifies strife of
enemies. To see himself endamaged by Beasts, shall be overcome of enemies or else
subversion, or disturbation.

To be assaulted of Serpents, signifies ^uill. If any thinks himself to
be clothed in white or bright apparel, signify^the joy to ensue. To see a
Carter running, signifies strife and contention with neighbors. To drink
vyneger, or wormwood signifies greuouse sorr^wes or asickenesse. To see the
air tempe^stuo^s, signifies a great sorrow. To see or handle Eeles, signifies
labor.

To see white feathers on his cote or other garmente, signifies gladness. To
see a tree, signifies deceyte or ^usines.

To walk by dunge hills, fignifyeth a sickness to ensue.

To walk by a still water, signifies securitye. To se himself aged,
signifies labor To walk by a runninge water, signifyeeth hynderaunce. To
speak to an Emperor, declareeh some aduau^cemente by a great man.

To conceive any thing in thy love, signifies carefulnes. To burn his
house, declares charity and good news.

To walk or talk with a stranger, declares expedition.

To dream that he has a great and long beard, declares gain and
fortitude. To se himself bearded, or in a strange manner from that he was,
declares contention or sorrow, or else decrease or sickness. That he seethe
himself to have a bearde burninge or on a fire, declares tribulation.

To see thy bearde clypped or shaven declares damage. To have a staff to
walk with, declares sorrow and sickness to follow. To be feared and set upon
by beasts, declares to take heed of thy enemy, and to see beasts running,
declares some trouble. And tame bestes, declares to win favor with
enemies, and to have them a while in thy power.

And to dream that he hears beasts speak, declares grievous sorrows.

To have strong arms, declares increase, to have goodlye arms, a good
message or an orname^t. And to have foul arms, signifies strife and loss.
And to have great arms, declares power.

To have small arms, desolation: to have mighty arms of strength, declarethe
friendship. And to se an Ox clyme, signifies much good. To see Oxen play,
feed or stand, signifies joy, and to see fat Oxen, declares temporal
goodness. To se leave Oxen, declares pouertye or needines of emporall goodness
after. To see an Ox black or killed, signifies danger. And to see an Ox
without horns, declares the conspiracye of enemies. To hear an Ox mow,
signifies strife. To se Oxe^ fight, signifies a business. To se Oxen run,
signifies joy, To see Oxen sleep signifies an evil time. To tame Oxen,
signifies a greeuouse sorrow. That Oxen cun upon him, signifies a wretched
business. To see a white Ox, or to sit upon him, signifies honor or
aduau^cement. To se Olyphauntes, signifies sorrow. To eat butter, declares a
happy message. To see beasts make a noise within themselves, signifies the
defense from enemies. And yt he sees the eleme^t touch the ground,
signifies expedicio^. And to se the eleme^t al on fire, declares noe goodness,
but iniquytyes in the dreamers heart. And to sit in heaven, declares
happinewes. And to fe a heart attaint the, declares that thou need not to
fear no man. And to se dogs play, signifies grace or fa^o^re of thy
aduersari And to think dogs barkinge, or leapyng on the: declares hatred
sought on thee or thy enemies to over come the. Also dogs leaping on the,
signifies that thou shall be deceived of thy enemies. And to make candels or
light lamps, signifies joy and iocundity. And to se a wax candel or ca^dels,
great gladness or a good message. To handle wax, declares good. And to have
long hear on the head, signifies fortitude: the head to be polled,
signifies sorrow or loss. To se himself heary declares a sickness after. To
singe psalms anger. And the bell to toll or to hear the sound thereof,
signifies fame, or a glad tydinges. And to se quick coals, signifies to
extincte or move thy enemies. And to eat coals, declares yt the enemies speak
evil of the. And to se thy neck bound, beware how you give credit to any, in
any thing after. And to put on new shoes, or new apparel thy self,
declares gayn with paynfulnes. And to put on old woorne shooen, signifies a
damage, trouble, deceuing, and sorrow. And to read or write a letter,
signifies a good message. And to talk with the dead, signifies good and
profit to follow, And to se books reading in the^, declares the not to be
overcome. To dwell with an Emperor or King, dedclareth joy and aduaunceme^t.
And to eat a fresh cheese, declarethe gain or favor. But salt cheese, no
good hap.

And to have an helmet on, declares securitye. To take or receive a garlande
of what kind it be, declares gladness or gain. And to wear a garland of
diverse flowers, declares an equality of temporallgoods. And to se lightnings
and thu^der declares gain. And to see doves, declares some heaviness after.
To se or have a borne, declares hynderaunce or peril of life. To dream that
he sees himself yt he cannot run, declares a sickness, hynderaunce or loss.
And that he can run, signifies gladness. And to dream yt he talks with a
dead person, signifies gain With other to be crowned, declarethe death to
follow. And to embrace friendly with a wife in bed, declares a grievous strife.
And with thy sister, sorrow or damage. But with they mother, securitye. And with
a virgin also declares sorrow. And with a man, strife and deceate of the
devil. And with a beast infirmitye. To lie with harlottes, signifies gayn. To
have cucu^bers and gourdes, signifies wearines, because ye grain there is
both red and black.

To see the white grayn like pease. signifies a grievous strife. To give a
s^ese, then beware thy enemy. To take a knife of on, declares that thy
enemies speak evil of thee. To sit in a carte, declares great gain to follow
To seem crouned or to wear a crown, declares gain. To read books or to see
them read, declares joy, to have gyues or fetters on, signifies friendship.
And to drink any spyced matter or sause, to take heed of an enemy. To se a
prison shut, declares securitye. To talk or walk with strangers, declares
an expectation. And to talk with thy master or lord, signifies great gain To
cut his own flesh with iron, declares a grievous sickness. And to eat ma^s
flesh, declares good as it wear sent. To see much flesh, then beware thy
enemy. And to se himself grievously punished or tormented, declares grievous
tribulation To dream that he has a heary boodye, declares hynderaunce. To
have a white head' signifies gain. And to vomit up meat, signifies yt what
thou shall have well settled in the, shall be troubled and tossed after. And to
swallow meat down, signifies damage. And meat to rise up, signifies the
effect of his will. And to se a whalswim, signifies loss And to dream that
his head is washed, shall be delivered. from al peril. And yt his head is
polled, signifies damage. To think thy self blind, signifies a sickness or
to fall into sin. And to hear a harp, signyfyeth vain words. And to dream
that his teeth fall out signifies the death of one of his friends after. And to
dream that the nether eye teeth fall out with pain and blood, declares that
he shall after come poor, or leese his near kinsman. And to dream yt he sees
himself rich, signifies to suffer an iniurye. And to build thy house,
signifies consolation or great gain. And to distroy thy house or to see thy
house fall, signifies damage or the death of.i. of thy parents: and to se thy
house burning, signifies the occasion of an offense caused by one, or peril
of life. And to be praised of young children, signifies yt he shall be glorified
of his proper children. And to dream that his head is stricken of, signifies
gain or to overcome an enemy, to eat sweet things, signifies to be
oppressed with many crimes. And to see dragons signifies some advancement.
And to have or see a diadem, signifies gayn, To se hymsefe comely decked,
signifies gayn, And to sit on a white horse or to see him, signifies
iocu^ditye. To have red or bay horses, signifies a happy message, to se a gray
horse signifies gayn, and to se a horse sadled, signifies labor. and to se
him self wa^dring, signifies a great grief or sorrow to follow. And to se a
dead horse, signifies gayn. And to have a black horse, or to sit on him
signifies sorrow. And to gelde a horse signifies damage, and that secrets to
be reveled. To se himself drunk, signifies sickness or scurity, And to see him
self gelded, signifies damage or a sickness. To see himself sick, signifies
some accusation. And to dream yt he is a vanyshed man, signifies a great
offense to follow. And to se spoils or to be spoiled himself, signifies yt
he shall receive loss by some of his near friends. And to see himself not to
exercise his proper relygion, signifies heaviness to follow. To dream that he
is hurt with iron, declaaeth desolation. And to dream that he sees his face
in the water, declares long life. To think himself to have a comely face,
signifies aduauncemente or to be enryched. But to dream that he sees
himself to have a foul face, signifies that he shall be oppressed with many
crimes. And to see a clear river, or quietly to pass the river, declares
securitye, to see a troublesome or tempestuous river, declares accusement or
offentio^. And to pass a reddishe river, signifyethe a tempest. To see a
fountayue or well, and to drink out thereof, declares to grow to riches. To se
a den^ or cave and to fall into the same declares a grievous acusmente,
falslye or craftily brought in. And to have sons or daughters borne, declarethe
increase. To see brother, mother, or sisters dead, declares joy and long
life. To see a well spronge up in his house, signifies consolation and
gladness. And to se a river flow into his house, declares peril of life.

To have springes of water, signifies yt he shall do matters for an other man,
and win by him To wash his face, signifies eth long life. To have a rudy
face, to be oppressed with many crimes. And to see his face in a glass, a
son to him borne.

And to see antes or pismiers, signifies great variaunces or controversies.
And to se wheat or wheat meal, or to handle the same, declares weakness or
sickness to follow. And to laugh or smile in thy sleep declares sadness. To se
himself mad or become a sword player, signifies comdemnation. And to see
sword players, that thy enemies shall over come thee. To see himself a master
of fence, and with it to be praised, signifies a g^^ouse sorrow to follow.
And carry a sword, and to receive harm by it, signifies sorrow or heaviness to
follow. To see people fighting and to beset upon by the^, signifies variaunce
or co^trouersye and peril. A cock to crow or fight, declares subuersio^ or
carefulnes. To lose a preciouse stone out of a ryng, declares that he shall
lose something after. To se or here hail, signifies a great damage. To see
got buckes, or r^ms, signifies plentifulnes to follow. To dream yt thou have
gests or receiuest gests, signifies envy or great deceites. To dream yt thou
killest men, signifies damage. To se a garden or to walk in an orcherd,
declares joy. And to make gardens. signifies iocu^dity. An emperor to dwell
with thee, or a king, signifies joy. And to se images, declares mutation: To
walk in a palace, declares sorrow. To walk in a church sygnifyeth joy.
And to walk or sleep in the market place declares a sickness. Advanced to
honors, signyfieth poverty. And to see a man changed or transformed into a
beasts lyknes, signifies to be reprehended of his master or Lord. And to
dream that be washes in a clear Well or river, declares gladness with
profit. But to dream that he washes in a foul spring or river troubled,
signifies a most bitter or greuouse accusemente and damage. And to dream that
he sees himself walk or goo into battles, declares greueouse sorrows to
grow to him. To wash him self in a privy bane, signifies sorrowfulnes. And
to see himself in prison or imprisoned, signifies some false or crafty
accusation against him. To dream that he plays with young babes or infantes,
sygnifyeth felicitye. And to dream that he walks man orchard, declares joy
and mirth. Also to wash himself in a well, or clear river, declares gayn to
follow. In the sea, profit or gladness. To swym in a great water, signifies a
long life. To wash in a foul deep pyt, signifies accusemente. To wash in
a ponde, signyfieth: iocundity of life: In a river, joy. And to dreme yt he
falled into a well signifies accusemente, Into the sea, sygnyfyeth joy. And to
see fyers in any place of the house, signifies peril to some part of the
house. To eat coals, signifies slau^derouse talk or euel report of enemies.

To paint in tables signifies long life.

To se fires otherwise in sleep, declares the peril of life. And to see ii.
or many mones sygnifieth aucthorities or powers else ill will. To dream that
thou seeste the moon bloudye, sygnifyeth peril. To dream that he sees the
moon fall from heaven, declares labor or traueil. And to dream that thou
see thy self bound, signifies hindrau^ce. To dream yt he sees his bed
trimly made. signifies yt he shall take or wed a faithful wife. And to se ye
(...) good, to the moon of many colors or obscure, signifies heaviness or
loss. To see the moon show white, signifies gayn To se a lion assaylinge the,
signifies sedicion To read or to hear a book read, a good message. To eat
larde or fat, that some of his parents shall dye. To se a lion runninge,
signifies an expedition of his business. To se himself clothed in white linne^
declares heaviness of mind, or a sickness. To se himself throw or gather
stones, signifies sorrow to follow or a sickness. To see himself brall or
strive, signifies increase. To see his bed well apparelled or decked,
signifies gladness or joy To se himself handle lights, declares sickness or
some infirmity to follow

To make or kyndle lights, declares gain and joy. To drink or eat milk
signifies joy.

To dream that he washes himself in could water, signifies health. To
dream that he has new books, signifye yt he shall either remove into a new
house or have a new house. To dream that he sees thieves, signifies gain or
otherwise. To dream that he speak the faynedly in confession or to laughe in
his sleep signifies strife or variance to follow. And to dream yt he sees
his hands foul signifies damage and offenses. And to dream that he sees
his mother dead declares joy. And to see the sea caulme, signifies joy. But
to se yt sea troubled or tossinge, signifies heuines or sorrow. And to se the
sea most clear, signifies an expedicio^. To dream that he departs the
world, declares remouinge into some desolate place. To dream that he washes
his hands, signifies to be delivered of his offense or offenses, and crimes
excused. And to dream y^ he sees a woman with the here sparsid abroad,
declares discord to a rise after. And to dream that he see^h himself removed
from one place in to another, signifeth deceyte. To dream y^ he sees a dead
person or that he talks with him, signifies joy. And to dream that he
sees himself dead, signifies hindera^ce. And to dream yt he kisseth a dead
pa^son, signifies a long life, To dream y^ be sees ba^des bound, signifies
greouns sorrows. And to see the majesty of God, signifies death or a most
greeuouse sycksickenesse. To dream that he gathers up corn new mowen,
signifies gladness or joy. To take honny, beware enemies. To marrye a wife,
a grievous sorrow. To see souldiars, signifies joy. To dream that he sees
fishes playinge in the sea, signifies security. To dream that he clymeth or
goes up on a mountain high and difficulte, signifies dyminutio^ or loss,
To dream that he (...) himself to be a hill or mountain, signifies joy. To
dream that thou feasteste marriages, or see singers of songs, declares
sorowing, weepyng, and labor. To dream that he walks bare footed, or sees
himself naked, signifies sorrows or great labors and travails. To dream
that he sees himself swym and cannot, signifies grievous hinderance.

To dream that he sees byrds nestes, signifies his busynes to come to good,
or happen prosperouslye to him. To find a neaste of birds, signifies rather
evil then good. To dream that he washes his feet, signifies an
expedition. To dream that he takes apples, signifyth gre^uous anguishes of
mind. To give Apples, signifies damage. To see peacocks. signifies
expedition. To dream that he fights or ^triueth, let him then beware his
enemy. To dream yt he takes mantels, signifies ioyfulnes. To dream y^ he
hears a chickin crowinge, signifies joy. To take a young maiden, signifies
gayn. To handle pepper, to fight with enemies. To have hearye feet, a
hinderaunce. To eat Apples, signifies labor. To burn a wall, signifies
sicknis to follow. A woman to see a wall signifies damage or loss. To dream
yt he sees a woman delivered of a child, signifies damage. To think
himself cloked in purple, signifies a sickness. To dream yt he sees the
going out of swyne, signifies a true message or tydinges. To see his father
alive being dead, signifies security. To dream yt he goes down into a pit,
signifies loss or damage. To think himself in exile, to be oppressed with
great crimes. To be set upon of four footed beasts. signifies no good. To
dream that he has or goes up to chariottes or horstiturs, signifies
honor. But to go dow^ from the^, or fall out of them, sygnifieth to loose
^onours, or to offend his Elders. And that four footed Beasts speak, that
thy enemies shall fle before thee. And to dream that he thinks himself
become blind, signifies sedition to follow. And to dream that he sees
himself fly, signyfyeth that he shall remove or change his hydinge place.
And to dream that he sees himself beset with a bear, signifies y^ sedition of
enemies. To se horslitters, signifies heauin^s of mind or some infirmity. And
to dream y^ be gives a four foted beast, signifies heaviness to follow. To
dream that he sees a king or kings, declares departur out of the world or
sorowfulnes. And to dream y^ he sees kings dye, signifies damage. And to se
ru^ninge brokes or ryuers, signifies variances at hand. And to dream y^ he
climeth or goes up a waterbancke, signifies labor and traueil. But to dream
y^ he goes down or falls from a waterbank, signifies evil. And to dream
y^ he is a queen, signifies deceit to follow. To se a rose, declares
health. And to give or take a rose, of other gladness. And to dream y^ be
sees himself shaven, signifies gain. And to laugh or to se laughing,
signifies gain. And to se frogs, signifies sorrow or heaviness of mind to
follow. To dream y^ be eats rotes, signifies strife or varyau^ce to follow.
To dreme y^ he sees ships or to clyme into them, declares happy message or
good news. And to sea white cloud, declares gladness or good news. To se ^^le
white clouds lying on y^ earth declares small goodness to happen. And to see
snow or yse, signifies sorrow or heuines. To think himself sail in peril,
signifies joy: To dream that he has business to do with an Emperor or judge,
signifies dignitye or aduau^cement.

To take or eat nuttes, signifies joy.

But to dream that he gathers nutts, sygnyfyeth strife or variance: to
dream tha^ he sees a ship saylinge, signifies a happy message or good
tydinges. To see a s^ippe charged or frayghted, signyfieth happier times, and
days to follow.

To dream that he prays, signifies happy days after. To se shorn sheep,
sygnifieth damage. To lose the right eye, to lose some next neighbor. To take
or see oil, signifies gladness. To dream that he sees dead men's bones, or
their bodies, declares great travails or labors, damage and i^iury: to take a
kiss, signifiioyfulnes and gain.

Or to give a kiss, signifies damage.

And to dream that he hears the sound of an Orgayne pype, or pypes playinge,
declares most great ire and variances to follow. And he that thinks to do
great works, grievous hinderance shall follow. And to dream that he
gathers Olives, signifies gayue. Or to dream that he sheareth or clippeth
swine signifies damage. To eat potherbes, signifies sorrow. Or to eat
eggs, signifies strife: To hear a pipe sound, signifies variances: To
dream that he has oil poured upon him, signyfyeth gain. And to dream
that he burieth ornaments in the bellye of the dead, declarethe a happy
message or good tidinges: To dream that he feeds sheep, signifies
sorowfulnes. And to dream that he sees rain, signifies abou^dance of riches
and ioyfulnes: To dream that he sees himself become hearye, signififyeth
fortitude or increase: To dream y^ he diggeth or makes a pyt and to fall
therein, signifies damage and a false and craftye accusation. And to se
himself weep, signifies joy after: to make, see, or to have a strong
fountain or well, declares securitye after. And to se wells or fountaynes
broken down, signifies heuines of mind: To dream that he sees hogs, a
sickness to follow: to handle lead, declares a great infirmitye to follow.
And to dream that he eats white bread, declares gain and joy. To dream
that he eats harlye bread, signifies sorrowfulnes to follow. And to dream
that he roweth on the water, declares labors: to se two or many stars
clear, signifies that thou shalt increase in power and joy. To dream that
he sees the son clear shyninge, signifies joy, or the stabilitye of the
king. And to dream that he sees stars fall from the firmamente, declares
that he shall see men fall to the earth in battaill or a great battle to
ensue: to dream y^ he sees the Sun runninge with the Moon, declares a
strife or a most wicked message. And to dream that thou art beset or assailed
by serpents, signifies an happy overcome of an enemy: to se the Su^ne
darke^ed, signifies the peril or danger of a king. And to see the Sun and
moon bloudye, signifies danger or harm: To dream that he sees blood
issue out of his side, declares peril and danger to follow. And to see two
or many sons. follows honor and joy. To dream that he goes up a ladder,
declares a deceyte or begylynge. To dream that he kills a Serpent,
signifyth joy. And to dream that thou sees either the Sun or Moon,
declares ioyfulnes to follow. To dream that he sees Serpents, signifies
women's wily intrappinges. And to dream that he sits, signifies an
infirmitye of mind or sickness to follow: to dream that he treads down
thorns, signifies to overcome enemies. And to dream that he sees Images of
timber or mettell, declares hatred. To walk on the water, signifies honor
and joy* To dream that he makes a will signifies d^scent^on. And to hear
thunder, signifieeth a happy message or glad tydinges. To dream that he sees
a tempest, signifies gain. To dream y^ he sees it darck signifies sorrow or
sickness to follow. To dream that he sees weauers weauyng, whether it be in
silk or clothe, declares a good message or tydinges. And to dream that he
sees and hears an earthquake or the moving of the earth, signifies the
loss of somewhat, wherefore he shall become very sad, or contrariwyse an
infirmity or sickness shall follow.

To dream that he sees the earth move or quauer, declares that ruin, or
some other unprofitableness shall happen of the place. And to dream y^ he sees
a lome or frame, after what manner it be* or to weaue, signifies ioyfulnes. To
dream that he puts on a rosy or scarlet color cote, signifies heuines of
mind or sickness to follow. And to dream that he passes the seas,
signifies joy. To dream that he sees playinge at tables or dyce, signifies
a ioyfulnes. To hear or see trumpets in sleep, signifies a good tidinges, and
to see a bull, or a bull to run on him, signifies a bariaunce to ensue. To
dream that he has a fair and comely garmente, signifies strife and varyau^c.
To dream that he hu^teth signyfieth gain. To burn his garments signifies
deceit or damage. To have a fair and comely garmente, declares favor, and
ioyfulnes, but in the beginning, or before to be sharply chidden or challenged.
And to make an oyntme^t, signifies perplexitye of mind. To cut or pare his
nails signifies grievous perplexityes of mind. And to dream that he sees
lost garments, signifies damage. To drink wine, signifies a sickness. To
dream that he walks on a clay ground, signifies a grievous sorrow or peril.
To see sower and unripe grapes, signifies some variaunces. And to see ^ynes
ripe signifies gladness. To see the gathering of grapes or making of wine,
signifies ioyfulnes. To dream that he sees birds fly, upon his head, and
pluck away the here of his head, declares an euel death after to that
person. And to think himself to have a fa^re house signifies perigrination.
To se a banner or flagge, signifies to be oppressed with great crime. And to
dream, that he maryeth a wife signifies damage. And to dream that he
handles a glass, signifies perplexity of mind. To dream that he sees a
virgin have a great bushe of here on the head, signifies gayn. To think
himself to fly, to wa^der or to change place. To dream that he sees himself
wounded, signifies dolor.

To se his wife in dream to mary to an other or to lie with another man,
signyfieth the death of his wife or a long sickness. To dream that he sees
himself grene in color, signifies heaviness: To dream that he ^^eth a bear
runninge or settinge upon him, signifies the discord of an enemy. To dream
that he sees white grapes, signifies joy. To dream that he sees black
grapes, declares pouertye or a sickness to ensue. To dream that he sends
presents, signifies damage. But to dream that he receueth presents,
signifies joy and gain. To dream that he sees water pots or pitchers full,
signifies comfort in adversity and riches. To see got buckes, signifies
happy^es to follow. And to think himself girte with girdels, signifies
safeguard, to the parsonne. To dream that he cutteth a girdell divided in
parts, signifies envy and discord.

To be girt with golden girdels, signifies gain or envy. To lose a girdell
signifies sedition of faith. To be gyrt with an old girdell signifies
langoure. To dream that he sows cockle or dar^ell, declares brawling or
contention and salu^der

FINIS,

