THE CRY OF ENGLAND.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross in September 1593. by Adam Hill Doctor of
Divinity, and published at the request of the then Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and others the Aldermen his brethren.



LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde, for B. Norton. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor of the famous City of London, and the
right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons of the same, Adam
Hill Professor of Divinity, wishes grace, peace, and life everlasting.
THere be four things in the earth very small, and very wise (as witnesses
wise Solomon): Prou. 30.25, etc.
the Pismires, a people not strong, yet prepare they their meat in the summer;
the Cunnies a people not mighty, yet make they their houses in the rock; the
Grasshopper has no King, yet go they forth all by bands; the Spider takes
hold with his hands, and yet is he in Kings Palaces: So must we provide now
in the summer time, while the Gospel shines out of the face of Christ Jesus,
against the winter, which has in it three months, death, judgment, and hell:
that as the Emmet escapes the annoyance of the three winter months, so we
may escape the terror of death, the rigor of Gods judgment, and the torments
of hell. The Cunnies build their house in the rock: so we may not trust to our
riches which are uncertain, to our bow which will break, to our spear which
shall be knapt asunder, to our horse which is a vain thing, to our hoasts of
men which are but flesh, to our Captains which are but locusts, to men which
are mortal, or to Princes which shall die; but to the Lord, which can keep
our eyes from tears, our feet from falling, and our life from death. The
Grasshoppers albeit they have no king, yet they go forth by armies: we have a
father to rule in the house, a preacher to teach in the Church, a gracious
Prince, with many honorable Senators to rule our Realm, and yet there is
strife in every house, sedition in every City, and sects in every Church;
and therefore our house will fall, our kingdom shall be desolate, and our
church will be the sinagogue of satan. The spider is in Kings palaces: but we
dwell some of us in the lusts of the flesh, some in the treasures of the world,
and some are as envious as the devil; few there are that say with David,
Psalm. 84.2.
My soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the Lord, for my heart
and my flesh rejoice in the living God. To move my countrymen therefore to a
general, speedy, and hearty repentance, I have laid down in this treatise,
the cry not of Sodom, but of England; which if it be diligently weighed,
Luke. 21.34.
I doubt not but we shall take heed to our selves, least our hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. We shall be
watchful, Matt. 24.24. Mich. 6.8. Rom: 12.12. Romans 12.11.
we shall do iustlye and love mercy, we shall be instant in prayer, we shall
be fervent in the spirit, we shall not persevere in sin but continue in
prayer without ceasing, saying: Turn thy face away from our sins, Psalm. 51.9.
O Lord, and blot out al our offenses: Psa. 19.8, etc.
remember not against us the former iniquities but make have and let thy tender
mercy prevent us: help us O God of our salvation for the glory of thy name,
and deliver us, and be merciful to our sins for thy names sake: so we thy
people and sheep of thy pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from generation
to generation will set forth thy praise: which God give us grace to do for his
sons sake Christ Jesus: to whom with the holy Ghost be all honor and glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

Yours in the Lord, Adam Hill, Minister.

THE CRY OF ENGLAND.
Genes. 18. ver. 21, 22. Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great, and
because their sin is exceeding grievous, I will go down now, and see
whether they have done altogether according to that cry which is come unto me,
and if not, that I may know.


OF all the holy Scriptures, there is not one example more frequently used of
the Prophets and Apostles to fear the people from sin, than this general,
severe, and fearful destruction of the Sodomites. The Prophet Jeremie says,
Ier. 49.40.
As God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha with the places thereabout says the
Lord, so shall no man dwell there, neither shall the son of man remain there.
Amos. 4.11.
So says the Prophet Amos, I have overthrown them as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrha, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the fire, yet have ye not
repented. And the Prophet Zephanie says, Zeph. 2.9.
Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and Ammon as Gomorrha, the breeding of
nettles and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation: So likewise it is said in
the Evangelists, And whosoever shall not receive you, Mat. 10.14. Mat. 6.11.
Luke. 9.5.
nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house, or that city, shake
off the dust of your feet, truly J say unto you, it shall be easier for them
of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for that city.
And in the second Epistle of S. Peter it is said, 2. Pet. 2.6.
And turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them and
made them an ensample unto them that should afterward live ungodly. Jude 7.
So in Jude, As Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities round about them which in
like manner as they did, committed fornication, and followed strange flesh, are
set down for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

As all the Prophets and Apostles, yea and Christ himself have unto their
hearers, set down Sodom and Gomorrha as an ensample of Gods justice against
sin and impenitent sinners: so do I purpose (by Gods grace) to handle this
fearful panolethrie or utter destruction to this City of London; assuring my
self, that if this exhortation work not in you a broken heart, you shall by
the iron rod of Gods wrath, be broken in pieces like a potters vessel, you
shall be like the breeding of nettles and salt pits, you shall not only have a
perpetual desolation in earth which is lamentable, but also suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire which is intolerable. A comparison betw^ene Sodom
and London.
Sodom was in a fruitful valley, so is London: in Sodom there were gorgeous
houses and fair works, so there are in London: in Sodom they did eat and
drink, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh, so do they in London: Sodom was in
captivity under Chedor Laomer, and freed by Abraham; London (and all England)
was in subjection to the Pope, and has been freed by our gracious Queen
Elizabeth: Sodom had Lot (the Preacher of righteousness) sent unto them whose
spirit they vexed; London has had many godly Fathers sent unto them, whom
they revile: Sodom was not moved to repentance, neither with their captivity
nor deliverance, therefore they were destroyed; London is not moved neither with
persecution nor peace to repentance, therefore London, except it speedily
repent, shall be brought to a perpetual desolation, and to the vengeance of
eternal fire.

In the sins of Sodom are three things to be noted: first, the euidencie of
their sins, which is noted in the word cry: secondly, they had many sins,
which is noted in the word great: thirdly, their sins were heinous, which is
noted in these words, exceeding grievous. The euidencie of sin as it was in
Sodom so was it says Esaias in Jerusalem: Esa. 3.9.
The trial of their countenance testifies against them, yea, they declare
their sins as Sodom, they hide them not. And are not the sins of England
manifest? do our Papists hide their sin? do they not call idolatry
catholic religion? Manifest idolatry in England:
they are worshippers of images, which are vain, unprofitable and abominable.
Images are vain both in respect of the maker, which is the cause efficient,
and in respect of the matter, in respect also of the form, and of the end.

In respect of the maker images are vain, for he is vain in thought, in word,
in deed, and in his essence: Psa. 94: 11.
in thought, for the Lord knows the thoughts of men, they are but vain. In
word, Psa. 12.2.
for they talk of vanity every one to his neighbor. Ier. 101.5.
In deed, for they are vanity, and the work of errors, in the time of their
visitation they shall perish. In essence, Psalm. 39.11.
for surely every man is vanity: man therefore being vain in thought, word,
deed, and essence, must needs make a vain image. The matter also of images is
vain, for they are made either of gold, silver, brass, clay, stone, or wood:
and therefore the Prophet Baruch says, Bar. 6.5, 6, 11
These Gods of wood, silver and of gold, can neither defend themselves from
thieves and robbers: for they that are strongest take away their gold, silver,
and apparel wherewith they be clothed, and when they have it, they get them
away.

The form also of images is vain, for they have eyes and see not, Psalm.
115.5, 6.
noses have they and smell not, ears and hear not, mouths and speak not,
feet and walk not. Finally, images are vain also in respect of the end, for
they help neither the teacher, nor the hearer, nor the minister, nor the
receiver of the sacrament, nor him that prays. Therefore the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, are better than images, nay, the door of the house, or a scar-crow in
the fields is better, for all these do serve unto some end, but images to no
end.

The images therefore of the Papists are as vain as the images of the heathen,
and so are they al as unprofitable: For as Paul says, they are nothing. An
idol is nothing in the world. 1 Cor. 8.4.
For this cause Zachary calls the unprofitable minister, Zach. 11.17.
an idol pastor: so the Magistrate that does not defend the poor and
fatherles, and see that such as be in necessity and need, Psalm. 82.
have right, is an idol magistrate: the father that brings not up his
children in the fear of the Lord, is an idol father: so the husband that
loves not his wife as his own flesh, as his own body, and as Christ loved
the congregation, is an idol husband: the wife that is froward, the child that
is disobedient, the servant that is unfaithful, the subject that is disloyal,
are al idols, insufficient for any spiritual use and therefore unless they
repent, they shall be burst in pieces by the iron scepter of Gods justice, and
so destroyed, as they shall never be builded again.

The idolatry of the Papists as abominable, as the idolatry of the heathen.
As the idolatry of the Papists is vain and unprofitable: so is it as
abominable as the idolatry of the heathen; for as the heathen in the time of
war did invoke Mars and Bellona, so the Papists do invoke S. George: the
heathen in poverty went to Ceres, the Papists to Saint Anne: the heathen in
sickness went to Aesculapius, the Papists to Saint Roche: the heathen in
captivity went to Liber, the Papists to Saint Leonard: the heathen in hunger
went to Bacchus, the Papists to S. Vrbane: the heathen in sea-stormes went to
Neptune, the papists to Saint Nicholas: the heathen in childbirth went to
Juno, the papists they went to our Lady. And herein they do offend most
grievously for three causes: first because they attribute to the Saints
omnipotency: secondly, because they attribute to them universal knowledge:
and thirdly, because they make them more merciful than Christ. Further, as the
heathen did consecrate Troy to Neptune, Cyprus to Venus, Athens to Minerua,
Carthage to Juno, and Rome to Jupiter: so the papists dedicated Spain to Saint
James, Germany to Saint George, France to Saint Denis, Scotland to saint
Andrew, Ireland to saint Patricke, and Rome to Peter and Paul. And as the
heathen have consecrated their head to Minerua, their heart to Juno, their
breast to Mars, their tongue to Mercury, their arms to Hercules, their liver
to Cupid, their throat to Bacchus, their belly to Ceres, their secrets to
Venus, their palms to Apollo, and their spirit to Jupiter: so the papists
have for the headache Anastasius, for their eyes Otilia, for the teeth
Apollonia, for the neck S. Blase, and for the belly Erasmus. And as the
heathen dedicated the boar to Mars, the goat to Bacchus, the peacocke to
Jupiter, the swan to Apollo, the dove to Venus, the night-crow to Minerua, the
wheat to Ceres, honey to Mercury, and the rose to Cupid: so the Papists
consecrated their sheep to Vandolius, their horse to Eulogius, their oxen to
Pelagius, and their pigs to Saint Anthony.

As therefore it is an abomination to call upon any but on him, on whom we
believe: so to commit our selves, or ours, to the defense or custody of the
creatures, which should dwell under the protection of the highest, Psalm. 91.1.
Psalm. 18.2.
and which should have the Lord to be our rock, and our fortress, and him
that delivers us, our God, and our strength, in him we should trust, our
shield, the horn also of our salvation, and our refuge, is a great
abomination: for the honoring of abominable images, Sap. 14.27.
is the beginning, the cause, and the end of al evil. I end therefore with this
notable saying of S. Jerome writing upon Ezechiel: Jerome in Ezech.
Cursed is every man that puts his trust in man, though they be Saints, or
though they be Prophets. Because therefore idolaters are the cause of the
overthrow of the land: God in his holy word commands that they should be
destroyed. Deu. 13.6. etc.
If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy own son or thy daughter, or
the wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying: Let us go and serve other Gods (which thou have
not known, thou J say, nor thy fathers) any of the gods of the people which
are round about you, nere unto thee or far from thee, from the one end of the
earth unto the other: thou shall not consent unto him, nor hear him, neither
shall thy eye pity him, nor show mercy, nor keep him secret, but shall even
kill him, thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and then the
hand of all the people.

The sin not only of idolatry is manifest, but also the sin of
blasphemy. Manifest blasphemy in England.
What bargain almost is made without swearing? what oath is ministered in the
judgment seat without forswearing? what sports without blasphemy? what
country, what city, what town, what house, or what tongue is not infected
with this sin of swearing? the old man swears by custom, the young man and
child by imitation, the gentleman swears of lustines, the poor swears for
necessity, the thief swears to cover his fault, the harlot to deny her
crime: and albeit not man but the Lord our God commands us saying; Exodus 20.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain: yet all the desperate
people of this declining age, are so given to swearing, as though no man could
be saved happily, unless he did swear continually. Can a bitter fountain
send out sweet water? no more can a blasphemous mouth speak to the praise of
God.

The first argument against swearing drawn from the person of God. Psalm. 139.3.
There be five things in God which every blasphemer should consider of: the
first is, that he is present in all places, and therefore David says; Thou
compassest my paths, and my lying down, and art accustomed to all my ways.
Secondly, he knows all things, for there is not a word (says David) in my
mouth, Psalm. 89.4.
but thou know it all, O Lord. Thirdly, there is truth in the Lord, Psalm.
5.6.
God loves no wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with him, the foolish
shall not stand in his sight, for he hates them that work iniquity, he will
destroy them that speak lies. Fourthly, God is righteous, and therefore the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 119.137.
Righteous art thou (O Lord) and righteous are thy judgments, thou have
commanded justice by thy testimonies, and truth especially.

God is righteous: first, because he judges in equity, With righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people with equity: secondly, because he
judges without respect of persons, Romans 2.9. etc.
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does
evil, of the Jew first and also of the Grecian, but to every man that does
good shall be honor and glory, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecian: for there is no respect of persons with God. Thirdly, God is just,
because he leaves no sin unpunished; Bind not two sins together, Sir.
12.14.
for there shall not one be unpunished. For as no virtue is of God unrewarded,
so there shall be no sin unpunished. Fourthly and lastly, in God is all power;
Our God is in heaven, Psalm. 118.3.
he does whatsoever pleases him. From heaven he cast down the Angels, from
Paradise Adam, he made the earth to swallow up Corah, the floods to cover
Pharaoh and his host, the sons of Aaron to be slain in the temple, Jezabel
to be cast out of her chamber window, Holofernes to be murdered in his bed, and
Ely to break his neck sitting on the thresholde. Wherefore excellent is that
saying of Bernard, Bernard in Psalm. 139.
God is in himself as Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: in the world,
as the author and governor of it; in the angels, as the favor and beauty of
them: in the church, as a father of a family in his house; in the soul, as a
bridegroom in his chamber: in the just, as a helper and protector; in the
reprobate, as a dread and horror. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? no man
goes from him, but to him: from his severity, to his goodness; from an angry
God, to an appeased: For what place can receive him that flies, but there thou
may find his presence? God is present, therefore the blasphemer should fear
him; God knows all things, therefore the blasphemer should praise him: in God
is truth, therefore the blasphemer should hate lies: in God is justice,
therefore he rewards the good and punishes the evil: in God is power,
therefore he can do what pleases him: fire, hail, storms and tempests
fulfill his commandments: yea, there are spirits created for vengeance, and
in their suriousnesse they hasten their torments, they will not ouerpasse the
commandment of the Lord. The Prophet Jeremy says, Ier. 4.2. The 2. argument
against swearing, drawn from the manner and ma^^er thereof.
thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, judgment, and righteousness: in
truth, in respect of the thing; in judgment, in respect of the swearer; in
justice, in respect of the cause: truth excludes a false oath, judgment a
rash oath, justice an unlawful oath but our blasphemers swear not in truth,
but in falsehood; not in judgment, but rashly; not in justice (that is first
for the glory of God, secondly, for the safety of their neighbor, thirdly,
for their own necessity, and fourthly when they are required of the Magistrate
for just causes) but in common speech unlawfully, in buying and selling
deceiptfully, and in sporting and playing most damnably. Further, Ephesians. 4.25.
Psalm. 32.5. Esa. 50.4. 1. These. 5.14. Psalm. 51.14. The 5. argument against
swearing, drawn from the use of the tongue.
the tongue being given of God to speak the truth, to confess our sins, to
teach, to comfort the afflicted, and lastly, to praise the Lord: the blasphemer
sets forth leasing, increases his sins, is an ensample of corrupt
manners, brings no comfort but the plague of God to his house, and
dishonors the Lord, whom he should praise with soul, heart, heart, tongue,
flesh, and with all his powers and members for ever. A thief steals but for
necessity, but a blasphemer swears in a bravery: the harlots do sin but
in darkness, the blasphemer offends openly: the covetous man offends but
seldom, the blasphemer often, and at every word: the slaunderer offends but
against his brother, but the blasphemer dishonoreth God his father. There are
but 3. sorts of languages in the world, The 4. argument against swearing,
drawn from the custom^ of speech. Psalm. 84.4.
the best is the heavenly language, whereof David thus writes, Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shall always be praising and
magnifying thy name. There is another language that is earthly, whereof Saint
John writes, John. 3.31.
He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth. There is
also an infernal language, which is nothing but cursing: Esa. 8.21.
therefore as it was said to Peter, Mark. 14.40.
Surely thou art one of them, for thou art of Galilea, and thy speech is like;
so because of the abundaunce of the heart the tongue speaks: you may thereby
know who is of heaven, who of earth, and who of hell. They that praise the Lord
are heavenly indeed, and their conversation is in heaven: they that speak of
the earth, are earthly; but they that curse and swear, are already damned,
their speech is like. As he is a Spaniard that naturally and properly speaks
Spanish, and he a Frenchman that speaks French, and hea Welch-man that
speaks Welsh: so he that speaks of the praises of God is a saint, he that
speaks of the earth is an earthly man, and he that is a swearer, is of the
devil. The bitter stream proves the fountain to be bitter, the leaves show
what the tree is: so the blasphemous words of wicked men do show that they
come from the bitter root of infidelity. No man receives gold but he
weighs it: no man has ground but he encloseth it: why then? do not our
swearers weigh their words, and hedge in their tongue, because as S. James
says, Iam. ^.
It is set on fire of hell: when therefore hell fire cease, the blasphemers
of Gods name will cease. And hereunto agrees the saying of Jesus the son of
Syrach, Sir. 23.13.15.
Use not thy mouth to ignorant rashness, for therein is the occasion of sin:
the man that is accustomed to opprobrious words, will never be reformed all the
days of his life; and such a one was Shimei. 1. sam. 16.7.
King Jews the eleventh having an accustomed swearer in his Court, cut off his
lips: and being demanded of his Courtiers, why he executed so grievous a
punishment? he answered, Would my lips were so cut off, that I had never a
swearer in my Kingdom. But the only cause why swearing is so frequent in
England, is the negligence of Princes, Why swearing is so frequent in England.
which punish not this offense; and the fearfulness of the Ministers, who dare
not reprove this sin in Gentlemen and noble personages, and especially the
evil example of parents: who neither leave this sin themselves, nor yet
punish it severely in their posterite. The blasphemies and periuries of
England, have infected every Country, City and House of this land: therefore
without a general, hearty, and speedy repentance, perpetual desolation, and
the vengeance of eternal fire will fall upon the father and the son, the
pastor and the people, the private man and the magistrate for ever.

Prophanatio^ of the sabbath, a manifest sin in England.
Profanation of the Sabbath is another of the evident sins of England. We are
willed to hallow our Sabbath, Genesis 2.23. Exo. 20 11. Exodus 31.17. Deuteronomy. 5.14.
Heb. 4.4. Jer. 17.21, 22, 23, 24. Ezech. 20.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and
yet in all places, and of the greater part of the people of this land, the
sabbath is profaned with dancing, stage-playing, bearbayting, bowling, and
with all manner of abominations. And not only the holy word of God, but the
ancient Fathers and the civil Law do speak of the sanctification of the
sabbath. Aug. in Psalm. 32.
Augustine on the 32. psalm. says, It is better to dig than to dance on the
sabbath. Chrisost. in homil. 48.
Chrysostom in his 48. homily says, Where wanton dancing is, there no doubt
the devil is present: for God has given us these members not to dance, but
that we should walk modestly, and not to dance impudently after the manner of
Camels (for not only women but Camels dance indecently) but that we should
stand in the company of the Angels: and if the body be deformed by
dancing, how much more is the soul? in these daunces the devil daunceth:
with these daunces they are deceived of the ministers of the devil. Ambrose
Lib. 3. de virg.
Ambrose in his 3. book of Virgins, thus writes: What say ye, O holy women?
you see what ye ought to teach and vnteach your daughters: she danceth, but the
daughter of an harlot; for she that is chaste and shamefast, teaches her
children religion, and not dancing. And as these inueigh against dancing,
Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 20.
so does Lactantius against stage-playing, in his 6. book, cha. 20. I know not
(says he) wherein there can be a more vicious corruption than in plays: for
the Enterludes do speak of the deflouring of virgins, and of the loves of
harlots: and the more eloquent they are that have fained those abominations,
the more the elegancie of the sentences does persuade, and they stick more
easily in the memory of the hearers, the verses which are numerous and
eloquent. The tragical histories also do set before our eyes, the patricides
and incests of evil kings, and do show their wickedness on the stage: the
unchaste gestures of the plaiers also what do they teach, or stir up in us
but lusts? whose bodies being made weak and wanton in imitating the going and
apparel of women, do countersaite unchaste women with dishonest gestures.

What shall I speak of ballads, which teach the doctrine of corruptions, which
teach adulteries whiles they feign, and by feigned adulteries instruct to
true? what may young men and maids do, when they see these things to be done,
and to be seen of al men gladly and without shame? they are warned therefore
what they may do, and they are inflamed with lust, which is most provoked
with seeing, and every one according to his sex prefigureth himself in those
images, and do allow them, while they laugh at them; and vices cleaving unto
them they return to their houses most corrupt: neither only children, which
should not be endued with vices in their first age, but also old men, whom it
becomes not to sin, do fall into the same path of iniquities. It is clear
by this that has been alleged, that as the Prophets and Apostles have taught
the sanctification of the Sabbath: so the Fathers have walked in the same
steps; yea, godly Princes have made laws for sanctifying the Sabbath. Leo and
Anthemius (being religious Princes) writing to Armasius, commanded him in these
words; That the festival days being dedicated to the excellent Majesty of
God, should neither be occupied in pastime and pleasure, neither be profaned
in exacting of tributes: likewise we decree (say they) that the Sunday shall
be reverently honored, that it shall be exempted from all business; in this day
let no suretiship be taken, let no man be summoned to appear: let no man use
pleading, and let no causes or matters of controversies be heard. And a little
after it follows, neither do we suffer, that this day being exempted from all
travel, should be spent in wantonness and filthy delights, that there be any
interlude or pageant played on the dominical day, or any game or pastime in the
place of exercise called Circus, or the lamentable spectale of beasts: yea
although the solemnity of our birth happen upon this day, let it be deferred:
if any man on this day shall have any access to spectacles, or under the
pretense of private or public affairs, shall be an Apparitor or Sergeant to
any Judge, violating or breaking these Statutes, let him loose the commodity
of warfare, and run into the prescription of attainder.

The holy Prophets and Apostles commend unto us the hallowing of the Sabbath,
the Fathers exhort us to the same, the laws of godly Princes command it, yet
we continue in England wilful contemners of this precept. The sanctification
of the Sabbath consists in four things. The sanctification of the Sabbath
consists in 4. things.
First of all, holy men ought to enter into the Church, where the Gospel must
be expounded and declared; by the which the Auditorie may learn what to think
of God, what is the true service of God, and how the name of GOD may be
glorified. Secondly, there must be prayers and petitions made unto God for the
necessity of all men. Thirdly, we must extol the goodness of God, giving
thanks for his daily and inestimable benefits; which giving of thanks
excludes four things, first contempt of God, secondly forgetfulness of God,
thirdly malice, fourthly the abuse of Gods creatures. And the sacraments must
religiously be celebrated, if the time, occasion, and custom of the Church do
so require: for it is chiefly required in the fourth precept, that we should
diligently observe and devoutly exercise the holy sacraments and holy rytes of
the Church being lawful, profitable, and necessary. Fourthly, humanity and
beneficencie must take place in the Church, all men must learn daily to be
beneficial in giving of alms privately, but to be most liberal publicly
whenever necessity of the time and opportunity shall so require. Whereas we
should spend our sabbath in hearing and reading of the word of God, we spend it
in reading of vain and wicked pamphlets: whereas we should then make petition to
God for our necessities, we wander up and down after deceiptfull vanities:
where we should be thankful to god, especially on that day for his benefits, we
misspend our time in idle pastimes: and lastly, where we should be liberal to the
poor, we are prodigal to minstrels, bearkeepers plaiers, and to al masters of
vanities: for as much then as al divines and godly princes have approved the
sanctification of this day, and now all sorts of people profane the same, the
old as well as the yo^g, the father as well as the son, the master as well as the
servant, the minister as well as the auditory, and the magistrate with the
private man: and neither the commandment of God is feared, nor the example of
our maker imitated, nor the admonitions of the prophets regarded, nor the
counsels of the apostles followed, nor the reprehe^sions of the fathers
esteemed: it cannot be but this prophanatio^ of the Sabbath so general, so
frequent, and so continual, cries to the Lord for a perpetual desolation,
and for the vengeance of eternal fire.

Murder also is another sin that cries for vengeance, Genesis 4.10.
The voice of thy brothers blood (says God) cries unto me from the earth.
Murder a manifest sin that cries for vengeance.
To loose our wealth it is grievous, but to loose our good name more grievous,
but to loose our life that is most grievous of all. First it is an heinous
offense that one man should kill another: secondly it is more heinous, when a
superior kills an inferior: thirdly, it is a most heinous offense, when one
brother kills another, as Cain killed Abel: fourthly it is more detestable,
when a wicked man kills a righteous: fifthly, and that for the sincere
worship of God: sixthly, if he do it of a pretended hatred: and seventhly if he
do it after admonition. In England man kills man, the lord the tennant, the
brother his brother, the wicked the good, and that for the true worship of God,
and of hatred, and after godly admonition. Therefore as the blood of Abel cried
from the earth unto the Lord, so does the blood of the Saints shed in the late
days of Queen Marie, cry for vengeance against the wicked.

Genesis 9.6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man let his blood be shed: for after his own
image God made man. First here we learn that man was made to praise God:
whosoever then kills man, hinders the glory of God. Secondly, how was man
created? in righteousness, holiness, mercy, truth: these virtues being
essential in God, are accidental in us: whosoever therefore murthereth a man,
destroys those virtues, wherein man does participate with the nature of God.
Thirdly, since God made man after his own likeness: here we learn that God
loves man above all the creatures of the world, and we ought not to hate him
whom God loves. Fourthly, since man is the image of God and does excel all
creatures; whosoever murthereth him, destroys the most excellent workmanship
of God.

But how little we regard these things, it is manifest by the wilful murders
often committed in and about London; whose blood no doubt cries to God, as
Abels did, out of the earth. For first God is the Judge of the quick and the
dead. Secondly, he is the auenger of all evil; for albeit men will wink at
murder, yet God will not. And therefore the Prophet David cries out; Psalm.
94.1^^.
O God to who^ vengeance belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, show
thy self: arise thou Judge of the world, and reward the proud after their
deserving. Thirdly, the just (as Abel was) do peculiarly belong to God. Psalm.
10.16.
The poor commits himself to thee: for thou art the helper of the
fatherless. Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you (says the Lord) touches the apple of mine eye. Precious
therefore is the blood of the Saints in Gods sight, and shall be of God
himself in time avenged.

Sodometrie and who^dome cry for vengeance.
Sodometrie also and unnatural lust cries to God for vengeance and punishment.
King Henry the eighth of famous memory, when he visited the Abbeys of England
by Thomas Lee, Richard Layton, and Thomas Bedel Archdeacon of Cornwall, being
Doctors of the Law, and by Thomas Barthlet public Notarie, in the year of our
Lord God 1538. In the Abbey of Battle were found 16 Sodomites, in
Christ-church at Canterbutie 9. and in every Abbey were found some to be
Sodomites, others to be adultrers, some having four, some five, some ten, some
twenty harlots, as in a Book called a Breuiarie of those things that were
found in Abbeyes, Conuents, etc. it does at large appear. And because that
Sodometrie and whoredom had made them very infamous, one of their own
friends thus wrote of them, Non male sunt monachis grata indita nomina patrum
Cum numere^t natos hic and vbique suos.
The acceptable names of fathers were aptly given to Monks, for they were able
to tell their children both here and there in euene place. Saint Paul against
whoredom thus writes; Meats are ordained for the belly, 1 Cor 6.13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and the belly for the meats, but God shall destroy both it and them; now the
body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body: and
God has also raised up the Lord, and shall raise us up by his power. Know ye
not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members
of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Do ye not know,
that he which coupleth himself with an harlot, is one body? for two (says
he) shall be one flesh: but he that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit. Flee
fornication: every sin that a man does as without the body: but he that
commits fornication, sins against his own body. Know you not, that your
body is the temple of the holy ghost, which is in you, Whom ye have of God?
and ye are not your own, for ye are bought for a price: therefore glorify God
in your own body, and in your spirit, for they are Gods.

Here are 7 arguments against whoredom: 7. arguments against whoredom.
the first is of the punishment in the 13. verse. where he says that meats are
for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God will destroy both it and them;
for gluttony and drunkenness are maintainers of venerie: the second argument is
drawn from the condition of our bodies, in the same verse, the body is not
for fornication, but for the Lord; for as God is worshipped in heaven of angels
which are spirits, so will he be worshipped in earth of men which have bodies;
and therefore our bodies shall be raised up to glory: the third argument is
drawn from an absurdity; It is against reason says the apostle, that our
bodies, being the members of Christ, should be made the members of an harlot,
and so to bring them from high dignity, to most vile indignity: the 4.
argument is drawn from the comparison of God and an harlot; for he that
joins himself with an harlot, is one with an harlot in affection, and shall be
one with an harlot in affliction; but he that coupleth himself to the chaste
God, shall be one with God in glory for ever: the fifth argument is drawn
from the effects of fornication, for the fornicator defiles his body with the
pockes, leprosy, and many other loathsome diseases; and therefore unnaturally
sins against his own body, shortning his life by wasting the vigor of his
body. The sixth argument is drawn from the purposes, whereunto the body is
destinated; your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, and you are not your
own, therefore in it God must be worshipped and not the devil. The seventh
and last argument is taken from the law, in the last verse; you are bought
with a price, that is, not with gold nor silver, but with the most precious
blood of Christ; therefore not only our soul must magnify the Lord, and our
spirit rejoice in God our Savior, but also our flesh must rejoice in our God;
and in the life and death of our bodies God must be glorified, bowing our knees
to GOD the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which leads us to life, and not
to whores and harlottes, Pro. 7.27.
Whose ways go down to hell.

Jeremies prophecy is fulfilled in them, and will be fulfilled in us; Ier.
5.7.8.9.
Though I fed them to the full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by companies in the harlots houses: they rose up in the morning like
fed horses, for every man neighed after his neighbors wife. Shall J not
visit these things says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a
nation as this? climb upon their walls and destroy them, take away their
battlements, for they are not the Lords. The harlot calls her pleasure
solace, and so do our delicate dames of England: but Jeremie says, this sweet
sin will have sour sauce. For it will cause the walls of our Cities to be
rased, and the battlements of our house to be beaten down. God be merciful
unto this pleasant Island and bless it: for if every house of our land shall
be destroyed, where this loathsome sin of leacherie has been shamefully
committed (as the monks houses were) our fairest Cities (no doubt) will come
to ruinous heaps.

GOD brought the Sodomites into captivity, to show them, that he did hate
their sin, yet would they not repent; GOD brought the^ out of slavery by
Abraham, to teach them that he was merciful to the contrite, yet would they
not repent. We have been under the tyrant of Spain in the late days of Queen
Marie, yet we forsake not our former fornications: we have been delivered by
her Majesty, yet we run on desperately into all manner of abominations,
forgetting the grief of our calamity, and the comfort of our deliverance, the
quietness of our private estate, the peace of our kingdom, or the felicity
which we have by the word of God.

Oppression of the poor is another sin that provoke GOD to plague us.
Oppression of the poor cries for vengeance. Exo. 3.7.
J have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for J know their sorrows. Iam.
16.
Do not the rich oppress you by tyranny, and draw you before judgment
seats? who oppresses? Pharaoh the tyrant, Nimrod the mighty, and Nabal the
rich. Those that should give do take away; those that should feed, do fleese;
those that should be merciful, be unmerciful. Whom do they oppress? their
brother, their own flesh, the Lords brother, and the Lords apple of his eye.
And what brother? his poor, needy, destitute, and afflicted brother; and to
whom he should give, from him he does take by violence; and whom he should
comfort, him he does spoil. How does he oppress? by his money and his might.
God has given them riches and authority, to defend the poor and fatherless,
to see such as be in need and necessity to have right; and with their wealth
and might they oppress and deceive, they grind the face of the poor, and
braye them as it were in a mortar: Ier. 5.
their houses are full of riches gotten by deceit.

When do they oppress? in the time of the Gospel. Elisha said unto his man
when he had taken gold and garments of Naaman; is this a time to take money and
to receive garments, and olives, 2. King. 5.26.
and vineyardes, and sheep, and Oxen, and men servants, and maid servants? So
say I to the Nimrodical oppressors of England, is this a day of peace and of
joy? is this a time to smite down the people of the Lord, and to murder his
heritage? and to devour widows houses, and to eat up the people like bred?
Gal. 6.10.
While we have time, we should do good to all, 2. Cor. 6.2.
especially to the household of faith; and in this time we do ill. This is the
day of salvation; and we make it the day of our destruction. 2. Cor. 6.2.
This is the time accepted; and we by our oppression of the poor will turn it
into the day of vengeance. Sir. 10.8.
Because of unrighteous dealing, wrong, blasphemies, and other deceipts, a
realm shall be translated from one people to an other.

Where is this oppression? in the judgment seat. How is the faithful City
become an harlot? Esaias. 1.21. etc.
it was full of judgment, justice lodged therein, but now they are murderers:
thy silver is become dross; thy wine is mixed with water, thy Princes ore
rebellious and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts and follows
after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the widows cause
come before them. They turn judgment into wormwood, Amos. 5.2.
and leave off righteousness in the earth. What abominable sin is this,
that those who should defend the poor, Psalm. 82.3.
and see that such as be in need and necessity have right, do add
affliction to the afflicted? Job. 24.15.
that those who should be eyes to the blind, do pull out their eyes? and those
that should be a leg to the lame, Job. 29.15.
do break his bones in pieces? and those that should pull the spoil out of
the jaws of the oppressors, commit violence, robery and murder themselves?
and those that should give the pure silver of righteousness, give the heavy
burden of oppression? and they that should give the wine of comfort, give the
water of tears? and they that should minister judgment, give the wormwood of
affliction? and they that should be the staff of the poor man's estate, are an
yorne rod to bruise them in pieces: being turned from fathers to tyraunts,
from magistrates to thieves, from Judges to murderers, from Princes to Lions,
from Gods to devils. For the covetous oppressor when he should give, he says
it is too much; when he should receive, he says it is too little; when he
should forgive, he says it is too great; when he should repent, he says it
is too soon; when he should come to hear the word of God, he says it is too
far: and thus as he holds his needy brother under his yoke, so the devil
holds him fast in his snare, that he shall never escape, but shall have
judgment without mercy, because he has showed no mercy. Esaias. 10, 1.
So true is the prophecy of Esaias, Woe be unto you that make unrighteous laws,
to rob the widows and the fatherless. For as the Prophet David says, Psalm,
32, 1.
God stands in the congregation of Princes, he is a judge amongst Gods. And
therefore albeit God in his secret judgment, does suffer the great and
mighty oppressors to go on in their unconscionable dealings, yet in the end
he will bring them to judgment, and then (as the Psalmist says) he will set
in order all their sin. Psalm, 50.
I might here speak the like of murmuring and rebellion, which are sins that
provoke the wrath of God; but time will not give me leave.

I will now go to the sin of all sins, which no doubt will procure to this
land a general, fearful, and severe destruction: this sin is Atheism.
Atheism a manifest sin that cries for speedy vengeance.
The Idolator is a breaker of the second precept, the blasphemer of the third,
the prophaner of the sabbath is a transgressour of the fourth, the rebel of the
fifth, the oppressor of the sixth, the Sodomite of the seventh; but the Athiest
is a wilful contemner of all. For he denies GOD the father, he trampleth
under his foot the blood of our Savior, he dishonors the spirit of grace;
in his heart he is an infidel, in his tongue a blasphemer, to his Prince a
traitor, to his country a rebel, to his house a poison, to his friends a
plague: wheresoever he goes, the earth is accursed; wheresoever he speaks,
the air is infected; and wheresoever he dwells, there dwells the wrath of
God for ever.

The star confessed the son of God, for it led the wise men to Christ: Mat.
3.10. Mat. 8.27. Mat. 21.5.
the sea and the winds did obey him; the ass did bear him to Jerusalem; the
fishes obeyed him when they came into the Apostles nets; Ioh. 21.6. Mat.
17.^7. Mat. 27.51, 52.
so did the fish that brought money in his mouth to pay their tribute; the
Sun at his death was abashed, the earth did tremble, the stones did cleave
asunder, and the graves did open: but our Atheists, more insensible then the
stone or stars, more hard hearted the^ the flints, more stinking then any
carcass, do not acknowledge Christ to be the son of God. Nay the very
diuelles confess Christ to be the Son of God. Mat. 5.7.
what have I to do with thee Jesus the most high God? and Jesus J know, and
Paul I know, Act. 19.15.
says the devil. But our Atheistes worse then the devil in this respect,
have so hardened their heart, that they deny Jesus to be the son of God: and
therefore since they will not acknowledge him to be a Savior, they shall know
him to be a judge, whose power they cannot resist, whose wisdom they cannot
deceive, whose justice they cannot corrupt, and therefore will punish them
without respect of persons.

Manasses was an idolater, but he repented: Paul was a blasphemer, but yet he
was made a Preacher: Lew was a Publicane, but yet he became an Evangelist:
Peter did forswear his master, but yet he continued an apostle: David was an
adulterer, and yet a Prophet: Zache was an oppressor, but yet he was converted
and said: Luke. 19.8.
Behold Lord the one half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have
taken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him four fold. Zache did
give the half of his goods, we will not give the hundred part: Zache gave of
his own, we will not give of that we have wrongfullie gotten: Zache gave his
goods, we give of the worst things we have: Zache gave presently, we defer
till we be sick or dead. Thus we see that Idolaters, blasphemers, extortioners
and adulterers, have turned themselves unto the Lord, but no Atheist: for they
go from worse to worse, they go from sin to sin, they never come into the
righteousness of God, they are vessels of dishonor, they are clouds without
water carried about of winds, corrupt trees, and without fruit, Jude. 12.13.
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, they are the raging waves of the
sea, foming out their own shame, they are wandering Stars, to whom is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever.

Against those therefore we must pray, Psa. 109.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14, 15.
A prayer against Atheistes.
as David did against them in his time, When he shall be judged let him be
condemned, and let his prayer be turned into sin: let his days be few, and let
another take his charge, let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow,
let his children be vagabonds, and beg and seek bread, coming out of their
places destroyed: let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let the
stranger spoil his labor: let there be none to extend mercy unto him,
neither let there be any to show mercy upon his fatherless children, let his
posterity be destroyed, and in the generation following let their name be put
out, let the iniquity of his fathers be had in remembrance with the Lord, and
let not the sin of his mother be done away, but let the^ alwaie be before
the Lord, that he may cut off their memorial from the earth.

As poison when it enters into the body, it infecteth first the vains,
secondly the blood, thirdly, the members, and last of all the heart: so Atheism
began in the vains of the lighter sort of people, and from thence it has crept
into the blood and generositie of this land, by means whereof it is spread
into all the members and parts of this realm: God keep it from the heart,
that is, from the Court and the City of London. If my flesh were of stone, if
I had the learned tongue of Esaias, or my face were of Adamant as Ezechias was,
if I had that spirit of fortitude, which was in Elias, or that bold spirit that
was in John Baptist, if my bones were of brass, and my sides of steddie
steel: Mat. 14.4.
then as John said to Herod: It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers
wife. And as Elias said to Ahab: ^. King. 18.18.
Thou art he that troubles all Israel: so I should say to our Atheists, it is
not lawful for the^ to eat, drink, live or breath among christians, for they
are the cause that this land will be brought to an everlasting destruction. My
heart tre^bleth, and my eyes shed tears to see the faintness of my self and
my brethren, that this sin of Atheism openly committed is not openly
reproved, that others may fear. We shall say in time to come as the Prophet
said: Esaias, 6.5.
Woe be unto me because J held my peace.

As the sins of Sodom are evident, In Sodom were many sins and so there
are in England. Exo, 19, 4, 9.
so are they many: Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride,
fulness of bread, and abundance of Idleness, neither did she strengthen the hand
of the poor and needy. Pride is of 2. sorts, carnal and spiritual: carnal
pride is that which consists in the decking and trimming of the flesh,
against which Paul thus writes: Rom, 13, 4.
Take no thought of the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. And women are
forbidden to wear broidred hair, or gold, or pearls, 1. Tim, 2, 9. 1, Pet,
3, 3.
or costly apparel. And the like is also inhibited by Saint Peter. This pride
was in the harlot, Prou, 7, 16, 17.
who said: she had decked her bed with couerings and clothes of Egypt, and made
her head to smell of mirrhe, Aloes, and Cynamon. And this pride Saint Paul
reproves, when he wills us not to fashion our selves according to this
world. Rom, 12, 2.
But notwithstanding, pride is first in all ages, as in children, young and old.
Secondly, in every sex, as in men and women. Thirdly, in all estates, as in
magistrates and private men. Fourthly, in all times, as in popery, and in the
Gospel. Fifthly, in all places, as in the market and in the temple.

Apparel was ordained for three causes.
Apparel was given for three ends: for honesties sake to cover our unseemly
parts: for necessities sake, to defend us from the injury of the weather: and
for dignities sake both to distinguish men from beasts, and me^ of high degree
from the lower sort. GOD clothed the noble subject of the soul with a vile
body, Phil. 3.21.
to teach us that we should not deck our vile body with gorgeous apparel, not
agreeing either with co^lines, necessity, or our calling. Ciprian.
I think it good (says Cyprian) that not only maids and widows, but also
married women be warned, that they should by no means adulterate the work of
God, Ierom.
and his making: for as Ierom says: These things are the nourishments of lust,
and the tokens of an unchaste mind: How can she weep for her sins, or lift
up her eyes and countenance to heaven, whom God does not know? Thomas deceived
Judas by trimming of apparel, Iezabell painted her face to deceive Ieho,
Cleopatra painted her face to deceive Antonius, who being overcome of Octauian,
he killed her himself and buried her alive with an aspe in the sepulcher of
Antonius.

Ambrose in his Hexameron says, Ambr. in hexamer.
do not take away the picture of God, and take on thee the picture of an
harlot, for that picture does not become thee, but is faulty, not of
simplicity but of deceit, it beguileth and deceives: so that thou can not
please him whom thou desire to please, which understands that it is not his
but an other man's that pleases,and thou despisest thy maker, whose workmanship
is defaced. For as Jerome, notes: Ierom.
If a woman deck her self that she may provoke the looks of men toward her,
although there follow no harm, yet she shall suffer eternal condemnation, for
she has offered poison, if any will drink of it.

Alas, alas, that great city that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and
scarlet, Apoc. 18.16.17.
and gilt with gold, and precious stones, and pearls: for in one hour so
great riches are come to desolation. Here ye see that pride goes before, and
destruction comes after. So the Prophet Esaias shows how this pride is
punished with a general and severe desolation: Esaias. 3.19.17.
Because (says he) the daughters of Sion are hawtie and walk with stretched
out necks and wandering eyes, walking and minsing as they go, and making a
tinckling with their feet, therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the
daughters of Sion bald, and the Lord shall discover their secret parts: in that
day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the slippers, and of the calls
and the round tires, the sweet balls and the bracelets, and the bonnets, the
tires of the heads, and the sloppes and the head-bandes, and the tablets, and
the earings, and the mufflers, the costly apparel, and the vailes, the
wimples, and the crisping pinnes, all the glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoodes, and the launes: and in steed of sweet sauors there shall be stink,
and in steed of a girdle a rent, and in steed of dressing the hair,
baldness, and in steed of a stomacher, a girding of sackclothe, and burning instead of beauty: thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy strength in the
battle. Then shall her gates mourn and lament, and she being desolate shall
sit on the ground. Carnal pride is reckoned but a small fault, but yet as
ye do well see, and learn out of the holy Sciptures, it brings sword,
mourning, and utter desolation.

But consider I pray you the course of this world: Christ says, we should
take no thought for apparel, and all our delight is to go brave: the Isralites
did wear their garments forty years, and we must change our apparel every
term: Christ commanded his Disciples they should have but one coat, and we
must have for every day in the week a coat Jho^ Baptist was clothed in a
Ca^els skin, but we must be clothed (with Dives)in purple and fine white, and
with Herod we must be attired in gorgeous apparel, and therefore with Dives and
Herod we shall suffer a sudde^ co^fusio^.

Queen Hester said: Hest. 14.16.
Thou know O Lord that I hate the token of my pre-eminence and worship,
which I bear upon my head, what time I must show myself and be seen, and
that I abhor it as unclean cloth, and that I wear it not when J am quiet
and alone by my self. As this good Queen did abhor pride in apparel, so the
daughters of vanity now adays do highly esteem it: But as in a coffin when
it is most sumptuously dect there is (no doubt) a dead carkas there lying: so
where ye see the daughters of men to have their broidred hair, their gold and
pearls, contrary to the rule of the Apostle: there (no doubt) is a dead
stinking soul. Democrates said: There were two ornaments of a woman, 2. Tim. ^.
few words, and few garments. The woman of Lacidemon refused precious garments
sent them by Dionisius: the Roman matrons sent back again golden roabes given
the^ freely by Pyrrhus. I will end therefore with an history of the Bactrians,
whose wives fell from the pride of apparel to whoredom, not only with their
servants, but with strangers: and they gat such a masterie, and rule over
their husbands, that albeit their husbands did see them committing adultery,
yet they durst not reprove them.

But as I would have the dames of England to leave wanton and superfluous
apparel, so I will with Tertulian commend unto them a good suit of raiment,
Come forth (says Tertulian) ye women beutified with the ornaments of the
Apostles, Tertulian.
having the whiteness of simplicity, the redness of chastity, having your
eyes painted with shamefastness, and your spirits with silence, having in
your ears the word of God, and tying to your necks the yoke of Christ,
subject your head to your husbands and you shall be brave enough, occupy your
hands with wool, fasten your feet at home, and you shall please more, then if
you were clad in gold: deck our self with the silk of sincerity, with the
Satin of sanctity, and with the purple of probitie, and you shall have God to
be your paramour: Thus far of carnal pride.

Spiritual pride is of four sorts, blasphemye, arrogancy, vaineglorye, and
self-love. In blasphemy offended Nabuchadnezar: Is not this great Babel which
J have built for the house of my kingdom by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my majesty? Dan. 4, 27, Blasphemy the sin of Sodom and England.
Such Babilonian blasphemers have we in England. James says, Iam. 1.19.
Every good gift and every perfect gift comes from above from the father of
lights: but the blasphemer thinks his riches to come from fortune, and
corporal gifts to come from nature, and gifts of the mind to come by study
and experience. Therefore as Nabuchadnezer was turned into a beast, until he
did acknowledge these things to come from God: so all they that call their
gorgeous houses their own, as Nabuchadnezar did: or do say, their barneful of
corn is for themselves, as the rich man did: Luke 12. Exodus 14. Number. 16.
or boast of their armies, as Pharaoh did: or brag of their holiness, as
Dathan did: or do pride themselves in their kinglye estate, as Saul did: or of
their tirannye, 1. Sam. 15. 1. King. 12. Esaias 37. Iud. 6.15. Hest. 4. Acts. 12.
as Roboam did: or of their victories, as Sanacherib did: or of their prowess,
as Holofernes did: or of their wit, as Aman did: or of their eloquence, as
Herod did: or of their stock, John 9.
as the Jews did: These all have the pride of Sodom, and shall have the
punishment of Sodom unless they repent.

Arrogancy is another sin of Sodom fallen, Arrogancye the sin of Sodom
and of England.
and of England falling: and that is, when we confess we have received all
good gifts from God: but we say we have merited them. Which sin Saint
Paul eftsoons reprooueth: Ephe. 2.8.9.
By grace are ye saved, and that of faith, and that not of your selves. It is
the gift of GOD, not of works, least any man should boast himself. If we
be not saved of our selves, nor of works, how is it true that we be saved
by merits? Aquinas brings many reasons to prove that we are not saved by
works, which neither the Seminaryes which come from Rheimes, nor the Jesuits
which come from Rome can confute. 7. Reasons against merits out of Aquinas.
The first is, the indignitye of our merits: For J count (says Saint Paul)
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed us. Romans 8.18,
Secondlye, we can not merit, by reason of the contrarietye between the
body and the soul: For the flesh lusts against the spirit, Ephe, 5.15.
and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to another, so
that ye cannot do these things as ye would. The third reason why we cannot
merit, is because of the corruption of the flesh. Sap. 9.15.
For the corruptible body is a burden unto the soul, and the earthlye
habitation presses down the mind full of cares.

The fourth reason why we cannot merit, is the straitnes of the way. Mat. 7.13.
Enter in at the strait gate, for it is the broad gate and wide way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat, because the
gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it.

The fifth reason why we cannot merit, is because of the difficulty of good
works, for virtue is occupied about that which is difficulte. For it is an
hard thing to believe, but it is easy to presume or despair: it is hard to be
liberal, but it is easy to be covetous, or prodigal: it is hard to be
valiant, but it is easy to be rash or timorous.

The sixth reason why we cannot merit, is the incertitude of our own
righteousness: We have all been (says Esaias) as an unclean thing, Esaias. 69.6.
and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes: for our righteousness is
neither pure, perfect, nor perpetual.

The seventh and the last reason is, the straitness of the Judge: Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant (says David) for in thy sight shall
no man living be justified. If David cannot be justified in the sight of GOD,
neither can the proud Pharisey, saucye Sadducey, or popish Pelagian.

Such arrogant Papists are well termed to be full of wind: For as the wind
first distinguishes the light, secondly extinguisheth the dew, and thirdly
blows up the dust: so this vaunting of merits darkeneth the pure light of
Gods glory, it dries up the dew of his grace in them and so puffs them up
with a swelling conceit of their own holiness, that they attribute that to
nature which is due to grace, and that to merit which is due to the promise,
and that to the flesh which is due to the spirit, and that to works which is
due to faith, and that to the Law which is due to the Gospel: and finally that
to man which is due to God.

Vain glory the sin of Sodom and of England. Apoc. 3, 16, 17.
Vaineglorye is another kind of pride: this was in the Church of Laodicia: Thou
say J am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not how thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind and
naked. This vaineglory was in Alexander, whom parasites had persuaded that he
was a God: but in the end when he perceived he must dye, he uttered these
words: Now I perceive I am but a mortal man. Let us not be desirous of
vaineglory, Gala. 6.26.
says the Apostle. We cannot glory of things past, for in times past we have
committed more offenses then good deeds: we cannot glory of things present,
because we are in exile: we cannot glory of things to come, because there
is coming, death and judgment.

Vaineglorye is hardlye shunned for three causes: first because it arises of
well doing, even as the moth is bred in the garment when it consumes, and the
worm in the wood which it rotteth. Secondly, al other vices are overcome of
some virtue: as adultery by chastitye, covetousness by mercifulness, and
hatred by love: but vaineglorye arises of well doing. Thirdly, by how much the
more vainglory is kept down, by so much the more it is increased. For every
evil arises of an evil, but only vaineglory proceeds of well doing.

Praise is desired ordinatly or inordinatly: ordinately, for the glory of God:
Mat, 5, 16.
But let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorifye your Father which is in Heaven. And secondlye, for the profit of
our Neighbor, procure things honest in the sight of all men. Romans 12.17. 1.
Cor. 10.33.
I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit
of many, that they might be saved.

Inordinatly, men seek praise: first, when they desire to be praised for
those things that be not worthy of praise, as for riches and temporal
things which are but vain. Secondly, if they glory in their sins: why
boastest thou O tyrant, that thou art able to do mischief? Psalm. 52.8.
Thirdlye, when it is done in contempt of our neighbor, or of God. For they
loved the praise of men, John 12.43.
more then the praise of God. Now unto tht King everlasting, 1. Tim. 1.17.
immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and
ever, Amen. Fourthlye, when a man sins to get praise: Mat. 6.1.
Beware that ye give not your alms before men to be seen of them, or else
you shall have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven. How many
vaineglotious persons are in England, which boast of the multitude of their
riches, rejoice in iniquity, and love the praise of men more the^ the glory of
God: you may know by Catoes rule for he says: Neither shall thou praise nor
dispraise thy self, for this do fools that are vexed with vaineglory. If all
those that praise themselves be fools, then the world is full of fools, and
these say there is no GOD: But he that sits in heaven will laugh them to
scorn, yea, Psalm. 2.4.
the Lord will have them in dirision.

An other kind of pride is self-love, Self-loue the sin of Sodom and of
England. Mal, 2, 10.
of the which Malachie writes: Have we not all one Father? has not one God
made us? why do we transgress every one against his Brother? This vice was
in the Pharisey: Luke 18.11.
J am not (says he) as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor
as this Publicane. When Saul was little in his own sight, 1. Sam, 15, 17
he was the head of the trybes of Israel. But when he despised David, a
better man then himself, God brought him low again. John Baptist humbled
himself, and said: Mat. 3.11.
He was not worthy to unloose the latchet of our Saviors shoe: But Christ
said: He was a Prophet, and more then a Prophet. Mat. 11.11. John 8, 33.
The Jews said, that they were the children of Abraham, and never served any
man. But Christ said, John. 8, 44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil. We may not therefore with the Pharisees
judge others and prefer our selves before them.

Five reasons why we may not ivdge our brethren.
For first humanity does require that we should not rashly censure the faults
of other men. Secondly, our own infirmitye should move us to the same, Iam, 3,
2,
for in many things we offend all. Now do we see our own faults, which are
in the piece of the wallet that hangs behind us. Thirdly, we are
fellow-seruants, and being therefore in the same condition, we should live in
charity which covers the multitude of sins. Fourthly, Christ is the only
judge of the quick and the dead, and therefore we may not male partly ascend
into his tribunal seat. Fifthlye, our judgments are to be suspected, because
we see only the outward and not the inward parts. Basil.
Basil says: The wicked man does most easily condemn the good, but the good
does not easily condemn the wicked. Most justly therefore says the Apostle.
Rom, 14, 4.
Who art thou that misdeemest an other man's servant? he stands or falls
before his Lord. Saul breathing out mischief against the church of God, was
suddenly called, and of Saul became Paul, of a proud Pharisie an humble
penitent, of a malicious persecutor a zealous Apostle, and labored more in his
vocation then all his fellows.

Augustine says, Au. de verb. dom. ser. 1^.
we must despair of none as long as the patience of God does lead him to
repentance, neither he, that will not have the death of a sinner, but that he
should turn and live, does take him out of this life. He is a Pagan to day, how
know thou but he may be a Christian to morrow? he is an unbelieving Jew to
day, what if to morrow he attain to the Catholic religion? he is a
Schismatique to day, what if to morrow he embrace the unity of the Church?
what if those in whom you find all kind of error and condemn as most
desperate, shall repent before they end their life? Therefore brethren, this
does the Apostle warn you, judge not any man, before the time come.

This rule of the Apostle as Augustine notes, condemns the Pharisees that
were in Christ's time, the Catharoi that were in Cyprians time, the Donatistes
that were in Augustines time, and the Martinistes of our time. They have
written a book of Martin marprelate, I hope hereafter they will write a book of
Martin marpharisey.

For as Augustine notes in a Treatise he has of the conflict of virtues and
vices, August.
self-love gives us this counsel, thou art better then all others in
eloquence, riches, and honors, and in all gifts both spiritual and
corporal, despise therefore all and make thy self better then all: so says
Martin, that he is better then the Bishops and Ministers of this land.

So said the false Prophettes in Esayes time. Esaias 65, 5.
Stand aparte, come not near, for I am holyer then thou. But albeit Martin
has many followers, which hope by sacrilege to enriche themselves; yet let
them hearken what God speaks by the mouth of his Prophet: Ier. 2.35.
Behold, J will enter into judgment with thee, because thou say I have not
sinned.

Absalom when he persuaded the people to rebellyon, said, Oh that I were made
judge in the land, 1, Sam. 15.4, 5.
that every man which has any matter in controuersye might come to me, that
J might do him justice, and when any man came near to him and did him
obeisance, he put forth his hand and took him and kissed him: and that he
stole the hearts of the people.

As Absalom made the people believe he would do justice better then David: so
does Martine make the World believe, that he will minister discipline a great
deal better then the grave fathers of this land; and to this end he bends
himself to drive our Bishops out of their houses, as Absalom did his father.
But I pray God give them grace to remember the tragical end of Absalom, that so
they by repentance may escape the like. For otherwise God will be avenged of
the reproaches and slanders that have been used against Ministers and Prophets.
Zach, 2, 8.
For he that touches you (says God to his prophets) touches the apple of my
eye.

Fullness of bread is another sin that forerunneth our overthrow, Fullness of
bread, the sin of Sodom and of England. Eccl. 2, 4, etc.
for fullness of bread causes curiosity. For then we make us great works,
build us houses, plant vineyardes, make us gardens, and plant in them all
manner of trees; then we make cesternes of water, to water therewith the woods
that grow; then we get us servants and maids, possession of beeues and
sheep; then we gather up silver and gold, and the chief treasures of Kings;
then we provide us men singers and maid singers, and the delights of the
sons of men. As fullness of bread causes curiosity, so curiosity causes
pleasure: Amos 6, 3, etc
so that the wicked Put far away the evil day, acd approach to the seat of
iniquity, they lie upon beds of iuory, and stretch themselves upon their beds,
and eat the Lambs of the flock, and the Calves out of the stall, they sing
to the sound of the viole, they invent to themselves instruments of music
like David; they drink wine in bowls, and annointe themselves with sweet
oyntements, and no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. 2, Tim, 3.4.
And as Paul says, They are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God. As
fullness of bread causes curiosity: and curiosity pleasure: so pleasure is
the cause of security. Psalm, 10.41 etc.
The wicked is so proud he cares not for God, neither is God in all his
thoughts, his ways are always prosperous, therefore defyeth he all his
enemies, for he says in his heart, J shall never be moved, there shall no
harm happen unto me: and again a little after, Psalm. 10, 11.
God has forgotten, he hides away his face, and will never see it.

This was the estate of the Sodomites, to put far from them the evil day, to
give themselves (as Christ says) to eating, drinking, building, planting, and
to voluptuousness, to say they should never be moved nor be in danger: to
trust to their riches which were uncertain, 1, Tim, 6, 17. Psalm, 46, 19.
to their Castles which were ruinous: to their bow which was broken: to their
spear which was knapt a sunder: to their horse which was but vain: to their
hosts of men, which were but Grass, Esaias 40.
to their Captains which were but Locustes: to their Princes, which are but
mortal: Psalm 46.
to their counsels which are of none effect. Psalm, 33.


What is the cause that the tyrants of the earth forget the fall of Pharaoh?
fullness of bread. What is the cause the idolatrous papists of England
remember not the violent death of the idolaters? fullness of bread. Exo, 32.28.
What is the cause that murmurers of our time, forget the fearful destruction
of the murmuring Jews? fullness of bread. Number, 26, 65.
What is the cause that fornicators remember not the slaughter of the twenty
and four thousand? Number, 24, 9.
fullness of bread has set this judgment out of their sight. Why do we cast
out of our remembrance the drowning of the whole World? which was so general,
that a dove could not pitch her foot on any ground, Gen, 8, 9,
fullness of bread has set this judgment of GOD out of our sight. Why do we
forget Sodom and Gomorrha (of the which not only Moses has written, but
Esa^e, Jeremy, Amos, Zephanie, all the Evangelists, and Peter and Jude) which
was destroyed with fire and brimstone, in such sort, that to this day no
grass can grow in it, no byrd can fly in it, no fish can live in the waters
of it, no cattle on the ground, nor no man in the Country? fullness of bread
has set this fearful judgment declared by Moses, repeated by the Prophets,
preached by the Evangelists, and inculcated by the Apostles, far out of our
sight.

Why do we burye in oblivion the desolation of the Jews, which was most
lamentable. First, because it was in the feast of the Passe-ouer, when they
were all assembled together. Secondlye, because of the domestical sedition,
for there were three Ruffians that striued in the City for the government,
John, Simon, and Eleazer, and these so skirmished one with the other, that in
one day eight thousand, and in an other day ten thousand or more were
slain within the walls. Thirdlye, by reason of the plague which was so
dreadful, that from the fourteenth day of April, unto the Calendes of July,
there dyed in the pestilence a hundredth fifteen thousand and eighty.

Fourthly, by reason of the famine which was so extreme, that the husbands
pulled the meat out of their wives mouths, the parents from the children,
the children from the parents, the Brethren from the sisters, sisters from the
brethren; they did eat hay, old leather plucked off their targets, ox dung,
and pigeons dung, and a noble woman dwelling in a street called Batezor killed
her own infant to eat it, but before she killed him, she uttered these words
with tears, and kissed him saying; o wretched child for whom shall I keep
thee in war, famine, and sedition? if thou go to the Romans there is
bondage, and before bondage goes famine, and the seditious will afflict us
worse the^ both: woe be unto me most wretched mother; I did hope that thou
should burye me, but now alas pinching famine (which pierces my bowels and
marow) forces me that I must bury thee again in my belly, whom before I have
carried in my womb; and when she had wept and kissed him often, she put her
child behind her and killed it with a dagger, and said be thou to me meat: to
the seditious Erinnis, and to the world a fable. Fifthly, it was grievous,
because two thousand killed themselves. Sixtlye, because the Senators were put
to most vile works. Seventhly, because this was all done of the enemies of
religion. Eghtly, because it was in the time of harvest. And lastly, because of
the great number slain, which were 110000. and of the captains which were
97000. what makes us I say, to forget this heavy downfall of the Jews (which
perished with famine, pestilence, the sword, and captivity) but fullness of
bread.

David though he repented for his whoredom and murder, yet his punishment was
so great, Psalm. 38.3.
that he said, There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thy anger,
neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin. Psalm. 6.6.
I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my couch with tears. Psalm.
38.10.
My strength fails, and the light of my eyes ever is not my own. Yea his own
Son Absalom first drove him out of his house, secondly, defloured his own
wives, thirdly, Absalom was hanged, fourthly, for one Vrias were slain three
of David's sons, Ammon, Absalom, and Adonias. Therefore well says David, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, Psalm. 119.120.
and I am afraid of thy judgments.

David was afraid of Gods judgments, because the sword never departed from
his house; but we that live in fullness of bread; we fear not the judgments
of God in the slaughter of the idolaters, the destruction of the murmurers, the
murder of the fornicators, the pitiful desolation of Jerusalem, the drowning
of all the world, the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha in the vengeance of
eternal fire.

Wherefore it is beter to eat the bread of affliction, and drink the water of
tears, then to have fullness of bread to fulfill the lusts of the flesh and the
measure of iniquitye. And better it is to go to the house of mourning, Eccl.
7.4.
then to the house of joy. And to this purpose our Savior Christ says, Woe be
unto them that are full, Luke 6.25.
for they shall hunger; woe be unto you that now laugh, for ye shall weep and
howl. For they that have lived here in pleasure and laughter, shall go the
black way with sighs and tears, from God and his Angels, from saints, from
joy and felicity, to the fiends of hell, to suppe in the palace of
darkness, with the Princes of horror, at the table of vengeance, in the
Chair of calamitye, with the Crown of death upon their head; and the devil
shall punish them until they cry out with Cain, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment is greater, then J am able to bear.

Idleness is an other sin which cries for vengeance, against which Paul
thus writes: Idleness the sin of Sodom and of England. 2. These. 6. etc.
We command you in the name of Christ Jesus, that ye withdraw your selves
from every Brother which walks inordinately, and not after the institution he
has received of us: for ye your selves know, how ye ought to follow us, for
we behaved not our selves inordinately amongst you; neither took we bread of
any man for naught, for we wrought with labor and travail, night and day,
because we would not be cha^geable to any of you: not but that we had
authority, but that we might make our selves an ensample unto you to follow
us. For even when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there
were any that would not work, he should not eat. For we heard that there
were some amongst you which walk inordinately and work not at all, but are
busy bodies: therefore them that are such, we command and exhort by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.

First Paul commands them not in his own name, but by the authority of
Christ, that they should labor. Secondly, he says that idleness is (...)
which is a perturbation of the order of God, who has appointed every man his
personal vocation, wherein he must stand and labor. Thirdly, idleness is
contrary to the institution and doctrine of the Apostle. Fourthlye, he
teaches them to labor by his own example, for albeit he had authority to
reap their temporal things, because he taught them spiritual; yet he would
not be burdenous unto the^, but got his living with his own hands. Fifthly, he
says; That he that will not labor, must not eat. Psalm. 128.2.
For every man must eat the labor of his own hands. Sixtlye, idle persons
are busy bodies, being most pestilent people to the Church of God. For a great
part of their life they spend in doing ill, a greater part in doing nothing,
but the greatest part of all in meddling with that, they have nothing to do
withal.

Of the idleness of Ministers, (how they seek their own, Phil. 2.21. Phil.
3.19.
and not these things which are Jesus Christ's; whose end is damnation, whose
God is their bellye, whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly things)
Saint Paul with tears complains. Of the idleness of Magistrates, how they
lie upon beds of iuorye, Amos. 6.4. etc.
and stretch themselves forth on their couches, and eat the lambs out of the
flock, and the Calves out of the stall, and drink wine in boules, and anoint
themselves with sweet ointments: Bar. 3.17.
and take their pastimes with the fowls of the air, and gather up silver as
the dust: and care not for the affliction of Joseph: The prophets cry out in
every place.

Three great and horrible sins come of idleness: Three great sins come of
idleness, murder, whordome, and theft.
The first is murder, for when Cain was idle, he killed his brother. And
idleness is the cause of so many fraies and bloodsheds, that are in and about
London. For as the scripture says; they lie in wait, which cannot be
performed without idleness. I would wish that young Gentlemen and serving men
were kept from idleness, and then no doubt they would keep themselves from
homicide. The second sin that comes from idleness, is whoredom; for David
being idle, and having slept on his bed, lusted after Ber-sheba. And it being
demanded why Aegistus was an adulterer, it is answered he was an idle person.
Take away idleness, and loves arts will be at an end No marvel therefore if
there be such whoring in England, since there is abundance of idleness. All our
vain Ballades and wanton books whence come they but from idleness? 7. Causes
of whordome.
Learned men have noted seven causes of whordome. First, original sin;
secondly, the outward sense; thirdly, the temperature of the body; fourthly,
the devil; fifthly, conversation with women; sixthly, idleness, seventhly, the
memory of women. The devil the^ causes idleness, idleness causes us to
remember women, remembrance causes concupiscence, and concupiscence causes
adultery. The third sin that comes of idleness is theft. Enter not (says
Solomon) into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of wicked men,
Pro. 4.19. etc.
for they cannot sleep unless they have done evil, and their sleep
departs except they cause some to fall; for they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of robberye. Idleness causes poverty,
poverty famine, and famine causes robbery: and therefore Solomon prays, Pro.
3.8.9.
Give me not poverty, nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, least J
be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? or least I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. Wherefore as you have made many laws
against murder, whoredo^, and theft: so I pray you make severe laws against
idleness, for all idle persons are either busy bodies, murderers, adulterers, or
thieves. Christ reproving those that stood idle in the market place said; Mat.
21.6. Rhabbanus in Mat.
Why stand ye here all day idle? Rhabbanus writing upon this place, says
thus. First he reproves them for the want of reason, o thou sluggard, thou
deformed monster, I speak to thee, thou have the bellye of an ostrich, the
throat of a dragon, the thighs of an elephant, the feet of a cammel, the legs
of an Ass, and the head of a Cow: heaven and earth do move, and every
creature, the Plannettes are turned about with their maker, the stars do
shine, the winds do arise, the rivers do run, the fire does inflame, the
earth does fructify, the trees do budde, the birds do sing, the beasts do
seek their pray, the fishes do search the bottom of the Sea; all things
do as they be made, only thou remainest immovable, to whose care all things
are subject. Thy creator has commanded that whiles thou have time, thou
should work. The Angels thy watchful keepers inuit thee, the devils do
mock thee: arise therefore O sluggard and go to the emm^t and learn wisdom
of him; for whilst the Harvest is, he gathers the best grain and lays
them up in his house, he repaireth the decayed places, that he may exclude the
Winter storms. This summer our Harvest is our life: the Winter shall be of
three months, in the point of death, in the day of judgment and in deep
hell, in all which shall happen fearful tempests. Arise therefore O
sluggard, and gather the grains of grace.

Secondly, he reproves the^ in regard of the necessity of the place agreeing;
for as in heaven al men shall rest, and in hell all suffer, so in earth all must
labor. John 5.15.
Christ says, My father woorketh hitherto, and I work: and Saint Paul says;
Romans 8.26.
The spirit it self makes requests for us with sighs that cannot be
expressed. Noah planted a vineyard, Abraham, Isaac, and Jaacob were shepherds,
the judges sat in the gates and ministered justice, the kings and valiant
captains fought the Lords battles, all the people of GOD in this life have
either labored in manual arts, or in teaching, or in governing, or in
counselling. For the Church is a vineyard, wherein are diggers and deluers; a
Harvest wherein are laborers; a ship wherein are either painful Mariners, or
fighting soldiers; a house, wherein every one has his ministerye; a body,
wherein every member has his office; here therefore to stand idle, is a great
shame.

Thirdly, they are reprehended in respect of the strength of their bodies: Why
stand ye? Impotent persons as Lazarus was, lie at the doors and cannot stand,
therefore they are to be refreshed by others: but those that have a sound mind
in a sound body, they ought not to stand idle, but to walk in their vocation
honestlye. Standing water soon stincketh, so idle persons are an abomination
to the Lord: Iron that lies still, rusteth; so idle persons give themselves
either to murder, whordome or theft. Therefore as an idol is a vain and
abominable thing, which has eyes and yet sees not, ears and hears not, a
nose and smells not, feet and walk not: so to see a man whose wit is
pregnant, and body strong, to be unexercised both in mind and body, is a sin
not to be suffered in the common wealth, or in the Church of God. For as the
tree that bears no fruit is to be hewn down and cast into the fire: so the
man that is unprofitable to the Church of God, shall by the axe of Gods
judgment, be hewn down and cast into hell fire, though he were the highest
cedar in Libanus.

Fourthly, he reproves them in respect of the time, for the day is appointed
to labor, and the night to rest: Psalm. 104.24.
The sun arises, the Lions retire and couch in their dens, then man goes
forth to his work and to his labor: So this being the day of salvation, 2:
Cor. 6.2. Gala. 6.10.
and the time accepted: we ought while we have time to do good. Man's life is
but short: First, because we should withdraw our love from the world:
secondly, that we might not be weary of well doing: thirdly, that we should not
spend our life unprofitably: fourthly, to show the love of God, who for a
days labor gives us the penny of eternal life: fifthly, hereby we learn
that God has chosen man to eternal life, because he would suffer him to be
here but a little while: sixthly, that we should make very great haste to enter
into our rest. As therefore man will labor earnestly and diligently that he
be not prevented with the night, so will the godly also labor earnestlye in
their vocation in this precious, short, and irreuocable time of their life,
because after death there is no day, but night, no time accepted, but the day
of vengeance.

Fifthly and lastly, the idle are reproved for the continuance of time, all the
day: wherefore it is a shame for a Christian man to be idle in the church of
God: a greater shame to be idle in the time of the Gospel, but to be idle all
day is the greatest shame in the world. If you will not come into the
vineyard at the sixth hour, come in at the ninth: if not at the ninth hour,
come in at the eleventh hour: but if you will come neither at the first nor
last hour, then shall you never receive the reward of everlasting life: they
that came in at the last hour shall be first, but they that came not in at
all, were refused as loyterers, and condemned as unprofitable, or rather
abominable reprobates.

Unmercifulness to the poor, the sin of Sodom and of England.
Unmercifulness to the poor is a sin also that procures the wrath of God
upon us. For as God only gives us all that we have, and gives it to us
freely and abundantly beyond our desert or desire: so God wills us to feed
the hungrye, to give drink to the thirstye, to cloth the naked, to redeem
the prisonner, and to visit the sick, promising that what we give to those,
we give to his brethren: Mat. 25.40.
and therefore we are to ponder first, what a dignity it is to be a brother
to Christ; secondly, that all things are ours; thirdly, we are hereby made
conformable to Christ; fourthly, we that are merciful excel the Angels;
fiftlye, that this brotherhood does excel all carnal cogitation.

If then God being bountiful unto us, we are unkind to our brethren, we are
justly condemned to eternal fire: first, because of the facility of the
petition, for what does he ask? a piece of bread, a cup of drink, an old
garment, or a piece of silver: who will deny this to the hungry, thirsty,
naked, or captive brother of Christ? secondly, because of the misery of him
that asks, for he is poor, thirsty, naked, or a prisonner. Thirdly, because
of the compassion of nature that should be in us, for he is a man, and
therefore we must weigh who asks, what he asks, and of whom. He that
asks is a man, so art thou: he is frail, so art thou: he is miserable, so
art thou: what does he ask? bread, drink, a garment, or silver, which is none
of thine, for thou art but a steward of it: But thou being a sinful man do
beg of God, and thou beggest righteousness. Now if thou being a man do
deny thy equal, when he asks that which is not thine: how dare thou being
far inferior to God, ask of him righteousness or mercy? thou will not give
to thy neighbor temporal things, how shall God give to thee eternal things?

The fourth thing that should move us to mercy, is the desire of the promise:
for God promises us a kingdom: Mat. 25.24. etc.
Come (says Christ) ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you before the foundations of the world: for J was hungry, and
ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink, I was naked and ye
clothed me, J was a stranger, and ye lodged me, I was sick, and ye visited
me, I was in prison, and ye redeemed me The kingdom of God (which in
dignity is highest, in liberty free, in peace secure, in honor glorious, in
cleanness pure, in societye of angels joyous, and perpetual in the affluence
of riches) the influence of pleasures, and the co^fluence of all Saints, is
promised for a piece of meat, a draught of drink, a nights lodging, an old
garment, or a piece of silver. Is not he a wise merchant, that changes lead
for gold, a copiehold for an inheritance, and for a house a kingdom? so do
all those that be merciful to the poor.

The fifth thing that should move us to mercifulness, is the dignity of the
receiver: for whatsoever ye give to the poor, ye give to Christ. We ought to
give to the poor for his own sake, for our sake, and for Christ's sake: for
his own sake, because if he be in the state of grace, he is the child of
God, if he be a sinner, he is the workmanship of God: and therefore albeit he
is to be punished, because he is an offender; yet he is to be pitied because
he is a man, and he must see in us the work of mercifulness, that he may
glorify our Father which is in heaven. For thy own sake also thou must be
merciful: For Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: Mat.
5.7. Iam. 2.13.
and there shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy: but if
thou will not do it for his sake, nor for thine own sake, at least wise do
it for Christ's sake, who says: In as much as ye have done it to one of the
least of these my brethren, Mat. 25.40
ye have done it unto me: for Christ reckons it given to himself,
whatsoever is given to the poor. What a dignity then is this for us, which
indeed are but dust, earth and ashes, to be accounted giuers unto him, which
is the giver of all things?

The sixth thing that should move us to mercy, is the super abundance of honor,
because Christ does vouchsafe to receive meat, drink, and lodging at our
hands. If the Queen of England should acknowledge her self to have received
at our hands, meat, drink, raiment, or silver, were we not greatly
honored? how much more when the son of God, King of kings, Lord of lords,
and God of gods: does so magnify us, that he acknowledges himself to be
indetted unto us, when we do but our duty?

The seventh thing that should move us to mercy, is the justice of the gift,
for his own things he accepts at our hands, as though we had given them:
he gives us bread, and yet he says, we give him bread; he feeds us, and
yet he says, we feed him; he gives us wine, and yet he says, we give
him drink; he gives us houses, and yet he says we lodge him; he
cloatheth us, and yet he says we cloth him; he heals us when we are
sick, and yet he says, we visit him; he delivers us being prisoners, and
yet he says, we have redeemed him. Thus the Lord of all things makes
himself a servant, the owner of all the beasts of the forest makes himself
hungry, Agge. 28.
and he that says: Gold and silver is mine, makes himself a beggar to
provoke us to mercifulness.

Now because neither the facility of the petition, nor the misery of the
afflicted, nor the compassion of nature, nor the desire of the promise, nor the
dignity of the receiver, nor the superabundance of honor which he gives, nor
the justice of the gift can move us to be pitiful to the poor, therefore it
is the sin of Sodom which was burned, and the sin of Jerusalem which was
sacked, and the sin of this iron age, which shall be condemned.

Under the name of the poor, are meant the ministers of God, poor scholars
which are the seed plot of the Church, poor soldiers, poor impotent men, as
Lazarus was, sick men, prisoners and banished men: to be unmerciful to these
is the sin of Sodom, and a sin that never leaves crying to God, till it
has brought down on the merciless extreme damnation: For we should love
them, and we hate the^; we should hear the^, and we stop our ears; we should
visit them gladly, and we disdain them: we should speak to them gently, and
we speak roughly; we should have compassion on them, and we are
incompassionate toward them: we should do them good, and we do them harm: we
should defend them from evil, and we smite them. Are we merciful to the
poor ministers in these days? do we give, or rather pull away from them? what
mercy is showed to poor scholars in Oxford or Cambridge? what relief have
soldiers? who refreshes the bowels of hu^ger-starued Lazarus? where these are
spoiled or despised, there God himself is spoiled and contemned.

If these shall be condemned that will not give their own, what shall those be
that take away from the poor? what shall become of our Martinistes, that
abhor Idleness, Rom, 2.22.
and commit sacrilege? what shall become of the tirants of England, which
join house to house, Esaias. 5.8.
and land to land, that there may be no dwelling for the poor? as we see in
many desolate places of england. What shall befall them which grind the faces
of the poor, and bray them as it were in a mortar? what vengeance shall they
receive, Mich. 3.2.3.
which hate the good and love the evil, and pluck off their skins from them,
and their flesh from their bones, and they eat also the flesh of my people
(says God) and flay off their skin from them, and they break their bones,
and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the cauldron.
Martin finds fault that a Minister should have two benefices, but for a
nobleman or Gentleman which has six he reprehendeth it not. The Ministers
(says he) join house to house; there be those in England that have and do
daily pull down houses, wherein have been families like flocks of sheep, and
now there is nothing but a shepherd and his dog: for the fruitful land is
become a wilderness. What is the reason, he reproves the ministers so
sharply, and leaves the other unreproved? rete non tenditur accipitri nec
miluo, his qui malefaciunt nobis: illis qui nihil faciunt, tenditur: the net is
not laid for the hawke or the kite, or the^ that do ill; it is laid for them
that do no harm. So no man speaks against him that commits sacrilege,
Usury, violence and oppression; which burn up the vineyard, Esaias. 3.14. Abac.
2.12.
and have the spoil of the poor in their houses; and build up Sion with
blood: as a cage is full of birds, Ier. 5.27.
so are their houses full of riches gotten by deceit, thereby they are become
great and rich. Unmercifulness is the sin of Sodom, much more is rapine,
and sacrilege, violence and usury. All these are in England, therefore
perpetual desolation is at hand. Will ye see the guilt of sin? remember Cain
wandering. Will ye see the fury of sin? remember Saul raging. Will ye see
the fear of sin? remember Baltasar trembling. Will ye see the ignominy of
sin? remember Haman hanging. Will ye see the end of sin? remember Sodom and
Gomorrha; and the countries round about burning in the vengeance of eternal
fire for ever.

The sins of Sodom were not only manifest and many, but also exceeding
great, The sins of Sodom are exceeding great, and so are the sins of
England.
and so are the sins of England. Sin is aggrauated 1. by the multitude of
sinners: 2. by evil examples in Magistrates, ministers, and fathers: 3. by
impunitie: 4. by encouragement in evil: 5. by study to do mischief: 6. by
perseverance in sins. In Sodom there was multitude of offenders, for they
did offend all; of every age, as children, young and old men, of every sex,
as men and women; and of every estate; as the magistrate and subject, the
priest and people, the master and servant, the father and son, and the
husband and wife.

Children have exceeding great s^^es. Psalm. 22.31.
First, for our children (I tremble to speak it) being our seed that should
serve the Lord after us: as soon as they are borne they are so accustomed to
blaspheme, that they fill every street, every house, and every high way with
it: and if it be true which the wise man says: that the plague of God
departs not from the house of the swearer: then no doubt it will fall upon
the posterity of our English nation.

Eccles. 12.1. Young men have exceeding great sins.
Secondly, for young men which should remember the Lord in the days of their
youth, their heads are full of drunkenness, their eyes full of adultery,
their toungful of filthy communication, their ears full of ribald^ie, their
hands full of blood, their feet run to vanity, their understanding is
blind, their affection froward, their heart is lewd and unsearchable. If
they learn not this lesson out of the Psalm. Psalm. 25.7.
O remember not the sins of our youth, but according to thy mercy think
vppin us: they must learn this lesson to their confusion, Psalm. 14.^.
destruction and calamity is in our ways, there is no fear of God before our
eyes.

Concerning old men, Tit. 2.2. Old men have exceeding great sins.
they should be sober, grave, modest, sound in faith, charity and patience.
They should be sober, and they are given to drunkenness; chaste, and they are
given to wantonness; discreet, and they are most foolish; sound in faith, and
they are as ignorant as horse and mule; in charity, and they are full of
envy; in patience, and they are most waiward.

You have heard of every age, now shall you hear of every sex, that is of men
and women. It has been an ancient strife whether is the most excellent
creature, Men and women have exceeding great sins.
the man or the woman; but now they strive whether may excel other in
vitiousnesse. For men are recusant Papists, so are women; men are murderers, so
are women, for they murder their own infants, men are adulterers, thieves,
slaunderers, and covetous persons, so are women. In S. Peter's time wives were
so subject to their husbands, that they which obeyed not the word, 1. Pet.
3.1.2.
might without the word be won by the conversation of their wives, whilst they
beheld their pure conversation, which was in fear. 2 Timothy 1.5.
In Paul's time Lois and Eunice brought up Timothy in the word of God. Luke
8.23.
In Christ's time Mary Magdalene out of whom went seven devils, and Ioanna
the wife of Chuza Herod's steward. Susanna and many others ministered unto Christ
of their substance. Though Nabal was a churl, yet Abigail his wife was a
virtuous woman. But in our days it is as it was in Sodom; children young men
and old, yea men and women, all do sin, they sin often, and they sin
greeuouslye.

Magistrates have exceeding great sins. Iath. 18.21. Jer. 4.22.
Now let us look into all estates; magistrates should be wise, fear God, love
the truth, and abhor covetousness. But our magistrates are wise to do
evil, to do well they have no knowledge. They should fear God, and they
fear man; they should deal vprightlye, and they turn justice into
oppression; they should abhor covetousness, and they join house to house,
and land to land, and they eat up the poor like bread. The foundation then of
our commonwealth being feeble, the walls of our vineyard being tottering, and
the hedges of our Church being broken down; what is to be looked for but a
speedy and fearful destruction.

Magistrates are called Gods, to show that they should be meek, Number. 12.3. 1.
King 4.34. Heb. 1.2.
wise, just. They are called Gods for the advancement of their vocation: for as
Jacob called Joseph's son after his own name, so God to honor magistrates
calls them after his own name; because neither the loftiness of their
estate, nor the pleasures of this life, nor the tempests nor troubles of this
dangerous world, nor the flatteries of the wicked should make them to pervert
justice: but Gods law should be their law, Gods honor should be their honor,
Gods kingdom should be their kingdom, and Gods enemies should be their
enemies. And therefore the wicked may not be spared either for love of friend,
hatred of enemy, desire of reward, or fear of superior. To be called Gods
servant is an honorable title, to be called disciple of Christ is more
honorable, and to be called the son of God most honorable; but to be called
God, this is a name, then the which there cannot be a greater. Men may be
called noble of their parents, and learned of their arts: but to be called
Gods is a nobility that comes of virtue: therefore for a God to be a briber,
scoffer, swearer, liar, drunkard, or usurer, is a most absurd thing. Should
such a man as J flee? Neh. 6.11.
says (Nehemiah) the Prophet: So, for a magistrate to be a covetous God, an
idol God, or a belly God, is a great shame. For as David excelling Saul in
virtue, was chosen to be king, and Saul rejected, so the wicked shall be humbled,
and the virtuous exalted. Now because our higher powers have in them base
villainies, our Fathers are tirants, our heads are giddy, our men are beasts,
and our Gods devils: it is a fearful token of our future desolation.

Subjects have exceeding great sins.
As the Magistrates have sins exceeding great, so have the private men. Saint
Paul wills us to submit our selves to our magistrates; which subjection
contains 5. things: first, that we acknowledge them to be appointed our
governors from God, for he himself says, Pro. 8.15.
by me kings do reign: Secondly, that we should yield them reverence with
fear: 3. that we should obey the^ in the simplicity of heart: 4. that we be
thankful unto the^ in heart and deed: 5. that of all the Princes actions we
give a gentle interpretation. For as a bitter medicine does oftentimes more
good then a sweet: so the actions of Princes, whether they like or dislike us,
ought to be gently interpreted. But we think not our governors to be
advanced by God; for if we did, then should we reverence them; but we as
beasts void of reason, speak evil of them that are in authority: Jude 10.
And for reverence we render contempt, for obedience, murmuring; for
thankfulness, ingratitude: and like busy bodies, we give a sinister
interpretation of all public actions. Even as the people murmured against
Moses, so do we against her majesty: and the reason is, every man is wise in
his own conceits, every man will be a head, every one a teacher, every one a
reformer; no man will be a member, a learner, or a Disciple. Hereof the Prophet
Esaias prophesied long before: Esaias 3.5.
Children shall presume against the ancient, and the wise against the
honorable. If this saying were true in the Prophets time, it is most true in
our time. This was the wrack of Jerusalem, and this will be the ruin of
England. For our young divines being children in understanding (making
themselves to be Doctors of the law, and yet understanding not what they
speak, or whereof they affirm) do speak against the fathers of the Church, not
only with permission, but with approbation and applause. And if they shall be
thus dealt withal that are worthy of double honor; 1. Tim. 5.15.
then others may think also, Ministers have exceeding great sins.
that their honors will fall to the dust.

Concerning the Ministers of our land, which should be the light of the world
and the fault of the earth; how dark, Mat. 13.14.
and unsavory are they? Zach. 11.17. Ioh. 10.5. Ioh. 10.8. Ioh. 10.12.
for some are idols, some are strangers, some are thieves and robbers, some are
hirelinges. The idol shepherd is an abomination, the stranger they know not,
the thief and robber does kill and destroy, the hireling does fly when he
sees the wolf coming. There be many false Prophets, Mat. 24.22.
and false Christ's, and shall show great signs and wonders to deceive the
very elect, if it were possible. Yea as Paul says, All seek their own, Phil.
2.21.
and not those things which are Jesus Christ's.

Which of our Bishops or Clergy, does exhibit to the maintenance of poor
scholars in Oxford or Cambridge, being the seminary of the Church of God? I
know many fine wits and young men of good hope, who for want of exhibition, must
either apply themselves to be serving men, which is not well; or else go to
Rhemes which is worse; or else to Anabaptisticall Schismatiques, to trouble the
peace of the Church, which is worst of al. The noble and wealthy of this land
shall be justly condemned, for that they have not been bou^tifull to the
professors of learning; but most justly we of the spirituality; for having
been nourished our selves by this godly means, yet we neglect the doing of so
honorable and necessary an action. Albeit therefore many have great livings,
yet as Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.14.
they have it but to live: to live says Bernard, not to be rich, not to be
proud, not to be wanton, not that he should build great palaces, not that he
should advance his kindred with the wealth of the Church, nor marry his
Nephews, his Sons and his Daughters with the Church goods. Two things I
note out of this saying of Bernard, Bernard.
the one that Bishops had Sons and daughters, and therefore were married,
against the Papists; the other is, they had great wealth, against the
Martinistes: to use these things is lawful, to abuse them is unlawful.

Finally, some of our Ministers are as covetous as Ahab, some as full of
scoffing, as Jsmael, some as wanton as Solomon, some as traitorous as Judas,
some as ignorant as an ass, and some as ambitious as the devil.

Chrysostom said. Chrisostom.
If thou see a tree that bears no fruit, the cause is in the root; so
where the people live wickedly, the cause is in the Ministers. For either they
are so ignorant they cannot, or so fearful they dare not, or so slothful
they will not do their duty. And therefore he says, many in name, and few in
deed; and in his eight Homily upon the third of the Acts, he maruelleth that
any of us do enter into the kingdom of heaven: for as the parrets spoke the
words of men, so we speak the words of the Apostles; and not only our words
are vain, but our works are abominable.

Concerning the hearers of the word, from some the Devil steals the word
out of their hearts, Hearers have exceeding great sins.
others are choked with the cares and pleasures of this life, others are so
hard hearted and impenitent, that a man were as good preach to the incensible
stones, as to them. We are commanded not only to hear the word, but to
understand it; Hear and understand, says Christ; Mat. 15.10.
neither should we only understand it, but lay it up in our heart; and
therefore Mary is commended, Luke. 10.51.
that she keep all Christ's sayings in her heart. And we should not only love
the word, Iam. 1.21.
but be doers of the same.

But some will never hear, as our Papists; some do hear and not understand,
as the ignorant; some understand the word, but love it not, as the hypocrite;
some do hear, understand, and love it, but are not doers of the word, as
vain Gospellers.

Paul says, 2. Tim. 4.2.3.
Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, improve, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering and doctrine; for the time will come, when
they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall
after their own lusts get them a heap of teachers.

Learned Divines have noted eight causes of heresies: the first is ignorance,
which indeed is the mother of seductions. For ignorance is not only destitute
of upright judgment, but also is in danger of the wickedness of deceitful
men, and therefore the Apostle commands, Brethren be not children in
understanding, 1. Cor. 14.28.
but as concerning maliciousness be children. The crafty Papists therefore
which got both gain and Lordship over the people, did care by all means to
keep the deceived multitude in ignorance. Secondly, a wavering mind follows
this ignorance; whereby it comes to pass, that they which are children in
understanding, are carried about with every blast of vain doctrine. This
wavering the Apostle reproves, Ephesians. 4.11. etc.
He gave some to be Apostles and some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, and for the glorification of the body of Christ, till we all
meet together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the same God, unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. That we
henceforth be no more children, wavering, and carried away with every wind of
doctrine by the deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive. This ignorance therefore and wavering of mind, does open the door
to all heresies and errors, and makes the unskillful multitude to follow
heretics and deceitful men. Thirdly, where the vice of curiosity takes
effect, there every heretical deceit prevails: for as soon as any new or
unaccustomed thing is taught, they which are curious, desiring to know what it
is, do greedily hear, read, and entertain it.

Fourthly, this happens to them which are as it were slaves to their lusts,
when they hear a doctrine pleasing their desires, by and by they note it, and
apply both their ears and their heart to it. Of this the Apostle foretold; For
the time will come, 2. Tim. 4.3.4.
when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching,
shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn
their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables. Sound doctrine to
the corrupt flesh languishing in desires, is as a medicine to a sick man: for
even as a faithful Physician is grievous to a sick man, forbidding him those
things which he greatly desires, and commanding him those things which are
contrary to his desires; and as a deceiuer is acceptable, who regarding his own
profit, yields to his desires: in like manner the Apostle did foresee that the
doctrine of truth would be grievous to carnal men, and servants of their own
lusts; and therefore they would turn away their ears from it to false teachers,
and their fables (being not grievous but joyous to the flesh) they should
greedily embrace. 5. Whosoever has such itching ears, they are always
unstable. 6 S. Peter says; that unlearned and unstable men pervert the
scriptures unto their own destruction: 2. Pet. 3.16.
for they are lighter the^ a reed and moved with every wind. 7 Ignorance
therefore joined with a desire of novelty, being coupled with instabilitie,
makes the simple people to receive chafe for wheat, dross for gold, vinegar
for wine, poison for meat, and falsehood for truth. Some hearers are compared to
stones, they profit nothing; some to thorns, they choke the seed which is
in them with voluptuousness; some to Swine, for they rail against the
Preachers: some to dogs, for they are willing to devour us. This froward and
crooked generation that despise the word and kill the prophets that are sent to
them, shall have their house desolate.

Fathers have exceeding great sins.
Fathers also have exceeding great sins. For fathers owe to their sons. 1. love;
2 dilligent education; 3. wise government; that they be not corrupted either
with too much cockering, or with overmuch austerity; 4. to bring up their
children in good arts and godliness; 5. to correct them if they do not their
duty. But our parents in steed of love use fond affection: and for government
we may say as Themistocles said, I rule Athens, my wife rules me, and my
child rules my wife: and whereas they should be instructed in good arts and in
pity, they are instructed in carding, dicing, dancing, hawking and hunting.
Lastly, where they should correct their children for offending, they rejoice
in their wickedness. Job and Jeremy did curse their father that did beget the^,
and the mother that did bear the^, because they were borne to such trouble and
miseries: but the children of our time will curse their parents because they
are nourished up in wickedness for the torments of hell, which are ceaseles,
endless, and remediles. Fathers will teach their sons to have their barns full
of corn with the rich man, their purses full of money with the rich glutton,
their houses full of plate with Ezechius, their backs full of gorgeous apparel
with Herod, their table full of daintye dishes with Assuerus, but they are
unfurnished of all kind of virtues and heavenly graces: and therefore though
they and their parents spend their days in wealthines, yet in a moment they go
down to hell.

Children owe to their parents, Children have exceeding great sins.
first the love of the heart, and they wish them dead to have their goods;
secondly honor, and they dishonor their parents; thirdly sustentation in
necessity, and they rob their parents; fourthly service in all obsequies, and
they are rebellious; fifthly reverence in words, and they are taunters: sixthly
obedience in honest things, and they are disobedient; seventhly pardon in
offenses, and they like Cham discover their Parents shame; eighthly tolerance in
aduersitye, and they refuse to acknowledge their parents; Therefore noble houses
are decayed, the posterity of the rich are brought to scarsitie, the
extorcioner consumes their wealth, and horrible is the end of the unrighteous
generation. For either with Absalom they are hanged, or with the Sons of Eli
they are slain; or with the sons of Job their brains are dashed out; or with
the sons of Saul they are beheaded; or with the children of Jerusalem they
are brought to a perpetual desolation. To tell here how some are scoffers with
Ismael; some adulterers with the sons of Eli; some bribers as the sons of
Samuel; some thieves as the sons of Achan; some gluttons as the sons of
Job; some Atheists, neither serving God, nor honoring the Magistrate, nor
loving the Minister, nor reuerencing the aged, nor obeying their father, nor
submitting themselves to their mother, nor pitying the poor, nor regarding
their consanguinitie, were too long for me to speak, and tedious for you to
hear: only this I say, our children are the children of wrath and of endless
destruction for the most part.

Evil example of Magistrates, Ministers and Fathers, Evil example of Magistrates
makes sin exceeding great.
are an other means to aggrauate sin. For when Israel coupled himself to Baal
Peor, the Lord being angrye said thus to Moses. Number. 25.4. Take all the heads
of the people and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the
indignation of the Lords wrath may cease from Jsrael. Magistrates should be
men noble in birth, in knowledge and in virtues. As they have a crown of pure
gold, so must they shine in purity to their subjects; as they are decked with
precious stons, so must they shine in excellent virtues; as they wear chains
of gold, so they must be endued with wisdom, justice, fortitude and
temperance; as they have a scepter, so they may not he be^ded from justice to
oppression, or from clemencye to foolish pity. They are the Sun of the common
weal, therefore if they be darkened, there must needs follow horror and
confusion: they are the heart of the political body, if they be poisoned with
the venom of sin, the whole body must needs be infected to death. Jeroboam
made all the people to commit idolatry; Baasha slew Jeroboam and al his house,
and left none alive, 1. king. 15.2^ 9. etc.
because of the sins of Jeroboam which be committed, and wherewith he made
Israel to sin by provocation. So is it written of Baasha, that he made all
Israel to sin. 1. King. 16.11.
But Baasha and all his posterity were destroyed for it. Zimri also was burnt,
1. King. 16.18.19.
because he walked in the sins of Jeroboam, and made all Israel to sin. Omri
also walked in the sins of Jeroboam, 1. King. 16.26.
and made al Israel to sin. The like may be spoken of Ahab and of other wicked
Kings: for there are many causes why they fall: 1. the loftines of their estate,
because they have none to control them; 2. the abundance of al things; 3. the
delights which they have in this world; 4. their liberty because they are
above al, and subject to none; 5. the example of wicked governors; 6. the
troubles of worldly things; 7. slatterye, then the which nothing is more
pernicious. Evil examples of ministers makes sin exceeding great.
The evil example of Ministers does likewise make sin heinous, for the
Minister must be an example to his flock, and zealous of good works: but if
he be either a proud person and lover of pre-eminence, as Diotrophes was; or a
lover of the world, as Demas was; or a covetous caitiffe as Judas was; or a
false Prophet, as were those that fed at the table of Iezabel; the^ (no doubt)
but they draw the people from religion to superstition, from the spirit to the
flesh, from Christ to the world, and from God to the devil. If there be a tree
withered (says Chrysostom) the fault is in the root: Chrysostom.
so if ye see the people irreligious, the fault is in the Ministers, and this
is a true saying in Augustine, Gregory and Bernard; He that lives ill in the
sight of those over whom he rules, as much as in him lies kills them; for
whose life is abominable, his doctrine cannot not be acceptable.

There are three things necessary for a Preacher, 3. Things necessary for a
Preacher.
knowledge which is noted in the book sent to Ezechiel; eloquence which is
noted in the hot cole that purged Esaias; holiness of life, which is noted in
the hand sent to Jeremy. If a Preacher lack knowledge, he is an idol; if he
lack utterance, he is an infant; but if he lack holiness of life, he is a
devil. It sorroweth me to think of the Ministers of England, for either we
never learn to speak, which is slothfulness; or else we speak before we
learn, which is rashenes; or else we learn and never speak, which is idleness;
or else we speak to please itching ears, which is flattery; or else we speak
falsely against the truth, which is impiety.

The evil example therefore of the Ministers which have gifts given them from
above, to gather together the body of Christ, and yet do scatter: which should
build up the house of the Lord, and do destroy it, which should sow the pure
seed of the word of unity, and they sow the darnel of dissension, is an other
heinous crime which provoke to eternal destruction.

The like may be said of Fathers, who participate the name of God our eternal
father, Evil example of Father makes sin exceeding great.
because they should beget us in the word of truth bring us up in the fear of
the Lord, and by their example teach us to worship our God, and serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. But (good Lord) how far are
we from this duty? for we bring them up in dancing, dicing, and daliance, not
in religion; we teach them to oppress and deceive in bargaining, we confirm
them in idolatrye and schisms, and make them instruments of iniquity. What is
the reason that we have so many recusant Papists in England but only this, the
ill example of their fathers? What is the reason our Saboths be openly
profaned throughout this land? ill example of the fathers: for whereas they
should specially care that day of the Lord, to enstruct their families in the
faith of Christ, they do that day bring them forth to lead their dance in
contempt both of Gods commandment and his Ministers. Happy are those that may
say with David, Psalm. 22 4.5.
Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, they hoped in thee, and were
not ashamed; they trusted in thee and were not confounded. But we must pray
with David, Psalm. ^9.8.9.
Remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us and that soon, for we are
come to great misery. For if God be not merciful unto us, we shall all both
the father and children come shortly and suddenly to eternal misery.

Impunitie also causes our sins to be exceeding great. Impunitie makes sins
exceeding great. Eccle. 7.17.
I have seen all things (says the Preacher) in the days of my vanity, there
is a just man that perishes in his justice, and there is a wicked man that
continues long in his malice: Job. 21.23.
Job speaking of these says; They spend all their days in welthinesse, and
in a moment they go down to hell. David says thus, Psalm. 33, 12.
And these are the wicked, yet prosper they always, and increase in riches.
And a little after he says; Surely thou have set them in slipperie places, O
how suddenly do they parish, consume, and come to a fearful end? Augustine in
his select sentences thus writes, Augustine.
the forty two sentence. There is nothing more miserable the^ the felicity of
sinners, whereby a penal impunitie is nourished, and the evil will as an
inward enemy is strengthened. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom on the first chapter of the Hebrews and his second Homily thus
says; But besides all other evils, riches have also this mischief, that rich
men sinning wickedly, are defended from punishments: and he that possesses
riches though he always sin yet he is not restrained with any punishment, but
always he receives the wounds of sins without any remedies, and no man
checketh him for it. And Augustine in a treatise he has of the Martyrs says;
The men of this world are unhappily happy, for they are for a time happy, and
for ever miserable: but the Martyrs are happily miserable, for they are
miserable for a season, and happy for ever.

For that then the manifest and many sins of England are not punished, we
have no cause to rejoice in it, but rather to fear that the dilation of our
punishment will be more grievous, for though he comes with leaden heels, he
strikes with iron hands, recompensing the tarditie thereof with the gravity.
Being the^ we see the idolaters to sin manifestly, the blasphemers to swear
outragiously, the Saboths of the Lord to be profaned notoriously, murders to
be pardoned, adulterers to be winckt at, robberies to be counted purchase,
slanderings and railings to be accounted zeal, and covetousness to be reckoned
theft, and oppression wisdom: since I say, al these sins are not only
unpunished which is lamentable: but also maintained, which is damnable: it
cannot be, but that God which made all the world of nothing, will bring the
wicked to nothing: and he that governs in equity, will destroy them that
work iniquity. He is by name almighty, therefore he shall consume away all the
wicked like dross. He is the Lord of hosts, therefore men, Angels, and devils
are at his commandment; he is the holy God of heaven, therefore he will
destroy all the wicked from the earth: he is a king for ever, therefore all the
wicked kingdom of the earth shall be brought to desolatio^. For as the Preacher
says, Eccle. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not speedely executed, therefore
the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Pontius in his 9, chapter of liberality, An example for Londoners wives,
Pontius.
shows; that a certain rich woman, had but one only son, whom she brought
up so wantonly, that he became a thief, and was brought to the gallows: and
seeing his mother, he desired to speak secretlye with her, and when she put
forth her mouth to kiss him, he Bit of her nosthrilles and did spitte them on
the ground (using these words) let this be an example for motherly education.
Senica the master of Nero, which is said to be a master of his vices, not
because he did provoke him to evils, but because he did not restrain him
from it, he is reported to be butcherly murdered of Nero his scholar.
Hemingius on the second epistle of John, notes that a fellow was accused of 7.
murders. The judge being greatly moved with the atrocitie of so heinous
crimes, studied what worthy punishment might be inflicted on him. An Aduocat
pleading for the transgressor, proved that the malefactor had committed but one
murder and the Judge the other six: and being demanded how, he replied, that
if the homicide had been put to death at the first murder as he deserved, then
those six had not been slain. The pardon therefore of the judge, was the cause
that those other six were slain. To this may be added the fearful break-neck
of Eli, who for not punishing his sons, drew a tragical punishment upon both
himself and his sons also. Let every Prince therefore draw out his sword, and
every father exercise his rod, otherwise the scourge of Gods wrath, and the
sword of vengeance will suddenly and severely fall upon them; Pro. 13.24. Sir
7.6. Encouragement in sin, makes sin exceeding great. Pro. ^.11. etc.
for he that spares the rod hates the child. Seek not to be a judge, least
thou be not able to take away iniquity.

Encouragement in sin, is another thing that makes sin exceeding great: do not
our murderers and thieves, encourage one another to mischief, saying: Come
with us, we will lay wait for blood, and lie privily for the innocent without
a cause, we will swallow them up alive like a grave even whole, as those that
go down into the pit: We shall find all precious riches, and fill our houses
with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, we will all have one purse. Do not our
harlots encourage men in wickedness, saying as does the harlot. Pro. 17.18.
etc.
Come let us take our fill with love until the morning, let us take our
pleasure in daliance, for mine husband is not at home, he is gone a journey far
off. He has taken with him a bag of silver, and will come home at the time
appointed: and stolen waters are sweet, and the bread that is priuilye eaten
has a good taste. Pro. 9.17.
Do not our extortioners and usurers animate one an other in mischief?
saying: Sap. 2.10.11.
Let us oppress the poor that is righteous, let us not spare the widow, nor
reverence the white hairs of the aged, that have lived many years. Let our
strength be the law of unrighteousness: for the thing that is feeble is
reproved as unprofitable. Do not our covetous cornmongers provoke one another
to afflict the people of God, as did the wicked in Amos time, saying: Amos. 8.5.
When will the new month begin, that we may sell corn, and the sabbath that
we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephasmall and the shekel great, and
falsify the weights by deceit: that we may buy the poor for silver, and the
needy for shoes, and sell the refuse of the wheat.

If these things be among the people of England, as they were among the Jews;
or rather if England does justify Jerusalem, as Jerusalem justified Sodom and
Gomorrha: then no doubt as God spared not the natural olive, so he will not
spare the wild: for we blushe not to commit idolatrye and blasphemy, to
profane our Sabbath, to rebel, to murder, to go a whoring, to rob, to
oppress, to commit usury, to slander our brethren, or revile our fathers.
Very well says Tullie: without shamefastness nothing is right, nothing is
honest. But better says Bernard, spiritual shamefastness is the glory of the
conscience, the keeper of a good name, the honor of life, the seat of virtues,
the praise of nature, and the badge of all honesty: but where this virtue
wants, there is scorn and contempt of God.

Study io do mischief makes sins exceeding great. Mich. 2.1.
Study to do mischief is also another thing that makes sin heinous. Woe unto
them that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their beds, when the
morning is light they practice it, because their head has power. The soul of
man being made after the image of God, ought to have God always for his object.

So says Mary: Luke. 1.46.47.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.
For the soul is more excellent, then all the creatures of the world, and all
things are vile in respect of the soul. Gold being in dirt is defiled, but
the soul is not defiled with the body of clay: Wine mingled with water is
corrupted, but the soul joined with the body, is pure.

The Stars and the Sun are darkened with the clouds, but the soul of man
seeeth, though being hid in an obscure body: and therefore David sets it
down most plainly, where he says: Psalm. 84.2.
My soul longs yea and faints for the courts of the Lord: for my heart and
my flesh rejoice in the living God. And Augustine most plainelye says:
Augustine.
Thou have made us O Lord, for thee therefore my heart is greatly unquiet, if
it do not rest only in thee.

O soul (says Bernard) made after the image of GOD, beautified with his
likeness, redeemed with Christ's blood, espoused to him in faith, endued with
the holy ghost, deputed among the Angels, capable of blessedness, and an heir
of bliss, what have thou to do with the flesh? The habitation of the soul by
affection is in heaven, as proves Paul, Our conversation is in heaven. Phil.
3.20.
It is a base thing therefore to take a cottage for a city; the world is a
cottage, heaven is the city of Saints. When then the soul of man desires
gold, he can never have all the gold of the world: when he desires rule he
can never have the rule of all the world; when he hunteth for the praise of
men, he cannot have the praise of all the world: but that soul which
possesses Christ, possesses all things. As God has given us Christ Jesus, so
has he given us all things. Romans 8.32.
Who will then study for riches, which is vanity; or for pleasure, which is
hurtful; or for sin, which is damnable: and forsake God which is truth,
Christ which is mercy, and the holy Ghost which is consolation.

Finally, all earthly things be of a short continuance, the things in heaven
(which are the object of the soul) are eternal. All things in earth are
grievous, for they are full of miseries; things in heaven are delightful. The
studies of mortal things do not perform those things they promise: for as
Basil notes: Things past are vanished and past our senses; things present
slay away before they be tasted; things to come since they are not present
afflict us with their want. All worldly things are unstable: for as a flower
they sprout up, and fall again, and never continue in one estate: Job. 14.2.
for we are whole and sick, rich and poor. Lastly, they that gather riches,
cannot tell to whom they shall leave them. To set our delight therefore on short
things and not in eternal; to set our studies on troublesome things, not in
happy things; to set our affections on earthly things that content us not,
and leave heavenly things that yield full contentation; to apply our mind to
the instable things of this world, leaving the certain treasures of heaven,
is a sin that argues Gods displeasure, and procures a speedy and fearful
destruction.

Perseverance in sin is another thing, Perseverance in s^nne makes sin
exceeding great.
that procures the vengeance of God to fall ineuitablie upon us. An hundred
years was the arc in making, and in all that time the people repented not;
therefore the flood came upon them and drowned them. Lot preached to Sodom and
Gomorrha, they repented not but vexed the spirit of Lot; therefore fire from
heaven consumed them. To Jerusalem did God send his Prophets, wise men and
Scribes, but the people did kill and crucify them, scourge and persecute them
from city to city, therefore their house is made desolate. So to the people
of England (I sorrow to write it) the Gospel is the smell of death: 2. Cor.
2.6. Romans 2.4. Gal. 5.13.
the long suffering of God is abused to impenitencie. Christian liberty is
turned into wantonness: the supper of the Lord is received to our judgment.
Cor. 11.29.
Christ himself is a stone to stumble at, 2. Pet. 28.
and a rock of offense. The conscience of men is defiled, Tit. 1.15.
therefore nothing is clean to them, Wherefore this exceeding great sin of
obstinacy is to be punished with an exceeding great plague.

It is a grievous thing that a man professing himself to forsake the devil,
the world and the flesh, should break this vow and covenant, which he has
made with the holy God, the searcher of his heart and veins, and the judge of
the quick and dead. But it is more grievous when not only we have contemned the
majesty of God, and proudly resisted his law, and defiled the image of God;
but also have given our selves to be followers of the devil, and do serve him
as a prince, and a God in all vnholines and unrighteousness for ever. But it is
a most grievous sin, that in the time of the Gospel we are obdurat in sin.
For this being the day of salvation and the time accepted, we turn it into the
day of destruction and time of vengeance. To stumble in the night it is
dangerous, but to fall backward in the light of the Gospel is damnable. David
sinned but in his youth, we in our youth are wantons, in our middle age proud,
in our old age covetous: and the older we are, the more wicked we are. It is
the nature of a man to sin, it is the nature of a Christian man to repent, but
it is the nature of the devil never to repent, Augustine.
says Augustine it a treatise of the contrition of the heart.

For as much then as the sinful generation of this realm of England will
never repent, but stop their ears when God calls them, flees from the Lord
when he seeks them, and shuts up their hearts when he knocks to come
into them; there must be either a general tepentance, as there was in Niniuie,
or else there will he a general destruction as there was in Sodom, which was in
this manner. In Genesis 19.24.25. Genesis 19.24.25.
Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha brimston and fire from the
Lord out of heaven, and ouerthrewe those cities, and all the plain, and all
the inhabitants of the cities, and that that grew upon the earth. Of this
dreadful desolation you shall read in Deutronomium 26.23. Esaias 13.14. Iere.
50.40. Eze. 18.49. Hos. 11.8. Amos 4.11. Luke 17.29. and Jude 7.

First, he is noted who destroyed Sodom, the Lord: secondly how he did rain
upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire: thirdly, from whence, from the Lord
from heaven. The Lord which made Sodom and Gomorrha a pleasant and frutfull
vale, for the sins of the people brought it unto utter desolation He did
rain: the end of rain is the fertility of the earth: the Sodomites turned
the fertilitye of the earth into pride, Ezekiel. 16.
fullness of bread, idleness, and unmercifulness to the poor: and therefore
when this wickedness was to be punished, it was revenged not with famine,
pestilence or sword, but as the wicked had perverted themselves, so the Lord
perverted the rain, not to the nourishment of the earth, but to the sterilitie
of it; and gave them for dew, brimstone, and for water, fire. Strabo in his
book seems to give some natural causes of this destruction: But Moses
shows it came from the Lord, who is able and willing to punish strange
sins with strange plagues.

Further we are here to learn in that it did rain, that abundance of fire
fell from heaven: so great is the treasure in heaven of those things whereby
vengeance is to be taken on the reprobate on the earth Deuteronomy. 32.34.35. Deuteronomy.
32.34.35.
Js not this laid in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures, vengeance
and recompense are mine, Moreover where he says, he ouerthrewe the cities and
all the plain, and all the green things of the earth; we are to remember
there are two sorts of destructions: the one, 2. Sorts of destruction.
whereby cities are so overthrown, that after peace made they may be
reedified again. These kinds of subuersions have but a temporal scourge to
chastise the wicked. The other, whereby in a perpetual destruction both the
inhabitants, and cities, and fields are unrecoverably destroyed So was Sodom
and Gomorrha destroyed with all their inhabitants, and in all the plain, with
trees, herbs and plants: and the monuments of this destruction remain to be
seen at this day, the shadows of cities, the rocks exust, the earth full of
ashes, heaps of salt, a filthy smell, a dreadful sight, and a filthy lake.

Here let every good man think, A note for England.
that if the Sodomites provoked so great wrath against them which were guided
but only by the law of nature, how much more detestablye do they offend, which
have received the light of the Gospel, and yet commit the sins of Sodom?
Matthew. 10.14.15. Mat. 10.14.15.
And whosoever shall not receive you nor bear your words, when you depart out
of that house or that city, shake off the dust of your feet. Truly I say
unto you, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the
day of judgment, then for that city.

5 God does not only say that the contemners of the Gospel shall be grievously
punished, but he says, it shall be more easy for the Sodomites, and more
grievous to the contemners of his word.

Right instructions to be learned out of the subversion of Sodom and Gomorrha.
In this subversion are these things to be committed to memory. First, it is
an easy thing with God to punish the wicked, and even as easy as to send
down rain from above.

Secondly, many ways has God to subvert the wicked: the old world he
drowned with water, the AEgiptians had diverse plagues, their waters were turned
into blood, the frogs crept into the kings chamber, they were punished with
gnats, flies, pestilence, biles, hail, locusts, darkness, and the sudden
death of the first borne of AEgipt. The murmurers in the book of Numbers, some
were swallowed up into the earth, some were consumed with fire from heaven, and
the tempters were all destroyed in the wilderness with fiery serpents.

The third thing memorable is this, that the judgment of God comes suddenly:
for when they were eating and drinking, building and planting, suddenly came
fire from heaven and consumed them. 1. These. 5.3.
So Paul says it shall be in these later days: For when they shall say peace
and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as travel upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape.

Fourthly, the wicked shall not escape when the judgment of God comes on
them. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, Amos 2.14.
and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty save
his soul. Amos. 9.^.
And he that flies of them shall not fly away, and he that escapes of them
shall not be delivered.

Fifthly, sins do shorten our lives, for the most part of the Sodomites were
no doubt in their youth, when the fire fell on them. Psalm. 55.23.
And thou O God shall bring them down into the pit of corruption, the
bloody and deceitful men shall not live half their days.

Sixthly, sins being continued, do always bring new plagues. The old world
was drowned with water, but Sodom was destroyed with fire: therefore it ought
not to be incredible, that all the world shall be burned with fire. The heaven
of heavens is the Lords, but the earth he has given to the sons of men; so
he gave a fruitful plain to the Sodomites, but when they abused it, he rayned
down fire and brimstone as plentiful as rain. So because in these last times
we abuse the creatures in riot and excess, God no doubt will according to his
word consume the whole world with fire.

Seventhly, they that live wickedly shall dye miserable. The Sodomits lived in
pride, therefore they came to shame, they were unmerciful to the poor,
therefore they had judgment without mercy.

Lastly, God will revenge all injuries done, especially those that are
committed against his ministers. Zach. 2.8.
For he says, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. And
Psalm. 105.15. Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Cham for mocking the
minister of God, Noah was cursed in himself, in his children, in earth, in
heaven, of God and of men: so the viperous brood of Cham, which scorn the
reverend fathers of the Church, shall be accursed for ever: The unclean
Sodomites were burned to ashes, and condemned because they vexed the righteous
soul of Lot: so our murmurers shall taste of the like fearful judgment, and
also the whole land, for soothing them in their Ismaeleticall scorning, if
speedilye and heartily they do not repent, which God give them and us also
grace to do, that we being delivered from the dreadful wrath of God, which
hangs over our heads for our many manifest and exceeding great sins, may from
one generation to another live to praise the Lord all the days of our life.
Number. 6.2^ 25.
The Lord bless and keep this Realm. The Lord make his face to shine upon
us, and be merciful unto us, the Lord lift up his countenance upon us, and
give us his peace, for his sons sake Christ Jesus. To whom with the holy
spirit be all honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

