THE MOST EXcellent History of Lysimachus and Varrona, daughter to Syllanus,
Duke of Hypata, in Thessalia.

Wherein are contained the effects of Fortune, the Wonders of affection, and the
conquests of incertaine Time.

By I. H. R.

-- Sectantem grandia nerui
Deficient, animusque --
LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Henry VVriothesly, Earl of Southampton, and Baron of
Titchfield: I. H. wishes increase of all virtuous and Honorable resolutions.
REport (Right Honorable) that has enobled your singular, and manifold
virtues, by nature and fortune, to the Worlds recommendation, has induced
me, to thrust into the open light this my abortiue issue, to be shrouded under
the shadow of your Lordships wings, the fruit of some idle hours, since
after many thoughts I could not excogitate any more pleasing recreation,
whereon I might bestow times of leisure. The argument I confess, is of too
base consequence; to procure your liking, or deserve your allowing.
Nevertheless the force of duty, and zeal, possessing the chiefest portion of
mine interests, ouerrule my thoughts and resolutions, in hazarding the
entertainment thereof, at your favorable courtesy, and construction. And if I
may perceive that your Lordship affoords the countenance, to grace my papers
with the demonstration, of the extremest degree of good liking, I shall be
emboldned to raise my Muses note, that now yields harsh music, to an higher
key, a fairer fruit, of my better ordered vacant hours, and manifest my duty
to your Honor, in some matter of greater import, then a superficial toy. But
fearing to grow offensive through tediousnes, I commit this simple work to your
Lordships patronage, and your Honor to the Almighties protection: for the
preservation of which, I will pray continually. I end.

Your Lordships most firmly devoted in all serviceable endeavors. I. H.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, I have written the History of Lysimachus and Varrona, a work
attempted to win your favors, but to discover mine own ignorance, in that
raunging in a large field of copious matter, and being engulphed in an Ocean of
conceit, I lie there overwhelmed. If my method be nothing pleasant, yet
presuming upon your courtesies, I doubt not but you will smoother it up with
patience: and the virtue of your affection I trust will stand in the front as a
strong fort of defense, to shield me from the descanting verdits of such
unfriendly Readers, which conceiting the Authors intent amiss, may wrest his
meaning by wrong co^iectures: and from the sour censures of the ouer-curious
Moralists of our age, which glory to be termed the new vprearers of the long
ago confuted Stoicall Apathy. Howsoever the case stands, I look for no
praise for my labor, but pardon for my good will: it is the greatest reward
that I dare ask, and the least which may be offered: I desire no more, I
deserve no less. Thus Gentlemen, committing these my labors to your friendly
view, and submitting my self to your courteous censures, I end: wishing to you
all several good fortunes. Farewell.

I. H. R.

Verses in praise of the Book.
COme see this work that is but slily wrought,
Take but this simple travail in your view,
As in a mirror there is deeply taught,
The wanton vices of proud fancies crew:
There is depainted by most curious art;
How love and folly iumpe in every part.
This little Pamphlet more conceit combines,
Then wanton Ovid in his art did paint:
And sharper Satyrs are within his lines,
Then Martiala sung proud Venus to attaint.
Since then his art does plainly yield such gains,
Read it, and thank the Author for his pains.
To. Bacchus.

YE English gallants stoop and gather bays,
Make Coronets of Floraes proudest flowers,
As gifts for him, for he must have the praise,
And taste the deawes that high Parnassus shewers:
As having leapt beyond old Ouids strain,
In taunting Lovers for their fruitless pain.
Tho: Talkinghame, Gentleman.

THE MOST EXcellent History of Lysimachus and Varrona, Daughter to Syllanus
Duke of Hypata in Thessalia.
IN Thessalia, when Nature has made the soil proud with the beawtie of
Floras riches, as though she meant to wrap Teilus in the glory of her
vestments, there dwelled a Magnifico* a man of most honorable parentage, whom
Fortune had graced with many favors, and Nature honored with sundry
exquisite qualities, so beawtified with the excellency of both, as it was a
question whether Fortune or Nature were more prodigal in desciphering the
riches of their bounties. This Knight thus enricht with virtue and honor,
surnamed Syllanus, had to joy him in his age a daughter of great beawtie, so
exquisite in her exterior feature, as no blemish might eclipse that which
Nature had bestowed in her lineaments. This Damsel whose name was Varrona,
daily used to trauerse the plains wherein her fathers sheep were kept, partly
to prevent inconveniences which through idleness might have annoyed ^^^^ealth,
and partly to ply the care of her fathers folds: (for she knew that the eyes
of the master faedes the cattle) which with such diligence was performed, as
that she seemed with labor to enter (...) against want and with her hands
thrift to preoccupaie her hearts grief. (...) thus daily the walks of
Thessalia, the Shepherds not a little delighted at the view of so excellent an
object, held their eyes fortunate when they might behold her feature,
accounting him happy that could lay his flocks nearest unto her walks. Amongst
these that fed their thoughts on her favors, there was one called Lysimachus,
a young youth, that had the pride of his years triumphing in his countenance, a
man, whose parentage though it were worshipful, yet was it not endued with
much wealth, insomuch that his wit was better then his revenues, and his
industry more beneficial then his substance. This Lysimachus travailing
amongst the lawnes, no sooner had a glaunce of her beawtie, but set down his
staff, resolving either to perish in so sweet a laborinth, or in time happily
to stumble out with Theseus: In which ecstasy he shall remain, till we have
described the cause why he left Macedonia his native country, and the perilous
events which happened during his voyage hither into Thessalia.

This youth was one of the sons of Alexandro, who having passed the prime of
his youth in sundry battles against Astolpho king of Lydia, at last (as the
date of time has his course) grew aged, his hairs were silver hewed, and the
map of his age was figured on his forehead, in such sort, as that all men might
perceive his glass was run, and that nature of necessity challenged her due.
Alexandro that knew the term of his life was now expired, having two sons
by his wife Olympias, the very pride of his forepassed years, thought now,
seeing death by constraint would compel him to leave them, with wholesome
admonitions and loving persuasions for the increasing of their ensuing amity,
to distribute in their portions the substance of his wealth for the
countercheck of poverty. All which being done, to the end that they might not
forget his axioms, he gave them a scroule, wherein they might read what their
father dying, willed them to execute living. At which Alexandro shrunk down
in his bed, and gave up the ghost. Whose death was greatly lamented of his two
sons, and bewailed of all his friends, especially of his fellow warriors,
who attended on his funerals, which were performed with great solemnities. His
obsequies done, Valentine caused his Epitaph, with the contents of the scrowle
to be pourtrayed out, which were to this effect.

The contents of the Schedule, which Alexandro gave to his sons.
1 LEt Gods worship be your mornings work, and his wisdom the direction of
your days labor. 2 Rise not without thanks, neither sleep without
repentance. 3 Choose but a few friends, and try those, for the flatterer
speaks fairest. 4 If you have discreet wives, make them your Secretaries, else
lock your thoughts in your hearts, for women are seldom silent. 5 If they be
fair, be not jealous, for suspicion cures not women's follies. 6 If they be
wise, wrong them not: for if they love others, they will loath you. 7 Let your
childrens nurture be their richest portion: for wisdom is more precious then
wealth. 8 Be not proud amongst your poor neighbors: for a poor man's hate is
perilous. 9 Nor too familiar with great men: for presumption wins disdain. 10
Neither too prodigal in your fare, nor dye indebted to your bellies, enough is
a feast. 11 Be not envious, least ye fall in your own imaginations. 12 Use
patience, mirth, and quiet: for care is an enemy to health.
Valentine having thus set up his schedule, and hanged about his fathers coffin
many passionat poems, that al Macedonia might suppose him to be passing
sorrowful, clad himself and his younger brother Lysimachus all in black, and
in such sable suites discoursed his grief: But as the Hiena when she mournes
is most guilefull, (...) Valentine under the show of dolor shadowed his heart
full of contented thoughts: The Tiger though he hide his claws, will at last
discover his rapine: The Lions look are not the maps of his meaning, nor a
man's phisnomie the display of his secrets. Fire cannot be hid in straw, nor the
nature of a man so conceald, but at last it will have his course: nature and
art may do much, but that Natura naturans which by purgation is engraffed in
the heart, will be at last perforce predominant. Even thus and no otherwise
fared it with Valentine, for after a quarter of a years lamentation was ended,
he entered into consideration how he might extort from his younger brother the
substance bequeathed him by his father, if not defraud him utterly of his due,
yet make such hauock of his legacy, as it should be a great deal the lighter,
whereupon he began thus to meditate with himself.

Valentines meditation with himself.
NOw Valentine, love and fortune have brought thee into a Laborinth, thy
thoughts are like Ianus pictures, that present both peace and war, and thy
mind like Venus anuile, where is hammered both fear and hope. Since then the
chance lies in thy own choice, do not with Medea see and allow of the best,
and then follow the worst; but of two extremes, if they be Immediata, choose
that which may have least prejudice and most profit: entreat thy brother in
favors, and entertain him with love, so shall thou have thy conscience
clear, and thy renown excellent. Tush, what words are these, far unfit (if
thou be wise) for thy honor. What though thy father at his death talked many
friuolus matters, as one that doated for age, and raued in his sickness, shall
his words be so authentical, as thou will in observing them prejudice thy
self? No, no, sick men's will that are paroll, having no hand or seal, are
like the laws of a City written in dust, which are broken with the blast of
every wind. What man, thy father is dead, and he can neither help thy fortunes,
nor measure thy actions, therefore bury his words with his carcass, and be
wise for thy self: what, it is not so old as true, Non sapit, qui sibi non sapit
But unhappy Valentine, whither do thou roue? Do thy virtues increase like
the pace of a Crab, who creeps backward? Have thou in the cradle bin
continent, and will thou in the saddle be impudent? Now I see, that albeit
virtue has bridled thy youth with chaste thoughts, yet vanity has enchanted
thy years with fond resolutions, resembling the Nettle, which may be handled
in the bud, but stingeth in the flower: Art thou so well skild already in thy
fathers precepts, as that thou meanest to buy folly and cheapen repentance? Are
not we sons of one father, siens of one tree, birds of one nest? and will thou become so unnatural as to rob him, whom especially thou ought to
relieve? Did not thy father tell thee, that brothers amity is like the drops
of Balsamum, that salueth most dangerous sores? Did he exhort unto concord, and
will thou show thy self careless? Fie upon these frivolous words, which
rather then they should in such sort be prejudicial unto my prosperity, as
detain me from reigning sole Lord over all my fathers possessions, I would not
only in forswearing the remembrance of them, violate natural affection, but
with mine own hands work my utter confusion: for loath would I be deprived of
so triumphant an expectation.



In this humor Valentine left his Chamber, vowing the performance of these
devilish resolutions. Thus for two or three day^s being very pensive, and full
of many passions, it chanced that as he walked thus in his muses, fetching the
compass of his conceit beyond the Moon, he met with two beggarly fellows,
who as their custom was, began their Exordium with I pray good Master, and so
forth, hoping to find the Gentleman as liberal, as he was full of gracious
favors: neither did they miss of their imagination, for he thought them
likely to be drawn on to the execution of his purpose, conceipted thus, that
gold was as good as glue to knit them to any practice whatsoever, and therefore
out with his purse and grea^ed the^ in the hands with a brace of angels. This
unaccustomed reward made the^ more franck of courtesies, that every rag reached
the Gentleman a reverence, with promise o^ many prayers for his health. He that
harped on another string took ye men by the hands, and sitting down upon the
green grass, discourst unto them from point to point the beginning of his
sorrows, and how by no means (except by them) he could rest satisfied. The
beggars desirous to do the Gentleman any pleasure, said they were ready to
take any pains that might redound to his content, whereupon he replied thus.
Then my good friends, ye shall run into yonder town (pointing to Idomena)
making solemn exclamations that if present remedy be not adhibited, there will
be no question but that the destruction of a certain person in this wood will
be infallible, being sorely oppressed by a desperate russian: if ye can cunningly
and closely thus convey unto the officers the tenor of your minds, I will ^o
highly gratify you, as never afterward ye shall be found to exercise your old
occupation. These hell hounds gla^ of this large proffer, promised to venture
aioynt, but they would further him in his enterprise: whereupon he dispatched
them away, whose minds were so fixed on this liberal condition, that they be
stirred their stumps till they came unto the town: where notice of their
advertisement being taken, assisted by the Magistrate they made to ye wood: who
no sooner were come within the reach of Valentines eye, but puffing and
blowing, as though all would have split again, he posted unto them, charging
the^ upon their allegiance they bore to their sovereign Lord their King, that
they should not spare to execute the rigor of the law upon his brother, who
esteeming gold sufficient honor, became so deaf against my fathers
philosophical harmony, and made more value of profit then of virtue, as to
the end that he might strip me out of my possessions, came rushing in, and laid
such violent hands upon me, as had not the sight of your approaching hither
terrified his unnatural stratagem, he had ere this bereaved me of life.
Whereupon seeing his notorious villainy which so long lay hid in the ashes of
pretended simplicity, thus discovered, and after this sort detected, for his
better security betook himself to his heels, whom if you follow down
along this vale toward my house, he cannot possibly escape your hands.

Fortune that saw how Lysimachus valewed not her deity, but held her power in
scorn, thought to have about with him, and brought the matter to pass thus.
Lysimachus as his usual manner was, walked before his brothers house in a
valley between two high mountains (topt with trees of marvelous verdure,
whereby ran a fountain pleasant, as well for the murmur of the streams, as
for the sweetness of waters) with his Boare-speare upon his neck, where having
stricken a Dear, and but lightly hurt, he packed down by the grove in great
hasle expecting his fall: from whence he might epsy his brother accompanied
with a crew of armed men following him: amazed at this sight, as he stood
gazing, his nose on a sudden bled, which made him conjecture (as it was
indeed) that there was some dangerous event pretended. As soon as they were
come within his reach, Valentine commanded the officers without further
examination, to carry him to prison. Lysimachus smiling both at the envious
treachery, and cowardice of his brother, brookt all the injuries of fortune
with patience. Lying in prison all night, the next morning as soon as the day
brake, taking a Cytterne in his hand, he warbled out this mournful Sonnet.

Lysimachus Sonnet that he made in prison.
YOu restless cares companions of the night,
That wrap my joys in folds of endless woes,
Tire on my heart, and wound it with your spite.
Since Time and Fortune proves my utter foes.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Mourn heavens, mourn earth, your servant is forlorn,
Mourn times, and hours, since bale inuades by bower,
Curse every tongue, the place where I was borne,
Curse every thought, the life which makes me lowre.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my lays.
Yet drooping, and yet living to this death,
I sigh, I sue for pity at his at the Lord of hosts,
shrine,
Whose mighty power can quickly comfort breath,
And make my self thus not in woes to pine.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my lays.
Mean while my sighs yield truce unto my tears,
By them the winds increase and fiercely blow:
Yet when I sigh the grief more plain appears,
And by their force with greater power does glow.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my lays.
Fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest.
Having thus chaunted over his Sonnet, he heard the prison door open,
whereupon he grew passing melancholy, and not without cause, for the Iayler
certified him that the Burgomasters of the town were assembled in the common
hall, to hear how he could clear himself of the accusations which were laid
to his charge. At this Lysimachus taking heart of grace, being imboldned with
his innocence, he boldly went with the officers unto the hall, with whom (as
the nature of man is desirous of novelties) came a great prease of people to
hear the matter thoroughly canuased. When Lysimachus was thus brought before
the bar, Valentine his brother who had suborned these retchles roagues
solemnly to depose that they saw him preiudicially bent, began his inuectiue
thus.

I am sorry grave citizens and inhabitants of Idoniana, that this day I am come
to accuse my brother Lysimachus, whose virtues hitherto have won him many
favors and the outward show of his good qualities has been highly applauded
of all men: but my conscience constrains me, not to conceal such heinous
sin, and the rigor of the law charge me not to smother up so great an
offense without rebuke. This considered, I am forced to discover a wicked deed
that this Lysimachus has committed, and that is this. It chanced (as I walked
solitary down my woods to see if any of my Ewes and Lambs (as it is my
ordinary custom) were stragled down to the strond to browze on sea Iuie,
whereof they take especial delight to feed that my brother having concealed a
secret resolution of some desperate plot, and could no longer hide fire in the
flax, nor oil in the flame (for envy is like lightning that will appear in
the darkest fog) and seeing now opportunity answerable to the performance of a
mischief, thought best not to let it slip, but assaulted me with such
violence, redoubling his strokes with such courage, that had not the arrival
of the officers been speedy, my death had been sudden. For proof hereof,
these men pointing to the b^ggars) shall here before you all make present
deposition, and with that he reached them a Bible, whereon being sold unto
sin, and sworn to wickedness, they swore that Lysimachus was most
preiudicially bent. At which oath the people that were Jurors in the cause,
believing the protestations of Valentine, and the depositions of the roages,
presently found him guilty, and Valentine and the rest of the Burgomasters
gave wagement, that he should the next day at the Market place loose his head.
As soon as Lysimachus heard the censure, he appeald for no mercy, nor abasht
any whit, as one d^sirous of favor, but li^ting up his eyes to heaven, only
said thus.

O God, which see the secrets of all hearts, and know all things before
they come to pass, which discernest the very inward thoughts* and trie^t the
hearts and (...): Thou know that my brother has slandered me with (...) me,
whereof I was never guilty, that he has produced these (...) men by a
sinister subordination to periure themselves in a fault* when^^ not so much as
in thought, I committed such a fact* he has to satisfy his malicious mind
without cause devised this false crime. I confess O Lord my self to be a most
grievous offender, and to deserve far greater punishment* but not for this
dee^^. Hea^ then my prayer, and let the innocence of my case plead before thy
divine majesty: if it be thy will prevent his practices, confound his
counsels, and let him which has dug the pit for others, fall into the (...)
himself. Thou have never as (...) o Lord (...) the succourlesse without help,
but have delivered them which fear the^, from all adversity. No^ who has
trusted in thy mercy, which has come to mishap^ or who has (...) his hope in
thee, and has suffered harm? So o Lord if it be thy will, thou can disclose
the devise of this my brother Valentine, and unfold the follies of these false
witnesses, help thou o Lord, for in thee is my trust. The people bearing, the
salcu^^, (...) ^ations of (...) Lysimachus, thought he had spoken these words
to excuse his fault, but not that he was guiltless of the fact* giving more
credit to the speeches of Valentine, and is the oaths of the man countenanced
out by the Bourgomasters, then to the (...) of a young man, supposing his
speeches were more of custom to choke his follies, then of conscience to
clear himself of that crime, returned him back again to prison, till the
day assigned for his punishment. Where being deeply grieved, and yet
smothering his sorrows with patience, he lay the rest of the day. When night
was come, Fortune that was careful other champion began to smile, and brought
it so to pass, that as Lysimachus was walking up the battlements of the
Castle wherein he was prisoner, he espied from whence he might leap down
withouthurt, and so escape away with security. Glad of this as a man most
valiant, and trusting to his fortunes, courageously skipt down with little
prejudice, which being performed, he trudged amain to the sea shore, where
boording a Foist which by chance there lay at Ancour, he boised up Sail, as
having the winds somewhat benign, purposing thither to direct his course,
whither Fortune and Aeolus would conduct him, whom for a while we will leave,
and return again to Valentine.

The morrow was the day of punishment, and Valentine was so desirous to see the
execution performed, that he passed the night with little sleep: but as soon
as Phoebus had vayled the curtain of the night, and made Aurora blush with
giving her the Bezolas labras in her silver couch, he got him up, and dispatched
an officer to the Iaylor to produce his prisoner to execution, who returned him
this answer, Non est inuentus. This news drove Valentine into a great
melancholy, that presently he went to the Sheriffs, giving them to
understand of this information, whose hearts were so set on fire, that they
straight raised all the country, and made hue and cry after him. But
Lysimachus knowing full well the secret ways that led unto the sea coast,
stole away privily through a part of the Province of Mygdonia, and escaped
safe to the sea. Valentine seeing himself thus brought into a fools paradize,
despairing of his brothers recovery, as a man careless what should become of
him, took horse and rode home, where he trusted (seeing the stop was removed
which galled him to the quick) to end the current of his years in all
contented quietness: having heaued up to promotion those two vassailes of sin,
whose lamentable fortunes, together with the principal member, shall at large
hereafter be declared. These unexpected accidents compelled Lysimachus to leave
his native country Macedonia, and in forrei^^ places to purchase more
favorable fortunes, with whom, we will now begin.

Lysimachus having for the space of three or four days sailed without
descrying land, sole Lord over the vessel, as having none to comfort him, at
last he might discover the coast of Thessalia whereon (as a man joyful of
land) he was cast: upon which ^^stening the Prince, he chanced on (...) that
led into the chick of a Forest, where wandering without meat, he was almost
famished, at last hunger growing on so extreme, like a mad man he ranged up
and down the woods, seeking to encounter some wild beast with a Iauelin which
he made at his entrance into the chick^^. He had not gone far, but he espied a
Shepherd, desirous therefore to be relieved by his favors, he saluted him
thus. Shepherd, for so far thy attire warrants me: courteous, for so much thy
countenance imports: if a distressed person whom fortune has wronged, and the
seas have favored (if I may count it favor to live and want) may without
offense crave so far aid, as to know some place where to rest my weary and
weather-beaten bones, thanks thou shall have as thy due, and more thou can
not have, for my abilities deny me to perform a deeper debt. But if any ways
it please thee to command me, use me as far as the power of a poor Gentleman
will stretch. The Shepherd hearing him speak so gravely, made him this
answer. Stranger, your degree I know not, therefore pardon if I give less
title then your estate meriteth: Fortunes frowns are Princes fortunes, and
Kings are subject to chance and destiny. Mishap is to be salued with pity,
not with scorn, and we that are fortunes darlings are bound to relieve them
that are in distress: therefore follow me, and you shall have such succor as
a Shepherd may afford. Lysimachus was passing glad and Procyon (for so was
the Shepherds name) led the way, who being desirous to infer some occasion of
parley, began his prattle thus. If thou be a man of such worth as I value thee
by thy exterior lineaments, make discourse unto me what is the cause of thy
pre^^nt misfortunes, for by the furrows in thy face thou seem to be crossed
with mishaps: but whatsoever or whosoever, let me crave that favor to hear
the tragic cause of thy estate. Lysimachus seeing by the Shepherds looks
that he was desirous to hear the discourse of his fortunes, briefly shaped him
this reply. In that your looks sees my grief, and your thoughts pity my
woes, my tongue shall give you thanks (the bounty of sorrows tennant) and my
heart pray that the gods may be as friendly to your flocks, as you are
favorable unto me. How I arrived here gentle Shepherd inquire not, least it
be tedious for thee to hear it, and a double grief for me to rehearse it.
Procyon not willing to occasionate offense, as having affection pourtrayed in
his visage, he conveyed him home to his house, as soon as he was arrived
there, he began at the door to entertain him thus. Sir, this is my cottage
wherein I live content, and your lodging, where (please it you) you may rest
quiet. I have no rich clothes of Aegipt to cover the walls, nor store of plate
to discover any wealth, for Shepherds use neither to be proud nor covetous.
You shall find here cheese and milk for dainties, and wool for clothing, in
every corner of the house Content sitting smiling, and tempering every homely
thing with a welcome: this if you can brook and accept of ^as allow the
meanest hospitality) you shall have such fare as Philemon and Baucis gave to
Iuppiter. Lysimachus thankt him heartily, and going into his house found what he
promised. After that he had sat a little by the fire and w^ll warmed him, he
went to supper, where Lysimachus fed well, as one whom the sea had made
hungry, and so plied his teeth that all supper he spoke not one word. After he
had taken his repast, Procyon seeing him weary, and that sleep chimed on to
rest, let him see his lodging, and so gave him the good night.

The Sun was no sooner the next morning stepped from the bed of Aurora but the
Shepherd got him up and went to his ^olds, where letting forth his sheep,
after he had espied where they should graze, he returned home, and looking when
his guest should rise, having slept in the last night, went roundly to his
breakefast: by that time he had ended his de suine, Lysimachus was gotten up,
against whose rising Od^^sa Procyons wife had shown her cookerie, and the
Shepherd tired in his russet iacket, no sooner had espied his guest coming
out of his Chamber but bade him good morrow, with a look not so much unfeigned
as affectionate: whom after breakefast was ended, Procyon led forth to see his
folds, plodding thus over the green fields, at last they came to the
mountains where his flocks grazed, and there he discoursed unto him the
pleasures of a country life, thus Did you but (Sir) live a while in this
condition, you would say the Court were rather a place of sorrow then of
solace. Here shall not fortune thwart you, but in mean misfortunes, as the
loss of a few Sheep, which as it breeds beggerie, so it can be no extreme
prejudice, the next year may mend all with a fresh increase. We drink without
suspicion, and sleep without care, envy stirs not us, we covet not to
climb, our desires m^unt not above our degrees, nor our thoughts ab^ue our
fortunes. Care (as I (...)) cannot harbor in our co^^ages, nor do our homely
couches know broken slumbers: as we ^xceede not ^ll diet, so we have enough to
satisfy. The Shepherd made Lysimachus so much in love with the country life,
that every day he led forth his flocks with such delight, that he held his
exile happy, and thought no content to the bliss of a country cottage.

Lysimachus using thus daily with bag and bottle to go a field in more
pleasant content of mind then ever he was in his own country with Valentine
his brother, it chanced on a day being enforced by the heat of the Sun to
seek for shelter, as he sat under the shadow of Limon trees, fortune (who is
like she Camelion) variable with every object, and constant in nothing but in
inconstancy, thought to make him a mirror of mutabilitie, and therefore still
crossed him contrarily. Thinking to recover his cottage, it fell out that
certain rascals (who after they had forraged in the Thessalian confines)
espying Lysimachus, and taking a general survey of his extraordinary
lineaments, thought that he was very like for the performance of some bold
attempt, and in time of necessity no small assistance unto their enterprises:
whereupon thus resolved, they came rushing in, and laid violent hands upon him,
who seeing that all hope of liberty should be taken away if he yielded,
thought rather to die in his own defense, then any way be deprived of such an
especial privilege, and therefore dealt such blows amongst them with his
weapon, as he did witness well upon their carcases that he was no coward. But
as ne Hercules quidem contra duos, so Lysimachus could not resist a multitude,
having none to second him: so that he was not only bat^ed, but sore wounded,
and to be brief perforce hoysed a Ship-boord, where for the space of a day or
two being with the Pirates carried into the huge Ocean, at length the Fates
sitting down in their Sinode to make Lysimachus happy, ordered so the matter,
that inaugre their beards (by a tempest which suddenly arose) they were cast
again upon the borders of Thessalia. This adverse wind fatally sent for the
purchasing of Lysimachus enfranchisement continued thus contrary three
months, the violence whereof, with the strange accidents that during the
continuance thereof befell, I refer to the Annals of the Thessalians, which
dilate not a little of it. These Pirates thus by a stormy constreint being
sore against their wills compelled to lie quiet at rode, at length through long
continuance necessity began to have eminency, swaying all things with a
cheek, and constraining them as tributorie to yield the soueraignetie unto her
supremacy. Whilst thus they were taxed with want, they bethought themselves
how that the present season exacted a warm coat, and a hot chimney* and
therefore deemed it not vnbehoucable, if by the diligence of two or three, that
want might be supplied. Which being concluded, our weather beaten soldier
Lysimachus was enjoined (seeming that way desirous) to add in that exploit his
indulge^ce: who putting up all abuses with patience by the outward appearance,
seemed so content with that present condition, as that little mistrust of
revenge in him was perceived. Well, being come into the wood, Lysimachus
thinking it hie time to put in: trial the assay of his redemption, heaued up a
forres^ bill which he had on his neck, and the first he stroke, had never after
more need of the Physician, charging his blows with such magnanimi^ie, that
the slaves were amazed at his valor, so yt in short time he had slain two, and
left the third in such sor^ sore wounded, as that there was none or very little
hope of his recovery. Having rid his hands of these his welwillers, he had not
so much care of executing his iniunction, as he had of escaping away with
safety, which as he performed with great diligence, so it wrought his future
contented happiness. The Pirates after long expectation waited (but all in
vain) for the return of their adherents, whom when they perceived that every
hour they were more slack in hastening homewards, misdoubted (and not amiss)
least some unexpected casualtie might befall them, which when by their arrival
in that place they found true, seeing Lysimachus was absent, imagined that
through his means these horrible deeds were brought to pass, but not daring
to make pursuit after him, for fear of leaping over the shoes in
transgressions, they rested patient, bearing unto their galley three dead
carkases (for by this time the suruiuer had yielded nature her due) to
solemnize their funerals with a watrie burial: what afterward betead of the^
I cease to relate, in that I neither esteem the persons, nor value their
actions.

By this time Lysimachus was come within the view of his host Procyons cottage,
unto which he made with such celeritie, as the recovery thereof was speedy:
being entered, he found the Shepherd and his wife at dinner, whom after this
manner he saluted. Gentle Shepherd, and courteous, tempered with the beauty
of affability, and the lineaments of thy face graced with the favors of
clemency, as many good fortunes to you and your wife, as your selves can desire
or imagine. Procyon hearing one so superfine, looking backward perceived that it
was his guest Lysimachus, whom (suddenly rising from the table) he entertained
with as many favors, as he tolerated his absence with dolours, whereupon he
took him by the hand, and bade him welcome, willing him to sit down in his
place, and in his room not only to eat his fill, but as Lord of the house to
think himself welcome: well, ^o be short, he fell eagerly to his victuals,
and feasted himself with such cates as they had. As soon as he had victualled
the camp, the Shepherd and his wife were desirous to hear what hard fortune
compelled him to be so long absent, requested Lysimachus to discourse (if it
were not any ways prejudicial unto him) the cause of his so long
discontinuance. Lysimachus (desirous to satisfy the courtesy of his favorable
host, first beginning his E^ordium with a volee of fighes, and a few
lukewarm tears) prosecuted his discourse, and thoroughly informed them of
his misfortunes, how as he was sitting under a covert most pleasantly
situated, which with the thicknes of the boughs so shadowed the ^lace, that
Phoebus could not pry into that arbor, so vnite^ were the tops of so thick a
closure, that Venus there in her iollitie might have ^allied unseen with her
dearest paramour. Fast by to make she place more gorgeous, was there a Font, so
Christaline and clear, that it seemed Diana with her Driades and Hemadriades
had that spring as the secret of their bathings. In this glorious arbor (I
say) as I sat, it chanced that certain rascals coming a bootehailing into
those parts discovered me, being discovered, haled me on ship-boord, whither
being haled, I had iourneyed with them had not the winds in being more
favorable forbad our course with their prosperous opposition. Lying thus still
(quoth he) two months, at length necessity grew powerful amongst us, which
willed us with labor to supply those things that else by propagation would be
perilous, whereupon my self with three more being charged to undergo this
enterprise, I supposed it not amiss being in a desert place, if I made hay
while the Sun shined, and took opportunity by the forelocks, and thereupon
betook my self to my weapon, minding in this resolution either to escape away
with safety, or valiantly to die immediately, rather then I would be returned
back and kept in such servile subjection, as though I were the son of some
country vass^ile, from whom as you see I am delivered, and that with little
prejudice. When Procyon heard this he fell on the neck of Lysimachus, being
exceeding joyful for his safe arrival, being thereto moved by reason that
(for sundry virtues which he (...) shine in his honest simplicity) he loved
him exceedingly, and took an intimate delight in his company: wherefore with
these words of true friendship he did embrace him.

Lysimachus, let not thy brothers unkindness which thou have felt, the
inclemencie of thy kin that I doubt hereafter ^hou shall find, nor the
miseries whatsoever thou have either passed, or do endure, further appale
thy spirit, then may be recovered by thy friends comfort. Thou know how
dearly I have held thee, and what care ever since thy first sight I received
of thy well doing, I had rather in action make known my love, then in words
but weary thy hearing: and albeit my abillitie cannot counteruaile my desire,
yet in affection I will not be wanting any ways unto you. Lysimachus in a
sudden passion surprised with this rare piece of friendship, after the
recovery of a little trance, yielded him most humble thanks: adding moreover,
that if ever fortune tied her favors in the top of his crest, he would not
wound the remembrance of these his extraordinary courtesies with oblivion.

Resting thus in the house with the shepherd, to avoid tedious conceits, he
framed himself so to country labors, that he often times would lead the
flocks to the field himself, and being dressed in homely attire, seemed like
amorous Paris courting Oenone. Near to this place dwelt the aboue-named
Gentleman Syllanus, of great worship, greater possessions, but of greatest
perfections, so that it was doubted, whether he was more indebted to his
parents for petigree, to nurture for piety, or to fortune for prosperity, yet
most chiefly he thought himself beholden to Nature, that had in his decaying
years, and decrepit old age, bestowed on him so precious a pearl and dear
jewel as his young daughter Varrona, admired at that time as the only Paragon
and Phoenix of Thessalia: which thing this good old sire perceiving, made him
as careful to breed her, as joyful that she was borne, thinking within
himself that as she was notable for her beauty, so should she be noted for
her honesty: and seeing Nature had invested her with so pleasing a personage,
Nurture should not deny her as plausible behavior, and that she should be as
sweet in manners, as seemly in making, which through his diligent performance
afterward came to pass.

This Varrona was the very picture and pattern of incomparable comeliness,
the perfect piece in whom nature played her prize against art, and in whom
her silent oratorie pleaded both for prick and price. This Paragon seemed to
surpass the perfection of the rest amongst whom she was sorted, and amongst
whom she shined as an orient pearl opposite to pebles, or Cynthias golden
beams obscuring the twinkling stars: None erst looked on her, but loved
her. Her stature was tall, and her golden wiered tresses wherewith her comely
head abounded, were infolded with Unions and Ouches, with Diamonds and
Chrysolites, saving some lawless locks amongst the rest hung loosely adoring
her temples, being all prettily frisled, crisped, and tusked.

In her high forehead wherein no wrinckle appeared* Cupid had placed his Iuorie
Bow, on which her i^tlie eys-browes resembled Venus. beautified by the near
opposition of her black bearded Vulcan. What shall I stand in describing her
eyes, those celestial lamps, or her cheeks like damask roses sprinkled with
morning deaw? in whose dimples were the Graces dwellings? What shall I recount
her coral, dainty chinne, and allablaster neck? each part deserved praise,
each member admiration. In sweet eloquence she resembled Cornelia: her looks
were cheerful, yet chaste: merry, yet modest: courteous, not contemptuous.
Hercules Gallus had all men's ears linked in the chain which he held in his
hand, but Varrona held both their ears, tongues, and hearts, all men pratled
of her, all praised her. First, gazed they at the heavenly hew of her
beauty, then at the excellency of her bravery, then wondered they at the
rareness of her courtesy, then they admired her passing good graces, then
were they amazed at the specialitie of her fine behavior, the^ the twinkling
of her eyes did so dim their lesser lights, that they could neither sustain
to behold her, or abstain from beholding her. This Uirgin, or rather Goddess,
every day used to view the plains wherein her fathers sheep were kept (as it
has been already mentioned) in a skarlet peticoate, defending her face from
the heat of the Sun, with no other veil, but with a garland made of boughs
and flowers: which attire became her so gallantly, as that she seemed to be the
Goddess Flora her self for beauty. On a day as Lysimachus sat amongst the
shrubs, by chance fixing his eyes on the glorious object of her face, he noted
her tre^ies in such sort, that whereas heretofore he was a contemner of Venus,
was now by the wily shaft of Cupid so entangled in the perfection and
beauteous excellency of Varrona, as now he swore no benign Planet but Venus,
no God but Cupid, no exquisite Deity but Love.

Being thus fettered with the pliant persuasions of fancy, impatient in his
new affections, as the horse that never before felt the spur, he could not
bridle his new conceived amors, but before he came to Procyons house where
daily he did continue, he endured such a Metamorphosis in his mind, that he was
constrained to cross himself with these or the like contrarieties.

But stay: what new motions are these Lysimachus? what heavy conceits, what
dumpish thoughts possess thee? what strange and unacquainted fits disquiet
thee? what fury, what fiend torments thee? by whom, where, when did it come
Lysimachus? Ah Varrona, Varrona, heavenly Varrona, and nothing but Varrona!
why how now? have thou so long escaped the snares of beauty, and must thou now
taste of the bait? have thou gazed on so many faces, and none but this could
fit thy fancy? accompanied heretofore so many gallants, yet none could please
thee? descried so many behauiours, viewed so many virtues, and none could
delight thee, none could entice thee? yea but stay Lysimachus, run not too
fast, least thou loose thy breath: wade not too far since thou art sure to
sink: yield not to love, as thou love thy life: kill it in the root, or
break it in the bud, beware of the blossom, as thou tenderest thy safety.
Thou have been always accounted the despiser of fancy, and will thou now be
noted the desirer of beauty? thou which have trod Venus under thy feet, will thou wrap therein thy heart? erst rejecting them as sluttish rags, and now
regarding them as the garments of a Goddess? But Varrona, Oh sweet Varrona,
the very pattern of Virtue, beauties lively grace, the only Idea of Jupiters
dream, and paragon of natures perfection.

By this time he was come home, and casting himself immediately on his bed, on
a suddein started as one in an ecstasy, surprised with the notable view of some
rare singularity, or drowned as it were in a deep sea of surpassing delight,
and wholly contemplating the substance of Varrona, which he already most
curiously had shadowed in his heart, he began to fall into a slumber, but love
impatient of delays and controlment, bestowed a sharp arrow upon him to
aggrauate his sore that already was incurable, which made him with a new
supply redouble his griefs, with this passionate part.

I see there is no stopping of the stream, but to force the greater flowing:
no killing the vine by cuting it: the repressing of Cupids rage, is the more to
kindle affection. Ah cursed Cupid, ah unjust dieitie, the restrainer of
liberty, the master of folly, the overthrow of honesty, a ruin of youth,
an arch nemie to the whole world: have thou none to prick, none to poison, but
poor Lysimachus? then would I he were not Lysimachus, or else as he has been
Lysimachus. But alas must I needs shake hands with liberty, and bid freedom
farewell, must my quiet weal become a malecontented war? must my pleasures
be passions, my songs sighs and sobs, my mirth melancholy, my moderate
thoughts amorous conceits? Then farewell discretion where desire diuelleth:
farewell wit, if will bear sway: and farewell counsel, if love be the
Lawier. But why do thou argue with love; seeing thou have not thy love?
assay rather to enjoy thy love, so that any t^ay thou (...) ease thy love. Ah
but whom do I love? Varrona, easy to be won if she were not Varrona. But
unfortunate Lysimachus, if he win not Varrona: yea but what hope can thou
have of her amity, with whom as yet thou have no acquaintance? Cease
therefore to furmise that which surpasses thy sense, die rather with desire
then live for disgrace, for well may thou love Varrona, but never be liked of
Varrona.

Lysimachus having thus tented his wound, and finding the hurt so desperate,
yielded his maimed mind as a patient to be cured by Varronas only mercy:
persuading himself that there was none so dainty, none so lofty, and none so
cruel, but loyalty with constancy might make them courteous. Houering in this
hope he began to take heart a grace, assuring himself almost of that gain
that was not so lightly gained, but when he mustered in his conceits how
Varrona was descended, how women's ears are not their tuchstones, but their
eyes, and how a dr^m of honor weighs down a pound of wit, how their hearts
reaches to the pulses of their hands, and let a man rub that with gold, and
it is hard but they will prove his hearts gold, he was presently driven into
such dampes, and being as it were in a laborinth of thoughts, was feign to
cease thinking. At the last coming to himself, he took it not amiss, if the
next day he walked abroad to see if the fields would further his desires, or
minister some matter to mittigate his malady: but coming into the air, the
ag^e of loves disease began to sha^e him afresh, and made him sometimes hot,
sometimes cold, sometimes in hope, and sometimes in fear; and thus at every
step in a contrary thought, he heard the Nightingale record in her song as he
surmised his passionate sorrows, and applying his tune to her note, he began
to bear his part.

Should I accuse mine eyes that boldly gazed
On that fair object not to be obtained?
Or, blame the worth in Europe wonder blazed,
That them to look, and me to love constrained?
Eyes for excuse allege prevailing reason,
Heart in extremes on fancies wrong exclaimed:
Hopes Sun shine clowded like obscurest season,
Yields to despair, at my misfortunes aimed.
Nature too lavish, outward graces planted,
Virtue too friendly, inward bounties sowed,
Yet those fair eyes of courteous looks are scanted,
And Angels hue on tigers thoughts bestowed.
Tush, love with griefs which did oppress me fore
Is cause, that I my death like life deplore.
When Lysimachus had warbled out those words, and wrested the confideration of
Varronas disposition Venus willing to bestow upon him the benefit of that
frie^dly aspect, which he most desired, ordered so the matter yt Varrona
according to her usual manner did frequent the leas wherein her fathers sheep
grazed, who with two other damosells sat under the side of an hill, making a
garland of such homely flowers as the fildes did afford. This sight so revived
his spirits that he drew nigh, with more judgment to take a view of her
singular perfection, which he found to be such, as in that country attire she
stained all the country dames of Thessalia: while thus he stood gazing with
piercing looks on her surpassing beauty, Varrona cast her eye aside, and
espied Lysimachus, as yet altogether unknown unto her, which sudden sight
made her to blush, and to die her crystal cheeks with a vermilion red, which
gave her such a grace as that she seemed far more beautiful. And with that
rising up, Lysimachus, (that could well skill to court all kind of degrees,
least he might then be thought to have little manners) encountered them thus.

Ladies believe me, love is of more force then wars, and the looks of women
pierce deeper then the stroke of the lance, there is no Curtlax so keen, but
armor of high proof can withstand: but beauties arrows are so sharp, and the
darts that fly from women's eyes are so piercing, as the Corslet tempered by
Vulcan for Didoes paramour, hold^ not out the violence of their strokes. The
gods tremble when Mars shakes his lance, but he fears when Venus casts a
frown. Alexander never took notice of the legions of his enemies, but he
stood frighted at the beauty of the Amazon. Then sweet saints of Thessalia,
marvel not if I were driven into a maze at the sight of such beauteous
creatures, whose faces are Venus weapons wherewith she checketh the pride of
ouer-daring warriors. I cannot (Ladies) court it as your gallant yongsters,
that tie their wits-to their fancies, nor fill your ears with amorous
discourses, as Cupids apprentices, that spend their time in such loving
philosophy. Nor can I feign conceited supposes of affection, to prove my
self loue-sicke by poetry, but as a blunt shepherd new come from the folds,
I offer my self a devout servant to your beauties, swearing to defend your
honors against all men with the hazard of my blood, and in pawn thereof,
generally to you all, but specially to one (as love has his unity) I desire
to be entertained as a dutiful servant to the Lady Varrona. Lysimachus having
thus boldly boorded these lovely virgin, the Ladies seeing with what affection
he offered his service to Varrona, began to bite the lip, and she to blush, who
seeing her self touched to the quick, made this answer.

I know not (shepherd) how to answer of love, because as yet I never knew
love: ignorant of his forces, because never acquainted with his fortunes. Vesta
forbids us virgins to name Venus* as they of Ephesus hateful Erostratus. Diana
deeles not in Paphos, nor suffers she any of her maidens to hunt in Erecynus,
least meeting with Venus meacocks, they skip with Calisto, and so seek after
loss. The less you are private the loves passions, the more welcome to our
presence: for rather had we fill our ears with shepherds sonnets, then with
(...), and sweeter are the tears that grow from the loss of a few sheep,
then a smile from a comicke tale of fancy, For your service (gentle swain)
finding my self unworthy, I crave pardon, but if it please you to be accepted
as a worthy Shepherd, and my fathers friend, look for such favor as my
honor and virginity can afford.

Lysimachus hearing the plausible answer of Varrona, although her first
infirmation seemed to answer for his purpose, as preferring the lawnes of
Diana, and fires of Vesta, before loves holy temples, yet she concluded so
sweetly as might stand with the modesty of her honor, he therefore made thus
his reply. In that Madame we are but nouices in love, the simpler are our
thoughts, and the nearer should be the simpathie of our affections. Doves match
when they are young, ^ens are graffed when they are sprigs, the one part not but
by death, nor are the other severed but they perish. Shepherds are like
Uirgins, the one striving to live virtuous, the other to die patiently, both
enemies to love, while they wait on those which brook not love, I mean
labor, and Vesta. But both must love, as having hearts, and thoughts, eyes to
see beauty, and ears to judge of virtue: I Madame, while I thought none
greater then Pan, was vowed to Pan, but seeing women's wits are more powerful
then he, I have resigned over my fortunes at his shrine, and mean to make
proof of the sweetness of love: glad that in my first entrance I have the
patronage of your gracious favor, armed with the which, Mars well may frown,
but not conquer. But sir, (quoth Varrona) I granted any favor to Lysimachus
the Shepherd, not to Lysimachus the lover. And so (Madame quoth he) I accept
of it, for I am a Shepherd to do you service, and a lover despite of my
self. Varrona being a Lady of passing merry disposition, hearing him thus to
reason prettily, thought to sift him in this manner. I see well (Shepherd)
that as women have their favors, so men have their sayings, the one prodigal
in gruess, the other politic in deceits, being as cunning to dissemble love,
as we charie to discharge love. We thought to have found you a flat Shepherd,
as ignorant in loves, as we of fancies, but how closely soever you cover the
flame, the fire will be known by the sinoake. For your talk so favors of
loves principles, as we judge you are as cunning in faining a passion, as in
folding sheep, and can as soon deceive a woman with a pen, as add a cure to
a diseased lamb. This will make us to take you for a day friend, and what we
like in you present, to disalow to morrow, swearing if you bring amongst us
Venus roses, we will beat you with Vestaes nettles: and therefore if you will
be admitted as our Shepherd, we either forbid you to say no more of love, or
else you shall be out of our favors. If ( Varrona) said he, thou had
enjoined me as Juno did to Hercules most dangerous labors* I would have
discovered my love by obedience, and my affection by death: with that pulling
forth his Pipe, began after some melody to carroll this Madrigall.

What are my Sheep without their woonted food?
What my life except I gain my love?
My Sheep consume, and faint for want of blood,
My life is lost, unless I grace approve.
No flower that saplesse thriues.
No turtle without pheare.
The day without the Sun does lowre for woe,
Then woe mine eyes unless they beawtie see,
My Sun Varro^^^ eyes, by whom I know
Wherein delight consists, where pleasures be.
Naught more the heart reuiues,
Then to embrace his dear.
The stairs from earthly humors gain their light,
Our humors by their light possess their power:
Varronas eyes fed by my weeping sight,
Infudes my pains or joys, by smile or lower.
So wends the source of love,
It feeds, it fails, it ends.
Kind looks, clear to your joy, behold her eyes,
Admire her heart, desire to taste her kisses:
In them the heaven of joy, and solace lies,
Without them every hope his succor misses.
Oh how I love to prove,
Whereto this solace tends.
Scarce had the Shepherd ended this Madrigale, but Varrona began to frown,
saying, he had broken promise. Lysimachus alleged if he uttered any passion,
it was sung, not said. Thus these two in an humorous descant of their pra^tie,
espied a far off other Shepherds coming toward them, so that he leaving
the Gentlewomen, taking his leave friendly of them all, but specially with a
pitiful glancing look toward Varrona, as craving some favor for his
farewell, he stole to his Sheep, and the damsels incontinently went home, who
by the way recalled to mind the proportion of Lysimachus, his not vulgar
behavior, adding besides that his gate was more stately then ordinary
Shepherds: moreover, a kind of majesty that remained in his looks, the
seemelines of which did so shine far above the rest, that all Thessalia
supposed that he was Coridon, or one more fine then Coridon, sweet Phyllis her
good man. When Varrona was come home, she took leave for a while of her two
friends, and stealing into her closet, she began to remember the divine
perfection of the Shepherd. Cupid waiting to spy this Uestall at advantage,
seeing her half at discouert, unloosed a shaft, headed with desire, and
feathered with conceit, which piercing the tender breast of this young maiden, he
made her shrink at the blow, and so breath out this complaint.

Ay me, now I see, and sorrowing sigh to see, that Dianas laurels, are
harbourers of Venus doves, tha^ there trace as well through the lawns, wantons,
as chaste ones, that Calisto be she never so charie will cast an amorous eye at
courting love, that Diana her self will change her shape, but she will not
honor love in a shadow: maidens ries, be they as hard as diamonds, yet Cupid
has drugs to make them more pliable then ware. See Varrona how fortune and
love have interleagued themselves to be thy foes, and to make thee their
subject or else their object, have inueigled thy sight, with a most glorious
object. Of late thou heldst Venus for a giglet, not a Goddess, now thou shall
be forced to sue suppli^^^ to her deity: Cupid was a boy and blind, but alas
his eye had aim enough to pierce thee to the heart. I have heard them say,
that love looks not at low cottages, that Venus iets in robes, and not in
rags, that her son flies so high, as that he scorns to which poverty with
his (...). Tush Varrona the s^are (...) tales, and neither (...) all precept^,
no (...) once (...) thee, that peta^^^ have their (...) as well as Princes:
that swains, as they have there labors, so have they their amors, and love
lurkes as soon about a shaeycoate as a palace. And for those dames that are
like Diana, that affect Jove in no shape, but in a shewer of gold, I wish them
(...) with much wealth and little wit, that the want of the (...) blemish the
abundance of the other. It (...) stain the (...) shepherds life to set the
end of passions upon pelf. Loves (...) look not so low as gold, there are no
fees to be paid in Cupids courts, and in elder times the shepherds love gifts
were apples and chestnuts, and their desires were loyal, and their thoughts
constant. As she was thus bevating the passions of her mind, one or her
acquaintance interrupted her disquiet with his approach from the Duke her
father presently to come to him; where for a while I will leave her, and
return again to tell you how the matter stood with Lysimachus.

Such was the inconstant sorrows that he sustained to think on the wit and
beauty of Varrona, as that he began to loose his wo^ted appetite, to look
(...) and (...) in stead of or mirth, to feed on melancholy: for country
meriments; to use cold dumps. In so much that not only Procyon and his wife
Odrisa, but all the whole village began to marvel at his sudden alteration*
thinking that some lingering sickness had brought him to this state. Wherefore
they caused Physicians to come, but Lysimachus heither would let them minister,
nor so much as suffer them to see his urine: but remained still so oppressed
with passions, as he feared in him self a further inconvenience. His poverty
wished him to cease from such follies, but love forced him to follow (...),
yea and in despite of poverty, (...) the conque^^ ^ so that her (...) desires
caused him ^o find new (...). For he (...) his chamber, there he began to put
down the passions of his pen to this effect.

To the chas^ost Varrona continual health.
MAdame, whether (...) our beauty, or the virtue of your behavior has a
(...) my loves affecti^^ (...), I leave it to your sweetest sense to
conjecture. But this I feel (although (...) ^ummed in every part) that some
strange accident has taken possession in the chiefest part of my heart, vowing
there to (...) he has conquered (...) of mind, and sworn their (...) do
(...) to your self, as their right sovereign, and true mistress. Although I
denied him not the alleagence of a most loving and faithful subject, yet such
was his rigorous justice (...) upon me, that I should not enjoy my (...), and
wounding my thoughts with the piercing (...) of your heavenly (...), restored
my conceited in this gi^es of best liking permiting me to live, only to think
on you. The bondage of my slavery did not so greatly dislike me, as the
beholding of young beauty did every way delight me: neither the straightness
of my fetters did put me to so great pain, as the rememberance of my thought
did procure my displeasure. As honor Varrona is it then a prison? nay a
paradise: to serve Varrona is it captivity? nay rather a heavenly bravery.
Content (quoth I) I like, I love, I honor Varrona. I feed, I hue, I die for
Varrona.

Your loving captive and true subject, Lysimachus.


When Lysimachus had written out his passionate fancies he carried the paper to
the messenger, which he for that purpose had prepared, desiring him to use the
best regard in delivery of it, wishing him not to present his mistress
therewith until he saw her in some pleasent vain, for he was in great fear
least Varrona would rather rend then read it. Toxeus (for so the messenger was
called) expecting opportunity, espied a time as he thought most convenient,
Varrona and two or three Gentlemen merrily discoursing of amorous phylosophie,
this messenger almost marueiling to see her so pleasant, thought it now the
fittest time to make delivery of his message, gave her Lysimachus letter, who
perusing it to the first period, perceived the practice of all, and beautifying
her face with modest blushing, was half angry with Toxeus that he made
himself messenger of so vain a matter, yet considering it came from that
worthy shepherd, she vouchsafed it, and wished the messenger in the evening
to come for an answer. Varrona immediately upon her man Toxeus departure
perused it a thousand times, and a thousand times kissed it, till at last
wrapping it in a white silk scarf, she gave it a place amongst her jewels of
price: very glad therefore that Lysimachus had given the onset, she determined
to counterbuffe him in this manner.

Varrona to Lysimachus health.
WHen I read (kind Lysimachus) thy Letters, and spied thy loves, I blushed at
mine own thoughts, and sorrowed at thy fortunes. I search not the cause of thy
love, for it suffices me thou do love, if it lay in me, either to grant thy
desire, or satisfy thy passions. Thy comeliness (Lysimachus) knockes at the
closet of my heart, thy exquisitie feature sue for their masters liberty: thy
loyalty enters pele mele with my thoughts, and gives a sore assault to my
settled resolution: all these put in their pleas, do purchase favor for young
Lysimachus. But Vesta, hard hearted Vesta, that makes her virgins pliant to her
own properties, commands that I shut mine ears against such alluring Syren^
I count my self greatly favored with the love of so worthy a swain, and
over will Varrona covet to prooueds thankful, as he affectionate: only in
love pardon me, for that I never mean to fall into that predicament. Wade not
therefore where the foord has no footing, bark not with the wolves of Syria
against the Moon, look not to climb to Olympus, way not at impossibilities,
but pacific that with patience, which thou can not obtain being passionate.
If thou think these denialls be but words of course, and perswadest thy
self that women will be first coy, and then courteous, as the marble that
drops of rain do piere, thou shall (sweet heart) deeply deceive thy self,
and highly wrong me. In a word, I wish quiet to thy thoughts, and an end to thy
loves.

Thine ever but in love, Varrona.


Varrona having thus ended her letter, she delivered it to Toxeus, who sending
him speedely to Lysimachus lodging, (...) him very melancholy, and all God w^t
was about Varrona. Lysimachus having received the letter, entered into his
Chamber, and read the contents. No sooner had he viewed and reuiewed over her
cruel determination, but in a great ecstasy of mind he cried out ( Dulcior
est mors quam amor:) and with that slinging out of his Chamber, he fell into
bitter, and extreme sorrows. Procyon grieuing at his friends hard fortune,
sought with plausible persuasions to appease his furious melancholy, wishing
him whatsoever Varrona wrote, still to think her a woman, that would one while
thrust out fancy with a finger, and straight entertain love as a friend: that
either time, or his constancy would make her stoop to the lure of his
desires. Thus sought the Shepherd to wrest him from his passions; but in
vain, for her answers confirmed with such perswas^^e determinations so
quietted the conceit of his hope, that going melancholy to his bed, love left
him to his quiet slumbers which were not long, for as soon as Phoebus shaking
his deawie locks on the mountains, had posted from the watery cabin of
Nereus, summoning plow swames to their handie labor, Lysimachus rose, and with
Procyon went into the fields, where unfolding their Sheep, they sat them
down vn^e^ on Olive tree, both of them diversely affected, Lysimachus ioying in
the excellency of Varrona, and Procyon sorrowing for the griefs which
Lysimachus sustained, not quiet in thought till he might hear of his health.
As thus both of them sat in their (...) they might epsy where Varrona with
her two Gentlewomen tript amongst the lawnes. At this sudden spectacle, as a
man metamorphosed, he lightly sprang from the groand, desiring to salute the
sole mistres of his thoughts: wherefore willing the Shepherd to expect his
return, he bo^ded her with this kind of greeting; giving her likewise the
Boniorno thus.

Gentle Nymph, all hayle, and as prosperous be you in your enterprises, as you
happy in content. If I be blunt in discovering my affections, and
(...)loquence in ^uelling out my loves, I appeal to the (...) of verity which
moweth no subtili^^e^, to (...) my self therefore (...) your (...), with (...)
and (...) Varrona, that before I saw you I knew not loves cumber, but held
affection as a toy, not as a malady, using fancy as the Hiperborej do their
flowers, which they wear in their bosoms all day, and cast them into the fire
for fuel at night. I liked all, because I loved none, and who was most fair,
on her I fed mine eyes, but as charilie as the Be, that as soon as she has
sucked honey from the Rose, straight flies to the Marigold. Living thus at my
own list, I wondered at such as were in love, and when I read their passions, I
took them only for poems that flowed from the quicknes of their wit, not the
sorrows of the heart. But now fair Nymph love has taught me such a lesson,
that I must confess his deity and dignity, as there is nothing so precious
as beauty, so there is nothing more piercing then fancy. For since my eye
took a curious survey of your excellence, I have been so fettered with your
beauty and virtue, as (sweet Varrona) Lysimachus without further circumstance
loves Varrona. I could point out my lovely desires with long ambages, but
seeing in many words lies mistrust, and that truth is ever naked, let this
suffice for country wooing, Lysimachus loves Varrona, and none but Varrona.
Although these words were most heavenly harmony in the ears of the Nymph,
yet to seem coy at the first courting, and to disdain love, howsoever she
disdained love she made him this reply.

Ah Lysimachus, though I seem simple, yet am I more subtle then to swallow
the hook, because it has a painted bait: as men are wise, so women are wary,
specially if they have that wit by others harms to beware. Do we not know
Lysimachus, that men's tongues are like Mercuries pipe, that can inchaunt Argus
with an hundred eyes? and their words as prejudicial as the charms of Circes*
that transformed men into monsters? If such Sirens sing, we poor women had
^^de stop our ears, least in hearing we prove so foolish hardy, (...) to
believe them: and so perish in trusting much, and susp^^ting little. Lysimachus
Piscator ictus sapit* he that has been once poisoned, and afterward fear not
to bowse of every potion, is worthy to suffer double penance. Give me leave to
mistrust, though I do not condemn. Lysimachus is now in love with Varrona, he
a Shepherd of mean parents, she a Lady of great parentage: he poor, she
honorable. Can love consist of contrarieties? Will she Faulcon perch with the
^atresse? the Lion harbor with the Wolf? Will Venus join roabes and rags
together? or can there be a sympathy between a King and a beggar? Then
Lysimachus, how can I believe that love should unite our thoughts, when fortune
has set such difference between our degrees? But thou likest of Varronas
beawtie. Men in their fancy resemble ye Waspe which scorns that flower from
which she had fetched her wax: playing like the inahbitants of the Island
Tenerifa, who when they have gathered the sweet spices, use the trees for
fuel: so men, having glutted themselves with the fair of women's faces, hold
them for necessary evils, and wearied with that which they seemed so much to
love, cast away fancy, as children do their rattles: and loathing that which
so deeply before they liked, especially such as take love in a minute, and
have their eyes attractiue like iet, apt to entertain any object, are as
ready to let it slip again. Lysimachus hearing how Varrona harpt still on one
string, which was the doubt of men's constancy, he brake off her sharp
inuectiue thus.

I grant Varrona (quoth he) many men have done amiss, in proouing soon ripe,
and soon rotten, but particular instances infer no general co^clusions: and
therefore I hope, what others have faulted in, shall not prejudice my favors. I
will not use sophistry to confirm my love, for that is subtilitie: nor long
discourses, least my words might be thought more then my faith: but if this
will suffice, that by the trust of a Shepherd, I love Varrona, and woe
Varrona, not to crop the blossoms, and reject the tree, but to consummate my
faithful desires in the honorable end of marriage. At this word marriage,
Varrona stood in a maze what to answer, fearing if she were too coy, to drive
him away with her disdain: if she were too courteous, to discover the heat of
her desires; in a dilemma thus what to do, at last this she said.

Lysimachus, ever since I saw thee, I favored thee, I cannot dissemble my
desires, because I see thou do faithfully manifest thy thoughts, and in
liking thee, I have thee so far as my honor holds fancy still in suspense,
but if I knew thee as virtuous as thy actions do pretend, and as well qualified
whereof you make demonstration, the doubt should be quickly decided, but for
this time to give thee answer, assure thy self thus, I will either marry with
Lysimachus, or still live a virgin, and with this they streined one another
hand. He having his answer, gave a courteous adieu to them 3. but specially to
Varrona, and so playing loath to depart, he went to Procyon, who all this while
attended his coming, unto whom Lysimachus made a true relation of all those
things which passed between them, aduertising him of the lenitiue remedies
which she applied unto his maladious spirit, whom we will for a time permit to
meditate on his singular expectations, and return unto Syllanus, Varronas
father. He having intelligence of the secret meetings which these two lovers
daily used, being exceeding much displeased, upon a day as he walked into his
Garden, by chance he met with Varrona, accompanied with diverse Gentlewomen,
whom saluting very graciously, he passed by them, and taking his daughter by
the hand, walking aside with her into an open green walk, fell into this
talk with her.

Why huswife (quoth he) are you so idle tasked that you stand upon thorns
until you have a husband? are you no sooner hatched with the Lapwing, but you
will run away with the shel on your head? soon pricks the tree that will prove
a thorn, and a girl that loves too soon will repent too late. What a husband?
why the maids of Rome durst not look at Venus temple till they were 30, nor
went they unmasked till they were married, that neither their beauties might
allure other, nor they glance their eyes on every wanton. Egypt is plagued with
a dearth, I tell thee fond girl when Nilus ouerfloweth before his time, the
trees that blossom in February, are nipped with the frosts in May: untimely
fruits had never good fortune, and young Genile-women that are wooed and won
ere they be wise, sorrow and repent before they be old. What (...) thou in
Lysimachus that thine eye m^st choose, and thy heart must fancy? Is he
beautiful? why fond girl, what thy eye likes at morn, it hates at night:
love is like a haven but a blaze: and beauty, how can I better compare it then
to the gorgeous Cedar, that is only for show, and nothing for profit? to the
apples of Tantalus that are precious in the eye, and dust in the hand? to the
star Artophilax that is most bright, but fitteth not for any compass: so
young men that stand upon their outward portrayture, I tell thee are
preuidiciall: Demophoon was fair, but how dealt he with Phillis? Aeneas was a
brave man, but a dissembler: all but little worth if they be not wealthy. And
I pray thee what substance has Lysimachus to endue thee with? have thou not
heard that want breaks amity, that love which begins not in gold, does end
in beggerie: that such as marry but to a fair face, tie themselves often to a
soul bargain? And what will thou do with a husband that is not able to
maintain thee? buy forsooth a dram of pleasure with a pound of sorrow, and a
pint of content with a whole tun of prejudicial displeasures? But why do I
cast stones in the air, or breath my words into the wind, when to persuade a
woman from her will is to roll Sisyphus stone: or to tie a headstrong girl
from love, is to tie furies again infetters. Therefore huswife as you tender
my affection I command you to surcease those vain and idle matters, which
please me as much as the stinging of a waspe: and shall profit you as little,
as fire to cool your thirst. And with that in a rage he flung away not
admiting her reply.

Varrona perceiving her fathers good will thus alienated from her, fearing a
further inconvenience, did in humility submit her self to his disposing, not
using any longer her accustomed walks. Which Lysimachus perceiving, mused
greatly what should become of his love; somewhile he thought she ha^ taken some
word unkindly, and had taken the pet, then he imagined some new love had
withdrawn her fancy, or happily she was sick, or detained by some great
bu^^nesse of Syllanus.

These (...) ^id Lysimachus cast into his head, who having love in his heart,
proved restless, and half without patience that Varrona wronged him with so
long absence: for love measures every minuit, and thinks hours to be days,
and days to be months, till he feeds his eyes with the sight of his desired
object. Thus perplexed lived poor Lysimachus, while on a day siting with
Procyon in a great du^pe, he was credibly informed by Toxc us of those
sorrowful accidents: at which being suddenly surprised with grief, and
string his eyes on the starrie concaue, began thus in their presence to utter
passionate complaints, not limiting his lamne^ts with distinct clauses, for his
moan admitted no method.

Injurious heavens (quoth he) has your influence effected this misfortune?
iniust gods, have you in envying this my prosperity, deprived me of the view
of that wherein I imagined my whole felicity should consist? ungentle Cupid
have thou deeming my Varrona fairer then thy Pshyche, thwarted thus my doting
humor? I will wander through the earth augmenting the springs with streams of
my tears, filling the woods with rebounding Echoes of my woes, tracing the
plains with my restless steps. O that I might equal Orpheus in art, as I
excel him in anguish! the powerful virtue of his heavenly tunes amazed furious
beasts, stayed flue^t streams, raised stones, assembled trees, moving sense in
senseless things. Descending to the silent ^aults of A^heron, he caused
ghostes to groan, shadows to sigh, effecting rele^ting thoughts in hels
remorslesse judges. But were I his pheere in that profession, I would do more,
enforcing Syllanus her father not touched with such a sympathy, to leave his
suspicion, and grant me my love: whither do I wandere Is this to rest: leave
Lysimachus: nay proceed Lysimachus: cease to suppose, begin to sorrow: Ay me,
wretched me, hoplesse, hopeless, what means can I now conceit, what devise
may now be potted* Her^a^ he s^^pt, and opening the floodgates of his eyes,
distilled a shewer of tears, supplying his speeches with deep sighs: But
resolving to proceed, he was interrupted by the shepherd: who hearing the
words of his complaints, lamented at the (...) of his sorrows, (...) by all
means to (...) of his memory the rememberance of these caushalties, assuring
him that time being the wachstone of love, would no doubt sort all things for
his content: and so (quoth he) you s^^ it is time to ^old our flocks, with
that they (...) sheep (...) home: but he poor soul that had love his (...)
thoughts set on fire with the (...) began to cau^^nate (...) upon the (...)
which Varrona had received from her father. Remaining in this pitiful plight,
feeding on nothing but heavy despair, he became so changed in his body and
soul, as though they had been now (...). But (...) good hap his mourning being
ouerheard by the good shepherd, and finding him so transformed, (...) ^^formed
Varrona thereof. She having taken diligent notice of this his information,
admired greatly at the constancy of his affection, and seeing her father upon
urgent affairs was rode to the Court, she deemed if not amiss herself to go
and visit him. Who calling upon Lysimachus with a ^hrill voice, recovered him
better with her words, then withal the potions or hot drinks she could devise
to give him. Lysimachus staring her in the face, muttered (as it seemed) to
himself, but remained speechless, but she with great care comforted him (as a
woman want no good words in such a case) and brought him again to the use
(...) his tongue, wherewith he soul^red out these words.

Ah Varrona! cruel despair has so mangled my sweet hope, that unless I
find some speedy remedy, the wound will grow incurable, and willing to go
forward his breath failed him. Lysimachus (quoth she) as I am ignorant of the
cause, so I am sorrowful for thy disease: and I would I had as much power to
heal thy extremity, as will to perform it, if it shall not prejudice the
glory of my credit, or blemish my honor* therefore if it be in my hands to
better thee* assure thy self to (...) the benefit, the honor of my name
always excepted.

Lysimachus (...) a while thought it best to discover himself, and presently
to receive the con^^t to life, or the reply to death (for his life and death
did depend in her answer) and praying the rest to depart, with a sighing
spirit, and trembling cheer, disclosed himself.

A^ my sweet Varrona, in whose answer is seated my heaven or hell; to recount
to you my sorrows, or repent my love, can neither ease me of the one, or
further me in the other, s^eing your self shall appear a witness in them
both. Although that reason did somewhat prefer me, by the benefit of seemly
government, keeping in subjection the untamed appetite of furious affections,
yet confirming it by my own eyesight, the manifold grace^ wherewith ^ame
nature has mightily enriched you, I found my thoughts so fiercely assaulted,
that either I must yield to be your captive, or else die in the combat. Yea the
glistering bea^^^^ of your heavenly perfections so pierced my heart, that I was
forced to forsake reason* to follow affections and to forgo liberty, to live
in bondage: if it may be termed bondage, to serve with love such rare
excellency. Having tasted so much of fancies cup, and the drink dispiersing
it self into every part, I felt such passions in mine unacquainted conceits,
that nothing but the rememberance of your sweetest sake, could procure my ease,
fully resolved to serve, love, and honor Varrona, till the destinies of death
should deny me. Tumbling in the extremity of these strange passions, and
hearing that thy fathers suspicion, or rather jealousy of our late united
simpathie, does watch like Argus over Io, unwilling that thou should pass
beyond the reach of his eye, unless as the thinks thou should ouerreach
thy self, my contents were turned into delays complaints, and my pleasure
wrapped in this laborynth of grievous lamentations: but now noting the ex^temitie
of thy fortunes, I find that Venus has made this constant to requite my
miseries, and that where the greatest onset is given by fortune, there is
strongest defense made by affection.

Thus I doubt not but thy father in watching thee, ouer-waketh himself, and (I
hope) profits as little, as they which gaze on the flames of Aetna, which
vanish out of the sight in smoke. Varrona thoroughly understanding his rare
and ruthful discourse, with weeping eyes, and sorrowful cheer, embracing him
in her arms, after a sugared kiss, gave him this sweet comfort.

The heavens Lysimachus by their miraculous working have taken truce with our
affections, whose divine influence, I think by some secret contemplation do
seem to conclude our loves. It may be I have been liked of some, and flattered
of many, but never deserved of any, but only of thee Lysimachus, whose life,
love, and loyalty, may justly claim an int^rest in the favorable consent,
and constancy of thy Varrona. Lysimachus hearing this heavenly harmony, was
so ravished between joy and fear (for he feared least it had bin but a
dream) that he was not able to utter one word, but at last sensibly perceiving
that it was no vision, but the verity of his desires, staying himself by her
hand, concluded thus.

Ah sweet Varrona, the only reuiuer of my dying spirit, although neither
heaven nor earth can afford me thanks sufficient to requite thine honorable
favor, yet shall the zealous truth and tried love of Lysimachus affections
encounter the glory of Varronas beawtie. And I vow by the heavens, that when
Lysimachus shall let his eye slip from thy beawtie, or his thoughts from thy
qualities, or his heart from thy virtues, or his whole life from ever honoring
thee, then shall heaven cease to have stars, the earth trees, the world
elements, and every thing reuersed shall fall to their former Chaos. Having
thus plight their troth each to other, seeing they could not have the full
fruition of their love in Thessalia, for that Syllanus consent would never be
granted to so mean a match. Varrona determined as soon as time and
opportunity would give her leave, to provide a great mass of money, and many
rich and costly jewels for the easier carriage, and then to transport
themselves and their treasure into Thracia, where they would lead a contented
life, until such time as either she should be reconciled to her father, or
else by succession, (being the sole child her father had) come to the Dukedom.
This devise was greatly praised of Lysimachus, for he feared, if the Duke her
father should but hear of the contract, that his fury would be such, as no
less then death would stand for painment. He therefore told her that delay
bred danger, that many mishaps did fall out between the cup and the lip, and
that to avoid anger it were best with as much speed as might be to pass out
of Thessalia, least fortune might prevent their pretense with some new
despite. Varrona, whom love pricked forward with desire, promised to dispatch
her affairs with as great haste as either time or opportunity would give her
leave, and so resting upon this point after many imbracings and sweet kisses
they departed.

Varrona having taken her leave of her best beloved Lysimachus, went
immediately home, her merry countenance giving no suspicion of mistrust at
all. Lysimachus poor soul was no less joyful, that being a Shepherd,
fortune had favored him so, as to reward him with the love of a Lady, hoping
in time to be advanced from that condition, to be the husband of a rich
Princess. So that he thought every hour a year, till by their departure they
might prevent danger, not ceasing still to go every day to his Sheep, not so
much for the care of the flock, as for the desire he had so see his love, and
sweet heart Varrona, who oftentimes when opportunity would serve privately
repaired thither (albeit her fathers prohibition to the contrary) to feed her
fancy with the sweet content of Lysimachus presence. And albeit she never
went to visit him but most secretly, yet her often repair made her not only
suspected, but known to diverse of their neighbors, who for the good will they
bare to old Procyon, told him secretly of the matter, wishing him to advertise
Lysimachus of it, that he would if it were possible restrain his liberty. In
the mean time Varrona was not slack in her affairs, but applied her matters
with such diligence, that she provided all things fit for their journey.
Treasure and Jewels she had gotten great store, thinking there was no better
friend then money in a strange country: rich attire she had provided for
Lysimachus, and because she could not bring the matter to pass, without the
help and advise of some one, she made the old servant of hers called Toxeus,
who had served her from his childhoode privy to her affairs, who seeing no
persuasions could prevail to divert her from her settled determination, gave
his consent, and dealt so secretly in the cause, that within short space he
had gotten a Ship ready for their passage. The Mariners, seeing a fit gale of
wind for their purpose, wished Toxeus to make no delays, least if they
pretermitted this good weather, they might stay long ere they had such a fair
wind. Toxeus fearing that his negligence should hinder the journey, in the
night time conueighed the Trunkes full of treasure into the Ship, and by secret
means let Lysimachus understand, that the next morning they meant to depart:
he upon the news slept very little that night, but got him up early and went
to his sheep, looking every minute when he should see Varrona. Now see the
valiantnes of a virgin, or rather consider the force of love, which makes the
weak strong, the witless wise, the simple subtle, yea, and the most cowards
most courageous. For that morning Varrona attired her self in one of her Pages
apparel, and trudged out of the town, as if she had been sent on some
message, and so fast as her faint legs (but strengthened by love) could
carry her, she hasted through the woods to the fields, where the saint whom
she only honored was ready to receive her: who though at the first he knew
her not, but thought she had been Cupid or Mercury fallen from the heavens,
yet at length by her loving looks cast upon him, he knew who it was, and
embracing her fast in his arms, said; If Jupiter (sweet wench) should see
thee in this Pages apparel, no doubt but he would forgo his Ganymede, and
take thee up into heaven in his steed. O most sovereign Lady and Mistres,
what service shall I be able ever to do you, which may counteruaile this
kindness? what duty can be a due recompense to this good will? If I by any
means can requite this courtesy, I never doubt to be deemed ungrateful while
I live. But accept (good Lady) I beseech you, that which is in me to perform,
which is, the faithfullest heart that ever was vowed to Lady, which when it
swerueth from you, let the torments of Tantalus, Tytius, Sysiphus, and all the
ruthful rout of hell be heaped upon me. Varrona hearing him so earnest, said.

Few words (most worthy Lysimachus) are enough to win credit to a matter
already believed: for only upon confidence of your constant and faithful
heart toward me, I have thus unadvisedly adventured mine honor as you see,
desiring you not sinisterlie to think of this my attempt, being boldned
thereto by the great love which I bare toward you, and by the loyalty which I
look for of you toward me. Ah (said Lysimachus) if I should make any ill
interpretation of your virtuous love and sincere affection toward me, I were
the veriest villain on earth: for I take God to witness, I take your forward
will for such frie^dly favor, that I doubt my deserts will never be able to
answer thereto as I desire: and with that he aptly ended his talk upon her
mouth. Now from thence they posted to the haven where the Ship lay, not daring
any longer to stay for fear of apprehe^sion by posts which should be sent
after the^. Whither so soon as they were come, the Mariners were ready with
their Cock-boate to set them aboard, where being coucht together in a cabin,
they horsting their maine sails weighed anchor, and haled into the deep,
having a lusty gale in the poope which drove them gallantly forward. But on
the next morning about the break of the day, the air began to be ouercast,
the winds to rise, the seas to swell, yea presently there arose such a
fearful tempest as the Ship was in danger to be swallowed up with every sea,
the maine mast with y^ violence of the wind was thrown ouer-boord the sails
were torn, the tackling went in sunder, the storm raging s^ill so furiously,
that poor V^rrona was almost dead for fear, but that she was greatly
comforted with the presence of Lysimachus. The tempest continued three days,
all which time the mariners every minute looked for death, and the air was so
darkened with clouds, that the master could not tell by the compass in what
coast they were. But upon the fourth day about nine of the clock, the wind
began to cease, the sea to wax calm, and the sky to be clear, and the
mariners descryed the coast of Arcadia: shooting off their ordinance for joy
that they had escaped such a fearful tempest. Lysimachus hearing that they
were arrived at some harbor, sweetly kissed Varrona, and bad her be of good
courage, being set on land, and rewarding the mariners bountifully for their
pains, they soiourned in a little village a mile distant from the sea, where
after they had rested for a day, they made provision for their marriage, which
according to the sacred rites was solemnly celebrated: which being performed,
putting on pilgrims aparrell, they went hand in hand, and heart in heart,
wailfully and wilfully wandering in that unknown country Arcadia, to avoid
further punishment and displeasure.

See (gentlewomen) the lamentable lot of love which drove Varrona from her
pleasant palace, from her flourishing friends, from her train of servants,
from her sumptuous fare, from her gorgeous garments, from variety of delights,
from secure quietness: yea from heavenly happiness, to wild wilderness: to
desert dens, to careful caves: to hard cheer with haw^s and hippes, to
pilgrims pelts: to peril of spoiling, to danger of devouring to misery of
mind, to affliction of body, yea to hellish heaviness. O pittiles parent! to
prefer his own hate before his child's love, his own displeasures, before his
child's pleasures, to forget that himself was once young and subject to love, to
measure the fi^ie flames of youth by the dead coals of age, to govern his
child by his own lust, which now is, not which was in times past To seek to
alter his natural affection from his daughter upon so ^ight a cause, showing
himself a rebel to nature, to undo the destinies, and disappoint the
appointment of the Gods, showing himself a traitor to them.

Two or three days being passed, and noe news heard of Varrona, Syllanus
assured of her escape, cried out as a man half lunatic, he was by Lysimachus
robbed of his only jewel, whereupon in a dispairing fury he cmomanded Procyon
to be sent for in all have. Who maruailing what the matter should be, began to
examine his own conscience, wherein he had offended the Duke, but imboldn^d
with his inocencie, courageously went to the palace: whither as soon as he
came, he was not admitted unto the presence of Syllanus, but presently sent to
prison. Many passionate thoughts came into his head, till at last he began to
fall into consideration of Lysimachus tollies, and to meditate with himself:
leaning his head on his hand, and his elbow on his knee, full of sorrow, grief,
and disquieted passions, he resolved into these terms.

Unhappie Procyon, whom too much courtesy has led to these misfortunes, and
vain credulity wrapped in the maze of these calamities. Now I see, but alas too
late, that the smoothest tales for the most part have put small truth, that the
fowlest skin is covered with fair paintings, that vice lies obfuscated in the
cinders of honest simplicity. Woe worth the day wherein my eye offended in the
prodigality of her sight: woe worth that I pitied his destresses, relieved
his wants, took compassion of his necessities, succored his state,
entertained him, favored, affected him, and approved his behauior. All these I
greatly fear, will if not ruinate my self, yet make shipwreck of my credit
and liking with the Duke, so that by living I shall die to want, and by death
purchase such a name of infamy as never shall be forgotten: be penitent, and
assign thy life some penance to discover thy sorrow, and pacify his wrath. In
the depth of this his passion, he was sent for to the duke, who with a look
that threatened death, entertained him and demanded of him where his daughter
was. Procyon made answer, that indeed Lysimachus was too familiar with
Varrona his daughter* whereupon I fearing the worst (quoth he) about 3. or 4.
days past very sharply rebuked him for his sauciness: adding moreover, that
if it were not lest, he would bring both upon himself extreme preuidice, and
eternal confusion upon me and my wife: now the next morning after, I neither
heard of him or saw him. Sylla^us perceiving the man's unfeigned simplicity,
let him depart without incurring further displeasure, concealing such secret
grief for his daughters re^^hlesse folly, that she had so forgotten her
honor, and parentage by so base a choice, to dishonor her father, and
discredit her self, that with very care and thought he fell into a quartain
feue^, which was so unfit for his aged years and complexion, that he became so
weak, as the Physicians would not grant him no life. And one day being in his
agony he breathed out his griefs in this sorrowful sort.

I^ nature by the divine providence of God, did not move us to the (...) of
mankind, surely the charge of children is such a heavy burden, that it would
fear men from entering into the holy state of matrimony. For to omit the
inconvenience of their infancy, which are infinite, when they draw once to
man's estate, what time they should be a stay to our staggering age, good God
with what trouble do they torment ^^^with what cares do they consume us? what
annoyes do they afflict our decaying years withal? They say we are renewed and
revived as it were in our offspring, but we may say we die daily in thinking of
the desperate deeds of our children. And as the spider ^^eleth if her web be
pricked but with the point of a p^^me: so if our children are touched but with
the least trouble that is, we feel the force of it to pierce us to the heart.
But how well this tender care is by them considered, alas it makes my heart
bleed to think. If we look for obedience of them, and that ^hey should
follow our counsel in the conueigh of their affairs, why they imagine we
doat, and their own wits are far better then ones. If we warn them to be
wary and thriftie, they think it proceeds rather of covetousness then of
kindness: if we provide them no marriages, it is because we will depart with
no living to them: if we persuade them to marriage, it is because we will have
them to forsake all good fellowship, and live like clownes in the country by
the plough tail: if we persuade them to learning, it is, that they might live
by it without our charge: if we persuade them to one wife rather then an other,
it is because the one is richer then the other. If we look severely to them,
we love them not: if we use them familiarly, we feed them with flattery,
because we will give them little: and so of all our loving deeds they make
these lewd devises: yea when we have brought them up with great care and cost,
when we have travailed all our time by sea and by land, early and late, in
pain and in perrill, to heap up treasure for them, when we have by continual
toil shortened our own lives, to lengthen and enlarge their livings and
possessions, yet if we suffer them not to royst and to riot, to spill and to
spoil, to lavish and to consume, yea and to follow the fury of their own
frantic fancies in all things, this forsooth is our recompense, they wish an
end of our lives, to have our livings.

Alas, a lamentable case, why has not nature caused love to ascend as well as
descend? why has she endued the Storke with this property, to feed his damme
when she is old, and men with such malice to wish their parents death when they
are aged? But I speak perchance of my own proper grief, God forbid it
should be a common case: for my daughter (why do I call her daughter) has not
only wished my death but wrought it. She knew she was my only delight: she
knew I could not live, she being out of my sight: she knew her desperate
disobedience would drive me to a desperate death. And could she now so much
doat on a poor shepherd, to force so little of her loving father? Alas a
husband is to be preferred before Father and Friend* but had she none to fix
her fancy on but a Swain, the son of I know not whom? Alas love has no
resp^^^ of persons: yet was not my good will and (...) to be craved therein?
alas she saw noe possibility to obtain it.

But now alas, I would grant my good will, but it is too late, her fear of my
fury is too great ever to be found, her (...) is too great, ever to look me
in the face any more, and my sorrow is too great, ever to be salued. And
thereupon got him to bed very heavily affected, daily bewayling the loss of
his daughter Varrona, with whom I do now begin.

The Sun soiourning in his winter mansion had disrobed Arcadia of all her
pleasures, and disgarnished Vestaes mantle of delights variable choice,
wherewith Flora had in plenty powdered the freshnes of her erst green hue.
Night suited in a duskie robe of pitchie darkness, besieged the globe with long
shadows, while Phoebus wanting wonted vigor, did by darting his scarce
reflected beams, afford surall comfort to the earths increase, so that
Arcadia erst the sovereign seat of all content, and sole place of worlds
perfections, seemed now a pattern of the ancient Chaos, wherein all things (if
things) were confounded. Fields flowerlesse, trees leauelesse, ground
heatelesse, brooks streamelesse, springs unhaunted, groves unhallowed,
augmented this hue of horror, blemish of Europs paradise. The maiden huntresse
Arcadiaes patroness, did seldom trace the plains guarded with her troop of
virgin knights, to fix shafts on the flying beasts, whose wont was in time of
heavens more mild aspect, to grace the fields with her daily presence, and
when her brothers scorching heat tired her limbs with faintnes, to bath her
chaste body in some pleasant brook. Nor did the wanton Satyrs lightly
skipping on the painted meades, (painted I mean by natures workmanship) vaunt
their bodies agilitie to the fairie wood-Nymphs. Pan, Arcadiaes president, pend
up himself in his winter lodging, and the other rural powers seeing their
glories date ended for that year, shrouded themselves in the place of their
wonted repose. In this season, a season well fitting their melancholy thoughts
distracted with moodie passions, Varrona and Lysimachus, the maps of fortunes
mutabilitie, left their country, wandered in midst of winters rage surcharged
with sorrow, the extremity whereof made them hapless abiects, while rough
Boreas winters henchman mustering legions of storms, scourged the plains with
a trou^e of tempests, and aimed his violent blasts at the tallest trees to loy
their heights pride, and combatting with his companions, filled the air with
dreadful noise of their tumultuous encounter; these unfortunate lovers, in
whose minds love martialled millions of striving passions, thus wandering, whom
fancy tossed in a boundless Ocean of perplexing thoughts, ceased not their
travail till the weathers intemperate fury calmed by heavens milder
influence, took truce with time, and sealed the atonement with a sudden
change. But when Phoebus renewing his yearly task, and denying longer
residence to stormy winter, had pierced earths entrails with comfortable
warmth, opening a fruitful passage for the issue of her womb, to cloth
Pomonaes branches with natures bounty, and diapre her own mantle with Floraes
sense-alluring pomp; Lysimachus and Varrona entered the maine continent of
Arcadia, where seeing the late hue of horror turned to an heaven of eyes
happiness, they redoubled many sighs drawn from the depth of their woeful
hearts center: for remembering that Tellus was erst dismantled, the trees
bereaved of their blossoms beauty, earths natural defects anatomized by
time, in the place where frostie Hyems had displaied her ycie trophies, they
lamented to think that these tokens of worlds mutabilitie, had recovered their
former flourish by the years timely alteration, but their desperate fortunes
(as they imagined) had no hope of any happy spring to calm the winter of
their woes. Drowned in these deep meditations, they proceeded pensive, but
they had not walked far, when they espied a fair broad Oak, whose spacious
branches environed the ground lying underneath with a shadie circle. There they
determined to rest a while their bodies wearied by long iourneis, and somewhat
disburthen their souls by displaying their sorrows.

As thus they were discoursing of their fortunes, they beheld as they looked
back an Arcadian, and by his habit seemed a Shepherd, who ouer-hearing the
last words of their complaints, and aiming (though amiss) at the occasion of
their sorrows, thought that being strangers he lamented ye loss of their way,
to which imagination applying his words, he began thus.

Friends (for so I may term you without offense) the day is almost spent, and
the night being dangerous for such as you are, or at least seem to be, I mean
strangers: accept then a simple lodging in my cottage, with such homely fare as
Shepherds houses yield, and when to morrowes Sun shall display his bright
(though late forcelesse) beams, ye may prosecute your intended journey,
wherein if my directions may further you, ye shall find me ready to afford
them. They wondering at such rare humanity harbored in those contemptible
weeds, made a long pause as if they had enjoined their mouths to perpetual
silence, at last Lysimachus shapt him this reply.

Friend (for so your preffered courtesy binds us to term you) muse not that
sobs interrupt my words, or sorrows season my discourse, which only comfort
my fates have assigned me. What we were we list not now to repeat, what we
are, you see, we grieve: a lodging in your cottage we gladly accept: your
country fare we will thankfully receive; your directions will be needless, for
we wander thus up and down to light on some cottage, where I and my wife, with
this our servant may dwell, for we purpose to buy some Farm, and a flock of
sheep, to become shepherds, meaning to live low, and content us with a
country life: for I have heard some say that they drink without suspicion, and
sleep without care. And if this double favor do proceed from you, then in
requital of your courtesy, first, we beseech Jupiter Xenius the patron of
hospitality, and protector of strangers, to bless our labors, prosper our
attempts, and enrich your store with hoped plenty: next, we vow by that bright
lamp heavens ornament, that if fortune (as she is never stable) raise us from
so low an ebb to the wonted height of our good hap, we will remunerate your
kindness with most ample recompense. Alexis (such was the Shepherds name)
seeing majesty in their looks, gravity seated in disguise, royalty suited in
base attire, gathered by these probable conjectures, that they could be of no
mean degree; moved therefore with a deeper remorse, he courteously entreated
them to repair to his ^^mple lodging, and remain there till fortune should
convert her frowns into favors, protesting that though he could not
entertain them as the quality of their condition required, yet he would
supply in good will the disabling defects of his low estate; and for the
buying of a Farm (quoth he) ye come in good time, for my Landlord intends to
sell both the Farm, hill, and the flock I keep, and cheap ye may have them
for ready money: which wrought such cheerefulnes in their hearts, that they
yielded him millions of thanks, and accompanied him to his house. Into which
when they entered, they found it not gorgeously embost, yet gaily trimmed: not
courtly, yet comely: though homely, yet handsome: and they were kindly
welcomed by Alexis wife, who greeted them with a merry countenance, being by
her husband certified of their fortunes.

The next morn they lay long in bed, as wearied with the toil of unaccustomed
travail; but as soon as they got up, they resolved there to set up their
rest, and by the help of Alexis, swapt a bargain with his Landlord, and so
became masters of the Farm, and of the flock, her self putting on the attire
of a Shepherdess, and Lysimachus of a young swain, both esteemed famous
amongst ye Shepherds of Arcadia. Living thus jointly together, they began to
be as Ciceronicall, as they were amorous, with their hands thrift coveting to
satisfy their hearts thirst, and to be as diligent in labors, as they were
affectionate in loves, so that the parish wherein they lived so affected them
for the course of their life, that they were counted the very mirrours of a
Democraticall method. Living thus in a league of united virtues, fortune
envying their prosperity, raised up one Maechander to race and beat down if
it were possible, the firm foundation of their faithful building, and biding
together.

For this Maechander glauncing his gazing eyes on the blazing beauty of
Varrona, received so deep an impression of her perfection in his heart, that
immediately he fixed his fancy upon her comely corpse. And being the chief
ruler of the city, he persuaded himself that there was none in that town so
stout, but would stoop at his lure: nor any so fair, but would feign employ
themselves to pleasure him: but one the other side, the renowned virtue of
Varrona came to his mind, which persuaded an impossibility to his purpose: and
floating thus between hope and despair, he entered into these terms.

O miserable wretch that I am, to whom shall I address my complaints? Is it
the heavenly power and gods of love that have deprived me of my senses, and
showed their dunne working in me? Or is it the hellish hags, and spirits of
spite, that bereaved me of reason, and executed their cruelty on me? Is it
love that leads me to this lust? or is it hate yt haleth me to this hurt and
mischief. No, no, the Gods guide us to goodness, the furies of hell they force
us to filthiness: neither does that any way deserve the name of love, which
brings such torment to my troubled mind, yt all the devils in the world
could not perform the like. But see my rashness, why am I so blindly bold,
beastly to blaspheme against yt which proceeds altogether from nature, which
nature has imparted to all men, and which I ought to follow without repining
or resisting? for so long as I follow nature as my guide, I cannot do amiss,
and seeing nature has taught us to love, why should I not rather prove her
precepts, then rebuke that which by natures lore is allowed? And touching
torment of mind, or other inconvenience that it brings, is it all able to
impair the least comfort which I shall enjoy in embracing my Varrona? Is it
not meet that he which would reap, should sow, he that would gather fruit,
should plant trees, he that would reach the sweet rose, should now and then be
scratched with the sharp briers? I mean, is it meet, if I purpose to possess
so proper a piece as Varrona is, yt I should eschew labors, or refuse any
perrill in the pursuit thereof? And hereupon he determined to follow the fury
of his fancy, what pangs or danger soever he thereby endured, and having
resolved many ways in his mind how he might aspire to his purpose, at length
he resolved upon this, to institute a sumptuous banquet: whereto he invited the
chief of the city, amongst whom Lysimachus and his wife Varrona were not
forgotten, the only authors of the feast. Now for the more ^oyall receiving
of his guests, he met them at the entry into his palace, and gave them this
greeting.

Fair Ladies, as I am right joyful of your presence, so am I no less
sorrowful for the pains you have taken, in undertaking so great a iourny this
dark and mistie evening, for the which I must account my self so much the
more beholding to you, by how much greater your labor was in coming, and by
how much less your cheer shall be able to counteruaile it now you are come.
And taking Varrona by the hand, he said softly unto her. I pity the pains
of these gentlewomen the less, for that you were in their company, whose
piercing eyes, as celestial stars, or heavenly lamps, might serve for ^ights
in the dark, whose sweet face might perfume the air from all noisome smells
which might annoy them, and beholding your lively looks, and perfect shape,
they might take such delight, that the weariness of the way could nothing
molest or grieve them. Varrona hearing her self so greatly praised of so great
a personage as he was, could not keep the roses red out of her alablaster
cheeks, and thinking no serpentine malice to lie hid under these m^rrie and
sugared words, she gave him this courteous answer. If sir the company had made
no better provision for lights, and other things necessary, then such as you
speak o^, they might soon have slipped into the mire: but as I perceive by your
words, you are disposed to jest, and be merry, so I am content for this once
to be made the instrument thereof, thereby to ease some part of the pains
which you are like to take in receiving such troublesome guests as we are: and
for our cheer you need take no thought, for it shall be so much too good for
us, by how much less we have deserved any at all your hands. After this
amorous encounter, he caused the company to sit down to the banquet, and so
disposed the matter that Varrona sat at the table right over against him,
whereby he freely ^ed his eyes on that meat which converted rather to the
norishment of sickness, then to wholesome humors of health. For as the finest
meats, by one in extremity of sickness, resolve not to pare blood, to
strengthen the body, but to watrish humors to feed the lever and disease, so
though her face and looks were fine and sweet, and brought delight to all the
beholders eyes, yet to him they wrought only torment and vexation of mind. And
notwithstanding he perceived her beauty to breed his bane, and her lokes to
procure the loss of his liberty, and that as the Cocatrice by sight only
slaieth, so she by courteous countenance only killed and wounded his heart, yet
would he not refrain his eyes from beholding her, but according to the nature
of the sickly patient, which chiefly desires that which most of all is
forbidden him, he so incessantly threw his passionate glaunces toward her,
that his eyes were altogether bleared with her beauty, and she also at the
length began to perceive his loving looks toward her, which made her look
pale, in token of the little pleasure she took in his toys, and of the great
fear she had least some other should mark them, whereby her good name might come
in question. The banquet being ended, every one of the^ prepared themselves to
hear a stage play, which was the^ ready to be performed: But Maechander being
able to play but one part, which was of a poor distracted lover, determined to
go forward with the tragedy already begun between Varrona and him, and
seeing her set out of her husbands sight, placed himself by her, and entered
into reasoning with her, to this purpose.

If (fair Varrona) this simple banquet had been so sweet and pleasant to your
seemly self and the rest, as your sight is delightful to me, I am persuaded
you would not have changed your cheer for Nectar and Ambrosia, which the Poets
feign to be food of the gods, but seeing there was no cause of delight in the
one, and the other contains that in it which may content the Gods themselves,
I shall desire you in good part to accept the one, and courteously to accept me
worthy to enjoy the other. And though I have not heretofore by dutiful service
manifested unto you the loyalty of my love, yet if my poor heart could
signify unto you the assaults which it has suffered for your sake, I doubt
not but that you would confess, that by force of love I had won you, and were
worthy to wear you. For albeit by humane laws your husband only has
interest in you, yet by natures laws, which being more ancient, ought to be of
more authority, he ought to enjoy you, which ioyeth most in you: which loves
you best, and endures most pain for your sake. And for proof of natures
laws, may it please you to consider the quality of the she wolf, who always
chooses that wolf for her make, who is made most lean and foul by following
her: besides that, my title marches under the ensign of justice, which is a
virtue: giving to every one according to his deserts: and that the reward of
love, is only love again, I know you are not ignorant. For all the Gods in
the world are not able to requite good will, the one belonging to the mind, the
other incident to the body: but from the equity of my cause I appeal to your
good grace and favor: and at the bar of your beauty, I humbly hold up my
hands, meaning to be tried by your own courtesy, and my own loyalty, and
minding to abide your sentence either of consent unto life, or denial unto
death. Varrona hearing this discourse, looked one while read for shame, another
while pale for anger: neither would disdain let her make him answer, nor grief
give her leave to hold her peace: but standing in a maze, between silence and
speaking, at length she brake of the one, and burst out into the other in this
sort.

If (sir) your banquet had been no better, then this your talk is pleasant
unto me, I am persuaded the dishes would have been taken whole from the table
without touching: but as the one was far better the^ the company deserved, so
the other, for a far worse woman might more fitly have seemed: and if your
sweet meat have such sower sauce, the next time you send for me I will make you
such an answer as was made to Craterus the Emperor by Diogenes, when he sent
for him to make his abode with him in his court: who answered, he had rather be
fed at Athens with salt, then to live with him in all delicacie: so for my
part, I promise you. I had rather be fed at home with bread and water, the^ pay
so deerly for dainty dishes. Touching the pains you have endured for my sake,
I take your words to be as false toward me, as you would make my faith toward
my husband: But admit they were true, seeing I have not bin ye cause of the^, I
count not my self bound in conscience to counteruaile them, only I am sorry
they were not bestowed on some more worthy your estate, and less worthy an
honest name then my self* which being the chief riches I have, I mean most
diligently to keep. The interest which cauellingly you claim in me, as it
consists of false premises, so though they were true, yet the conclusion
which you infer thereof follows not necessarily. For were it so that your
love were greater toward me then my husbands (which you cannot induce me to
believe) yet seeing he by order of law has first taken possession of me, your
title succeeding his, your succession and suit must needs be cold and naught:
for as your self says of laws so of titles, the first are ever of most
force, and the most ancient of most authority. Your woluish example though it
show your foxely brain, yet does it in force no such proof to your purpose,
but that by my former reason it may be refelled, for that the wolf is free
from the proper possession of any: but therein truly you observe decorum* in
using the example of a beast in so brutish a cause: for like purpose like
proof: like man like matter.

Your manly marching under the ensign of justice, if reason be your Captain
general to lead you, I doubt not but soon to turn to a retire: for if it be
good will which you bear me, I must needs grant you duly deserve the like
again, but when you are able to prove it good will to deflowre my chastity,
to bereave me of my good name, to dispoile me of my honor, to cause me to
transgress the bonds of honesty, to infringe my faith toward my husband, to
violate the sacred rites of Matrimony, with other innumerable enormities, when
I say you are able to prove these to proceed from affection, then will I
willingly yield consent to your request. But see the unreasonableness of your
suite, would you have me in showing courtesy toward you, commit cruelty
toward my self? Should I in extending mercy to you, bring my self to
misery? Should I place you in pleasure, and displace my self of all joy? For
what solace can a woman purchase, having lost her chastity, which ought to be
the joy, i^well, and ien^me of all Gentlewomen of what calling and countenance
soever? Your appeal from your own cause to my courtesy, bewrays the
naughtiness thereof: for if it be not ill, why stick you not too it? if it be
good, why appeal you from it? But seeing you have constituted me judge in this
case, you know it is not the part of a judge to deal partially, or to respect
the man more then the matter, or to tender more my own case then your cause:
therefore indifferently this sentence definitive I give, I condemn you
henceforth to perpetual silence in this suite, and that you never hereafter
open your mouth herein, being a matter most unseemly for your honor, and most
prejudicial to my honesty: and in abiding this sentence (if you can be
content with honest amity) for the courtesy which I have found at your hands,
and for the good will which you pretend to bear me, I promise you, you shall
enjoy the second place in my heart, and you shall find me friendly in all
things, which either you with reason can ask, or I with honesty grant.
Maechander having heard this angel thus amiably pronouncing these words, was
so rapt in admiration of her wisdom, and ravished in contemplation of her
beauty, that though she had not enjoined him to silence, yet had he not had a
word to say: and least his looks might bewray his love, and his countenance
discover his case, he secretly and suddenly withdrew himself into his
chamber, to study what face to set on the matter: and casting himself upon
the bed, after he had dreamed a while upon his doting devises, at length he
awaked out of his wavering thoughts, and recovering the possession of his
senses again, he sung this mournful Dittie.

Maechanders Sonnet.
O Cupid thou, which do in ha^ty skies,
Amongst the great and mighty gods soiourne:
And eke that present art with terreine wight^*
To cause their hearts with lovers laws to burn.
To thee O God, whose bow and golden sha^^
Does wound both gods, and men alike:
And causest every one, to yield themselves to thee,
And subjects to become, for all Dianaes spite.
To thee I make, and swear my fixed vow,
If I by help of thee, my wished joys attain:
Then must I only praise thy mighty bow,
And subject will to thee always remain.
By this time the Play was ended, and his guests ready to depart, whereupon he
was driven to come forth of his chamber, to take leave of them: and bidding his
mistres good night, he gave her such a look, that his very eyes seemed to
plead for pity: so that what his tongue durst not, his eyes did. His guests
being gone, he disposed himself to rest, but love willed him otherwise to
employ that night, which was in examining particularly every point of her
answer. And though the first part seemed somewhat sharp and rigorous, and the
second contained the confutation of his cause, yet the third and last part
seemed to be mixed with metal of more mild matter, which he repeated to
himself a thousand times, and thereupon, as upon a firm foundation,
determined to raise up his building again, which the two former parts of her
answer had utterly ransackt to the ground. But mistaking the nature of the
soil whereon the foundation was laid, his fabrike (as if it had been set in
the sand) soon came to ruin: for by that promise of friendship, which she
kindly made him, he sinisterly conceived hope of obteining that, which she
neither with honor could promise, nor with honesty perform: and feeding
himself with that vain hope, in great bravery, as in a manner assured of the
victory, he wrote unto her to this effect.

Machander to Varrona, wishes what he wants himself.
ALbeit good mistres, you have enjoined my tongue to silence, yet my hands are
at liberty to bewray the secrets of my heart: and though you have taken my
heart prisoner, yet my head has free power to plead for release and relief.
Neither would I you should count me in the number of those cowardly soldiers,
who at the first Canon that roareth, give over the siege: for I have been
always settled in this opinion, that the more hard the sight is, the more
haughty is the conquest^ and the more doubtful the battle, the more
doughtie the victory. And as it is not the part of a politic Captain to put
himself in peril, without hope of gain or praise: so to win the bulwark
of your breast, I count it a more ^ich booty, then Caesar had in ransacking so
many Cities: and a most r^^e praise, then ever Alexander had in subduing so
many nations. And though my presumption may seem great in assaulting one as is
your sweet self, yet seeing in all degrees of friendship equality is chiefly
considered, I trust you will clear me of crime that way: neither would I you
should think my flight so free, as to stoop (...) the haughty Hawke will not
pray on carrion, so neither will courtly silks practice country sluts. (...)
because I (...) that to be in you, which both concerns my ca^^ing and
consents with my fancy, I have chosen (...) to for the^ (...) of my
devotions, humbly (...) that it may not be said your name has bin, called upon
in vain* ^hereby you may loose that honor which I in (...) unto you. The
benefit which you bestow on me, (...) the second place in your heart, as I mus^
(...), though somewhat unthankfully, so must I crave a greater, though (...)
heart and body are yours, (...) amends. Weigh the mat^^^ vprigh (...) cas^
courteously, and take compassion on me (...)

Yours altogether Maechander.


To this letter ^e (...) this passion.
MY boat does pass the straights
of seas incenst with fire:
Filled with forgetfulness,
amidst the winters night:
A blind and careless boy,
(brought up by fond desire)
Does guide me in the sea
of sorrow and despite.
For every oar, he sets
a ran^e of foolish thoughts,
And cuts (in stead of wave)
a hope without distress,
The winds of my deep sighs
(that thunder still for naught,)
Have split my sails with fear,
with care and heaviness.
A mighty storm of tears,
a black and hideous cloud,
A ^housand fierce disdaines,
Do slack the tacklings often,
Till ignorance does pull,
and error hale the shroud,
No star for safety shines,
no Phoebe from aloft.
Time has subdued art, and joy is slave to woe,
Alas (loue-guide) be kind, what, shall I perish so ^
Varrona having received and read this letter, was assailed diversely: sometimes
with sorrow, in thinking on the time she first saw him, or he her: sometimes
with repentance of her former promise made him: sometime with pity on his
part: (...) with pity on her own: but at length pity vanquished pity, and
caused her to send this rough reply to his letter.

Varrona wishes to Machander remorse of conscience, and regard of honesty.
THe little account you make of me, and my good will, I perceive by the little
care you have to satisfy that which I gave you in charge. You would ill have
done as the knight V^^^ did, who at the commandment of his Lady Lis^^
forbear the use of his tongue, and remained dumb the term^ of three years.
But as you subtly think to discharge your self of my iniunction, by writing,
and not speaking, so by writing I simply do you understand, that from
henceforth you look for no more favor at my hands, then at strangers, I will
not say an enemies. For seeing my promise was but upon condition, the condition
being violated, my promise is void. And seeing you have played the pelting
merchant venturer, to hazard that good will and credit you have had with me, to
get more, the tempest of my just displeased mind has driven your suit against
the rough rocks of repulse, and you have made shipwreck of al. Your
courageous persisting in your purpose, proves you rather a desperate sot then
a discreet soldier: for to hop against the hill, and strive against the
stream, has ever been counted extreme folly. Your valiant venturing for a
pray of value, proceeds rather of covetousness then of courage: for the valiant
soldier seeks glory, not gain: but therein you may be fitly resembled to
the caterpiller, which eleaueth only to the good friute: or to the moath,
which most of al eats the best cloth: or to the canker, which commonly
breeds in the fairest rose.

The equality which you pretend to be between us, is altogether unequal, for
both you (...) me in degree, and I ^^ell you in honesty (...) neither in
calling or quality, there i^ any equality between us Whereas you have chosen me
for your goddess, I beseech you suffer me to remain an earthly creature: and
(...) you that God which can bridle your wanton desires, and give you grace
(...) leave to live honest^^e by you, (...) vain, who will verily punish your
vanity at the length, though for a time he suffer you to wallow in your
wickedness. For it is the prudent policy of God, (...) suffer the sinful long
time to swim in their sin, to make their downfall more hideous, by their
sudden shrinking from prosper^tie to adversity. For that is ever most bitter
unto him, who has long time lived in prosperity: neither must you think that
that which is deferred is taken way. For as (...) self or (...) other, that
owes (...), though you defer your creditor for a time, yet you defraude him
(...), though God take days with you soon (...) yet assure your self he will
pay you at the length: yea and (...) with large usury, besides the due d^bt.
And this good counsel take of me, as the last benefit which you shall (...)
at my hands.

Yours nothing at all, Varrona.


Maechander having sin this rigorous resolution of his mistress, went
another way to work, he subdr^ed ^n old woman of the city, well seen in
soliciting such suits, to go (...) her and present her from him with many rich
iewell^, all which (he wiled her to tell) he would willingly bestow for one
simple consent of her good will. The old woman (...) would have said) having
done his shameful message, said (...) self in this sort.

Surely mistress Varrona, if the experience which old years have given me,
might crave credit for the counsail^ which I shall give you, I would not wish
you to (...) the (...) such a one as is Maechander, (...) pearls, and fulfill
you with pleasures every way: Neither is it wisdom for you to spend your
golden years, but in a golden pleasure, and not to be tied to one (...) which
brings (...) and loath^^mnesse, but ^o have choice of change which brings
appetite and lustiness.

The chaste ears of Varrona not able to endure this base discourse, she cut of
her ghostly counsel with these inuectiue words. Gentlewoman if you were endued
with as many good conditions as you have lived years, you would never have
undertaken so shameful a message: and were it not more for reverence of your
years, then in respect of your errand, I would make your filthy trade of life
so famous, that you should ever hereafter be ashamed to show your face in any
honest company. What do you think, though money can make you a bawd, that it
can make me an harlot? and though you for gain flee no filthynesse, that I for
glory follow no faithfulness either toward my spouse and husband, or toward
my Lord and God? Do you judge me so covetous of coin, or so prodigal of my
honor, that to get the one, I will lose the other? Or does he that sent you
think so obiectlie of me, that gain may more prevail with me then good will,
money more then a man, jewels more then gentleness, pearls more then troubles
which he has endured for my sake? No let him understand, if any thing could
have caused me to swerve from my duty, love not lure should have allured me
theretoo. But as I am fully resolved, faithfully to keep my vow, and promise
made to my husband, so I beseech him not to bestow any more labor in
attempting that, unto which he shall never attain: for before this my
resolution shall be reuersed, he shall see the dissolution of my body into
dust. But if he will not thus give over his suit, he will cause me to make
those privy to his dealings, who will make him ashamed of them: and for your
part, pack you hence with this your trumperie, to those which measure their
honor by the price of profit, and their glory by the guerdon of gain. This
good old subaudi gentlewoman being gone away with a flea in her ear, Varrona
began to think on the matter with advised deliberation, and entered into
reasoning with her self in this sort.

What fearful folly is this in me to contemn the friendship of so great a
Lord, whom the brauest Lady in this land would willingly receive for husband,
and I rigorously refuse for servant? What is that honor whereupon I stand so
stiffely? Shall it not rather increase my dignity, to have so noble a servant?
And what is that chastity which I seek so charily so keep? Do not some men
say, that women always live chastely enough, so that they live charily enough?
that is, so that they conueigh their matters so covertly, that their doings be
not commonly known: for otherwise to incontinencie were added impudency;
likewise for a woman to enter in conversation with a rascal of no reputation,
cannot be but a great blemish to the brightness of her name: for a foul
adulterer, is ever worse then adultery it self. And is it not a great sign
she loatheth her husband, when she likes one better, which is every way worse?
But to have a friend of reservation whose very countenance may credit her
husband, methinks cannot be no great dishonor, either to the one, or to the
other. What discredit was it to Helen, when she left her husband Menelaus and
went with Paris to Troy? did not the whole glory of Greece to her great glory
go in arms to fetch her again? And if she had not been counted a piece of
price, or if by that fact she had defaced her honor, is it to be thought the
Graecians would have continued ten years in war continually to win her
again? But to leave honor and chastity, and come to commodity and safety,
what do I know what perils will follow of this repulse? Is it likely Maechander
will put up this reproach patiently? May I not justly look to have his love
turned to hate, and that he will either by tyrannous means seek the
subversion of my husband, or by treacherous designements work the overthrow of
me, and my good name? For the first, Edward a King of England may serve for an
example, who when the Countess of Salisbury would not consent to content his
incontinent desire, he so raged against her parents and friends, as that the
father was forced to persuade his own daughter to folly, and the mother as a
bawd to prostitute her to the Kings lust, and bring her to his privy chamber.
For the second, the Earl of Pancaliar may serve for testimony, who when the
Duchess of Sauoy would not yield to his lascivious lust, wrought such wiles,
that she was condemned for adultery, and judged to suffer most shameful death
by burning. Now to prevent either of these perils, it lies in my power: and
seeing of evils the least is to be chosen, I think it better then to hazard
life, living, or good name, to loose that which shall be no great loss to my
husband or my self: for as the Sun though it shine on us here in Arcadia,
yet it gives light likewise to those which are in England, and other places,
so is there that in me wherewith Lysimachus may be satisfied, and Maechander
sufficed. And this encourages me thereto the rather, for that I see by
experience in most of my neighbors, that those are ever most made of, who that
way deal most falsely with their husbands. Besides that, how openly soever
they deal in these affairs, their husbands never hear of it: and though they
do, yet will they not hearken unto it: and albeit they do in a manner see it,
yet will they not believe it: and though thereto they give credance, yet will
they love them the better, to have them leave it the sooner. Again, what know
I whether my husband deals falsely with me, and row in some other stream,
which if it be so, I shall but save his soul in paying his debts, and exercise
the virtue of justice in requiting like for like. And touching the corruption
of my blood, I think it made more noble, in participating with one of more
dignity then is my husband. But can thou harlot call him husband whom thou
meanest so wickedly to betray? Am I in my wits to use these senseless words?
Is it my mouth that has uttered this blasphemy? or was it the Devil within
me that delivered it forth? No if I were guilty but in thought hereto, I
would restore the fault with criminal penance: yea if I felt any part in me
apt to any such evil, I would cut it off, for fear of infecting the rest of
the body. Good God whither now is honor fled, which was ever wont to be the
fairest flower in my garland? whither now is chastity banished, which has
been always the chiefest stay of my state? shall the sun of my shining life
be now eclipsed with an act ^o filthy, that the very remembrance thereof is no
less grievous then death? Why was Helen for all her heavenly how any other
accounted then a common harlot? and was it not only to be revenged on her, and
on her champion Paris that the Grecians continued their siege so long? And
touching the inconveniences which may incur by this refusal, is any evil
worse then dishonestie? Is there any thing to be feared more then offense? Is
not the less of goods less then of ones good name? Is not an honorable death
to be preferred before an infamous life? And touching the Countess before
rehearsed, had she ever married with the King if she had not continued in her
constancy to the end? And for the Duchess of Sauoy, what hurt sustained she
by that false accusation? did it not make her glory and virtue show more
splendentlie to the view of the whole world? yes no doubt of it.

For like as streams the more you hinder their current, the greater is the
deluge, or as the herb Camomtle, the more it is suppressed, the more it
spreads abroad: even so virtue and honesty, the more they are wronged with
envy, the more they eleuate and extend their flourish: for honor evermore is
the reward of virtue, and does accompany it as duly as the shadow does the
body. And as the Sun though it be under a cloud keeps still his
brightness, albeit by us it cannot be discerned: so virtue though it be
darkened with devilish devises, yet it reserueth her power and vigor still,
though to us it seem utterly to be extinguished: so that so long as I remember
virtue and honesty, I need not care what man, what malice, or the devil can
devise against me. No, no, sweet husband, I will not make thee ashamed to show
thy face amongst the best of them: and I will let thee understand the villainy
which that viper Maechander indeuoureth to do thee. And shall I deal so fondly
indeed? Is not the repulse punishment enough, unless I bewray his doings to
Lysimachus, and so procure him further displeasure? yea, I might thereby be
occasion to set them together by the ears, whereby it might fall out (as the
event of battle is always doubtful) that my husband might be hurt, or
slain, and the common report would be (as the people are ever prone to speak
the wrost) that I, being an ill woman, had conspired his confusion and set
Maechander to sley him. And though no such thing chanced (as God forbid it
should) yet this at least I should be sure to get by it, that my husband ever
after would be jealous over me, and right careful would he be to keep that
which he saw others so busily to seek. And (such is the malice of men)
perchance he would judge some light behavior in me to be the cause that
encouraged Maechander to attempt my chas^itie. For men have this common opinion
amongst them, that as there is no smoke but where there is fire, so sieldome
is there any seruent love, but where there has been some kindness showed to
kindle ones desire. Moreover, this toy may take him in the head, that it is a
practice between us two to prevent suspicion, and cloak our love: and with
the firm persuasion of my invincible chastity, to lull him a sleep in
security, and then most to deceive him, when he least suspected guile. And if
at any time he hear of it by others, I may stop his mouth with this, that I my
self told him of it, which if I had meant to deal falsely with him, I would
not have done. Yea what know I whether he will like the better or worse of me,
for breeding such a bees nest in his brain? Lastly, I should derogate much
from my own chastity, and in a manner accuse my self of pronenesse to fall
that way, as though I were not strong enough to withstand his assaults without
the assistance of my husband. Yes God, in whom I repose my trust, shall
fortify me against the fury of my foes, and give me grace with wisdom to
escape his wiles, with chariness to eschew his charms, and with piety to
resist his prauitie.

Now to return to Maechander: so soon as that old bawd had related unto him
at large the answer of his mistres, he fell from the place where he sat, flat
upon the groued, and lay in a trance a great while: and now those sparks
which before love had kindled in him, were with continual sighs so blown, as
it were with a pair of bellows, that they brake forth into fiery flames, and
that which before was fancy, was now turned into turie. For being come to
himself, or rather being quite past himself, with staring looks, pale
countenance, with fier^e eyes with gnashing teeth, with trembling tongue, in
rage he roared forth these words. And shall I thus be frustrate of my desire?
shall I with words and works, with prayers and presents, pursue the good will
of a dainty disdaining dame, and receive but labor for my love, and grief for
my affection? But oh frantic fool, why do I in a fury rage against her,
who is the most fair and courteous creature under heaven? No, it is that
churl Lysimachus that sows the seed of my sorrow, it is his severity
toward her, that causes her cruelty toward me, the fear which she has of
him, is the cause, she dares not take compassion on my afflictions. And shall
be swim in bliss, and I lie drencht in deep despair? shall he be ingorged
with pleasure, and I pine away in pain? No I will make him feel that once,
which he makes me feel athousand times a day. And hereupon determined with
himself by some means or other, to procure the death of Lysimachus, thinking
thereby the sooner to obtain his purpose of his wife. And calling unto him one
of his swearing swash-buckler servants, he laid before him the platform of
his purpose, and told him plainly if he would speedily dispatch Lysimachus out
of the way, he would give him a thousand crowns in his purse, to keep him in
another country. His servant though altogether past grace, yet for fashion sake
began to advise his master more wisely, saying.

For my own part it makes no matter, for an other country is as good for me
as this, and I count any place my country where I may live well and wealthily:
But for your self, it is requisite that extraordinary care be added, in
regard that your love toward Varrona is kowne to diverse of this city, by
reason whereof, if I should commit any such fact, it must needs be thought that
you are accessarie thereto, which will turn, though not to your death, (for
that none has authority above you to execute the rigor of the laws upon
you) yet to your utter shame and reproach it cannot but convert. Tush (said his
master) the case is light where counsel can take place: what talkest thou to
me of shame, that am by imurious and spiteful dealing deprived of the use of
reason, and dispossessed of my wits and senses. Neither am I the first that
have played the like part. Did not David the chosen servant of God, being
blasted with the beauty of Bersheba, cause her husband Vrias to be set in the
vanward to be slain, which done he married his wife? And why is it not lawful
for me to do the like? But I know the worst of it, if then wilt not take it
upon thee, I will either perform it my self, or procure some other that
shall. The man seeing how his master was bent, both to satisfy his mind, and
to gain so great a sum of money, consented as soon as opportunity would give
him leave to murder Lysimachus: wherewith Maechander remained somewhat
appeased, hoping now to be invested into the throne of his delights. But the
ground of this unnatural devise was most strangely detected. For all their
consultations were ouerheard by Conscionato, an other of Maechanders men, but
more religiously addicted, being then resident in a chamber near adio^ning
unto that place wherein those things were thus debated. He utterly condemning
his masters too much luxurious thoughts, and greatly misliking his fellows
impudent promise, but especially affecting Lysimachus as a man in whom the true
sparks of virtue were eminent, made manifest incontinently the whole
conspiracy, which Maechander for the love of his wife had devised against him,
desiring him not to account him a traitor for bewraying his masters counsel,
but to think that he did it for conscience: hoping that although his master
inflamed with desire, or incensed by lust, had imagined such causeless
mischief, yet when time should assuage his desires, and moderate his
affections, that then he would count him as a faithful servant, that with such
care had kept his masters credit.

Lysimachus had not fully heard the man tell forth his tale, but a quaking
fear possessed al his limunes, thinking that there was some plot wrought, and
that the fellow did but shadow his craft with these false colors; wherefore
he began to wax in choler, and said that he doubted not Maechander, since he
was his friend, and there h^d never as yet been any breach of amity: he had
not sought any ways to wrong him, with slanderous speeches to offend him, by
sinister reports to molest his patience: but in word and thought he rested his
at all times: he knews not therefore any cause that should move Maechander to
seek his death, but suspected it to be a compacted kna^^rie of some, to bring
the gentlewoman and him at odds. Conscionato staying him in the midst of his
talk, told him, that to dally with suspected friends, was with the Swans to
sing against their death: and that if some had intended any such secret
mischief, it might have (...) better brought to pass, then by (...) the
conspiracy: therefore he did ill to misconsture of his good meaning, (...) his
intent was to hinder murder, not to become a murderer: and to confirm his
promise, if it pleased him with his wife to fl^^ out of Arcadia for the
safeguard of his life, he would go with him, and if then he found not such a
practice to be pretended, let his imagined treachery be repayed with most
monstrous torments. Lysimachus hearing the solemn protestation of the servant,
attributed credit thereto, willing him to abide at his house a day or two, that
thereby the man which should accomplish this stratageme being discovered, he
might with more security avoid the ensuing danger. Now when the (...) was
grown by many hours aged, Conscionato who had given Lysimachus to understand
of this intended purpose might espy where his fellow Christophero do mala mente
came posting to his house amain, which thing after Lysimachus had known,
aiming himself for the purpose, as having a sword obscured by the couerture of
his cloak, walked down a grove which Christophero perceiving, and seeing none
near for his succor, with his cutlax violently rushed upon him: but Lysimachus
having evermore an eye upon him, with facility avoided the blow, and with
such courage threw him to the ground, falling upon his chest with so willing a
weight, that Christophero yielded nature her one, and Lysimachus the victory.

He forthwith informed the chief officers of the city of these accidents,
who examining very effectually the matter, found Maechander a duating leacher,
whereupon they not only amersed him a great fine to be paid to Lysimachus and
Varrona, but put him for ever after from bearing any office in that city.
Thus where these two lovers delivered from their enemies, and reckoned now
famous for their virtues through all Arcadia. This strange event spread abroad
through all the country, and as same flies swift and far, so at length it
came to the ears of Syllanus, who hearing by sundry reports the same of their
forwardness, how Lysimachus coueted to be most loving to his daughter, and she
most dutiful to him, and both to strive to exceed one another in loyalty, and
glad at this mutual agreement, he fell from the fury of his former melancholy
passion, and satisfied himself with a contented patience, that at last he
directed letters to his son in law, that he should make repair to his house
with his daughter. Which news was no sooner come to the ears of this married
couple, but providing for all things necessary for the furniture of their
voyage, they posted as fast as they could to the sea coast. Where taking
ship, and having a prosperous gale, in a day and a night they were set on
shore in Thessalia: who speedily arri^ing at their fathers house, found such
friendly entertainment at the old man's hand, that they counted this smile of
fortune able to counteruaile all the contrary storms that the adverse Planets
had inflicted upon them.

Syllanus for ye safe recovery of his daughter, surprised with exceeding great
joy, wait the last end of his lives lege^d. Lysimachus after the death of his
father in law was created Duke of Hypatae, and being willing to recompense old
Procyon, of a shepherd made him a knight. Toxeus was preferred into the kings
service, being substituted Captain of his guard: and because I will not blot
from your thoughts the remembrance of all those actions, Conscioanato by act of
parliament was made Baron of Cypera, and their farm in Arcadia made sure to
Alexis, Et haeredibussuis in perpetuu^. These two lovers thus floating in the
top of lovers gallantise, transtreated the sea of their life in so peaceable a
calm, turning all their actions with the sweet consents of mutual amity,
that they were accounted the only presidents of married government. What
should I say? they lived a mirror to men, a wonder to women, and a maze to
all, which when it changes expect for news. Now to close up this comicall
Catastrophe with a tragical stratageme, I will relate unto you the history of
Valintine, brother to Lysimachus, and the fortunes of those two suborned
villains, as in the beginning hereof I promised.

The History of Valentine, and the two Beggars.
VAlentine utterly forgetting ye abuses which he had offered his brother,
thought himself so surely seated, as no sinister chance or dismal influence
might remove. She that is constant in nothing but inconstancy, began in a
fair sky to produce a tempest thus. It fell out as he frequented the court of
Diocles King of Macedonia, that he fired his eyes on the face of a noble
gentlewoman, named Fuluia, daughter of Hermodius. And as the mouse mumpeth so
long at the bait, that at length she is taken in the trap: so he bit so long
at the bait of her beauty, that at length he was caught in Cupids snare. And
on a time as she was at cards in the presence chamber, this youth Valentine
stood staring in her face in a great study, which Fuluia perceiving, to bring
him out of it prayed him to reach her a bowl of wine, which stood upon a
cupboord by: and as he approached therewith to the place of her presence, his
senses were so ravished with the sight of her sweet face, that he let the
bowl fall ^oorth of his hands, and retiring back with seemly shamefastnes,
went for more, and being come therewith, she thanked him for his pains,
saying, I pray God that the fall of the wine hinder not my winning, and bring
me ill luck, for I know many that cannot away to have salt, or drink, or any
such like thing fall toward them.

Madame (said Valentine) I have often heard it disputed in Schools, that such
as the cause of every thing is, such will be the effect, and seeing the cause
of this chance was good, I doubt not but the effect will follow accordingly:
and if any evil does ensue thereof, I trust it will light on my head, through
whose negligence it happened. Fuluia answered, as I know not the cause, so I
fear not the effect, and in deed as you say, hitherto you have had the worst
of it, for that thereby you have been put to double pains.

If that be all (said he) rather then it shall be said any evil to have ensued
of this chance, I will persuade my self that every pain which you shall put
me to, shall be double delight, and unto me treble contentation. You must use
(quoth she then) great eloquence, to persuade you to such an impossibility. Oh
if it please you (said he) there is an Orator which of late has taken up his
dwelling within me, who has eloquence to persuade to a far greater matter
then this.

If (said she) he persuade you to things no more behoofefull for your self
then this, if you will admit of my admonition, you shall not give him
house-roome long. Madame (replied he) it is an assured sign of a free and
friendly mind to give good counsel, but it is hard for one in bondage, and
out of his own possession to follow it. For what know you whether he has
already taken entire possession of the house wherein he is, which if it be so,
what wit is able to devise a writ to remove him from thence? If sir (said she)
he entered by order of law, and paid you truly for it, it is reason he enjoy
it: mary your folly was great to retain such a tenant: but if he intruded
himself by force, you may lawfully exclude him by strength.

Indeed (said he) he entered vi and armis, forcibly, but after upon parley, I
was content he should remain in peaceable possession, mary as yet he paid me
nothing, but he promises so frankly, that if the performance follow, a house
with beams of beaten gold, and pillars of precious stones, will not
counteruaile the price thereof: yet if I were placed in quiet possession of it,
I would think my self richer, I will not say then the King, but which is
more, then God himself, who rules heaven and earth. And as the hope of
obteining the effect of that promise heaueth me up to heaven, so the doubt ^o
be deceived thereof drives me down to hell.

And what iollie fellow (said she) is this that promises so frankly? will he
not promise golden hills, and perform dirtie da^es? Would to God (said he) your
seemly self were so well acquainted with him as I am, then would I make you
judge of the worthiness of the thing he has promised, for that you know the
goodness thereof, none better.

The Lady smelling the drifts of his devises, and seeing the end of his talk
seemed to tend to love, and that touching her own self, thought not good to
draw on their discourse any longer, but concluded with this answer. As I am
altogether ignorant what your obscure talk means, so care I not to be
acquainted with any such company as is your Landlord, for so (me thinks by
you) I may more fitly call him, then term him your tenant: and so departed
away into her lodging.

Valentine likewise his mistres being gone, gate him to his Chamber to
entertain his amorous conceits, and being alone, brake forth into these
words. O friendly fortune, if continually hereafter thou furiously frown upon
me, yet shall I all the days of my life count my self bound unto thee, for
the only pleasure which this day thou have affoorded me, in giving me occasion
to talk with her, whose angels voice made such heavenly harmony in my heavy
heart, that where before it was plunged in perplexities, it is now placed in
felicity: and where before it was oppressed with care, it is now refreshed
with comfort. Yea every look of he is able to cure me, if I were in most
deep distress of a most dangerous disease: every sweet word proceeding from
her sugared lips, is of force to fetch me from death to life. But alas how true
do I try that saying, that every commodity has annexed unto it a
discommoditie? How does the remembrance of this joy put me in mind of the
grief, which the loss of this delight will procure me and yea it makes all
my senses shake, to think that some other shall enjoy her more worthy of her
then my self: and yet who in this court, nay in all Christendom, nay in the
whole world, is worthy of her? No, if she never have any, until every way
she have one worthy of her, she shall never have any. And shall I then, being
but a poor Gentleman, seek to insinuate my self into a place so high? Shall
I by my rude attempt purchase at least the displeasure of her friends and
parents, and perchance of hers also, whom to displease would be no less
offensive unto me then death? Alas, and must love needs be rewarded with hate?
must courtesy be counter^ailed with cruelty? must good will be returned with
displeasure? Is it possible that bounty should not abide, where beauty does
abound? and that courtesy should not associate her comeliness? Yes, I am sure
at the least she will suffer me to love her, though her young years, and high
estate will not suffer her to affect me: and though she will not accept me for
an husband, yet I am persuaded she will not reject me for a servant: and though
she will not receive my service, yet I doubt but she will affablie take the
tendering thereof unto her. And touching her parents displeasure, what care I to
procure the ill will of the whole world, so I may purchase her good liking.
Yea, if I should spend the most precious blood in my body, in the pursuit of
so peerless a piece, I would count it as well bestowed, as if it were shead
in the quarrel of the Gods, thy Prince, or country. For she is ye Goddess
whom with devotion I will adore: she is the prince, whom with duty I will
obey: she is the country in whole cause I will spend my life, living, and all
that I have. Neither is there such cause why her friends should much storm at
the matter: for my lands and revenues are such, as that they will not suffer
me to want any thing pertaining to my estate and degree. Why Alearne a youth
like my self, being inamoured with Ardalesia daughter to the mighty Emperor
Otho stole her away, and married her: and do I stick to attempt the like with
one of far meaner estate, though of far more worthiness? And albeit
frowning Fortune tossed him for a while in the temp^stuous seas of adversity,
yet at the length he arrived at the haven of happy estate, and was reconciled
to the good grace of the Emperor again. And though at the first my ship be
shaken with angry blasts, yet in time I doubt not but to be safely landed on
the shore, and have my share of that which the shewers of shrewde fortune shall
keep me from. He is not worthy to suck the sweet, who has not first sauoured
the sower: And as the beauty of a fair woman, being placed by a foul,
blazeth more brightly, so cach joy is made more pleasant, by first tasting some
sower sops of sorrow. Did not the perrill which Leander ventured in the Ocean,
and the pain which he took in swimming, make his arrival to the haven of his
heavenly Hero more happy and pleasant? yes no doubt of it: for besides the
feeling of the present pleasure, the remembrance of the danger past delights.
Besides that, by how much more a man hazardeth himself for his mistress sake,
by so much the more he manifests the constancy of his soul, and meriteth
solace at her hands the more worthily. This saying also is no less tried then
true, that fortune ever favors the valiant: and things the more hard, the
more haughty, high and heavenly: neither is any thing difficult to be by him
accomplished which hardly enterpriseth it. With that he took a Lute in his
hand and played a note to a dittie which he sung as follows.

Valentines Song.
I would thou were not fair, or I were wise,
I would thou had no face, or I no eyes:
I would thou were not wise, or I not fond,
Or thou not free, or I not so in bond.
But thou art fair, and I cannot be wise,
Thy sunlike face, has blinded both mine eyes:
Thou can not be but wise, nor I but fond,
Nor thou but free, nor I but still in bond.
Yet am I wise to think that thou art fair,
Mine eyes, their pureness in thy face repair:
Nor am I fond, that do thy wisdom see:
Nor yet in bond, because that thou art free.
Then in thy beauty only make me wise,
And in thy face, the Graces guide mine eyes:
And in thy wisdom only see me fond,
And in thy freedom keep me still in bond.
So shall thou still be fair, and I be wise:
Thy face shines still upon my cleared eyes:
Thy wisdom only see how I am fond:
Thy freedom only keep me still in bond.
So would I thou were fair, and I were wise:
So would I thou had thy face, and I mine eyes:
So would I thou were wise, and I were fond,
And thou were free, and I were still in bond.
With these, and such like sayings, encouraging himself, he purposed to pursue
his purpose, and sailed not daily to attend upon his mistress with all duty
and diligence, and sought all occasions he could to let her understand his
loyal love, and great good will toward her: which she perceiving, disdayned
not to acknowledge by her amiable and courteous countenance toward him,
wherewith he held himself as well satisfied, as if he had been made Monarch of
the whole world. And though he were often determined in words to present his suit
unto her, yet when it came to the point he should have spoken, fear of
offending her altogether disappointed his purpose, and made him mute in the
matter which he minded to utter. But at length perceiving that delay bred
danger, for that she had many other suitors, and feeling by experience, that as
fire, the more it is kept down, the more it flameth up: so love, the more he
sought to suppress him, the more fiery forces within him he expressed: he
began to set fear aside, and to force a supply of courage in his faint
heart, and seeing his mistress fit in the presence alone, he entered into
reasoning with her in this manner.

Madam, for that I see you without company, I am the bolder to presume to
prease in place, whereof though I be altogether unworthy, yet am I willing to
supply it: and if my company may content you, as well as your sight satisfies
me, I doubt not but you will accept it in good part: and so much the less I
hope my company shall be cumbersome unto you, for that you are busied about
nothing whereto my presence may be prejudicial. And verily when I consider the
common course of life, which your sweet self, and other maids of your estate
lead, me thinks it is altogether like the spending of your time at this
present, which is (with your leave be it spoken) idly, unfruitfully, without
pleasure, without profit. And if my credit were such with you, to crave belief
for that which I shall speak, I would not doubt but to persuade you to another
trade of life, more commendable to the world, more honorable amongst all men,
and more acceptable in the sight of God. For believe me I pity nothing more
then virgins vain pity, who think they merit reward for living chastely,
when in deed they deserve blame for spending their time so wastly.

Sir (said she) as your company contenteth me well enough, so your talk likes
me but a little: for though I must confess I sit at this present without doing
any thing, yet in my fancy it is better to be idle, then ill employed as your
self is now, in reprehending that state of life which excels al others, as
far as the Sun does a star, or light darkness: and wherein I mean, for my
part, to pass the pilgrimage of this my short life, if either God dispose me
not, or my friends force me not to the contrary.

God forbid Madame (said he) you should continue your time in any such trifling
trade of life, which indeed is to be counted no life at all, as the Grecian
Ladies can truly testify, who (as Homer reports) reckon their age from the
time of their marriage, not from the day of their birth: and if they be
demanded how old they be, they begin to number from their marriage, and so
answer accordingly: for then only (say they) we begin to live, when we have a
house to govern, and may command our children and our servants.

Tush (said the Lady) this is but the sentence and proper opinion of our
peculiar people, who perchance by nature of their country or otherwise, are
more desirous of husbands then other: neither is it any more reason that we
should be tied to their example, then they bound to follow our virgin Vestals:
or other, who consume the whole course of their life without contaminating
their corpse with the company of man. Nay rather (said he) without receiving
their perfection from men, according to the opinion of Aristotle. But Madame I
did not produce that example as necessary for all to follow, but as profitable
to prove and show, what base account they made of virginity, which you so
highly esteem of. But to leave particular opinions, and come to general
constitutions and customs, I mean both natural, humane, and divine laws,
and you shall see them all to make against you. And first if you consider
natures, which in the doings of creatures without reason are plainly set
down, you shall behold no living wight in the world universal, but that so
soon as by age they are apt thereto, apply themselves to that life whereby
their kind may be conserved, and number increased. Behold the high flying
Falcon, which soareth so high in the air, that a man would think she should
neither stoop to lure or lust: yet she is no sooner an Entermurer, or at the
farthest a white Hawke, but that of her own accord she comes to the call of
the Tersell-gentle her mate. Likewise the Do, which flingeth so freely about
the woods, as though she made no account of the male, yet she is no sooner a
forressister, but that she seeks the society of the Bucke. Yea if it would
please your seemly self to enter into the consideration of your own nature,
or if your courtesy would deem me worthy to have the examination of your
secret thoughts, I doubt not but you would confess your self to feel a
fiery force of that natural inclination which is in other creatures: which
being so, you must grant to deal unnaturally in resisting that motion which
cannot be ill or idle, because nature has planted it in you. For God and
nature do nothing vainly, or after a vile manner. And in that some do amiss
in rebelling against her, their own scrupulous niceness is the cause, when
they will impose upon themselves heavier burdens then they are well able to
sustain, and refuse those which nature has appointed them to bear, being
indeed but light.

What talk you sir (said she) so much of nature, and of creatures without
reason, as though we ought to follow either the instinct of the one, or the
example of the other. I have been always taught, that reason is the rule
whereby our actions ought to be directed, and that we ought to lay before us
the deeds of creatures endued with reason to follow and imitate. For if you
stick so strictly to the example of brute beasts, you should use the company of
women but once or twice at the most in a year, as most of them do with their
females, whereto I am sure you would be loath to be tied.

Madame (replied he) a Gentlewoman of this city has already answered this
objection for me. Why then (quoth she) will you condemn their doings in some
points, and place them for patterns to be practiced by other some?

Yea why not (said he) otherwise you might generally take exception against the
example of men, for that some men in some matters do amiss. The good ever is
to be used, and the evil rejected. Does not every man so soon as his daughter
is arrived to ripe years, travail to bestow her in marriage, whereby she may
enjoy the fruits of love, and participate with pleasures incident to that
estate? whereby they plainly show that the cause why they beget them with
pleasure, and bring them up with pain, is to have them enter into that trade
of life, wherein not only themselves may live happily, abounding in all
pleasure, but also by the fertile fruit of their body make their mortal
parents immortal, that when they shall be blasted with age, and withered away,
the issue of their seed may begin greenely to grow, and flourishly to spring,
to the great comfort both of father and daughter. For what pleasure the
Grandfather takes in the sporting pastime of his proper daughters pretty
children, I think you partly understand: and what delight the mother takes in
the toys of her little son, you soon shall perfectly perceive, if it
please you freely to follow the friendly counsel which I frankly pronounce
unto you. For do you think, if virginity were of such virtue, that parents
would not rather pain themselves to keep their daughters modest maids, then
strain themselves and their substance to join them in Iunoes sacred bond? Yes
persuade your self, if ^our mother were so assured, she would rather lock you
up c^ose in her closet, then suffer any to enjoy the sovereign sight of your
beauty, or once aspire to your speech, whereby you might be persuaded to some
other kind of life. But she experienced by years knows what is best for your
behoof, and would you should follow her example, and make no conscience to
loose that which she herself has lest, which except she had, we had mist so
rare a jewel as your seemly self is, which what a detriment it had been to
my self, I dare not say, least you should count virtue vanity, and truth
trifling flattery. But to our purpose, you perceive (as I said) your parents
pleased with the access of Gentlemen unto you, whereby you may conceive their
mind is you should accept such service as they profer, and partake with those
pleasures which they prefer unto you.

Why sir (said she) you altogether mistake the meaning of men in this matter:
for when fathers tender marriages to their daughters, it is not for any mind
they have to have them married; but only for fear least they should fall to
folly other ways: for knowing the fickle frailty of youth, and our
propens^ues to gravity, and weakness, they provide us marriages to prevent
mischiefs: and seeing of evils the least is to be chosen, they count wedlock a
less evil then the lightness of our life and behavior.

Alas good Madame (said Valentine) why do you so much profane the holy state
of Matrimony, as to count it in the number of evils, whereas the Gods
themselves have entered into that calling, whereas Princes pleasantly pass
their time therein, whereas by it only mankind is preserved, and amiss and
love amongst men continued, of the worthiness whereof I am not sufficient to
open my lips.

Sir (said Fuluia) I speak it not of my self, but according to the opinion of
the most wise and learned Philosophers that ever lived, amongst whom one
Aminius so much misliked of marriage, that being demanded why he would not
marry, answered, because there were so many inconveniences incident to that
estate, that the least of them is able to sley a thousand men.

Why Madame (replied he) you must consider there is nothing in this mortal
life so absolutely good and perfect, but that there be inconveniences as well
as commodities thereby incurred: by that reason you may take the Sun out of
the world, for that it parcheth the Summer green, and banisheth away the
beauty of those that therein blaze their faces. But to leave natural and
humane laws, and come to divine precepts proceeding from Gods own mouth, does
not God say, It is not good for a man to live alone, and therefore made Eve for
an help and comforter? Likewise in diverse places of Scripture he does not only
commend marriage unto us, saying, Marriage, and the bed undefiled are
honorable, but also commands us to it, saying, You shall forsake father and
mother, and follow your wives.

Why sir (said she) and does not God say, It is good for a man not to touch a
woman? And if thou be unmarried, remain so. But why allege you not this
text, It is better to marry then to burn? whereby is plainly showed, that
marriage is but a mean medicine for the burning in concupicence and lust. But
because we entered into these mysteries, I could refer you to an history, where
it is reported that in heaven Uirgins chiefly serve God, and set forth his
glory. And Mahomet the great Turk, when he was in heaven, said, he saw there
Uirgins, who if they issued from heaven would lighten the whole world with
their brightness, and if they chanced to spit into the sea, they would make the
whole water as sweet as honey: but here is no mention of married folks.

Belike (said he) those Uirgins are like your self, and then no marvel
though God be delighted with the sight of them, which perchance is the cause he
has them in heaven to attend upon him, as first Hebe and after Ganymedes did
upon Jupiter. But generally of women, the histories record, that by bringing
forth of children they shall be honored, and enjoy a place in heaven, which
must be by marriage, if honestly. But because I am persuaded that it is only
for argument sake that you disalow marriage, and that you pretend otherwise in
words, then you intend to do in works, I am content to give you the honor of
the field, and thus far to yeels my consent to your opinion, that virginity
considered of it own nature, simply without circumstance is better then
matrimony: but because the one is full of peril, the other fraught with
pleasure: the one full of ieopardie, the other full of security: the one as
rare as the black swanne, the other as common as the black crow: of good
things, I think the more common, the more commendable.

I (said she) I have gotten any conquest thereby, I thank mine own cause, not
your courtesy, who yields when you are able to stand no longer in defense.

Nay Madame say not so (quoth he) for in that very yielding to your op^^^on,
(...) marriage better then virginity, for that it is more common: neither
would I have you turn my silence (...) this matter in lack of knowledge, or
reprehend me, if I spare to enforce further proof in a matter already
sufficiently proo^ed: no more then you would rebuke the spanniell, which
cease to hunt, when he sees the hawke seized on the pa^tridge. But you may
marvel madam what is the cause that makes me persuade you thus earnestly to
marriage, which as mine own unworthiness wills me to hide, so your
incomparable courtesy en^^rageth me to disclose, which makes* me think that
it is no small cause which can make you greatly offended with him, who bears
you great good will, and that what suit soever I shall prefer unto you, you
will either grant it, or forgive it: pardon, or pity it. Therefore may it
please you to understand, that since, not long since. I took large view of
your virtue, and beauty, my heart has been so inflamed with the bright beams
thereof, that nothing is able to quench it, but the water which flows from
the fountain that first infected me: and if pity may so much prevail with
you, as to accept me, I dare not say for your husband, but for your slave and
servant: assure your self, there shall no doubt of danger drive me from my
duty toward you, neither shall any Lady whatsoever have more cause to
rejoice in the choice of her servant, then shall your self, for that I will
account my life no longer pleasant unto me, then it shall be employed in your
service.

Fuluia dying her little cheeks with vermilion red, and casting her eyes on
the ground, gave him this answer. As I am to yield you thanks for your good
will, so am I not to afford consent to your request: for yt I neither mind to
marry, nor think my self worthy to retain such a servant. But if I were
d^^p^sed to receive you any way, I think the best manner mean enough for your
worthiness.

Immediately hereupon there came company unto them, which made them break off
their talk, and Fuluia being got into her chamber* began to think on the suit
made unto her by Valentine: and by this time Cupid had so cunningly carved and
ingraued the idol of his person and behavior in her heart, that she thought
him worthy of a far more excellent wife then her self: and persuading her
self by his words and looks, that his love was loyal without lust: true
without trifling, and faithful without faigning, she determined to accept it,
if her parents would give thereto their consent. Now Valentine nothing dismayed
with her former denial, for that it had a courteous close, so soon as
opportunity served, set on her again in this sort.

Now Madame you have considered my case at leisure, I trust it will stand with
your good pleasure to make me a more comfortable answer. I beseech you sir
(said she) rest satisfied with my former resolution, for other as yet I can
make you none.

Alas Madame (quoth he) the extremity of my passion will not suffer long
prolonging of remorse, wherefore I humbly entreat you, presently to pass your
sentence either of bale or bliss, of salvation or damnation, of life or death:
or if the heavens have conspired my confusion, and that you mean rigorously to
reject my good will, I mean not long to remain alive to trouble you with any
tedious suit: for I account it as good reason to honor you with the sacrifice
of my death, as I have thought it convenient to bestow upon you the service of
my life.

Alas (quoth she) this jesting is nothing joyful unto me, and I pray you use
no more of it, for the remembrance of that which you utter in sport, makes me
feel the force thereof in good earnest: for a thousand deaths at once cannot
be so dreadful unto me, as once to think I live to procure the death of any
such as you are.

If (said he) you count my words sport, jest, and daliance, assure your self it
is sport without pleasure: jest without comfort: and daliance without delight,
as tract of time shall truly mani^est. But if you love not to hear of my
death, why like you not to give me life? which you may do only by consent of
your good will. Why sir (quoth she) you know my consent consists not in my
self but in my parents, to whom I owe both duty and honor, therefore first
it behooves you to demand their consent.

Why Madame (quoth he) shall I make more account of the meaner parts then of
the head, you are the chief in this election, and therefore let me receive one
good word of your good will, and then let heaven and earth do their worst. It
is not the coin, countenance or credit of your parents that I pursue: for to
purchase such a treasure as is your good will, I could be content all the days
of my life to be obnoxious unto all calamities, so that you be mainteyned
according to your desire and worthiness.

Well (said she) seeing I am the only mark at which you shoot, assay by all
means to get my friends good liking, and if you level any thing straight, me
you shall not miss. Valentine upon this procured the Kings letters (for in his
favor he was highly interested) to her father in this behalf, who having
perused them, said, he trusted the King would give him leave to dispose of his
own according to his pleasure, and that his daughter was too near unto him,
to see her cast away upon one, who for lack of years wanted wisdom to
govern her, and for lack of lands, living to maintain her. And calling his
daughter before him, he began to expostulate with her in this sort.

Daughter, I ever heretofore thought you would have been a solace and comfort
to my old years, and the prolonger of my life, but now I see you will increase
my hoa^^e hairs, and be the hastner of my death. Does the tender care, the
careful charge, and chargeable cost which I have ever used in bringing you up,
deserve this at your hands, that you should pass a grant of your good will in
marriage without my consent? Is the piety toward your parents, and the duty
of a daughter toward her father, so utterly forgotten, that you will prefer
the love of an unthrift, before my displeasure; and to please him care not to
offend your parents, who travail to bestow you upon one worthy your estate
and ours? No, never think Valentine shall enjoy you with my good will, and
never take me for your father, if you grant him your assent thereto. Fuluia
hearing this cruel conclusion of her father Hermodius, with bashful
countenance and trembling tongue framed her answer in this form.

I beseech you good father not to think me so graceless a child, as once to
imagine, much less to do any thing which may heap your heaviness, or hasten
your death, the least of which two, would be more bitter unto me then death.
For if it please you to understand, I have not granted my good will to any,
unless yours be thereto gotten. Neither have I as you see preferred the love
of an unthrift before your displeasure. But as I cannot let that noble
Gentleman Valentine to love me, so can I not, to confess the truth, but love
him, mary in heart only, for my body as you gave it me, so shall you have the
disposing of it. And as I faithfully promise you by the love which of duty I
owe you, that I will never have any husband without your approbation, so I
humbly beg of you, for the affection which by nature you bear me, that you
will never force me to any without my good liking. For if for the transitory
life you have given me, you make me pay so dearly, as to be linked with one
against my will, I must needs count it a hard peniworth, and well may I wish
that never I had been borne.

I beseech you (Sir) consider the inconveniences always incident to those
marriages, where there is more respect of money, then of the man: of honors,
then of honesty: of goods, then of affection of the parties each to other.
What strife, what iarres, what debate at bed, and at board, at home, and
abroad, about this, about that, never quietness with contentation, never merry
countenance without countersaiting, never loving deeds without dissimulation?
And whence, but from this rotten root springs so many dishonest women, so
many evil living men? Is it not the loathing of never liked lips, that makes
women stray from their husbands, to strangers? And is it not either the
difference of years, or the diversity of manners, or disagreement of natures,
that makes the husband forsake the wife, and follow other women? And where are
any of these differences, or inequallities between the married, but where the
force of friends, not liberty of love, linketh them together. These things by
your wisdom considered, I trust as you restrain me from one whom I love, so
you will not constrain me to any whom I love not: in so doing doubt not but
you shall find in me modesty meet^ for a maid, virtue fit for a virgin, duty
beseeming a daughter, and obedience becoming a child. Her father having mildly
heard her modest talk, told her, he meant not to force her to any, but would
provide her a husband, whom he doubled not should like her better every way
then Valentine did, and therefore willed her to race out of her mind the
liking which she had conceived of him: and so gave her leave to depart. And
being in her Chamber, she began to devise all the means she could to ^oose out
of her heart the love which she bare unto Valentine, and revoked to her memory
her fathers displeasure, and her own preferment, with many other
discommodities that way arising. But nothing prevailed, for as ye bird caught
in sin, the Dear in a soil, the more they strive, the faster they stick,
so the more diligently she labored to get out of the laborinth of fancy, the
more doubtfully was she therein infricated: and as ^ne climbing on high, his
feet fasting, and he in danger to fall, more firmly fastneth his hold then
before he did: so Love, seeing himself ready to be dislodged out of her breast
took such sure hold, and fortified himself so strongly within her, that no
vigor was of force sufficient to fetch him from thence. Which the good
Gentlewoman perceiving, thought best for her case and quiet, to yield the
summons of love, to be disposed at his pleasure, wherein no doubt she had
reason. For as the swift running stream if it be not stopped runs smoothly
and without noise, but if there be any damme or lo^ke made to stay the course
thereof, it rages, and wareth, and, swells above the banks, so Love, if we
obey his lore, and yield unto his soueraignitie: deals with us gently, and
like a loving Lord reigns over us, but if we withstand his ^or^e, and seek
to stay the passage of his power, he rages over us like a cruel tyrant. Which
this Gentlewoman (as I said) perceiving, without any more resistance determined
in her heart to love Valentine only and ever.

Now Valentine notwithstanding the angry look of the father, the frowning
face of the mother, and the strange counterfeit countenance of the daughter,
followed his suite so effectually, used such apt persuasions to the maid, and
in short time insinuated himself so far into her familiarity, that her
parents lowred not so fast, but she allured as much, and thought she received
no other contentation in the whole world but in his company, which her parents
perceiving, and besides dreading the Kings displeasure, thought as good by
their consent to let them go together, as by severity to keep them asunder,
whom the Gods seemed to join together: and so much the rather they were
induced thereto, for that they saw their daughter so affected to Valentine,
that the hearing of any other husband was hateful, and unto her hurtful. And
hereupon the marriage was concluded, and consummated, and to this bargain only
the fancy of Valentine forced him.

Now behold the nature and condition of fortune: for she having saiued these
men (namely Valentine, and the two rogues) a long while with roses, (...) now
to whip them with nettles, and having presented them with the brightness of her
favors, now she crossed them with many frowns. They that did think themselves
the most fortunate amongst men, may now account themselves the most distressed
of all men. For they having carelessly floated in the seas o^ voloptuousnes, and
retchlesly reigned in the lazy seas of lawless liberty, where they fed on
naught but loosenes and liceutiousnes, whereby most prompt to wickedness, were
wrapped in the performance of most desperate designements. For one of them named
Delfridus was by the furies of hell so set on fire in libidi^ous lust toward
his mistres Fuluia, that he sought all the means possible to win her to his
wicked will, not much unlike Maechander above mentioned: the other called
Insolainder, was so instigated on with arrogancy, that he daily aucupated
after the destruction of him who was the cause of his elevation unto
prosperity, utterly casting behind them the remembrance of their former state
and condition. This Insolainder was so blinded with promotion, that upon hope
of a little commodity purchased by his masters death, sought as (I said) by
all means to work his ruin: which being perceived (for God will not suffer
such vilde attempts to be practiced) Valentine prosecuted the matter so
earnestly against him, that he was thrown into prison, where for shame of his
deed, and dread of deserved punishment, he did himself desperately to death.

Now Delfridus seeing his mistres too firmly fortified in virtue to be by
consent vanquished by villainy, determined also by death to remove the
obstacle. And as nothing is so impossible which frantike fury will not
enterprise, nothing so shameful which unbridled desire will not undertake,
nothing so false which fleshly filthiness will not forge, so to bring his
purpose to pass, as Valentine on a time (in ill time) passed through a blind
lane of the city, he throwded himself in a corner, and as he came by, shot
him thorough with a Pistol, which done, he forthwith repaired home, making
grievous lamentation (but in a counterfeit manner) for the cruel murder of his
most loving and affectionate master as he termed him. ^uluia hearing of this
unnatural deed, and by circumstances knowing Delfridus to be the author
thereof, tearing her hair, scratching her face, and beating her body against
the ground, so soon as the floods of tears had flowen so long that the
fountain was dry, so that her speech might have passage which before the
tears stopped, she began to cry out in this careful manner.

O God, what injustice is this, to suffer the earth to remain polluted with
the b^oud of innocents? Did thou curse Cain for killing his brother Abell?
and will thou not crucify Delfridus for slaying Valentine? Is thy heart now
hardened that thou will not, or are thy hands now weakened that thou can not
preserve thy servants from the slaves of Satan? If there be no safety in
innocence, wherein shall we repose our selves? If thou be not our protector,
who shall defend us? If the wicked vanquish the virtuous, who shall set forth
thy honor and glory? or who will so much as once call upon thy name? But what
mean I wretched wight to exclaim against God as the author of my evil,
whereas it is only my self that am guilty of my husbands death? It is I that
pampred up my beauty, to make it glister in the sight of every gazing eye, in
the thriftlesse thread whereof this miscreant was entangled, that to unwind
himself thereout, ^ee has wrought all this mischief. It is I that would not
detect his doings to the view of the world, whereby the peril which hung over
my husbands head might have be ^e pr^uented. And seeing I have been the cause
of his death, shall I (being a murderer) remain alive? Did (...) seeing the
dead carcass of her husband C^i^ cast on shore, willingly cast her self into
the Sea ^o accompany his death? and shall I see my sweet belou^d true
Valentine ^laine, and not drink of the same cup? Did true (...) goare he
gorgeous body with the same sword wherewith princely Pyramus had prick^
himself to the heart? and are not my hands strong enough to do the like? Did
Iulietta die upon the corpse of her Romeo, and shall my body remains on earth,
Valentine being buried? No gentle death come with thy direful dart, and pierce
my painful soul, and with one death rid me out of a thousand at once. For
what thought do I think on my Valentine, which does not procure me double
death? What thing do I see belonging to him, which is not a treble torment unto
me? But it is cowardlinesse to wish for death, and courage valiantly to take
it. Yes I can and will bestow my life for my Valentines sweet sake. But O God,
shall the varlet remain alive to triumph in his treachery, and vaunt in his
villainy? Shall I not lo his fatal day before my final end? It is his blood
that will be a most sweet sacrifice to the ghost of my Valentine: and then can
I end my life contentedly, when I have offered up this acceptable sacrifice. And
until such time as I have opportunity hereto, I will prolong my woeful d^yes
in direful grief, and only the hope of revenge shall heavily hold my
loathsome life and sorrowful ^oule together. For other can^^ why I should
desire life I have not, for that I am utterly deprived of all joys of life.
For as the bird that is bruised with some blow lies aloft in the ^eaues, and
hears his fellows sing, and is not able to utter one warbling note out of his
mournef^^l voice, but rather hates the harmony which other birds do make, so I,
my heart being broken, sit solitary alone, and see some h^ng about their
husbands necks, some closely clip them in their arms, some trifle with them,
some talk with them, all which redoab^^ my pain, to think my self destitute
of those pleasures: yea, to a wretched wounded heart that dwells in dole, every
pleasant sight turns to bitter anguish, and the only object which shall ever
content my eyes, shall be the destruction of that Judas which has brought me
to this desolation.

Now Delfridus thinking that time had taken away her ^eares and sorrow, and
supposing that neither she, or any other had suspected him for the murder of
Valentine, began to enter into she lifts of lu^^ again, and with a new
encounter of incontinencie to set upon her. But she so much abhorred him, that
if she had but heard his name, it caused her nature to fail in her, and all
her senses to faint: so that when he saw no possibility to impell her to
impictie, he meant to solicit her in the way of marriage, and caused her
near kinsfolks and friends to move his suite unto her (for he was a man well
countenanced of many) who labored very earnestly in the matter, and were so
importunate upon her, that no answer would satisfy them. Now Fuluia seeing
she could not be rid of her friends, and foreseeing that by this means she
might be freed from her enemy, agreed to take him to husband. And the day of
solemnizing the marriage being come, they went together to the temple of Diana,
where all things according to custom being consummated, the Bride-wife (as the
use was) drank to her husband in wine as he thought, but indeed in poison
which she had provided of purpose: and when she saw he had drunk up his death,
she said unto him, Go now, and in steed of thy marriage bed get thee a grave,
for thy marriage is turned to murder, a punishment just for thy outrageous
lost, and merciless designement: for vengeance, asks vengeance, and blood,
blood, and they that sow slaughter, shall be sure to reap rume and
destruction.

Now Delfridus hearing these words, and feeling the force of the poison to
work within him, assayed all the remedies he could to heal himself, but all
in vain. Fuluia also feeling the poison to prevail within her, fell upon her
knees before the altar of Diana uttering these words. O Goddess, thou ^^owest
how, since the death of my sweet husband, this life h^^h been most loathsome
and sour unto me, and that the only offering up of this sacrifice has kept
me from him, which now in thy presence being p^rformed, I think my self to
have satisfied my duty, and purchased thereby a pasport to pass to the
ha^i^ation and paradise where my husband has his dwelling.

Immediately upon this, so well as she could, she crawled home to her house,
where she was no sooner, but tidings were brought her that Delfridus was dead,
wherewith with great joy she cast her self down upon her bed, and called
her little son which she had by Valentine, whom blessing and bussing, said.
Alas pretty impe, who shall now defend thee from thy ^oes, who shall redress
thy wrongs? Thy father is gone, thy mother is departing, and thou poor soul
must abide behind, to endure the brunt and bitter blastes of this wretched
world. Ah if the love which I bare my husband had not been exceeding great,
nature would have caused me to have some care of thee, and for thy sake to have
suffered my self sometime longer to live: but now as I have showed my self a
loving wife, so have I scarce showed my self a natural mother. But alas it
was reason I should pre^er him before thee, who was the author of thee, and who
blessed me with thee. Well I see now my time is come, my tongue begins to
^aile, come dear child and take thy last Conge of thy dying mother: God shield
thee from shame: God preserve thee from perrill: God send thee more prosperous
fortune then have had thy poor parents. And thus farewell my fruit, farewell
my flesh, farewell sweet babe. And welcome my Valentine, whom I see in the
Skies ready to receive me And so in sorrow and joy she gave up the ghost. Thus
was the end of Valentine ^atally no doubt sent, thus was the end of the beggars
miserably accomplished.

Now I would wish you blazing stars, which stand upon your chastity, to take
light at this lot, to take heed by this harm* you ^ee the husband slain, the
leacher poisoned, the wire dead, the friends comfortless, the child
parentlesse. And can the preservation of one simple woman's chastity
counteruaile all these confusions, had not the loss of it been less then of
her life? But it is naturally incident to women to enter into extremities, they
are too loving or too loathing: too courteous or too coy: too willing or too
wilful: too merciful* or too merciless: too forward, or ^oo froward: too
friendly, or too fiendlie: the mean they always ^^^nderly account of:
otherwise she might with (reason, sooner then outrage) have suppressed his
rage: she might with some continent courtesy have cooled his incontinent
desires: and better it had been to have drawn him on with delays, then to
have driven him into such despair: and to have brought him into some error,
then into such fear to have pre^^pated him. But howsoever my words run, I
would not you should take them altogether to tend to her dispraise: for as I
must condemn her cruelty, so can I not but commend her constancy, and think
her worthy to be compared to Lucrece, Penelope, or what woman soever that ever
had any pre-eminence of praise for her virtue. And I would wish my gallant
youths, which delight to gaze on every beautiful glass, and to have an oar
stirring in every lovely boat, not to row past their reach: not to fire their
fancies upon impossibilities: not to suffer themselves to be blasted with the
beams of beauty, or scortched with the lightning of loving looks: such
affection toward the married is ever without love: such fire is without fear:
such suits are without shame: such cankers, if they be not at the beginning
cured, grow to the confusion of the whole body. Therefore gentlewoman, I
leave it to your judgments, to give sentence, whether is more worthy of
reprehension he or she. He had the law of love on his side, she the law of men,
and of marriage on her part: love led him which the Gods themselves cannot
resist: chastity guided her which the Goddesses themselves have lost: he
killed him whom he counted his enemy: she slew him whom she knew her friend:
she with reason might have prevented great mischiefs, his wings were too much
limed with lust, to flee forth of his folly.

FINIS.

