A Free Will Offering, OR, A Pillar of Praise, With a thankful remembrance
for the receipt of mercies, in a long voyage, and happy arrival.

First Preached in Fen-Church, the 7 of September, 1634. now published by the
Author, SAMVEL HIND.

Exodus 17.14. Write this for a memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the
ears of Joshua.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir WILLIAM COVRTEN Knight, The Author dedicates both
him self, and labors.
SIR,
IF I were a Judge instead of a Counselor, it should be my charge instead of
my advice, to charge them that are rich in this world, 1. Tim. 6.17.
that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God. Nor could
such a charge concern any (for ought I know) more, than your self, on whom
the God of blessing has heap't such affluence and abundance, as if both Sea
and Land, the Christian and the heathen world had conspired to empty themselves
into your coffers and warehouses.

He said it that will maintain it, To whom much is given, Luke 12.48.
of them much shall be required: Your engagements to the God of Heaven are
neither common, nor ordinary, but as if singled out for blessings, you have
received a Benjamins portion above many others of your brethren. Gen 43.34.


I know: the world knows, that you hide not these talants in a napkin, Lu.
19.20.
thousands are bettered by their improvement, your employment.

The following Manuell or Enchiridion, will only advertise you (not as if you
wanted better discipline) that amongst all other your transactions and
transmutations, you, return to the Caesar of heaven his tributary due of
praise and thankfulness, from whose liberal hand you have received such ample
testifications of favor and beneficence.

This Pyramid of praise, this new erected pillar serves for no other end,
Statuae Mercurii in competis and triviis, quae certis indiciis perplexo
viateri, iter ostendebant A^l. Gel.
but like the Statues of Mercury, to direct every traveller and voyager, or any
else that are capable of mercies, to the ways of thankfulness, and to divert
them from the paths of that Satanicall sin, ingratitude: What was once
planted in your ears, is now presented to your eyes, favor it with
acceptance, read it with diligence, follow it with conscience, and the God of
mercy give unto you what blessings the book can contain, or the Author wish,
for this life or for a better.

It was no dishonor to the great Peer and Lord of Syriah, 2. King. 5.13.
Naaman, that he listened to the advice of his servants.

Solvit inops diti Craeso quod debuit Irus. Owen. Epigr. lib. un. ep. 62.
Rich Croesus disdained not to receive a debt from poor Irus. Accept you also
of this my Free Will Offering, which, together with my self, is justly devoted
to your protection and patronage. It Was conceived in the womb of the vast
Ocean, it is my Firstborn, which I can father on none but your self, from
whose influence next under God, I received what I have, or can present unto you.

The injury were too public if I should be too tedious, Horat.
Cum tot sustineas, ac tanta negotia solus, in publica commoda peccem si longo
sermon morer tua tempora, etc.

In brief then I commit this to you, and you to God, wishing what happiness
or honor you do or can wish unto your self, or successful progeny, health
to your person, blessing to your endeavors, success to your enterprises,
security to your body, salvation to your soul. So prays he that does proffer
and promise obedience to your laudable

Commands and injunctions, SAMUEL HIND.

The Author to the Reader.
REader, in the perusal of the following leaves, thou shall have some trial
both of thy patience and judgment. My absence from the Press, with some
delinquency of the transcriber, occasioned diverse errors, which either thy
judgment may rectify, or thy patience dispense with. I endeavored to purge
it from some, which thou shall find amended in the closure of the book. Let
thy aim be directed to the matter, not the words, 'twill bring God most
honor, thy self most benefit.

Thy faithful friend and Monitor, S. H.

A PILLAR OF PRAISE.
PSALM. 107.23 They that go down to the Sea in ships, and do their business
in great waters, PSALM. 107.24 These men see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep, etc. PSALM. 107.30 Then are they glad, Text.
because they be at rest, and so he brings them to the haven where they
would be. PSALM. 107.31 Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.
THe son of Iesse, and sweet singer of Israel in the general parts of this
Psalm, summons up diverse sorts of debtors to the King of heaven to discharge
their obligations, and make their appearance in the Courts of the King of
glory, there to pay their vows and his dues of praise and thankfulness.
Neither does the Prophets summons concern a few, or is the tribute of our
heavenly Caesar to be levied of the remnants and outcasts of Israel, both are
as large as the taxation of Augustus, Luke 2.5
wherein all the world was taxed. None that is clothed with humane flesh can
free themselves from these obligations, except they can shuffle themselves out
of the number of Prince or people, travelers by Land, voyagers by Sea, be they
Sea men or Land men, Sick men or Sound men, Free men or Bondslaues, Rich or
Poor: Let their persons be whom they will, their qualifications how they will,
their conditions what they will, all are here wished and warned, sent for and
summoned to praise the Lord for his goodness, and to declare the wonders that
he, etc.

But in these particular verses of this Psalm which I have singled out from
the rest, like a Dear from the Heard: the Prophet of God, and the God of
Prophets, address themselves to such only as go down into the Sea in ships,
Verse 23.
and do their business in great waters. Those painful voyagers as compass
their livings and your livings in the fearful floods, and are daily
spectators of his works and wonders in the deep, being brought to the haven
where they would be, are here excited to testify their thankfulness, by the
performance of a double duty, to praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men:

This is the Prophets wish, and Sea man's obligation; O that men would therefore
praise the Lord, etc.

Brethren and beloved in the Lord, I cannot exclude my self from the number of
such whose obligations are infinite to the God of heaven for his favorable
protection both by sea and land. I dare not like those unthankful Lepers,
smother the mercy of an omnipotent God and beneficent Savior, either in
silence or ingratitude. Luk 17.17
Let those other Lepers of Samaria should rise up in judgment against me, who
said amongst themselves; 2 King 7.9
This is a day of good tidings, we do not well to hold our peace; If we tarry
till the morning light, some mischief will befall us; now therefore come that
we may go and tell the Kings household.

It were a piece of impardonable sacrilege to monopolize or ingrosse the
divine Elixar of my Masters and my Makers mercies and miracles, works and
wonders, that I have had experience of in foreign and far distant Climats,
Counties, Kingdoms, Islands, Provinces, Nations, People, Languages. Since then
that God the Father requires no more of me than God the Son did of the
dispossessed Demoniacke, Mark. 5.19. Go and tell what great things the Lord
has done for thee, I were unworthy of my tongue if I should not speak to you,
of your ears if you should not hear what shall be delivered. May the God of
heaven therefore open my lips, Mark. 1.17.34.
and my mouth shall show forth his praise, say Ephphata to your ears, and they
shall be opened for the wonders of the King of glory to enter in.

In these words that I have read, and you have heard, there is an exact mixture
and accurate composure of Dangers, Mercies, and Duties; these three are woven
and platted in the Text, and are the three Tabernacles of my meditation: here I
build one for God, another for you, a third for my self, and such else as it
does concern. Here is dangers of such as go down into the deep, Mercies of
him that made the Sea and all that therein is, Duties for such as have received
these mercies, and escapt these dangers, and are brought to the haven where
they would be. Heaven, earth, and waters roll and tumble up the billows of
the Text, the woofe and warpe whereof is spun both of course and fine thread.
Exra 8.16. Exodus 36.1 1 Cor 3.16
It would require the skill of Iarib and Elnathan, men of understanding; the
hand and loome of some Aholiab and Bezaleel, to make it fit work for the
Tabernacle of the Lord, for the Temple of God, which Temple ye are; that while
you hear of these dangers, ye may be brought to fear and awfulnesse: of these
mercies, ye may be drawn to practice thankfulness, of these duties ye may be
woed to service and obedience.

It wants not what skill I could bestow upon it according to my talant and
ability, and my time and present opportunity, of which I may say as Philip of
the five loaves and two fishes, (...), Alas, what are these amongst so many.
Alas, what are these my meditations, these waterworks, not able to express
the shadows of that divine Majesty they do adore, and to which they are
dedicated. Yet they should be seasonable, they have crossed many brinish
billows and waves of salt water, and to you they should be acceptable. For as
amongst you I preached my Vale and long farewell, so now by divine providence am
I brought again once more upon this holy mount, The Communion day.
to salute you with my primum salve, first salutation: what you can conceive
not to be seasonable in regard of your time and meeting. You may freely correct
it, it will show part of your judgment, which I conceive to be suitable in
respect of my time and arrival, you may favorably accept it as part of my
love. Incline therefore your ears to the tenor of the following Embassy, the
arrant is Gods, the task is mine, the use is yours.

Let your pious acceptance and patient attention, be as Midwives to assist me
in the delivery of these three dangers, mercies, duties, that struggle in the
womb of my text, like the quarrelling twins that descended from the loins
of Isaac from the bowels of Rebeckah. Genesis 25.22
The rough and hairie Esau comes first to view. I Will first speak of the
dangers, Ioh. 2.9.
reserving the other as the Bridegroom did his best wine until the last.

They that go down into the sea expose themselves unto a danger, that like the
mace of Neptune is three-forked. Danger threefold.
All voyagers are liable to a triple danger, of the Sea, of the enemies in the
Sea, of the enemies on the shore after their arrival.

In any or all these three kinds was there never more danger than now since
Noah's Dove was pilot unto Noah's Arc, Genesis 8.8.
or since Saturn the King of Greet did first find out the Art of Navigation.
The way of a ship in the Sea is one of those four things that proved a paradox
to puzsle and nonplus the wise and great King Solomon, Pro. 30.9.
and thousands more since his dissolution.

He that commits himself to the custody of a three incht plank (for there is no
more between death and us) had need to say with David, Psalm 108.1.
My heart is ready, O Lord, my heart is ready: He had need to be ready for
prosperity, ready for adversity, ready for liberty, ready for slavery, ready
for the storms, tempests of vengeance, ready for the calmes and favorable
air of mercy He must look to be a sharer in the first, Phil 4.11.
he may hope to be partaker of the last.

They that go down into the deep shall see a Sea whose billows bellow, whose
surges swell, raging with tempests, roaring with whirlwinds, and be at once
terrified with fearful thunderclaps, dazzled with terrible lightenings, amazed
with ayerie fires and apparitions, astonished with eruptions and evaporations
from the furnaces of heaven, with the clouds, those bottles of heaven, that
sometimes empty themselves in such violence as if they threatened another
deluge. With those winds that come from the treasuries and hollow concaves of
the earth, which as is let loose for vengeance, like some accursed bandogge,
are more fierce for former cohibitions. These, besides many other sad
apparences, are they liable to, that go down into the deep, which oftentimes
affright them worse then the ghost of Brutus did him in his dismal and
nocturnall vision. Plutarch. Cher.
Now such as are humbled with these judgments, amazed with these wonders,
astonished with these terrors, affrighted with these apparitions, can never
disrellish the offers of mercy in such deliverances, they cannot but praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare his wonders that he does for the children
of men.

I lived to see which now I live to declare and memorate, all the four
elements in a combustion, Psa. 118 17
uproare and confusion, as if they had been to have been reduced to their
former chaos.

Frigida pugnabant calidis, Ovid. lib. 1^ Met:
humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Having passed the dangerous and strait gulf of the danger,
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim: Ovid. in Loc.

Not far distant from the Trinacrian or Sicilian shore we sailed near an
Island that burns like mount Sinai, Earth.
yet not consumed with those blasts of fire, which proceed from Mines of
brimstone by which they are nourished. The terrible and sulphurious flames do
pierce the air above, Fire.
that in the day time it seems to be covered with smoke, in the night with
fire. The ayrie and tempestuous winds above, Air.
enraged the billows and surges of the Sea below, Water.
that as said the Poet: Ovid de Pont.
Iam iam tacturos sidera summa putes. So said the Prophet, so say I, sometimes
we were lifted up to the heavens, and sometimes cast down again unto the
deep, every element a messenger of death; The fire flaming, the earth
smoking, the air storming, the water raging; Psa. 8^.5.
as if all the foundations of the earth had been out of course. The envelloped
clouds descended round about us in shouts terrible to each beholder into the
water, the water ascended into the clouds, and as a weaker vessel yielded to
their violence. The fire burnt in the bowels of the earth, and the earth
incapable of resistance sent forth flashes and flames of fire and brimstone, as
if Hell had no other chimney but Strumbelo, Strumbelo, Aetna Vulcans temple,
mount Soma or Vesuvia puteoli all burning mountains.
and the adjacent mountains to vent her smoke. These things for commonnesse
and familiarity to some Mariners the oftener they are seen the less they are
regarded. But some fresh water spectator beholding them in their terror, would
think perhaps as little of preaching in a Church of England, as ever did Jonah
in the streets of Ninive, when the sea was his death, the fish was his death,
the wind and waves his death: Presentemque intentant omnia mortem. Virg in Luc.
Yet that God that set Jonah a shore upon the borders and lists of Syriah, has
brought us also to the Haven where we would be. Oh that men would therefore
praise the Lord, and declare the wonders that he has done for us the children
of men.

These and all other dangers to which Seamen are subject have their end and
use: For as the penance and mulct of Demosthenes did serve to adorn the
altars of Jupiter: so the miseries and troubles of such adventurers do work
together for the best to them that love God, To. 8.28.
and are called of his purpose. Here Is some honor to adorn the altars of the
God of heaven. For as storms do purge the air above, so they do or should
purify men's hearts below. For now if ever the Mariners will deprecate their
Dieties, and call upon Jonah to call upon his God. Ion. 1.5.6.


Now if ever the Disciples will awake their Savior with a (...), Master, save
us, we perish. Mat. 8.26.
Now every Turk betakes him to his sacrifice, every Christian unto his
prayers. Even such as allow not or approve not of a Letanie ashore would
quickly learn to say and pray, From lightening and thunder from storms and
tempests, from violence of wind and waves: God Lord deliver us.

The soundest heart will disrelish this bitter Colloquintida, and quake to be
fed with this unsavory Hemlocke, though but for a few days or hours, and
after the storms are once blown over will prefer the case of a Christian to
the wealth of an Arab or savage Indian: Quid maris extremos Arabas ditantia and
Indos. Horace in loc.
I, and conclude with Meander: Satius esse pauperem in terra vivere, quam
divitem mari se committere: It Is safer to live a poor man on shore, than a
rich man at Sea.

Neither are we more subject to the violence of winds at sometimes then to
variety at other: Aul. G^l. li 2 c. 24.
at night we sail Vento Iapige with Virgils Western wind; Act. 27.14
ere midnight troubled with Paul's tempestuous Euroclydon which blew and
blustered at midnight; ere morning, Virg. Aen. 1
Validus iactaverit auster in alto, turned with a Southern and after that a
Northern gale, it is possible to see them and many more blow all at once
according to the Poetical description, where each strives to get the mastery:
Virg.
Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, Creberque procellis Affricus, etc.

Nor yet more troubled either with violence of winds or variety then a third
time with want and scarcity. After heaven had seemed to frown and lower, she
now does laugh and smile at our former troubles and present helplesnesse. Now
we have a breathing time, and our former sorrows be becalmed. It proves to
many the increase of worse, who lie for want of wind in sight of their port
but cannot come at it: Like Moses in the sight of Canaan but could not come
near it. The first makes them a trouble to themselves which is storms of
abundance; the last which is the calmes of want do make them a booty and
purchase for roving and ranging Pirates, 2. Danger of the enemy in the Sea.
which is but the second part of Danger, at first proposed.

One woe is past, Revel. 9.12
and now behold another woe is at hand: Sicut unda impellitur unda, Ov.
I two more woes do follow it as one wave does another.

If there were no more woes or danger in the Sea then the opposition of our
enemies, it were enough to make a voyage miserable: No day in the week, or
scarce hour in the day, are we free from encounters or preparation to
encounter with those Turks, Gods and our adversaries; those venomous
Cantharides do swarm in the Mediteranean and Adriaticke Seas.

Sex quotidie millia lampadum ante Pseudo prophetae Mahometi tamulum, etc.
Petr. Bess.

Mr. R: Know^s in his Turkish History.


Millions of Christian souls have rued the terror of those (worse then
debauched Saracins) worshippers of the false Prophet Mahomet, borne in an
unluckie hour, whose body hangs up in their Sancta Sophia or chief Church of
the City of Mecha, with six thousand lamps always burning before him.

These his followers and worshippers are and have been the ruin of many
thousand Christians on Land by war, on Sea by pyracie.

Neglecta solent incendia sumere vires. As fires neglected gather strength, and
make way for their own fury: So does their security give advantage to our
ruin and their cruelty. They have already so long triumphed in mischief, that
if we credit the annals or opinion of such who record it, they have got a
greater part of Christendom than is left for to oppose them. Or if we believe
but our own experience and ordinary probabilities, Hist. de destruct. and
ruina Troiae
we may expect that ere long like Aegcon the Greekish Pyrat they will set upon
the Navy Royal of Jupiter himself.

God stir up all Christian Princes to unity amongst themselves, and to unite
their forces against this common enemy, herein would lie the safety of their
own Monarchies, and security of their own Subjects: For now so many ships,
so many fights, and funerals both of men and loss of ships if not
overmatcht, so many squadrons, and fleets, so many feinds and furies armed to
destruction. One half hour is the loss of many a Christians life and
liberty. If they dye, their bodies want what yours enjoy, the charitable
honor of a grave.

Propertius.
Cuius honoratis ossa vehuntur aquis. Yet that's the least of sorrows: Rev. 20.13
for the Sea shall give up her dead as well as the Land; The fish in the Sea as
the worms in the Land surrender all at the general audit, if they live they
live to liberty, and need the help of your prayers; or to slavery and
thraldom, and need the assistance of your purses to redeem them from their
worse then Egyptian thraldom and servitude under Pharaoh Neco King of Egypt.
Exodus 5.9.


Brethren, its one thing to speak of Hanibal at Rome, and another to meet him
in the field: its one thing to speak of their miseries in England, another
thing to be liable to them, or behold them abroad; they are but shadows of
compassion that are wrung from men that behold the miseries of slavery with
other men's eyes, in comparison of what would be if you beheld them with your
own; and saw either what they had which they would willingly want; or what they
wanted which they would willingly enjoy.

Suave mari magno, etc. Lucre.
says the Poet, Its an excellent object to stand upon some Tower and behold a
battle in the Sea between two ships, or a shore between two Armies; But
far from any thoughts of pleasure or content is it for such as graple with
their adversaries now upon such disadvantages as usually happen to such as go
down into the deep.

Sea Fights now are not as they were between the Romans and Thracians, where
they did end their quarrels with Darts and javelins, 1. Sam. 17.40.
or as between David and Goliath with slings and pibble stones; But with the
roaring and rending Cannon, that except our ships and sides were vengeance
proof of force there must be effusion of blood, loss of ships, of men, their
lives, their limbs, their liberties. There, Christian is forced to fight
against Christian, Isa. 19.2.
as Egyptian once did against Egyptian.

He that is a bondslave against him that is a freeman, and those of our own
nation and household are forced to be our worst enemies. Mat. 10.36
In these bitter and sad conflicts either with ships or Gallyes. How many poor
and miserable captives are there that cry out unto their Country men, as Lyncus
the Prisoner of Hercules did upon Andromada, seeing him in another ship; O
Andromada, H^st. Tro.
save thy friend Lyncus, else I shall loose my liberty, and thou thy friend.
But alas it is work enough for us to save our selves, or if we could
ouer-master our enemies, yet our hands are manacled as were the Israelites,
that they might not fight against the Moabites, nor Ammonites, nor Edomites.
Deuteronomy. 2.5.
There Is them that have paid too dear at home, for damage done to their
adversaries abroad.

All evils of the Sea said one, is less than shipwreck, Eccles. 6.1.
but this evil of slavery say I, is worse than that: and this evil have I
also seen under the Sun, and to this one more, that Princes walk on foot,
Eccles. 10.7.
and vassals ride; the subjects and servants of honorable and Christian
Princes walk on foot, when such vassals are mounted upon the pampered and
ietting Steeds of honor and ambition, and triumph in number and insolency.

This also would teach a man to prefer Minerva before Mars, and a certain
peace before a doubtful victory.

Hist. Tro.
No indifferent man but would choose to live with Demo Gorgon in the Caves of
Arcadie, and live the life of the stricktest Anchorite, rather than to expose
himself to these dangers, or if necessity of employment do call him abroad,
he will learn the second clause of the Sea man's Letanie: From Battle,
Murder, and from sudden death, or lingering slavery; Good Lord deliver us.
Certainly, there is not ordinary probability of escape for ships of
indifferent force or burden, except they be delivered by his hand of power if
they fight, of Providence if they meet not with their enemies; for they are
mighty, we are weak; they are light and nimble, when we are dull and slow: we
are men of peace when they are men of war. They are many, we but few, how
can they choose but win, and we but lose the victory, Deuteronomy. 32.30.
unless that God did encourage us, and discourage them; that one might put a
thousand, and ten thousand to flight.

Yet this is but the second stem of danger, our enemies at sea; the third
follows which is worse than both the other, The third danger: Enemies ashoare
after our arrival.
that is our enemies on the land after our arrival.

There is not more danger of our corporal enemies at sea, than of spiritual
ashore. Friars of all orders and disorders, Monks, Priests, Jesuits,
Inquisitors, these sease upon many a reformed Protestant, as the ravenous
Vulture does upon the helpless Chicken that is scattered from the wings of the
Hens protection, as the Wolf upon the Lamb, or as the greedy and eager
Hound upon the helpless and breathless Hare.

Oh that God had as faithful servants, as the Devil has Clyents, who like
their Lord and master go seeking whom they may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Or that they were as sure Gods friends as they are his enemies. Their care and
diligence to gain a Proselyte is far greater than others to avoid it: Mat.
23.15
for how many men, travelers by land, voyagers by Sea, after all other
escapes, by their bad Pilotage, come to make shipwreck both of faith and of a
good conscience. 1 Timothy 1 9.


Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. Horat.
Such as desire to enjoy the benefit of foreign Countries, change not their
mind, but their air, was once used as an ancient Adage. But now too many
change their religion with their climate, and their God with both; yielding to
the subtle insinuations and serpentine persuasions of those crafty
Politicians, Wolves in sheep clothing, Mat. 7.5.
who send many men home to their native Country, laden with the vices,
fashions, corruptions, and opinions of those Countries they have lived in, of
those persons they have conuersed with, of those arguments they have discoursed
of, who having lost all shadows of sanctity, return to their own home like
the weather-beaten Bark of Athens, with never a Planke of the same wood they
were first made of. All principles of Religion and grounds of faith being quite
obliterate and defaced, they stamped in a new mould, having not so much as the
relics of a reformed Christian, or half lettered monuments of their former
profession; but like the Vane upon the Mast, or Weather-cocke on the steeple,
are turned about with the wind of every vain doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14^.


They wander so far, till Dinah like they loose their spiritual chastity and
virginity. Genesis 34.1, 2. Quint. Curtius.
Did they but with Alexander, change their habit only in every Country, who
when he was in Persia, was clothed as a Persian; in Parthia, a Parthian; in
Greece, a Grecian; we could and would allow them the liberty of the ancient
Distick, Si fueris Romae Romano vivito more,
Si fueris alibi vivito more loci.


But too many turn Romans in heart as well as in habit: Luke 22.55.
and while they are in the high Priests Hall warming their hands, pretending to
make themselves fit and serviceable agents for their King and Country, they
then cool their hearts, and suck in the filthy dregs of foreign opinions,
split their souls upon those shelues of error; enter into the house of
Rimmon, 2 Kin. 5.18 Romans 11.4 2 King. 23.13.
bow and bend the knees of their devotion and affection to Baal, run after
their new invented Gods and Goddesses, as once offending Solomon, who bowed his
knees to Ashta. roth, the Goddess of the Zidonians, and ran after Milcom the
abomination of the Ammonites.

Worse than Alexander they change their habit, worse than Scipio and Sertorius,
Val. Max. 2 Timothy 4.10 Luke 22.57. They that turn Turks.
they counterfeit their religion: and which is worst of all, like Peter they
deny, forswear, forsake their Savior. There Is some alive yet to be happy if
they could imitate him in his tears as in his apostasy, in the reluctance of
his sorrow, as in the precipitancy of his zeal, who like Zeno the Athenian
Philosopher, Dixit se nunquam foeliciori venio navigasse quam cum navis eius
submersafuit quia tempestas ida suae tranquilli tatis existet causa. Plut in
I^a. Psalm. 120.5. Gen 9.27.
pretend both happiness and content in their shipwreck, both of their faith
and conscience; these are worthy of other men's tears, that have none of their
own to wash away their woes while they are not constrained, but content to
dwell in Mesech, and to have their habitations in the Tents of Kedar.

God persuade every such Iapheth to return to the Tents of Sem from whence
they are revolted.

Are Abana and Pharphar, 2 King. 5.8
Rivers of Damascus, better than Jordan? No, let the curse of your deathbeds
light upon me, if I prefer not the streams of our Jordan, the free and
liberal use of the Gospel, in peace and tranquillity, before the Abana or
Pharphar of their religion or inquisition: and which is more, Judge 8.2.
as Gideon said to the Ephramites, I prefer the gleanings of our Ephraim,
before the vintage of their Abiezar, and far before it too, as Ulysses did
prefer the smoke of Ithaca, before the immortality of the Gods: often
wishing for the enjoyment of this our native freedom, with as great a desire
as ever David could wish for to drink of the waters of the Well of Bethlem. 2 Samuel 23.15.
Oh that one would give me to drink of the waters, etc. And heartily saluting
the sight of our English ground with as much joy as Achates and his
confederates did their Italian -- Humilem que videmus
Virg.
Italiam, Italiam primus conclamat Achates
Italiam Laeto socij clamore salutant.


He that has escapt these triple and triple crowned dangers of the Sea, enemies
in the Sea, enemies a shore, must needs be glad, because he is at rest, Text.
and brought to the haven where he would be, etc.

I and my floating Parishioners are not now to learn experience in any or all
of these three dangers, yet the storms of our Sea are blown over, the danger
of our enemy is already past, the share of the cunning Fowlers, Ps. 24.7.
who catch nothing but blind Bats and Owls, is also broken, and we are
delivered, and brought to the haven where we would be: Now we live to praise
our God for his goodness, and to declare his wonders to the children of men.
And in doing both to pay our vows of thankfulness in the midst of our
Jerusalem, Ps. 116 16.
in the midst of thy Church and congregation which stands as in the midst of
Sion; of which I have often said and prayed as Lot did of Zoar; Genesis 19.20
Oh let my soul escape thither; Is it not a little one and my soul shall live?

The mercies that provoke us to thankfulness.
But so much of our danger that must bring us to awfulnesse; now follows the
mercy that must bring us to thankfulness.

After the storms of displeasure, succeed the calmes of mercy, the smooth
issue of rough progenitors. For a moment does he hide his face from us, but
with everlasting mercy he does embrace us.

Look we to the present Text, it reduces Gods mercy to two heads, that like
Tanais and Volga, water the residue of our meditations; He makes the storms to
cease, and brings them to the haven where they would be; two favors that
include all other favors in them.

If brevity may be any whet-stone to sharpen your attention, or as holy water
to sprinckle on your face and awaken your devotion, I Will put them both in one,
and exemplify both these mercies to us, by examples and ample testifications
of his mercyes to others in the like miseries, which are the best expression of
our own sorrows, or his favors.

Have you read of Noah floating in his Arc without thought or fear of
danger, Genesis 7.17.
Genesis 7.21.
when heaven and earth, the Sea and all that therein is, was in an uprore, when
thousands perished in that common innundation of evils. The case was ours, the
mercy Gods, that we also were delivered from those surges wherein many perish,
and are brought to the Ararat of our desires, to the haven where we would be: O
that men would, etc.

Exodus 2.3.
Have you read of Moses, crawling and sprawling in his Arc and Bark of
Bul-rushes, when the waves could not drown him, nor Egyptian damage him. Exodus
2.5.6.
We have been as helpelesse as Moses, and God as merciful to us as unto him:
he was to us instead of Pharaohs daughter, ready to challenge our custody and
protection. For by his mercy we are brought to the haven where we would be: O
that men, etc.

Exodus 14. ^^. and 28.
Have you read of Isreal's safe convoy through those seas wherein thousands after
perished; the case is yet ours, we have past those (...)that cost many
thousands both life and liberty, and are brought in safety to the Ca^an of
felicity, to the haven where we would be: He was our Pillar and Cloud: O that
men would therefore, etc.

Have you read of Daniels security amongst those Lions that afterward devoured
his accusers, Dan. 6.23.24.
their wives and children; we have been also even in the jaws of those Lions
that have devoured many, Turks. Psalm. 57 4. Psalm 3.7.
yet are we not delivered as a prey unto their teeth. But by the honorable
convoy of his mercy, by the hand of his clemency, are we brought to the haven
where we would be. Oh that men would therefore, etc.

Have you heard and read of Jonah embarked, en wombed, Jonah 1.17.
and entombed in the entrals of that great Leviathan, yet blessed with
protection; Even we also have had the like menaces of winds and waves,
storms and tempests, to make us fit morsels for those living mountains whose
entrals and gorges would soon consume us to a gelly. Jonah 2.10
But the mercies of the God of Jonah are not yet diminished, for he has
brought us to the haven where we would be. Oh, etc.

Mat. 8.^3.24.
Lastly, have you heard both of sinners and Savior both in one ship, covered
with waves, tossed with tempests; he asleep, they awake; they fearful, he
powerful; they as sufferers, he as a commander both of them, and what they
feared. The case was ours, we have been though not in eadem nave, in the same
ship, yet in codem praedicamento, Toto sonuerum aethere ^^mbi. Vir.
in the same predicament. And when we cride in our distress, he heard us, when
we went to awake him, he arose and calmed the waves, stilled the winds, stayed
the spouts, repelled the gusts, rebuk't the storms. And by his mercy are we
brought to the Haven where we would be. Oh that men would therefore, etc.

He that neither slumbereth nor sleeps was our aid and helper, or if he have
seemed to sleep, it is as he expounds himself, Cant. 5. Cant. 5.2.
I sleep, but mine heart waketh: He seems to use sleep but his heart waketh,
and himself is vigilant for our protection.

Once indeed above all other times he seemed to us to sleep out a miserable and
fearful storm, as if he had forsaken us, as once his Father had forsaken him,
it is worthy the file and records of eternity; Mat. 27.46 In the mould of Genoa.
In Genoa the eight of January last was such a storm and tempest as caused
the Inhabitants to rake up the urnes and bring forth the ashes of the deceased
Saint John Baptist, as a propitiatory sacrifice to calm the raging Sea, I
neither believe that they are, or that they are of some virtue, or that they
have them if they were; yet there all the he Saints and she Saints, Angels,
Lords, and Ladies of Heaven were sued unto, for mercy and deliverance.

Mat. 8.27.
In this never to be forgotten misery we cried unto the Lord our God, who
seemed to sleep and be awakened, and both the winds and sea they did obey
him. De profundis clamavi, out of the depth did I cry unto the Lord. Abyssus
abyssum invocat, One depth calls on another, a depth of our misery caused for a
depth of his mercy; he did neglect us but for a while for the greater
manifestation of his mercy, and increase of our services. Oh that men would,
Psalm. 99 6.
etc. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, Noah, Daniel, and Job, those spiritual
Courtiers and favorites of the King of heaven in their distresses cried unto
the Lord and he heard them, and delivered them, and his mercies are renewed to
us every morning, and his compassions fail not. Lam 3.22. Psalm. 86.1.
He will have us know that when sinners bow their hearts, he will bow and bend
his ears to their prayers and supplications And that he desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather, etc. As I live, says God the Father, as I dye, says
God the Son, I desire not nor delight not in the death of sinners, no he is
proner to mercy then to judgment. He was longer in destroying one City, I, in
threatening to destroy it, than in building of the whole world. Jonah 3.4. Exodus
20.11.
Forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed, six days and the whole world was
made, the heaven, earth, the sea, and all that therein is.

Well may he forget to be angry with us, Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 136.1.
for the storms of his anger endure but for a moment; but he can never forget
to be merciful, for the calmes of his mercy endures for ever. So much for the
two generals, viz. the Dangers that provoke us to awfulnesse; the Mercies that
move us to thankfulness: 3 General, Duties to draw us to obedience.
the third follows, which is duties to provoke us to obedience. And this
obedience must reflect back again, and be seen and showed in the performance
of a double duty, viz. The publication of his praises, and proclamation of his
wonders. Text.
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

This is all the Text will enjoin or the Prophet look for, or the God of Text
and Prophet require after the receipt of his mercies, to yield unto him his
tribute of praises. It Is as much as he does ask, it is as little as we can give;
it is his due and our duty. Of both which a word or two, and there cannot much
more remain. Hitherto we have but numbered the turrets and bulwarks of this
text, as David wished the spectators of Sion, Psalm. 48.1.
Psalm 48. and have been stayed in Atrio templi, in the porch entrance and
body of the Text. Now suffer me to lead you by the hand into the sanctuary of
Sanctum sanctorum, or holy of holyes. He that will not lend an ear, deserves
not that every Angel should move a wing, or descend the ladder, or look out
of the windows of heaven to assist him either in his wants or wishes. Genesis 28.12


The first piece of our obligation consists in the publication of his praises,
and to do this brings honor to God: He that offers me praise he honors
me. Psalm. 50.23. The second is the declaration of his wonders, and he that does
not this, draws a curse and prophetical anathema upon his own head: which
waits for such as regard not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands. Psalm. 28.5.6. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare, etc.

Those that have been most deeply interest in human miseries, and the receipt
of divine favors are called here to the performance of these holy services:
And they only because there cannot be a greater argument of Gods praise and
our duty then escape from danger and receipt of mercy. This truth is firmly
built upon the pillars of the Text.

The conquering Romans in all their honorable and glorious triumphs, Hist. Romans
suffered none to make any triumph, to erect any Prophees, or to enter into the
Temple of honor, where were Crowns, Garlands, Palms, Laurels, Robes, Aul. Gel.
Rewards, Emblemes; but they must first pass the Temple of virtue, where were
Swords, Iavelins, Targets, Lances, Helmets, and other instruments of war, by
which they must purchase their honor, and pass to their Temples: So read we
2 Timothy 2 5. Nemo coronabitur nisi qui Legitime certaverit. Revel. 7.
Read also our vision of that blessed Saint, who were those that were watching
with crowns on their heads, Palms in their hands, Haleluiahs in their
tongues, adoration in their hearts, long white robes on their shoulders,
emblemes both of honor and victory. Hi sunt qui venerunt ex tribulatione,
These have come out of tribulation, and have washed their robes in the blood of
the Lamb. Rev. 7.14.


They are fittest to be Heralds of divine praises, that have been the deepest
interested in humane miseries.

Thus I have long drank of those waters that are more bitter than the waters
of Marah, more venomous than the waters of Nonacridis, are fittest to receive
that double favor that Ascha the wife of Othniel begged of Culel: The springs
above, Josh. 19.15
and the springs beneath, blessings from heaven, and blessings from earth. They
can but relish our bread and Mannah of heaven, King 22
that have long eaten and drank such as Ahab threatened to Micaiah the bread
of sorrow and water of affliction. 1. King. 22.27.


They are most glad when they are brought to the haven, Psalm. 107.25.
whose souls have most melted, and whose bodies have most suffered in the
deep and dangerous waters.

They are fittest for the calmes and favorable airs of a merciful God, Hor.
of the sons of Dia. Sunt quos E^ea domu^ reducet palma coelesiis. Thy sons
like heavenly wights do come with an E^eon Garland home. 1. Cor. 9.24.
that have been tossed and tumbled upon the surges and billows of a merciless
ocean.

In vain should the actors in the Olympian games have professed either their
skill or abilities if they had not sometimes returned like the sons of
Diagoras with an Elcan palm and Garland.

In vain should we run, if we should not sometimes get the Crown.

In vain should we wrestle, if not sometimes get the mastery.

In vain should we be cast down into the deep, if not sometimes raised up
again to the heaven, and after long be brought to the haven where we would be.
And in vain should we be brought to the haven where we would be, if we
should not praise the Lord for his goodness, or declare, etc.

Exodus 15.1
When God mercifully delivered Israel from the hand of Egypt and Egyptian
bondage, there followed a Song of praise, Exodus 15.

When Christ mercifully delivered his Israel from the Egypt of sin and
iniquity, Luke 1.68.
there followed a song of blessing; Blessed be the Lord. Judge. 5.12.
Deborah after her victory and Siseraes overthrow may not sleep out such a
favor, nor slumber out such a mercy. But Deborah must awake, and Baruke must
arise to utter a song of triumph and victory, Awake, awake, Exodus 17.14.
Deborah. Moses himself after his conquest and Amalecks ruin, must write it
in a book for a memorial, and rehearse it in the ears of Iosuah. Which he
did and more, he erects an Altar enrowls the mercy thereon, offers it with
thanks, hallowes it with sacrifice. This priestly Prophet and Propheticke King
David, as he has many Psalms of prayer to express his misery; So has he
many of praise and thanksgiving for the receipt of mercy, witness those that he
has committed to the care of those chief Musicians, to Ieduthun, to Gittith,
to Neginoth, to Sheminith, and many more. Besides these holy men of old never
was there any age that wanted such as did yield ample and large testimony of
their praise and thankfulness, for the receipt of blessings and benefits.
Caesar.
All Caesar's actions ended in a triumph. Antonius Pius erects his Pillar,
Antonius Pius. Traian.
and Traian his, about which are engraven their victories and conquests: they
both stand firm in Rome to this day. So should all men that God has blessed
with deliverance and victory, erect some pillar of thankful remembrance, and
acknowledgement, that succeeding ages may be stirred up to leave the like
monuments of praise in the like deliverances, and beholding our good works may
glorify our Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16.


So was Themistocles animated the performance of many a noble action, Val. Max.
by beholding the triumphs and trophies of Miltiades. And Alexander seeing the
victories and conquests of Achilles engraven on his Tomb, was stirred up and
provoked to an honorable emulation of the like valor and magnanimity. I, and
Caesar when he saw the tomb of Alexander in the Temple of Hercules in Spain,
and about the walls of the Church the conquests of the world, he wept to think
how little he had done, and how much Alexander. In ea aetate qua iam terrarum
orbem subegisset: It was worthy of Caesar's tears to consider if he had done
nothing in the time and age wherein Alexander had conquered the world.

Right even so may we (that will not be provoked by others patterns and
examples, to a demonstration of our gratitude) be compelled to weep with
Caesar, while we see how the lives and acts of mere moralists do shame us
besides our own.

None of us but have received favors of an higher nature than any of them. But
alas, where are our erected pillars? where are our Hecatombes? where our
holocausts? where the pyramides of our praises? where our smoking Altars? our
burning Incense, our hallowed sacrifices, our holy services? Genesis 31.47.
Tell me who with Laban has erected a Iegar-saha dutha, a Pillar of witness,
between God and him, of Gods mercy, and his thankfulness? Who with Jacob
has built an Altar of acknowledgement, and entitled it, El-elhoim Israel?
Genesis 33.20 Exodus 17.14 16.
to show that God is the God of Israel? Who with Moses has registered the
favors of his God and ruin of his enemies upon an Altar, and called the name
of it Jehovah Nissi? Who with Jonah disgorged out of the bowels of the deep
has erected his pillars of praise? His one for Ionahs two, which yet stand
firm on the confines of Syriah, and are called by the name of Ionahs Pillars,
or near the place where the Fish set Jonah ashore?

Who with the holy woman has powered out the ointment of her best praises upon
the head of her Savior? Mat. 26.7.
Or with the woman that Christ cured of her bloody issue, has left a double
monument one of her own misery, another of her Saviors mercy, Joseph. Eccl.
Hist.
as we read she did in Ecclesiastical Histories.

Who so is wise will ponder these things, and seek to make some benefit by
these examples which I lay before you, Psalm. 107. ult.
as Jacob laid his Rod of green poplar before the sheep of Laban, Genesis
30.37.
when he laid speckled Rods, they brought forth speckled Lambs, but when he
laid fairer and white rods they brought forth fair and white lambs. I lay
before you not speckled but fairer and candid examples, of which I say to you
as Moses concerning the building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.9
Fac secundum hoc exemplar. And as our Lord and Savior to the questioning
Lawyer, Go thou and do so likewise. Whatsoever things have virtues, in others
will be no less eminent in the imitatours. Wherefore then whatsoever things
are honest, Phil 4 8.
just, good, virtuous, laudable, that follow, they will carry away a blessing.

Shall the Jews offer their children in sacrifice in imitation of Abraham? S.
W. R. Hist.
Or Agessilaus King of Sparta, offer sacrifice in imitation of Agamemnon, which
was thrown off the Altar by the Th^ban Lords in Aulis: And shall not we be
provoked by better examples to imitation, of better actions?

God requires neither trophies nor triumphs, sacrifices nor burnt offerings of
us though we receive as great and greater mercies as our progenitors, who so
testified their thankfulness. He asks no more of us but to be thankful, and
to praise the Lord for his goodness, etc.

Well said the servants to the Prince and Peer of Syriah, 2. King. 5.13.
to their Master Naaman, when they would provoke him to follow the Prophets
order and advise. If the Prophet had required some great thing of thee,
would thou not have done it? how much more, when he bids thee but wash and
be clean. So say I, if the Lord of Prophets should require some great things
of you, would ye not do it? How much rather, when he bids you to wash your
selves from the foul spots of unthankfulness and be clean?

Should God raise a Subsidy, and challenge but what is his own, and require
of you that are Lords both of Sea and Land, to resign your Lordships in the
one, your interest in the other, your title to both. Of you Land Lords to give
up your rents and revenues. Of you rich men to give away your wealth, of you
poor men to give away your alms, of you Officers, to give away your fees, of
you Servants to give away your earnings, of you Mariners to give away your
dear bought wages: I know that this would be Dui us Sermo, Luke 18.23
a harsh and unreasonable request. But quis requisivit? Mic 6.3.
who has required those things at your hands? God has not troubled you with
sacrifices, nor wearied you with offerings; no, the God of heaven has another
request unto you, which you may not, you must not deny him; and Saint Paul in
Gods name, and I in Saint Paul's name, Beseech you Brethren by the mercies of
God, To 11.1.
that ye present your selves souls and bodies as a holy, living, and
acceptable sacrifice unto God, for although the other were an unreasonable, yet
this is but your reasonable service, Romans 12.1.

Caius Cotta that thankful Roman, Plut. vit. To.
when he would show himself truly grateful to the Senate, he gave them his
soul, and his reason was, vita and mors iura naturae sunt; Life and death are
the rites of nature. We cannot better testify our praises and gratulations,
than by giving our souls unto our Maker, whose they are by creation and
redemption, saying with the Psalmist, Psalm. 41.5.
Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord,
thou God of truth. Joseph charged his brethren to bring with them their little
Brother Benjamin, else they might all have been left behind: So Christ our
elder brother, Genesis 42.20.
charge us to bring with us our little brother Benjamin of thankfulness,
else all other services are of no value.

Plut. in v. These.
Aegeus, the Father of Theseus, sent his son to graple with the Minotaure,
and gave him one suit of black sails, and another of white, to be hoysed
only and worn in case he got the victory; which though he had got, yet he
returns home with the black sails he went out with; at sight of which, his
father threw himself from the Sigean Promontory, where he expected his sons
arrival. In which history is lively moralized the natural dispositions of too
many, who like Theseus, the son of Aethra and Aegeus, after a happy voyage
and prosperous, do return with the black sails of ingratitude and
unthankfulness, Ephesians. 4.30.
and hereby grieve the spirit of their holy and heavenly Father, by which they
are sealed unto the day of redemption: whereas if they did hoyse the candid and
white sails of gratulation and applause, they should rejoice both Angels and
Cherubins that sit upon the scaffold of heaven expecting our victory and happy
arrival. Luke 15.10.


Now that we may aright bless God for his mercyes, let us in praising of him,
offer this sourefold sacrifice. First, let us offer the sacrifice of charitable
alms, as occasion is offered to us. To do good and distribute forget not, He
13.16.
for with such a sacrifice God is well pleased: I, hereby we shall make our
selves Creditors to God, and him a debtor to us. Pro. 19.17
For he that gives unto the poor, lends to the Lord: he that puts his
money into the bank of heaven, shall make plentiful return in this world,
Luke 18.10
an hundred fold, and in the world to come, life everlasting. Secondly, offer
to God the sacrifice of an humble penitence and contrition, Psalm. 51.17. The
sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, Psalm. 51.17
a broken and a contrite heart, O Lord thou will not, thou can not despise.
While your hearts are thinking of your sins, let your eyes be like the Pooles
of Heshbon by Bathrabim, Cant. 7.4.
which were ever full of standing water, to wash away those soul spots, that
sullage of Adams clay that rests within us. Thirdly, lets sacrifice our wills,
and make a perfect and absolute resignation of them to the will of God, whether
it be paetiendo or faciendo, by doing or suffering, by a patient sufferance of
what he inflicts, by an obedient yeeldance to what he commands. In this we do
no more then the Son of God and Savior of the world, who subscribed to the
will of his Father. Mat. 6.10,
Not my will, but thy will be done.

Fourthly and lastly, we must sacrifice our sins if ever we mean to bring
any honor to God by yielding him his praise. This sin offering or offering
of sin is equally necessary with them that went before. Even those that are
as near to us as Isaac was to Abraham, must be sacrificed: those that are as
near as our right eye or hand must be cut off, Mat. 5 29.
pulled out and offered.

Genesis 2^.10
Sin is an Hagar that must be thrust out of doors, else Sarah our conscience
shall never be at rest and quiet.

1. Sam. 5.4
Sin is a Dagon whose neck must be broke upon the threshold of repentance. 1
King 5.10.
Sin is a Naaman that must be washed in Jordan seven times in the vermilion
streams of our Saviors sufferings, seventy times seven times.

Ion^. 1.15.
Sin is a Jonah that must be thrown over board; if ever we mean that the
tempests of vengeance shall cease, or be bettered by calmes of mercy. You that
love your sins as Judah loved Tamar, Ge. 38.15.
to enjoy your pleasures by them, as Saul loved David, to get honor by them,
Ge. 30.36.
as Jacob loved Laban, to get wealth and riches by them: You must part with
all, in all, or none at all. One leg in the stocks will hold fast the whole
body: one sin in the soul will hold fast both body and soul.

In vain shall you praise God for his goodness, if you displease him with the
continuance and increase of sin and wickedness. To what purpose will you
offer to sing Psalms of praise and thanksgiving, if the noise of your sins
drown the noise of your Psalms, as Drums in the sacrifice of Molech did
drown the cry of the burning and tormented Infants, or as the ringing of the
Bells does drown the noise of the clock.

How dare ye profess a subjection and loyalty to the King and Crown of
heaven, if we nourish sin in our bosoms and hearts, a traitor both to him
and us? Eccles. 5.1
Or offer the sacrifice of praise to please him, when we offer the sacrifice of
fools to provoke him. This is the high way to enrage him, by whose power we
are created, by whose providence we are preserved, to send worse judgments
upon us then we have escaped.

Iud. 16.19.
Such as with Sampson will sleep in sin as in the lap of Dalilah, let them
beware their locks. Judge. 5.26
Such as with Siserah will short in this Iael's tent, let them beware their
lives. If you will boyse sail in all weathers, who can deplore your
shipwreck? If you will run from Niniveh to Tarshish, Iona. 1.3.
who will pity you though you meet with a worse storm in your teeth than what
you seek to avoid? D^str. Tr.
So did Polydamas that son of Antenor, to avoid a storm, run under a
ruinous rock that crushed him and killed him. So did the wise of Lot escape the
vengeance of Sodom, Ge. 19.26.
yet continuing in her sin procured a worse and more peculiar, to be turned
into a pillar of salt. And so shall all such as are not seasoned by her
example, but will wilfully split themselves upon the Rock of their own
sins, they are unworthy of my farther reproof or your farther attention.
Such as will avoid both the sin and danger, must praise the Lord for his
goodness; And such as will give unto their heavenly Caesar his tributary due
of praise must do it, Mat. 22.21
by acknowledging him to be a Lord: So said Ieptha to the men of Gilead, Judge.
11.9.
If I fight for you against the children of Ammon, shall I not be your head? As
I say to all of you, whose faces seem to congratulate this day, whose
attentions seem to entertain this doctrine; If he fight for us against our
enemies, and deliver us, shall not he be our Lord? Yes! Lets first acknowledge
him, and secondly lets apply him, all the merits of his active and passive
obedience must be laid claim to by a peculiar and particular application: so
did Thomas, who seemed to have engrossed him to himself, Ioh. 20.28
My Lord and my God. Thirdly, by obeying him as a Lord, in mercy for fear we
find him to be a Lord in justice, Those mine enemies that will not I shall
rule over them, Lu. 19.27.
bring them hither that I may slay them: Heb. 10 31.
Its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living Lord. Fourthly, lets
praise him as the only Lord of heaven and earth without a rival. For his
glory he will not give unto another, nor his praise to graven Images.

God in the frontispiece of his royal Law provokes, persuades his people
Israel to have or serve no other Gods but him, because he, and no other God but
he, Exodus 20.1.2.
had brought them out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. So
let all such as the Lord has redeemed out of the hands of the enemy, praise
him alone as their sovereign Lord He that has more than one God, or one Lord,
has neither God nor Lord.

Alexander told Darius King of Persia, Quin. Cur.
offering to him half his kingdom that the Heaven had not two Suns, neither
should the Earth have two sovereigns. One Alexander was enough for a world,
Val. Max.
one Phoenix enough for an age: Duos Alcibiades neque Attica neque Graecia
tulit. Nor Greece nor Athens brought forth two Alcibiades. Sparta brought not
forth two Lysanders, nor the world two such Lords.

Let those fishermen that know no better sacrifice unto their nets, or Neptune,
those husbandmen unto their dunghill, or to Ceres for their corn; others to
Bacchus for their wines, to Pallas for their oils, to Apollo for their
wisdom, to Minerva for their peace. Let the Turks thank their Mahomet for
protection; the Persians go to their god Nergal for defense; the Hamathensians,
to Asima for strength; the Babylonians to Succobenoth for deliverance: Ier.
1^.13.
For according to the number of their countries are the number of their gods.
Let them and all Atheists go to their false and foolish Dieties; all Papists to
their Saints; but let us go unto the Lord our God. Oh that men would therefore
praise the Lord. Oh that they would either cease to be men, or being men,
would never cease to praise the Lord. Or yet if our tongues could be weary of
the publication of his praises, yet let them be employed in the proclamation of
his wonders.

Text. And declare the wonders that he does for, etc.

We men are put upon the labor and task of Angels. To publish his praises,
and proclaim his wonders is the office and theme of the Hyerarchy of heaven,
who are ever singing their divine Carols of praise, ^^d rejoicing in the
expression of his wonders. Had I the tongue of men and Angels, you the ears
and wings of Cherubins, we could neither well enough nor soon enough extol
his praises, or express his wonders. Of both I may say as the Psalmist said
before me; Who can express the noble acts of the Lord, Psalm. 106.2
or show forth all his praise? Yet since the royal hand of heaven vouchsafe
not only to require, but requite our weak performances with acceptance; As we
have begun with his praises, so let us go on a little also to declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

Duhartas. 1. day. The world's a book in Folio written all with Gods great
works in letters capital.
This world is a book in Folio wherein are written the works and wonders of
Gods omnipotent hand, the acts and monuments of our maker and preserver in his
own proper characters; Not as Christ wrote when he wrote in the dust that
spiritual paradox, Ioh. 8, 8. But as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks in another
case, Ier. 17.1.
Stylo ferreo in ungue Adamantino: As with a pen of iron, and point of a
diamond. Man is no other but a concise abridgement of this book of the world,
and an entire Index to show and point out the capital observations of the
voluminous and massy pile.

Would you see works of imitation, he turns you to the leaves and pages of
Gods sacred Oracle, the Conclave of holy Scripture. Would you see works of
Admiration, no page in this book of the world, no act in this great and high
creation, but gives us occasion. I call you not to a tedious recapitulation of
what I have spoken before in the expression of his wonders in the Sea, there
are enough as yet remain unrelated. For it is above all creatures wonderful,
whether in regard of the situation of it which is above the Land, and roares
and rages as if it would swallow up the earth, as the earth did Corah and his
rebellious train. Number. 16.32.
Yet he keeps it within his bounds with a Huc usque, or a Ne plus ultra, thus
far shall thou go, and no farther. Or upon the nature of her ebbes and flows,
Job 38.11.
her fuls and wanes, her spring and neape tides; It has puzzled the wisest
Moralist, Q. Cur. concludes only that it is terrible, Fluxus refluxus maris
terrorem incutit. Or upon the innumerable number of creatures that are within
the bowels of that womb of moisture. B. Hall.
There are those living and moving Islands the Whales, that for greatness of
body, Psalm. 104.6
infinicy of number, variety of forms, strangeness of shape, are above our
apprehension or expression: These dance, roll, and tumble upon her fearful
billows. Or upon the wonderful art of Navigation and sailing, which now is
grown so excellent and so common, that we cease to bestow more wonder on it.
That the water, a creature of fidelity, should firmly bear up all vessels,
from the shallop to the ship, from the smallest Caruel to the mightiest and
greatest Carrack: and with the help of propitious and favorable winds,
convey them from climate to climate, from India in the East, to India in the
West, if it were to the Antipodes themselves, to the benefit and commodity of
their far distant owners.

It Is recorded to be the answer of a Traveller to one asking him what he had
seen in his Alexandrian journey: Credit mihi fratres, ego ibi faciem nullius
vidi nisi tantum Episcopi, etc. Believe me, brethren, I saw no face there, save
the Bishops. So if I were in a few words to give an accurat and exact account
of my two or three years absence, Credit mihi fratres, etc. Believe me,
brethren, I saw the face of none, save only of him that is the Bishop of our
souls; For his face and Image is upon all the works of his hands, by Sea or
Land. That look how Phydias, Didac de la Vega, Iol.
the cunning Artificer, had so curiously engraven his picture upon Minervaes
shield, that none could look upon the shield, but he must look upon the
picture of him that made it; for it could not be taken off without the ruin of
the shield. Right even so (with reverence to the Majesty of heaven be it
spoken) has God, that great and cunning Artificer, of heaven engraved his
picture upon all his works, that none can look beside it, nor beyond it,
above it, or below it, all his works do both spread his glory and proclaim
his Dietie. Look we upwards, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work. The heaven of heavens that rowls so
gloriously both above our heads, and apprehentio^s, Act. 7.50.
is the royal palace and place of his residence, there is the Chamber of his
presence, Psalm. 123. There the guard chamber of Angels, Archangels, and
Cherubins, Matt. 24.36. There the lodging Chambers and many mantions of those
spiritual Courtiers, the glorified Saints; these do all declare the glory of
God, and the firmament as an open Court or Hall for all comers, does show his
handy work. It would puzle a Roman Antiquary, or Persian Sophie, or the most
curious indagator of Natures secrets, to show the nature, number, order of the
greater and lesser lights and lanterns of heaven, the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Plannets, winds, thunders, lightenings, Meteors, vapors, which do there attend
the pleasure of the King of glory, and fulfill his words, Psalm. 104.8. While I
think, speak, or write of them, I must do it in the Prophets language, Oh
Lord how wonderful art thou in all thy works, in wisdom have thou made them
all. Or if we look down from heaven which is his throne, Act. 7.49.
to earth which is his footstool: even there also do we see the image of his
goodness, For the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, and so is the
broad sea also. Here we behold him in his goodness and wisdom, making one
Country the helper and mutual supporter of each others welfare. He makes one
the Granary to furnish her neighbors with corn, another the Armory to furnish
the rest with weapons, another the Piscary to furnish the rest with fish:
another the Treasury to furnish the rest with gold. As Spain is famous for her
Wines, Calabria and Apulia for their Oils; Sicilia and Turkey for their Corn;
Newfound land for Fish; Greece for fruit; Italy for Arms; Russia for Furs;
Barbary for Gold; England for all.

Those blessings that severally make other Countries happy, are conspired to
meet in ours. Whether it be by the proper commodity of our own native soil,
or by traffic and merchandise with others, or by both. He that travels
farthest, may sit down by the waters of Babylon and weep, Psalm. 137.1
while he remembers this our matchless Sion. O England, say I, happy for
peace, happy for tranquillity, happy for a general conflux of all happiness
that can make either soul or body blessed; Lu. 19.42.
miserable only because she knows not her own happiness. Oh that thou
would know in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace. So should
this peace rest long within thy walls, Psalm. 122.7.
and plenteousnesse within thy Palaces, and thou should continue as thou
art, the terror of thy foes, the glory of the world, the Mart of Nations. And
thus while we wonder or declare the wonders that God does for the children of
men, Isa. 25.1.
may we say with Esaias, Thou art my God and I will praise thee, for i^ thou have
done wonderful things. And with Moses, Exodus 15.11.
Who is a God like unto our God, fearful in praises, doing wonders. And while
we meditate of the works themselves, let us reflect our contemplative thoughts
of Adoration upon that great Atlas of heaven, that supports them all with the
two shoulders of his power and providence.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

And now I have waded through the three general parts of the Text; thus much
only for the literal signification: the tropologicall is briefly this.

The Church of God is this ship tossed upon the Ocean, tumbled upon the
unconstant billows of this troublesome world; laboring with the boisterous
winds of opposition, opposed with the enemies of Gods grace and her peace;
packt and poasted from haven to haven, from country to country. Sometimes she
is carried down to the deep and nethermost Hell, as in the times of Nero,
Maximilian, Domitian, and other Roman Emperors, as also in the days of
Queen Mary in England. Sometimes again she is lifted up into the heaven, by
an happy and blessed tranquillity, as in the days and times wherein we live,
and the Gospel flourishes.

The holy Bible is her armorie and place of defense, and it is like the Tower of
David. Cant. 4.4. In which are weapons shields and targets, for a thousand, I,
for ten thousand thousand valiant men.

The Law as her fore-castle to them that went before, wherein was placed the
chase-pieces and thundering Cannons of legal austerities, discharged by her
cunning marks-men the Prophets and Patriarks, against the bulwarks of heresy,
and Babels of sin in all ages. The Gospel is now our armory and place of
defense; and herein also are variety of weapons, which are not carnal but
spiritual, and mighty through God to throw down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
Here is the Helmet of salvation, the shield of faith, and Breast plate of
righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God. Ephesians. 6.13.
which will quench the fiery darts of the devil, that like a roaring Lion goes
about seeking whom he may devour.

In this ship of our English Church sits the sovereign Majesty of our Lord
and King as supreme head and governor, his Nobles, Lords, Judges,
Counselors, as representative pieces of his own Majesty, sit in the steerage
of estate, and to them is committed the helm of government.

His reverend Clergy of all degrees are each of them another Palenurus, or all
Pilots guiding you in the right and perfect way, informing your judgments,
reforming your lives according to the card and compass of Gods holy Word.

The many promises of mercy, patterns of mercy, precepts of mercy, presidents
of mercy, are as so many favorable gales and winds to further us till we come
to the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls.

All men are embarked in this ship of the Church, whose pretended voyage is to
the Land of Canaan, but not all alike; Some as passengers receive neither wages
nor content in this tedious and troublesome voyage, who desire a quick and
speedy passage through this Baca of fears, this Bochim of tears, and with
Saint Paul to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Others as Mariners in their own proper element, know of no other happiness,
aim at no other felicity, than what the sea of this world affords them. The
longer they stay, the greater their pay: they have their portion here in this
life, and in the other, they receive only the wages which is due unto them; it
were better they were without it; for the wages of sin due to the servants of
sin, is death both of body and soul, when the former receive only the gift
of God, which is eternal life. I had rather stand to his courtesy, than
engage him to payment:

Before we can arrive at our Canaan of felicity, our Port and haven of heaven,
we must all pass through the straits of the last judgment. For we must all
appear before his judgment sent, 2. Cor. 5.10.
to stand to our trial at the universal inquisition, and then arrive at our
desired haven, where for ever we shall spend our days in praising the Lord for
his goodness, and in declaring his wonders to us the children of men.

Angels shall meet us with our Palms, our Robes, our Crowns; Archangels with
triumphs and Carols of Celestial bliss, and while we are thus singing of our
praises to the King of glory, the whole host and Quire of heaven shall say,
Amen.

But so much for the literal and historical meaning of the words. Pardon my
willing error of tediousness, Polulogie is the common fault of travelers, my
desire was this day to pay my vows, where I am most obliged, and to whom, and
before whom; and to erect this Sermon as a Pillar of thankfulness, and an
Altar of praise, that like the Prayers and Alms of Cornelius, might reach up
to heaven. I should be sorry it should prove a Babel to breed confusion
either in your patience or your memory.

About this pillar are written these three things; Dangers, to draw us to
awfulnes; Mercies, to draw us to thanfulnesse; Duties, to draw us to obedience.
And but three, as being most portable for your memory, easy for your
judgment, ready for your use. Neither is this Pillar of Praise dedicated as
was that Athenian Altar, Acts 17.23. with this inscription, Ignoto Deo, to an
unknown God or Lord, but to a Lord of mercy, wisdom and power, who knows
best, when, where, and how, to succor and relieve us. Let this serve both for
present use, and future memory. Thus if we bless God, he will bless us.
Blessed therefore be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
us his people.

Let them whom the Lord has redeemed from the hand of the enemy, praise the
Lord: Let them that are daily spectators of his wonders in the deep, praise
the Lord, when they are brought to the haven where they would be.

Let the house of Israel, and the house of Aaron accord in these holy and
religious services to publish his praises. And what ever others do or do not;
My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which saves
thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness.

The Lords holy name be blessed and praised from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down of the same, and let all the people present say, Amen. So be it.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4. lin. 24. read lest. 5. 16. Countries. 7 20. praise and thankfulness.
8. 21. my first. 9. 2. what. 11. 4. and. ibid. 6. aires. 12. 3. if. 13. 10.
after danger, read, Scilla and Charibdis little injured by the Poets, in
expression of it is danger. 14. 17. spouts. 16. 15. so should they. 35. 10. the
seas: ibid. 24. this. 41. 10. us to. 42. 3. such ibid. 5. their. ibid. 18.
called. 45. 17. the. 47. 19. the. ibid. 11. walking. 48. 12. Those that. ibid.
18. Caleb. ibid. 23. best relish the. 50. 5. both. 53. 15. that. 55. 7. at, 56.
15. been virtuous.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1634.


