A SERMON PREACHED AT PAUL'S Cross the 9. of February, being the first Sunday
in the Parleament, Anno. 1588. by Richard Bancroft D. of Divinity, and
Chaplain to the right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight L. Chancellor of
England. Wherein some things are now added, which then were omitted, either
through want of time, or default in memory.

2. Tim. 2. Stay profane and vain bablings, for they will increase unto more
ungodlines. Imprinted at London, by E. ^. for Gregory Seton, and are to be
sold at his shop under Aldersgate. 1588

August.
SChismaticos non fides diversa facit: sed communionis dirupta societas.
Schismatikes are such as retaining with us the true faith: do separate
themselves from us, for orders, and ceremonies. Hierom.
Nullum Schisma non sibi aliquam postea confingit haeresim, ut recte ab
ecclesia secessisse videatur. Schismatikes in short time for the most part do
prove heretics. Hierom.
Epistolas plenas mendaciorum and fraudulentiae atque perjurii in orbem
dirigunt, ut and aures polluant audientium and existimationem simplicium
laedant, quod impleatur in eis hoc quod scriptum est: Aprophetis Jerusalem est
egressa pollutio in omnem terram. Non enim eis sufficit iniquitatem propriam
devorare and proximum laedere: sed quos semel oderunt per universum orbem
infamare conantur and ubique seminare blasphemias. That is in effect thus. In
that they cast abroad their infamous libels, so leudly fraught with lies, and
sleights, to corrupt thereby the ears of their hearers, and to hurt the opinion
and judgment of the simpler sort: that is fulfilled in them which is written:
From the false prophets which are in the church, is wickedness gone forth into
all the land. For it is not sufficient for them to hide and devour their own
iniquities, and by such calumniations to hurt their neighbors: but those whom
once they hate they labor to defame through all the world, and do sow in every
place their cursed and slanderous speeches. Galati.
Discipulos saepe numero gignunt, ideo se nocentiores quod Magistros superent
audacia, vana ostentatione and inani suasione perfectionis. Hi cum aliquid
addiderunt aut immutarunt, suam quoque seorsim habent sectam, cujus ipsi eadem
permoti gloriae cupiditate authors videri volunt? Nemo enim est ejusmodi vir,
qui non aliquid novi comminiscendo eminere and nominari: and magister suorum,
aut doctor dici and haberi cupiat. The scholars of schismatikes, through a
vain ostentation, and persuasion of perfection, are commonly more impudent and
worse then their masters. These men having added or changed any thing, will
have by themselves a sect of their own, whereof (being as desirous of glory as
their masters) they desire to be reputed the authors. For there is (...) of
them who by devising of some new t(...) does not covet to be famous, and to be
a^counted a captain and doctor of his ow^ crew. Deerly beloved, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God: For many false
prophets are gone out into the world. 1. IOH. 4. 1.
THESE words which I have readde unto you (right Hon. and beloved in the Lord)
do divide themselves into three parts: a prohibition, Believe not every
spirit: a commandment, But try the spirits whether they be of God: and a
reason of them both, Because many false prophets are gone out into the world.
Of these three parts, the last in order is the first in nature; and the first
is the last: and I mean to proceed accordingly. First I will show unto you,
that many false prophets are gone out into the world: secondly, the trial of
them is to be considered of: which two points being well understood, the
necessity of the prohibition will evidently appear; which is, that we ought
not to believe every spirit. Money false prophets are gone out, etc.

In this first part I observe four things: the number of these prophets, They
are many: their quality, They are false: their going out, and the causes that
moove them so to do: and where they remain, They are gone into the world.

As concerning the number of these prophets, The number of these pro^ts. ^ts.
8. ^t. 13. ^oc. 2. ^im. 2. ^im. 1. ^im. 1. ^hn. ^ts. 5.
the scriptures do name these: Simon Magus, Elimas, Barjehu, the Nicholaites,
Himinaeus, Philetus, Alexander, Phigellus, Hermogenes, Diotrephes, Theudas, and
Judas of Galilee. To whom also these may be added: Ebion, Cerinthus, the
Carpocratians, Simon of Galilee, Menander, and diverse others.

With these prophets the Church was so troubled and disquieted in S. John's
time, that (as it seemed) some cared for no spirit, prophet, nor doctrine: and
some were so giddy headed, that in a manner every spirit contented them, which
caused the Apostle to use in effect these words: to the one sort, Beleev^ not
every spirit: and to the other, although you are not to believe every spirit,
yet it is your duty to believe some spirit.

After the Apostles times, as it were out of the ashes of these false prophets,
there grew and sproong up so many other schismat ikes and heretics: as
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epip hanius, and S. Augustine do testify, that the very
name of Christ began to be odious among the people: and as Socrates reports,
the Socrates.
Christians were mocked and jested at upon public stages, and in their common
interludes.

Of the times in like manner wherein we now live, the Apostle S. Paul did
prophecy, 1. Tim. (...)
that there should be many false prophets: and we do see his sayengs therein to
be fulfilled by the number of such prophets as now remain amongst us: Arrians,
Donatists, Papists, Libertines, Anabaptists, the Family of love, and sundry
other (I know not of what opinion) so many sectaries and schismatikes, as that
in very deed diverse do revolt daily to Papistrie, many are become merely
Atheists, and the best do stand in some sort at a gaze.

So as all the complaints which in times past have been made heerof, may truly
be applied to these our days wherein we now live; Vos Christiani dissidetis
inter vos and tot sectas habetis: quae licet omnes Christianismi titulum Clem.
St^ mat. lib. 7^
sibi vendicent, tamen alia aliam execratur and condemnat. Quare vestra religio
vera non est, nec a deo originem ducit. Ye Protestants say the Papists (as
Clemens Alexandrinus notes some others to have said upon the like occasion)
ye dissent amongst your selves and maintain so many sects: which sects
notwithstanding they al claim the title of Christian religion, yet one of them
curses and condemns another: and therefore your religion is not true, nor
has her beginning or ground from God.

And Chrysostom of the Atheist; Venit Chrysostom. in act. ^il. 33.
gentilis and dicit, vellem fieri Christianus: Sed nescio cui adhaeream. Multae
inter vos sunt pugnae, seditiones and tumultus. Nescio quod dogma eligam, quod
praeferam. The Infidel and Heathen comes and says, I would be a Christian
man, but I know not whom I should follow: there is much strife, dissension and
trouble amongst you: I can not tell what doctrine to choose to set before
other: Nam singuli dicunt, ego verum dico for every one says, I speak the
truth.

The best amongst us in like manner I fear are come to the same pass that they
were at Chrysostom. ^s in act. ^il. 33. hom
in Melancthons time, who complained as he writes in this sort; Quos fugiamus
habemus, quos sequamur non intelligimus: We understand whom to avoid (meaning
the Papists) but as yet whom to follow we know not. God for his mercies sake
remoove this great stumbling block from amongst us: even as he shall see it to
be most expedient for his church.

Now of the quality of those prophets: The quali ties of those prophets. 1 Timothy 4.
they are false: false in doctrine, and false in conversation. In respect of
their doctrine, they are called in the Scriptures Spirits of error, seducers,
deceivers, juglers, authors 2. John. Col. 2. 2. Tim. 3 2. Tim. 2 1. Tim. 4 1.
John. 3 Col. 2. 1. Tim. 6
of diverse sects, false speakers, and the children of the devil, who is the
father of all falshoode.

In respect of their conversation they are said to be humble and lowly in
outward show, but yet of nature very contentious and unquiet, doting about
questions and strife of words: whereof comes envy, strife, railings, and evil
surmisings. Their mouths do speak proud things and swelling words Jude.
of vanity: likewise dangerous things. They are bold and stand in their own
conceit: 2. (...)
they despise government and fear not to speak evil of them that are in
dignity and authority; whereas the angels which are greater both in power and
might give not railing judgment against them before the Lord. They are
Libellers, and do speak evil of those things which they know not. They are
bolder in avouching their untruths, and in depraving their superiors, than
Michael the Archangell durst be when he strove against Jude.
the devil.

In both these respects they are resembled in the Scriptures, and in the
ancient fathers unto diverse things; as unto painted walls and sepulchers,
because they are hypocrites: Matt. 23. Luke 11.
to trees which have nothing but leaves, because they are fruitelesse: to the
mermaides Just. Man
because they hide their errors under their counterfeit and fair speeches: to
Helena, of Greece, for that they moove as great contention in the church as she
did troubles betwixt the Grecians and the Trojans: to the diseases called the
leprosy and the cankar, 2 Timothy 2.
in that their corruption takes deep root and spreads so far: to a
serpent that is lapped up together, because they have many windings and
contradictions: to the fish named a Cuttle, for that they infect men with their
black and slanderous calumniations: to snakes or adders, the poison of aspes
being under their lips: to the viper, because Romans 3.
they regard not to wound and destroy their mother the church: to tigers and
lions, for that they are very cruel and fierce: and to diverse other such
things as ought to make them odious to all that love the truth.

Of these false prophets some endeavor to seduce the godly under pretense of
dreams and revelations: especially the popish priests and prophets: For
prooving of their real presence and purgatory, as it appears most
manifestly in diverse of their books: but especially touching purgatory in
Dionysius the Carthusian; De quatuor novissimis. Dionysius.


Unto these I might add the holy maid of Lisbone, who did prophecy this
last year (if the report be true) that the invincible navy of the Spaniardes
should no sooner approach the coast of England, but that presently all English
men's hearts should fail them, and the Spaniards obtain the victory. I pray
God that al prophesies and attempts against England have never better success
then these of late have had.

There are other false prophets in like manner so termed, because they do apply
the saiengs of the true prophets unto a false end and purpose: as those in the
Apostles times who took upon them to set down peremptorily the certain time
of the day of judgment. Such there are also in these days: especially Brocard
the Italian, who expounds Danaeus prolego. i^ Proph. c^
the prophesies of Esaie, Ezechiell and the rest touching the overthrow of
Jerusalem, Egypt, Tire, Sidon, and Babylon with their kings and rulers to be
understood of the destruction of Anwarpe, Paris, the prince of Orange, the
prince of Conde, and others both noblemen, and famous cities in these last
days.

Of this number I may very well account the late obstinate heretic Francis
Ket, who Ket.
was within these two months brent at Norwich. All the places in the prophets
which did describe the spiritual kingdom of Christ, he applied to the material
restoration of the earthly Jerusalem: affirming that as many as would be
saved must go and dwell there in the land of Chanaan.

Another of this sort (whose book I have, written with his own hand)
endevoreth to prove out of the prophets, that ELIZABETH now Queen of England
is ordained of God to be Queen of Jerusalem: even as the Anabaptists long
since dreamed of John Contr. ^ Anab.
Bocaldus of Leiden, whom as Bullinger notes, the crowned king of Jerusalem.

Lastly they are to be reckoned amongst the number of these false prophets who
do pervert the meaning of the Scriptures for the maintenance and defense of any
false doctrine, schism, or heresy. Heerof you know I might give you many
examples: I pray you bear with me if I set down one as strange in my opinion,
as any is to be found in a matter of no greater importance.

The name of false prophet I am content in diverse respects to suppress: the
matter it self which I mean, stands in this sort. There are very many now a
days, who do affirm that when Christ used these words, Dic Matthew. 18.
ecclesiae, he meant thereby to establish in the church for ever the same plat
and form of ecclesiastical government, to be erected in every (...). 11.
parish, which Moses by Iethroes counsel appointed in mount Sinaie: and which
afterward the Jews did imitate in their particular synagogs.

They had (say these men) in their synagogs The cert^ form o^ cles. gov^
their priests, we must have in every parish our pastors: they their Levites,
we our doctors: they their rulers of their synagogs, we our elders: they their
leviticall treasurers, we our deacons.

This form of government they call the tabernacle which God has appointed,
the glory of God, and of his son Jesus Christ, the presence of God, the place
which he has chosen to put his name there, the court of the Lord, and the
shining forth of Gods glory. Where this ecclesiastical synod is not
erected, they say Gods ordinance is not performed: the office of Christ as he
is a king is not acknowledged: in effect that without this government we can
never attain to a right and true feeling of Christian Religion, but are to be
reckoned amongst those who are accounted to say of Christ as it is in Luke, We
will not have this man to reign over us.

And their conclusion upon this point against Demons^ of Discip^
all that do withstand their government is this, according as it likewise
follows in the same place: Those mine enemies which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me. Luke 19.


Here you see there is great vehemency used, and very sharp applications are
urged, A man would think that if the ground of this government were not more
clear then the sun, and so determined of by all the godly and learned in
the world ever since Christ's time, they could never be half so resolute or
earnest.

But herein they pass indeed the measure of a modest man's conceit. For
there was never ancient father since the Apostles times, were he never so
learned or studious of the truth: there was never particular Church, council
or synod, or any man of judgment that ever lived till these latter times (as
I think, and I have taken pains for the search thereof) that did ever so
expound and interpret that place: or that ever did so much as once dream of
any such meaning.

Besides, it is most manifest that there has been a diverse government from
this used in the church ever since the apostles times: and these men themselves
confess that long before the council of Nice this their government began
greatly to decay: and that since the said council it was never heard of in
christendom until these their times.

A very strange matter if it were true, that Christ should erect a form of
government for the ruling of his Church to continue from his departure out of
the world until his coming again: and that the same should never be once
thought of or put in practice for the space of 1500. years, or at the least (to
take them at the best) that the government and kingdom of Christ should then
be overthrown, when by all men's confessions the divinity of his person, the
virtue of his priesthood, the power of his office as he is a prophet, and the
honor of his kingly authority, was so godly, so learnedlie, and so mightily
established against the Arrians, in the council of Nice, as that the
confession of the Christian faith then set Council. 2 Nice
forth, has ever since without contradiction been received in the church.

So as for mine own part I cannot choose but account these Interpreters to be
in truth perverters of Christ's meaning: and do hold them among the number of
those of Tertul (...) praescrip^ verse. hae^
whom Tertullian speaking says: Caedem scripturarum faciunt ad materiam suam:
They murder the Scriptures to serve their own purpose. And thus of their
qualities.

Many false prophets are gone out. Are gone False prophets go^ out.
out, that is, are manifest. Before they lay hid in the Church, but now by
their schisms they have made themselves known. They departed from the
congregations of the faithful accounting them ungodlie: and have gathered to
themselves companies agreeable to their own humors: which they only esteem
for the Churches of God.

Thus all heretics and schismatikes have done from the beginning, wherein they
are greatly to be woondred at. For this has ever been reckoned a most certain
ground and principle in religion, that that Church August.
which maintains without error the faith of Christ, which holds the true
doctrine of the Gospel in matters necessary to salvation, and preaches the
same; which retains the lawful use of those Sacraments only which Christ
has appointed, and which appoints vice to be punished, and virtue to be
maintaned; notwithstanding in some other respects, and in some points it have
many blemishes, imperfections, nay diverse and sundry errors, is yet to be
acknowledged for the mother of the faithful, the house of God, the Ark of Noah, the pillar of truth, and the spouse of Christ. From which Church whosoever
does separate himself, he is to be reckoned a schismatike or an heretic.

I might bring very many testimonies out of the ancient fathers to prove this
principle: especially out of S. Augustine against the Donatists; but I hold it
needless. And yet for the better satisfaction of those which are of the new
humor, I will trouble you with the judgment heerin of a man of the new
reformation. Danaeus handles this Danaeus sag. par. 3 lib. 1. cap
point at large, and is flat of this opinion, that whosoever departs from the
Church for any imperfections or errors, which do not impugn nor overthrow the
substance and articles of the Christian faith, he is a schismatike: Quia
discedit ab eo coetu qui fundamentum verae fidei vere retinet: Because he
departs from that company, which truly retains the foundation of the true
faith. And out of this church says he: Nulla est salus: there is no salvation.

Touching the causes why false prophets The cause why false prophets go out.
with so great danger of their souls do depart from the Church: if we respect
them as they are indeed, I can say nothing, but as it is contained in the old
distinction; They were in the church, but they were not of the Church. Or as S.
John says; They went out 2. Ioh. 2.
from us, because they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they should
have continued with us. In the Lords barn there is contained both wheat and
chafe. Triticum Matt. 3.
non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice fundatam: sedinanes duntaxat
paleas jactat tempestas: The wind (says Saint Cyprian) carries not away the
wheat, nor overthrows the tree Cyprian.
that is deeply rooted, but the light chafe only is tossed and carried away
with the tempest: how beit although in truth they depart from the Church,
because they were not of the Church, yet there are certain reasons whereby
they are moved so to do.

Martin affirms that there are so many schisms in the Church of England at
this day, because that Bishops will not suffer men to do as they list (for I
can make no better sense of his discourse touching that matter) but for mine
own part I am not of his opinion. For I find in the ancient fathers sundry
other causes far differing being truly applied, from those which Martin
alleges. Of which causes if that which I have to say do happily displease any,
let them not be offended with me, but rather blame themselves and their own
demeanor, in that a man can scarcely speak any thing out of the said godly
fathers as touching the behavior of the ancient heretics and schismatikes, but
he shall seem to point at and describe the factions in these days.

There are many causes set down by the ^tempt of(...).
said ancient fathers why so many false prophets do go out into the world, but
I will only touch four, whereof I find the contempt of Bishops especially to
be one. For unto them as S. Jerome says ever since Saint Marks time the care
of church government Epist. ad. E^gr.
has been committed. They had authority over the rest of the Ministry, Vt
schismatum Idem. in 1. Tit.
semina tollerentur: That the seed of schisms might be taken away. And again,
Ne unusquisque ad se trahens Christi ecclesiam rumperet: Idem. ad (...) vagr.
Least every one drawing to himself by a several way should rent in pieces
the church of Christ. For if Bishops had not that authority, Tot in Ecclesiis
efficerentur schismata quot Sacerdotes: There would be as many schisms Idem
cont. Lucif.
in the church as there are priests.

Which thing being observed before Ieromes Ad Rog^ anum.
time by S. Cyprian: Initia haereticorum and ortus atque conetus schismaticorum
male cogitantium, haec sunt, etc. Vt praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. Sic
de ecclesia receditur: sic altar prophanum foris collocatur: sic contra pacem
Christi, and ordinationem atque unitatem deirebellatur. The beginning of
heretics (says he) and the first springing up and enterprise of schismatikes
thinking amiss, etc. grows of this, that being puffed up with pride they
contemn their governors. By this means men stray from the church. Thus a
profane altar is placed without the doors: and thus they rebel against the
peace of Christ, and the ordinance and unity of God. And in another place:
Vnde schismata and haereses ortae Ad Pupl^ number.
sunt nisi dum Episcopus qui unus est, and ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam
presumptione contemnitur: and homo dignatione Dei honoratus ab indignis
hominibus judicatur. Whence do heresies and schimes spring but of this, that
Bishops having the government of the churches in their several Dioceses (as M.
Nowell shows at large against Dorman) are through the proud presumption of
certain contemned, and being men by Gods approbation allowed and honored, are
of unworthy men judged. Thus you see what the ancient and godly fathers have
thought in times past of the contempt of Bishops, let it prevail now with you
as it shall please God to work in your hearts.

The second cause why so many false prophets are gone into the world, I find
to be A mbition. ^ utilitat. ^dendi in Job.
ambition; or as Augustine says, desire of glory: or as Gregory speaks,
desire of principality, not by such as are already advanced to any honor or
authority, but rather by those who accounting themselves nothing inferior to
any of their superiors, do affect with greedines the like places and
preferments: the which if they miss one way, they labor to attain them by
another.

This will appear very evidently unto those who shall consider the histories
of Arrius coveting the Bishopric of Alexandria: of Donatus laboring to have
been Bishop of Carthage: of Novatus desiring a Bishopric in Italy: and of
Aerius contending with one Eustathius for a Bishopric in Pontus. These men
affecting these honorable rooms, by receiving their several foyles, when
through ambition they could not get the places they looked for in the church,
they sought to attain them in their particular synagogs. But the history of
Aerius is most of all pertinent to this purpose. Epiphanius does report it
Lib. 3. T^ 1. haeres. (...)
thus in effect.

Aerius and Eustathius being scholars together The histo^ of Aerius
in Pontus, and profiting in learning with like commendation, at the last did
sue one against another for a Bishopric there. Eustathius obtained it: Aerius
is greatly offended. The Bishop seeking carefully how to content him, made him
the Master of an Hospital. But heerwithall Aerius was not satisfied. The
repulse he had taken greatly tormenting him, upon a stomach he gave over his
Hospital, and began to devise how to slander Eustathius: affirming him to be a
proud man, and not the man he had been taken for: that now he abounded too
much in wealth, and was declined Ad pecuniarum collectionem, to hoording of
money. Thereupon he entered into a schism, he departed from the church, and
having allured unto him a multitude of men and women, he fell into many
absurdities. That he might likewise, the rather (as he thought) pinch and vex
Eustathius, as also for the advancement of his own credit: he affirmed
himself (being but a priest) to be equal in honor and dignity with
Eustathius a Bishop, and that there was no difference by the word of God
betwixt a priest and a B. He used for proof of these his assertions the very
same arguments which now are used of those that maintain his opinions: as
that the apostles sometimes writing to priests and deacons, and sometimes to Bb.
and deacons, should thereby signify, that a B. and a priest is all one. Which
is an assertion (says Epiphanius) Stultitiae plena: full of folly. And thus
you see what ambition accompanied with emulation wrought in Aerius.

The course of which history I have the rather at large noted unto you,
because Martin would gladly have been as subtle to have deceived you, as he is
malicious in depraving his superiors. Who taking upon him with Aerius to
prove an equality in the ministry, and that there ought to be no difference
betwixt a B. and a priest, comes at last to these words; There was never
any but Antichristian popes and popelings that ever claimed this authority
(he means the superiority which Bb. have over the clergy) especially when
the matter was gainsaid, etc.

Why does man's allowance or disallowance make a matter Antichristian or not
Antichristian? Were they godly Bb. which claimed this authority when it was
not gainsaid, and are they become Antichristian Bb. for challenging the same,
because some do mislike it? But that you may yet farther see Martins boldness (I
might say either his malice or ignorance) it may please you to understande,
what account was made in the church of God in those days of Aerius gainsaying
and impugning of the superiority of Bishops. For if then his opinion
prevailed, the favorers of the same cause now have some what to boast of: but
indeed it fell out far otherwise. For it appears in Epiphanius, after due
trial and examination made by the learned fathers who then lived, of all his
arguments and sleights which he used for the proof of his assertions, that
with a general consent of the whole church his opinions were overthrowen, and
he himself persisting in them was condemned for an heretic. Saint Augustine
likewise bears witness heerof, who in his book of Heresies ascribes this to
Aerius for one, in that he said; Presbiterum ab episcopo nulla differentia
debere Cap. 53.
discerni: That there ought to be no difference betwixt a priest and a Bishop.

Besides for all Aerius gainsaying, the most of the godly, the best learned,
and the most zealous of the fathers, who spent themselves in the defense of
religion against such heretics and schismatikes as the church of God did then
abound and slow withal, did themselves take upon them the offices of Bishops:
and till this day there was never any but heretics, and such lewd persons, who
did account them antichristian.

There were, as it seems, in Chrysostomes time such like men in behavior
toward Bishops, as we see many to be amongst our selves at this time: who
being called before them as occasion required, did behave themselves in very
proud and disdainful manner, in so much as thereby they were discerned to be
very arrogant and contemptuous heretics; Quilibet haereticus etc. loquens cum
pontifice, nec eum vocat pontificem nec Archiepiscopum, nec religiosissimum,
nec sanctum: sed quid^ reverentia tua. sapientia tua, prudentia tua, and nomina
illi adducit communia ejus negans authoritatem. Diabolus hoc fecit cum Deo,
etc. Every he ^hrysost. in Psalm. 13.
ritike says he, speaking with a Bishop does neither call him Bishop nor
Archbishop, etc. But what? your reverence, your wisdom your prudencie, and he
gives him common names, thereby denieng his authority. The devil so dealt
with God himself. And this of the second cause.

The third cause why many false prophets go out into the world, Saint Augustine
notes Self-love
to be self-love. Self-love says he, did De ci^it li. 14. ca^
build the city of the devil. For heerin is their chief vaunt and glory (as
Bernard says) Captare laudem de singularitate scientiae: to hunt Sermon. in Came,
65
after commendation by singularity of knowledge.

And surely it is greatly to be marvailed at, into what doting folly men may
fall, who shall give over themselves to follow this humor. Irenaeus writes,
that some were so besotted with an opinion of themselves, that Advers. res.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
they accounted their own writings to be Gospels: as we see now by the
family of love, that have set out their Evangelium regni. Others reckoned
their own wisdom far greater then the Apostles. There were who termed
themselves (...), accounting themselves thereby ignorant of nothing. The
Manichees derived their name of Manna, because they held that whatsoever they
taught August
was to be received at their hands as food from heaven. Montanus said, he
was the Tertul.
comforter which Christ promised should lead the church into all truth.
Novatus called himself Moses, and having a brother, he Clem. A^
named him Aaron. Simon Magus affirmed sometimes that he was God the father,
sometime God the son, sometime God the holy Ghost, and sometime the power of God.

And hence it is, that the ancient fathers have reckoned this dotage to be the
very beginning and fosterer of heretics: Initia haereticorum, etc. The
beginning of heresies is (says Cyprian) Vt sibi placeant: When men begin to
please themselves. For then (as Jerome (...). Zach.
notes) whatsoever they conceive; Vertunt in Idolum; The make it an Idol. And
again; Avarus colit Mammona, and haereticus dogma quod finxit: The covetous
man worshippeth his money, and the heretic his own opinion.

They may rightly therefore be compared unto Pigmaleon, who fell in love with
an image of his own making: or to Narcissus that doted so greatly in beholding
himself. These men if once they affirm any thing, they will rather hazard
their lives than by revoking the same impair their reputation.

Allege against them the general consent of all the ancient fathers, and they
esteem it not a rush. He is but of a mean conceit among them who will stick
to say (as Bernard Epist. 190.
notes of Petrus Abailardus and his followers) Omnes Patres sic, at ego non
sic: Indeed all the fathers are of this opinion, but I am of another judgment.
Of whom (says Bernard) an non justius os loquens talia fustibus tunderetur
qua^ rationibus refelleretur? Were it not more agreeable to justice that the
mouth of such a man should by punishments be stopped then by reasons refelled?
Nonne omnium in se merito provocat manus, cujus manus contra omnes? Does not he
woorthilie provoke all men to be against him, who is himself against all men?
How this self-love has blinded many in these days, there is none of you my
brethren who are ignorant of it. God of his infinite mercy deliver us all from
so dangerous an enemy.

The fourth cause why many false prophets are gone out into the world, is said
to 4 Covetous nes.
be covetousnes: whereof the apostle speaks when he says of some, that they
teach Tit. 1.
things which they ought not for filthy lukers sake. Heerunto likewise the
devil had respect when he said unto Christ, All these Matt. 4.
will I give thee. It is written of Paulus Samosatenus 2. Theod. lib* haeret.
fab*
that being allured with great hope of preferment, which he expected of
Zenobia the Queen of Arabia, he fell into those schisms, which after wrought
his overthrow.

But I would to God this matter were not evident by experience amongst our
selves. For I am fully of this opinion, that the hope which many men have
conceived of the spoil of Bishops livings, of the subversion of cathedral
churches, and of a havocke to be made of all the churches revenues, is the
cheifest and most principal cause of the greatest schisms that we have at
this day in our church.

I would be loath to say thus much if I had not very apparent reason to lead me
thereunto. For the better explanation whereof I Clergy factious.
have thought it good to devide the factious of our age into two sorts: the
clergy factious, and the lay factious. The clergy factious Discip. Eccl.
^rned dis* ^se. (...) judge to 6. quest.
do contend, that all the livings which now appertain to the church, ought of
right to be employed for the maintenance of their presbyteries, and that rather
then they should want, the old spoil of the abbeys and such religious houses
should be restored again unto their use: and in this course they are so
earnest, as that in a supplication exhibited in the name of the communaltie to
the high Court of Parleament 1585. they have set it down as a resolute doctrine,
that things once dedicated to a sacred use, ought so to remain by the word of
God for ever, and ought not to be converted to any private use.

The lay factious on the other side are of The lay fac tious.
a far contrary opinion. For say they (as it appears in the late admonition
to the people of England, as I conceive by the circumstances there noted) our
preachers ought to conform themselves to the example of Christ and his
Apostles. Their Master had not a house to put his head in. The apostles their
predecessors had neither gold nor silver, possessions, riches, goods, nor
revenues: and why then should they being in gifts and pains inferior unto
them, have greater preferments in the world then they had? If they have a mess
of pottage and a canvas dublet, may it not content them? Surely these
advancements which they have do greatly hinder and hurt them.

Even as though one should say unto you, The Vn^ baptists.
my brethren of the poorer sort: these gentlemen and wealthier sort of the
laity do greatly abuse you: the children of God (you know) are heirs of the
world, and these things which the wicked have they enjoy by usurpation. The
earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof. You have an equal portion with the
best in the kindome of God: and will you suffer this unequal distribution of
these worldly benefits? Consider how in the apostles time the faithful had
all things common. They came and laid their goods at the Apostles feet, and
division was thereof made according to every man's necessity. You can not but
groan under the heavy burden which is laid upon you. Your landlords do
wringe and grind your faces for the maintenance of their pride in apparel,
their excess in diet, their unnecessa^ie pleasures, as gaming, keeping of
hawks and dogs, and such like vanities. They enhaunce your rents, they take
great fines, and do keep you in very unchristian slaverie and bondage. Why do
you not seek for your better relief to renew the use which was in the
Apostles times? These great possessions, lands, and revenewes, which the richer
sort have in their hands, do (as you see) make them very proud, choke their
zeal, hinder them in their virtuous proceedings, and will in deed (if order be
not taken) mar and undo them.

Now deerly beloved unto you of all sorts, but especially to you of the
richest, I pray you tell me how you like this doctrine. Do you think it is
true or meet to be taught? No surely it is not. The whole manner thereof is
wholly Anabaptisticall, and tends to the destruction and overthrow of all good
rule and government. And yet I tell you it may be urged with as great
necessity against the laity, as the other may against the clergy: but in
deed neither the one or the other against either of them both truly. Mary it
may be you desire to hear what the clergy factous do answer for themselves,
and in what good part they take their scholars liberality toward them. I
warrant you they are not toong-tied on their own behalf, but finding their
desire are bold enough to tell them of it.

Whilst they hear us speak against Bb. The clergi factious of the lay fac
tious. Discipl. E^
and Cathedral Churches (says the author of the Ecclesiastical Discipline)
it tickleth their ears, looking for the like pray they had before of
Monasteries: yea they have in their hearts devoured already the churches
inheritance. They care not for religion, so they may get the spoil. They
could be content to crucify Christ, so they might have his garments. Our age
is full of spoiling soldiers, and of wicked Dionysians, who will rob Christ of
his golden coat, as neither fit for him in winter nor summer. They are
cormorants, and seek to fill the bottomless sacks T. C.
of their greedy appetites. They do yawne after a pray, and would thereby to
their perpetual shame, purchase to themselves a field of blood.

And whereas you have already in your Discipl. E^
hands many impropriations and other church livings: they say that in keeping
them you sin against your own consciences: that you ought to be so far from
looking for any more, which does now appertain to the Church, as that you
rather ought to fear you loose not that you have already: especially seeing
you waste the same in courtly braverie, and consume it with most sacrilegious
impudency and boldness.

I have not used a word of mine own heerin, but have been a faithful relator
unto you, what the clergy factious do think of their lay scholars. And is
not then dear brethren the consideration heerof very pitiful unto you? The
one sort you see would bring us to the government which was, as they say, in
the Apostles times, but they would have the livings of these times: the other
sort not caring so much for the said government, do greatly urge in the
ministry the Apostolical poverty, to the intent that they might obtain the
pray, which they look for. Whereby I doubt not, but it is manifest unto you,
that covetousnes in them both has thrust them into this schism.

But yet a word or two more unto you the factious of the laity. I beseech you
upon what grounds do you stand? Your own teachers seeing your fetches do
utterly condemn you; and for mine own part I do not absolve you. It is
therefore very meet and agreeable to the reputation which you desire, either
for your virtue or for your religion, that before you proceed any farther in
your disclosed mask, first you provide you of teachers for your warrant
therein: least otherwise you grow into hatred, as men for their commodity
regarding neither God nor the word.

Nay in my opinion you ought to be ashamed to open your mouths ever hereafter
against the present government of the Church, and for the new platform,
until you can be contented to be so far from coveting the goods of the church,
as that you are both willing and ready to deliver out of your hands such
spoils and prays thereof, as you have already.

If I were urged, deerly beloved, to give my consent to the erection of these
Presbyteries, which both the sorts of these men do seem so earnestly to
desire, I could be content (so that first they agreed who should have the
present revenues of the church) for some short time (until they saw the
mischief of them) to yield therein unto them. Almighty God grant unto them
and to every one of us such grace from above, as that we may not wilfully
infringe his holy commandment, prohibiting us to covet other men's goods: but
with all thankefulnes to satisfy our selves with those benefits which of his
mercy he has already bestowed upon us. And thus much of these four causes
why so many false prophets go out from the church.

Now follows the last point of the first Where else prophets remain
part of my text. Many false prophets are gone out into the world. Into the
world; that is (as one observes very well upon this place) Dan aeus
they are now sproong up in every corner amongst our selves, even in these
places wherein we live, Velut sparsa in nostro itinere pericula and venena: As
dangers and venom laid in our ways to entrap and infect us.

It had been good for the church, that when false prophets will needs separate
them selves from the communion thereof, they would have gone likewise and have
dwelt in some strange countries; as India, Cataia, or to the farthest parts of
Afrike, where they might have delighted themselves in all sorts of novelties,
and erected such governments as should best have pleased their fancies. But
they will none of that: for as Tertullian notes; Illorum opus non proprio
aedificio venit, sed ex De praescrip. haeret. adv.
veritatis destructione: Their workmanship rises not by their own building,
but by the overthrow of the truth. And again; Nostra suffodiunt ut sua
aedificent: They undermine our works, that they may erect their own.

But indeed if they would be gone to dwell in strange countries: yet they could
not be permitted. For (as Saint Augustine says) where God does build his
city, the devil will have another hard by to confronte it: or as an other
writes; where Christ erecteth his church, the devil in the same church-yarde
will have his chapel. Where Christ's ministers do sow the good and pure seed
of truth, unity and order, there the devil does stir up his ministers by ways
and means secretly in corners to cast abroad their cockle and darnell of
falsehood, discord, and confusion. When Satan (says Saint Augustine) saw his
De civit. Deilib. 18. ca*
temples forsaken, and that his oracles were all put to silence, he cunningly
devised for a new supply, to have always his ministers in or about the
church: Qui sub vocabulo Christiano doctrinae resisterent Christianae: Who
under a christian name might resist the christian doctrine.

True it is, that almighty God if it had stood with his good pleasure, could
easily The caus^ why false prophets suffered t^ be in the world.
have brought it to pass in spite of the devil, that there should never have
been any such false prophets or heresies amongst us. But he saw it not to be
expedient: for as the apostle says, by his directions, there must be heresies
in the church: and that as the ancient fathers do note out of the Scriptures
for three causes.

First (as Saint Paul says) that they which 1. Cor. 1^
are approoved might be known: or as Tertullian speaks; Vt fides habendo
tentationem, De praes^ adver. h^
haberet etiam and probationem: That faith by having temptation, might have
also probation.

Secondly (says Saint Augustine) there must be heresies, because God does
see it Enchiri^
more agreeable to his wisdom; Ex malis bona elicere quam nulla esse
permittere: To bring good out of evil, then at all to permit no evil.

The third reason heerof is this, that men might be driven thereby the rather
to labor and search for the finding out of the truth. To that end God permitted
the Iebusites to Josu. 15.
dwell with his people, and to the like purpose Scipio Nasica diswaded the
league of peace betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, least thereby the
Romans should grow to be slothful. Saint Augustine upon the 54. Psalm
affirms, that the doctrine of the Trinity was never so fully handled by the
church, as when they were driven thereunto by the heresies of Arrius: nor of
repentance, as when Novatus opposed himself against it: nor of Baptism, as
when the Donatists labored to confirm their false opinions.

And again, Multi sensus Scripturarum latent, Psalm. 67.
nec asseruntur commodius, nisi quando hereticis respondendi cura compellit:
Many senses of the Scriptures lie hid, and are not more prositablie applied,
then when men are compelled to answer heretics.

Seeing then (deerlie beloved) that there are many prophets and of false
disposition, which through contempt of ecclesiastical governors, through
ambition, self-love, and covetousnes have made a great schism in the church,
and do continue amongst us for the trial of our faith, the glory of God, and
that we might more carefully search out and hold fast the truth: you see how
necessary this exhortation of the apostle is: Dearly beloved, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God. And thus much of
the first part. Try the spirits whether they be of God.


That which I have to say of this matter will be subject to slanderous toongs:
I pray Two sor^ erring sp^
you therefore conceive me rightly, and do not pervert my meaning. Some forbid
the children of GOD to prove any thing. Others command them to be ever seeking
and prooving of all things. But neither of them both in a right good sense, do
deal therein as they ought to do. A mean course betwixt these two is to be
allowed of and followed: which is, that we prove some things, and that we
receive without curiosity some other things being already examined, prooved
and tried to our hands.

The Popish false prophets will suffer the The slei^ of popi sh rits
people to try nothing, but do teach them wholly to depend upon them: and to
that purpose they have indeed three notable sleights.

First they forbid them the reading of the scriptures. And the better to be
obeyed therein, they will not permit the Scriptures to be translated into their
vulgar tongue. Whereof it came to pass that the people were so easily seduced
and drawn from Christ to the Pope; from his merits, to the saints and their
own merits; from his bloody sacrifice, whereby only sins are remitted, to their
most dry and fruitelesse sacrifice; from the spiritual food of his body and
blood, unto a carnal and Capernaicall transubstantiation; from the calling
upon his name, to the invocation of saints: and from their sure trust and
confidence in his death, to a vain imagination of the virtue of their masses,
pilgrimages, pardons, and I know not to what intolerable superstition and
idolatry.

Against this their falsehood and very lewd dealing all those places of
Scripture may be alleged, wherein we are commanded to search the Scriptures,
To prove all things, and to hold tha^ which is good: and likewise in this
place to try and examine the spirits whether they be of God.

To the like purpose an infinite number of places out of the ancient fathers
may be applied (as you may find them collected together by doctor Buckley in
his answer to certain reasons in the Preface of the Remish testament) where
they are very earnest upon this point. That all Christian men should read the
Scriptures, buy unto themselves Bibles, and meditate continually upon the word
of God: so as thereby their eyes might be opened, their consciences comforted,
their faith nourished, and their hope lifted up to a full assurance of the
promises therein contained.

The second shift which these false prophets of the Romish church do use, is
this: Now that they perceive the scriptures to be translated into the language
almost of every nation; and that the books are now so common in every man's
hands, as that with their former devise they are no longer able to cover their
nakedness: they labor with all their might to bind us to the fathers, to the
councels, and to the church of Rome, protesting very deeply, that we must
admit of no other sense of any place of the scriptures, than the Romish church
shall be pleased to deliver unto us: according to the saying of Hosius; Si quis
habeat interpretationem ecclesiae Romanae de loco aliquo scripturae, etiamsi
nec sciat De expr^ Verbo D^
nec intelligat an and quo modo cum scripturae verbis conveniat, tamen habet
ipsissimum verbum Dei: If a man have the exposition of the church of Rome
touching any place of scripture, although he neither know nor understand,
whether and how it agrees with the words of the scripture, yet he has the
very word of God.

To refell the grossenes of this absurd opinion, all that is very effectual
which is brought, to prove that the church is inferior to the scriptures.
Besides, we say that the fathers do in many points dissent amongst
themselves: and their general councels have been oftentimes repugnant one to
another. But yet we join with them upon a nearer issue. Where the fathers do
all agree together, we do not dislike them; and for the first four general
councels we allow and approove them.

And heerof it comes to pass, that we do the rather condemn many points of
Popery, in that they have of later days broched and taught us sundry very
strange and dangerous opinions: which as they are not to be found in the
scriptures; so are they repugnant as well to the fathers, as to all the
foresaid general councels.

Whereupon arises their third shift. They will not stick to confess, that they
teach many things now which are not to be prooved either by the words of
scripture, fathers, or councels. Mary say they, if the Apostles and fathers
had lived in our times they would have taught and decreed, as we have done.

For you must understand (says Cardinal Epist. 2 Bohemo^
Cusanus (Scripturas esse ad tempus aptatas, and vary intellectas, ita ut uno
tempore secundum currentem universalem ritum exponantur: mutato ritu, iterum
sententia mut^tur: That the scriptures are appointed to serve the time, and
have diverse understandings: so that at one time they may be expounded after the
universal, common, and ordinary custom: and that the same custom being
changed, the meaning of the Scriptures may likewise be changed. Namintellectus
scripturae currit cum praxi: For the understanding of the scriptures runs
with the practice of the Church. And therefore he commends that obedience to
be most full and perfect which is without reason: that is, when a man obeieth
without requiring of any reason. Sicut jumentum obedit domino suo: as a horse
is obedient to his master.

To refell these blasphemous assertions, all those authorities of Scripture are
very material, wherein God is showed to be immutable, and his word an
everlasting word, and a word of truth. Likewise those sentences of the fathers,
wherein they appeal as occasion serves, to the Scriptures, accounting them as
the very touchstone and rule of all truth. Which could not be true, if (as
the Papists say) they were like a nose of wax, or a sword of lead, that might
be turned as a man list: or like to the Cameleon that changes his colors
according to his seat: or as though the scriptures were to yield to the
fantasies of men: that as they changed their minds, being by nature mutable: so
the scriptures should change the sense and meaning of God, who is not subject
to any alteration or change. It were but a deceitful touchstone that would
apply it self unto the goldsmiths pleasure: and he that should trust it, were
not unlike often times for pure gold to be deceived with copper. The Lord open
their eyes that they may see the grossenes of this their great sin: or
otherwise I can say nothing farther of them, but that if needs they will be
filthy, let them be filthy still.

Another sort of prophets there are, Giddie spi rits
(you may in mine opinion call them false prophets) who would have the people to
be always seeking and searching: and those men (as well themselves as their
followers) can never find whereupon to rest. Now they are carried hither, now
thither. They are always learning (as the apostle says) but do never attain
to the truth. That which pleases them to day, displeases them to morrow: they
read the scriptures (as Greg. Naz. writes) thereby To arm their toongs, and
that they may be eloquent against the truth.

They will take upon them to be masters, before they deserve the name of
scholars, and to be in the greatest matters of Gods law, judges, being far
unmeete to be called to the bar. Si verbum nacti sunt subito prosiliunt,
Orat. 2.
summaque cum injuria recte tradita discerpunt: If they catch but a word (says
Gregory Nazian.) they straight insult upon it, and with great injury they
contemn those things which have been rightly delivered unto them. They wring
and wrest the Scriptures according as they fancy. It would pity a man's heart
considering what pains they will take in quoting of places, to see how
perversely they will apply them. And I greatly fear, except they take heed
betimes, they will fall into the number of those, who (as Saint Peter says)
being unlearned indeed, and unstable, do wrest the Scriptures unto 2. Pet. 3
their own destruction.

To repress therefore this boldness, first I De pr^ adver. haer.
say with Tertullian, and then also (for other men's contentation) with Danaeus,
that it has ever been noted as a right property of Isag. p^ lib. 3. (...)
heretics and schismatikes, always to be beating this into their followers
heads: Search, examine, try and seek: bringing them thereby into a great
uncertainty whereupon they may insist: as also to a more ready conformity for
the imbrasing of their opinions. For as the said father says: Qui credit quae
credere debuerat, and aliud ulterius putat in ea re requirendum: indicat sane
nihil se eorum credidisse quae credere videbatur, aut credere jam desusse: He
that once believes those things that he ought to believe: and afterward
thinks some other thing to be sought for in the same; he shows himself that
he did not believe those things which he seemed to believe, or else that now he
has given over to believe.

August.
And therefore in this sense I say again with S. Augustine, Melior est fidelis
ignorantia quam temeraria scientia: Faithful ignorance is better then rash
knowledge. And with Greg. Nazianzen: It falls not within the compass Greg.
Nazi^n.
of every man's understanding to determine and judge in matters of religion:
Sed exercitatorum: but of those who are well experienced and exercised in them.

Which things considered, together with our experience of the presumption which
is every where to be found in these days: Very just occasion is given to all
the godly to complain with Saint Ierom in his epistle ad Paulinum: Hieron
Husbandmen, Dawbers, Smiths, Carpenters, Woolsters, Fullers, and other men of
such like occupations, Absque doctore non possunt esse quod cupiunt: They al
are content to learn of their masters. Quod medicorum est promittunt medici,
tractant fabrilia fabri: Physicians deal with matters of physic, and men of
trade with their own occupations: Sola scripturarum ars est quam sibi passim
omnes vendicant: Only the knowledge of the scriptures is that which every man
chalengeth to be skillful in. Learned and unlearned they take upon them to
write. Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus senex, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc
universi presumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discant: This art of the
scriptures the prattling old woman, the doting old man, the brabling sophister,
and generally al men presume they have obtained it, when it is far otherwise:
they tear it in pieces, and take upon them to teach it before they have
learned it.

The mean therefore betwixt both these extremities of trieng nothing and
curious trieng of all things, I hold to be best. And this it is: that when you
have attained the true grounds of Christian religion, and are constantly built
by a lively faith upon that notable foundation whereof the Apostle speaks,
which is Jesus Christ, being incorporated into his mystical body in your
baptism 1. Cor. 3.
by the holy Ghost: and afterward nourished with the heavenly food exhibited
unto you in the Lords supper: you then content your selves and seek no
farther; according to the saying of Tertullian: Nobis curiositate opus non est
post Christum Iesum: nec inquisitione post Evangelium: We need not to be
curious after we have apprehended Christ Jesus: nor inquisitive after we have
received the Gospel. And again, Cum credimus nihil desideramus ultra
quaerere: When once we believe, we do not desire to seek any farther.

Read the Scriptures, but with sobriety. If any man presuming upon his
knowledge, seek farther then is meet for him: besides that, he knows
nothing as he ought to know, he shall cast himself into a labirinth and never
find that he seeks for.

God has bound himself by his promise Councels.
unto his church of purpose, that men by her good direction might in this point
be releeved. To whose godly determination in matters of question, her dutiful
children ought to submit themselves without any curious or wilful
contradiction. I could bring many authorities to this effect. Those things
(says Athanasius) which have been prooved Athanasius.
and decreed by so many and so worthy Bishops, Supervacaneum est denuo in
judicium revocare: it is in vain to call again into question.

When certain men in the council of Calcedon began to dispute of some points
determined before in the council of Nice, the fathers there assembled said
all with one voice: Si quis retractat, anathema sit: si quis super ista
inquirit, anathema sit: maledictus qui addit: Council. Calced.
maledictus qui aufert: maledictus qui innovat: If any retract, accursed be
he: if any inquire of these things, accursed be he: accursed be he that adds;
accursed be he that diminishes; accursed be he that innovateth.

The Emperors Valentinian and Martian thought it very unmeete, that those
things Valentini^ Martian.
which had been once judged of, and well decided by the decrees of godly synods,
should again be debated and disputed upon: and both they and diverse others
made very godly laws for the better containing of busy heads within the
compass of this christian modesty.

And surely it is a very true doctrine, that when councels and synods being
lawfully assembled and directed with Gods spirit do resolve upon matters in
question: that private men should content themselves therewithal. Neither can
I see, now that popery is banished and the truth of christian religion (maugre
the malice of all sorts of enemies) is godly planted amongst us, why in these
days we should not attribute as much to the decrees of our learned fathers in
their lawful assemblies, as other men in times past of as great judgment as
we are of, have done.

Is it not very absurd that we should seek every way to discredit them in
matters of lesser importance, who have most notably sealed unto us the very
grounds and substance of religion with their blood? Or is it likely that that
Church which was able to discern betwixt truth and falsehood in so great
points of doctrine being wrapped through continuance of time in so deep an
obscurity; should be unable to judge of ceremonies, forms of prayer, decency,
order, edification, and such like circumstaunces of no greater weight? You
would not, I think, take it in good part, that men should now begin to sift
and quarrel at the articles of religion, set out and approoved in the year
1562. and yet I see no reason why they may not as well do it, as to carpe and
control at such orders, as were then likewise established for order and
government.

Quantarum rixarum semen futura est earum Lib. 4. instit. ^p. 10. sect.
rerum confusio, si prout cuique libitum sit mutare liceat, quae ad communem
statum pertinent: Of how great quarrels (says M. Calvin) would such confusion
become the seed, if it may be lawful according to every man's fancy, to
change and alter those things which do appertain to the common state. He
means being determined of before with such grave and due consideration as
already is mentioned. For as it follows; Nunquam futurum est ut omnibus idem
placeat, si res velut in medio positae singulorum arbitrio relictae fuerint: It
will never come to pass, that one and the self-same thing should please all
men, if matters may be left indifferent to be determined of, by every private
man's discretion.

And writing upon this place I have in hand, where the Apostle says generally;
Prove the spirits whether they be of God, he restrains the words to a due
consideration of certain circumstances. For as there he adds; Aurum igne aut
lidio lapide probatur, sed Calv. in 1. Ioh. 4.
ab iis qui artem tenent: nam imperitis nec lapis lidius nec ignis usui esse
poterit: Gold is tried by fire, and by the touchstone, but yet of those who
have skill so to try it: for unto those that have no experience therein,
neither the stone nor the fire serves to any purpose.

And therefore says he; Duplex est examen doctrinae, privatum and publicum:
The trial of doctrine is twofold, private and public. The private trial to be
had by private men, and privately, he allows in such sort, as I have before
observed against the Papists: but the public trial already made or to be made
with such consideration as has been decla red, is to be preferred by many
degrees. Nam si penes singulos jus and arbitrium erit judicandi, nihil unquam
certi constitui poterit: quin potius vacillabit tota religio. For (as there it
follows) if authority and liberty of judging shall be left to private men,
there will never be any certainty set down, but rather all religion will
wholly become doubtful.

This which I have said heerof, to those who are of any moderation or good
discretion, I account it sufficient: but yet that I may the better heerin
satisfy every man's humor, you shall hear the judgment of our English
reformers touching this point. It is thus in effect: That when such great
causes of 2. Admonit.
the churches as could not be ended in their Consistories or conferences, shall
be heard and determined by a synod provincial, national or more general,
thereunto the church shall stand, as it was at Jerusalem: except it be in a
great matter of faith, or a great matter expreslie against the Scriptures, as
that was in the Nicene council, of the marriage of ministers, where the whole
council would have concluded against it, etc. had not one man Phaphnutius
withstoode them, etc. In which case say they, Try the spirits whether they be
of God or no. For otherwise the particular churches must stand to the
determinations as before. Hitherto the Admonition.

And for the better observation of this Subscripsion
sobriety in resting our selves upon the decrees of our synods and councels;
as also for the avoiding of such confusion as Calvine has before mentioned;
you shall understand that there is not a reformed church in christendom which
does not in this case require subscription (at the least) of their ministers.
Calvine refusing to administer the Communion in Geneva, and to use therein
unleavened bread or wafercakes, was compelled to Bexa in Vit. Calvin.
depart the city, and was not received thither again, until he had allowed of
the same kind of bread; De quo postea restitutus nunquam contendendum putavit.
minime tamen dissimulans, quid alioqui magis esset probaturus: Whereof
afterward being restored, he thought never meet to contend, not dissembling
in the mean while what otherwise he rather approoved.

In Germany likewise subscription is required very streightlie unto the
confession of Augusta, of all that take degrees in any of their universities, of
all that are made ministers, and of all that are admitted to any
ecclesiastical livings: neither is any suffered there to preach, who shall
refuse the said subscription. True it is that one Osiander a notable heretic
(as Melancton notes and I doubt Melanct.
not of his followers) did heerat take many exceptions, greatly inveighing
against that order. He cried out* O wickedness* O tyranny, O cruelty, christian
liberty is heerby restrained; a yoke and bondage laid upon men's consciences:
godly men's mouths hereby shall be stopped. It is not tolerable; it is
unlawful. Even as many cry out in these days, and that which is least to be
borne withal, by such as account themselves very great lawyers.

He likewise (as evidently it may be collected) did bitterly inveigh against
such as did subscribe: Et gloriatur se libertatem retinuisse nec admisissa haec
vincula: And he gloried (says Melancthon) that he had retained his liberty
and not admitted these bonds. Atque hi clamores in tanta licentia and anarchia
hujus temporis, plausibiles sunt apud multos, qui infinitam licentiam sibi
sumunt fingendi opiniones, and Phirronico more labefactandi omnia recte
tradita: And these out cries (as it follows in the same place) in so great
licentiousnes and confusion of this time are plausible with many, who take to
themselves an infinite liberty of coining new opinions, and in a Pirronious
sort of the overthrowing of all things which have been rightly determined.

Howbeit notwithstanding this mislike of what schismatikes soever, that Church
to this day requires this subscription. And Melancthon himself by sundry
good arguments approoveth the same in his oration De calumniis Osiandri.

I might here add how in times past Emperors, Kings, and generally al
Christians subscribed to the Decrees of the Church either by themselves or by
their substitutes: and I would to God the same order were yet observed,
especially by our Justices of peace in England. Peradventure it would make
them more careful than they are in the performance of their oaths which they
take (as it is reported) when they are admitted unto those rooms: especially
concerning the punishment of such persons, as are complained of unto them, to
be common depravers and contemners of the orders of the church. For heerin (I
am afraid) they take as great liberty to dispense with themselves, as ever the
pope did with any by his fond and grossest pardons.

But touching Ecclesiastical persons it was commanded about 1270. years ago,
that certain men, having by schism and heresy divided themselves from the
church of God, and rent in sunder by their factions the peace thereof, should
not again be received or admitted before they had subscribed to the
constitutions of the church. Thus the words stand in the eight canon of the
council of Nice. Ante omnia hanc habeant ab iis confessionem, quam per
scripturam exigi oportet, Council. N ice.
ut fateantur se cum omni consensu, ecclesiae Catholicae statuta observaturos:
Let them first take of them this confession, and that under their handwriting,
that they promise with all consent, to observe the statutes of the catholic
church.

Whereas therefore we have at this time many Osiandrians amongst us, and many
over-busie in searching and trieng to make new quarrels of matters before
compounded, you see what spirits they are, and need no farther trial to
discern them. GOD grant unto them more humble and sober minds, that they may
no longer continue in this rebellion against the church of God. And thus much
of the second part. Believe not every spirit.


That which hitherto has been spoken does contein diverse and very sufficient
reasons why you ought not to believe every spirit. There are many of them
false, contemptuous, ambitious, proud, and covetous. Whom if you find (knowing
your selves to be thoroughly grounded in matters of salvation) to draw you by
slanderous speeches, and false collections, into a mislike of other points
agreed upon by the church, thereby troubling your peace, and feeding your ears
with plausible devises, I beseech you with the Apostle in this place, believe
them not.

When the Queens most excellent Majesty had first obtained the crown, (which
God of his great mercy grant she may long enjoy) as a most zealous Solomon,
Iehosaphat, and Josias, her principal care was, how to abolish all popish
superstition and idolatry, and to place in her peoples heart a right and true
feeling of Christian religion. Wherein through the great diligence of all the
godly and learned in the realm, in disputing, examining and trieng of spirits,
of prophets, and of their doctrines, with what notable success her highness did
proceed, they are very ignorant that know it not, and very froward and
obstinate that knowing it, will not with all thankfulness acknowledge it.

All the Churches in Europe which were then reformed, understanding of our
reformation, did on our behalf clappe as it were their hands for joie. The
apology of the church of England which shortly after was set forth to the
justifieng of our doctrine, with the reasons of our mislike of popery, has
ever since obtained principal commendation amongst all the apologies and
confessions, which hitherto have been set forth by any church in
christendom. The Papists only in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, did
show themselves to be therewith discontented. Marie now of later years we have
gotten new adversaries.

O Jesus Christ, who would ever have thought, that he should have lived to have
heard any Protestants reproove our religion: or would ever have dreamed of such
division, of intolerable bitterness against the maintainers of it? It must be
confessed for a truth, that Barnard says upon the like occasion; Leones
evasimus, sed insidimus in dracones: Epist. 190. ^icha. 7.
We have escaped the lions mouths, but now are fallen into a den of dragons.
Inimici hominis domestici ejus: Our friends are turned to be our enemies. And
you know the old saying; Fratrum odia acerbissima: When brethren fall out, they
grow to great extremities. The Papists did never deal with more egernes
against us than these men do now.

They say that, As the state is now of the church, 1. Admonit.
we can have no right religion: that the church of England has neither the
word of God rightly preached, nor the sacraments sincerely ministered: that the
truth does but in a manner as it were behind T. C.
a screene peep out amongst us: and that we M. ^iles.
have mixed together in our religion Christ and Antichrist, God and the Devil.
Diverse such slanderous speeches you shall find every where in all their
writings* I beseech (...) brethren believe them not. Or if any shall neglect
this apostolical admonition, let him then likewise take part of the like
reprehension; O amentes Galatae, quis vos fascinavit ne obsequeremini Galat. 3.
veritati? O you foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should
either thus deprave or revolt from the truth.

Again, as touching the Communion Of the Communion book.
book, you know what quarrels are picked against it, although for mine own
opinion there is not the like this day extant in Christendom.

In the beginning of king Edwards reign, notwithstanding it was then carefully
compiled and confirmed by a synod: yet by and by after (that I may use Master
Foxes words) Fox.
Through the obstinate and dissembling malice of many, it was impugned.
Thereupon it was again reviewed, and after published with such approbation, as
that it was accounted the work of God. But yet not long after there were
again, who affirming the same to resemble the Mass book, Divisionis
occasionem arripiebant: Did greedily hunt (as Alesius says) for occasion of
division. Vocabula Alesius.
and pene sillabas expendendo: Weighing and sifting the very words, yea almost
every syllable in it.

Whereupon Archbishop Cranmer procuring the same book to be translated into
Fox.
Latin, and requiring M. Bucers judgment of it, received this his approbation:
That there was nothing therein contained, which was not taken out of the word
of God, or at the least which was against it, Commode acceptum, Bucer.
being well understood. Some things indeed there are, says he, Quae nisi quis
candide interpretur, videri queant non satis cum verbo Dei congruere: Which
except a man do charitably interpret, may seem not sufficiently to agree with
the word of God. And in another place; Quae rapi possunt ab inquietis ad
materiam contentionis: Which may be snatched of unquiet men to breed matter of
contention.

Upon this occasion the book was again Fox.
carefully survaied and almost in every point (which then was so cavilled at
and wrested) corrected and amended. King Edward died, Queen Marie succeeded.
The book is condemned, but yet God raised up means for the defense of it.

Master John Oulde a very learned man writ Io. Old.
a treatise against the Papists in defense of the said book, and of every
part of the reformation injoied in king Edwardes days. Archbishop Cranmer
likewise being provoked Cranmer.
thereunto, did offer a challenge to all the papists living, that if he might
obtain the Queens favor to take unto him Peter Martyr, and four or five
others whom he would choose, they would together defend the foresaid
reformation, (naming withal the Communion book) to be in every point
agreeable to the word of God: and to be in effect the very same, Quae fuit
ante annos 1500. which was above 1500. years ago.

Another also in those days, as it appears in a Preface before Archbishop
Cranmers E. P.
book of unwritten verities, writes of the Communion book in this manner. Then
(meaning in K. Edwards days) the common prayer was rightly used, and the
Sacraments were plainly administered according to Christ's institution, and the
rule of his holy word. Furthermore, the godly fathers (who then were fled,
and for the liberty of their consciences lived in exile) using in their
meetings this form and order of public prayer: Master Knoxe a man who was of
nature too contentious, with some other that joined with him, began to
quarrel, and to make many exceptions against them.

Doctor Grindall late Archbishop of Canterbury, being there in banishment with
Grindall
them, certified Bishop Ridley condemned to die, and then in prison in Oxford,
of Master Knoxes perverse behavior. Whereunto the godly father answered again
in these words, (which he said he thought should be the last that ever he
should write.) Alas that brother Ridley.
Knoxe could not bear with our book of Common prayer, in matters against
which; although I grant a man (as he is) of wit and learning, may find to make
apparent reasons, yet I suppose he cannot be able soundly by the word of God to
disproove any thing in it.

Afterward when it pleased almighty God to bless this Realm with the happy
government of our Sovereign Lady the Queens most excellent Majesty that
now is (whom almighty God long preserve, with all health and prosperity to
rule and govern us) the said book in some points bettered together with the
truth of christian religion, established in her brothers days, was again
through Gods favor and her goodness restored unto us.

Of this book a certain learned man writing Dering.
against Master Harding, utters these words by way of challenge. Our
service, is good and Godly, every title grounded on holy scriptures, and
with what face do you call it darkness? Sure with the same that the prophesies
of the holy Ghost were sometimes called dreams, the doctrine of the apostles
heresy, and our Savior Christ a Samaritaine. As Elias said to the priests of
Baal, let us take either our bullockes (meaning the Popes portuise, and our
Communion book) and lay the pieces on our altars, and on which God sends
fire, let that be the light. And a little before, O Master Harding, turn to
your writings, examine your authorities, consider your councels, apply your
examples, look if any line be blameable in our service book, and take hold of
your advantage, I think Master Jewel will accept it as an article.

Heerby you see, deerly belooved, what account was made of this book in times
past, and that by men neither for life nor learning, to be any way contemned.
But now the case is altered: and many are grown to such a hatred of it, as
they scarcely have patience to hear the book once named. Cranmer, Ridley,
Bucer, Peter Martyr with many other, as famous men as ever this land brought
forth: notwithstanding they employed their whole times very diligently and
painfully in the studies of Divinity, and other good learnings thereunto
appertaining, were compassed about, belike with such thick clouds and mistes
of papable darkness, that they could in a manner see nothing.

Marie now, two or three years study is as good as twenty. It is
wonderful to see, how some men get perfection. One of four or five and
twenty years old, if you anger him, will swear he knows more then all the
ancient fathers. And yet in very deed, they are so earnest and fierce, that
either we must believe them, or else account their boldness to be, as it is,
most untollerable.

For they are not afraid, even as has been said, with the same faces, that
the prophesies of the holy Ghost were sometimes called dreams, the doctrine
of the Apostles heresy, and our Savior Christ a Samaritane, to publish in
their writings, that the foresaid book so notably approoved, has in it at 1
Admonit.
the least above 500. errors. That It is full of corruption, confusion, and
profanation: that the orders therein prescribed are carnal, beggarly, dung,
dross, lousy, and antichristian. They say, We eat not the Lords supper, but
play a pageant of our own, to make the poor feelie souls believe they have an
English mass: and so put no difference betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt
Christ and antichrist, betwixt God and the devil.

If this were true beloved, then had we cause to look about us: But (God be
thanked) there is no such matter: it is but contempt, ambition, and self-love
that deceives them: their toongs and pens are their own, they will write and
speak what they list: and yet who shall control them? Heretics in former
times looking upon the Scriptures with their eyes have condemned them of
folly. There was never any thing so exactly written in the world, which is
not subject to malice and slander. We desire these men in as mild and gentle
sort as we are able, that they would not deal in this manner.

The very heathen might teach them better modesty. He that by wresting of
laws established (says one of that crew) does seek to pervert their meaning,
Dum sophos esse cupit, fit plane sycophanta: Whilst he would seem wise, he
prooveth in deed a sycophant.

I have read, that if any thing, fact, writing, law or whatsoever may in
reasonable construction admit two interpretations, the best and the mildest is
ever to be received. And the civil lawyers have these rules; Semper in dubiis
benigniora sunt praeferenda: Always in doubtful matters the more benign are
to be preferred. Non op^rtet jus calumniari, aut verba ejus captare: It is not
meet to cavil at laws, or to snatch at their words. Another says; Non sunt
rejiciendae leges quae interpretatione aliqua possunt convenire: Laws must not
be rejected, which by any reasonable interpretation may be reconciled.

By these and many other the like persuasions we labor to withdraw them from
their wringing and wresting (with such bitterness) those things in the Communion
book: which either they mislike without cause very unjustly, or else do
pervert upon some false collection very extreemely. But nothing will serve
them: for now some of them through a swelling pride of their own conceits
(which as it is commonly noted, has cast them into a kind of frenzy) are not
afraid to lay this slander upon the church, and upon her most excellent
Majesty, that since her Highness reign, there has not been in England any
book of public prayers, and order for the administration of Sacraments, or
any open form for the outward profession of our religion, allowed at all
hitherto by the laws of the Realm.

Another sort likewise there are, that will not give their heads for the
washing, who of their goodness are content to allow us a book and form of
public prayer confirmed by law, but yet in another sort, even for good natures
sake, and because they would be thankful to the time, they wholly condemn 2
Admonit.
it. For say they, though there were never an evil word or sentence in all
the form of our prayers, yet to appoint that form to be used, though the words
be good, the use is naught. As if a man should say) if I attain their
meaning) although the words in the Lords prayer be good, yet to appoint such a
form of prayer, the use it naught.

Good Lord, if the fathers before mentioned, dearly belooved, were now alive
to see their dealings herein, how every boy, in a manner, does take upon him
(as though he only were learned, zealous and wise) to control, condemn, and
to rage thus at his pleasure: surely I suppose they would wish at the least, as
Gregory Nazianzen sometime did, seeing in his days, the like pride and saucy
malepartnes of many.

When I consider (says he) effrenem linguarum pruritum: the unbrideled itch of
toongs, which Orat. 3.
reigns at this time: and how men by their own voices, as it were, Vnius
diei spatio, do make themselves divines, and challenge the commendation of
learning and wisdom: Quibus una voluntas ad hoc sufficit ut docti sint, whom
their will alone is able to make learned: I cannot choose but wish with all my
heart, with the prophet Jeremy; That I might go and dwell in the wilderness,
that so I might leave the society of men, and give my self only to
contemplation.

And for you my brethren, I am plainly out of doubt, that if they said not of
them, Vtinam abscindatur qui vos perturbant: I would Gal. 5.
to God, they were cut off who thus do trouble you: they would advise you from
the bottom of their hearts, to be ruled by the Apostle in this place; Nolite
credere omni spiritui: Believe not these spirits.

But very well: seeing they are so greatly offended with this book, what is
it they desire The ne Comm^ on boo^
themselves? Forsooth a book they could be contented to have* but it must
(...) of their own making. I beseech you mark and observe their course taken
to this purpose. About four years since, some two or three private men in a
corner framed a book of the form of common prayer, administration of the
Sacraments, etc. And without any authority published the same, as meet to be
embraced and used in all the parish churches of England.

This book they told us was a very perfect book, agreeable to Gods word, and
the use of the reformed Churches: and in the end thereof, a proviso is made in
these words: Provided that nothing be done contrary to any order set down in
this book. The posie which they have chosen to set in the fore-fronte of their
book, thereby insinuating the excellency of it, is this. No man can lay any
other foundation then that which is laid, even Christ Jesus.

In this book they seem to set down a brief sum of christianity, and the
very absolute form of ecclesiastical government: which they say, Christ
has prescribed only to be received with the godly in the church. And here you
shall see (my brethren) a very strange and wonderful stratageme. For would
you think that in a book of this nature describing so perfect a platform of
Church government, the civil magistrate should be quite forgotten? Was there
ever until this day any public confession set forth by any true church in
the world, since the prophesies were fulfilled (as Saint Augustine says) that
Kings and Queens August.
should be the fosterers and nurses of the church, where for any supremacy or
government of persons, and in causes ecclesiastical the civil magistrate is
wholly left out? Can there be in a christian commonweal such an absolute
order of ecclesiastical government, as they brag of, set down for the only
form, which is necessary to be observed without any mention of the civil
magistrate? Let this sink into your hearts as it shall please God: what if they
had obtained their purpose, for the allowance of this book? But I will proceed
with the history farther.

The next year another book of Common prayer, etc. with the like authority
and commendation that the other had, was cast abroad: or you may call it the
same book if you list, so you understand what violence and torments in so
tender an age it has sustained. The whole form and order of it, was in a
manner changed (they are so constant) and in other places and points of matter,
there are not so few as 600. alterations. The wise man speaking of such
resolution, says that Stultus Eccles. 27.
ut Luna mutatur.

In the last page of this book for manners sake (as it seems) they have
remembered the civil magistrate: but that in so cold and sparing a sort, as in
my opinion, there is not a priest in Wisbich who will refuse (the circumstances
thereof being considered) to subscribe unto it.

But to go forward: Within another year a third book is begotten and brought
forth, differing in some points from both the other: and they have been very
earnest that this should be allowed of by public authority. Howbeit if you
think their meaning to be, as they seem to pretend, you are wholly deceived.

For a simple man would conceive thereby that their purpose is, we should have
a prescribed and set form of public prayer to be used from time to time in
our several congregations: so as poor men by often hearing of them might the
better know and understand them, and peradventure have them by heart, or at the
least be so cunning in them, as that when the minister shall begin with any
prayer, understanding before the drift thereof, their hearts might fully
concur with him in every particular sentence, and with a better resolution in
the end say, Amen.

But in deed they have no such intent: for you must imagine, though (as the
serpent before mentioned) they have many implications and turnings, yet they
have always means and ways to shift for themselves. If they should in deed
prescribe unto us a set form of prayer, it might be said that though the words
were good, yet the use were naught: and therefore you shall find it a general
rule in their Rubrickes, that the minister shall either pray as there it is set
down, or else as the spirit of God shall moove his heart, to that effect,
framing himself according to the time and occasion.

So as you see your selves in this point left to the ministers discretion. If
he conceiving a prayer upon the sudden, shall after say it was to the same
purpose that is prescribed in the book, you may not control him.

And how by such kind of prayers you are like to be edified, and in what
danger you are thereby left, he is of simple judgment that cannot discern it.
A great man and Ringleader in this faction (at the least heertofore so
accounted) though otherwise of a giddy disposition and very uncertain: yet
heerof upon his good experience he writes upon occasion, after this sort.

Now what worship or prayers do you use? I am ashamed to name the boldness and
folly of some who scarce able to utter three words orderly, will yet take upon
them to babble out a tedious, long and stuttering prayer, wherein every tenth
word shall be the repeating of, O heavenly father, O merciful father, O dear
father, O good Lord, O merciful God, etc. and all things so foolishly packed
together, that their praieng seems rather to be the prattling of an infant
that would tell some great tale but can not hit of it. Thus far the reformer:
and yet he says not all.

For sometimes they will so wander either by error or malice, in framing their
prayers answerable to their affections (which are oftentimes maliciously bent
against any thing or matter wherewith they are displeased;) that no true
christian, if he had time to consider of their meaning, ought in charity when
they have done, to say, Amen.

These inconveniences have been long since foreseen, and for the avoiding of
them, the church has ever tied her ministers in their ordinary and public
service, unto a prescript and certain form of prayer.

About 1200. years ago it was decreed in the council of Milevitanum: placuit,
ut preces, Council. Mi le vit.
etc. Quae probatae fuerint in Concilio, ab omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae
omnino dicantur in ecclesia nisi quae a Prudentioribus tractatae in Synodo
fuerint: It pleased the council, that those prayers should be generally used
of all men* which are approoved in a council: and that no other should at all
be said in the church, but such as have been sufficiently considered of by
wise men, or allowed of in a synod. And the reason which the council adds,
is most effectual: Ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, velper
minus studium sit compositum: least peradventure some thing be uttered or
framed, either through ignorance or want of due consideration, which may be
against the rules of faith.

And therefore deerly belooved, seeing these spirits would draw you from the
church, and from those prayers which you know to be godly, and carry you, yea
teach you, they know not whether nor what themselves, I beseech you believe
them not.

Thirdly they cry out, that the government 1. Admonit
of the church now established in England, is both antichristian and divelish:
and that (as I can collect out of their writings) in two respects: First,
because where we had before Dialog of white devils
a spiritual Pope, now the civil magistrate is made a temporal Pope: which
they show to be far more discommodious to the church, then if they had kept
their spiritual Pope still: secondly, because bishops in their several
dioceses have a superiority and authority over the rest of the clergy.

Martin upon this ground took upon him very boldly to reason against the
Bishops in this sort. No petty Popes ought to be maintained or tolerated in
any christian common weal: but our Archbishops and Lord-Bishops, etc.
therefore, etc. Thus Martin has reasoned against one part of this
antichristian government. But why stayed he there? Indeed it was time for him
to stay. He says he is a courtier: howbeit I am persuaded there is none there
of so undutifull a heart to his sovereign: For though he cunningly would seem
to show his malice only against bishops: yet has he left to be implied the
very same reasons against the civil magistrate.

So that upon his principles a man may frame this rebellious argument; No
petty Pope is to be tolerated in a Christian commonwealth: But her Majesty
is a petty Pope: Therefore her Majesty is not to be tolerated in a Christian
commonwealth. And his Minor may thus be prooved; Whosoever do take upon them,
or usurp the same authority in causes ecclesiastical within their dominions,
which the Pope had, they are petty Popes: But her Majesty does so: Therefore
her Majesty is a petty Pope: and so consequently not to be tolerated in a
Christian commonwealth. Now surely if Martin were well examined, he is like to
prove a very good subject. But for me he must be as he list, seeing neither
in respect of God nor his prince he will be as he should be.

Touching the Bb. as you have heard before out of Ierom, and as Master Calvin
upon Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4.
his report seems to confess: Bishops have had this authority, which Martin
condemns ever since the evangelist S. Marks time. Besides, in the most
flourishing time of the church, that ever happened since the apostles days,
either in respect of learning, or of zeal, Martins and al his companions
opinion has heerin been condemned for an heresy. Lastly, there is no man
living, as I suppose, able to show, where there was any church planted ever
since the apostles times, but there the Bb. had authority over the rest of the
ministry. The place of Ambrose will no way serve their turn. But I will leave
this matter, and come to the second part of this their divelish and
antichristian government.

When it pleased almighty God to deliver this Realm of England from the
bondage and thraldom of the B. of Rome, it was thought agreeable to the word
of God, by the chiefest and best learned men of the religion in all
Christendom, that not only the title of supreme governor over all persons,
and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil, did appertain, and ought
to be annexed unto the crown: but likewise all honors, dignities,
preeminences, jurisdictions, privileges, authorities, immunities, profits, and
commodities, which by usurpation at any time did appertain to the Pope.

In this supremacy, these principal points Supremacy.
were contained; that the king has ordinary authority in causes
ecclesiastical: that he is the chiefest in the decision and determination of
church causes: that he has ordinary authority for making all laws,
ceremonies, and constitutions of the church: that without his authority, no
such laws, ceremonies, or constitutions are or ought to be of force: and
lastly, that al appellations, which before were made to Rome, should ever be
made hereafter to his Majesty's chau^cerie to be ended and determined, as the
manner now is, by delegates.

This preeminence and authority was greatly impugned by the Pope and his
adherents: but notwithstanding it was so notably defended by the sundry
writings of rare and special men in all gifts of piety and learning, as that
hitherto (Gods name be blessed for it) the truth therein has notably
prevailed. Amongst many books which have been written to this purpose, you
shall find these very learnedly penned: one De vera differentia Regiae
potestatis and ecclesiasticae: another written by Master Bekinsawe, De supremo
and absoluto Regis imperio: a third, De vera obedientia, written by a man at
that time in this point well affected. Likewise (as you may read in Master
Fox) Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Duresme, and John Stokeslie Bishop of London,
write a short treatise in form of a letter to cardinal Poole then resiant in
Rome, very effectually compiled to the same effect. Lastly, you cannot but
remember with what learning and authority this matter has been defended by
Bishop Jewel against Harding, by Bishop Horn against Fecknam, by the Deane of
Paul's against Dorman, by doctor Ackwoorth (as it is supposed) against
Saunders, and by diverse others, as occasions have been offered by the Papists.

I am persuaded there was never cause more thoroughly handled; and the issue
betwixt them was ever this, whether the king within his dominions, or the B. of
Rome, might by the word of god rightly challenge the foresaid authority.

Marie now a third sort of men are risen up in the world: who do affirm that
they al joined upon a wrong issue: and that the authority which both sides
labored for, does indeed appertain unto their presbyteries, and ecclesiastical
senates.

I would be loath dearly beloved, to abuse you with untruthes: and therefore I
have thought good to make this matter more A declara tion.
plain unto you by a very manifest example, authorized in a declaration
published by the king of Scots.

About some six or seven years ago (as Scotland.
I do imagine) certain men of the new government, intending the erection of
these presbyteries in Scotland, began their parts and proceeded as follows.

They did greatly inveigh against the superiority of Bishops, and likewise
repined at the kings authority in causes ecclesiastical: whereupon in his
minority, a certain number of ministers gathering to themselves certain
gentlemen, and diverse others, did erect by their own authority their
ecclesiastical senates: and usurping all the whole ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, did alter the laws at their own pleasures, without the
knowledge and approbation, either of the king or state.

They likewise took upon them to discharge the estate of Bishops, and to
declare the same to be unlawful: directing their commissioners to the king,
and commanding him and the counsel, under pain of excommunication never
afterward to appoint any more Bishops, because they had concluded that estate
to be unlawful.

They prescribed laws to the king and state, and appointed general fastings
throughout the Realm when they thought good: especially when some factioners in
the country were to moove any great enterprise.

Besides, diverse of the ministers having preached very factious and seditious
doctrine, and being in that respect called before the king to answer the
complaints made against them, they utterly disclaimed the kings authority, as
an incompetent judge, alleging for themselves, that for such matters as were
spoken in the pulpit, they ought to be exempt from the judgment and correction
of princes, denieng his authority flatly in causes ecclesiastical.

The king giving commandment upon the saturday, to certain noble men for the
feasting of the ambassador of France in Edenborough the next monday after: a
number of the presbytery understanding thereof: assembled themselves together
on sunday in the morning, and presumptuouslie caused the ministers to proclaim
a fast to be held the same monday, and could by no means be entreated to alter
their determination therein. So as whilst the lords and the chief of the
city, according to the kings commandment, were about the intertainment of the
ambassador, the ministers one after another all the day long in their several
sermons were bitterly inveighing against them: and had it not been for the
kings, great importunity, they had been all excommunicated.

But yet another pranke which they played passed all these. The king with the
advice of his Estates in Parleament, having resolved upon a certain fact
committed by some of his subjects, that it was treason: these men in their
assembly (esteeming their judgment to be the sovereign judgment of the
Realm) did not only approove the same fact as lawful, contrary to the said
act of Parleament, but ordained al them to be excommunicated, who would not
subscribe to their determination therein.

When the king saw what course these men held, and how notwithstanding the
equality they pretended, they sought altogether their own advancement: how
they erected that in themselves, which they had dejected in the Bishops: how
they took more upon them then ever the Bishops had done: how they did imitate
preposterouslie the papal jurisdictio^: how under the pretense of their
presbyteries, they trod upon his scepter, and labored to establish an
ecclesiastical tyranny of an infinite jurisdiction, such as neither the law of
God or man could tolerate: and perceiving withal, that the new erected
government was the mother of all faction, confusion, sedition, and rebellion:
that it was an introduction to Anabaptisme and popularitie: that it tended to
the overthrow of his state and Realm, and to the decaie of his crown: and that
he must either discharge himself of the crown, or the ministry of that
form of government, by the consent and act of Parliament, 1584. he overthrew
their presbyteries, and restored the Bishops again to their places. All this
you may find more at large set down by the king himself in his said
declaration.

It may here be said (for they dare say what they list) that now the king is
of another mind: and that this declaration was made when he had conceived some
displeasure against them.

For the king, he is not altered. Ictus piscator sapit. His crown and their
soveraigntie will not agree together. And what cause he had to proceed against
them as he did, although it be great boldness in such a case, not to rest
satisfied in the word of such a king: yet for your better understanding, what
to think of this kind of government (for never a barrel will prove the
better herring) you shall hear the opinion of one of our own countrie-men,
who was in Scotland about the same time, and observed very diligently the
wonderful pride and insolency thereof.

I judge says he (writing of this Parleament now assembled) that if the
Parleament should establish such names, and those the officers according to
those names which seek their own discipline, that then in steed of one Pope
we should have a 1000. and of some lord Bishops in name a 1000. Lordly
tyrants in deed, which now do disdain the names. This I have found by
experience to be true: I can testify by trial of Scotland, which have
traveled it over in their best reformed places: as in Doude, Saint Andrews,
Edenborough, and sundry other towns: and have known the king in great
danger, and fear of his life by their lordly discipline, etc. And again: I
have seen all manner of wickedness to abound much more in their best places in
Scotland, then in our woorser places here in England.

Furthermore it may please you brethren to hear the same man's judgment of
such, as do labor so busily in this matter: in a treatise of his against one
Barowe.

Whereas you charge us (says he) in denieng Christ in his offices, and
consequently not to be come in the flesh: it shall appear by your presbytery
or eldermen, that indeed you are and will be the aldermen even to pull the
most ancient of all, Christ Jesus himself by the beard: yea and seek not
only to shake him by the locks of his hair out of his offices, but also all
his ancients under him, I mean the lawful magistrates and ministers, which
have lawful authority from him.

Wherefore not we but you rather seek the glistering blase of great name: and
if once you might get up the names of Elders and Presbyters, what mischief,
cruelty, and pride would not stream from that name, even as fire from a
blasing star to set on fire the whole world? For every busy fool, the more
busy he were in discrediting others, and seeking mastership among the people,
the better elder he should be judged. Yea and this new name of an elder given
him, were even as a sacrament of grace, and would seal up all his knaverie:
that whatsoever filthiness dropped from him, yet the skirte of his ancients
gown should cover it.

This man's opinion heerin I know will be greatly contemned, because I think he
has bin of another judgment. But yet they may give him leave to speak, as
his experience (which is no foolish master) has taught him. For commonly it
comes to pass, when rash men run hedlong into any new devises, that
Posteriores cogitationes solent esse sapientiores: Cice to.
their after wits are best. How beit let him find what favor at their hands
he shall. I must indeed confess, that if this matter had only depended upon
his report, or opinion I would not at this time have made mention of him. But
it is far otherwise. For indeed if their proceedings be better considered,
that which he has said, either of his judgment touching their presbyteries,
or of his experience in Scotland concerning their practices, and that even
against the king it is in a manner nothing.

I beseech you brethren, especially you that have been brought up in learning,
and are able to look into this cause, do but consider how the chief
magistrates have been used and dealt withal, wheresoever this absolute
government which they speak of, has been erected. Read the writings of the
chiefest pillars of these platformes, as the book De jure magistratuum in
subditos: the book entitled Vindiciae contra tyrannos: another De jure regni
apud Scotos: The dialogs of Eusebius Philadelphus, with sundry other of that
sort: and you shall find in them these most strange and rebellious propositions
stiflie maintained, dilated and amplified.

The people of themselves may set up Gods service (...) 28.
and abrogate superstition: It is lawful for the people by force of arms to
resist the Prince, if he hinder the building of the Church: That is (as it
appears by the whole drift almost of that book) their presbyteries: The
people Id. ^ 3.
that do not resist the Prince affecting the seat of God (that is claiming
supremacy in causes ecclesiastical) do as it were offer sacrifice to idols.
Dialog of white Devils.
If Princes do hinder them that seek for this discipline, they are tyrants
both to the church and ministers (says one of them:) And being tyrants they
may be deposed by their subjects, as they do generally all of them hold.

I dare avowe it unto you brethren, and I think no man will make exception
against it: that if all were laid before you that the Popes have done against
Princes: it is not more then these men defend may be put in execution when they
think good by themselves and the people.

I might make this thing very plain unto you by diverse particular examples,
which they greatly allow and propound to themselves for their imitation: were
it not that the very naming of them would grow offensive unto you all. Only in
generality it may please you to understand what is written to this purpose in
a book printed at Geneva, and compiled by three or four whose names I know
not. Although (say they) The Popes for sundry enormities have deposed princes
by their unlawful authority, yet the reason that moved them so to do was
honest and just, and meet to be received and executed by the body or state of
every common wealth.

If any do here object, that I stand too long upon this matter, considering
that these things do touch men's dealings and writings in other countries, and
cannot in any sort be applied to our reformers in England: my answer is, that I
wish from the bottom of my heart it were so, but I greatly fear, by that which
already is done, that except there be in time very good order taken, it will
fall out far otherwise.

For it seems to me, that whatsoever has bin done heerin abroad, is labored
for to be put in execution here with us at hom. Our Bishops you see how
unchristianly they are handled, even with more contumely and disdainful
reproach, then ever it is to be read that the heathen used against their
priests, of what condition and behavior soever.

Her majesty (for whose happy estate and long life he that will not pray
unto almighty God, deserves neither state nor life in this common wealth) in
that she takes upon her to rule as she does in matters concerning the church,
according to the lawful (...), etc.
authority which is united unto her crown, is by these men cunningly
resembled unto all the wicked kings and others, of whom we read in the
scriptures, that they took upon them unlawfully to intrude themselves into the
priests office: as unto Saul for his 1 Samuel 13. 2 Chro. 26.
offering of sacrifice, unto Osias for his burning of incense upon the altar of
incense: unto Gedeon for his making of an ephode: and Judge. 8. Levit. (...)
unto Nadab and Abihu for their offering with strange fire.

And they affirm, that no civil magistrate has preeminence by ordinary
authority, either T. (...)
to determine of church causes, or to make ecclesiastical orders and
ceremonies. That no civil magistrate has such authority, as that without his
consent it should not 2. (...)
be lawful for ecclesiastical persons to make and publish church orders.
That, They which are no Elders of the church, have nothing to do Demon* of
discip
with the government of the church. And whereas Master Harding says, that the
office of a king in it self is one every where, not only among the Christian
princes, but also among the heathen: and thereupon concludes, that a Christian
prince has no more to do in deciding of Church matters, or in making
ceremonies and orders for the Church, than has a heathen: Master Cartwright
allows of his judgment, and does expressly affirm, that he is of the same
opinion, professing his mislike of those who teach another right of a
Christian, and of a profane magistrate.

So as indeed they attribute in effect no more to her Majesty, and all other
civil magistrates in these causes, than the Papists do, which is Potestatem
facti non ^uris. I know T. C.
how some of them shuffle to avoid this accusation, pretending that they give
the prince more than Potestatem facti: For our men do think they may say what
they list, and salve it again at their own pleasure: marie Gellius Snecanus
de ^ccles.
Snecanus he deals more plainly, and commending this distinction, says in
express words, that Controversia juris does pertain to the ministry: Licet
facti executio in politic is sit penes civilem magistratum: although the
execution of the fact in civil causes do appertain to the civil magistrate.

Now seeing, deerly beloved, how far these men are gone already upon their own
heads, who knows whether in short time they will not disclaim her Majesty's
authority, if they shall be called to answer to their misdemeanors, especially
if they concern matters of the pulpit: or whether they purpose to discharge
the estate of Bb. and to erect of themselves their new found plat for
government? What they will do, I know not; but what they have written, you
shall hear.

If this reformation (said on of them, when he was of that humor) be not
hastened forward by the magistrate, the subjects ought not any longer to tarry
for him, but do it themselves. The author of the second Admonition (against
whom, as I think, there will no exception be taken (affirms, that he and his
fellows Are forced in conscience to speak for this new order, and (as he
says) to use it. And in another place, that There is many a thousand that
desire the same that he does, and that great troubles will come of it, if it be
not provided for. I think he means, if they obtain not their desire. Another
is likewise very peremptory and resolute, that the Presbytery must prevail:
and if it Demon^ discipl. i^ Preface
come to pass (says he to the Bb.) by that means which will make your hearts
to ache, blame your selves. Martin in his first book threateneth Fists: and in
his second, he wishes that our Parleament, which is now assembled, would put
down Lord Bishops, and bring in the reformation which they look for, whether
her Majesty will or no. Let the place be considered, whether I have attained
to his meaning. Surely whilst he talks much of treason, I fear he will be
found a traitor himself.

For how can he conceive that such a thing should be brought to pass (if her
majesty do her best to withstand it) without a rebellion at the least, that I
may go no farther. Has not her highness in making of laws a negative voice? Is
not Lex principis opus? has not every law Vim cogentem of the king?

I assure you (my brethren) these are desperate points to be stood in. And I
do verily fear, that except good order be taken, and that in time, these
things will grow to some extremities. For seeing these spirits of ours do
follow so exactly, and with such hot pursuit, the outlandish precepts,
touching the form of their new government, is it not to be provided for,
least they fall to the outlandish means likewise (mentioned before in their
traitorous propositions) for the erecting and establishing thereof?

I was informed by a magistrate of right good worship, that a preacher of this
faction, in the presence of certain Justices of the peace, and in a very
great congregation did without controlment, convention, or binding over either
to sessions or assizes, set on broch the doctrine of the former propositions
for violent reformation.

He greatly complained of the manifold imperfections, wherewithal (as he
said) the church of England was greevously oppressed: and labored very
earnestly to persuade his auditorie, that in France it was lawful for the
people or inferior magistrates, to compel their prince to a reformation of any
such deformities: or else whether he would or no to do it themselves. As though
he should have said: if by the word of God it be lawful in France, it is
likewise lawful in England: the duty of subjects to their kings in that
respect being one in both.

If these things dearly beloved, which I have reported unto you (in sort as I
have insisted upon the^) be not true, let me be called to mine answer: but if
they be true, then I trust you will confess the necessity of this exhortation
(so far as concerns your duties) which here the Apostle makes: Charissimi
nolite omni spiritui credere. Take heed of such spirits least they seduce you,
and believe them not.

Saint Paul in his epistle to Titus does straightly in him command us, that
after Cap. 3 An exh^tion to Magist Beza.
one or two admonitions, we should avoid the company of an heretic. Upon
which place some learned men do observe, that the Apostles doctrine there
appertains but unto private men. For say they, if he had written the same to
civil magistrates, he would have bidden them after one or two admonitions, to
have punished with due severitie all such kind of persons. And even so say I
touching this place. The apostle exhorts you that be private men, that you
believe not every spirit, but concerning you that be magistrates, I am assured
the apostolical doctrine does command you, that by your authority you
carefully endeavor to suppress such spirits. Martin affirms that the Bishops
are in fault, that there are so many schisms this day amongst us, and I
confess, I am my self in some part of his opinion. But yet no farther, then
the same reprehension is to be extended generally unto all other magistrates.

Basil.
Saint Basil in his time finding the like jars, and disorder that we have now
amongst us: how (as it is in the book of Judges) every man did even what he
list himself, he says, he perceived this was the cause: for that (as it is
there noted) in those days there was no king in Israel, that is, God was not
regarded, or as it may truly be said, the magistrates did not their duties. For
there is no great difference betwixt having none at al, and having of such as
do neglect the charge which is committed unto them.

Nay surely mine opinion is, that if there were not some, (whether Bishops or
men of as great or greater authority) that do in some sort favor these
spirits, they would never have grown either in number so many, or in their
dealings to have been so violent.

That which Master Calvine writes, may Epist. 171.
very fitly be applied to this purpose: Nemini verbum facere in mentem
veniret, nisi quisquiliae hominum viderent se proceribus officium praestare, ac
paratam sibi esse maledicentiae mercedem: subitoque evanescerent mendacia, nisi
ab eisdem illis in quorum gratiam conficta sunt, foverentur: None would ever
have opened their mouths in this sort, except the base and rascal sort of men
had seen that thereby they should gratify some men in authority, and were to
be rewarded: for their evil speaking and lies would soon have died, if they
were not nourished by those, for whose pleasure they were published.

Be it that hitherto you have been moved to spare them with their great show
of zeal. Ad Q. fratrem.
For as Cicero says: Vt quisque est vir optimus, ita difficillime esse alios
improbos suspicatur: The best men, do least of all suspect others to be evil.
Yet now that you see into how desperate and dangerous a course they are fallen,
your farther bearing with them will not be well excused. They are almost come
(as Tert. notes) of such like men, Astilo ad machaeram, from words to blows.
Her majesty is depraved, Tertu ll.
her authority is impugned, and great dangers are threatened. Civil government
is called into question: princes prerogatives are curiously scanned: the
interest of the people in kingdoms is greatly advanced: and all government
generally is pinched at, and contemned. The church is condemned, the ancient
fathers are despised, your preachers are defaced, and yet these men are
tolerated.

Let it be held for good policy, Vt anseribus Cicer o
cibaria locentur, and canes alantur in Capitolio, for fear of thieves in the
night: But yet (as Cicero says) if they will gaggle and make a noise in the
day time without any cause, Opinor iis crura suffringantur: I think it very
fit they be rapt on the shinnes. And even so it is with these our prophets and
their adherents, as it follows in the same place: Alii eorum anseres sunt qui
tantummodo clamant, nocere non poss^nt: alii canes qui latrare and mordere
possunt: cibaria his praeberi videmus: Some of them are geese which only
gaggle, and cannot hurt: others are dogs, which both can bark and bite: and
yet we see them maintained. Sed vos maxim debetis in eos impetum facere: But
you that are magistrates ought rather to restrain them. Zanchius.


Zanchius in his epistle before his answer to Holderus the Arrian, being
greatly moved with the like schismatikes in Germany, does cry out in the
bitterness of his heart, O tempora, O mores: good Lord what times are these
wherein we live, and how are men in their manners grown to be monstrous? I
beseech almighty God (says he) (using the very words which Alexander Bishop
of Constantinople upon the like occasion had once used) that either it would
please his majesty to repress Hor^m incendiariorum nefarios conatus: The
wicked attempts of these firebra^ds, or else to take me out of this life, that
I may never behold the miseries and calamities which of necessity thereby must
fall upon the church. He exhorts the magistrates that they would more
diligently look unto their duties then before time they had done. Cur enim
unicuique quicquid lubet scribere, and in quemvis pro sua libidine debacchari,
eaque ratione ecclesias perdere permittitur? For why is every one suffered
(says he) to write what he list, and to rail upon every man at his
pleasure, and so by that means to destroy the church?

Naie surely if you look not to this gear in time, this judgment does but
begin at the house of God, and it will proceed farther to the overthrowe of
all government. God of his infinite mercy open your eyes that you may see these
dangers, and grant you both grace and courage, that you may in due time prevent
them.

And now unto you all dearly belooved, To the people.
who having no authority to repress these spirits, must carefully look about
you, that you be not deceived: I beseech you with the apostle, Do not believe
them.

The doctrine of the church of England, is pure and holy: the government
thereof, both in respect of her majesty, and of our Bishops is lawful and
godly: the book of common prayer contains nothing in it contrary to the
word of God.

All these points have been notably approoved and maintained not only against
the Papists, but likewise against some other schismatikes, and you your selves
with great joy and comfort have in time past embraced them accordingly. If any
of you now, my brethren, be otherwise affected, the fault is in your selves:
for they remain (as the nature of truth requires) to be as they were before:
but you through your rashness in following of every spirit, are grown to a
wonderful newfanglenes: and are indeed become mere changelings. Quemadmodum
Orat. ^.8
eadem terra stat recte valentibus, quae vertigene correptis videtur moveri: As
the same earth (says Greg. Nazianzen) appears immooveable to those that are
in health, which to the giddie does seem to turn about: so you, my brethren,
by following the persuasions of false prophets (who, as Irenaeus says; De
iisdem non semper easdem sententias habent: Of the selfsame things have not
always the same opinions) are drawn to an unjust mislike of the church; Et
amantes vel non amantes, haud eadem de eisdem judicatis: And according to your
love or hate, your judgments upon the selfsame things do vary and alter.

See, I pray you, what dislike is able to work; and therefore take heed of
those who shall endeavor, through lies and slanders, to make the truth and the
preachers thereof odious and hateful unto you. For as the Apostle writes;
Aemulantur vos non been, sed Gal. 4.
excludere vos volunt, ut illos aemulemini: They are jealous over you amiss,
even for their own purpose and commodity: yea they would exclude you from the
doctrine you have received at our hands, and from the affection and love, which
you once bare unto us, that ye might altogether love them, and follow their
devises.

And that is the end of their railing and libelling. Mos semper fuit
haereticorum, quorum doctrinam non possunt confutare, illorum vitam in odium
adducere: It has always been the manner of heretics, to bring their lives
into hatred, whose doctrine they cannot confute. Knowing that by the contempt
of the one, does easily ensue the dislike of the other.

How beit, they will pretend that the zeal of Gods glory does moove them unto
such bitterness, against the present estate of religion, and against the chief
maintainers of it, and that for conscience sake, and for the glory of Sion they
are driven to use such more than tragical outcries. But Bernard Sermon. sup
Cant. 2
will not suffer them to hide their malice under these masks, who writing
against certain schismatikes in his time, says, Alii quidem nude atque
irreverenter, uti in buccam venerit, virus evomunt detractionis: Some do
plainly and irreverently, even as it comes into their stomach, spue out the
poison of their slanders. Mary others there be, who cover their malice more
cunningly, nay more hypocritically, as though all they said proceeded of mere
love and Christian charity, of whom it follows; Vide as praemitti alta
suspiria: sicque quadam cum gravitate, vultu moesto, demissis superciliis and
voce plangenti egredi maledictionem, and quidem tanto persuasibiliorem, quanto
creditur ab hiis qui audiunt cord invito and magis condolentis affectus, quam
malitiose proferri: You shall see some, that after they have fet diverse great
sighs and groans, will presently with great gravitie and drawing out of their
words, with a heavy countenance, with casting down their heads, and with a
pitiful voice, breath out malediction, the which men do rather believe,
because it seems by such their hypocritical dealing, rather to proceed of a
sorrowful compassion, than of malice and hatred. But deerly beloved, take heed
of these spirits. Where you find these conditions, believe not, I pray you,
any such protestations.

Furthermore, you shall have some that will come unto you with a long tale,
protesting that they cannot refrain their tears, with the ancient men in
Esra, to see the foundation Ezra. 3.
of our new temple not to be answerable (as they say) to the beauty of the
old. And heerin they think they should be very acceptable unto you: whereas
in truth the crying of those aged men, was a great discouragement to the
builders, and one of the (...) in 12. (...)
principal lets, why the work went no better forward: and the prophet Aggaeus
was sent from God to reproove them for it; allowing, nay preferring in some
respects, the new building, which then they had in hand, before the other,
which some so much affected.

So as, deerly beloved, when you hear the like cries, in any wise believe them
not: but rather shout aloud for joy (as there it is likewise noted) in that you
have lived to see your temples purged from the leaven of Popery, and to
flourish, as they do, with the sincerity and truth of Christian religion.

They will furthermore (the better to creep into your hearts) pretend great
humility, and bitterly exclaim against the pride of Bb. as though they
affected nothing else by their desired equality, but some great lowlines, and
to prostrate themselves at your feet for your service: whereas in deed they
shoot at greater superiority and preemi nence, then even your Bishops did use
or challenge unto them: and would no doubt tyrannise by their censures over
both prince and people at their pleasure, in most untollerable and popelike
manner. As partly you may gather by the premises, and partly furthermore
understand in that not only they do use the very same arguments for the
sovereign authority of their presbyteries (against the prince) in causes
ecclesiastical: that the Pope does for his principality in the same (and none
other so far as I can read, or I think can be showed by any:) but do likewise
make to all our arguments for her majesty's supremacy against them, the very
same answers, (if not word for word, yet always in effect) that Harding,
Stapleton, Dorman, and Saunders have made to the same arguments, used by Bishop
Jewel, Bishop, Horn, Master Nowell and others to the same purpose, and against
the Pope. I cannot stand to enter into any particular examples of this matter,
only I thought it necessary at this time to advertise you of it (take his
advantage thereof who list) that you might the better beware of such kind of
spirits.

You have heard them, I am sure, greatly exclaim against our Bb. livings, as
though they had too much, thereby to persuade you with what simple allowance
they could con tent themselves: and yet (as you have heard) they reckon all the
livings of the church too little for themselves: condemning you of the laity,
who either have or would have part with them, for cormorants, Dionysians, and
for such wicked traitors against the church, as Judas was against Christ.

The would gladly seem to be very godly, zealous, and religious: and yet
notwithstanding, if you will rely upon Saint James his opinion, and judge of
them by the usage of their toongs, in their immodest speeches and libelling,
you shall find their profession thereof to be full of so great vanity, as
that particularly it may be verified almost of every one of them: Hujus vana
est religio.

If they set forth a book of common prayers, then caution is made that
nothing be done contrary to any thing set down in the same. If they decree
any thing in their synods (yea though it be in civil matters) against an act
of Parleament, that treason is not treason, yet if you withstand them, you are
forthwith accursed: or as touching church causes, except it should so fall
out, that they do err in their determinations, and that in some great matter
of faith, all men must stand unto their orders, decrees laws and
constitutions,.

But on the other side, if the church indeed, upon sufficient grounds shall
either publish a book, or command any thing to be observed, though that which
is commanded have been determined of, not only by provincial or national
synods, but by all the general councels in effect, which were held before the
tyranny of popery: yet (as Saint Bernard
Bernard says in the like case) Haerent ad singula quae injunguntur, exigunt
de quibusque rationem, male suspicantur de omni praecepto, nec unquam libenter
acquiescunt, nisi cum audire contigerit quod forte libuerit: they stick at all
things which are injoined, they require the reason of every thing, they suspect
amiss of every precept, and will never willingly hold themseves contented, but
when they hear that, which peradventure does please them.

They sift, they search, and condemn at their pleasure. This is too much, that
is too little: this is too long, that is too short: this is idolatrous, that is
superstitious: this is wanting, that is superfluous: this is not aright, August.
that is awrie: and as Saint Augustine says, Nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihil
rectum existimant: They think well of nothing, but of that they do themselves.

If they expound a place of Scripture, as they do that, whereof I spoke before,
Dic ecclesiae: and those likewise which they bring for the proof of their
aldermen: though they therein dissent among themselves, and from the
interpretations of all the ancient fathers who ever lived, yet we must believe
them (as Hosius spoke of the church of Rome) that what they say, it is the
very word of God.

If they allege unto us the authorities of fathers and councels, to prove the
equality of ministers, the authority of their lay governors, and the
continuance of their presbyteries since the Apostles times: though therein they
pervert them all most grossly, (and I fear of purpose to deceive you my
brethren, even against their own consciences, and contrary to the express
meaning of the said fathers and councels, even in those places which they bring
and infinte others:) yet they will face out the matter with very strange
boldness, and be more then offended that any should examine or seem to mistrust
them. I could bring you diverse examples heerof, but one of each sort shall
suffice.

To prove the equality which they say ought to be in the ministers of the
word T. C. lib. 1 page 99. 107.
and sacraments, they allege Cyprian, Ambrose, etc. affirming that in those
times there was no difference betwixt a Bishop and a priest, but that they had
all equal authority within their own parishes, and that whosoever T. C. lib.
2page 589
was a Bishop, was a priest, and whosoever was a priest (that is, a minister of
the word and sacraments) was a Bishop: whereas in the whole course of their
writings the contrary is most manifest: never man besides themselves (to my
understanding) did so expound them: the ecclesiastical histories report of
those times otherwise, and within less then an hundredth years after Cyprian,
and either before or in Ambrose days, it was condemned as an heresy, for any
to hold that opinion.

Again to prove the authority of their T. C.lib. 3. 45. 41. 68.
Aldermen, (which do neither preach nor administer the sacraments) with the use
and practice thereof in every church long after the apostles times, they
allege certain places out of Ignatius, Tertullian, Hierome, etc. where mention
is made of priesthood, of colleges, counsels, and companies of priests, that
joined with the Bishops for the better government of the church, and execution
of certain particular duties.

Whereas besides that Master Calvin himself writing of the state of the church
presently after the Apostles days confesses, that those priests were
ministers of the word and sacraments: Habebant singulae civitates Lib. 4.
Instit. 4. sect. 2.
presbyterorum collegium, qui pastores erant and doctores: Every city had a
college of priests which were pastors and doctors: the very authors themselves
almost in every part of their works do call the said priests Sacerdotes,
(which cannot agree to these lay aldermen) distinguishing them in direct
terms, a Laicis from Laymen: and do ascribe unto them ordinarily, authority
for the administration both of the word and sacraments, as all writers,
fathers, councels and histories from that time till this, have ever (these men
excepted) accounted of them, that is, as of pastors, doctors, and ministers of
the Gospel.

But of all other in my opinion the last example appertaining to this purpose
is most notable. For the better understanding whereof, you must know that the
church of God ever since the apostles times, has distributed the
ecclesiastical ministry principally into these three parts, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons: according as it is contained in the apology of the church
of England: Credimus, varios in ecclesia esse ordines Apolog ie
ministrorum: alios esse Diaconos, alios Presbyteros, alios Episcopos, quibus
institutio populi and religionis cura and procuratio commissa est: We believe
that there be diverse degrees of ministers in the church: whereof some be
Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops: to whom is committed the office to instruct
the people, and the charge and setting forth of religion.

This division our new reformers with one consent do allow, for the very
platform of their desired government: But their exposition of the parts
thereof, is agreeable to that which is before observed of the^: even contrary
to the profession which hitherto we have made to all the world, and contrary
to the testimonies of al antiquity. By Bishops, they say, was meant the
ministers of the word and sacraments, without any distinction of degree, or any
inequality for government or authority: and by priests their lay elders
only.

And upon this presumption and very gross falsification of all the ancient
fathers, the chief ringleader in this crew is not afraid T. C. Lib. 1. 183.
to use these words: If master Doctor had ever read the ecclesiastical
histories, he might have found easily the Eldership most flourishing in
Constantimes time, and other times, when as the peace of christians was
greatest.

For reply whereunto master Doctor Whitgift now Archbishop of Canterbury,
having desired him that was so cunning in the ecclesiastical histories, to
bring forth but one that affirms this kind of government to have been under
Constantinus: about three Lib. 3.^a. 67.
years after, he brought out Eusebius, who must do this feate for him: in that
he says there were Bishops, Elders, and Deacons at the council of Nice.

But you shall hear this skillful man in histories, how he applies the
authority of Eusebius. It is manifest (says he) that the churches were
governed under him (meaning Constantinus) as before, by Bishops, Elders, and
Deacons; by that which is cited of An infinite number of Elders, and Deacons,
which came to the council of Nice, with the two hundredth and fifty Bishops.

Here you see how gladly this fellow would have you to believe, that this their
government so earnestly now sought for, did most of al flourish about the time
of the council of Nice, that then there was no difference betwixt a Bishop and
a minister of the word, but were both of them, of equal authority, and that
then their lay Elders had their consistory with the rest of their companions
in every parish.

Whereas all the world knows, that Eusebius means nothing else in that
place, but to signify the great appeerance, from all places, of the clergy
men, of all sorts, in that most honorable synod. And it is likewise apparent by
the sixth Canon of the said Council, that long before that time, Bishops had
very large jurisdictions: as the Bishop of Alexandria is said according to an
old custom, to have authority or power over all Egypt and Pentapolie.

Nay it is manifest by the history of those, and the former times, that as at
the first for the repressing of schisms, Bishops had authority given them
over the rest of the clergy, so upon good experience and long proof, that the
Bishops being many in number, did grow themselves likewise at some jarres; it
seemed good unto that council, with the emperors consent, for the better
government of them in like manner, to devide the whole body of Christendom into
four Patriarckships: whereof the first was Rome, which had authority over
Italy and other churches of the west: The second Alexandria: which had
confirmed unto it the old jurisdiction before mentioned: The third Antioch:
which was over Syria: and the fourth Ierusalum, that ruled the churches in
Jury.

So as he that should dream of any such presbyteries in Constantines time, as
our new men talk of: must either be very much distempered, very ignorant or
very malicious. This I am sure of, that men of such a faculty, can never want
authority to prove what they list. And therefore as I said, so I say again
my brethren, that if they shall allege any of the said ancient fathers,
councels or histories to prove the equality of ministers, the government of
their Aldermen, and the continuance of their presbyteries since the Apostles
times, they always abuse themselves, falsify their authors, and endeavor to
deceive their readers and hearers: I beseech you deerly beloved, believe the^
not.

I might here likewise put you in mind, how these prophets, who seek to
withdraw you from the church established, are rent in sunder, and divided
amongst themselves. They have written books one against another, and do most
bitterly condemn the doings and proceedings one of another. You (says one
sort of them) in that you separate your selves from the public assemblies in
England, are grown to become plain Donatists and heretics: you (says the
other) in that you having laid the foundations whereupon we stand, and yet do
join your selves with them, are become mere hypocrites and apostataes: it had
been better for you never to have known the truth, than by such your dealings
so to have betrayed it.

Do you see these things (deerly beloved) and will you not eschew them? Will
you give your selves over to an unbridled course, the end whereof you know not?
Shall men of such inconstancy lead you from the truth, and make you to embrace
those things, which you know to have been condemned with one consent by all the
ancient fathers for heresies? If you will needs affect them still, because you
have no stay of your selves; yet let me, I beseech you, prevail thus much with
you, that until, at the least, they agree amongst themselves, you will be
content to give over any longer to follow them.

In so doing, I doubt not, but you shall return to your old love of the truth,
embrace with your former joies this your present reformation (which your
neighbors adjoining would think themselves most happy to attain:) and with
all sobriety and contentment, willingly and obediently submit your selves to
obey these and the like exhortations, penned by the holy Ghost, and tending to
persuade you to perseverance in that godly doctrine which you have received.
Sicut accepistis Iesum Christum Dominum, ita in Col. 2.
eo incedite: As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. And
again; We beseech you brethren, by the coming 2. These. 2.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by your assembling unto him, that you be not
suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled by spirit, that is, by deluding
spirits and vain doctrine, but stand fast, and keep the instructions which
you have been taught. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever Phil. (...)
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things, which
you have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in your true prophets,
who have some of them sealed the truth with their blood, those things, I say,
forget not, but hold fast, remember, and put them in practice: Et Deus pacis
erit vobiscum, And the God of peace shall be with you.

Beware (says the Apostle) of dogs, beware ^ll workers, beware of concision,
that is, Phil. 3.
of such as cut a sunder the church of God. If any man preach unto you any
other Gospel, Gal. 1.
than that which you have received, let him be accursed. Be not carried about
with Heb. 13.
diverse and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace. Non convalescit planta quae saepe transfertur: that
plant never prooveth, which often is remoo ved.

Suffer not your selves, as it were bowls, to be easily turned hither and
thither. Lapis quadratus stabilis est: The square stone lies surest. It is
very unmeete you should hence forth be any more Ephesians. 4.
as children, wavering and carried about like little boats with every wind of
doctrine by the deceit of men, and with craftines, whereby (as men that are well
practiced) they lie in wait to deceive: but follow the truth in love, and in
all things grow up as true and lively members of that body whereof Christ is
the head. By whom in so doing you shall receive increase of all heavenly
graces in this life, as of faith, sobriety, obedience, and constancy in the
truth, and in the world to come obtain to your endless and everlasting comfort,
that glorious an d immortal crown, which is purchased fo r the godly, by the
blood of the lamb tha t sits upon the throne of al glory. Of which crown
God of his infinite mercy grant u s all to be partakers, through the merits an
d death of Jesus Christ our Lord: to who m with the holy Ghost, three persons
and on e God, be all praise, honor, and glory, bot h now and for evermore,
Amen.

The time will come when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but having th
eir ears itching, shall after their own lust s get them an heap of teachers.
2. Tim. 4.
Whereas there is am ong you envieng and strife, and devisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? for when one says, I am Paul's, and an other I am
Apollos, are ye e not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.
FINIS.

