DAVNGEROVS POSITIONS AND PROCEEdings, published and practiced within this
Island of Brytaine, under pretense of Reformation, and for the Presbiteriall
Discipline.

(...).

My son fear the Lord and the King: and meddle not with them that are
seditious.

Prou. 24. 21. They despise government, and speak evil of them that are in
authority.

Jude. LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1593.

An advertisement to the Reader.
THE Author of this Treatise was required by some persons of honor, who might
dispose of him and his labors: to set down by way of an historical
narration, what he had observed touching certain positions holden, and some
enterprises achieved or undertaken, for recommending, and bringing the
Presbiteriall Discipline into this Island of Britain, under pretense of
reformation. The performance of which duty, when he had undertaken and was
entered into it: he found the work to grow far greater upon him, then at the
first, he did imagine. Insomuch as although in the beginning he verily
supposed, tha he might easily have contrived his matter into a few sheets of
paper: so that as many coppies, as were to be disposed, might easily and in
very short time have been written forth: yet by the necessary length of the
Discourse, as it fell out, and through his manifold quotations, he was
constrained, (as the time required) to procure for the better dispatch, that
some few copies might be printed. And albeit there is no meaning, that this
Treatise (labored but for the private satisfaction of some few especial
persons) should otherwise continue then as an vnpublished Copy: yet the writer
of it wished to have it signified, that nothing is alleged therein, which is
not to be found either in Books and writings published to the view of the
world, (such as he thinks will not be disclaimed,) or in public records, or
else is to be showed under those parties own hands that have been either the
principal procurers, favorers, or dealers in those things, whereof he
entreats. Which asseueration of his thus made, he will be ready, (as he
says) God assisting him, to justify at any time for the satisfaction of such,
as shall make doubt of it. And does further protest with all sincerity: that
he has not (willingly) detorted any thing in this whole Discourse, to make
either the cause it self, or the fauorors thereof more odious, then their own
words and deeds shall necessarily infer, and enforce against them, with all
indifferent and considerate Readers. Farewell in Christ.

The Contents of the first Book.
OF two sorts of men that especially disturb the Church of England, and of the
drifts of them both, by way of a Preface. Chap. 1. Fol. 1. Of the course held
at Geneua, for reformation of religion, and of the Doctrine which upon that
occasion has been broached. Chap. 2. Fol. 7. Of the proceeding of some
Scottish Ministers: according to the Geneuian rules of Reformation. Chap. 3.
Fol. 9. How the Geneuian Doctrine, or principle for Reformation, has been
amplified, by certain pretended Reformers in Scotland, Chap. 4. Fol. 14* The
objections against the doctrine, reported of in the former chapter with the
Consistorian answers unto them. Chap. 5. Fol. 16. The proceedinges of certain
Scottish Ministers, according to the grounds mentioned in the two last
chapters, for setting up of the Consistorian Discipline, and of their urging of
our English Disciplinaries, to follow their steps. Chap. 6. Fol. 18.
The Contents of the second Book.
The Doctrine of certain English Ministers, which they learned at Geneua, and
published of purpose to have procured the like course for Reformation in
England, to that which was in Scotland. Chap. 1. Fol. 34. Our English
Disciplinarians, do imitate the Scottish, in their desire of the Consistoriall
government, saving that they are more bewitched with a kind of dotage after
it. Chap. 2. Fol. 41. Our pretended English reformers do imitate or rather
exceed the Scottish Ministers in reuiling and railing against all that do
encounter them Chap. 3. Fol. 44. The speeches of the said pretended reformers,
concerning England: the State: the present reformation, and government of the
Church. Cha. 4. Fol. 47. Some of their undutiful and consistorian speeches
concerning her Majesty etc. Chap. 5. Fol. 48. Some of their railing speeches
against the high court of Parliament, and all others generally that do
maintain the present government of the Church of England. Chap. 6. Fol. 50
Some of their Disciplinarian speeches concerning the Lords of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Council. Chap. 7. Fol. 52. Some of their railing
speeches against the Magistracy in England, the Judges, Lawyers, and laws both
civil and ecclesiastical. Chap. 8. Fol. 54. Some of their consistoriall
sayings, as touching our Religion, Communion book, Sacraments and ceremonies.
Chap. 9. Fol. 55. How they do charge the present government with persecution.
Chap. 10. Fol. 56. Some of their consistorian speeches of the Clergy of
England, assembled, as occasion has required, in the Convocation house. Chap.
11. Fol. 58. Some of their presbiterial speeches of the Bishops of England
professing the Gospel. Chap. 12. Fol. 58. Some of their uncharitable words
against all the Clergy in England, generally that mislike their designements.
Chap. 13. Fol. 60. Their especial drift in their said railing speeches, as
outragiously published as if they were mere Jesuits, and peradventure to as
dangerous a purpose. Chap. 14. Fol. 61.
The Contents of the third Book.
The practices of certain English reformers for Discipline, from the year
1560. until the year, 1572, chap. 1. Fol. 65 The secret meetings for
Discipline, and the matters handled in them here in England from 1572. till
1583. chap. 2. Fol. 67 A form or book of discipline is drawn, and a
resolution agreed upon, how far they might proceed for the practice of it,
without breaking the peace of our Church. chap* 3. Fol. 69 About the year
1583. they fell again to the practice of their discipline, and of a
consistorian question, chap. 4. Fol. 73 Their Book of Discipline is reuiewed:
it was after sent abroad about 1587 it was put in practice, in Northamptonshire
and many other places, cha. 5 Fol. 75. A Synod is held at Couentry, 1588. many
questions are resolved, the book of discipline is subscribed unto, chap. 6.
Fol. 85 The book of the pretended discipline is made perfect at Cambridge,
certain Synods are kept, and of their estimation, chap. 7 Fol. 88 Upon some
detecting of the premises some were called into question: they refuse to be
examined: all they were charged, which is in effect confessed, chap. 8. Fol. 91
Cartwright is called for, by authority: a Synod is held in London: it is there
resolved that he shall refuse to be examined upon his oath. chap. 9. Fol. 93
Further proof for their practice of their discipline: collected out of the
rules of their subscribed book, chap. 10. fol. 94 Further proof for their
practice of their discipline out of the articles they subscribed, cha. 11. fol.
98. It is confessed that they agreed to put one point of their book in
practice without her Majesty's assent: what it is: and of strange names given
to children, cha. 12. fol. 102 A second point of their book confessed to be
agreed upon, for the practice of it, without her Majesty's assent, cha. 13.
fol, 105 Mo points of their book put in practice: fasts: calling of ministers:
presbiteries: censures, etc. cha. 14. fol. 112 They have joined themselves into
an association or brotherhood, and do appropriate to their meetings the name
of the church, cha. 15. fol. 120 A ridiculous pretense of laws: with a
capitulation of the sum of this third book, cha. 16. fol. 125
The Contents of the fourth Book.
Some of them seem to grow desperate, and propound to themselves a strange
example to follow, for the advancing of their discipline, Cha. 1. Fol. 129 Of
their doctrine for making a reformation themselves, and how the people must be
thrust into that action, Cha. 2. Fol. 133 They would have the Nobility and the
inferior Magistrates to set up their Discipline: and of their supplication with
a hundred thousand hands, Cha. 3. Fol. 135 Presuming upon some unlawful
assistance, they use very violent words, Cha. 4. Fol. 138 Upon Cartwrights
coming to Prison: some strange attempts were looked Cha. 5. Fol. 141 One
Edmond Copinger took upon him to work Cartwrights etc. deliverance: he
pretends an extraordinary calling, and acquainteth diverse with it: one Gibson
a Scot, P. Wentworth, Cartwright, Wigginton, Charke, Trauers, Egerton, etc.
Cha. 6. Fol. 143 How Copinger and Arthington came acquainted with Hacket: of
their conference with Io. Throg. Copingers letter to Io. Throg. and his
answer, Cha. 7 Fol. 152 Copinger to Hacket of an appearance in the
Star Chamber: his letter to Vdall: Why Cartwright etc. refused to confer with
him: Cartwright resolved some questions of Copingers: Of eight Preachers that
did fast and pray for Copingers success, Cha. 8. Fol. 156 Of Hackets first
coming to Wigginton: of his gadding up and down: and of the designement to
have been executed in the Star Chamber, cha. 9 Fol. 159 A preparation
toward the intended disloyalty: two of Copingers Letters to M. Charke, and to
another: Cartwrights and Wiggintons commendation of Penries being then in
London, Cha. 10. Fol. 161 Of the traiterous intendments which were toward the
Court, Cha. 11 Fol. 166 That of long time, some such attempts as Hacket made
for discipline: were of great likelihood purposed, Cha. 12. Fol. 168 Brief
collections: whereby it may summarily appear: that certain Ministers in
London did know what Copinger intended, Cha. 13 Fol. 171 The cunning dealing of
certain Ministers in London, how notwithstanding they wished Copingers plot to
go forward: yet they might be (if it were possible) without the compass of
Law, Cha. 14. Fol. 173 If Hackets treasons had prevailed for the pretended
Discipline, how they might have been defended by the Disciplinary doctrine,
Cha. 15. Fol. 176
FINIS.
Thou shall not rail upon the Judges, Exodus 22. 28.
neither speak evil of the Ruler of the people.

The Lord keep me from laying my hand on him. 1. King. 24.
For he is the Lords anointed.

Who can lay his hands upon the Lords anointed, 1. Xing. 26.
and be guiltless?

Speak not evil of the King: no, Eccle. 20.
not in thy thought*

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: Paul to the Romans 13.
for there is no power but of God: and the powers that be, are ordained of
God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God:
and they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment. Ye must be subject,
not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake.

We call upon the everlasting God for the health of our Emperors, Tertul. in
Apologetico.
always beseeching Almighty God, to send every of them long life, happy
reign, trusty servants, valiant soldiers, faithful Counselors, orderly
Subjects, and the world quiet: and whatsoever people or Prince can wish for.

One night with a few firebrandes, Tertul. in Apologet.
would yeald us revenge sufficient, if it were lawful with us to requite evil
with evil. But God forbid, that either they, which take part with God, should
revenge themselves with human fire, or be grieved to suffer wherein they be
tried. If we would not practice secret revenge, but profess open enmity,
could we lack number of men or force of Arms? Are the Moors think you or
the Parthians, or any one Nation whatsoever, more in number then we, that are
spread over the whole world? We are not of you, and yet we have filled all the
places and rooms which you have: your Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns,
Assemblies, your Tents, Tribes, and Wards, yea the very Palace, Senate, and
Judgment seats* For what war were we not able and ready, though we were
fewer in number then you, that go to our deaths so gladly, if it were not more
lawful in our religion to be slain then to slay? We could without arms
never rebelling, but only dividing our selves from you, have done you spite
enough with that separation. For if so great a multitude as we are, should
have broken from you, into some corner of the world, the loss of so many
Citizens would have both shamed you, and punished you. Believe me, you would
have been afraid, to see your selves alone and amazed as amongst the dead, to
see silence and desolation every where, you would have had more enemies, then
inhabitants, where now you have fewer ennemies, by reason of the multitude of
your Citizens, that are almost all Christians.

Saul had not innocence, August. con..lit. Petil. lib. 2 cap. 48.
and yet he had holiness, not of life, but of unction.

After the Priest had reproved the attempt, Chrisost. de verb. Esa. vidi
dominum.
and the king would not yield, but offered Arms, shieldes, and spears, and
used his power: then the Priest turning himself to God: I have done (says he)
my duty to warn him, I can go no further. For it is the Priests part only to
reprove, and freely to admonish (with words,) not to assail with arms, not to
use targets, not to handle spears, not to bend bows, nor to cast darts, but
only to reprove and freely to warn.

Pateat quod noxium est, Mir. lib. 2. adu. Iouinianum.
vt possit conteri cum patuerit.

THE FIRST BOOK OF DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES and Practices.
CHAP. I.
Of two sorts of men that especially disturb the Church of England, and of
the drifts of them both, by way of a Preface.
AS it is said of Caiphas, when he told his companions the Pharisees and the
rest, that it was expedient for them, that one man should die for the people,
Hoc a seipso non dixit, sed prophetauit, etc. so in mine opinion it may well be
said of the Pope, when he gave to the Kings and Queens of England this Title,
to be called Defenders of the faith: he spoke not this of himself, but
prophesied. For if any Christian King or Queen might ever be truly so
termed, (as in deed it is a style that contains a great and the most royal
part of all their kingly offices,) surely of all the Princes that since that
time have reigned, it is verified most properly in her most excellent Majesty:
Whether you respect the Reformation of Religion, which her Highness has made
in this Church of England (according to the noble examples of Moses, Joshua,
David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, etc.) or whether you respect, not
only the relief, which strangers persecuted at home for the profession of the
Gospel have here received: or her Majesty's great and unspeakable charges,
for the ayding and assisting of other Christian States, Princes, and countries:
that for their profession of the same right Religion, are mightily afflicted,
by certain Gyantes of the earth, the soldiers and members of that Antichrist
of Rome.

So as in these and many other respects (which do concur with them) I neither
doubt that her Majesty (whom the Lord protect with his mighty hand long to
reign over us) shall be for ever renowned amongst the most famous Queens,
that ever lived in the world: or that the Church of England, so reformed by
her Highness, is presently at this day the most Apostolic and flourishinge
Church, simply, that is in all Christendom. Howbeit let a Church be as richly
planted as ever any was, before, or in the Apostles times: Let either Moses
with his Aaron, or David with all his Counselors, govern both the Church and
Commonwealth, as godly as ever any was governed: yet such is, and ever has
been, the malice and cunning of Satan: as that he wants not at any time,
either will or means, to slander, to deprave, and to endanger the same. He
has his Core, Dathan, and Abiram, that if need be, Numb. 16
dare presume to tell both Moses and Aaron, they take too much upon them. He
is able to set the children of one father, the servants of one master, the
subjects of one Prince, and the members of one Church; at dissension, at deadly
hatred amongst themselves. As occasion serves, he has his Shemeis to curse
King David, 2* Sam. 16
also his murmurers, complayners, mockers, makers of sects, such as despise
government, Jude 2. Pet. 2
which are presumptuous: men that stand in their lewd conceits: such as fear
not to speak evil of those things they know not, and of them that are in
dignity, that is, of Princes and great men, be they never so high in authority.

The experience which we have hereof at this day in the Church of England, is
more then pregnant: partly through the devilish and traitorous practices of the
Seminary Priests and Jesuits: and partly by reason of the lewd and obstinate
course, held by our pretended refourmers, the Consistorian Puritanes: both of
them laboring with all their might, by railing, libelling, and lying, to
steal away the peoples hearts from their governors, to bring them to a
dislike of the present state of our Church, and to draw them into
parts-taking: the one sort, for the embracing of such directio^s, as should
come unto them from Rome: the other for the establishing of that counterfeit
and false Hierarchy, which they would obtrude upon us by the countenance and
name of the Church at Geneua.

The which proceedings of both the sorts of disturbers, are so much the more
dangerous, in that they deal so secretly, and have combined themselves,
together with their Proselites, into such a league and confederacy; as get out
what you can your felfe by mere chance (as they say) for the discovery of
their actions, and attempts; you shall be sure that neither the one sort nor
the other will detect any thing. Nay matters being detected in some sort to
their hands, they will utterly refuse to be examined, as law prescribes: or
if they take any oathe, it is as good never a whit as never the better, they
dally so exceedingly with it.

For under pretense of not accusing themselves, if they find any thing to be
come to light, which may any ways touch them, they will utterly refuse for the
most part to answer it, either upon oath or without oath: saying, that neither
by the Laws of God, nor man, they are bound so to answer. Under color
whereof they exempt themselves from the ordinary course held in justice, for
criminal causes, throughout all the world: which is, that before witnesses be
produced against any supposed offender, the party accused shall first answer
to the accusation, yea, or nay, etc. as we use in England, and that in matters
of life and death (but in these without an oathe) he must first plead guilty
or not guilty.

And as they deal for themselves, so do they for their confederates, their
favorers, relieuers, abetters, and receivers: affirming it to be against the
rules of charity, to bring their Christian brethren and friends into any
danger, for doing of those things, which both the sorts of these seducers have
drawn them into, and do themselves judge to be religious and just.

From these points all the Judges of the land, and diverse Divines that have
dealte with them, as yet cannot bring them: both the sorts are so settled in
this seditious doctrine of Rhemes, Annotat. Rhemish* upon the 23. of the Acts
of the Apostles.
which is as follows, vz. If thou be put to an oath, to accuse Catholics,
for serving God as they ought to do, or to utter any innocent man, to Gods
enemies and his, thou ought first to refuse such unlawful oaths: but if
thou have not constancy, and courage so to do, yet know thou that such oaths
bind not at all in conscience and law of God, but may and must be broken under
pain of damnation.

Now in these confederacies, what course should be taken for the preventing of
such dangers, as may thereby ensue, I refer it to be thoroughly considered by
those that have the government both of the Church and Commonweal committed
unto them. But before they can be prevented they must be understood. Concerning
the Seminary Priests and Jesuits: their very coming into the land does
declare their traitorous intentions. What allegiance and love soever they
pretend (upon their apprehension) to her Majesty and their country, it is
very well known, they do it but for the time, rebus sic stantibus, and that
their coming hither, is to no other purpose, but to make away for the Pope and
the Spaniardes; the sworn and mortal enemies, both to this state, and to all
other that do profess the right reformed religion of Christ.

But for the other sort of practitioners, their proceedings and designements,
are not so well, as yet discovered. Their pretenses do carry a greater show of
good meanings: and many (that are indeed truly zealous, little suspecting
what hooks do lie hid under such fair baits) are daily carried (as we
see) headlong with them. In respect whereof, you are to be advertised, that as
it is an easy matter by looking to the said Popish and Spanish practices, to
know in generality, their Seminaries dealinges here amongst us, be they in
particularity never so secret: so are there certain men in other countries,
of the same humors with our pretended refourmers, whose courses and
proceedings, as well for the matters they desire, as for the manner of attaining
of them, they propound to themselves, as the fittest patterns for them to
follow: and namely the Ministers of Geneua, but more especially some of the
Ministers of Scotland: as may hereby appear.

As we have been an example, to the Churches of France and Scotland (says M.
Cartwright) to follow us; so the Lord would have us also to profit, and be
provoked by their example. An other also in this sort. A Letter of P. A.
Nobiles quidam praecipui huius regni mecum egerunt, vt author essem regi meo
de tollendis omnino Episcopatibus, vt exemplum postea posset manare in vicinam
Angliam. Certain of the chief Noble men of England (who I think now are
gone,) dealt with me (by the instigation no doubt of some of our Ministers,
Anno, 1583.) to persuade the King of Scotland my master, to overthrow all the
Bishoprics in his country, that his proceedinges therein might be an
example for England adjoining.

Upon a certain repair of term thousand in arms to the King of Scots at
Sterling, Anno, 1585. whereupon the Bishoprics were indeed suppressed,
Knewstubbe Knewstubbe*
a Consistorian Minister of Suffolk, did write thus to Field: I would be
glad to hear somewhat of the estate of Scotland: it does more trouble me then
our own: For I am conceiving some hope upon the change of their former
proceeding.

It also appears that there is great and ordinary intelligence, betwixt their
and our especial presbytery ministers, for the better, and more ready
compassing of such devises and platformes, as are sought for, by our said
ministers so busily amongst us. The best of our Ministry (says James Gibson
a minister of Scotland to a brother in England) are most careful of your
estate, Gibson to Ed. Cop.
and had sent for that effect, a Preacher of our Church this last summer
(1590.) of purpose, to confer with the best affected Ministers of your
Church, to lay down a plot, how our Church might best travel for your
relief. And again: The Lord knows what care we have of your Church both in our
public and private prayers, etc. For as feeling members of one body, we
reckon the affliction of your Church to be our own.

One Dauison in like manner (an other minister of that country) takes upon
him to justify the proceedings of our malecontent ministers here: Dauison
against R. B.
(as it shall herafter more plainly appear) and for the better encouraging of
them in their peeuishnes, Page 29.
he tells them, that the just defense of their holy cause of Discipline
must not be left, which has no less warrant to be continued perpetually
within the Church, under this precept; Feed my sheep: then has the preaching
of the word and ministration of the Sacraments. Page 29.
He does also publish it, so as the world might take notice of it: that the
good brethren of England, Page 20.
are of the same mind with them of Scotland: and that both their causes, are
most neerelie linked together.

Lastly there is almost nothing more ordinary in all the Consistorian
discourses and libels of our own countrymen, whether they be printed here or
in Scotland, then to press us with the examples of Geneua and Scotland, and to
inueigle the people of England, with (I know not what) great commendation of
the proceedings and platformes of some of the ministers in both those places.

Which points considered, and being required by those that might command me,
that whereas certain writings, and letters were come to my hands, concerning
some courses taken by our said more friendly disturbers, then the Jesuits
are, but yet very great disturbers; I should make the same in some sort
known: I thought it my best way, for the discharging of my duty therein,
first to lay down before you, the examples, patterns, and proceedings of
those Ministers and Churches, which those our factious crew, propound to
themselves to follow: and secondly (that I may not be enforced to pass by
them, as Refor. no enemy. B. 2
one says, D. B. was in his sermon at Paul's cross) to make it most apparent
unto you, how artificially and effectually, they have already by imitation
expressed them. Whereby you shall perceive, that although by reason of their
said combination and secretnesse used, many things lie hid from those in
authority, which they have done already, in the setting forward of their
pretended discipline: yet there will fall out so much to be disclosed, as
laying it to their patterns, you may easily discern (notwithstanding all
their goodly pretenses) what to judge of their proceedings, and whereat in
truth they do aim.

CHAP. II.
Of the course held at Geneua, for reformation of religion, and of the doctrine
which upon that occasion has been broached.
IT seems, that when the Gospel began first to be preached by Farellus,
Viretus, and others at Geneua, they could have been well content with the
government of the Bishop there, if he would willingly have rejected the Pope,
and joined with them for the reformation of Religion. This appears by M.
Caluins words to Cardinal Sadolete. Talem nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeant, in
qua sic emineant Episcopi, vt Christo subesse recusent, vt ab illo tanquam
vnico capite pendeant, and ad ipsum referantur: in qua, sic inter se fraternam
societatem colant, vt non alio modo, quam eius veritate, sint colligati: tum
vero nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt qui non eam reuerenter
summaque obedientia obseruent. If they do bring unto us such an Hierarchy or
priestlie government, wherein the Bishops shall so rule, as that they refuse
not to submit themselves to Christ, that they also depend upon him, as their
only head, and can be content to refer themselves to him: in which
priestlie government they do so keep brother lie society amongst themselves
that they be knit together by no other knot, then by the truth: then surely
if there shall be any, that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy or
priestlie government, reverently and with the greatest obedience that may be,
I confess there is no kind of Anathema, or curse, or casting to the devil,
whereof they are not worthy.

Thus far then, it must needs be thought, that the Bishop was offered by
such as sought to refourme that Church: which offer he refusing (as I guess)
to accept of, they dealt (as it appears by the issue) with the inferior
magistrates and people, Call. to Sadolet.
to make such a reformation themselves, as they required of them. Whereupon the
Bishop being Lord of the City, and having as well in his hands, the Sovereign
civil Jurisdiction over it, or (as M. Calvin speaks) Ius gladij and alias
ciuilis iurisdictionis parts, etc. as the Ecclesiastical; they said, He was
a thief and an usurper; and so of themselves, with such assistance as was
procured, did thrust him from both those authorities. Even like (in my opinion)
as if a Christian Prince, being possessed within his dominions of the supreme
Jurisdiction, as well in Ecclesiastical as in civil causes, might upon the
like occasion be served in the same manner: or, to prevent all exception, as if
some Prince of some particular state or City in Germany, Ioach. Camerarius.
Phil. Mela. Georg. Mayor de vita eius.
taking upon him, together with his principality, the calling of a Preacher,
Bishop, Superintendent or Ruler of many particular Churches, (as George the
Prince Anhault did) should in such a case (as the Bishop of Geneua was) be
deprived of both.

The means which was used, for such their abandoning of their Bishop, was this.
When they perceived that the Bishop sought, by force to encounter their
proceedinges, and that (as Sleydan notes) he had excited the Duke of Sauoy,
to that end, to assist him: they joined themselves into a more near amity
with Berne. So as the Duke and the Bishop coming together to besiege the City;
they were both repulsed, Bernatibus illis auxilium ferentibus, The force of
Berne assisting the Geneuians. Since which time (as I suppose) it has been a
principle, with some of the chief Ministers of Geneua, Whittingham in his
Preface to Goodmans book. Knox.
(but contrary to the judgment of all other reformed Churches, for ought I
know, which have not addicted themselves to follow Geneua) that if Kings and
Princes refused to refourme Religion, the inferior magistrates or people, by
direction of the ministry, might lawfully, and ought (if need required) even
by force and arms, to reform it themselves.

CHAP. III.
Of the proceeding of some Scottish Ministers: according to the Geneuian rules
of Reformation.
ACcording to the refourming rule, mentioned in the end of the former Chapter,
(to omit some other examples) certain Ministers in Scotland with their
adherents (being mere subjects) have taken upon them of later years, Knox in
his hist. of the church of Scotland, page 213
by a violent and forcible course to reform Religion.

In which course M. Knox a man trained up at Geneua, in the time of Mary Queen
of England, and very well instructed for such a work, did show himself to be
a most especial instrument, as it appears by a very strange letter, written
by him from Diepe, Anno Knox page 213. ibid.
1557. Wherein he shows, that his opinion and motion of that matter, was not
grounded, only upon his own conceit, but upon the grave counsels, and
judgment of the most godly and learned, that then lived in Europe. (He means
the Geneuians, Calvin, and the rest there.) Upon this Letter and some other, to
and from the said Knox, An Knox p. 217
oath of confederacy was taken amongst his followers, in Scotland; and a
testification was made of their intents by a kind of subscription.

Immediately after, they prescribed also Knox p. 218
Orders for Reformation, to be observed through all that whole Realm, Anno,
1558. and writ a Knox p. 234
memorable letter to the Religious houses, in the name of the people, that they
should either remove thence by such a day, or else they would then eiecte them
by force.

Shortly after ( a Parliament being there holden by the Queen Regent) they
Knox p. 256
protested to the same, that except they had their desires, etc. they would
proceed in their course: that neither they nor any that joined with them,
should incur therefore any danger in life, or lands, or other political
pains: and that if any violence happened in pursuit of those matters, they
should thank themselves. Afterward, (the Queen Regent, seeing all the
disorder, that was then, proceeded from such of the ministers) she Knox p. 258.
summoned them to have appeared at Striueling: which they refusing to do, were
thereupon by the Queens commandment (as it is there termed) put to the
Knox. pa. 2^
Horn: and all men (under pain of rebellion) were inhibited to assist them.
But all this notwithstanding, their friends did stick unto them. And presently
after, upon a Sermon to that purpose, preached by M. Knox, in Saint
Hollindshed page 366. Knox 262
Iohnstowne, for the overthrowing of Religious houses: they fell the same day
to their work: and within two days had quite destroyed and Knox. p. 263
rased in that town, the houses of the Black Friars, of the Gray Friars, and
Charterhouse Moonkes, down to the ground. And so they Thynne page 366.
Buchanan.
proceeded, breaking down images and altars, in Fife, Angus, Meruis, and other
parts adjoining.

This course being known, and thereupon the said Queen threatening to
destroy Saint Iohnstowne, they Knox p. 265
writ unto her, affirming that except she stayed from that cruelty, they
should be compelled to take the sword of just defense, and protested, that,
without the Reformation, which they desired, they would never be subject to
any mortal man. Then they Knox p. 268
writ to all their brethren, to repair unto them: likewise to the Nobility,
upon pain of Knox p. 272
Excommunication, to join with them: saying, that it was their duty to bridle
the fury and rage of wicked men, were it of Princes, or Emperors, Knox page
269.

Upon these letters, diverse Knox p. 274
repaired to Saint Iohnstowne, from sundry places: in so much as when Lion
Herault in his coat armor, commanded all men, under pain of Treason, to
return to their houses, by public sound of Trumpet, in Glasco; never a man
obeyed that charge, but went forward to their associat^. They Knox p. 27^
writ in like manner to the Bishops and Clergy, that except they desisted
from dealing against them, they would with all force and power, execute just
vengeance and punishment upon them: and that they would begin that same war,
which God commanded Israel, to execute, against the Cananites.

This Knox p. 276
manner of proceeding, they termed to be, the resisting of the enemy. After
(upon conditions with the Queen) this great assembly at Saiut Iohnstowne,
departed thence. But before the seuering of themselves, they entered into a Knox
p. 283
league by Oath, that if any one member of their congregation, should be
troubled, they should all concur, assist, and conuene again together, for
the defense of the same.

Presently after (upon a new quarrel against the Queens dealing) an other
concourse was made of these reformers* at Saint Knox p. 288
Androes: where, by M Knox persuasions in his Sermon, they made the like
havoc, that was before at Saint Iohnstowne, and did cast down, spoil, and
destroy, both the houses of the Friars, and the Abbayes in that town. So dealt
they also within a very short time, with the Abbay of Knox page 298. 299.
Thynne, 367
Scone, the Friars at Striueling, at Lithquo, and at Edinburgh, the Queen Knox
p. 300
being fled thence for fear. They kept the field Knox p. 306
two months, and took away to themselves the Knox p. 308
coining Irons, (being as the Queen alleged, a portion of the patrimony of
the crown.) and Knox p. 308
justified the same. They Knox p. 317.
entered into a League, that though the Queen sent for them, they would never
come to her after that time: without the consent of their company.

After, the Knox p. 330
Queen Regent made a Proclamation of her desire of peace, and that the state
of the Realm, might at the last be at quiet: but they Knox p. 333.
confuted it: and did animate those of their faction (with all their might) to
be always ready, and to stand upon their guard. They gave the Queen the Knox
p. 362
lie diverse times, and used her with most despightfull speeches. And at the
length they came to that boldness, as that they termed the Queens part Knox p.
364
a faction: and renouncing their obedience unto her, protested, that whosoever
should take her part, should be punished as Traitors, when so ever God should
put the sword of Justice, into their hands.

Within a while Knox p. 372
after, they consulted with their Ministers, especially M. Wilcocke, and M.
Knox, for the deposing of the Queen Regent, from her government: who assuring
the rest, that it was lawful for them so to do, process was made, sentence
was given, and she was Knox p. 378
deprived from all her regiment, by a formal act, which is set down in the
same story, penned by Knox, and in some part printed after in England.

Not long after this: the Queen Regent dies. And then they had a Parliament
by the consent of the french King, and their Queen his wife. In that Knox p.
468
Parliament, held Anno, 1560. they reformed Religion, and set out a Confession
of the Christian faith: but the said King and Knox p. 500
Queen denied, to confirm, or to ratify the acts thereof, when they were
moved thereunto. Which thing, (said the confederates, upon intelligence given
them) we little regarded: or yet do regard: for all that we did, was rather
to show our duetifull obedience, then to beg of them any strength to our
Religion. And whereas it was objected, that it could not be a lawful
Parliament, where there was neither Scepter, Crown, nor Sword borne: they
made light of it: Knox p. 50^
saying, that those were rather, but pompeous and glorious vain ceremonies,
then any substantial points, of necessity required to a lawful Parliament.
I might proceed much further, in the ripping up of these and such like
practices, for reformation of Religion. But because some peradventure, will
labor to excuse these manner of proceedings, and to color the same, with some
pretense of zeal, and great desire they had, to be delivered from Popish
Idolatry and Superstition: I have rather thought it convenient to let you
understand, how far they are, from making any such pretenses in their own
behalf, and with what new Diuinity-positions, M. Knox and M. Buchanan have
amplified the Geneua resolution (before mentioned,) to the justification not
only of all their said attempts and actions, but of many other of the like
nature, which (since those times) have been there also practiced.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Geneuian Doctrine, or principle for Reformation, has been amplified,
by certain pretended Reformers in Scotland.
REformation Knox p. 216 Knox appel. fol. 28.
of Religion, does belong to more, then the Clergy and the King.

Noble men Knox app. 25
ought to reform Religion, if the King will not.

Reformation Knox to the Comminalty s. 49. 50
of Religion, belongs to the Comminaltie.

The Comminaltie, ibid. fol. 47
concurring with the Nobility, may compel the Bishops to cease from their
tirrannie.

The ibid. fol. 55
Comminaltie by their power, may bridle the cruel beasts (the Priests.)

The ibid. fol. 55
Comminaltie, may lawfully require of their King, to have true Preachers: and
if he be negligent, they justly may themselves provide them, maintain them,
defend them, against all that do persecute them, and may detain the profits
of the Church livings, from the other sort.

God has Knox histo. page 343.
appointed the Nobility, to bridle the inordinate appetites of Princes, and in
so doing, they cannot be accused, as resisters of authority.

It is their Knox appel, fol. 33.
duty, to repress the rage and insolency of Princes. The Knox appel. fo. 28.
30, etc.
Nobility and Comminaltie, ought to reform Religion, and in that case* may
remove from honors, and may punish such, as God has condemned, Deu. 12. ( he
means Idolaters, etc.) of what estate, condition, or honor soever.

The Knox appel. fol. 30
punishment of such crimes, as touch the Majesty of God, does not appertain
to Kings and chief rulers only, but also to the whole body of the people,
and to every member of the same, as occasion, vocation, and ability shall
serve, to revenge the injury done against God.

The people Knox appel. fol 35.
are bound by oath to God, to revenge (to the utmost of their power) the
injury, done against his Majesty,

The cruel murdering of the Archbishop of Saint Androwes, in his
bedchamber, 1545. by three private gentlemen, because (as they told him,) he
had been, and so remained an obstinate enemy to the Gospel, History of the
Church of Scotl. pa. 187.
is sought to be justified lately in print, to be a godly act: and
encouragement is given for others, in the like case to commit the like outrage.

Princes, for Knox histor. page 372.
just causes may be deposed.

It is not knox to England and Scot. fol. 77.
birthright only, nor propinquity of blood, that makes a King, lawfully to
reign above a people, professing Christ Jesus.

If Princes knox ibid* folio 78.
be tyrants, against God and his truth, their subjects are freed from their
oaths of obedience.

Populus rege Buch. de iure regni page. 61.
est praestantior and melior: the people are better then the King, and of
greater authority.

Populo Ibid page 13.
ius est, vt imperium cui velit deferat: the people have right, to bestow the
Crown at their pleasure.

Penes ibid page 25
populum est, vt leges ferat: sunt reges veluti tabulariorum custodes. The
making of laws, does belong to the people: and Kings are but as the Masters of
the Rolls.

The people, ibid page 58.
have the same power, over the King: that the King has over any one person.

It were ibid page 40.
good, that rewards were appointed by the people, for such as should kill
tyrants: as commonly there is, for those, qui lupos aut vrsos occiderunt, aut
catulos eorum deprehenderunt: that have killed either wolves or bears, or
taken their whelps.

The ibid page 62.
people may arraigne their Prince.

The ibid page 70
Ministers may excommunicate him.

He, that ibid page 70
by excommunication, is cast into hell* is not worthy to enjoy any life upon
earth.

And whereas there are sufficient, and sound objections, made, by such as have
truly reproved these dangerous assertions: Behold I pray you, their answers,
worthy to be known and remembered, to the everlasting discredit of the authors,
framers, and partakers with them.

CHAP. V.
The objections against the doctrine, reported of in the former chapter, with
the Consistorian answers unto them.
Objection. Custom, Buc. de iur. egni* page 49.
is against such dealing with Princes.

Answer. There is nothing more dangerous to be followed (publica via) then
custom.

Ob. We must Knox appe. fol. 26.
obey Kings, be they good or bad.

Ans. It is blasphemy to say so.

Ob. Jeremy Buch. de iure regni. page 53.
commanded obedience to Nabuchodonozer.

Ans. The example is but singular.

Ob. God places Ibid. page 57
tyrants sometimes for the punishment of his people.

Ans. So does he private men sometimes to kill them.

Ob. The ibid. page 57
Jews dealt not so with their Kings.

Ans. Their Kings were not first elected by the people; and therefore they
might not: but ours have nothing but from the people.

Ob. Show an ibid. page 57
example out of the Scriptures, that subjects may use their governors in this
sort.

Ans. The argument is not good: it cannot be showed in the Scriptures,
therefore it is unlawful. Possum apud multas nationes, plurimas and
saluberrimas recensere leges, quarum in sacris litteris nullum est exemplum. I
can show sundry good and wholesome laws, in diverse countries, of the which
laws there is no example in the Scriptures.

Ob. Saint Paul ibid page 50
does command us to pray for Princes. 1. Tim. 2.

Ans. We may punish thieves, and yet we ought to pray for them.

Ob. Saint Paul ibid p. 50. 55
does command us to be subject and obedient to Princes. Tit. 3.

Ans. Paul writ this in the infancy of the Church. There were but few
Christians then, and not many of them rich, or of ability, so as they were not
ripe for such a purpose.

As if Ibid. page 56
a man should write to such Christians as are under the Turk, in substance
poor, in courage feeble, in strength unarmed, in number few, Note this
Divinity
and generally subject to all kind of injuries: would he not write as Paul
did? So as the Apostle, did respect the men he writ unto: and his words are
not to be extended, to the body or people of a common wealth, or whole City.

For imagine ( says ibi. p. 56. 57
he) that Paul were now alive, where both the King and people do profess
Christianity, and that there were such Kings, as would have their becks to
stand for laws: as cared neither for God nor man: as bestowed the Church
revenues scurris and balatronibus upon iesters and rascals, and such as gibed
at those that did embrace the more sincere Religion: what would he write of
such to the Church? Surely except he would dissent from himself, he would say,
that he accounted no such for Magistrates: he would forbid all men for
speaking unto them, and from keeping them company: he would leave them to
their subjects to be punished neither would he blame them, if they accounted no
longer such for their Kings, as by the law of God, they could have no society
withal. And thus far the answearer.

There are diverse other objections against those reformers: which receive
almost as desperate answers. But I will not at this time trouble you with them,
especially if you will give me leave to advertise you, that this new Divinity
of dealing thus with Princes, is not only held by Knox and Buchanan, but
generally (for ought I can learn) by most of the Consistorians of chief name
beyond the Seas, who (being of the Geneua humor) do endeavor by most unjust
and disloyal means, to subject to their forged presbyteries, the scepters and
swords of Kings and Princes: as Calvin, Beza, Hotoman, Vrsinus, (as he comes
out from Newstadt). Vindiciae contra tyrannos, Eusebius Philadelphus, etc. For
the further fruit of which Consistorian Divinity, (besides that which is said
by some of the Ministers of Scotland) I refer you to the consideration of
such stirs, as have happened of late years, in some other countries. And thus
far concerning the justification, which is made of the Scottish reformation.
Now I will lead you back again, where I left: vz. to certain of the
Ministers further proceedings there; upon these aforesaid maine grounds and
principles.

CHAP. VI.
The proceedinges of certain Scottish Ministers, according to the grounds
mentioned in the two last chapters, for setting up of the Consistorian
Discipline, and of their urging of our English Disciplinaries, to follow their
steps.
THe Parliament Knox hist. page 502.
of Scotland before mentioned Chap. 3. of An. 1560. being dissolved, there was
then a book of Discipline, or new kingdom of Christ (by their several
presbyteries) drawn and compiled after the Geneua fashion, by M. Knox and
others. Which book, upon the offering of it to their associates and favorites,
to be allowed, received, and publicly practiced, was by them rejected, and
termed to be in truth, but a devout imagination. Whereupon now rises, an
occasion of a new history, how (after they had obtained reformation of
religion, as touching the true preaching of the word, and administration of
the Sacraments) they also dealt and prevailed in the end, for the establishing
of their Discipline and Consistoriall government.

It Knox hist page 468.
appears, that in the foresaid spoils of Abbayes, Fryeries, and Cathedral
Churches, etc. every man almost did seek his private commodity. Which being
espied before by the said Ministers, they misliked it: (as finding the pray
taken out of their teeth:) but yet they were gone so far belike, as that there
was no remedy. They told them of it in their sermons in some sort then, as it
should appear. Marry now, when they came to the end of their travail, the
hope of their glory, the erecting of their government, and their reign over
all, and do find themselves crossed therein* blame them not, though they were
not a little angry. Then Knox hist. page ^03.
they gave it out against their own favorers before, that some were
licentious: some had greedily griped the possessions of the Church: others
thought they would not lack their part of Christ's coat, yea, and that before
that ever he was hanged.

Of a Noble man, Ibidem.
that refused to subscribe to their Discipline, (as they call it) they writ
thus. He had a very evil woman to his wife: if the poor, the schools, and
the ministry of the Church, had their own, his Kitchen would lack two parts
and more* of that, which he unjustly now possesses. And generally to the like
effect: there were none within this Realm, more unmerciful to the poor
Ministers, then were they, which had greatest rents of the Church. But in that
we have perceived the old proverb to be true: nothing can suffice a wretch.
And again, the belly, has no ears. They In the conclusion of their book of
Discipline.
threatened the greatest men of the land, with Gods heavy punishments, if they
should reject that Discipline, ascribing it to their blind affection, to their
respect of carnal friends, to their corrupt judgment, and to their former
iniquities, and present ingratitude. But Knox histo. page 504.
(notwithstanding, that some refused to subscribe to this book, which made the
Ministers so angry:) yet by sundry cunning devises, raylings, threatenings, etc.
many yielded thereunto, and did promise, thereby to set the same forward, to
the uttermost of their powers.

This subscription thus in sort obtained, they began to put the same in
practice. They Declaration B. 1. 2.
appointed to have their assemblies both particular and general. They Knox
histo. page 523.
exercised jurisdictions, and appointed one Saunderson to be carted for
adultery: but he was rescued. A great ibid. pa. 527
uproar arising in Edinburgh, about the making of a Robinhood, they of the
Consistory did excommunicate the whole multitude. The Bishops ibid. pa 531.
seeking to encounter and repress them in their practices, they professed that
they would not suffer their pride and Idolatry. They ibid. pa. 334
caused diverse places (as they termed them) of superstition, to be burnt: I
think they mean some Bishops houses) as Knox Just. 534.
Palsay, the Bishop also narrowly escaping them.

The Bishops having embraced the Gospel, it was at first agreed even by the
brethren, with the consent of the Regent, that the Bishops estate should be
Declaration B. 2.
maintained and authorized. This endured for sundry years: but then there was
no remedy, the calling it self of Bishops was at last become Antichristian,
and down they must of necessity. Whereupon ibid B. 2.
they commanded the Bishops (by their own authority) to leave their Offices
and their Jurisdictions.

They ibid. B. 2.
decreed in their assemblies, that Bishops should have no voices in
Parliament: and that done, they desired of the King, that such Commissioners
(as they should send to the Parliament and Council) might from thence forth
be authorized in the Bishops places, for the estate. They also directed their
Commissioners to the Kings Majesty: commanding him and the Council, under
pain of the censures of the Church (meaning excommunication) to appoint no
Bishops in time to come, because they (the brethren) had concluded, that state
to be unlawful.

Hereof as it seems they writ to Geneua, their new Rome, or Metropolitan
City. From whence they were greatly animated, and earnestly persuaded, to
continue in that course. Beza Epistola 79.
the Consistorian Patriarche, assures them that they had done well, and
moves them, ne vnquam illam pestem admittant, quamuis vnitatis retinendae
specie blandiatur: that they would never admit again that plague, (meaning the
calling of Bishops) although it might allure them, with color of keeping
unity.

After they had discharged the Bishops, (as it has been noted) they agreed
amongst themselves, to have their Declaration B. 3.
Superintendents. But that devise continued not long: for in the end it was
determined, that needs all Ministers of the word, must be equal. And then
(especially) their Presbyteries began to flourish. They took upon Declaration
B. 1.
them (with their adherents) to usurp the whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
They altered the laws after their own appetite. They assembled Act of
Parliament ca. 4.
the Kings subjects, and enjoined Ecclesiastical pains unto them. They made
Decrees, and put the same in execution. They used Ibid. cap. 2.
very traiterous, seditious, and contumelious words, in the pulpits, schools,
and otherwise, to the disdain and reproach of the King, and being called to
answer the same, they utterly disclaimed the Kings authority: saying, he
Decl, A. 3.
was an incompetent Judge, and that matters of the Pulpit ought to be exempted
from the judgment and correction of Princes. They Decl. B. 3.
prescribed laws to the King and State. They appointed Decl. B. 3.
Fasts throughout the whole Realm, especially when some of their faction were
^o move any great enterprise.

With these manner of proceedings, the King there, and the State, finding great
cause of just coffeehouse and danger: after diverse consultations and good
deliberation, order was taken about the year, 1582. for the checking and
redressing of them. His Majesty began to take upon him his lawful authority,
belonging to all Christian Princes, in causes Ecclesiastical. Whereupon he
caused the foresaid courses, held by the Ministers, to be examined and looked
into. And they were found to be such, as that some of them were removed from
their charges, Declaration 1582.
some were imprisoned, and some indighted. Commandment was also given, that
they should not proceed, in the execution of their Ecclesiastical censures,
as they had done. A Proclamation was made in diverse of the chiefest places in
the Realm, for discharging the Ministers of their foresaid conuentions and
assemblies, under pain, to be punished as Rebels. They were published in that
Proclamation, to be unnatural subjects, seditious persons, troublesome and
unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies to the King, and the Commonwealth
of their native country: and were charged to desist from preaching, in such
sort as they did, amongst other matters against the authority in Church
causes, against the calling of Bishops, and for the maintenance of their former
proceedings.

But the issue of the Kings good intention to have reformed these disorders,
was this: In August 1582. his Highness being drawn unto a certain Noble man's
house to be feasted in Rutheuen: there he was surprised and restrained. Act of
Parliament* 1584. cap. 7.
Which attempt was qualified and termed (in a Declaration set out, 1582. to
justify the same) to be only a repair of the Kings faithful subjects, to
his Highness presence, and to remain with him, Declara. 1582
for resisting of the present dangers appearing to Gods true religion, etc. and
for the removing from his Majesty, the chief authors thereof.

After a time, the King delivered himself out of their hands, that so had
restrained him: and by the advice of his three estates assembled in Council,
(notwithstanding the said qualification or pretense of repair) the action in
it self was judged and published in December, Act of Parl. 1584. cap. 7.
1583. to be Crimen lesae Maiestatis, the Offense of Treason: and some were
executed for it, others fled, and diverse of the Ministers, that had bin dealers
in that matter, pretending they were persecuted, escaped into England.

With this his Majesty's course for Reformation, the Disciplinarian faction was
greatly displeased: and did proceed in their Consistorian humor accordingly.
In an assembly of Ministers and Elders (forsooth) at Edinburgh, shortly after,
the State of the Realm was stoutly encountered. For although the King, Declar.
1582
with the advice of his estates, had resolved the said fact of surprising his
Majesty's person, to be treasonable, yet the brethren did not only authorize
and avow the same, but also, esteeming their own judgments, to be the
sovereign judgment of the Realm, did ordain all them to be excommunicated,
that would not subscribe unto that their judgment.

About the same time, Act of Parl. 1584. cap. 7.
or not long after, vz. in April, 1583. there was another most treasonable
conspiracy and rebellion attempted at Sterling, and intended to have been
further executed and prosecuted against his Highness person: and all under
pretense of Religion, and chiefly (in show) for the Consistorian or
Presbyteriall soueraignetie.

With these and many more such undutiful insolences, the King and State
there, being greatly moved: a Parliament was called, and held in May, 1584.
wherein order was taken, for a general Reformation in causes Ecclesiastical,
throughout the whole Church of Scotland.

The Kings Act of Parl. cap. 2.
lawful authority in causes Ecclesiastical, so often before impugned, was
approved and confirmed; and it was made treason, for any man to refuse to
answer before the King, though it were concerning any matter, which was
Ecclesiastical.

The third ibid. cap. 20
estate of Parliament, (that is, the Bishops) was restored to the ancient
dignity: it was ibid. cap. 3.
made treason, for any man after that time to procure the innovation or
diminution of the power and authority of any of the three estates.

The foresaid ibid cap. 4.
judgments, Senates, and Presbyteriall jurisdictions were discharged: and it
was enacted in these words: that after that time none should presume, or take
upon them to conuocate, conuene, or assemble themselves together, for holding
of Counsels, conuentions, or assemblies, to treat, consult, or determine in
any matter of estate, civil or Ecclesiastical, (excepting the ordinary
judgments:) without the Kings especial commandment.

It was ibid cap. 7.
further then ordained, that none of his Highness subjects, in time coming,
should presume to take upon them by word or writing, to justify the most
treasonable attempt at Ruthuen, or to keep in Register or store, any books
approouing the same in any sort.

An Act ibid. cap. 8.
was also made, for the calling in of Buchanans Chronicle, and his book de
iure regni apud Scotos.

Lastly (says the Act ibid. cap. 8.
of Parliament it self.) Forasmuch as through the wicked, licentious, public,
and private speeches, and untrue calumnies of diverse his Highness subjects, to
the disdain, contempt, and reproach of his Majesty, his Council, and
proceedinges, stirring up his Highness subjects thereby, to misliking,
sedition, unquietness, to cast off their due obedience to his Majesty.
Therefore it is ordained, that none of his subjects shall presume, or take upon
them, privately or publikelie, in sermons, declamations, or familiar
conferences, to utter any false, slanderous, or untrue speeches, to the
disdain, reproach, and contempt of his Majesty, his Council, and
proceedings, or to meddle in the affairs of his Highness under pain, etc.

And thus you have seen some part of the practice of the Geneua resolution in
Scotland, for their book of Discipline; and reformation in Religion. But yet I
must needs draw you on a little further.

Presently, after that the said Parliament was ended, notwithstanding the
kings majesty, had in the same cap. 1. of that Parliament, etc.
most royally and religiously confirmed with great sincerity the articles of
true Religion, for preaching the word, and administration of the sacraments
accordingly, and had likewise united to his Crown, the supreme authority in
all causes within his Realm, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: yet (because
their Presbyterial sovereignty was thereby abridged) diverse very spiteful,
disloyal, and slanderous speeches were cast abroad, by them and their
associates, against his Highness.

For they Declar. A. 2.
gave out, as though the King had been declined to Popery, and had made Acts
to derogate the free passage of the Gospel: that he endeavored Thinnes addition
to Hollinshed. pa. 446. D. A.
to extinguish the light of the Gospel: that there was left nothing of the
whole ancient form of justice and policy in the spiritual state, but a
naked shadow, with many other the like reproachful and calumnious reports,
which they spread abroad in their own Country.

Diverse of Archbishop of Saint. Androwes Letter, and of other Preachers.
the chief Ministers of that faction likewise that were fled out of Scotland
into England, for fear of punishment, in respect of many their great and
heinous offenses, pretended (as it has been noted) that they fledd hither,
because they were persecuted at home for their consciences, and could not be
suffered to preach the Gospel. One M. Hutchinsons Letter and as he is ready
to be deposed.
Dauison (a Scottish Minister) so rayled against the King of Scots in the
pulpit, at the parish Church of the old Jury in London, that upon complaint
made thereof, by the Lord Ambassador of Scotland, direction was given to the
Lord Bishop of London, for the silencing of all the Scottish Ministers in the
City.

And this disloyal and slanderous course was held, both in Scotland and
England, so far as they Thinnes addition, page. 446.
durst, from May, until November following.

At what time, this stratagem here ensuing was wroght (as I am persuaded) by
the Consistorians instigation. The King ibid Thinn.
of Scotland, being upon occasion of a contract, nere Striueling: heard of
certain enemies (as he then accounted them) coming toward him. Whereupon
his Majesty raising such power as he could, conuayed himself to Striueling.
Where before he looked for them, ten thousand men presented themselves in
arms. They pitched their Tents before the town the first of November, and
there made a Proclamation in their own names, commanding all the Kings
subjects to assist them. Many pretenses The Proclamation is there also set
down.
are alleged of that their attempt. And these namely: that whereas there had
been Acts and Proclamations a little before published against the Ministry
and Clergy, inhibiting their Presbyteries, assemblies and other exercises,
privileges, and immunities: and that the most learned and honest were
compelled, for safety of their lives and consciences, to abandon their
Country, etc. Now the afflicted Church might be comforted, and all the said
Acts lately made in prejudice of the same, might be solemnly cancelled, and
for ever adnulled. This Proclamation thus known, the King fortified the town
as he could: but to no purpose. For within two hours assault it was won. The
King thereupon, was enforced to fly unto the Castle. The Conquerours of the
town, placed their ensigns before the blockehouse of the Castle, and so
ordered the matter, that there was no way for any in the Castle to escape their
hands.

Whereupon (a parley being concluded) the King desired by his Commissioners
three petitions: The first, That his life, honor, and estate might be
preserved. The second, That the lives of certain of his friends with him might
not be touched. The third, That all things might be transacted peaceably. The
other side, by their Commissioners likewise desired other three petitions: The
first, That the King would allow of their intention, and subscribe their
Proclamation, until further order were established by the estates, etc. and
that he would deliver unto them, all the strong Holds in the land. The second,
That the disquieters of the Commonwealth might be delivered unto them and
abide their due trial by Law. The third. That the old guard might be removed,
and another placed.

Upon mutual relation from the Commissioners on both sides, the parties that
were assembled in arms, did yield unto the first and third of the Kings
petitions: and the King granting to all theirs, as there was no remedy,
committed himself into their hands, and had a new guard immediately appointed
to attend him.

And thus the Presbyteries of Scotland by the Kings subscribing to the foresaid
Proclamation, This appears by James Gibsons conference with the King: penned
by himself, and delivered abroad in many Copies.
recovered again a great part of their strength. But not all (as it seems)
upon the sudden: which was the occasion of a new stir. For presently after
the said Noble victory, the Scottish Ministers that were in England, (having
al their former disloyalties upon composition remitted:) made their repair
without delay into Scotland: where finding not such readiness as they
expected, for a more authentical repealing of the statutes made in the
foresaid Parliament, 1584. they began (notwithstanding the Kings late goodness
toward them,) to exclaim in their Pulpits, with most proud and bitter
Inuectiues against him.

One James Gibson, compared his Majesty publicly in his preachings, unto
Jeroboam, termed him a persecutor, and threatened him, that if he took that
course, he should be the last of his race.

And being called for such his disloyal speeches, Gibson has penned this
matter as Co^sistorianly, as Catiline himself could have done it.
before the King and Council, the xxj. of December, 1585. he very boldly
justified the same: saying to his Highness, As long as you maintain these
cursed Acts of 1584. the tyranny of Bishops, etc. Ye are a Persecutor. And
again, As Jeroboam for the leading of the people of Israel from the laws of
the house of Judah, and from the true worshipping of God, to serve Idolatry,
was rooted out, he and all his posterity: so should the King) if he continued
in that cursed course, maintaining those wicked Acts against God) be rooted
out, and conclude that race, etc.

What else has fallen out since that time, by reason of the raines, which now
(as it has been noted) these zealous brethren have gotten to themselves, and
how moderately and duetifully they do proceed, in the practice of their
Presbyteries, and Consistorian Kingdoms: the articles, which the King not long
since offered unto the Ministers, to have been subscribed unto by them, do
sufficiently declare and make manifest. The coppie of these articles, was
delivered abroad by some of her Majesty's privy Counsel.
Ex malis moribus nascuntur bonae leges: Out of ill manners spring good and
wholesome laws. The chief and especial points of the said articles are
these: that all Preachers there, should yield their obedience to the Kings
Majesty: that they should not pretend any Privilege in their allegiance: that
they should not meddle in matters of State: that they should not publicly
revile his Majesty: that they should not draw the people from their due
obedience to the King: and that when they are accused, upon their facts or
speeches, or for refusing to do things, etc. they should not allege the
inspiration of the holy spirit, nor serve themselves with color of conscience
but confess their offenses as men, and to crave pardon as subjects, etc.

It is great pity, that so worthy a Christian King, should be driven to
require such a subscription in his own kingdom, especially of those men, that
should be lights to the rest, and the chief examples of all duetifull
obedience: It is more to be pitied, that (for ought I can learn) his Majesty
cannot as yet obtain so much at their hands. But most of all it is to be
lamented, that no man can guess (for ought I know) how far this Gangrene will
spread it self.

At the first, they found but faults against the Bishops, but after they
ouerthrewe them. The Anabaptists in Germany began with the Bishops and Clergy,
Bullinger.
but they ended with the civil Magistrate. Consider of Buchanans dealing,
whether he makes not the like assault against Princes, that his companions did
against Bishops; as in deriding their titles, misliking their pomp, and in
glancing at their revenues. He terms Epistle to the king of Scots before his
book de iure regni etc
the honorable phrases of Majesty, Highness, and Lordship, solaecismos and
barbarismos aulicos, that is, unlawful and corrupt kinds of speech, which are
used in Court, and do proceed (as he says) from flattery. He gibeth De iure
regni pa. 17.
at the state which Princes take upon them, when they show themselves to the
people, comparing them to Childrens puppets, which are garishly attyred.

After Ibid. pa. 34.
also, he insinuates that a good Prince should appear and come abroad, only
defended with his innocence, non superbo spiculatorum and (...) caetu,
sericatisque nebulonibus stipatus: not with a proud company of guarders, and of
pensioners, and of silken knaves. He would have Kings to content themselves
with less revenues and service, commending the Discipline of Laconia, where it
was strange to have one man pull off an other man's sockes, at his going to
bed: and likewise the example of Pelagius, that first discomfited the
Saracens in Spain: in that he had his house, not built after the fashion now a
days, with many stately rooms of honor, but was contented with one place for
himself, his fire, his friends, and his cattle, (after the Irish fashion.)

But to let pass these contempts and points of Anabaptisme: one thing more is
likewise to be considered in these Scottish reforming ministers, which they
have sucked from their Mother-City Geneua. They cannot be content, to have
raised up sedition and troubles at home, to have slandred both far and nere,
the most Godly reformation of Religion, which their King had made there, and to
erect (you have seen how) in place thereof a mere counterfeit plot of a new
Popish tyranny, such a one as has already quite ouerthrown the ancient estate
of that Church, and wroght more mischief in that Country in thirty years,
then the Pope of Rome had done before (as I think) in five hundred: But they
presume also, much further then becomes them, to cast some of their
contentious and disloyal seeds into England.

Vulpecula Melancton.
(cauda amissa) reliquis vulpibus callide persuasit vt similiter and ipsae
caudas refecarent, ne sola turpis and deformis in suo genere videretur. The Fox
(having lost her tail) craftily persuaded the other Foxes, that they would
likewise cut off their tails, least she herself alone, should seem the foul
and deformed beast of all that kind. And hence it comes (as I take it) that
to bring the flourishing estate of our Church in England into the same misery,
that theirs is brought into, they rail, devise, and clap their hands, to set
us here together by the ears.

Some of them say, that Dauison in the name of the rest, in a book of his
lately published. Page. 2.
our Church is still under the bondage of an Antichristian government: that
our Bishops are a hurtful relic of Romish confusion: that page 29.
they thrust with side and shoulder to make havoc of the Church, by a
disguised persecution, and that they do tyrannize above their brethren with
violence page 28.
and cruelty.

They use these words of her excellent Majesty. Alack good page 28.
Princess, the true report of things comes seldom to her ears. And do
very grossly insinuate, nay indeed plainly affirm, that there are in Court
some crafty page 12.
miscreants, which do abuse her Majesty, whom they resemble to Ioab, Iesabell,
Haman and Gehasi.

They do page 3.
justify the proceedings of our disturbers here, and animating page 21.
them to go forward, as they have begun, do tell them, that both their causes
(vz. their own in Scotland, and of our factions in England) are most nerely
page 20.
linked together: and do page 29.
promise, that they will not cease to commend their troubled state unto God, in
their private and public prayers. They page 20.
compare our hindering in England of the pretended Discipline, unto the
hinderance, which Gods enemies made, unto the building of Jerusalem. They seek
under hand page 21.
to steal away the hearts of her Majesty's subjects, especially of those that
have been, and still are seduced, by our Consistorian Schismatikes: by putting
them in hope of one Darius, that after a time shall give full authority for the
said building of Jerusalem. Which manner of dealing, there is no Darius
living, could take in good part, if the like practices were used by others
amongst his people.

GOD of his infinite mercy, grant unto her Majesty, a long, a prosperous, and
a happy reign over us: and so knit the hearts of all true English men, unto
their Queen of Saba, their Hester, and their most royal Elizabeth, that
without the expectation of any Darius whosoever, they may ever continue her
most loyal, faithful, and obedient subjects, rather wishing in their souls,
that the world with her Majesty should end their days together, then once to
take joy, by the least imagination of any future change. Amen.

And thus much of the manner and ways used by certain Scottish Ministers, for
Reformation and Discipline. Which points or Consistorian proceedinges, I have
not touched (as God knows) with any mind or intent, to dishonor the state
of that Country. Besides, much may well be said (I assure my self) in excuse
of such of the laity; as joined in the premises. For I find they were led
with a very great zeal. They had been so long imprisoned in the darkness of
Popery, that when the Gospel appeared unto them, it so dazeled their eyes, as
that for very gladness they considered not well, what they did, so they might
enjoy it. Their goods, their lands, their wives and their children, nay their
lives (in respect thereof) were not greatly dear unto them.

Moreover it is manifest, how long they were exercised with great fear and
many perplexities, what entertainment and continuance the Gospel should find
amongst them. In which case every man may easily conjecture, how easy a matter
it was for them, to be miscarried by their teachers and Preachers: persuading
them, that by Gods commandment they were bound to undertake that course, and
withal not omitting great threats of excommunication and damnation, if they
refused so to do. They found their said Ministers doctrine very good and
sound, in the chief points of salvation, and who would then have suspected
them in matters of less importance?

So as whatsoever was done amiss by them, as touching their proceedings
mentioned, I do (wholly in a manner) ascribe it to their Ministers of the
Geneua learning. Unto whom also it ought of right to be imputed, that I or any
other, either have, or hereafter shall have, any occasion at all so much as
once to make mention of the least thing, that might be any ways offensive to
the meanest of that nation.

For what had I, or any other private man in England, to do with their
matters, otherwise then to have prayed for them: had their said Ministers, but
only taken upon them to have justified their said proceedinges, by their
own Laws, customs, and privileges* and could have contented themselves to
have gone no further? Marry now that the chiefest of them, Buchanan. The
history of the church of Scotland. Knox.
for the excusing of themselves, and that they might show, whose scholars they
are, have presumed to publish (and that in print) such strange and seditious
doctrine, as does tend to the like disturbance, and indeed to the utter
overthrow of the freest and most absolute Monarchies, that are or can be in
Christendom, not omitting withal, to solicit and encourage our pretended
reformers in England, to proceed as they have begun, in following their steps,
contrary (I am sure) both to the word of God, and to all the laws and customs
of this Realm: I am in very good hope, that there is no man of any sound
judgment, who will be offended with me, in that to disclose, and thereby to
prevent such mischiefs, as might otherwise ensue with us, I have been bold
to lay down (but yet out of their printed books) some of the proceedinges of
the said Ministers of Scotland, which at this time our own Preachers in
England, of the Disciplinarian consort, (as now it follows to be showed)
do take upon them to imitate, and have already proceeded further in them,
then some of their favorers will acknowledge or (I think) do as yet suspect.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES and Practices.
CHAP. I.
The doctrine of certain English Ministers, which they learned at Geneua, and
published of purpose to have procured the like course for reformation in
England, to that which was in Scotland.
AS you have heard in the first Book, how M. Knox being at Geneua in Q.
Mary's time, labored and afterward proceeded to reform Religion in Scotland
by force and arms: so did sundry English men, that then lived there in like
sort, according to the Geneua resolution in that point, endeavor as much as lay
in them, to have kindled the like stirs at that time here in England. To
which especial end, they did write hither sundry letters and books, wholly of
this argument: vz. that the then Counselors; the Noble men; inferior
Magistrates; and (rather then fail) the very people; were bound before God to
overthrow the superstition and Idolatry that was then in the Land, and to
reform Religion, whether the Queen would or no: yea though it were by putting
her to death: Out of two of these English books, I have collected these
seditious and consistoriall propositions following.

All men, Goodman. Page 73.
counselors, noble men, inferior magistrates, and people are bound and
charged, to see the laws of God kept, and to suppress and resist Idolatry,
ibid. page 74.
by force. ibid. page 77.


If the magistrates shall refuse, ibid. page 196
to put massemongers and false preachers to death, the people (in seeing it
performed) do show that zeal of God, which was commended in Phinees,
destroying the adulterers, and in the Israelites against the Beniamites.

To teach, ibid. page 30.
that it was not lawful in any case to resist the superior powers, but rather
to submit our selves to punishment is a dangerous doctrine, taught by some, by
the permission of God for our sins.

It is not sufficient for subjects, ibid. page 63. 43. 59. 72.
not to obey wicked commandments of their Princes, but to withstand them also,
in doing the contrary, every man in his vocation and office.

Shieriffes, ibid. page 87. 88, 89. 90.
Iaylors, and other inferior officers, ought not only not to cast the saints
of God in prison (having commandment thereunto by the Prince) for fear of
loosing their offices: but to withstand evil, to support them, and to deliver
them, to the uttermost of their power.

If we see a sheep in danger to be devoured of a wolf, ibid. page 90.
we are bound to deliver it: even so to our power we are bound to put to our
hands, to deliver the children of God, when we see them pitiouslie in danger,
by Gods enemies.

It is the office of Counselors, ibid. page 34. page 35.
to bridle the affections of Princes and governors: Noblemen were first
ordained to bridle Princes. Noblemen have their honor of the people, to
revenge the injuries of their Kings, Obedience. page. 107.
and not for their lusty hawking, nimble dicing and carding, singing and
dancing, open bragging and swearing, false flearing and flattering, subtle
picking and stealing, cruel polling and pilling, etc.

The authority, Obedience* 25.
which Princes have, is given them from the people: Kings, princes, and
governors, have their authority of the people: and (upon occasion) the people
may take it away again, as men may revoke their proxies and letters of
Attorney. ibid. page 105.


Subjects do promise obedience, that the Magistrate might help them: Goodman,
page 190.
which if he do not, they are discharged of their obedience.

If Magistrates without fear transgress Gods laws themselves, and command
others to do the like; ibid. page 119. 139.
then have they lost that honor and obedience, which otherwise their subjects
did owe unto them: and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates, but be
examined, accused, condemned, and punished as private transgressors.

Judges ought by the law of God, Obedience, page 111.
to summon Princes before them, for their crimes: and to proceed against them,
as against all other offenders.

Evil Princes ought (by the law of God) to be deposed, Goodman, 144. 145.
and inferior magistrates ought chiefly to do it. Examples allowed of Kings
deposed Obedience, 110.
Edward 2, Richard 2. Christierne of Denmark, etc.

It is lawful to kill wicked kings and tyrants: Obedience, 99 103.
and both by Gods law and man's law, Queen Mary ought to have been put to
death; Goodman, page 99.
as being a tyrant, a monster, a cruel beast, etc. Examples. The subjects did
kill the Queens highness Athalia: Obedience, page 113.
Iehu, killed the Queens majesty Iesabell: Elias, being no magistrate,
killed the Queens majesty's chaplains, ibid. page 114.
Baals priests. These examples are left for our instruction. ibid. page 115.
Where this justice is not executed, the state is most corrupt.

When Magistrates do cease to do their duties, Goodman, page 185.
(in thus deposing or killing of Princes) the people are as it were without
officers: and then God gives the sword into their hands, and he himself is
become immediately their head: ibid. page 180
for to the multitude a portion of the sword of justice is committed: ibid.
page 184
from the which no person, ibid. page 185
King Queen, or Emperor (being an Idolater) is exempt: he must die the death.
The people in the 25. of Numbers, did hang up certain of their heads and
captains: which ought to be for ever a perpetual example of their duty, in
the like defection from God to hang up such rulers, as shall draw them from
him. If neither the inferior magistrates, Obedience, page 115
nor the greatest part of people will do their offices: (in punishing,
deposing, or killing of Princes) then the minister must excommunicate such a
King: Obedience, page 116.
any minister may do it against the greatest Prince. ibid. 18.
God will send to the rest of the people, (which are willing to do their duty,
Goodman, 199. 200. 201.
but are not able) some Moses or Othoniell. If they know any Jonathan, they
must go unto him to be their Captain: and he ought not to refuse them. By the
word of God (in such a defection) a private man (having some special inward
motion) may kill a tyrant: Obedience. page 110.
as Moses did the Egyptian: as Phinees did the lecherous: and Ahud did king
Eglon: or otherwise, a private man may do so, if he be commanded or permitted
by the commonwealth.

And unto some objections that be made to the contrary, these answers are
shaped.

Ob. Be subject to higher powers: Goodman, page 106.
the powers be ordained of God.

Ans. Wicked Kings are not Gods ordinance. Goodman, page 111.
Saint Paul speaks of lawful powers.

Ob. Servants must be obedient to their Masters, though they be froward.

Ans. Paul speaks of bondmen, Obedience, page 47.
not of subjects obedience.

Ob. Peter was commanded to put up his sword.

Ans. He was a minister, Goodman, 12^.
and no magistrate.

Ob. Christ could have called for twelve legions of Angels for his defense,
Goodman, 119. 120.
if it had been lawful to have used force, for the setting up of the Gospel.

Ans. Christ's kingdom was not of this world: he took upon him no temporal
sword: but that hinders not those that have it.

Ob. Jeremy was commanded to obey the king of Babel. Goodman, 125. 126.


Ans. The secret counsel of God was revealed to him to that effect. It is no
general rule.

Ob. David said, Goodman, 138. 139.
God forbid that I should touch the anointed of the Lord.

Ans. It was in his own private cause, and so unlawful.

Ob. Sir Thomas Wyat did, Goodman. 202. 205.
as you would have others to do, etc. but he had no good success.

Ans. The goodness of his cause is not to be measured by his success.

He was no traitor, Page 203.
his cause was Gods: and none, but papists and traitors, can justly accuse him
of treason.

The Counselors and all others, that would be accounted nobles (and took not
his part) are in very deed traitors to God and his people, Page 206. Page 207.
and to their country.

The author of the book of obedience (he should have said of rebellion) ends
his treatise, with signification, that the nobility of England, Page 137.
(he speaks of them that were in Queen Mary's days) are not to be trusted
either by their words, oaths, or handwritings, further then a man does see, and
hear them, and scarsely so far. And Goodman likewise, for his conclusion, is
most earnest with all english subjects, that they would put his doctrine in
practice, assuring them that in so doing, if they be cast in prison with
Joseph, Page 218. 219. 220. 221.
to wild beasts with Daniell, into the sea with Jonas, into the dungeon with
Jeremy, into the fiery furnace with Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, yet they
shall be comforted: whereas if they will not: in seeking to save their lives,
they shall loose them they shall be cast out of the favor of God, their
consciences shall be wounded with hell like torments, they shall despair and
seek to hang themselves with Judas, to murder themselves with Frauncis Spira;
drown themselves with Judge Hales, or else fall mad with Justice Morgan, at
Geneua.

This doctrine says Whittingham (afterward unworthily Deane of Durham) was
approved by the best learned in these parts, In his preface to Goodmans book.
meaning Calvin and the rest of the Geneuians. The Englishmen of name, there at
that time, besides Goodman and Whittingham, were (as I take it) Anthony Gilby,
Miles Couerdall, David Whitehead, and sundry others. Who liking the said
doctrine also exceedingly, were very earnest to have the same printed, for the
benefit (as they said) of their brethren in England. Whittingham made a
preface to Goodmans book: wherein he greatly commends this doctrine, and
writes thus, in the name (as it seems) of all his fellows there. We desire
that you (meaning all in England and elsewhere, that love to know the truth and
follow it) should be persuaded in this truth. Again, here thou do hear
the Eternal speaking by his minister, etc. quickly give ear and obey, etc. And
again, If thou wish for Christian liberty, come and see how it may easily be
had, etc. From Geneua.

Here it is very material further to be observed, that the rest of the learned
men, that fled in Queen Mary's time, as John Scory: William Barlow: Richard
Cox: Thomas Beacon: John Bale: John Parkhurst: Edmond Grindall: Edwine Sands:
Alexander Nowell: Robert Wisdom: John Jewel: and very many more, having no
great affection to Geneua, bestowed themselves in Germany, especially at
Zuricke, Basil, and Franckeford. These men maintained the reformation of the
Church of England in King Edwards time: they used in their holy assemblies, the
form of service, and order of ceremonies, which were then established: and
they utterly misliked, and condemned the foresaid propositions, as very
seditious and rebellious, according to the judgment of all the reformed
Churches, (for ought I can learn) both in Germany and elsewhere, besides
Geneua and her offspring.

Besides they of Franckeford, (as it appears) notwithstanding their grief,
that they were constrained to leave their country for their conscience: yet in
the midst of all their afflictions, they retained such duetifull hearts unto
Queen Mary, (imitating therein the Apostles and Disciples of their Master) as
that they could not endure to hear her so traduced into all hatred and
obloquy, as she was by the other sort. Knox hist. page 185.
Master Knox, coming upon occasion from Geneua to Franckeford, was by these
grave men, accused of Treason, (as he himself confesses) for matters that he
had published in print, against their Sovereign and the Emperor: and was feign
thereupon, for the saving of his life, to fly thence secretly back again to
Geneua.

Lastly, by means of their disliking of the said propositions, and their
further course held in the defense of the foresaid reformation in England,
against the other men's counterfeit presbyteries: these learned men at
Franckeford, could have small reputation with them of Geneua. Thus one of that
crew then, has written since of them. The English Church, Knox hist. page 201.
which was assembled at Geneua, was separated from that superstitious and
contentious company, that was at Franckford. And again, Ibid. page 185.
They were more given unto unprofitable ceremonies, then to sincere Religion.

These things I thought meet, for your advertisement, to set down, that the
propositions precedent might appear unto you, not to have proceeded from any
rash or light conceit in our English propounders, publishers, and maintainers
of them: but that they do contain their resolute judgment, agreeable to
those points of the Geneua resolution, mentioned before out of Knox and
Buchanan.

Whereby it is apparent, that if our said English Geneuians, had found as ready
assistance at that time in England, as Knox and his accomplices (about, or soon
after the same time) did in Scotland, they would not have failed, to have put
the said positions as well in practice here with us, as some Scottish
Ministers did in that Country. Which great mischief, and disloyal outrage, as
the state here, did then prouidently suppress and withstand: So her Excellent
Majesty, has since prevented, by abolishing of the Romish Religion, and the
restoring of the Gospel, which was the quarrel in those days pretended. So
as our English Reformers, having hitherto had no cause for this point to
imitate the foresaid proceedinges in Scotland, it remains, that I show unto
you, how far (as yet it is disclosed) and how directly they endeavor to follow
the said practices of the Scottish Ministers, for the erecting up in England of
the Geneua new Papacy.

CHAP. II.
Our English Disciplinarians, do imitate the Scottish, in their desire of the
Consistoriall government, saving that they are more bewitched with a kind of
dotage after it.
IN Scotland, notwithstanding that at the last the Ministers had obtained, in
some sort, the allowance of the confession of their faith, containing the
sum of that doctrine, which before they had so greatly desired: yet because
they wanted the Geneua discipline, wherein consisted their very great joy,
together with the hope of their future soueraignety, they were but a little
satisfied with all the rest. And even so, it has fallen out since in England,
saving (for ought I can read) that the said Scottish ministers were not then
come unto so great a dotage after this Discipline, as there now is grown
amongst us.

About some two or three and forty years agone, and after, Harmonia confess.
in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, the deuisers themselves of this new
platform, Call. Epist. etc.
were well content to accept of, and commend such Churches, as had abandoned
Popery, though they had withal embraced another kind of Discipline.

Then in disputation against the Papists and Anabaptists, Bertram pa. 15 Mornay
p. 37. Calvin instit. lib 4. Cap. 1. sect. 9.
there could be found in all France and Geneua, but two essential notes of
the Church: vz. the true preaching of the word, and the right administration of
the Sacraments.

Then upon Goodmans, Beza in colloquio Possiaceno. Convict. de statu. Gall.
pasto. fol. 122.
Whittinghams, and Gilbies return, (with the rest of their associates) from
Geneua into England: although it grieved them at the heart, that they might not
bear as great a sway here in their several consistories, as Calvin did at
Geneua, This appears by their letters, sermons, and by Gilbies most railing
Dialogue betwixt a lame soldier of Barwicke, and an English Captain.
and so not only repined and grudged at her Majesty's reformation of this
Church, but labored (as they might) to sow abroad in the land that seed,
which has brought forth a great part of all the disorders, troubles, and
disobediences, that since have ensued. Yet notwithstanding they meddle not much
in show, (for any thing I can hear of,) with matters of this Discipline, but
rather busied themselves, about the apparel of ministers, ceremonies
prescribed, and in picking of quarrels against the common Book.

Marry since that, Confess 5. and 7.
Master Beza devised a way, how to bring in the Geneua Discipline, to be a
third essential note of the Church: since, Master Cartwright has been at
Geneua, and upon his return did engage his credit to justify that platform,
to be a necessary form of Government, prescribed by Christ for all times and
places: since, Master Trauerse has also been there, and did take upon him in
his book de Disciplina Ecclesiastica, to do the like: since, Master
Cartwright did likewise (at his second being beyond the seas, T. C. Second
reply pa. 53.
) send us word in his second book, that Master Beza accounted his said
third note of the Church,(vz. the Geneua Discipline) to be as necessary a
note, as either the word or Sacraments: and since, Master Cartwright and
Trauers, with the chiefest of their followers in England, have of later years
(upon consideration of the premises, and further deliberation, in their
conferences and meetinges to that purpose) resolved and concluded generally,
for the necessity of the same Discipline, which before had been only
delivered with us, as their private opinions: Since these times (I say) the
friends and favorers of it, have from time to time, by certain degrees, so
increased in their fond affections toward it; as that now they are in a manner
overcome with the strength and violence of them, and do brag in their
books, that they will not stick to dye in the cause.

Master Cartwright (as I take it) had an especial eye to this devise when he
says, that certain of the things, which he and his followers do stand upon,
are such, as if every hair of their heads, were a several life, they ought to
afford them all in defense of them. Diverse other besides, do offer to
adventure their lives for the iustifiyng of it, Epist. before the demonst.
Epist. before the sup.
as Vdall and Penry, and nothing will content them without the Geneua
discipline. For say they, it is found Practice of Prelates D. 2.
to be the only bond of peace, the bane of heresy, the punisher of sin* and
maintainer of righteousness.

It is pure, Motion. pa. 46.
perfect, and full of all goodness for the peace, wealth and honor of Gods
people, and is ordained for the joy and happiness of all Nations.

The want T. C lib. 2. in the Epist.
of the Eldership is the cause of all evil. It is not T. C. lib. 1. page 3.
to be hoped for, that any commonwealth will flourish without it. This
Discipline T. C. lib. 1* pa. 6. and 48.
is no small part of the Gospel: it is of the substance of it. It is the
Motion 84.
right stuff and gold for building the Church of God. This would make the
Ibid. 84.
Church a chaste spouse, having a wonderful brightness as the morning, fair as
the Moon, pure as the Sun, and terrible like an army with banners. Without
Register. p. 68.
this Discipline, there can be no true Religion. This government Epi before
sup. A. 2.
is the scepter, whereby alone Christ Jesus rules among men. The Churches of
God in Martin Junior: These, 14.
Denmark, Saxony, Tigurin, etc. wanting this government, are to be accounted
maimed, and imperfect. The establishing T. C. lib. 1, page 3.
of the Presbyteries, is the full placing of Christ in his kingdom. They that
T. C. lib. 1. page 220.
reject this Discipline, refuse to have Christ reign over them: and deny T. C.
Table preface to the demonst.
him in effect, to be their king or their Motion to the Lords. page 22.
Lord. It is the blade Ibid. pa. 49.
of a shaken sword, in the hand of the Cherubins, to keep the way of the tree
of life.

Ridiculous men and bewitched. As though Christ's soueraignety, kingdom, and
lordship were no where acknowledged, or to be found, but where half a dosen
artizans, Shoomakers, Tinkers, and Tailors, with their Preacher and Reader,
(eight or nine Cherubins forsooth) do rule the whole parish. But I have noted
unto you, out of these few places, (omitting many other) this their wonderful
dotage, to this end* that it may be considered, whether it be likely, that our
English Consistorians having ouerrunne the Scottish ministers, or at the least
overtaken them, in their opinions of the necessity of this Discipline, will be
left behind them, in their practices according to the Geneua resolution, for
the attayning of it, or no?

CHAP. III.
Our pretended English reformers do imitate or rather exceed the Scottish
Ministers in rebelling and railing against all that do encounter them.
WHen in Scotland they first had in mind to reform religion, and after to
erect their Discipline, (according to the Geneua resolution) they spent their
wits and all their devises, by railing and slandering, to bring the Bishops
and the rest of the Clergy, with the whole course of their gouernements into
detestation and hatred with the people. They write their own pleasures of
them, Knox hist. page 234.
and to them: and that in the name of the people. They stirred the Nobility by
their writings against them: they had their supplications to their Parliaments:
ibid. page 213, 214, 216.
and to the Queen Regent; ibid. page 256.
they had their appellations from their Bishops, their exhortations to the
Nobility, ibid. page 304.
to the Estates and comminalty, and many such practices they had to that
purpose, yea, after their Bishops and Clergy had received the Gospel.

But in this course, our reformers in England, have not only imitated them,
but (as ready Scholars, and apt for such mischief) have very far exceeded
both them, and as I think) all others, that hitherto have dealt that way. They
have renewed over again, and applied to our Church governors, Satan prince of
hell, to the Pope, Cardinals, Bishopes, etc.
two or three of the most bitter Treatises, that ever were made against the
Popes, Cardinals, Popish Bishops, Monks and Friars, etc. in King Henry the
eight his days. They have four or five very devilish and infamous Dialogues:
Practice of Prelates. 1. Gilbies. 2 lB. 3. Vdals. 4. That which came from
Throgmor.
likewise their complaints and petitions to her Majesty and Parliament, in the
name of the comminalty, their appellation, their exhortation, and diverse other
most lewd and scurrilous Epistles and Letters.

When they are called before any Magistrate, and dealt withal for their
factious proceedings, they usually afterward do take upon them to write and
publish, under the name of a conference, what words and arguments have passed:
which they perform with all reproach, disdain, untruth, and vanity: and so do
pester the Realm and their favorers closets, with infinite such shameless
and slanderous discourses, as is most intolerable.

They have had five or six supplications to several Parliaments, penned
altogether according to Knox his style and violent spirit, in many places word
for word: besides Martin, and his two sons, their holy imitations of Beza his
Passauantius, (that all things might proceed Geneua like) in their six books
of Consistorian gravity. Martins Epi. His Epitome. Hay any worcester. Martin Iuni.
Martin Senior Martin Prote.
And now, upon better care taken by her Majesty, that no such libels should be
hereafter printed in England, (at the least without some danger to the
parties, if it may be known) they have found such favor, as to procure
their chief instrument and old servant Waldgraue, to be the King of Scots
Printer, from whence their wants in that behalf shall be fully supplied.

For having obtained that place, Refor. no enemy.
(as he pretends in Print) they have published by hundreths, certain
spiteful and malicious books against her Majesty's most honorable privy
Council. Also their humble motion to their LLs. with three or four other very
slanderous Treatises. And now it seems, for fear that any of all their said
Libels and railing Pamphlets, (that have bin written in her highness time)
should perish, (being many of them but triobolar chartals:) they have taken
upon them to make a Register: and to Print them altogether in Scotland, in two
or three volumes: as it appears by a part of the said Register, all ready
come from thence, and finished: which contains in it three or four and forty
of the said Libels.

In all which courses taken, more then heathnish, this is their drift and
especial end, that having by their forged lies, their poisoned tongues, and
their hypocritical outcries, procured a general mislike of her Majesty's
reformation, the present government of the Church, the chiefest defender
thereof, the Lords that favor it, the Archbishops and Bishops that have
authority in it, and the rest of the Clergy that do submit themselves unto
it: they might come at the last to attain their purpose, and by fishing in our
troubled waters, (according to the Geneua resolution) set up and establish
their glorious scepter and kingdom.

Out of these books, because some might otherwise charge the premises herein
with slander of the godly brethren, I have thought it very convenient to lay
down before you, particularly, some most lewd and wicked speeches, in manner
and order, as in ten of the next Chapters following, is specified.

CHAP. IIII.
The speeches of the said pretended reformers, concerning England: the state,
the present reformation, and government of the Church.
ENgland Penries Epistle before the humble motion.
with an impudent forehead, has said: I will not come near the holy one. And
as for the building of his house, I will not so much as lift up a finger
toward that work, nay I will continue the desolations thereof. Gilby, p. 77
England hates them to this day, that faithfully do their office. Of Epistle
before the demonst. B. 3.
all the nations that have renounced that whore of Rome, there is none in the
world so far out of square, as England, in retaining the Popish Hierarchy.

We in 1. Adm. p. 4
England are so far off, from having a Church rightly reformed, that as yet
we are scarce come to the outward face of the same. We Supplica. to the
Parliament, page 67
are never the better for her Majesty's reformation, seeing the walls of Syon
lie even with the ground (that is, seeing their discipline, is not established.)

Your Supplica. 62
reformation (as it stands) will be little better, then that of the
Samaritanes, who feared Jehovah: but worshipped their own Gods. Men Supplica.
6^
belike do think no more to be required at their hands, then the rasing of
Babell: the devil as yet contenting him self with Bethel. Your Preface to the
demonst. A. 4.
government is that, which gives leave to a man to be any thing, saving a
sound Christian. Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.

We 1. Adm. pa. 2.
lack a right government of the Church. In Epist. before the supplica.
stead of the ordinance of God in the government of his Church, the merchandise
of shameless Babylon is maintained. The 1. Adm. p. 25.
government now used by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is both Antichristian and
devilish. Rome is Gilbyes dial. 151.
come home to our gates. Antichrist 1 Adm. p. 33.
reigns amongst us. The Suppl. to the Parlia, 56.
established government of the Church, is traiterous against the majesty of
Jesus Christ: it confirms the Popes supremacy, it is accursed. It is Hay
any. pa, 5, 6, 8, 12.
an unlawful, a false, a bastardly government. In the state of the Church
there is nothing Martins Epistle. 33.
but sores and blisters, yea the grief is even deadly at the heart: They Hay
any, pa. 13.
must needs be not only traitors to God and his word, but also enemies unto
her Majesty, and the land, that defend the established government of the
Church to be lawful.

CHAP. V.
Some of their undutiful and consistorian speeches concerning her Majesty, etc.
THe Martins Epistle 10, 53.
Bishops have long deceived, and seduced her Majesty and her people. Do Hay
any. page 5.
you think our Church government to be good and lawful, because her Majesty
and the state, who maintain the reformed religion, allows the same? why? the
Lord does not allow it. In effect: that Ibid page 13 15, 23.
her Majesty and state, (in maintaining the established government, and
rejecting theirs) do mayme and deforme the body of Christ, and so do bid God
to battle against them. Ministers Register, pa. 48.
ought not to obey the Prince, when he prescribes ceremonies, and a fashion of
apparel. By Gilbyes preface to his dialogue of the soldier of Birwicke.
the same authority, that the Queen commands the apparel, now appointed to
the Ministers, she may command any piece of Popery, so she name it policy.
Achaz, of policy, brought such an altar into Jerusalem, as he did see at
Damascus, where he had overcome the Idolaters and their Idols. But cursed was
his policy, and so are all they that retain any thing of their old Idolatry,
( he adds for example, the candlestickes upon the Queens altar, kneeling at
the communion, etc.) Martin Junior. These. 22
Of necessity, all Christian magistrates are bound to receive this government
by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, and to abolish all other Church
government. Motion our of Scotland to the Lords. page 41.
Either her Majesty knows not what they desire, being abused by the Bishops;
or else she is negligent of her duty, and unthankful to God.

Her Gilbie, 66. 68. 142. Motion. p. 31. 32. 33.
Majesty, is cunningly resembled, to Jeroboam, Ahab, Iehoram, Ahaz, Gedeon,
Nadab, Saul, Iehu, Asa, and Iehosaphat in those points, whereby they offended
God, and she is threatened by their examples, in that having begone so well, she
does not proceed to set up Christ's government thoroughly.

A question being asked (as the register reports) by the Bishop of London,
Regist. p 33.
Anno. 1567. vz. have we not a godly Prince? speak: Will. Why. Tho. Rowla^d To.
Hawkins
is she evil? There are three answers made, by three several men. The first:
what a question is that? the fruits do show. The second: No. But the servants
of God are persecuted under her. The third: Why? this question the Prophet
answers in the Psalms: how can they have under standing that work
iniquity, spoiling my people, and that extol vanity? To this objection: that
it is Demonst. of Discipline. page 75.
Dotanisme to challenge such authority over Princes, (meaning the authority
which the Eldership challenges) answer is made: vz It is flattery to suffer
Princes to do what they list.

To this T. C. 2 part of his 2 replic. page 65.
position: That princes should be excepted from Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and namely from excommunication, they answer thus. That excommunication should
not be exercised against Princes, I utterly mislike: To affirm that, It is
but a mere mockery of the Lord, ibid. page, 92,
and to offer himself ( meaning the now L. Archbishop of Canterbury) as a bawd
to al manner of sins in Princes. To insinuate, that others being subject to
this correction, only Princes should be exempted, (I fear,) comes from a
worse cause, then from simple error.

CHAP. VI.
Some of their railing speeches against the high court of Parliament; and all
others generally that do maintain the present government of the Church of
England.
FOr not admitting the platform set down in the first admonition, etc. Anno.
14. of her Majesty: and suffering the parties, that offered, it to be
punished: Thus they write. The 2. Admonition page, 3
state shows it self not upright, allege the Parliament what it will: al
honest men shall find lack of equity; all good consciences shall condemn
that Court. It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of judgment,
then for such a Court. There is no other thing to be looked for, then some
speedy vengeance to light upon the whole land, provide as well as the politic
Machiauels of England think they can though God do his worst.

Likewise of the Parliament, the 29. of her Majesty (for their tollerating the
Bishops, etc. in stead of their new government) it is said. That they shall be
in danger of Supl. pa, 18,
the terrible mass of Gods wrath, both in this life and in the life to come:
and that if they did not then abrogate (the government by Bishops,) well Sup
pa, 25
they might hope for the favor and intertainement of Moses (that is the curse
of the law,) but the favor and loving countenance of Jesus Christ, they should
not see nor ever enjoy.

Again of the same Parliament, it is likewise af firmed: that (if the
reformation desired, were not granted,) they should betray God, betray the
truth, and betray the whole kingdom. They Ibid, page, 7
should declare themselves to be an assembly, wherein the Lords cause could
not be heard; an assembly, wherein the felicity of miserable men could not be
respected; an assembly, that wittingly called for the judgments of God upon
the whole land; an assembly, wherein truth, religion, and piety could bear
no sway: There Ibid, page, 43
shall be not be a man of their seed that shall prosper be a Parliament Man, or
bear rule in England any more.

Furthermore, a prophecy is passed (but from that spirit, I trust that took
upon him to be, 1 Of the kings. 22.
spiritus mendax in ore prophetarum) that if they prevailed not in the said
Parliament according to their supplication: then Sup, page, 75 76.
the Navy of the Spaniards should come again, and fight against this land,
and waste it with fire and sword: that God shall send a terror into the hearts
of our valiantest and stoutest men: that one enemy shall chase a thousand of
us: and that although we had smit the whole host, so as there remained none
but wounded men amongst them, yet shall every man rise up in his tent, and
ouerrunne this land.

Lastly, this they write generally, of all that do withstand their desires:
Those Martin junior: These. 28
kingdoms and states who defend any Church government, save this of Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, are in danger of utter destruction. None ibid*
Th. 46
ever defended this Hierarchy of Bishops to be lawful, but Papists, and such
as were infected with Popish errors. No Motion out of Scotland. page, 20
man can open his mouth (against Presbiteries) but with a shameless face, and
seared conscience. The Epistle to the suppl, A, 3
enemies hereof after the manner of the wicked, mentioned in Job, do say unto
the almighty, depart from us: because we desire not the knowledge of thy ways:
yea and in their practice they say, who is the almighty, that we should serve
him?

This Epist, to the Sup. A 4,
shallbe the portion, of as many, as (to the end) oppose themselves against the
cause of reformation now labored for: the heaven shall declare his
wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against him: the increase of his house
shall go away: it shall flow away in the day of his wrath: his eyes shall see
his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. They
Register out of Scotland.
are no better to be thought of, then enemies to the Gospel of Christ, to her
Majesty, pa. 71.
and people: that seek to keep Christ's holy Discipline from amongst us. This
Epi before the supl.
is that cause, against which never man yet striued and prospered. All the
Newgates and Oldgates, Exhort to the BB. B, 1,
yea and all the Tiburns in England, are too little for such rash, and
presumptuous he ades, that will not give God leave to rule: but will take the
scepter out of his hands. I do Penry in his Epi. from Scotl. before reformat.
no ennemie
fear that many of the forwardest ennemies of reformation, are not the
backwardest friends, that the king of Spain has in England at this day.

CHAP. VII.
Some of their Disciplinarian speeches concerning the Lords of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Council.
Our Epist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3.
Council may truly be said, to delight in the injury and violent oppression
of Gods saints and Ministers: therefore the Lord will surely visit our
Council, with an heavy plague.

Our Council Ibid. A. 3. and 4
cannot possibly deal truly in matters of justice, between man and man;
insomuch as they bend all their forces, to bereave Jesus Christ of his
government. The which ungodly and wicked course as they have held on, ever
since the beginning of her Majesty's reign: so at this day they have taken
great boldness, and grown more rebellious, against the Lord and his cause,
then ever they were. In so much as their honors, in token of thankfulness to
him that exalted them: dare now charge the cause of reformation, to be an
ennemie unto our state and such as favor the same, to be unquiet and factious
men, disturbers of the common peace and quietness, and sowers of sedition among
the subjects.

They do Ibid A, 4*
not ablie detect their impiety against God, and their enmity to the kingdom
of his Son Christ: they offer injury to her Majesty. If her Majesty give
ear to such Counselors, she may have cause one day to lament. Assuredly,
those that are our ennemies for the profession of the truth, ( meaning the
pretended Discipline (cannot be her Majesty's sure friends, whatsoever they
pretend.

Satan Ibid, A, 4
works the defacing of the way of truth: and supporteth his own kingdom, by
instruments of no mean countenance.

Be they noble or Ibid, B, 1
unnoble, Counselors or inferior men: I am so far from fearing their power,
that the more I see them rage, the greater strength I have, to stand to the
truth, which they rave against.

I do warn Ibid, B 1.
and admonish those Counselors, with whom and against whom especially, I
deal in this Treatise, to repent them of their great insolency, whereby they
have been puffed up with Senacharib, to magnify and oppose themselves;
against the cause and people of the Lord of Hosts: as against the Religion and
people, of some of the Gods of the earth. Otherwise they are to fear least the
Lord, having raised up many of them, out of mean places into the throne of
justice, means to show his power and great name, by making them examples of
his fearful wrath; as he did Pharaoh, who wrought his own overthrow.

If men will wonder, that Ibid, B* 1,
we being so contemptible in the sight of the world, dare yet be so bold, as to
control great states and mighty men; and to challenge them of injustice,
against the Son of God and his members; who will not stick to brag with
Pilate, that they have power to crucify Christ, and to absolve him; they are
to understand, that we know of no power, but from above: and therefore of no
power, that is able to bear out injustice and wrong. The hills of the Robbers
we grant to be high, and vnassayleable in the sight of an eye of flesh: but
we have learned of the holy man, to account the habitation of the wicked to be
accursed, even when he seems to be best rooted: for we know that the steps
of his strength, shall be restrained, and that his Counsel shall cast him
down.

CHAP. VIII.
Some of their railing speeches against the Magistracy in England, the Judges,
Lawyers, and laws both civil and ecclesiastical.
THe Epist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3.
Magistracy and ministry have walked hand in hand, in the contempt of true
Religion: and unto both, the word of the Lord is made a reproach.

Amongst Ibid. A. 3.
those who deal in the cause of justice, there are found wicked persons: even
wicked lawyers and judges, (who seem to know of no other God, but their own
gain, (that lay wait for the blood of Gods saints, as he that sets
snares; and mark whether they can hear of any, that go further in the cause
of God, then the corruption of our state does permit. And if they find any
such, they know how to wrest against them, a clause of some statute, contrary
not only to the meaning thereof, but even contrary unto all justice and
equity, yea common reason it self, and the very grounds of all good laws
and statutes. So that it is now grown, and has been of a long time, a common
practice of these Godless men; to make of the statutes, ordained for the
maintenance of Religion and common quietness, a pit, wherein to catch the
peaceable of the land.

The common ibid. A. 3
inditements of the Lords true and faithful Ministers, for matters of trifles,
as the omission of the surplisse, churching of women, cross in Baptism, etc.
does manifestly witness the iniquity of these Atheists.

The Maitin Junior. These. 34.
laws, that maintain the Archbishops and Bishops are no more to be accounted
of, then the laws maintaining the Stews.

The ibid. These. 38.
human laws, that maintain them, are wicked and ungodly.

The laws Fenner against Bridges. p, 5.
are made their common sanctuary, to defend all our wickedness.

Impiety is Sup. pa. 59
suffered to bear sway against the majesty of God: and that by law and
authority.

Such laws Sup, pa, 24,
are retained in force, as iustle and overthrow the royal prerogative of the
son of God.

As Epistle before the demonst. B. 4
great indignity is offered unto Jesus Christ, in committing his Church unto
the government of the common law, as can be, by mean hyrelings unto a king:
in committing his beloved spouse unto the direction of the mistress of the
Stews, and enforcing her to live after the laws of a brothel-house.

CHAP. IX.
Some of their consistoriall sayings, as touching our Religion, Communion
book, Sacraments and Ceremonies.
WE 1. Adm. 32,
strive for true religion. As ibid, page, 2.
our lackes are, there can be no right religion. Gilby, p* 29.
Many religions are mixed together, of Christ and Antichrist, of God and the
devil. ibid. page 90
Christ's Religion is fondly patched with the Popes; joining fire and water,
heaven and hell together.

The 2, Adm, p. 6
truth (in a manner) does but peep out from behind the screene.

Their 1. Adm, p. 17
prescript form of service, is full of corruption. In ibid, page 24
all the order of their service, there is no edification, but confusion. The
ibid. page, 16
Communion book is an imperfect book, culled and picked out of that popish
dung hill, the portuise and masse-booke: and many of the contents therein be
such, as are against the word of God. And Martin senior. C. 2.
Martin senior calls it our sterue-vs Book.

The 2 Admon. page 42.
Sacraments are wickedlie mangled and profaned. They Gilby. page 2
eat not the Lords supper but play a pageant of their own, to blind the
people: and keep them still in superstition: to make the seely souls believe
that they have an English mass: and so put no difference betwixt truth and
falsehoode, betwixt Christ and An^ichrist, betwixt God and the devil. 1 Admon.
page 21.
The public baptism is full of childish and superstitious toys.

And of our orders, garments, and ceremonies. They are Gilby. p, 40.
carnal, beggarly: Antichristian pompes, rites, laws, and traditions: popish
fooleries, Romish relics, and rags of Antichrist dregs and remnants of
transformed Popery: page 41.
Pharisaicall outward faces and vizardes: remnants of Romish Antichrist: of
superstition, Page 1. page 5. page 12. page 14. page 91. page 96. page 95 page
150
and Idolatry: Known liueries of Antichrist: accursed leaven of the
blasphemous Popish Priesthood: cursed patches of Popery and Idolatry, they
are worse then Lousy: for they are sib be to the sarke of Hercules, that made
him tear his own bowels asunder.

CHAP. X.
How they charge the present government with persecution.
THere 2. Admon. page 59
is a persecution of poor Christians, and the professors of the Gospel
suffered, not far unlike to the six articles. Gods ibid.
cause is trodden under foot, and the benefit of his Church is little regarded.

1 Adm. p. 2
Poor men have been miserably handled, with reuilings, deprivations,
imprisonments, bannishments, and such like extremities. Godly Practice of
Prelates. D. 8
Ministers have been brought before the bars of justice: they have been
arraigned amongst fellons and thieves: they have been imprisoned to the
uttermost and defaced: they are reproched, shaken up, threatened; many are
deprived: they are examined by an inquisition, much like tha: of Spain. O
lamentable case, O heinous impiety.

ibid B. 2
Shall they be thus marked with the black cole of reproach and villainy? O
inhumaine and more then barbarous impiety.

Besides Mart protest. 13.
whorish impudency, halter, axe, bands, scourging, and racking, our Bishops
have nothing to defend themselves withal.

The Vdal. dialogue. F, 1
Clinke, Gatehouse, White-Lion, and the Fleet, are their only arguments.

If Exhorta, to BB. A. 1
I say, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Osee, Micheas, and Zachary, were alive: they would
be carried to the Marshall-sea; the White-lyon, the King's Bench, the
Gate House, and other Prisons, yea to Newgate.

In 2, Admon. page 1. and 2.
effect, as Caine persecuted Abell: Esau, Jacob: the Patriarchs, their brother
Joseph, the Jews, Moses: the Priests Jeremy, Osea, Amazia and Christ: even so
in these days, the Preachers are slandred and persecuted by such, as would
seem pillars of true religion. If this persecution page 59.
be not provided for, it is the case of many a thousand in England, great
trobles will come of it.

The Dialog that came from Throg, D. 2
land is sore troubled: there is no place nor being, Martin. protest. page 5
for a faithful Minister of the word. Our blood cries for vengeance against
the Bishops.

I Snape to his father, 1590.
am made like to our Savior Christ who has trodden this path, in that (as he
says) he is troubled not for euiil, but for good, It fares Wight before he
was imprisoned to a friend.
with us as with prisoners in Popery: God send us their comfort, Mnisters
Lord in his papers.
are in worse sort suppressed now, then they were by the Papists in Queen
Mary's time. This cross Fen of Lords imprisonment.
is common, not only with him, but with all that will live godly in Christ.
The cause is holy: and his sufferinges acceptable. Ik perceive the Lion
roareth, but cannot bite, further then the Lord shall permit.

CHAP. XI.
Some of their Consistorian speeches of the Clergy of England, assembled, as
occasion has required, in the Convocation house.
THey Sup. pa. 47,
are wolves. It is a Synagogue. Their only endeavor is, Page 48,
how to prevent Christ, from bearing rule in the Church, page 49.
by his own laws. page 53
They are known to be ennemies unto all sincerity. The whole convocation
house, are (in judgment) contrary to our Savior Christ, they are
intolerable oppugners of Gods glory: and utter ennemies unto the liberties of
his Church. As long as that house stands, (as at this day it does) there can
be no hope at al, that either Gods heavenly truth; should have free passage,
or the Church her liberty, in this kingdom. page, 55.
They have seduced and deceived the civil state, and people, in bearing them in
hand, that al is well in the Church.

They are termed, (by one of the Mart, Epist
Captains of this crew) right puissant, poisoned, persecuting, and terrible
Priests: Clergy masters of the confocation house: the holy league of
subscription: the crew of monstrous and ungodly wretches: that mingle heaven
and earth together: horned masters of the conspiration house: an Antichristian
swinish rabble: ennemies of the Gospel: most covetous, wretched and Popish
Priests, the Convocation house of Devils Belzabub Dialogue that came from
Throgmort. D. 4
of Canterbury, the chief of the Devils.

CHAP. XII.
Some of their presbiterial speeches of the Bishops of England professing the
Gospel.
THe Hay any. p, 15, 34, etc.
Bishops are the greatest and most pestilent ennemies that now our state has,
and are like to be the ruin of her Majesty, page 20.
and the whole state: Archbishops and Bishops are unlawful, unnatural, false,
and bastardly governors of the Church, page 21
and the ordinances of the Devil: petty Popes: petty Antichrists: Idid, 28.
like incarnat Devils: they are Bishops of the Devil: Bishops Martins Epist.
37.
are cogging and coosening knaves. They will lie like dogs. Our Epist, page, 6
Bishops are proud, popish, presumptuous, profane, paltrie, pestilent,
pernicious prelates, and usurpers: Impudent, shameless, page 33.
and waynescot faced Bishops, like beasts. They are in a praemunire. They ought
not to be maintained, by the authority of the civil Magistrate, page 21 page 4
in any common wealth. They Vdals dialogue. c. 1
are, in respect of their places, ennemies of God. The Martins protest. 27.
worst Puritan is an honester man, then the best Lord Bishop in Christendom.

Their Martins. protest, page 4. page, 8. page 12 page, 21 page, 21
cruelty is without measure. They are butchers and horseleeches: it is the
portion of their inheritance. Their bloudthirstie attempts. These dragons.
Their tirannie and bloudthirstie proceedings are inexcusable. In effect, that
they conspire to pull the Crown from her Majesty's head.

Bishops Vdals dialogue. D, 2
callings are mere Antichristian. The Martin sen. B. 4. c. 1
Bishops are robbers, Wolves, simoniacks, persecutors, sowers of sedition and
discontentednes between her Majesty's subjects. They have incurred the
statute of praemunire: they are (ipso facto) depriuable. Though they be in the
Church; yet are they none of the Church. The true Church of God ought to have
no more to do with them, and the Synagogue, (namely their Antichristian
Courts) them with the Synagogue of Satan. Be Epist to the epitom.
packing Bishops: you strive in vain, you are laid open already. Friars and
Monks were not so bad.

Of The Dialog that came from Throg. mort, D. 3
all the Bishops that ever were in the Sea of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
there was never any did so much hurt to the Church of God as he has done. No
Bishop that ever had such an aspiring and ambitious mind as he, no not
Cardinal Wolsey. None so proud as he: No not Stephen Gardener of Winchester.
None so tirannicall as he: no not Bonner. He sits Ibid, c. 4.
upon his cogging stool, which may truly be called, the chair of
pestilence. His mouth is full of cursing against God and his Saints. His feet
are swift to shed blood* there is none of Gods children, Mart, sen. C. 1
but had as leeue see a Serpent, as meet him. It grieueth them to see so
wicked an ennemie of God and his Church. Belsebub Mart sen.
of Canterbury. The Canterbury Caiphas: Esau. a monstrous Antichristian Pope:
a most bloody oppressor of Gods Saints: a very Antichristian beast: a most
vile and cursed tyrant. In Epistle out of Scotl. before reforma. no ennemie.
respect of his Antichristian prelacie over Gods Church, and for the notable
hatred, which he has ever bewrayed toward the Lord and his truth, I think
him one of the dishonorablest creatures under heaven.

And again of the Bishops, but especially of the Lord Archbishop. In Practice
of Prelates. C. 6.
his behavior, wrath, anger, reproach, and disdain (as in a wood, so many
Lions, Bears, Tigers, and cruel beasts) were seen to range, and in this
more savage, that whereas they by time and usage may be tamed and appeased,
this man never. It Supp. 37.
would be known, whether they have some secret meaning, if opportunity would
serve to aspire unto the Crown.

CHAP. XIII.
Some of their uncharitable words against all the Clergy in England,
generally that mislike their designements.
WE 1, Adm. p. 2
lack in England a right ministry of God. The Ibid, page 4.
Ministers are neither proved, elected, called, nor ordained according to Gods
word. I. B. is to be Mar Iu, C, 2
invested into the place of a natural fool, after a solemn manner, according
to the book of ordayning Bishops and Priests.

The Exhort. to BB^. B. 2.
Clergy is indicted, as the followers of Antichrist, and that their Ministry
is from the Pope. Little Gilby. p 50 Ibid. page, 3,
or nothing is required of our English Priests; but to say the Catechism, and
to wear a cap, coap, and tippet: Antichrists rags shall make him a Priest, be
he never such a dolt or a villain.

The Gil, p. 11^.
most part of our Ministers, are either Popish Priests, or Monks, or Friars,
or alehouse haunters, or boys and lads, dronkardes and dolts: that will wear
a fools hood, for living sake: They are Hogs, Dogs, Wolves, Foxes,
Simoniakes, Usurers: procters of Antichrists inventions: Popish chapmen,
halting Newtrals. page 53. page 32, page 89, page 112,
They seek nothing, but like greedy dogs, how to fill their paunches.

Our supposed Ministers are a multitude of desperate and forelorne Atheists,
Epist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3. Hier. lib. 2. con Rufin.
a cursed, uncircumcised, and murdering generation, you shall find amongst
this crew nothing else, but a troop of bloody soule-murtherers, and
sacrilegious Church robbers. Been quod malitia non habet tantas vires, quantos
conatus.

CHAP. XIIII.
Their especial drift in their said railing speeches, as outragiously
published, as if they were mere Jesuits, and peradventure to as dangerous a
purpose.
BY the former so wicked and slanderous speeches, contained in the te^ last
Chapters, you see how the brotherhood endeuoreth with the multitude, (as I
said) not only the disgrace of our Church and Clergiemen, but likewise how
bold they are with her most excellent Majesty: the high Court of Parliament,
the Lords of her privy Council: the Judges lawyers, laws, and all things
besides, that do give any impediment unto their devises and complots.

Harding, Dorman, Stapleton, Sanders, Allen, Gregory Martin, and diverse other
fugitives and Traitors, to make a more easy way, for the bringing in again of
popery: have taken the like course in her Highness time: meaning principally,
by such vile slanders, to withdraw her Highness subjects, from their dutiful
approbation of the present estate and reformation of Religion.

Goodman, Wittingham, Gilby, the author of the book of obedience, with the
rest of the Geneua accomplices in Queen Mary's days, practiced the very same
policy: when (as you have heard) according to the Allobrogicall resolution,
they urged all states, by degrees, rather to take arms, and to reform
Religion themselves by force, then to suffer such Idolatry and superstition to
remain in the land.

But in these more political then Christian practices, as I said, that our
English Disciplinarians of these days, have far exceeded the Scottish
Ministers: so may it be truly affirmed of them, that all the popish Traitors,
that hitherto have written, and all the said Geneuians that then lived, for
malicious and spiteful tauntes, for railing and bitter terms, for
disdaineful and contemptuous speeches, did not come near them.

Besides, it is especially to be observed, that in their own opinions, they
have by these ungodly means so prevailed with the multitude, as that now they
begin to vaunt and brag of their good success* already therein attained. One
of them sends us word from Scotland, that such as have withstood their
pretended Church government, The Motion. page 40. 42,
are made already in England to be despised and vile before all the people:
that a poor simple Minister of their etc. is heard with more reverence, and
resorted unto with more diligence, then one of ours; though he have the great
bell rong, and men to help him up into the pulpit: that this was wrought by a
contemptible, and very base and strange means, (meaning Martin and his sons
libels, etc.) not once dreamed off by a thousand of Gods saints: and that when
their creastes, (meaning the Bishops) were set up, and they began to say all is
ours; then their presumption was dashed, daunted, and taken down.

They might as well have signified unto us, in what terms and reputation, her
Majesty, her Parliaments, her Lords, her Judges, and her laws, do stand and
hold with the people. In dealing as they have done, by their particular
supplications and motions unto her Highness, and unto their LLs. their intents
to that purpose, when the time shall serve (if in the mean while they be not
prevented) are not ablie disclosed. For otherwise, it might have sufficed them,
to have delivered their discontentments, in private manner, by writing, both to
her Majesty, their LLs* and other in authority: thereby to have discharged
their consciences without their publishing of them in Printe to the world,
except their purpose had likewise been, by that lewd means, to have brought
them all into contempt, as well as the Bishops. What private man, if his friend
should write a letter unto him, and lay open in the same, (either truly or
falsely) many great crimes to his charge: and afterward should by Printing or
any other ways publish it: could otherwise account of his dealing therein, but
that he meant to make him thereby odious to the world, or at the least to be of
no great account, or estimation.

Queen Marie was of nature and disposition, very mild and pitiful; and yet,
because she suffered such cruelty and superstition to be practiced and
maintained in her days, you have heard by the consistorian propositions (before
mentioned) what was resolved by Goodman, Whittingham, Gilby, and the rest of
the Geneuians against her, concerning her deposition, etc. Which is a matter
that would be well considered-of, and in time prouided-for accordingly:
considering that these our homebred Sicophantes, men of the Geneua mould, as
proud and presumptuous as any that euerliued, do charge the present state,
under her Majesty, (as before it is noted) with such great impiety,
corruption, idolatry, superstition, and barbarous persecution: Which may touch
her highness, as nearly (by their doctrine) for maintayning the present
state, as Queen Marie was, for defending of Popery.

Well the conclusion of this Book is this, vz: that seeing our English
consistorians do labor more vehemently, or at the least as egerly, per fas and
nefas, by slander, reproach, and malicious practices, to discredit all those,
that withstand them, in their desires, for the Geneua-like discipline: as any
other Scottish Ministers, Papists, or old Geneuians, have labored to
discredit those, that maintained al kind of Popery, Idolatry, and superstition,
it is to be feared, least they proceed in the Geneua Resolution, as their
fellows (who^ they do imitate in Scotland, or rather whom they do excel) have
done before them.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES and Practices.
CHAP I.
The practices of certain English Reformers for Discipline, from the year,
1560. until the year, 1572.
AS in Scotland, when they could not obtain their desires, for the full
establishing of their book of Discipline, by lawful authority; they procured
such private subscription thereunto, as they were able, and so fell themselves
to the practice of it (as it has been said in the sixth chapter of the first
Book: even so have our men in England, of the same consort and faction,
proceeded in effect, upon the like occasion, for their new platform: but yet
in a different manner.

For the first ten or eleven years of her Majesty's reign, through the peevish
frowardnes, the outcries and exclamations of those that came home from Geneua,
against the garments prescribed to Ministers, and other such like matters; no
man (of any experience) is ignorant, what great contention and strife was
raised: insomuch as their sectaries divided themselves from their ordinary
congregations, and meeting together in private houses, in woods, and fields,
had and kept there, their disorderly and unlawful conuenticles.

These kinds of assemblies (notwithstanding the inconvenience and absurdnes of
them in a Church reformed,) M. Cartwright (within a while after) took upon
him (in sort) to defend, T. C. ^. reply. page 38.
saying: that the name of conuenticles, was too light and contemptuous for them.

About the twelfth year of her highness said government, these malcontents,
growing weary of the foresaid dissentions, and being of restless
dispositions, began to stir up new quarrels, concerning the Geneua Discipline:
being the matter indeed which they still aimed at, in all their former
proceedings. Hereupon, (the 14. of her Majesty) two admonitions were framed,
and exhibited to the high Court of Parliament. The first contained their
pretended griefs, with a declaration (forsooth) of the only way to reform
them: vz. by admitting of that platform, which was there described.

This admonition, finding small entertainment, (the authors or chief
preferrers thereof being imprisoned) out comes the second admonition,
toward the end of the same Parliament: with great lightning and thunder, as
though heaven and earth should have met together, because of the little regard
which was had before, to the former admonition. In this second admonition, the
first is wholly justified: the Parliament (as it has been showed) is mightily
challenged: great words are used, and in plain terms, it is there affirmed:
That if they of that assembly would not then follow the advice of the first
admonition, they would surely themselves be their own caruers. The Church (say
they) may and must keep God his orders: 2. Admonition. pa. 60. 61.
and surely this is only God his order, (vz. the said platform) and ought to
be used in his Church, so that in conscience we are forced to speak for it,
and to use it.

Whereupon, presently after the said Parliament, (vz. the twentieth of
November, 1572.) there was a Presbytery erected at Wandesworth in Surrey (as it
appears by a bill endorsed with Master Fields hand, thus: the order of
Wandesworth.) In which order the Elders names, eleven of them, are set down:
the manner of their election is declared: the approuers of them, (one Smith of
Micham, and Crane of Roughampton) are mentioned: their offices and certain
general rules, (then given unto them to be observed) were likewise agreed
upon, and described.

CHAP. II.
The secret meetinges for Discipline, and the matters handled in them here in
England from 1572 till 1583.
How they grew to be so far gone at Wandesworth, that I find not: they of
London, at that time, were nothing so forward. And yet, as it appears by the
lawful deposition and oath of one, Tho. Ed. both before the Commiss, and in
the Star Chamber.
(then of that faction, but now a very honest man, a Batcheller of Divinity,
and an ancient Preacher) they had then their meetings of Ministers, termed
brethren, in private houses in London: as namely of Field, Wilcox, Standen,
Iackson, Bonham, Seinctloe, Crane, and Edmondes, which meetinges were called
conferences, according to the plot in the first and second admonitions
mentioned.

In these London-meetings, at the first, little was debated, but against
subscription, the attire, and book of common prayer. Marry after (says he)
that Charke, Trauers, Barber, Gardener, Cheston, and lastly Crook and Egerton,
joined themselves into that brotherhood, then the handling of the Discipline
began to be rise: then many motions were made, and conclusions were set down.
As for example.

That forasmuch, as diverse books had been written, and sundry petitions
exhibited to her Majesty, the Parliament, their LLs, and yet to little purpose:
therefore every man, should labor, by all the means he could, to bring into
the Church, the said reformation themselves.

That the present government of the Church, by Archbishops and Bishops, was
Antichristian: and that the only Discipline and government of Christ, (as they
termed it,) vz. by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, should be established
in place of the other.

That for the better bringing in of the said form of Discipline, they should
not only, (as well publicly as privately) teach it, but by little and little,
as much as possibly they might, draw the same into practice, though they
concealed the names, either of Presbytery, Elder, or Deacon, making little
account of the name for the time, so that their offices might be secretly
established.

There was an assembly of threescore Ministers, appointed out of Essex,
Cambridge-shiere, and Norfolk, to meet the eighth of May, Pig. to Field. 16.
of May, 158^.
1582. at Cockefield, (Master Knewstubs town) there to confer of the common
book, what might be tolerated, and what necessarily to be refused in every
point of it: apparel, matter, form, days, fastings, injunctions, etc.

Of this meeting it is thus reported. Our meeting was appointed to be kept very
secretly, and to be made known to none, etc. That this assembly was also kept
accordingly, it appears by these words. Concerning the meeting, I hope all
things were so proceeded in, as your self would like of: as well for reverence
to other brethren, as for other matters. I suppose before this time, some of
the company, have told you by word: for that was permitted unto you.

Another meeting was also appointed to be held, that year, Pig. to Field.
ibid.
at the Commencement in Cambridge, as is plain by these words. Concerning the
Commencement, I like well your motion: desiring it might so come to pass: and
that it be procured, to be as general as might be: which may easily be brought
to pass, if you at London, shall so think well of it, and we here may
understand your mind: we will (I trust) as we can, further it. M. Allen likes
well of the matter.

CHAP. III.
A form or book of Discipline is drawn, and a resolution is agreed upon, how
far they might proceed for the practice of it, without breaking the peace of
our Church.
Whilst the brethren in the Country, were coming thus fast on forward (as
you have heard in the end of the former Chapter:) you must not think that the
Rabbis in London were in the mean time idle. Hitherto it should seem, that in
all their former proceedings, they had relied chiefly, upon the first
admonition and Cartwrights book: as having had no particular and several
platform, that was generally allowed of amongst them, for the Church of
England. But now at the length, (about the year, 1583.) the form of
Discipline (which is lately come to light) was compiled: and thereupon an
assembly or Council being held (as I think at London, or at Cambridge)
certain decrees were made, concerning the establishing and the practice
thereof. In which decrees, mention is made of a collection; concluded upon for
the Scottish Ministers, fugitives here in England, 1583. (which shows the
time when they were made:) and order is likewise taken for the putting in use
of the Synodicall Discipline; which also proves the age of that book.

The decrees themselves are extant to be seen, under Master Wights hand; a
man of that brotherhood. But it may not be omitted, that you must think; how
the godly brethren in all these and such other their zealous courses, had never
any meaning to disturb the present state established. And thereupon (forsooth)
in this conspiracy or council mentioned, (like good and quiet spirited men)
they had an especial care, that the peace of the Church might not be broken,
by any order or decree of theirs. So as then the question amongst them was,
(seeing the Discipline must needs up) how far they might proceed in the
establishing and practice of it, keeping notwithstanding the peace of the
Church, established already by her Majesty. And it was ouerruled accordingly,
as it follows in the decrees themselves, faithfully translated, word for
word, out of their own Latin copy.

The title thereof, vz.

These be the things, that (do seem) may well stand with the peace of the
Church.

The Decrees.
Let no man (though he be an University man) offer himself to the Ministry,
nor let any man take upon him an uncertain and vague Ministry, though it be
offered unto him. But such as be called to the Ministry by some certain
Church, let them impart it unto that Classis or conference, (whereof themselves
are,) or else unto some greater Church assembly: and if such shall be found fit
by them, then let them be commended, by their letters unto the Bishop, that
they may be ordained Ministers by him.

Those ceremonies in the Book of common prayer, which being taken from Popery,
are in controversy, do seem, that they ought to be omitted and given over,
if it may be done without danger, of being put from the Ministry. But if
there be any imminent danger to be deprived, then this matter must be
communicated with the Classis, in which that Church is: that by the judgment
thereof, it may be determined, what ought to be done.

If subscription to the articles of Religion, and to the book of common
Prayer, shall be again urged: it is thought, that the book of articles, may
be subscribed unto, according to the statute 13. Eliz. that is, unto such of
them only, as contain the sum of Christian faith, and doctrine of the
Sacraments. But for many weighty causes, neither the rest of the articles in
that book, nor the book of common prayer, may be allowed: no, though a man
should be deprived of his Ministry for it.

It seems, that Churchwardens and Collectors for the poor, might thus be
turned into Elders and into Deacons.

When they are to be chosen, let the Church have warning fifteen days before,
of the time of election, and of the ordinance of the Realm: but especially of
Christ's ordinance, touching appointing of watchmen and overseers in his Church:
who are to foresee, that none offense or scandal do arise in the Church: and
if any shall happen, that by them it may be duly abolished.

And touching Deacons of both sorts (vz. men and women) the Church shall be
monished, what is required by the Apostle: and that they are not to choose men,
of custom and of course, or for their riches, but for their faith, zeal, and
integrity: and that the Church is to pray, (in the mean time) to be so
directed, that they make choice, of men that be meet.

Let the names of such as are so chosen, be published, the next Lords day: and
after that, their duties to the Church, and the Churches toward them, shall
be declared: then let them be received unto the Ministry, to which they are
chosen, with the general prayers of the whole Church.

The Brethren are to be requested, to ordain a distribution of all Churches,
according to these rules, (in that behalf) that are set down in the
Sinodicall Discipline, touching Classical, Provincial, Comitiall or of
Commencements, and assemblies for the whole kingdom.

The Classes are to be required, to keep acts of memorable matters: which they
shall see delivered to the Comitiall assembly that from thence they may be
brought by the prouincial assembly.

Also, they are to deal earnestly with patrones, to present fit men:
whenever any Church is fallen void in that Classis.

The Comitiall assemblies are to be monished, to make collections for relief
of the poor and of scholars: but especially for relief of such Ministers
here, as are put out, for not subscribing to the Articles, tendered by the
Bishops: also for relief of Scottish Ministers and others, and for other
profitable and necessary uses.

All the provincial Synodes, must continually, before hand, foresee in due
time, to appoint the keeping of their next provincial Synodes: and for the
sending of chosen persons, with certain instructions, unto the National
Synod to be holden: whenever the Parliament for the kingdom shall be
called, and at some certain set time euere year.

Hitherto the Decrees of this grave Council, whereby it seems to me, that
when they resolved, they might proceed thus far, and keep (notwithstanding)
the peace of the Church of England established: they opposed (in that
resolution) the word peace, to war: as though they should have agreed, how
far they might run on in this race, without urging of their followers, to
force and arms. For otherwise, how could any sober men, so much as once have
imagined, that they might, in this sort, overthrow (in effect) the present
government, and establish their own devises, and yet never break the peace
of the Church? But I will not press this point. It is more agreeable to my
purpose to pursue the chase.

CHAP. IIII.
About the year, 1583. they fell again to the practice of their Discipline,
and of a Consistorian question.
TO make good laws, and not see them executed, is but labor lost. And
therefore it should seem, that these wise Lawmakers, were presently after, as
careful to put the said orders in practice, as they were before to resolve
upon them: as it may appear by a letter, written to Master Field from
Antwerpe, the 25. of June, 1583. by one Cholmeley, in answer of a former
Letter, sent unto him from the said Field. For thus Cholmeley writes: Laetor
intus and in cord, de meliori successu rerum vestrarum, quod cum de
conuentibus vestris audiam, tum de Disciplinae Ecclesiasticae formali (...)
multo lubentissime. Dicam quod verum est, sero nimis incepistis: quisquis iam
tandem vel incipere recusauerit, vel a tam praeclaro incepto desistat, peccatum
suum feret: paenitendumest de priori lentitudine. I am glad with all my heart,
for the better success of your affairs, not only in that I hear of your
assemblies, but most willingly of all, in respect of your effectual practicing
of the Ecclesiastical Discipline. I will tell you that which is true, you have
begun this course too too late. Whosoever shall now, either refuse to begin, or
shall desist from so notable an enterprise, he shall bear his own sin. You
ought to repent you for your former slownes. And afterward, thus out of the
same Letter, Philip. 1.
to encourage Master Field and the brethren. In nulla re terreamini ab ijs
quise opponunt, quod illis quidem est exitij indicium, vobis autem salutis,
idque a Deo. In nothing fear your adversaries, which is to them a token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that from God.

In July the next year, Gelibrand to Field.
vz. 1584. some of the Scottish Ministers before spoken of, went to the Act in
Oxford: where Master Gelibrand with his brethren, gave them great
entertainment. At that time, there was a notable question propounded amongst
their favorers there, by the said Ministers, as is manifest by these words.
Here have been a good company of godly brethren this Act. Master Fen, Wilcox,
Axton: the Scottish ministers, and we have had some meeting and conference, to
our great comfort that are here. One point (which then was moved) I would wish
to be thoroughly debated among you and them, concerning the proceeding of the
Minister in his duty, without the assistance or tarrying for the Magistrate,
etc.

What was resolved amongst the brethren of London, about this matter at that
time, I know not. Marry this I find, that presently thereupon, they grew more
violent, and prepared themselves to proceed more resolutely, in the
challenging of their Discipline, as it is plain by the dealing both of them,
and of their favorers, that year in November and December after, at the
Parliament, 27. of her Majesty.

And besides, let the said Master Gelibrands words, in a Letter to Field,
dated the 12. of January after, vz. 1584. be considered. For (as it seems to
me) they either tend to sedition, or to the admitting, in Oxford, of the
foresaid Decrees or Discipline. Sure I am, that they can hardly (for ought I
see) receive any good construction. Thus he writes

I have already entered into the matters, whereof you write, and dealt with
three or four of several Colleges, concerning those among whom they live. I
find, that men are very dangerous in this point generally favoring
reformation: but when it comes to the particular point, some have not yet
considered of these things, for which others in the Church are so much
troubled: others are afraid to testify any thing with their hands, least it
breed danger before the time. And after: many favor the cause of reformation,
but they are not Ministers, but young students, of whom there is good hope, if
it be not cut off by violent dealing before the time. As I hear by you* so I
mean to go forward, where there is any hope, and to learn the number, and to
certify you thereof.

Furthermore, at the time of the Parliament last mentioned, I find, that there
was a national Synod held likewise in London by these brethren: according to
their former decisions and Synodicall Discipline. This appears by three
letters. The first was, from eleven ministers of Essex, to Field: wherein they
desire to be certified, 26. Ia. 1584.
whether the brethren meant to be exercised, in prayer and fasting, and upon
what day. The second was, from nine of the said Ministers, to Field and
Charke: 2. Febru. 1584.
wherein they writ thus: We have elected two Godly and faithful brethren,
Master Wright and Master Gifford, to join with you in that business. 29.
Nouemb. 1584.
The third was, from Gelibrand, to Field: Wherein he excuses himself of a
great oversight, in these words. Touching my departure from that holy assembly
without leave, etc. I crave pardon, both of you and them, etc. And thus (says
he) commending this holy cause to the Lord himself, and your godly counsel
to the President thereof, I take my leave.

CHAP. V.
Their Book of Discipline is reuiewed: it was after sent abroad about, 1587.
it was put in practice, in Northamptonshire and many other places.
NOtwithstanding that the book of Discipline was abroad, as it has been
noted, (in the third chapter,) and that the brethren had framed themselves (as
they might) unto the rules thereof: yet there were found, some imperfections in
it: which in the Synod, mentioned in the former chapter, (as I take it) were
referred to Master Trauers, to be corrected and ordered by him, as his
leisure will permit. Which appears by a letter of Master Fields to Master
Trauers, in these words.

Concerning our other business: I would wish, that the Discipline were read over
with as much speed as could be, Field to Trauers. 3. Iulie. 1585.
and that some good directions were given, for the brethren abroad, who are
earnest to enter some good course, for the furtherance of the L: cause. And
after in the same place: I find many abroad, very willing to join with the
best: to put in practice that which shall be agreed upon, by the brethren. If
it might please the brethren therefore, that those or the like instructions
(which we had) with a perfect coppie of the Discipline, might be sent, I would
wholly employ my self in that service. Another also upon the longer stay
thereof. I pray you hasten the form of Discipline and send it. And the same
man again: Gelibrand to Field. 9. of Nouem. 1585
I pray you remember the form of Discipline, which Master Trauers promised to
make perfect, and send it me when it is finished. Gelibrand to Field, 30.
January.
We will put it in practice, and try men's minds therein, as we may.

According to these requests, the draught of Discipline was at the last
finished: and then sent abroad, to be approved generally by all the
brotherhood, as may thus appear: The discipline we have received, and we give
you and the brethren hearty thanks for it. Gelibrand to Field.
As yet we are not resolved in all points of it: having had but small time to
peruse it, nor the commodity of often meeting about it. But we have taken
order for our monthly assembly, and after our own consents yielded unto it,
for associating other into our company, Sands to Field 20. June 1587.
whom we shall think approved. And an other. We heartily give God thanks
(says one) for the godly and most Christian pains of the brethren, in the
travail of the Discipline: which is come to our hands to be considered-of
Gelibrands letter of his receipt of the book of Discipline, was written in the
name of the brethren in Oxford. At which time there was another Synod held in
London: whither (says the letter) Master West and Master Brown were sent
from Oxford: to whom they referred the estate of their Church, to be related:
and by whom they desired to understand, directions from the Synod, how they
might deal afterward in those matters.

Within a while after, This appears under M. Wights hand.
vz. 1587. (as I suppose,) there was in like sort an assembly or Synod held
of the Cambridgeshire brotherhood: accompanied peradventure with some of other
shires. About which time also, upon the new edition of the foresaid book, the
further practice of the Discipline mentioned by Cholmeley, 1583. (as is before
showed) began to spread it self more freely, into the most parts of the
Realm: but especially (for ought I do yet understand) it was most friendly
entertained, amongst the ministers of Northamptonshire, as it appears in
record by some of their own depositions, 16. of May, 1590. in these words
following. About two years and a half, since the whole shire was divided into
three Classes. M. Johnson. So in effect M. Litleton M. Sharp.
1. The Classis of Northamptonshire, consisting of these Ministers: Master
Snape, Master Penrie, Master Sibthorpe, Master Edwards, Master Littleton,
Master Bradshaw, Master Lark, Master Fleshware, Master Spicer, etc. 2. The
Classis of Dauentrie side, consisting of these: Master Barebon, Master
Rogers, Master King, Master Smart, Master Sharp, Master Prowdloe, Master
Elliston, etc. 3. The Classis of Kettring side: consisting of these: Master
Stone, Master Williamson, Master Fawsbrooke, Master Patinson, Master
Massey* etc.

This devise (says Master Johnson) is commonly received in most M. Snape
reported as much, as Edward Smith. Ri. Hawgar and Ri. Holme have deposed
parts of England, (as I have heard in sundry of our meetings:) but
especially, in Warwickshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, etc.

The manner of every particular Classis is this. At M. Sharp and M. Litleton
do likewise herein agree with M. Johnson.
their meeting (which is always in some private house, but yet in their Mother
Cities) first a moderator is chosen* in this sort: one of them conceiueth a
prayer, for Gods direction in that choice.

Then he, that conceived the prayer, sits alone in scrutonie: and every one
gives his voice secretly unto him. He that has most voices is chosen.

The moderator, thus chosen, conceiueth another prayer: that God would bless
him in the course of his office. Then being set at the tables end, with his
brethren by him: the names of all the brethren are called. If any were absent
at their first sitting down, he sits after in order, as he comes, for
avoiding of superiority.

The authority of the moderator endures until the next meeting of that
Classis. At the breaking up of every Classis, there is ever some certain time
appointed, when they shall meet again: which is sometime within a fortnight,
but commonly three weeks at the furthest: If any thing do fall out in the mean
time, fit to be consulted upon: the moderator may call the Classis together
sooner, according to an order made amongst themselves.

It is Mast. Litleton deposes as much.
a general order, that when any is admitted into a Classis: he does promise
under his hand, that he will submit himself, and be obedient to all such
orders and decrees, as shall be set down by the same Classis to be observed.

As for example: these were part of the particular articles, whereunto every
one of Northampton Classis did subscribe, at his entering or admittance into it:
we do promise to submit our selves, unto such orders and decrees, as shall be
set down by our Classis: We do promise to submit our selves, to be censured by
our brethren of this Classis, in all matters concerning doctrine and
Discipline, etc.

In this Classis it was furthermore concluded and agreed upon, that when any
controversy did arise, touching any matters of doctrine, or about the
interpretation of any place of Scriptures: every one of that Classis, should
always yield therein, unto that interpretation and resolution, which the
brethren of that Classis should determine of. And so also when any questions
did rise amongst them of greater difficulty. As for example, Master Stone
moved this question to the Northampton Classis in the behalf of one: vz. two
are contracted: one of them marries with a third: he or she so married are
free again. The question is: whether the former contract, do now again
bind. And the resolution was: it did not: which was a false Resolution.

The determinations and acts concluded upon in this Classis, Mast. Sharp to
the same purpose of Dauentry Classis.
were registered in a book by Snape: chosen Register by the company, and who
always kept the same.

Besides these particular Classes, there is another kind of meeting, which is
termed the Assembly. And it consists (for example) in Northamptonshire, of
the number of six: that is two of every Classis, which are sent thither by
election. The ordinary place of this assembly in Northa^ptonshire, was at
Northampton: where Snape commonly was one, and a chief man, Barbon and King,
were the men that usually came from Dauentry side: and Stone and Williamson
from Kettring side.

At the meeting of the six, there is always a moderator first chosen, in
manner and form, as in the Classis: and so likewise for their further order of
proceeding. The moderator continues his authority, over all the three
Classes, until the like meeting happen again: which is never certain. But yet
commonly within six or eight weeks, upon occasion signified from the Classes
unto this moderator. For unto him belongs the calling of this assembly.

The matters, which here are handled, are those of great moment; such as
concern the state of the Church generally. As for example: the writing of
letters to the brethren at Oxford, Cambridge, and London: The like Ma. Sharp
of Dauentry Classis
to certify them of their proceedings, and to know what course is held amongst
them, in those places, for the Discipline and government, which they term
Reformation:) to the intent, that the particular Classes, upon their
aduertisements, may direct themselves, and their Churches accordingly.

It is likewise always concluded, at such times, which of the six assembled,
shall pen the letters. And in this choice, Snape was commonly the man.

The men, to whom they usually did write: were one in Cambridge; Trauers in
London, and Gelibrand in Oxford: When any answers were returned from those
places: they were commonly directed to Snape, or to him that had written to
them, in the name of the brethren.

Two especial points (I remember) were concluded in this assembly: the one
was, for a suruay of all the Churches in Northhamptonshire: M. Sharp to to the
same purpose of Dauentrie Classis.
the other, for an order to be observed at the last Parliament, which then drew
near.

The suruay was, to know what every benefice in the shire was worth, how many
souls by a general conjecture, were in every parish: who were the
incumbents, and of what life, pains and qualities they were. To this purpose,
the fittest men, and such as were best acquainted in the shire were nominated:
as Litleton for Haddon Deanerie, etc. Which duty he performed for his part to
the uttermost: and brought a most railing Discourse, against every Minister,
which was not of our company.

The end propounded of this survey, was: vz. that if upon signification to the
brethren abroad, what was done there: they would likewise make the like survey
in other countries: the Parliament (if need required, and to the better
furthering of their purposes) might have a general view, of all the Ministers
in England, that impugned their desires.

The second point before mentioned was this: vz. a conclusion to send up to
London, one or two of every Classis in Northhamptonshire, with letters of
credit, to attend at the Parliament: to join themselves with the brethren of
other countries: and to offer disputation, (if it should be so thought meet)
and to undertake any other such matter, as should then and there be determined
of amongst them: and that there should be letters written, of this resolution,
to know how the brethren abroad liked it: or what other course they would hold,
at that time, for the bringing in of Discipline and Church government.

These two points, were penned by Snape: and sent to the brethren abroad, as it
was ordered.

What answer was returned to Snape, from the brethren in Oxford and Cambridge,
I know not: but well I remember, that Trauerse did write to Snape, a very
cunning Letter: wherein he showed himself not to mislike the foresaid suruay
to be generally made, but signified, that the Parliament drawing on so fast,
it could not be done so soon. But for the second point: that (he writ) was
liked, and meet to be followed.

Whereupon the Classes of Northamptonshire, did send up some three or four, as
Settle for Northampton, Rogers for Dauentry, etc. with a further conclusion,
that if any of them (upon occasion) should be committed, others should be sent
up in their places.

Although the time was short, This survey has been made in the most shires of
England: as by the surueies themselves to be showed it appears. They are in
manner of heathnish libels.
for the general accomplishing of these forenamed points: yet this examinate
thinks, some thing was done in the first: vz. as he has heard, a suruay was
made to the purpose before touched, of the Ministers in Northfolke, Suffolk
and Essex. And for the second, true it was, that many were sent to attend at
the Parliament, from the most parts of England. And one resolution was, that
some twenty or thirty of them, should have come in their gowns, with all
gravity, to the Parliament-house-dore; and there have desired by petition a
disputation.

Furthermore, concerning some censures used, there was a general consent and
purpose, amongst the brethren, touching a secret kind of excommunication: for
examples sake. A lay man commits some sin. One of the Elders was to
admonish him. The party is obstinate. The Elder must take two or three with
him the second time. And if this serve not, then he is to be debarred from the
communion. In this case, if the said party should (notwithstanding) intrude
himself to communicate, then it was agreed to repel him, upon pretense of
certain words in the communion book. So as thereby, they might keep their
own course, for their Discipline, and yet have a cloak to cover them withal,
out of the book.

Again, an other thing is notable to this effect. About a year and a half a
go, John Nelson of Northampton, an Elder or a Deacon of Saint Peter's, (as I
think) having either his daughter, or his sister gotten with child, in his
house, by one of his servants, Master Snape dealt with the said servant, to
urge him to public repentance: and at the last, so far prevailed with him,
(as it was thought,) that he promised the next sunday so to do: but came not.
Whereupon Snape made a very bitter Sermon against him. The next Sunday he came
indeed. And then Snape made a long prayer, that God would give him grace, to
make a faithful acknowledgement of his sin etc. That done, the penitentiary,
made public confession etc. Which being performed, Snape absolved him; and
then entered into a great discourse how clear the party was, and free from
that sin committed, even as though he had bin newly born: charging the
congregation, that no man should presume, at any time after, to object the same
unto him. But that, which was most wondered at: whereas this poor man was thus
dealt withal, Snape caused lame Pretty, a Soldier of Barwicke (who without
any calling in the Church at all, saving that he had a tolleration to read, did
such service in that place, as was appointed by Snape to be read, till he came
to Church) the next morning to marry the said penitentiarie to the woman with
child before named, without any bringing of her, unto any such public
repentance. Hereof, grew amongst the people great speech, that the poor man was
so used, and the cicher man's sister or daughter was so freed. The said lame
Soldier, has married many in that place, upon Snapes commandment: for that
Snape holds, that duty to appertain no more to the Ministers office, then
to any other man.

And as touching that point mentioned, of the bretherens submitting of
themselves, by subscription, to be censured in their Classis: it was thus used
in the Northampton Classis. The brethren being together in a chamber, the
party to be first censured, (as they were all to be in course) goes forth out
of the chamber. Then the moderator asks every man's opinion of him: how he
behaueth himself as well in his life, as in his Ministry: and every man,
having spoken his opinion, the party is called in: and then, if he were not
any way touched, he is greatly commended: if otherwise, then reproved, as the
causes require. For example, Edwards of Cortnall coming under this censure,
was blamed for using the Cross in Baptism: and at his comming-in again, was
wonderful sharply dealt withal for the same.

Thus far Master Johnson of the Northampton Classis. With whom do also
agree in the principal points: Master Littleton, as touching the same
Classis, Master Sharp, and Master Walker, Preachers and persons deposed,
concerning the Classis of Dauentry side: and Master Stone (a Preacher
likewise) upon his oath, for that of Kettring side. One or two points I may not
omit, Stone in the Starchamber.
which Master Stone has delivered. He confesses that at diverse times,
Master Snape, Master Barbon; Master Sharp, Master Prowdloe, Master King,
Master Johnson, Master Sibthorp, Master Spicer, Master Baxter, Master
Littleton, Master Williamson, Master Bradshaw, Master Fleshware, Master
Harrison, and he, have met in Northampton: and likewise at Kettring: and at
his house, the most of them, with some others as Master Rishbrooke, Master
Atkinson, Master Dauyes, Master Massye, Master Oaks etc. about matters of
discipline. And he says further, that in an assembly had, either at his house
or at Kettring, it was propounded, treated, and concluded, that the Apocrypha
writings were not to be read in the Church. And in an other assembly, which of
them he does not remember, he affirms likewise, that it was debated and
concluded upon, that the superiority of the Bishops of this land, over the rest
of the Ministers, is not warranted by the word of God.

To these depositions, concerning the Northamptonshire Classes, I might add
the depositions of one master Parker, Vicar of Dedham in Essex, for the proof
of the Classes in that shire: as of one about Brayntree side, consisting of
these Ministers, master Culuerwell, master Rogers, master Gifford etc.
another about Colchester, consisting of these Ministers, Doctor Chapman, Doctor
Chricke, master Dowe, master Farrar, master Newman, master Tey etc. and so
likewise the depositions of others.

Ego singulis sabbatis, si non alius adueniens locum suppleat, cum prescripta
leiturgias formula nihil habens co^mertij; Hen. Asker to Field. Apr. 14. 1585.
in coetu concionem habeo: idque reuerendorum fratrum consilio, qui suos habent
singulis fere hebdomadis conuentus, qui etiam me in eorum numerum, (sic est
mihi propitius Deus,) benign ascripserunt. I preach every Sabbath day, (if no
other that comes by chance, does supply the place) having nothing to do at
all with the form or book of Common Prayer: and that by the counsel of the
reverend brethren: who have their meetings almost every week, who have also,
(God being so merciful unto me) admitted me very kindly into their number.

But in following of that course, I should be too tedious. I will only set
down, one man's witness more, agreeing with Master Johnson; for the proof,
that the like Classes, are or have been held in most Shires in England: and so
referring you to judge of them all, by that of Northampton, I will go forward.

About two years since, Master Snape did say and affirm, in the presence of
Edward Smith, Robert Vicars, Edward Bird, Richard Holmes, and himself, that
there were three or four small Classes of Ministers in every shire, where
there were any learned Preachers, who did use (in their meetinges) to debate of
the Discipline, by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and that the said
several small Classes, did send their resolutions and opinions, to the greater
assemblies at Cambridge at Sturbridge Fair time, and at London at Bartholomew
Fair time, which did meet together also for the same purpose: and that if the
said great assembly did like of that, which was done by the smaller Classes,
then was the same (so liked of) generally concluded, to be that, which ought to
be, or stand, in the Church. (As for example.) That it was concluded and agreed
upon, both in the said Classical and general assemblies; that the dumb
ministry was no ministry, or else no lawful ministry: and that the
Ministers in their several charges, should all teach one kind of doctrine,
tending to the erecting of the foresaid government, by Pastors, Doctors,
Elders and Deacons: which points ( says Holmes of himself in another
examination) were concluded in the Synod at Sturbridge Fair last. vz. 1588.

CHAP. VI.
A Synod is held at Couentrie, 1588. many questions are resolved, the book of
Discipline is subscribed unto.
THere is mention made, in the last chapter, of a Synod or meeting, 1587. of
the Cambridgeshire Classical Ministers, and peradventure of some others also
with them. In which meeting there were certain questions propounded and dealt
in: the which questions were afterward sent by their direction, to the
Warwickshire Classes, or brethren assembled in those parts, to be further
entreated of and resolved.

The next year after, vz. 1588. the said Warwickeshire Classes, etc.
assembling themselves together, in council, (as it seems at Couentry,) the
questions mentioned, were determined upon: and besides, other matters were also
concluded, as by the acts themselves following (to be showed under Master
Wights hand, and are acknowledged in effect upon two men's oaths in the
Star Chamber) may sufficiently appear. Thus the proceedinges of that meeting
are entitled. Acta conuentus Classium Warwic, die decimo, quarti. 1588. The
Acts of the assembly of the Warwickeshire Classes the tenth day of the fourth
month. And touching the questions specified. Questiones a fratribus ex Synodo
Cantabrigiensi, anno superiore delatae, ea quae sequitur formula sunt
explicatae. The questions brought the other year, from the brethren of the
Cambridge Synod, are resolved in manner as follows. I will not trouble my
paper with the form which they used, but these were some of their
resolutions: vz.

That private Baptism is unlawful.

That it is not lawful, to read homilies in the Church.

That the sign of the Cross, is not to be used in Baptism.

That the faithful ought not to communicate with unlearned

ministers, although they may be present at their service, if they come of
purpose to hear a sermon. The reason is, because lay men, as well as ministers,
may read public service.

That the calling of Bishops etc. is unlawful.

That as they deal in causes ecclesiastical, there is no duty belonging unto
them, nor any, publicly to be given them.

That it is not lawful, to be ordained by the^ into the ministry; or to
denounce either suspensions or excommunications sent from the^.

That it is not lawful, to rest in the Bishops deprivation of any from the
ministry, except (upon consultation with the neighborministers adjoining, and
his flock) it seem so good unto them: but that he continue in the same,
until he be compelled to the contrary by civil force.

That it is not lawful, to appear in a Bishops Court: but with protestation
of their unlawfulness.

That Bishops are not to be acknowledged, either for Doctors, Elders, or
Deacons, as having no ordinary calling.

That touching the restoration of their Ecclesiastical discipline, it ought
to be taught to the people, data occasion, as occasion should serve.

That nondum (as yet) the people are not to be solicited, public (publicly)
to the practice of the discipline: donec, (till) they be better instructed in
the knowledge of it.

That men of better understanding, are to be allured privately, to the present
embracing of the Discipline and practice of it, as far as they shall be well
able, with the peace of the Church. And thus far the provincial Synod of
the Warwickeshire Classis.

Likewise at that time, there was in the same assembly, a great approbation
obtained of the foresaid book of Discipline, as to be a draught of Discipline,
essential and necessary for all times: and certain articles (being devised
in approbation, and for the manner of the use of that book,) were then brought
forth, treated-of, and subscribed unto, (as Master Nutter and Master Cleuely,
two that were then present, have deposed,) Nutter and Cleueley in the
Star Chamber
by Master Cartwright, Master Fenne, Master Wight, etc. who promised to
guide themselves by the said Discipline, and according to it, as it is set
down in the said articles, which herafter shall be likewise declared. It
appears also by the said parties depositions, that diverse others did
subscribe at the same time, (or at the least within a short time after,) but
they might not (forsooth) by reason of their own consciences, name them.
Howbeit the matter is otherwise plain enough, who they were: by a note taken
with Master Litleton: vz. John Oxenbridge, Edward Gellibrand, Hercules
Cleuely, Anthony Nutter, Leonard Fetherstone, Matthew Hulme, Edward Lord, etc.

This book, having thus at the last received this great allowance, more
authentically: was carried far and nere, for a general ratification of all
the brethren. It was offered to the Dauentry side Classis, Sharp and Walker
before the Commissioners.
as Master Sharp and Master Walker have deposed; and likewise at Northampton by
Penry, as Master Litleton affirms. But that, which Master Johnson has set
down, Johnson before the Commissioners.
is worthy the remembrance. The effect of it, is this: that when the book of
Discipline came to Northampton, to be subscribed unto: there was a general
censuring used amongst the brethren there, as it were to sanctify themselves,
partly by sustaining a kind of penance, and reproof for their former
conformity, to the orders of the Church, established by her Majesty, and other
matters of conversation: and partly to prepare their minds for the devout
accepting of the foresaid book. In which course of censuring used at that
time, there was such ripping up, one of another life, even from their youth,
as that they came unto great bitterness, with many reuiling terms amongst
themselves, one growing thereby odious to another, and some did thereupon
utterly forsake those kind of assemblies.

CHAP. VII.
The book of the pretended Discipline is made perfect at Cambridge: certain
Synodes are kept: and of their estimation.
IT might have been deemed, that after so many viewes, Synodes, and
subscriptions, this worthy draught of discipline, would have grown to great
perfection: but it falls out otherwise. For (as it is confessed upon oath)
at Sturbridge Fayre-time, the next year (after the said Classical counsel of
the Warwicke-shire brethren) vz. in the year, 1589. there was another Synod
or general meeting, held in Saint John's College in Cambridge. Where (says
M. Barber) they did correct* alter, and amend diverse imperfections contained in
the book, called Disciplina ecclesiae sacra, verbo Dei descripta: and (as
master Stone affirms) did not only perfect the said form of Discipline,
but also did then and there, (as he remembers*) voluntarily agree amongst
themselves, that so many as would should subscribe to the said book of
Discipline after that time. The persons, that met in this assembly, were as
these two last deponents affirm,) master Cartwright, master Snape, master
Allen, master Gifford, master Perkins, master Stone, master Barber, master
Harrison, with others, etc.

I find mention also of another Synod, 1589. held (as I take it) at Ipswich.
Thus one John Ward did write, that year, to certain at Ipswich: I think not
to come over, till the Synod, which is (as I take it) a month after
Michaelmas.

It has been observed before, out of master Edmonds deposition: cap. 2. who
were the Classical brethren of London. It is also fit to be understood, who
they are, that most commonly met there also, at their more general,
provincial or national assemblies or Synodes. And this both master Barber,
and master Stone, do sufficiently declare. For the space of about four
years last past, (says master Barber,) and since the last Parliament, (says
master Stone,) there have bin several meetings in London at the houses of
master Gardener, master Egerton, master Trauers, and master Barber. The
persons, that usually met in these assemblies, (says master Barber,) were
master Cartwright, master Charke, master Trauers, master Egerton, master
Gardener, master Oxenbridge, master Gelibrand, master Culuerwell, master
Brown of Oxford, master Allen, master Gifford, master Sommerscales, and
himself.

Master Cartwright, master Trauers, and master Egerton, were at sundry times
chosen Moderators or Presidents in the said assemblies. And afterward
generally of the office of the Moderators. The resolutions, conclusions, and
determinations of such matters, as were disputed-of, and agreed-vpon, by the
more number of them, that so disputed in the said assemblies: were by the said
Moderators or Presidents, before named, at the times and places of the said
several assemblies, summarily and briefly, either written in a book, or
otherwise set-downe in loose papers, as to the said Moderators, or Presidentes
should be thought meet or convenient.

As the Classical assemblies of London were of greater estimation, then those
in the Country: so these more general meetings or Synodes last mentioned, were
of highest authority: and indeed the grand test of all the rest. It may be
said truly of them both, that they have been the kindling sparks of all those
flames, which are in the Church. What was there ordered, went, as perfectly
current. From thence, the brethren, of other places, did fetch their light. As
doubts did arise, thither they were sent to be resolved. The Classical and
Synodicall decrees in other places, were never authentical indeed, (as it
seems,) till there they were ratified. The chiefest directions, for all the
brethren elsewhere, were sent from thence. It is wonderful to consider, how
men so obstinate and wilful in their own ways against the Church of England,
established by her Majesty; should be brought to submit themselves in such
sort, as they did, to be led by these assemblies, as elsewhere it does appear.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon some detecting of the premises some were called into question: they
refuse to be examined: all they were charged, which is in effect confessed.
IN the year, 1590. upon the detecting (before some of her Majesty's
Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical) of the most of these things, whereof I
have hitherto spoken: Interrogatories were drawn, containing in them the
effect of all the premises; and diverse such Ministers were sent for, as were
said to have been the chief ringleaders in all those actions, Accordingly
they appeared: but in the place when they should be examined, In the Preface
they refused to answer upon their oaths. Diverse pretenses thereof were made,
as one; that first they would see the Interrogatories, whereof they should be
examined. The general sum of them, was imparted unto them: and it was
likewise told them, that they should be charged to answer no further, then by
the laws of the Realm they were bound to do. But all this would not serve.
Whereupon the Interrogatories themselves were showed unto some, as namely to
Master Snape, who stood most at the first upon that point, and did pretend,
that if first he might see them, he would then answer unto them. But the
issue was accordingly, as it was expected: For having perused them, he was
further-of, then he was before: and writ to his friends, what was the sum of
them: to the intent they might be forewarned, and so (as he said) become better
armed. Which course taken by him: was not without the great providence of God.
For thereby their whole plot, and all in effect, that was laid to their
charges, was discovered. His Letters were intercepted, wherein he writes after
this sort.

Reverend and beloved, this day April the 7. I have been again before the
Commissioners: Snape to N. N. 1590.
After much adoo, I obtained to see and peruse the Articles against me, (but
briefly and in their presence only,) they are many, (36. 37. besides those
under mine own hand,) and very large, some twelve, some twenty lines long,
consisting of many branches. As far as I could (for the time) conceive and
remember, they may be referred to these two heads: some concerning may self,
together with others, and some touching my self alone. The former sort are
touching Classes and Synodes: wherein there are mentioned particular places:
(London, Oxford, Cambridge:) times (Act, Commencement, Sturbridge fair,
Term:) persons, ( Cartwright, Perkins, Trauers, Charke, Egerton, Barbon,
Stone, Snape, Knewstub, Allin, Dike, and diverse others, etc.) and some things
dealt* in and agreed upon, etc. By all which, besides many other things
specified, it is most evident, that they have manifest and certain knowledge,
not only of generals, but also of specials and particulars.

Beloved, Snape to Barbon April 11. 1590. and so also to Stone.
I have twice appeared before the high Commissioners: the first time, the issue
was prison: the second, close prison. This is my state now: the causes of both,
and the proceedings in both, you stall receive of Master Knightlye, the former
more large in a Dialogue, the latter more briefly in a Letter: both imperfect,
both vnperused: read them, and return them with what speed you may: for I
have now no copy of them: let them be wisely kept, lest they breed more
anger. I have procured another copy to be sent to Master Stone, that in both
places you might be forewarned, and forearmed. Touching the conferences, those
of our Country, are yet more particularly discovered: persons (besides those
there named) King, of Coleworth: Prowdloe, of Weeden, etc. Spicer, of Cogenho:
Edwardes, of Cortenhall, etc. places: Sharpes house at Fawseley: Snapes chamber
at Northampton, etc. Si quis coniecturae sit locus: I would judge John Johnson
to have been the man: because (to my remembrance) persons and things of his
time being mentioned, he only is not named. Whosoever and howsoever, we see
the Lord calls us to be more resolute. They will not, they cannot be any
longer concealed: now whether it were better and more safe, that one man with
the consent of the rest, should boldly, freely, and wisely, confess and lay
open, etc. or that some weak (or wicked) man should without consent, and in
evil sort acknowledge, etc. Judge you: the thing they ayme-at, is: A
conuenticle. It must come to trial. In the cause of murder, etc. it is wont
to be enquired, whether the party fled upon it: consider and apply to this
matter, and the Lord give us wisdom in all things. It were good you sent to
T. C. with speed.

CHAP. IX.
Cartwright is called for, by authority: a Synod is held in London: it is
there resolved that he shall refuse to be examined upon his oath.
Afterward the same year before mentioned, 1590. (in September, as I take
it,) Master Cartwright upon occasion was sent for, by the said Commissioners.
Now, about a week or a fortnight before, Cartwright was committed, (says
Master Stone) whereas, Depos. in the Star Chamber.
the question mentioned by Snape to Barbon and the brethren: (which, as it
seems, troubled them all:) vz. whether it were not fit, that one man with the
consent of the rest, should boldly, freely, and wisely, confess and lay open
etc. came to be disputed in London. There was a Synod or meeting, held at
Master Gardiners, by these brethren, Master Cartwright, Master Charke,
Master Trauerse, Master Egerton, Master Cardiner, Master Barbon, Master
Barber, master Oxenbridge, master Gelibrand, master Culuerwel, my self, and
certain other Ministers: and they did then and there debate and consider
amongst themselves, whether it were fit or convenient, that the said master
Cartwright, (after his commitment to prison) should discover or reveal, all or
any the matters, which passed in conference and disputation, in any of their
former assemblies, or not. What the resolution hereof was, whether through the
examiners oversight, or Master Stones perverseness, (I know not) but it is
not set down. Howbeit the effects which followed, do make it manifest.

For master Cartwright, about the time before limited, being conuented: and
moved in the Consistory at Paul's, by the Bishop of London, the then two Lords
chief Justices, master Justice Gaudy, master Sergeant Puckering, now Lord
Keeper of the great Scale of England, master Attorney General, now Lord
Chief Justice of England: and diverse others her Majesty's Commissioners then
present to take his oath to answer to certain Interrogatories: yet
notwithstanding that the chief points of them were then delivered in general
terms unto him, and that the said both honorable and grave persons, did
(every man) severally assure him upon their credits, that by the laws of the
Realm he was bound to take his oath, and thereupon to answer, as he was
required: he desired to be borne withal, and said that he thought he was not
bound by the laws of God so to do.

CHAP. X.
Further proof for their practice of their Discipline: collected out of the
rules of their subscribed book.
IF hitherto, as yet the point (I have in hand) be not sufficiently proved:
vz. that our English reformers have attempted after the Scottish Ministers
fashion, to bring into the Church of England, their pretended Disciplinarian
government, of themselves, and by their own authority, without any further
staying (as they had done) for the civil Magistrate, albeit they pretend now
the contrary: then it is fit that I produce some further matter to this purpose.

Amongst sundry things in the said book of Discipline, let these few be well
considered of, and weighed. It is there said: Presbyterium in singulis
ecclesiis constituendum est, there ought to be erected in every Church a
Presbytery. Now if they had meant, (as it is pretended) not to have put their
book, or at the least some chief parts thereof in practice, until it should
have been established by Act of Parliament, they would have said for
constituendum est, there ought to be erected, constituatur, let there be
erected in every parish a Presbytery.

Again, Cap. de convent. ecclesiae.
in all their assemblies prescribed in the book, this was one point to be
still inquired of: vtrum disciplina vigeat, whether the Discipline had any life
in it, or were esteemed, or continued: which question had been frivolous, and
very unmeet to have been continued, as prescribed by Law, if the Discipline
it self had been allowed by Act of Parliament, before that question should
have been moved.

Furthermore says the book: Cap. de concionibus ad ecclesiam habendis.
in funeribus desuescendum est commode, ab habendis concionibus, quod periculum
sit, ne superstitionem quorundam foueant, aut vanitati inseruiant: The
Preachers must leaue-of by little and little, as they may conveniently, to
preach at burials, least thereby they nourish the superstition of some men, or
give over themselves to the preservation of vanity.

Likewise, festi dies sunt commode abolendi: holy days (as we term them)
must be abolished, commode, as they may, handsomely. Now, if this book had
not been meant, to have been put in practice in these two points, before it
had come forth, authorized by law: they would have said for the reasons
alleged: from henceforth let there be, or it is ordered, that there shall be
no more preaching at burials, nor holy days observed, or let them henceforth
be abolished.

Moreover: reliquae liturgiae tota ratio in sacramentorum administratione, Cap.
de reliqui. Liturg. officiis.
and ex vsu ecclesiae in nuptiarum benedictione consist it. Cuius forma
commodissima est, quae ab ecclesiis vsurpatur, quae disciplinam ex Dei verbo
instaurarunt. The rest of the liturgy does consist in the administration of the
Sacra^ents, and (as the use of the Church is,) in blessing of marriages. The
form whereof, is most fit and commodious, that is used by those Churches,
which have erected the discipline, according to the word of God.

In the Parliament (27. of her Majesty: as I remember) the brethren having
made another book, termed at that time: A book of the form of common
prayers, etc. and containing in it the effect of their whole pretended
discipline: the same book was penned, altogether statute and lawlike, and
their petition in the behalf of it was: vz. May it therefore please your
majesty, etc. that it may be enacted, etc. that the book hereunto annexed,
etc. entitled: a book of the form of common prayers, administration of
Sacraments, etc. and every thing therein contained, may be from henceforth
authorized, put in ure, and practiced throughout all your majesty's dominions.
See here, when they hoped to have attained their purposes by law, and to have
had the same accordingly established: they offered to the Parliament a book of
their own, for the form of common prayers, etc. and thought it (as it seems)
altogether inconvenient, to leave every minister to his own choice, to use
what form he list, other then such as were allowed in some Church, which had
received the Discipline: for any such they liked-of indefinitly.

Whereby it to me it seems manifest, that they never meant, to have required
the enacting of that Chapter, de reliquis liturgiae officijs, but only to set
down, what course their brethren should follow for the interim, until they
might take further order for a book of their own.

Lastly, in all this whole book of Discipline, there is not once mention made
of any authority, or office, in or over the Church; belonging to the Christian
civil Magistrate. He has not so much, as either voice or place, in any of
their Synodes, as a member thereof: except he be chosen to be an Elder. He has
not any power assigned unto him to call a Synod: no, though it be a National
Synod: nor so much as to appoint the particular times or places of their
meetinges, nor (which is most strange,) so much as that his assent, is to be
required to any of their Canons. But all these things are set down in this
book, as of right to appertain unto their Ministers and Elders. For the
trial whereof: I must needs refer you to the book it self, which is in
many men's hands: where you shall find the brethren ascribe that to
themselves, which in the greatest darkness of Popery, all the BBs. in the Land
(for ought I do remember) durst never challenge. Which is a proof sufficient,
that either they meant by cunning to have deprived her Majesty, by her own
consent, of all her regal authority, in these and such like causes of the
Church, as not of right belonging unto her (which they will not acknowledge:)
or otherwise, that they had agreed without her consent, to take this authority
unto themselves: which (if they had any conscience) they would not stick to
confess: that being assuredly their current doctrine, as in some other place
it shall hereafter more fully appear.

But it may be said that these are only collections. Well let them be, as they
are. Indeed there is no cause, why I should stand upon collections, having yet
in store most evident demonstrations.

CHAP. XI.
Further proof for their practice of their Discipline out of the articles they
subscribed.
THere has been often mention made, of the articles, whereunto the brethren
subscribed, for their allowance and practice of the said book of Discipline:
and they are word for word, as here I do set them down, according to the
deposition of those, that subscribed unto them, and as they are to be showed
under Master Wights hand.

We the brethren assembled together, in the name of God, having heard and
examined, by the word of God, according to our best ability and judgment in
it, a draught of discipline essential, and necessary for all times, and
Synodicall, gathered out of the Synodes, and use of the Churches; have thought
good to testify, concerning it, as follows.

We acknowledge and confess the same, agreeable to Gods most holy word, so
far as we are able to judge or discern of it, excepting some few points,
which we have sent to our Reverend brethren of this assembly, for their
further resolution.

We affirm it to be the same, which we desire to be established in this
Church, by daily prayer to God: which we promise (as God shall offer
opportunity, and give us to discern it so expedient) by humble suit unto her
Majesty's honor able Council, and the Parliament, and by all other lawful
and convenient means, to further and advance, so far as the laws, and
peace, and the present estate of our Church, will suffer it, and not enforce to
the contrary.

We promise to guide our selves, and to be guided by it, and according to it.

For more especial declaration of some points more important and necessary,
we promise uniformly, to follow such order, when we preach the word of God, as
in the book by us is set down, in the Chapters of the office of Ministers of
the word, of preaching or sermons, of Sacraments, of Baptism, and of the Lords
supper.

Further also, we promise to follow the order set down in the Chapters of
the meetings, as far as it concerns the Ministers of the word. For which
purpose, we promise to meet every six weeks together, in Classical
conferences, with such of the brethren here assembled, as for their
neighborhood may fit us best: and such other, as by their advise we shall be
desired to join with us.

The like we promise, for Provincial meetinges every half year from our
conferences, to send unto them, as is set down in the Chapter, concerning the
Provinces, and the conferences belonging unto them, being divided according to
the order following.

Likewise also, that we will attend the general assembly every, year, and at
all Parliaments, and as often as by order it shall be thought good, to be
assembled. Hitherto the Articles.

Now by these articles, and by their subscription unto them, it is most
evident, that the pretenses made by some, are but merely shifts: as that their
purpose only was, to have the book in readiness against a Parliament, and that
they subscribed the articles to no other end, but only to testify their
agreement in judgment, for that they were charged to disagree amongst
themselves. For if that had been their intent, it had been sufficiently
performed, by subscribing to the first article only. But they proceede-on
further: and entered into a certain league, or association, binding themselves
by promise; under their hands, what they (for their own parts) will attempt,
and as they might perform.

In the second article, (as it is apparent,) there are other lawful means
promised to be undertaken, (for the advancing of the Discipline,) then prayers
to God, and supplications to her Majesty and the Parliament. Litleton.
Whereupon Master Litleton (a subscriber) being examined, what he understood
those means to be: Before the Commissioners.
answers upon his oath, that he thinks their private conferences, were
meant, to be those lawful means mentioned in the article. Which is according
to the resolution of the brethren in of London, set down before, out of
Master Edmondes examination: vz. that seeing they could not prevail, Before
the Commissioners.
by suit to the State: the Ministers themselves should set up the Discipline,
as they should be able. And Master Johnson, is also as direct upon his oath,
to the same effect, saying.

It was a general conclusion amongst all the Classes, and brethren, that
forasmuch, as the Discipline required by petitions, could not be publicly
established by law, it was thought in conscience necessary, to establish it
and practice it privately: to which purpose also, every man was to use his
endeavor, to increase the number of such, as would conform themselves that way.

Again it is promised in the same Article, that they would proceed with their
said means, for the advancement of their Discipline, so far as the peace of
the present state of our Church would suffer.

Now how far that is, it has been before touched in the decrees of one of
their Synodes, 1583. for as men most strangely bewitched) they imagined, that
they could so cunningly play their feats, as that they (might in effect) set
up their own Discipline, secretly, under hand, and yet never disturb the
present government of the Church.

For as peace is here taken in their sense, one King or government may invade
another, with all kind of hostility, and say (as they do) that they mean but
peace. The truth is, they may have peace in their mouths, but in their actions,
there is nothing less. So as this their restraint (being but a vain pretense)
does no way indeed impaeach my assertion.

Furthermore, whereas also it follows in the same article, (and not enforce
to the contrary,) Master Littleton being examined upon his oath what that
should mean: In the Star Chamber.
answers that he himself, Master Snape, Master Proudloe, and others did
agree, to put the said articles and Discipline in execution and practice, so
far as the peace and the present estate of the Church will suffer, and not
enforce to the contrary. That is to say: till the Magistrate did enjoin them
or enforce them, to leave the practice of the said Discipline: and in another
place, till the Magistrate did inhibite them to the contrary, and force them
to leave it. And further, he also says: that they did agree to guide
themselves by the said book of Discipline, and according to it, with the same
limitation. Now what if by their secret practices, (to draw away the peoples
hearts from the present government of the Church) they could have procured such
strength and number, to have followed them, as that no reasonable restraint, or
force of the Magistrate had bin able to have encountered and suppressed them? I
do but ask the question.

In the rest of the Articles, there are but two general points: the one
contained in the third Article, concerning the uniformity, which they promise
to use in their Ministry: and the other is, as touching their agreement, to
follow the orders set down for their meetinges: Classical, contained in the
fourth: Provincial in the fifth: National in the sixth article.

So as where before in the second Article, they had mentioned other means,
whereby they had promised to advance their Discipline, besides prayers to God,
and supplications to her Majesty: they do now in part explane themselves, in
the other Article following, and do set down, what means they that were
Ministers would use and put in practice, for the advancement of it, vz. the
two points mentioned, that is, their uniformity in preachings, and their
meetinges: according to Master Littletons deposition: in these words: they
meant by those means, in the second Article, their conferences, as he
thinks. But to carry this matter past thinking: In the Star Chamber.
let Master Fen be heard: who says: that he agreed to put some things of the
book in execution, according to the subscription: let Master Lord be heard:
who says, that he agreed to put some things of the said book in practice, as
in the Articles is contained. But let their Coryphaeus Master Cartwright
himself be heard: who says, that he agreed to put two points of the Articles
in execution: vz. touching the order of preaching, and touching the assemblies.

CHAP. XII.
It is confessed that they agreed to put one point of their book in practice
without her Majesty's assent: what it is: and of strange names given to
children.
NOw because it appears, in the third, fourth, fifth and sixth of the said
Articles, that concerning both these points, they refer themselves to certain
Chapters of their book of Discipline: I have thought it very convenient, to
set down, out of the said Chapters, some of those particulars, which by their
said subscription they bound themselves to practice, without any further
staying for the civil Magistrate: and withal to adioyne some part of their
constancy, (if so I may abuse a good word*) in the perfourming of their
promises touching the said particulars* Master Littleton being sworn, Exami.
before the Commi.
deals (as it seems) very directly to this purpose: for (as he says)
concerning the contents of the four last Articles, he for his part, whilst
he was of that company, performed his promise, and (he thinks) that the
rest that subscribed did the like. But to the particulars: and first of the
first point.

The Minister, that is to preach, shall appoint the Psalm that is to be song,
De officio. Minist. etc
etc. After the Psalm, let there be made a short admonition to the
congregation: how they shall prepare themselves rightly, to pray. Let a Prayer
follow, containing the confession of sins, etc. and concluded with the Lords
Prayer. After the Sermon, let Prayers be made for grace, that the auditors may
profit by the doctrine delivered: also for the whole Church, and all
particular callinges: and let them end likewise with the Lords Prayer. Then a
Psalm, etc. and lastly let the conclusion be made, with some short form of
blessing the congregation, taken out of the Scriptures.

For the practice of this order: I refer the proof of it to all those, who
have observed the manner of any of the brethrens behavior, in their several
Churches. The most of them, that are but Doctors, (as they term themselves)
and readers of Lectures in other men's charges, do seldom or never come to the
service, which is read in the Church according to her Majesty's Laws: but
under pretense of studying for their sermons, do absent themselves, until
service be done, or at the least almost finished, and then they come in,
(gravely I warrant you,) and do go to this their own form of service.

The rest of the fraternity, that have cures of their own, some of them will
have a Parliament Minister, (as they term him) under them, to say service: and
then he himself deals, as it has been noted of the Doctor: but others,
that are not able to have such a one, they for their safer standing (as their
term is) do use some piece of our seruice-booke, and peradventure read a
lesson, (which things they affirm, as it has been touched, may be performed
as well by those, that are not ministers, as by them.) And then they in like
sort, do begin their own ministerial function, and proceed according to the
foresaid fashion, subscribed-vnto, and promised.

But to proceed unto their practice of other points of that book.

The Preachers must leave off, Deioncionibus habendis, etc.
by little and little, as they may conveniently, to preach at burials, least
thereby they nourish the superstition of some men, or give over themselves to
the preservation of vanity.

Let not women only offer infants to Baptism, but the father, if it may be
conveniently, De Baptismo.
or else some others in his name.

Let persuasions be used, that such names, as do savor either of Paganism or
Popery, be not given to children at their Baptism, but principally those,
whereof there are examples in the Scriptures.

Whether these points, (especially for two of them) have been practiced by
the brethren or not, the new Churchyard in London, and many brables in the
country, about urging of the natural fathers to become Godfathers to their own
children, etc, can more then sufficiently witness. And for the third, it is
also sundry ways apparent. Fenner. Barbon. Air. Wigginton. etc. Before the
Commissioners.
For whence else do these new names and fancies proceed? The Lord is nere.
More-tryall. Reformation. Discipline. Ioy-againe. Sufficient. From-aboue.
Free-gifts. More-fruite. Dust. and many other such like. But Richard Hawgar of
Northampton, did first under his hand, and after upon his oath, deliver an
especial history (to this purpose) of giving names.

Snape would not Baptize one Christopher Hodgkinsons child, because he would
have the child called Richard. The order was this. Hodgkinson obtained promise
of Snape: that he would christen his child. But (says Snape) you must then
give it a Christian name, allowed in the Scriptures. The party told him, that
his wives father, whose name was Richard, desired the name. Well (says Snape)
you must do as I bid you: that, when you come, the congregation be not
troubled. But notwithstanding, the said Hodgkinson not thinking it would have
been made a matter of such importance, the child was brought. Snape proceeded
in the action, till he came to the naming of the child. And when he heard,
that they called the child Richard, and that they would give him no other name;
he stayed there* and would not in any wise Baptize the child. And so the child
was carried away thence, and was Baptized the week following, at Alhallowes
being named Richard.

Of likelyhoode, the brethren have found this thing to be a matter of great
importance: that they will rather leave an infant unbaptized, then give him such
a name.

CHAP. XIII.
A second point of their Book confessed to be agreed upon, for the practice of
it, without her Majesty's assent.
NOw I will come to Master Cartwrights second point, that is, of the meetings:
and set down the Chapters, whereunto in the Articles subscribed, they referred
themselves: that thereby herafter no man, that will read them, may doubt of
their purpose, of not staying for the Magistrate: which are as follow, so near
as I could by translation of them out of Latin, express their meaning.

Mutual conference is to be practiced in the Church by common assemblies: Of
the assemlie of the Church.
but in these, matters Ecclesiastical are to be handled, and such chiefly as
concern those Churches, whereof the assembly does consist.

They shall not determine, (except they be requested,) of any thing touching
other Churches: but shall only decree, that such matter is to be referred to
the next greater assembly: Let the matters and order of things to be handled
in them be thus.

Next after the view or calling of those that be present, (wherein withal, the
names of such as be absent must be noted, that in the next Assembly, they may
either yield sufficient reason of their absence, or else be censured, by the
judgment of the assembly,) first let the Acts of the next assembly before,
(that was of the same sort) be read: to the intent, that if any thing of them
were left then undone, it may be dispatched. Then, let those matters be done,
that are peculiar to the Assembly in hand. And first, let every of them
deliver the instructions from their Churches, in the same order that they sit,
together with the Fiduciary or Letters of credence of the Churches: next, let
there be * censures had of the Churches of that assembly: vz. inquisition (as I
take it) is meant.
whereby may be understood how they are framed and used: whether the doctrine
and the Discipline have their course in them, and whether the officers of them
do that which appertains, and such like.

Besides let them decree those things, that shall concern either the common
behoof of all the Churches of that assembly, or of any one of them: and this
course will be sufficient enough, for the view and oversight of the Churches.

Lastly, (if it so seem good) let there be inquiry and Censures had, even of
those, which be delegated to meet in that Assembly.

Such as are to meet in the Assemblies, let them be chosen, by the Suffrages
of those Churches or Assemblies, that have interest or to do in it: and out of
these, let such only be chosen, as has exercised some public office in that
Church, either of a Minister, or of an Elder, and which has subscribed both to
the doctrine and Discipline, and which have undertaken to behave themselves in
all things according to the word of God.

It shall be lawful for other Elders and Ministers, yea and for Deacons and
Students in Divinity, by the appointment of the assembly, (especially if they
be such, as do exercise themselves, in interpreting the Scriptures in the
Assembly,) to be both present, and to be asked their judgments: these of the
latter sort are therefore to be admitted, that their judgments to handle the
affairs of the Church, may hereby both be tried and sharpened. Yet let none be
counted to have a voice, but those only, that were chosen by the Church, and
which bring their commissions consigned unto them.

If any matter be to be consulted of, that is of special importance, let the
President of the last superior Assembly, or the Minister of that Church, in
which the next Assembly is to be made, send it over in due time unto the
Ministers of all the churches of that assembly: to the intent they may before
treat thereof, with those of their charge, and so may know and report their
judgments. In making choice of a place for the Assemblies, respect is to be
had of neerenes, and other oportunities: in case any party may instly find
himself grieved above the rest.

It is expedient, that in every Ecclesiastical Assembly, there be a
President, which may govern the assembly, and that he be from time to time
changed, if it may be conveniently: and he must be thus chosen, viz.

He that was President of the last Assembly of that kind before, or the
Minister of that congregation, where the Assembly is made, (conceiving first a
prayer directed to that purpose) shall prefer unto the Assembly, the motion
for choice of a President.

The President being thus chosen, conceiving first a Prayer fitting unto the
whole action and Assembly,) shall call over the names of those, which be
present and which be absent, and note them: that the absents may be
called-vpon at the next assembly, to yield a reason of their absence.

Which if it be not sufficient, let them be censured, by the authority of the
Assembly. Then let him read the Acts of the last Assembly, that if any thing
thereof remain, it may then be dispatched. Then shall be ask of every one,
in order as they sit, their letters fiduciarie or of credence, and their
instructions signed. Which being propounded in the same order, and sufficiently
debated by all their opinions, he shall ask their judgments, and gather the
suffrages, and pronounce what the greater part adiudgeth, Which be shall
procure to be put into Acts, that the Delegates of the several Churches, may
procure copies and transcripts to be made, which they may impart unto those
Churches, to whom it appertains.

The President also, by the judgment and authority of the Assembly, is to give
answer, either by word of mouth, or by letters, to such as require it. If any
censures be to be inflicted, he is to perform them. He shall also take care,
that all things be godly and quietly carried, by exhorting them unto quietness,
and moderation of mind, one bearing with another, as need shall be, and by
preferring up, such as be wilful and contentious, unto the Assembly: lastly,
he shall propound unto them, touching the time of their next meeting: and then
with exhortation unto them, chearefully to go forward in their duty, and with
thanksgiving, he shall courteously dismiss them.

Before the dismission of the Assembly, let no man depart, but with leave.

The assemblies according to their several kinds, if they be greater, are of
more; if they be less, they are of less authority. Therefore it is lawful
to appeal from a less assembly to a greater, if any man think he have
injury, except the fact be most evident and plain unto every man: but yet
none otherwise, but that the judgment of the assembly shall hold, until it
shall be otherwise adjudged, in an assembly of greater authority.

Assemblies are either Classes, or Synods.

Classes are conherences of the fewest Ministers of Churches, standing near
together, as for example of twelve.

The chosen men of all the several Churches of that assembly, are to meet in
conference; that is to say, for every Church a minister and an Elder: and they
shall meet every fortnight. They shall chiefly endeavor the oversight and
censure of that Classis: searching particularly, whether in them every thing be
done, according to the holy doctrine and discipline of the Gospel: vz. Whether
any question be arisen, touching any point of doctrine.

Whether the Ecclesiastical discipline have his course.

Whether any Minister be wanting in any of the Churches, that they may speedily
provide a fit person.

Whether the rest of the Elders and Officers of the Church, be appointed in
every Church.

Whether care be had, over scholars, and the poor.

In what points the Classes do want advise, for the further advancing of the
Gospel among them.

Before they make an end, let some of the Ministers present, make a sermon,
either in course, or being chosen thereto by voices. Of whom the rest of the
Ministers (secluding the Elders) shall judge among themselves: and if in any
point, it shall be requisite, they shall monish him brotherly: weighing every
thing, according to the course, before laid-downe in the Chapter, touching those
things, which are to be performed by him that preaches to the congregation.

Synodes.
A Synod is an assembly of chosen men, from ^oe Churches, then those that be
in one Classis, or conference.

In these, the Articles of the holy Discipline and Synodicall, must always be
read: also in them, (after all other things be finished,) censures or
inquisition made, upon all that be present: and the supper of the Lord shall
be celebrated by them, in and with that congregation, where the Assembly is
made, if conveniently it may be.

Of Synodes there be two sorts: the first is particular, and this contains
under it both Provincial and National Synodes.

A Provincial Synod, is an assembly of those, which be delegated from all
the Classes or conferences of that Province. Let every Province contain in it
24. Classes.

This may be fit order, for the assembling together of a Synod Provincial,
vz. Let this care be laid upon some certain Church, by consent of the Synod:
let that Church, with advise of the Classis whereof it is, prefixe the place
and time for the Assembly: let other Churches, send unto such Church, those
matters which seem unto them of some difficulty to determine: and likewise
those matters, that do appertain to the whole Province, and that diligently
in convenient season: to the intent, that that Church may in due time give
advertisement unto all the Classes of the Province, both of the time and place,
and of the matters to be handled: so that such as are sent, may come better
prepared, and and that they may judge thereof, according to the resolution of
their own several Classes or conferences.

Let every Classis send unto the Provincial Synod two Ministers, and as many
Elders.

It shall be called every half year, or more often, until the Discipline be
confirmed.

But before a National Synod be celebrated, let it be called three months
before, that they may prepare, and furnish up those things, that belong unto it.

Let the Acts of all the Provincial Synodes be sent unto the National, by
that Church, in which the Provincial assembly was had: and let every Minister
be furnished, with the copies of the Acts, and with the reasons used.

The National, is a Synod consisting of the Delegats from all the Synods
Prouincail, that are within the dominion of one commonwealth. Let the manner
of calling it, be the same, that is appointed for calling the Provincial,
except the Synod it self shall take other order herein: vz: by some certain
Church: yet so, as the said Church do appoint for place and time (to hold it
in) such as the Provincial Synod of that Church, which shall next ensue,
shall determine, and think good.

For the National Synod, three Ministers and three Elders must be chosen, out
of every Synod Provincial.

In it, the common affairs of all the Churches of the whole nation and
kingdom, are to be handled: as of Doctrine, Discipline, and ceremonies: causes
not decided in inferior Assemblies, Appellations, and such like.

By the decree of the National Synod, one is to be chosen, which shall reduce
the commentaries or Acts of all the several Churches, into one body.

Hitherto concerning particular assemblies. Now follows the universal or
oecumenicall Synod of the whole world.
And this is the Synod, that consists and is gathered together, of the
chosen men out of every particular National Synod.

The Acts of all Synodes, are to be reduced into one body.

And thus far these Chapters of the meetings: the particular points whereof,
master Cartwright, and his companions, have bound themselves, by their
subscriptions, to put in practice, without any further expectation for her
Majesty's assent. And according to these points, (as their numbers and
oportunities have served their turns) they have accomplished their bonds and
promises; as by that which has been said, and by depositions upon oaths,
concerning their meetinges and dealinges in them, is most apparent, to any that
is not blinded with wilful obstinacy.

CHAP. XIIII.
More points of their book put in practice: fasts: calling of Ministers:
presbyteries: censures, etc.
FVrthermore also, they have not contented themselves with the execution of
these things only, but they have besides proceeded, in like manner, with the
full practicing almost of all the rest of the book.

It is most notorious, that according to the doctrine thereof, they have taken
upon them, to appoint public fasts: and then especially they have done it,
when their fellows have been most busy, to trouble the present estate of the
Church. Besides that, these fasts with their several sermons and other
prophecyings, have had another principal use: vz. (as Lord did write to Fen of
master Cartwrights pleasure) that the day following, the brethren might talk
of other matters.

Likewise ( says master Johnson) touching the election and making of
ministers, Johnson before the Commisioners.
I think they observe, as much as they can, the order prescribed in the said
book of Discipline. As about Proudloe, of Weedenbeck his admission, ((...) I
have heard) and Snapes and Larkes. The manner whereof is, that they renounce
the calling, they have had of the Bishops, and do take it again, from the
approbation of the Classis. And again: they will be content to accept orders
from the Bishop, as a civil matter, but do not thereby account themselves
Ministers, until the godly brethren of some Classes have allowed them. But
more fully Richard Hawgar. Rich. Hawgar his depositio^.
The first degree they have entered into, is this: that teaching all Ministers,
which are called according to the order of the Church of England, to be
unlawful: they do urge, such as they dare trust, and who are Ministers
already) to seek at their Classis a new approbation, which they term the
Lords ordinance.

In this action, the Minister before allowed of, must renounce his former
calling, and take that calling* (whereby he must stand) of them.

The manner whereof, is this: when any do yield hereunto, they appoint a day
of their Classis, etc. As the example following will show. One master Hocknel,
being to have a benefice, was willed (by his Patron) to bring some
testimonial, of the Ministers of the shyre for his good conversation.
Whereupon he came to Master Snape. Who dealt with him (as is before
mentioned,) and Hocknell having been a Minister before, (some six or seven
years) yielding: Snape, with his companions gave him a text, and appointed him
a day.

At which time the Classis met in Saint Peter's: and he preached. After, they
assembled themselves, willing Hocknell to stand aloof. Then Master Penry
began to make a speech, exhorting them to be careful, to call upon God: to
deal without affection in this their action etc. After which, they fell to the
matter. Some liked, that the man should be admitted, and some otherwise. Those
that were against him made these two reasons. First, that he had not iumped
meet, in delivering the Metaphore, which was in his text: secondly because he
was neither Grecian nor Hebrician. So as they ouerruling the rest, Hocknell was
called for, and in some sort commended: but yet the speaker of the Classis told
him, he must take more pains at his book, before they could allow of him, as a
fit Minister. Hereupon Master Hocknell and they fell out: and he (contemning
their censure) did proceed, and took possession of his benefice.

When they call a man, that is not already a Minister: then having used the
order before mentioned, they command him to go to the Bishops, as to a civil
Magistrate, for his writings, ( which they term by a pretty name that this
ex. has forgotten: and this they say, is only for his safe standing in his
former calling, received of them: not that thereby he receaueth any power to
be a Minister. On this sort was Master Lark (dwelling a little from
Wellingborow) called.

After this calling by them, the parties so called, may preach here and there,
as he thinks good, until he be called to a charge: and then he must go to
the Bishop, for his better standing, and so the people calling him, he is a
full Minister.

Master Snape being a Minister already, renounced that his first calling: was
called by the Classis: by that calling he preached, but would not administer
the Lords Supper. After the parrish of Saint Peter's knowing, that he must not
account himself a full Minister, until some particular congregation, had
chosen him, they chose him for their Minister, and so he stands at this
present. Thus far Hawger.

It is likewise deposed by two, Rich. Holmes. Rich. Hawgar before the
Commisioners.
that Master Snape for the answering of a question propounded unto him, said,
that rather then he would have stood, by virtue of any Letters of orders, he
would have bin hanged upon the gallows.

But let Master Snape speak himself. Snape in a writing of his own hand.
Touching the substance of my calling to the ministry: I affirm, that I had
it of the church of God, being approved by the learned and godly neighbor
Ministers, and chosen by the people of my charge, to that function. Touching
that allowance, that I had of the Bishop, I take it to be a thing merely
civil, belonging to a civil Magistrate: which authority he has by Act of
Parliament, and which therefore I might lawfully receive at his hands, for the
peaceable execution of my Ministry.

Again, concerning the Presbyteries, (which the book affirms should be in
every parish:) they (want in effect) nothing of all their whole platform: if
they could but once attain unto the public erecting up of those thrones. And
how far it is likely they have already prevailed therein, without staying any
longer for her Majesty; let these things following, whereof some have been
touched already, make it known unto you. Mention has been made of a
Presbytery set up at Wandesworth. Ma. Edmonds
It was a decree of the London brethren, that the Ministers should by little
and little, as much as possibly they might, draw the Discipline into practice,
though they concealed the names, either of Presbytery, Elder or Deaco^, making
little account of the names for the time, so their offices might secretly be
established. There was an order set down, in an assembly (1583. as I take
it) for the converting of Churchwardens and Collectors into Elders and Deacons:
as before in the Acts themselves it appears. According to this order the
brethren afterward sent their directions abroad, to their fellows, for their
execution of it. Barbon to Field.
I received ( says Master Barbon) from our faithful brother Master
Gelibrande, a direction of the brethren, concerning the Converting of
Churchwardens into Elders, and Collectors into Deacons. Holmes.
Richard Holmes affirms that by such speeches as he has heard, he does
verily think, that the Ministers in their Classes have resolved, to erect up
their several Presbyteryes, in their own parishes. With him agrees Master
Johnson: Johnson,
according to the rules of that book, I think that sercetly in most places,
where the brethren of the Classes are, there are Elders chosen, and that they
put the Discipline in practice, so far as they may, amongst themselves,
without any apparent show thereof, to the overthrow of their safe-standing.
Further also he deposes, that he himself has been blamed diverse times,
privately, in that he would make no such choice of Elders, (where he
preached,) to practice the Discipline. And what else should Gellibrand mean, by
these words in a Letter to Field? I have written to Master Cartwright
severally, and jointly to him and the Elders, signifying my readiness, and what
adversaries there are.

Lastly there was a nomination of Elders, at Kilsby in Northampton-shiere, made
by Master Lee the Pastor, in the year 1588. Their names as it was deposed
before Sir George Farmer and Sir John Spencer, were, William Green, Roger
Cowley, Ioh. Brown.
Thomas Hall, Richard Wolf, John Brown, and William Mariat: which six (says
the deponent,) Master Lee thought sufficient to determine and end all matters
of controversy in the said town. Henry Pinson also affirms, that he being
informed of this election of Elders, by the said Brown and others would not
yield his consent thereunto, but said he would stand to the laws of this
realm, appointed by her Majesty.

One especial reason, (as it was informed) why Pinson refused in this sort to
join with his neighbors, was: for that there should have been some
punishment, inflicted by the said Elders upon his son, for flinging a stone
at Elder-Mariats window, which he would none of, but was feign to fly to her
Majesty's laws.

So here then it appears (in some sort,) whether the brethren meant, to stay
any more for the civil Magistrate, in erecting of their Presbyteries: then
they confess they did, concerning their uniformity in Sermons and tripartite
meetings.

Besides, it does also appertain to the further proof of the said
Presbyteries, that (as it seems) some of those censures have been used: for
example, excommunication: Which (by the rules of the Discipline book) are of
right to be exercised by them. One Bluet a Minister (as I suppose) being
excommunicated (as it seems) did write a Letter to Field and Egerton: wherein
he is most earnest, that upon his repentance he might be restored again to
the Church. Woe is me (says he) that I am cast out of your presence this day:
but shame and sorrow is unto the cause. And if this woe and shame did but touch
the body, it were tolerable: for then at the day of death I should end my
misery, and no more hear the words of reproach. For now every one that sees
me, reprooueth me: and I am become a rebuke unto all men. But this is not all.
Woe is me, that there is a partition wall, between heaven and my conscience,
etc. If my offense may not be passed by, without further confession: even
before God and his Church in London, will I lie down and lick the dust at
your feet, and confess more against my self then any of you know. Severe
Catoes, I warrant you. But is this the matter they contend for, that men may
fall down, and kiss their feet?

There is also another example to this effect, worthy of your remembrance: one
La. Thomson writes in this sort of it. I think of him as an unsound member,
unfit to be continued in the body, unless he would be subject to the
government of a body, especially the body of our saving God. The party meant
by Thomson, was (as I take it) master Wilcox, the author of that admonition,
which caused the first breakingout, of all those troubles, that since have
ensued. This appears by four letters, written about the year 1583. three of
them from Field to Wilcox, and one from Wilcox to Field. What the cause was,
though it be expressed in one of the said Letters, I omit to rehearse it, no
ways minding to touch any man's private behavior or infirmities. But this I
must tell you, that the brethren, (that is in Thomsons sense, the body of our
saving God,) were so displeased and angry with him, that they suspended him
from his Ministry, and did use their censure of excommunication against him.

If you ask me how Wilcox took this course at their hands, I answer, even
as Pinson before named did, when his son should have been punished: he
disliked it so much, as that he began to call their authority (for such kind
of their proceedings,) in question, he refused to submit himself to their
censures, and told Field plainly, that he had bin dealt disorderly withal,
both for matter and manner: adding that he had perhaps concealed as great
infirmities of Fields, and of some others, as his were.

With these and many such like words Field was greatly provoked, and for his
own part defied him. Whereas (says he) for the hiding of your own shame,
you begin to score up my faults, which you say are six in number, as great
as yours, if you should utter them: I say it is no help to you, but testifies
that old pride, hypocrisy and malice, which long time has lurked in that
cankered heart of yours, etc. But I do defy you, etc. And for his refusing of
their proceedinges: you ought not ( says Field) so lightly to esteem, that
holy censure of the brethren, but in true repentance to have hidden your face,
etc. Again: if God has made you an instrument, to seek for the advancement
of Christ's Scepter: kiss it your self and be subject unto it etc. Again, if
you love Christ and his Church, before your own glory, and your own sins
have shut up your mouth: then be silent for ever. And notwithstanding that
Wilcox took exception to their authority, yet in the Letter wherein Field
answers that point, and many others, he begins thus. The Lord Jesus open
your eyes, and give you such a true sense, and feeling of your sins, that
howsoever you for) a time) be thrown to Satan; in the end your soul may be
saved, and you may feel assurance of eternal life, etc.

What the issue of this matter was amongst them, I find it not. It seems that
in the end, Wilcoxe for lack of his former maintenance, (which was withheld
from him by the brethrens procurement, and upon persuasion that after a time he
should be restored to his ministry again, and in the mean space be
relieved) he was feign to yield and to submit himself unto their censure, (by
them termed the Scepter of Christ.) Marry still he thought himself to be
hardly used, and after some time of expectation, desired (as it seems) to
know, how long he should undergo their heavy indignation. Whereunto Field
answered thus. The brethren thought meet to admonish you, utterly to surcease.
For how long or how short, me thinks you should not enquire, considering the
circumstances: who know very well your self, that if an otherwere in your
case, that no time can be limited. Nevertheless, if you doubt the judgment
to be too hard, that already is given, you may ask the private opinions of
others your best friends, as of Master Cartwright, and M. Thomson, who are of
mind that you are for ever disabled to that function, etc.

CHAP. XV.
They have joined themselves into an association or brotherhood, and do
appropriate to their meetings the name of the Church.
THere is often mention made, in the premises of the brethren, but yet in none
other sense, the^ they approriate to themselves, in sundry of their writings
and Letters, as Barbon to Field. Pig to Field. Snape to Stone.
Salute the brethren. Salute the Barbon to Field.
reverend brethren, Master Trauers, Chark Barber, Gardner, Egerton. Salute D.
chapman to Field.
our most reverend brother Master Cartwright. Salute Pig to Field 1586.
our reverend brother Master Cartwright, and the rest of the brethren. The
Gellibrand from Oxford to Field.
brethren salute you. Commend Wake to Field.
me to all our brethren. Commend me Knew stub to Field.
to all the brethren with you: the brethren with us here are in health. Commend
Wade to Field.
me to Master Charke and Master Trauers, with all the rest of the brethren.
Remember Barbon to Field.
me to the brethren. Let him L. Thomson to Field.
be accounted among the brethren, as he deserves. I writ to my Mother, to
speak to you and our good brethren, to provide me of some honest brother, to
Catechize my family. To Lord to Field.
Master Field, with the rest of the Godly Ministers, his brethren, in London.
To his beloved Wigginton to Field.
brother, Master Field, and to all other his faithful brethren, namely of the
Ministry, at or about London. Our D. Chapma^ to Field.
brethren have determined. I'trust Gellibrand to Field.
you are so linked together, by the bond of brotherly love, and the desire of
the pure Discipline of the church, that nothing may sunder you. The brethren
assembled: the Godly brethren: our pore brethren here, (at Oxford) do long to
hear from you: and, in the Articles whereunto they subscribed: we the brethren,
etc.

Upon the occasion of these terms, and many other such like: it is found out
by examination, that this Classical and reforming consort, with their
followers; have divided themselves from all the rest of the ministry, and
Christians in England: Cricke to Field.
and linked themselves into a new brotherhood, with this lincke, vz. (as
Doctor Cricke terms it) the desire of the pure Discipline: thereby showing
themselves to be most notorious Schismatickes.

When Salutations are written, Johnson.
( says master Johnson) by the brethren that seek reformation, as unto the
godly brethren: the meaning is, (as I ever took it) to such as have submitted
themselves unto the holy Discipline. Again, when the name brother, is given to
ministers, it signifies them to be of some Classis, for their consulting and
setting up of Christ's kingdom: and when to the laity, those that generally
do join with the ministers for the discipline, and do every of them submit
themselves to a minister of some of the Classis, etc. And these, both ministers
and people, are the godly brotherhood, denying the name properly of a godly
brother or sister to any other. The same also (in effect) has he deposed in
the Star Chamber: where he further adds, that thus he thought himself,
when he was of that brotherhood, and that it was so commonly maintained, both
by him, and by the rest of the Northampton Classis.

And master Edmondes, Edmondes.
in like manner, has deposed as much to the same purpose, both in the
Star Chamber, and before her Majesty's Commissioners for causes
ecclesiastical. This (says he) I do know, that when salutations were sent, or
letters written to London from some Ministers abroad, as from Fen or
Cartwright, etc. to master Field and the rest, etc. thereby was always meant,
properly, the ministers or the brotherhood of the Ministry in London: and when
they use the name or phrase of godly brethren, or sisters, or godly brotherhood
or sisterhood, they mean generally both all the said Ministers, and likewise
as many, as do depend upon them for the cause of reformation. So as the rest of
the Ministers and people, who and wheresoever, that do not join with them,
(as is before said) are altogether excluded out of their brotherhood: insomuch,
as they will avoid the company of all other, as much as they can possibly,
refusing either to buy or sell, or to eat or drink with them.

Again, it may not in any wise be omitted, that in their several said letters
and other writings, they use oftentimes the name of the Church, and of the
Churches: in as lewd a sense, as they do the name of brethren. Thus they write.
I know Snape to Field.
the state of this Church: Make known to us the state of the Church with you:
Our Churches Knewstub to Field.
are in danger of such, as having been of us, do renounce all fellowship with
us.

The Knewstub to Field.
hand of God is like to be heavy upon our Churches here, if the malice of
Satan and his instruments be not prevented. A woman with us, etc. sometimes
thought to be a friend to Religion, etc: gives it forth, that Master Walsh
had laid witchcraft upon her. She would have had him conuented, by some of the
Justices: but when he was once named she was repelled. Now she is come to
London etc: She deuiseth new matter against him, and against us all, Good
Justice.
as that we should have had meetinges at her house etc. and that we have a
private jurisdiction among our selves, thinking that this will make her
entrance unto the Archbishop, or high Commissioners etc. I pray you first
confer with master Walsh: and then deal, (as secretly as you may) to
medicine these mischiefs.

It is long Blake to Field.
since I heard from you, (says one Blake) of the state of the Church of
London. Another, By M. West Gelibrand to Field.
and M. Brown, you shall understand the state of the Churches, wherein we are.
A third: If my offense Rob. Bluet to Field and Egerton.
may not be passed by, without a further confession, even before God and his
Church, in London will I lie down, and lick the dust at your feet, and
confess etc. A fourth: I received a letter Fenne to Field.
from you in the name of the rest of the brethren: whereby I understand your
joining together, in choosing of my self, unto the service of the Church,
under the Earl of Leicester, etc. I am ready to run, if the Church command
me, according to the holy decrees and orders of the discipline. By these their
speeches it appears, that as they have cut off themselves from the fellowship
of the rest of the Christians in England, by joining themselves into a several
brotherhood: so have they already seduced her Majesty's subjects, by gathering
them together into a new society, whereunto they do appropriat the name of
the Church: as though all other Churches in the realm, were but as Jewish
Sinagogues or heathenish assemblies. This is not, (you shall see) my bare
collection: hear the witnesses, what they hereof have deposed.

In these brethrens speeches of the Church or Churches: Johnson.
it is to be understood, that by the Church of England, they mean the Church
according to human laws and the Popes: which is ruled, (as they term it) by
an Antichristian government. And by the Godly Churches, or the Churches of God
in England, they mean such places, congregations, or assemblies, as do
embrace the reformation, and have such a minister, as is of some Classis.

Sometime also by the Church, (as the Church of God in London) is meant the
Classis of the brethren, or their Synods. And so master Edmondes: Edmondes.
when they use these, or the like speeches, in their writing or otherwise: vz.
the Church or Churches of God here, with this or that, or the Church in London
has done this or that: they by they especially mean the Ministers themselves.

But for the further clearing of this matter: because the chief Rabbis of
this conspiracy, do themselves preach in our material Churches, it is to be
observed, that the parish where they preach, being assembled, is not the Church
properly in their sense: but as many thereof only, as are joined unto them
with that inviolable bond mentioned: vz. the desire of the godly discipline:
and those furthermore, who leaving their own parish Churches, do come unto
them. As for example: The Church of God (forsooth) in the Black Friars, does
consist, besides that parish, of a number of men and Merchants wives,
dispersed here and there throughout the whole City. Be content to hear the
depositions, that are taken to like purpose. Master Snape Snape.
affirmed (as Richard Holmes Holmes.
and Richard Hawgar Hawgar.
have deposed): that here one, and there one, picked out of the Profane and
common multitude, and put apart to serve the Lord: makes the Church of God,
and not the general multitude. Master Johnson says, that the brethren of the
laity do seldom come to their own parish Churches, nor receive the
communion there, otherwise then they are compelled for fear of trouble. For
they account those their pastors only, whom they do so choose. And master
Edmonds, Edmondes.
upon his experience in London. The people of this brotherhood, do seldom come
to their own parish Churches, otherwise then for fear, to incur some
danger of laws: neither do they account the minister of their parishes, to
be any of their pastors properly: except he be some one of the brethren
Ministers, before specified, or very effectually inclining that way.

It is likewise to be observed, that if any of this faction, brotherhood, or
sisterhood, do lie dangerously sick: they do seldom or never, send for their
own pastors to visit them: nor move them to pray for them, publicly* in
their own parish as neglecting their prayers: but do send to the Readers
abroad, whom they have chosen for their pastors, both to come unto them, and to
pray with them, and for them, in their assemblies.

This also is to be observed, that the stricter sort of this crew, when they
lie at the point of death, will have no bell tolled for them: and many of them
do take order, before their death: that afterward, they be not buried in any
Church: that there be no sermon: nor any wanner of burial used, which is
prescribed.

CHAP. XVI.
A ridiculous pretense of laws: with a recapitulation of the sum of this
third book.
AS they countenance these their conuenticles, and unlawful assemblies before
specified, with the name of the Church: so with the like boldness, (to the
same purpose) some of them are not ashamed to affirm: that by the doctrine of
the Church of England, and by the laws and statutes of this Realm, the present
government of the Church of England, under her Majesty, by Archbishops and
Bishops, is to be accounted wicked and unlawful, and withal (in effect) that
by the said doctrine, laws, and statutes, all the former proceedings, Martin
Iun*
decrees, etc. of the brethren, are to be maintained and justified. As by the
particular proofs following, it will appear.

The offices Martin Iun,
of Lord Archbishops and Bishops, etc. (says Martin Junior) are condemned, by
the doctrine of the Church of England. The doctrine that condemns the places
of Lord Bishops is These. 49
approved by the statutes of this Realm, and her Majesty's prerogative
royal. To be These. 50
a Lord Bishop is directly against the Statute: 13. Elizab. According These. 78.
to the doctrine of the Church of England, our Prelates have no authority to
make Ministers, or to proceed to any ecclesiastical censure: their These. 82
citations, processes, excommunications, etc. are neither to be obeyed nor
regarded. Men ought These. 83
not to appear in their Courts: a These. 84*
man being excommunicated by them, ought not to seek any absolution at their
hands. And in the behalf of the brethren, he does also further affirm: that
by the These. 72*
said doctrine of the Church of England etc. all Ministers be of equal
authority: that the These. 80.
godly ministers ought to ordain those, that would enter into that function,
without any leave of the prelates, and not so much as once to suffer them to
take any approbation of the prelates: that These. 85.
every minister is bound to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the inhibition
of the Bishops: that These. 86.
a man being once made a minister, is not to be kept back from preaching, by
the inhibition of any creature: and These. 106.
that by the said doctrine, etc. all ministers are bound by subscription, etc.
to disauow the Hierarchy of Bishops.

When you shall read these strange assertions, so far passing any ordinary
bounds of common modesty: think with your selves, that it is no marvel, to
see their writings so full of authorities. For I do assure you, that even in
the like sort, and with the same sincerity and faithfulness, do they allege
for their platformes, both Scriptures, Councels, Fathers and Histories.

Moreover, what with the pretense of Gods law, of man's law, and (I know not) of
what law, they have been suffered to go so far against all laws: that now
they have taken such heart, as that some of them are not afraid to affirm
(and that in print because the people might take notice of it): that there is
no authority, which may lawfully suppress their foresaid proceedinges. Martin
Iun. These. 17. 18. 22.
No Magistrate (says one of the brotherhood) may lawfully mayme or deforme the
body of Christ, which is the Church: no lawful Church government is
changeable, at the pleasure of the Magistrate: of necessity all christian
Magistrates are bound, to receive this government, etc.

And thus hither to you have seen the proceedings of our English reformers
according to their ringleaders actions in Scotland: they have had their
draughts of discipline: they have subscribed a particular book for England:
they have put their former platformes, and their said particular book, (for
the most part of it) in practice, as near as they could: they have had their
meetinges and Synodes, generally throughout all the land: they have made
decrees and conclusions, not only to further their own conspiracy, but also to
overthrow the present government of the Church: they have had in some places
their Elders: they have exempted themselves from the ecclesiastical government
in this Realm, accounting the same, (in some respects,) to be Antichristian,
and so not to be obeyed, (and in some other) to be a mere civil, and a
parliament church-gouernment: and in that regard, only after a sort, to be
yielded unto, for their better and safer standing, in their own seditious and
consistorian ways. They have, by their false gloses, seduced many of her
Majesty's subjects: they have combined themselves together, into a strange
brotherhood. They challenge to their unlawful and seditious assemblies, the
true and most proper name of the Church.

They say their doings are according to law.

They affirm (in effect) that no Magistrate may lawfully overthrow that, which
they have builded: in as much, The humble motion pa. 84.
as now it is said, that the Bishops, in seeking by the authority which her
Majesty has given and confirmed unto them, to maintain (as they are bound)
the present church-gouernment and state, established by her highness laws
within this Realm, and to suppress and reform their schismatic and
seditious disorders, and such like, are the disturbers of the peace of the
church: that the Bishops begin the The humble motion pa. 84.
quarrel in disquieting of them, who in town and country, were very greatly at
unity, and took sweet council together, for the profiting of the Church.
That Epistle to the discovery of R B. etc.
the Bishops are the schismatickes, and not they: that the crime of schism,
which the prelates would fasten upon them, does justly cleave to the Bishops:
and that Register pa. 69
Bishops may be discharged by the Church.

And they have entered already into this consideration, how Archbishops,
Bishops, Chauncellors, Deanes, Cannons, Archdeacons, Lord to Fe^. 158. 9.
Commissaries, Registers, Apparitors etc. (All which, by their said pretended
reformation, must be thrust from their livings.) should be provided for, that
the common wealth be not thereby pestred with beggars.

Whereby it appears, that (in their own conceits) they have already
attained their soueraintie. They and their conuenticles (forsooth) are the true
Church: and all England besides is in a schism.

So as now it may be daily expected, when these godly brethren, for a full
conclusion of their attempts, will take upon them, (as their masters did in
Scotland) to discharge the estate of Bishops, Declaration B 2.
and to direct their commissioners; to her most excellent Majesty, commanding
both her and her highness most honorable privy Council, under the pain of
excommunication, to appoint no Bishops hereafter, because they have concluded
that state to be unlawful: and that furthermore her Highness, under the same
penalty, shall not presume from thenceforth, either any longer to maintain
the present Antichristian Church-gouernment, or once to attempt the
overthrowing of theirs. And thus much of this matter, vz. concerning our
English reformers, and their imitation of the Ministers of Scotland, in that
seeing they could not prevail, with their suites and supplications to her
Majesty and the Parliament, for the setting up of their discipline: they have
taken upon them to do it themselves.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES and Practices.
CHAP. 1.
Some of them seem to grow desperate, and propound to themselves a strange
example to follow, for the adauncing of their Discipline.
As the Ministers of Scotland with their adherentes, finding sundry
impedimentes in their foresaid proceedings, and in the setting-vp of their
discipline, did grow to be very angry, and ther-vpon oftentimes before they
came to arms or violence, did cast out many great speeches and threatenings
(as it has been before declared): even so also it fares now rightly, with
our Disciplinarians in England. They threaten and brag above measure, what
shall come to pass: and I pray God they be suffered to go no further.

One of the brethren, (in the name of the rest,) complaining, that they are
oppugned, and (as he says) persecuted, desires, that the same may be provided
for: and adds therwithall these words. 2. admonit. pa, 59.
It is the case already of many a thousand in this land: yea it is the case of
as many, as seek the Lord aright, etc. Great troubles will come of it, if it
be not provided for.

None seek the Lord aright but this brotherhood. Great joy of them. But what
troubles mean they? That, an other seems to clear: where he says, that
they can endure no such hard dealing, as is used against them any longer.
Suppl. pa. 61,
Alas (says he) we are never able to stand against the poverty, losses,
imprisonment, discountenance, by our superiors, that our brethren have
sustained etc. Never able to swallow up the slanders, and bitter names of
puritanes, precisians, traitors, seditious libellers etc. Why? what will you
do?

The best that can be gathered of his words, is this. Come, (says he) let
us make a Captain, and return again into Egypt. If they have not their
minds, the danger may be, which in deed will bring some troubles that they
are not unlike to become either Atheists or Papists.

Shortly after the strange attempt before mentioned that was made against the
king of Scotland, Anno 1585, by ten thousand of his own people at Sterling:
(whereby the consistorian Ministers prevailed, as well against their Sovereign,
as against their Bishops, for the advancing of their presbiteries): there came
out a railing Dialogue, here in England published abroad in print and
scattered by the brotherhoode, throughout the whole Realm.

This Dialogue is entitled: the state of the church of England laid open in a
conference, between Diotrephes (representing the person of a Bishop,)
Tertullus a Papist, (brought in to plead for the orders of our church,)
Demetrius, a Usurer (signifying such as live by unlawful trades:) Pandocheus,
an Inkeeper, (a receyuer of al, and a soother of every man for his gain:) and
Paul a preacher of the word of God: ( sustayning the place and persons of the
Consistoriall brethren.)

Where, (by the way,) see again the account they make of all that do maintain
the present state of the Church: they are but ambitious worldlings: Papists:
livers by unlawful trades: and men pleasers. But themselves are Apostles.

In this Dialogue, Paul is set forth as a man desirous, (upon the Innekeepers
motion,) to hear some good news from Scotland: who meeting with the Bishop,
he uses him according to the Consistorian humor: that is, most proudly, most
spitefully, and most slanderously. He condemns both the calling of Bishops
as Antichristian, and censureth al their proceedings, as wicked, Popish,
unlawful, and cruel. He affirms that all the good, that has been done for
the present flourishing estate of the Gospel in England: has E. 1.
been brought to pass, by those men, whom the Bishops despise, and by that
course, which they were ever ennemies unto. He says, that F. 1.
very many of all degrees, are fully persuaded in the matters of reformation,
and that he is persuaded, this will come of it, vz. that he shall see the
government of the Church,, (by the rules of their discipline) set up before it
be long.

The Bishop is supposed to have been sent out of England into Scotland, for
the suppressing of the Presbiteries there: and so is made, upon his return
homewarde, to be the reporter of the Scottish affairs, and withal to signify
his great fear, least he and the rest of the Bishops in England, should be
served shortly, as the Bishops had lately been in Scotland, namely at
Edinburgh and Saint Andrews etc.

Ah ( says the pretended Bishop) my host. The Puritanes in Scotland have
got-vp their discipline, ^. B
and utterly ouerthrown all the sovereignty of Bishops: by which they prevailed
so mightily, that we feared, our fall in England shortly to ensue. Whereupon I
was sent, together with this my friend (Tertullus,) who came out of France into
England: to go and seek the subversion of their great assemblies, and the
rest of their jurisdiction: wherein I prevailed a while, but now it is worse
then ever it was. And it came so to pass: because the whole land cried for
Discipline again; and the Noble men so stiffly did stand to it: and lastly the
Ministers that came home from England, dealt so boldly with the king; that I
was utterly cast out, without all hope ever to do any good there again, and
now I make homeward in have, least I loose all there also.

Here you have the brethrens approbation of the aforsaide attempt in Scotland:
whereby it is apparaunt, that if they shall be able to bring the people to such
a kind of clamor, and the nobility to such a manner of stifnes: they can be well
content for their parts, to have her majesty used, as the Scottish king was:
for it is according to their Geneua Divinity.

Tertullus the Papist, F. 2, and 3, etc.
he is made the Bishops only Counselor, in the whole course of the government
of our Church: by whose advise, (the author of the Dialogue says) that the
Bishops do bear with the Popish recusants, and that so many ways are sought
to suppress the Puritanes. This Tertullus, together with the Host and the
Usurer, do relate to the Bishop those occurrents in England, which had fallen
out and happened in his absence. And upon the occasion of this question, asked
by the Bishop: vz. have not the Bishops yet suppressed the Puritans, neither
with countenance, nor by authority? Tertullus makes this answer. Suppressed?
no, my Lord: a friend of mine writ unto me, that one of their preachers said
in the Pulpit; he was persuaded that there were a 100000. of them in England,
and that the number of them increased daily in every place, of all estates and
degrees.

Is it not time for the Magistrates to look about them? They do take it in
scorn to be thought so weak, as that they could be suppressed. Be it, they
flatter themselves therein: yet their desire is apparent, that (if they be
suffered, and shall ever be able) they will bring it to that pass. And if this
be not a necessary consequent of the premises: my judgment fails me. But to
proceed.

CHAP. II.
Of their doctrine for making a reformation themselves, and how the people must
be thrust into that action.
ABout four years since, it should seem that some of the brethren, were of
opinion, that they had dealt long enough in the practice of their Discipline,
after such a secret manner: and that then they were bound in duty to proceed
to the public exercise of it, notwithstanding any danger, that might thereby
ensue. For thus one of them writes. Pain to F.
Our zeal to Gods glory, our love to his Church, and the due planting of the
same, in this horheaded age should be so warm and and stirring in us, as not
to care what adventure we give, and what censures we abide etc. The Jesuits
and Seminaries, their diabolical boldness, will cover our faces with shame etc.
And after also in the same letter. We cannot be discharged, of great disloyalty
to our coming Christ, except we proceed with practice, and so to further the
Lords cause by suffering: forasmuch as that dutiful suffering, for so
honorable a matter, is as sure a sign of subjection, as obeying, the time so
urging that bounden duty. It is verily more then time, to Register the names
of the fittest and hottest brethren round about our several dwellings, whereby
to put Master Snecanus godly counsel in execution: vz. Si quis obijciat etc.
If any man object, that the setting up, and the lawful practice of the
discipline in the Church, is hindered by the civil magistrate: let the
magistrate be freely and modestly admonished of his duty. If he esteem to
be accounted, either a godly or a Christian magistrate, without doubt he will
admit wholesome counsels. But if he do not, yet let him be more exactlie
instructed, that he may serve God in fear, and bend his authority to the
defense of the church and of Gods glory. Marry, if by this way there happen no
good success, then let the ministers of the Church, execute their office,
according to the appointment of Christ. For they must rather obey God then men.
In this last point, we have dolefully failed, which now or never stands us in
hand to prosecute with all celerity, without lingering and staying so long for
Parliaments.

This advise of Pains, was thought by the brethren, (as I guess) to be
somewhat too rash. For of likelihoode they could not find at that time, so
sufficient a number of such hot brethren as might serve their turn.
Whereupon (as I suppose) out comes the decrees of the Warwickshire Classes,
that for the increasing of the said number, every minister, (as occasion
served,) should teach the Discipline unto the people, as well as the other
parts of the Gospel. And for the moderating of Pains too hasty advise, it
was thus determined. Non dum solicitandum esse public vniuersum caetum ad
praxim Disciplinae, donec melius instituantur homines in eius cognitione: that
is: As yet the whole multitude are not to be allured (publicly) to the
practice of the Discipline, until men be better instructed, in the knowledge
of it. As though for the answering of Pain, they had said; that when by that
means they had gotten, a sufficient number to assiste them, then his counsel
should be followed.

For you must understand, that their chiefest trust is reposed in the people,
as it may be further made more plain unto you by the deposition of master
Edmonds, whose words I will set down, as they remain in record. I do well
remember (says he) that after I had left that company, meaning the London
assemblies, meeting with Master Field, I talked with him, what harm was
already done, by inueighing against the present state of the Church, and by
their proceedings, in beating this their new reformation into the heads of the
common people, because they were already grown thereby amongst themselves,
into great divisions: very contemptuous, insolent, and intractable, etc,
Whereunto he answered, tush, hold your peace: seeing we cannot compass these
things, by suite nor dispute: it is the multitude and people, that must bring
them to pass. But I will leave their endeavors a while, how they may seduce
the people, and enter into a discourse to their further proceedings.

CHAP. III.
They would have the nobility and the inferior Magistrates to set up their
discipline: and of their supplication with a 100000 hands.
IT is here to be considered, what course they take, to bring the Nobility and
inferior magistrates of England, to the before said stifnes, Suppl. to the
govern. of Wales. pa. 15. 16. 36. 37. 38. 39.
(mentioned in the first Chapter) that was in them of Scotland: Master Penry
exhorts the Lord President of Wales, by the examples of Moses, Iehosuah,
David, Solomon, Iehosophat, Hezechiah, Iosue, Nehemiah, etc. and to take in
hand their pretended reformation, in that country: proving that he has
authority thereunto, because he is a governor under God, and that if he
refused so to do; he could have no commission to rule there, in that thereby
Christ being rejected, he was become but the Lieutenant of Satan. Here you
have Allobrogical, and Consistoriall stuff, able of it self, (if it were
received) to fill all Christian kingdoms, with all kind of mutinies,
sedition, Goodman with the conent of the Geneuians etc p. 214. 215
and rebellion. They would make the inferior Magistrates, under their
Sovereign to believe: that they had, (for their times, and within their
limittes,) as absolute authority, as if they themselves were fully Princes
there: and were not many ways restrained, by the supreme Magistrate. Surely
if they shall be able, by these and such like persuasions, to draw unto them
the Justices of Peace, the Shirifes or Lieutenants of every Shire, (and so make
them the executioners of their good pleasures and platformes, without any
further Commission or warrant from her Majesty:) they shall not need to
expect either Prince, or Parliament, but may throw down and set up, as great
builders do, whatsoever shall be most agreeable, to the mutabilitie of their
own affections.

And whereas an objection might have been made, that if either the Noblemen,
Gentlemen, or people should take upon them to cast down the Bishops, and to
reform the church, according to their reigning fre^zy, without her majesty's
commandment, that in so doing they should greatly disturb the state of the
Realm, and highly offend her most excellent majesty: these points are both of
them passed over with a snuff, and with great disdain, as being no such
impediments, as ought to hinder the valiant corages of Consistorian subjects.
Martin Iun. Epilog.
I tell you true, (says one of their Captains) I think it a great blessing
of God, that has raised up Martin to hold tackling with the Bishops, that you
may have some time of breathing, or rather a time to gather courage and zeal,
etc. to set upon these ennemies, etc. For if, as hitherto you have, you be so
loath, for disturbing of our state, forsooth and the offending of her Majesty,
not only to speak against but even utterly to reject this Hierarchy of our
Bishops, even to have no more to do with it, then with the seat of the beast:
you shall declare unto our children, that God can set up, but a company of
whiteliuered soldiers etc. Forsooth if this exhortation be according to their
Discipline: it ought no longer to be termed Christ's, (as they term it) but
the Devils Discipline. Martin sea
And yet, because they would not have her Majesty altogether neglected, an
other of their Lieutennants can be content, that (before their soldiers
mentioned, should begin the skirmish) there might be first, (as it were)
for a parlee, some little ouuerture of duty signified: that, if (as yet) her
Highness would be ruled by them, they would desist. To this purpose he
moves all the Puritanes, (as he terms them,) in England both Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers and people, to offer a supplication to her
Majesty: in effect, for the full obtaining of all their desires.

To this (says he) an hundred thousand hands would be gotten etc. and then
thou (speaking to his reader) may well think, what a stroke so many would
strike together, etc. It should appear, that they are not few, and of small
reputation, but in a manner the strength of our land, and the sinow of her
Majesty's royal government, which our Bishops do falsely note with the names of
Puritanes, The consideration whereof, I tell thee, even in policy, would make,
that this their suite should not be hastily rejected, especially in such a
time, as wherein we now live, in danger of our enemies abroad, and therefore
had need of no causes of discouragement at home. I like it well when men will
deal plainly, You see indeed their hearts. And is it not then evident,
whereat they aim? In such a time no policy? Indeed the return of the
Spaniard was then expected. No need then of discouragement at home? Why?
wanting your desires, would you have taken no part, if the Spaniard had come? or
purposed you, to have made a more ready passage for him, by rebelling at home,
before he should have come? or would you have joined with him, if he had come?
or meant you thereby, (through terror) to have enforced her Majesty, to your
purposes, least you should have taken some of these courses? Chose which of
them you list: the best is seditious.

CHAP. IIII.
Presuming upon some unlawful asistance, they use very violent words.
HOw true it is, that they have a hundredth thousand, ready at their direction,
I know not: but they have surely too many: if the companion of the brotherhood,
that sent his humble motion abroad, may be herein believed. Thousands (he
says) do sigh for this discipline, page 39
and ten thousand have sought it: and approved and worthy men of every shire,
have consented unto it.

But certain it is such is their hope, to thrust the people, with the rest of
their confederates, into some unlawful execution, of their distempered
designementes: that they are come to a wonderful resolution and assurance, as
having almost (in their own conceits,) obtained already, the very scepter of
their kingdom. The Eldershippe is at hand, (says the humble motioner.) And
again: using reasons, why the state here in England should presently embrace
their government, he falls upon these two points, (iumping justly, with
the Scottish ministers logique, mentioned before by Diotrephes, the pretended
Bishop,) vz. the people are inflamed with zeal, and (as it seems) the second
reason depends upon the first: that is, because it is hard, dangerous, and
impossible to stand against it. In effect, the people cry for the Discipline,
and therefore it must needs prevail. Indeed they have slanderously set out
supplications and complaints in the name of the comminaltie: thereby to
terrify their withstanders. But I trust the people generally are not so mad,
although there be some that are straungely bewitched: unto this conceit of
the peoples readiness it seems to me, that M. Snape had relation, when he
used these words following, as they are set down by the oaths of some of them,
to whom he spoke them. How say you (quoth he) if we meaning himself and his
fellow ministers, Holmes, Hawgar. etc.
with their adherentes devise a way, whereby to shake off all the Antichristian
yoke, and government of the Bishops: and will iontly together erect the
discipline and government all in one day: but peradventure it will not be yet,
this year and a half. An other, (of his more then superabundant charity)
foreseeing the mischiefs that are ready to fall by his brethrens procurement,
upon the Bishops of this realm: gives them warning to begone in time. Epistle
to mart* epitome.
Be packing Bishops, (says he you strive in vain: you are laid open already.

Friars and Monks were not so bad. Look to your selves: for my sons will
not see their father thus persecuted at your hands. W. F.
We protest (say the authors of a certain supplication, drawn to her Majesty:
and found in one of the brethrens studies: but he will not confess, by whose
advise it was penned:) We protest (say they) unto your Majesty: that we will
be no longer subject unto the Bishops unlawful and usurped authority etc.
Wherefore let them not look for it at our hands. Epistle to the Demonst.
And an other. The truth will prevail (speaking of the discipline) in spite
of your teeth (meaning the Bishops,) and all other adversaries of it. Likewise
an other deals as charitably with the common wealth, as his fellow did with
the Bishops: Martin iun. These. 98. 103. 100. 105.
that is: he warns to take heed: saying, that it will be very dangerous to
our state, to mayntaine two contrary factions: that the Magistrates are then
bound, even for the quieting of our state, to put down the one: that those,
that stand for the discipline, neither can nor will give it over, (so as they
will not be put down): and that the said Magistrates cannot maintain the
corruption of our Church, namely Archbishops and Bishops, without the
coffeehouse of their subjects.

And an other: we have sought to advance this cause of God, by humble suite to
the Parliament, by supplication to your Convocation house, by wrighting in
defense of it, and by challenging to dispute for it: seeing none of these
means used by us have prevailed: if it come in by that means, which will make
all your hearts to ache, blame your selves.

And to conclude. Martins protestation.
In this one point (says another) the Bishops are of my mind: vz. that
reformation cannot well come to our Church, without blood. Let the place be
througly considered. The words are ambiguously set down: of purpose to cover
(in some sort) the cruelty, which lurketh in their own hearts. For in my
simple judgment, his speeches can have no other good and coherent sense, then
this, vz. that as the Bishops do think (as he slanderously deemeth) that there
can be no reformation of the Puritanes disordered proceedings, without the
blood of some of their brotherhoode, so he is of mind, that the reformation
which he and his companions do seek for, cannot be attained unto, without the
blood of some of those, that do withstand their platformes. It is true that
he there only prosecuteth the cruel opinion, which he ascribes to the
Bishops: saying that no blood can handsomely be spilt, unless they be the
butchers. But he passes cunningly by his own mind, as very well knowing his
companions capacities. Indeed, if they do take upon them to spil blood, they
cannot (thanks be to God) as yet, do it handsomely. The Lord of his infinite
mercy grant that their opportunities, to such a mischief, do never serve them
better, then hitherto they have done.

CHAP. V.
Upon Cartwrights committing to prison: some strange attempts were looked.
BEsides, prayers to prevent such outrages (as are mentioned in former
chapters) there must be other means diligently looked into. For out of
question, it is high time. Every one is acquainted with the execution of Hack.
but few do understand, the secrets of those attempts. They stretch much
further then they are supposed.

You may remember, Buch, de iu^e regn. 57.
the Disciplinarie men's doctrine (before mentioned) vz. Goodman. page 185.
Iunius Brutu s. 170.
that when Princes grow to be tyrants, (whereof seditious spirits will be the
judges, (and that the inferior Magistrates will not do their duties: Beza de
authorit. magist. insubd. p. 97
the people then, (if any Jonathan will step forth, to be their captain) are
bound to join themselves unto him, and may use the sword in their own right:
I. P Of obedience. Whittinghams preface Goodman page 196, I. P. 121.
or otherwise some private man, that is moved with zeal extra ordinem, may
execute vengeance, upon prince or Potentate, Idolater, wicked persons, etc.
even as the spirit shall move him. The which doctrine (as I said) they take upon
them to co^firm, out of the scriptures: by these examples vz. of Phineas, who
in zeal killed the adulterers: of Ahud, who in zeal killed king Eglon, in his
private chamber: of Iaell, who in zeal killed Sisara: of Matathias, who in
zeal killed a Jew, for committing Idolatry: and of the same Matathias, who in
the same zeal killed likewise, at the same time, the kings commissioners, that
commanded the people to conform themselves to the kings proceedings. etc.

To those that know these principles, how can it be either obscure or
difficult, what they are both to think and judge, when they shall hear of any
extraordinary callings, and secret motions, in private men? whereby they shall
take upon them, (through the assistance of giddy and seduced malecontentes,) to
correct and amend, to set up and throw down, to deliver and restrain, to
punish and execute, how, what, where, when and whom, etc. according to their
own pleasures: and all under pretense of such directions, as they shall affirm
that the holy Ghost does minister unto them.

Upon the proceedings, held by course of law, against Vdall and some others:
and likewise by reason, that certain Preachers, but especially master
Cartwright, being called before her Majesty's commissioners in causes
ecclesiastical, for their aforesaid vndutyfull proceedings, were (upon just
occasions) committed to prison: the matter was greatly grudged at, and so taken
to heart; amongst the reforming and zealous brotherhoode, as that many devises
and complots, were (as it seems) in deliberation not only how the said
prisoners, might (for the present) be defended and delivered: but also how
thereupon they might proceed, for the setting up of their Discipline. To this
purpose, Wigginton, to Porter at Lancaster, 6. Nouemb. 1590.
in mine opinion these words of Wiggintons are very pertinent. Master
Cartwright is in the Flee^e, for refusal of the oath (as I hear) and Master
Knewstubs is sent for, and sundry worthy ministers are disquieted, who have
been spared long. So that we look for some bickering ere long, and then a
battle: which cannot long endure. How far these words may be drawn, I leave
it to be considered of, by those that can discern of such like kind of
phrases. This I can assure you of, that (upon what grounds I know not) through
the course which was held by the magistrates here, against the said prisoners:
there was great expectation, and as it were a hope conceived by their favorers,
in another country, of some bickering amongst us, (about that time,) as
Wigginton writes of. P. A. 7. De. cemb. 1590.
Thus a man that has been of especial account in Scotland, did write unto a
friend of his in England. I attend your next answer, as well of the estate of
your Church, as of all other affairs. For there is here great word of sundry
vprores, which I trust be false, or repressedin due season by her Majesty.

But that passes all (to this purpose,) which falls out most apparantlie, by
the view taken of such letters and papers, as were found upon the apprehension
of Hacket and his Prophets.

CHAP. VI.
One Edmond Copinger took upon him to work Cartwrightes etc. deliverance: he
pretends an extraordinary calling and acquainteth diverse with it: one Gibson
a Scot: P. Wentwotrh, Cartwright, Wigginton, Charke, Trauers, Egerton, etc.
Whilst some were devising of one way, and some of an other, for the good of
the said prisoners, etc. One Edmond Coppinger, with his familiars, could find
no means to be looked for, except it might please God, according to the
foresaid positions, to stir up some zealous brethren, by some extraordinary
calling, to effect their desires. This cogitation (as it seems) no sooner grew
upon the^, but that by and by they fealt, (as they thought) in themselves: some
certain slender instigations, to such a heavenly purpose. It appears that
toward the latter end of December, 1590* Copinger, Arthington, and John
Bentley, Coppinger examined, 19 of July. Arthing. discourse.
master Knightlies man, did hold a fast, at one Thomas Lancasters house, a
scholemaister in Shoe-lane. It began upon the Saturday at night, and held till
Sunday at night. In the time of this fast, vz. the Saturday Coppinger to T. C.
at night, Coppinger (as he said) found himself very extraordinarily exercised
etc. with a wonderful zeal, to set forth Gods glory any ways, which lawfully
he might enter into. At that time also, (I mean at that last fast: Arthington
had likewise his extraordinary calling. Thus Copinger did write of his matter
to Lancaster: the letter was also subscribed unto, by Arthington, In Coppinger
and Arthing to Lancaster, the 15. of July 1591.
your house, in your presence, and partly by your means; I had my first
extraordinary calling, and of the same mind is my brother Arthington.
Copinger the next day after the said fast, did ride into Kent: and upon his
return, (which was with some speed) he signified unto his fellow-fasters, how
he had been extraordinarily called, both before his going, the said Satterday
at night: and also in his journey, since he departed from them: vz. how God had
revealed Arthing, discourse.
unto him, such a secret mystery, as was wonderful. By the way (says he) as I
rid, I fansied to my self, Cop. to T. C.
that there was leave given me, to speak to God, in a more familiar manner,
then at any time before: also I persuaded my self, that his spirit did give me
many strange directions, wherein the Lord would use me to do service to his
most glorious Majesty, and to his Church. Concerning the substance of his said
revelation, he also told, Arthington and Lancaster thus much: vz. Arthingtons
discourse.
that he knew a way, how to bring the Queen to repentance, and to cause all
her Counsel and Nobles, to do the like, out of hand, or else detect them, to
be traitors that refused.

After the relation of these things, within a day or two, this Copinger and
Arthington, Cop. to T. C.
held another fast by themselves. Whereupon (says Copinger) I was again
stirred up, to such business of such importance, as in the eyes of flesh and
blood, was likely to bring much danger to my self, and unlikely to bring any
good success to the Church of God.

Of these his instigations, or revelations, he writ to some preachers in the
Realm: Cop to T. C.
and to some without: as namely a letter the last day of December, 1590. to
one Gibson, a kind of preacher in Scotland. Copping to Gibson.
Wherein he greatly complayneth of the present state of our Church: and
desires of him, to be instructed from the brethren there, in diverse points,
concerning an extraordinary calling. Thee state of our Church (says he)
grows worse and worse: our zealous Ministry and Magistracy are daily
disgraced and displaced: the means of help is taken away, except, that God
would either move her Majesty inwardly, she being bereaved of those holy
helps* which Gods servants enjoy in the public exercise of religion: or else
stir up, some faithful Zorobabell or Nehemiah, to let her see how the Lords
house lies waste, and how usurpers of Antichristian tyranny, do keep Christ
Jesus from governing in his kingdom. And then he adds. My self am
acquainted with some, who, to do service herein, would adventure the loss of
their lives, so that they might have warrant from the word, for their so
doing, and have approbation by the Church. And to this end they fancy to
themselves to have received an extraordinary calling, wherein they fear to be
abused by Satan. Then follows his petition. And therefore I, though most
unworthy, have adventured to write unto you, to beseech you in the bowels of
Christ Jesus, to have conference with such, as are most able to advise you on
our behalf, and to return answer, how a man may examine himself in this
matter, and what be the extraordinary things, which must be in him, that is
so called: what course he is to take, to have his extraordinary calling
known: first to himself, and then to the Church.

After he had sent away this letter into Scotland he began to draw his doubts
into some Method: and did propound them all in eight questions. The chief
sum whereof, it this, whether in these days, and in this country, where
there is but preaching here and there, where the Discipline is not
established, but oppugned, by the public Magistrates, whether there be place
for any extraordinary calling, immediately from God, of workers and helpers to
his Church etc. These questions thus contrived he sent them to his old
acquaintance Wigginton: who justly according to Copingers humor, answered them
all affirmatively: as his aunswers are to be showed, under his own hand, and
as Copinger did also write unto master Cartwright; the effect of which Letter
will follow in course.

Upon Copingers receite of this answer, that there was high time, for such
extraordinary callings: presently after, there was an other fast procured by
Copinger, for a better co^formation of such his manner of calling, Cop. to T. C.
and to see, if any mo might be drawn thereby into the same conceit. This fast
was held upon the Wednesday, in a Merchants house, where Wigginton then lay,
Cop. exam. 19. Iulie.
and Wigginton himself with three or four others was present at it. But
before this fast was held, means was used (says Copinger) to have some notice
given to some of the Preachers in Prison, of the day of their humiliation, and
of their desire to have them commend unto God in their prayers the holy
purposes, Cop. to T. C.
which any fearing God, should in time attempt to take in hand, by seeking the
glory of God, and the good of the Church.

The effect of their prayers in this fast, Copin exam. 19. Iulie.
was this, vz. They humbly beseech Almighty God, that if he had appointed to
use any of them, to do any special service to him and his: and that to that
end would extraordinarily call them, Cop to T. C.
that he would seal up his or their so calling by some special manner, and by
his holy spirit, and give such extraordinary graces and gifts, as were fit
for so weighty an action.

How the rest of this company sped hereby, I find it not: but Copinger (as he
says) was called again the same night in a dream. Copin. exam.
The manner whereof, he thus describes. About the midde part of the night, I
thought my self in my sleep, to be carried into Heaven, and there being
wonderfully astonished with the Majesty of God, and brightness of his glory,
I made a loud and most strong noice etc. since which time, I find every day
more and more comfort: and suppose, there is somewhat in me etc. to work (he
means some strange reformation.)

As before it has been partly touched, Copinger did not only crave the advice
of some ministers in these his great actions, (as often he termed them): but
also of such of the Laity, as he thought were most fit to join with him, or
to advise him: and I doubt not, but that he dealt as plainly with them, as he
had done before with Dauison a Scotte and others. This does appear in some
sort, by a Letter written unto Copinger by Peter Went worth, the five and
twentieth of January 1590. in answer of one sent unto him before, from
Copinger. P. W. to Cop. 25. lan, 1590.
It seems that Copinger having desired master Wentworth to come unto him to
London, that they might confer together, etc. for answer he excuses
himself in respect of his lamenes. etc. and of his debillitie and weakness, to
give advise in matters of importance, wherein I perceive (says he) you are
laboring. And further (says he,) I do assure my self, that the purpose
tends unto the true service of God, and of her Majesty. I beseech you resort
to the Lord, to direct your labors both in matter and manner. For an ill
manner may mar a good matter. You are in a plentiful soil, where you may use
the advice of many godly wise. Use the benefit thereof, and then as Iosuah
said, be bold, and of good courage: fear not to be discouraged.

Besides it appears by a Letter of Copingers to Thomas Lancaster, Cop. to L.
29, Iau. 15. 19
the Icholemaister, dated the nine and twentieth of January: that he had
disclosed, (as it should seem, all the premises, unto diverse of the Ministers
of London, desiring to have had some conference with them: and offering
himself to be directed either to proceed, or draw back, as the Church should
advise. But they supposing the matter to be too hard to be effected: and him
an unfit man to manage it, refused to admit of any such conference. In the
same letter, it is also evident, that Copinger had made the night before a rude
discourse (as he terms it) to Lancaster of these matters, which Lancaster
disliked. And touching some speeches had with master Egerton, thus he there
writes. Most true it is, that he refused to take trial of me, and of my
gifts: alleging, that he was a mean ordinary man etc. and one that could
not judge of extraordinary gifts: and withal, most Christianly, wisely, and
lovingly persuaded me, to be careful and circumspect over my self: to take
heed least I was deceived by the subtlety of Satan, and so misse-led:
whereby I might endanger my self, both for my liberty, estate, and credit, and
also be an hinderance to the great cause, which I would seem to be most
desirous to further. But withal he concluded, that he would be loath, to
quench the spirit of God in me, or to hinder my zeal.

In another letter also, to the said Lancaster from Copinger: concerning other
his proceedings with Egerton, he says: it cannot be denied, but that the
cause is good, which I desire to be an actor in: but it is said by some, that
it is impossible that I should be fit to meddle therein. He also desires
Lancaster, to deal with Egerton, that he might have a sight of all the letters,
which he (the said Copinger) had written unto him about these matters.

About this time it also appears, that Copinger fell in to some dealings with
M. Cartwright, concerning the premises: and that he had sent unto him, the
questions before mentioned, for to know his resolution, whether it would be
agreeable to Wigintons. He writ a letter unto him, dated the 4. of February
1590. beginning thus.

Right reverend Sir, your most wise and christian council, together with offer
to take knowledge by writing from me, of such matters, as might induce me to
suppose my self, to have received some hope of special favor from god, to
some special use: does move me more and more to admire his mercies toward me
etc. In this letter, he signifies to M. Cartwright (as before I have noted,)
the number of their fastes, his several callings, his writing to some
preachers within the Realm, and to some without: and his confirmation by
Wigintons said answers, and makes these petitions unto him: vz. that the
church (I mean, says he, your self and such as you shall name unto me:) would
look narrowly into him, for the trial of his extraordinary calling. If (says
he) I bethought to be any ways miss-led, I crave sharp censuring* If I be
guided by Gods spirit to any good end, (as heareafter shall be adjudged,) I
shall be ready to acquaint you and them, with generalities and particularities,
so far-foorth as you and they be desirous to look into them. And his second
petition was, vz. to have (says he) your further answer to some questions,
wherein I desire to be resolved* with your direction also, what hereafter I am
to signify to your self, concerning the matter it self.

After M. Cartwright had received this letter from Coppinger, he sent unto him
a message, that he should attempt nothing but by advise, and that he should be
wise and circumspect. Besides it seems, Copinger to T. C. 13. of febr. 1590
that upon Copingers so earnest suit made as has been specified, there was a
time appointed, that he might be conferred withal. These things do appear to
be true, by a second letter of Coppingers to Cartwright, the 13. of February.
Wherein he greatly complaned that he had been put back from that service of
god and his church, which he had in hand, (and that hy his friends:) he desired
M. Cartwright that the day appointed for conference might hold, and he adds
this reason. The danger which some stand in: for their lives, is not unknown:
and if I had not been let, I durst have ventured my life, to have procured
their release ere now.

And again to the same effect. As I may, I command you in the name of God,
that you advise the preachers, to deal speedely and circumspectly, least some
blood of the Saints be shed. In the end he signifies, that the next day,
he with some others, did mean to humble themselves in fasting, and that the
prisoners did know of it.

Whilst Copinger was in expectation of the said conference: how it fell out I
know not, but (as it seems) council was taken, and the matter ouer-ruled,
that the ministers appointed, should utterly refuse to have any conference with
him. Whereupon M. Cartwright, Trauers, Charke, and Egerton, sent him word by M.
Hockenhull, that they would leave him, to himself: or rather to Satan: and
that they thought him unworthy, to be conferred withal. Coppinger. to Charke,
Trauers and Egerton.
And this appears by Coppingers letter to Charke, Trauers and Egerton
beginning thus: Right reverend fathers etc. About the delivery of this message,
Copinger did after, (in some sort) challenge M. Hockenhull: and told him also,
Cop to Hockenh. 24. Feb^ 1590.
that seeing he had been refused to be conferred with-all, by those godly,
wise, and zealous preachers, who had promised to have had conference with him
etc. occasion thereby was offered unto him, to approve himself.

About this time or a little before, Coppinger received a letter in answer of
his, from Gibson (the Scottish Minister above mentioned:) dated from
Pententland in Scotland the sixth of February 1590. concerning the points of
Coppingers said letter unto him. Wherein he writes very cunningly, touching
Coppingers question, and shifteth it over (like his craftes-maister) with an
indirect and uncertain answer. But in these points he is very plain: vz.
that he had showed Coppingers letter to sundry: that he had conferred of it
with the best of their Ministry: that their Church was not forgetful to do al
good offices, for the weal of the brethren here: that there was a writing
ready to send to Germany to Iunius, that he would travail with some of the
good and well affected professors there: that (of his knowledge) travail was to
be made with some others, as namely the King of France, and that their
ministry would themselves travail with her Majesty. No doubt if Iunius or
any other, at their request shall take upon them, to deal with her highness,
for men of Coppingers humor or for any of those, whom he would have delivered,
the suggestions (which either are, or must be made unto them,) are like to
contain many slanders and untruths. But to go forward.

CHAP. VII.
How Coppinger and Arthington came acquainted with Hacket: of their conference
with Io. Throg. Coppingers letter to Io. Throg. and his answer.
SHortly after this time, Hacket to Wigginton 3. march. 1590.
vz. the 3. of March 1590. William Hacket, an old companion of Wiginto^s did
write unto him, and does comfort him then in prison, with the examples of
Gideons empty pitchars, of the deliverance by Moses through the red sea, and of
Haman that was hanged upon the same gibbet, he had prepared for an other. He
uses also these words. Master Wigginton: I desire to communicate my spirit at
large with you: but I know not your keeper etc. Good M. Wigginton, make my
sound heart, known to M. Cartwright, M. Snape, M. Vdall, M. Lord.

In the Easter term, this Hacket came up to London, of likelihood to
communicate his spirit with Wigginton, and to grow into acquaintnance with the
parties named: but his pretense was, partly to see what would become of Job,
Throgmorton, Hackets discourse.
and partly to reckon with Wigginton, about the making of malt between them
together. He had not been long in London, but he came to Wigginton, who
(amongst other discourses) told Hacket that there was a Gentlman (meaning M.
Coppinger) in the City, a very good man etc. He describes him unto Hacket,
and the matter also he was entering into: signifiyng further, how Coppinger had
been wonderfully discouraged (in his purposes) by the Preachers in London: but
that he (for his part) had not so done. etc. He also commended Arthington to
Hacket, Arthing. ex 19. Iulie 1591.
to be an honest man. Then Wigginton sent for Copinger, and by Gods providence
he came forthwith unto him: and M. Wigginton willed Copinger and Hacket, to
take acquaintance one of the other: assuring Coppinger, that he knew Hacket to
be a man truly fearing God, and such a person, Arthingt. ex 30. of July 1591.
as God might minister some comfort to Copinger by his conference: that Hacket
had been tormented, and that for the a credit of Hackets sufferings, a
hundredth could witness. About this time also, Arthingt. ex 19. of July 1591.
Arthington by Wiggintons and Coppingers means (as he says) fell into
acquaintance with Hacket, meeting first with him at Mistress Lawsons house, M.
Job Throgmorton also being the^ at London, grew into some conference (as it
should seem) with these three companions, Coppinger, Arthington, and Hacket.
And this is gathered by Coppingers letter to Job Throgmorton, after his
departure from London, that term: and by the answer, returned from him under
his own hand, and sealed with his seal of arms. Both the letters are fit to
be considered. Thus Coppinger writ unto him, as it appears under his own
hand.

My own dear brother: my self and my two brethren, Where Hacket then lay by
Coppingers appointment.
who lately were together with you in Knight-rider street, do much desire
conference with you, which will ask some time. The business is the Lords own,
and he does deal in it himself, in a strange and extraordinary manner, in
poor and simple creatures. Much is done since you see us, which you will
rejoice to hear of, when we shall meet: and therefore I beseech you, as soon
as you receive this letter, hasten an answer in writing, to my sister
Randolphes house, at S. Peter's hill foot, by Poules wharfe. Therein advertise
(I beseech you) when I may come to speak with you: for delays are dangerous,
and some of the great enemies begin to be so pursued by God, as they are at
their wits end. The Lord make us thankful for it, who keep us ever to
himself, to do his will and not ours.

Your very loving brother in the L. most assured to command.


This coppie remains thus endorsed. The coppie of a letter to M. Job
Throgmorton, from E. C. And now follows Throgmortons letter, being an
answer (as I take it) unto Coppingers.

My good brother, etc. (I rejoice that you will vouchsafe so to account of
me.) Your godly conference at any time, when opportunity shall serve, I will
not refuse. And albeit our business may hinder us now to meet, yet there is no
time ouerpast, but that it may be performed, when it please God. The next
term, (you hear) I must appear here again upon my band: at which time you
shall find, that I will be glad of your christian conference, or of any other
brothers, by whom I may be enlightened. Lord deliver me, from that pride of
heart, to reject or refuse that while I live. That course you speak of,
intended by you, I was never (you know) in particular acquainted with. And
therefore, for me to like or dislike a matter, that I had no knowledge of, had
been (I take it) without ground or warrant. Only I confess, I heard some
buzzes abroad, of a sole and singular course, that either you, or some other
had plotted in his head, which was greatly feared, and condemned of the
brethren. What that was, as I know not, so had I small reason to speak of it
with prejudice. Only I would wish you, and all that bear good will to the
holy cause, in this perilous age of ours, to take both your eyes in your
hands, (as they say) and to be sure of your ground and warrant, before you
strive to put in exeecution. For as I like not of coldness of zeal, under
color of discretion: so on the other side, I think that this sentence of our
savior (be ye wise as serpents) was not written in vain neither, and had great
need to be practiced of some in this age. A sanctified cause, (you know) would
always have a sanctified course. Our rule and square, must be the word of
truth, which so long as we lay before us, as our leuel, we shall not lightly
swerve much from the mark. The Lord therefore direct us, in these fearful and
miserable days, and let not our infirmities be a bar to his mercies. I know,
(my good Brother,) that the greatest works of the Lord: are wrought by the
weakest instrumeuts, least men should boast in the arm of flesh. And
therefore, (were it not for my sins and unworthiness,) I could easily
persuade my self, in regard of my weakness, that the Lord might effect
something by me, who am privy to mine own wants, and far short of those good
gifts, it pleases you (of your love) to load me with. But this work, that
you speak of, (howsoever the instrument be compassed with weakness,) must sure
be wrought by a more sanctified heart, then my self can yet without hypocrisy
boast of. And therefore, though in affection and good will I join, yet I
resign the honor of the work, to those, that the Lord has more enabled. The
man you speak of, (if he be at Oundhell,) dwells hard by a Sister of mine,
and thereupon I shall have the better occasion to see him, when it please God.
Forget me not in your holy prayers and meditations, and salute good Giles with
many thanks, whose debtor I am in the Lord. Blessing upon Syon: confusion upon
Babell: have this 18. of the 5. Month.

Ever yours in the Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
Copinger to Hacket of an appearance in the Star Chamber: his letter to
Vdall: why Cartwright, etc: refused to confer with him: Cartwright resolved
some questions of Coppingers: of eight preachers that did fast and pray for
Coppingers success.
AFter some few days, that Hacket had tarried in London, the said Easter term,
he returned home again to Oundle: having first promised Coppinger, that he
would come up again unto him, whenever he sent for him. Now Coppinger, by
his said conferences and acquaintance with Hacket, was grown (as he said) very
bold and courageous. Copinger to Hacket.
But yet shortly after, vz, (as I think) the seventeenth of May, he liked so
well of Hackets company, that he sent for him again, to come up unto him:
saying, If Gods spirit direct you to come, come: if not, stay. But write with
all speed, Copinger to Hacket. 17. of May. 1591.
and convey your letter, and enclose it in a letter to him, who brought you and
me acquainted: (that was Wigginton): put not too your name, for discovery, etc.
And in the same letter, he sends Hacket this news. The zealous Preachers
(as it is thought) are to be in the Star Chamber to morrow. ( I think, he
means the last day of Easter term last.) The L. by his holy spirit be with
them, and stay all evil that is intended against them. My self, if I can get
in, am moved to be there: and I fear, if sentence with severity shall be
given, I shall be forced in the name of the great and fearful God of heaven
and earth, to protest against it. About this time also, he writ a very
courageous letter to Vdall in prison: (for he confesses it was written about
ten weeks, Copinger to Vdall. May 1591.
before his examination: which was the nineteenth of July). In this letter he
tells him, that (notwithstanding some brethrens hard opinions of him, and
other discouragementes) yet now the Lord has not only enabled him to fight,
but at the length (in some sort, to vanquish and overcome. He signifies also
unto him, that the next day, there were some few, that purposed to join
together, in a holy fast, in regard of the afflicted Saints in general, etc.
He greatly commends the Ministers cause and suffringes, that are in prison,
assuring himself that God will bless all the actions in it. He says, there
were diverse out of prison, lying hid, that in this great work were hammering
their heads, bestowing their brains, Hacket and his fellows.
and spending their spirits: who do hope (in short time) to be brought forth
into the sight of their and your enemies, to defend the cause you stand for:
whose presence (God assisting them,) will daunt the enemies more then yours:
for that they be men void of learning, wisdom, and gifts, such as can
challenge nothing to themselves, but must give all to God: who in all the
greatest works, that ever have been wrought, has used the weakest means,
least men should boast in the arm of flesh. And therefore (I beseech you)
cheer up your selves in the Lord: for the day of our redemption is at hand:
and pray, that the hand of the Lord, may be strengthened in them, whom he has
appointed to take part with you in this cause.

Here (you see) he was grown to a wonderful resolution. But yet there is
another letter of his, that will make the same more evident, and likewise lay
open more plainly, some of the premises, then hitherto they have been. He
shows therein, that he could be still well contented, The Copy of Cop.
letter to a friend 21 May. 1591.
to have some conference with Master Charke, Master Trauers, Master Egerton,
Master Gardener, Master Philips, and Master Cooper. But (says he) I make
not this suite, for that I would seek to have approbation from them, or any
other living creature, but from God himself.

You have heard before, how these Ministers have refused to confer with
Coppinger. And what should a man think, the cause might be? Surely a fear
they had: least he should (by entering into some particulars) bring them,
within the compass of his dangerous complots. This may be necessarily there
also gathered, in that as showing he could be content, to confer with the
said parties, not because (he protests) that he would seek any approbation
from them: so does he likewise remou that doubt, saying, that he purposed not
to acquaint them with the courses, which he purposed, by Gods assistance, to
take in hand, whereby great danger might grow to them, and little good to
him: but that they might be witnesses of his humility, etc.

You have heard also, of one of Copingers petitions to Master Cartwright, for
his answer to those questions mentioned, that he had before propounded to
Wigginton. Whereunto it should seem, that (although at the first he misliked
that motion) yet in the end he yielded. My humble desire to you is (says
Coppinger) that you (in my name) give great thanks to good Master Cartwright,
Ibidem.
for satisfying me in some questions, which, at the first, he thought little
use to be made of. Likewise it also appears, that Master Hockenhull did his
aforesaid message unto Copinger, from the preachers, in harder manner then he
had Commission. For (says he) his counsel, Ibidem.
(that is Cartwrights) and carriage of himself, the Lord did direct and bless
it unto me: though the Messenger etc. in his carriage of himself, failed
somewhat, both in that he delivered from him, and the rest of the Brethren.
And whereas further more in like sort, notice being given to the Ministers in
prison, of one of Copingers fasts, it appeared not, what regard they had
thereof: that point also is now cleared in the same Letter. I beseech you also
give thanks, on my behalf, to the other eight preachers: for upon notice
given unto them, by some of Gods children, that somewhat was intended to be
don, Ibidem.
wherein Gods Glory might appear, and request made that the religious desires,
and godly purposes of the faithful, might be strengthened by their holy prayers:
they thereupon, (as it is credibly signified unto me) humbled themselves in
fasting and prayer: and such an extraordinary blessing came to me thereuppon,
as it is not fit to be repeated.

CHAP. IX.
Of Hackets first coming to Wigginton: of his gadding up and down: and of the
designement to have been executed in the Star chamber.
EDmond Copinger, having thus proceeded in the course you have heard of: at the
length he did send again for Hacket: the spirit (as it seems) moving
Hacket: before, to stay at home. Cop. to Hack.
Marry now, he straitghtly urges him to be at London, three or four days,
before the beginning of Trinity Term: which he could not be: but came up the
first day of the Term which was the fourth of June 1591 and lodged at
Islington. Hackets discourse written by Copinger.
The day following, he went to the Counter, and there dined with Wigginton: 4.
June. 1591.
and after dinner, he began his Pageant, vz. to cry out against certain of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and to utter against them most
villainous speches. The next day being Sunday, he went to have heard master
Phillippes preach: but he preached not that day there: as the Sexton informed
him. Then he went to have heard Master Cooper: but seeing a Surples lie
there, he departed thence, and went to Master Egertons Sermon. At night, not
knowing where to lie, he went to Wigginton: where he met with Coppinger, and
by Wiggintons appointment, he lodged at Master Lawsons. The next morning,
viz. the seventh of June, he proceeded with his slanderous outcries against the
said honorable Counselors: and so continued two days after. In the one of
which two days, he was commanded, (as is set down) to go out of Paul's
by London gate, and say: by your leave London: because he knew, he was
shortly to remove his dwelling. The same day also, in the forenoone, he went
to the Fleet, to have spoken with Master Cartwright: but missing of his
purpose, he left his message with the porter, vz. that master Cartwright
should deal faithfully in the Lords business etc. Of his afternoones work,
thus it is also in the same place recorded. He was commanded to sit that
afternoon at master Lawsons shop: but the purpose of the Lord in that, and
what some of the Citizens themselves know, (he says) I forbear to speak.
These courses held by Hacket, Ibidem.
in the streets, of exclaiming against such persons etc. did proceed (as it
seems) by the advice, or at least by the allowance of Wigginton. For it
appears under his own hand, that he approved (after his fashion) such
outcries in the streets to be lawful, by two examples: one out of Josephus,
and an other of a Yorkshire man, that heretofore had used the like in London,
as Wigginton records.

About this time* vz. in June, (as I guess,) one John Boman, a servant, Boman
to Wigginton. June. 1591.
in Oundell, did write thus to master Wigginton: I desire you to send me a
Coppie of a writing, which you had from Master Cartwright, upon the Court
matters, when Goodman Hacket was with you the first time.

Also, shortly after the aforesaid outcries were finished, and many other
things thought upon amongst them, (you may be sure to such seditious
purposes:) the end of Trinity Term drew near: when it was commonly expected,
that Cartwright and the other ministers in prison, should have come to their
answer openly in the Star Chamber. Whereupon a Letter was written, by
Copinger to his most dear friend Thomas Lancaster, the Schoole-maister, from
whom he could keep nothing, that Lancaster in policy would suffer to be told
him. Which Letter Lancaster says: he did tear in pieces, but confesses under
his hand, that in the same these words were contained: vz. If our Preachers in
prison do appear to morrow in the Star Chamber, and our great men deal with
them so, 24. June. 1591
as it is thought they will: if God do not throw some fearful judgment
amongst them, so as some of the chief of them go not alive out of the place
then never give credit to me, in any thing, whilst you live. But master
Cartwright and the rest appeared not this day: and so the parties threatened,
escaped this judgment.

CHAP. X.
A preparation toward the intended disloialtie: two of Copingers Letters to
Master Charke: and to another: Cartwright and Wiggintons commendation of
Penries being then in London.
NOt long after this time, (if not before) master Wiginton and Copinger, Wigg.
ex.
were very busy, for the better preparing of the peoples minds, to the
readidier acceptance of their further purposes, to publishe in print two
pamphlettes of Wiggintons penning, as he himself confesses. The one was of
Predestination, as though (by the abuse of that doctrine) they meant to have
had the blame of all the wicked and intended mischiefs, both of themselves and
of their partakers, removed from themselves, and laid upon the Lords
shoulders: as though he should have moved them to such lewd attemptes. The
other was a kind of Ballade, directed for advice, to a young courtier, wherein
they make way (as it seems) for their friend Hacket, and that with wonderful
quotation of Scriptures. I will trouble you only with four of the verses. A
Christian true, although he be a clown
May teach a King to wear Scepter and Crown.
And after. For God will sure confound such, as devise
His ordinance or church to tirannise.
To these rimes, both for manner and matter, I may well resemble those, made (I
doubt not) by the same spirit.

Either from country or Court, Epist. to Mart. Epitome.

Martin Mar-Prelate will do you hurt.
Now that Copinger was a dealer in these things, with Wigginton before they
were printed, Hack. decla.
it appears by these words of Hackets in his last declaration to master
Young: Wiggintons boy can declare all his Masters writings: for the boy and
Master Copinger, sat writing half a night, by this examinates bed side,
but what they writ, he cannot tell: but one word he heard: that the Country
Clown, can teach the king to wear the Crown.

Afterward (as I take it) vz. the 9. of July, being friday M. Charke preached
at the black Friars, Cop. to Chark 9. July. 1591.
at which Sermon Copinger was present: who misliking (as it seems) some
words then uttered, did write a letter presently to M. Charke: wherein amongst
other points, he says. Right reverend Sir etc. I do not deny (good Sir) but
I have now a long time taken a strange and extraordinary course, but such as
has offered occasion of suspicion, of my not only doing hurt to my self, but
also to the best sort of men now in question, and to the cause it self. But by
what warrant I have done this, that is all. For if the holy Ghost has been my
warrant, and carries me into such actions, as are differing from other men's
etc. What flesh and blood dare speak against it, etc. Forbear to censure me
and such other, as should deal extraordinarily with me, in the Lords
business, committed to our charge, and judge of us, by the effects which
follow: which if you heareafter see to be wonderderfull great, then let all
ordinary men call themselves to an examination etc. And after. The waste of the
Church cannot be denied to be great, so that there is a place for
extraordinary men, etc. Again, my desire heretofore has been to have had
counsel and direction: but now by comfortable experience, I find, that the
action which the Lord has drawn me into is his own: and he will direct it
himself by the holy Ghost etc, To conclude, I beseech you (says he) to show
this letter to M. Trauers and M* Egerton.

M. Charke, upon the receipt of this letter, preaching again the Sunday after,
in the same place, uttered in his sermon, these words, which ( Copinger says)
were meant of him, in respect of his foresaid letter: there are some persons so
desperate, that they would willingly thrust themselves upon the rocks of the
land. This also appears by an other letter, concerning this second sermon,
Copin. to a preacher the 13. or 14. of July.
written about the 13. or 14* of Iulie, to an other preacher in London, but he
is not named: it had been to good purpose, if he had been named. For it
seems he was as thoroughly acquainted with Coppinger, and his fellows
designements, as it may be well supposed, that Wigginton was.

In my letter ( unto Charke) I manifested my self to have an extraordinary
calling, and signified, that the Lord had so called others besides my self,
who would approve our selves, to be the servants of the Lord, in a high
calling. Again the ship ( that is the Church) had perished, if the Lord had
not immediately called three of us, to help to recover it etc. My calling is
especially to deal with Magistrates: another has to do with Ministers, who
has written a letter to you of the City etc. The third is the chief, who
can neither write nor read, so that he is the executioner of the Lords most
holy will. He further offers to acquaint this Minister, with their whole
course, and wills him to show this letter to his brethren, and to publish it,
where ever he should go.

Hacket confessed, Hack. last ext.
that being about this time, (as I take it) with Wigginton, the said Wigginton
affirmed, in the presence of two gentlemen and others, that if the Magistrates
did not govern well, the people might draw themselves together and to see a
reformation.

Upon the 15. day of July, Copinger and Arthington did write a iointe letter of
purpose to have drawn Lancaster unto them, for the making up of a quaternion.
And this was one persuasion. If I Ed. Coppinger, do not prefer you, before any
one man in the land, whosoever, for your wise, holy, loving, and religious
course, both in the general calling of a Christian, and in your particular
calling, the Lord confound me.

After Lancaster had received this letter, notwithstanding he writ unto him, of
some mislike he had of their proceedings, yet (as Hacket says,) he came unto
them all three, the same night, Hack. ex. 21 of July.
to one Walkers house at Broken wharfe, where they conferred together about an
hour after supper. Of what great account this Lancaster and some others were,
with these companions, it does further appear by that which follows. 16. of
July
The same day in the morning that Copinger and Arthington made their seditious
Proclamation in Cheapside: they two together first, and afterward Hacket, came
unto Wigginton, and amongst many things, (as Wiginton himself confesses) they
told him; that M. Cartwright had done more against Antichrist then any in the
world before him, since the Apostles times; and that Wigginton, was comparable
unto him, and that M. Lancaster was above them both, in the estate of heavenly
glory, because he had kept himself undefiled from the common corruptions of
these times, and had a most simple heart to God. Likewise also they said to
Wigginton, at the same time, that Reformation and the Lords discipline should
now forthwith be established: and therefore charged Wigginton in the Lords
name to put all Christians in comfort, that they should see a joyful
alteration, in the state of Church government, shortly.

Arthington, after being examined said, that Penry had sent him word by a
letter out of Scotland, that reformation must shortly be erected in England:
and that he took him (in so writing) to be a true Prophet. It is not also
unlikely, but that Penry was a Prouoker of these men to such their outrages:
hoping, that upon their outcries and proclamations the people would have risen.
For he was then in London to have played his part if their attempts had found
the good success, Ienk. Ioh. ex
they looked for. Marry when he saw Hacket executed: he presently (the same
day) posted back again toward Scotland.

CHAP. XI.
Of the traiterous intendments which were toward the Court.
BEfore this their intended insurrection, it is to be further remembrd unto you
what was disclosed amongst themselves in their own discourses and prophesies,
(as since it appears,) concerning the means, whereby they thought to have
prevailed, for their discipline, Arthingtons prophecy.
etc. by those their most lewd, seditious, and traiterous attempts. Her
Majesty's course held, for the maintenance of the present government of the
Church: was their chief grief, (which course they termed the defense of
abomination: Vdall. etc.
the bearing of the beasts mark, the thrusting of Jesus Christ out of his own
rule and government) and the arraignement of some, with the imprisonment of
Cartwright and others.

If the Star Chamber day (before mentioned) had held some of her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, (whom they supposed to stand most in their
light) should never have departed thence alive. After that plot failing they
devised how by their imprecations and cursing of themselves they might persuade
the people, that certain of the Lords of the said most honorable Counsel,
were traitors. Wherein how they prevailed I know not: but this I find, that
they had not only determined to have removed them all from her Majesty:
Coppinger in a letter.
and to have placed others in their rooms, (whom they had already named
particularly,) but likewise to have proceeded against their LLs. with very hard
censures. The Lord pardon their souls, (says Copinger) for in their outward
man, they must be punished, though they repent. Nay in their own conceits: they
had likewise already deprived some of the chief of their LLs from their great
places of honor: so as when they took occasion, to speak seditiously of them,
they used their bare names, without any of the honorable titles, belonging
unto them: as such a man lately such an officer, Chancellor or Treasurer, etc.

Besides (when the time of their said intended insurrection grew nigh,) they
sent to have her Majesty moved for the committing of her said Counselors:
least in the vprores, which they meant to stir, their LLs. might have been
violently surprised etc. they having peradventure some purpose, to bring them
afterward to some of their own more public courts of justice. Ibid.
I do advise (says Coppinger,) that every one of her Council, be commanded,
to keep their house or chamber for fear of stir and danger: and that such and
such, etc. be appointed to wait upon her: and that master Wigginton, ( in
more favor with God then any man of his calling, whosoever,) be commanded to
be near her highness, to pray to God, and to preach privately, etc.

But that which is especially most horrible, (although they might seem, by this
last provision, for her Majesty, to have indeed some good regard of her
safety) yet is it confessed to have bin affirmed amongst them: that her highness
was worthy to be deprived, Arthin. exam. 19. of July
for giving credit and countenance to the Bishops and such other wicked
persons: and for misusing her good subjects, I think they meant the
imprisonment of Cartwright and the rest.

It is also further confessed by Arthington, that his fellows refused to pray
for her Majesty: and in his second examination, he acknowledges, that he
verily thinks, that Hacket meant her Majesty should have been deprived: and
in his long Apology unto the LLs. thus: In my conscience Hacket meant to
murder those noble men, that hindered his purpose, one way or other, etc. and
after, etc, to have done that, which my heart and hand for trembling cannot
express.

Agreeable hereunto, are Hackets words, both before he was condemned, and
after. If (says he) Copinger, one Catiline late of Oundell, Hack. on the
torture.
and Wigginton were straightly examined: Hacket examined. 24. July
they could utter and declare matters of treason. And at an other time: If
these fellows ( meaning Copinger and Wigginton, etc) were well sifted, they
could declare all the treasons. And the morning before his death. It was a
gracious and an happy turn, Hacket to M. Young in presence of diverse.
that these treasons were in time revealed: for otherwise it would have cost a
number of innocent men their blood: hut now (I trust in God,) that they will
reveal their treasons. And thus you see the end and drift of the foresaid
extraordinary callings, for the setting up and establishing of the pretended
holy discipline.

CHAP. XII.
That of long time, some such attemptes as Hacket made for Discipline: were of
great likelihood purposed.
MY purpose was not, from the beginning, either to set down, or to prosecute,
the full history of these desperate reformers, (which is most effectually
performed already by another), Conspiracy for Discipline
otherwise then they do concern some other persons, and especially those, not
of the meanest of our Disciplinarian Ministers, and are thereby very pertinent
(in my opinion) to show the point, I have in hand, of the brethrens imitation
of the Scottish ministers reformation. For I trust (as I said, in the entrance
to this part,) it will not now be denied but that great and many threatening
speeches are published: One tells us, that great troubles will come of it, if
that brethren may not be suffered to do what they list: another, that they can
no longer endure to be used as they are: another in effect: that our Bishops
shall be used, as they were in Scotland: and that there are more of this
confederacy, then can be suppressed: another, that it is more then time, for
the hottest brethren to set up the Discipline themselves, without any further
staying for Parliaments: a Synod, that the people, being first instructed, are
then to be thrust into the public practice of the Discipline: another man,
that seeing the brethren cannot obtain their wills, by suit nor dispute, the
multitude and people must work the feat: another, that inferior Magistrates of
their own authority, within their limits, are to make this new reformation:
another, that it is a shame for all the favorers of this faction, in that for
fear of disturbing of our state, (for sooth,) and offending of her Majesty,
they had not before this time cast out our Bishops: another, that there are a
hundred thousand of this brotherhoode in England, who if they come with a
petition for the discipline to her Majesty, cannot in policy be rejected,
without danger: another that approved and worthy men of every shire have
already consented to this Discipline: that the Eldership is at hand: that the
people are inflamed with zeal, and that it is impossible to stand against it:
another, that there is a devise amongst them, how to obtain their desires all
in one day: another, that Bishops are to be packing after the Friars and
Monks: another, that they will have their Discipline in spite of all the
adversaries of it: another, that it is dangerous to the state, if they have not
their wills, in regard of the coffeehouse, which will ensue thereby, in the
hearts of her Majesty's subjects: another in effect, that the Discipline is
like to come into our Church, by such a means, as will make all the Bishops
hearts to ache: and another, that he is of this mind, that reformation will not
be had without blood.

Now if any man, to extenuate these things, shall say: let every man bear his
own burden, and be charged with his own particular actions: what some in the
heat of their zeal have published it ought to have a charitable construction,
and cannot well be further extended, to touch any other: as if all the factioners
had entered into such a seditious conspiracy, as the said threatening speeches
do import, I answer, that some indeed there be, that do cast these and such
like colors over this matter, to bleare men's eyes withal. Some commends their
zeal, but not their discretion: some allow their matter, but not their manner:
and some will take upon them to excuse both: but as yet I never heard any of
that crew, but he would either in one respect or other, find some occasion to
commend the worst of them.

Besides where so many of any one sect do concur in their writings, about any
new point: it is commonly taken to be the judgment of them all. And who
knows not, that if Cartwright and the rest, had not secretly clapped such
fellows on the backs for their zeal, and laughed in their sleeves to see them
go so forward, but had disliked them: his earnest reproof of the first (being
their Apostle and worthy) would have prevented all the others that followed,
being his Disciples. But if it be true, (that I have heard reported) that upon
the coming forth of Martins Epistle: Master Cartwright should say: seeing the
Bishops would take no warning: it is no matter that they are thus handled:
Surely those words, from him were enough to set these men agogge. So as, that
which is commonly reported of great robberies: may fitly serve to satisfy the
bowlsterers of such lewdness.

There are (say they) in such attemptes not only executioners, but also
setters, receivers, and favorers: and in matters of treason concealers: who
are all of them within the danger and compass of law. How this may be
applied, I leave it, to any reasonable man's consideration, that shall be
pleased to weigh the premises, as well concerning the said threatening speeches
and great bragges: as also the course which was held, by the ministers in
prison, and those of the London-fraternitie, together with some others,
touching the attemptes, which Coppinger and his fellows took upon them to
effect.

CHA. XIII.
Brief collections: whereby it may summarily appear: that certain Ministers
in London did know, what Coppinger intended.
WIgginton (as you have heard) upon Cartwrightes commitment, etc. writes of a
bickering, and then a battle to be looked for. Coppinger with his companio^s
fasteth, and so dreameth of a way, how to work wonders. He sends into
Scotland concerning an extraordinary calling, signifying that some did fancy to
themselves such a manner of calling, who would hazard their lives, that Christ
himself, by the abolishing of the Antichristian tyranny, (which he affirmed
did reign in our Church,) might govern in his own kingdom. Wigginton
afterward approves the lawfulness of such a calling, in these days, our
Churches lying wast etc. Copinger and Wigginton with some others, do thereupon
fast again, to know which of them should be so called. The lot (forsooth)
falling upon Copinger chiefly he is not silent: but master Wentworth (amongst
others) must be of his privy Council. He also disclosed himself, (after a
sort) as you have heard, to certain of the Ministers in London before
mentioned: and namely to Master Cartwright, imparting unto him his several
callings to an extraordinary course for the discipline, etc. His said writings
into Scotland, and Wiggintons said approbation of an extraordinary calling. He
sent Master Cartwright the same propositions, that Wigginton had allowed:
whereof master Cartwright, afterward thought, there might be good use: he
signified unto him, that by his calling, he was to take in hand such business,
as in the eyes of flesh and blood, was likely to bring great danger to
himself, and unlikely to bring any good success to the Church: he told him,
that if he had not been discouraged, he had before that day procured the
release of some, that stood then in danger of their lives, meaning (as I
suppose) Vdall, and Newman, etc.

As he dealt with Cartwright, so did he with the other Ministers, and with some
of them more plainly, desiring still of them all, both Cartwright and the
rest, and that most instantly, that he might be conferred withal, offering
himself to be altogether ruled by them, either to proceed (if they thought
meet) in his said so dangerous business, or otherwise wholly to desist and
leave it off. He also offered to imparte unto them all his designements, as to
M. Cartwright, not only in generality what he intended, but also the
particular means, whereby he purposed to bring the same to pass. Afterward
when through his acquaintance with Hacket, by Wiggintons means, and other
encouragements given him by an other of his lay friends: and by Wigginton etc,
that he grew to be more resolute: he signified the same to M. Charke, (not
past six days before their fury brake forth,) still yet desiring conference
with him, Trauers, Egerton, Gardener, Cooper and Philips.

CHAP. XIIII.
The cunning dealing of certain ministers in London, how notwithstanding they
wished Coppingers plot to go forward: yet they might be (if it were possible)
without the compass of law.
COnsider I pray you the policy, which the said ministers (mentioned in the
end of the former Chap.) used. They at the beginning, no sooner heard of
Copingers conceit of an extraordinary calling, to work such great matters: but
by and by, (as me^ acquainted with the fore-saide Geneua positions,) they very
well knew, whereunto that matter tended. And therefore wher-as the poor
misse-led gentleman, would have imparted unto them, al his secrets: they
started from that point, and refused wholly to take from him any knowledge of
them.

They sent him some cold messages, of their dislike of his proceedings, (which
they after qualified, as it has been showed,) not so much to withdraw him
from his lewdenesse, as that thereby if things fell out amiss, they might have
some means to clear themselves, by the testimonies of such their messengers,
as Hockenhull and others. And touching conference that was also by them denied,
and surely upon good and provident reasons. For if thereby, they should have
yielded in opinion unto him, they knew it might have broughr them into apparent
danger. Besides, they were not unlike by sufficient arguments to have dissuaded
him, from such a fantasy: which (as it seems) was very far from their
meaning. And lastly, it was almost impossible, but that in their debating with
him of his pretended calling, he must needs have made some mention of such
particulars, as with their own safety they durst not have concealed* and so
that way also his platform would have been dashed. The safest way therefore,
for them was, not to have any conference at all with him: and that course (for
ought I find) they took: to the hardening of Coppingers heart, and his
fellows: and to the great aduenturing of all the mischiefs, that were
intended.

It was not denied amongst them, (as Coppinger says,) but that the cause was
good, which he desired to be an actor in: but the thing that stuck in their
teeth, was this: vz. they thought it impossible that he should be fit to
intermeddle in it, without the endaungering both of himself (as Egerton
said,) and of the great cause which he would seem to be most desirous to
further. Howbeit though Egerton would not take upon him, to approve his
extraordinary calling, (for fear of himself:) yet (for all the said
danger) he thought it no policy greatly to discourage him, when he qualified
his speeches after this sort: vz. he would be loath to quench the spirit of
God in Coppinger, or to hinder his zeal.

Iosuah was called extraordinarily by God himself, Numb. 27. Deuteronomy. 31
to cast the enemies of the Israelites out of the land of Canaan, that they
might possess it. Iosuah. 1. 9.
Which example M. Wentworth applying to Coppinger, and encouraging him, upon
advice taken, as the Lord did Iosuah: vz: be bold and of a good courage, fear
not to be discouraged etc. he showed no great mislike of Copingers purposes.
Likewise, though M. Throgmorton, notwithstanding his conference, (as it
seems) with Coppinger, Arthington and Hacket, was not acquainted (as he
said,) with Copingers particular platformes: yet in that he confesses, he had
heard some buzzes abroad of a sole and singular course intended, and does not
only advise him to imitate the serpents wisdom, but says also, that in
affection and good will he joined with him: it could not otherwise be, but that
Coppinger was thereby greatly animated.

When Copinger told Vdall that certain unlearned men, then lyinge hid, would
shortly take upon them the defense of the cause, which he and his brethren in
prison stood-for, and would thereby daunt all their ennemies, more then they
could, willinge both him and the rest, ther-vpon to cheer up themselves, (for
the day of their redemption was at hand: I do greatly marvel, what Vdall
thought to be Copingers meaning.

It might well have stood with M. Charkes duty, (seeing Coppingers full
resolution to enter into some desperate attempt, by virtue of his
extraordinary calling,) to have disclosed the same to the state. When he
preached in the Black Friars, to the brotherhood there, about two days after
his said intelligence of Copingers resolution, and but five or six days before
their proclamation that there were some persons, so desperate that they would
willingly thrust themselves upon the rocks of the Land, thereby to have
dissuaded Copinger, (who then was present,) or for what other purpose, I know
not: he should forth with have acquainted the said rocks also, what
boisterous tempests and violent storms had been ready to assault them.

In this brief summary, I omit the rest of Wiggintons actions, referring you
to his fellow Hackets judgment, both of him and them. They are so apparent, by
that which has been said, as they seem to me, to be past conjectures. And I
would withal my heart, that all which has been hitherto said of the other
ministers, touching this point, did only depend upon probabilities. For then
charity would bind us to judge the best. But men may not call good evil, nor
darkness light, nor treasonable conspiracies, ecclesiastical policies.
Mark them (if it please you) for disciplinarian practices: and then bearing
that brande, own them, who list, and term them as you fancy.

CHAP. XV.
If Hackets treasons had prevailed for the pretended discipline, how they might
have been defended by the disciplinarie doctrine.
I Am not ignorant, that now, if any of the said ministers or their favorers
were asked, how they like of Coppingers and his companions proceedings: no men
will more eagerly exclaim against them. When Hacket with his adherents, found
themselves prevented, and that they were cut of in the beginning of their race,
then (to save their lives) they could confess, their extraordinary purposes,
pretended before with tears, with fasting, (with groans and imprecations, to
have proceeded from the spirit of God,) to be nothing else, but illusions of
Satan, cruel, bloody, and traiterous designements. But if they had prevailed,
what would have been said of them then? Surely it is no hard matter to guess.
If Coppinger, Hacket, and Arthington, had murdered two or three of the Lords
in the Star Chamber, the last day of the said Trinity Term, the Consistorian
doctrine would easily have defended it: especially if their further intents for
the discipline, had thereby succeeded. I will tell you a notable history to
this purpose.

About the year 1545. (M. Calvin then reigning in the Consistory at Geneua,)
The hist. of the church of Scotland. pa. 143. 144. 145.
one Norman Lesly son to the Earl of Rothsey, fell at some jar with the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, then a Cardinal: for a private cause (says our
Chronicle and Buchanans) betwixt them two, for his dealing, concerning the
burning of one George Wisehart, (says the history of the Church of Scotland.)
Whereupon the said Norma^, F. Thyn. and Buchanan.
with some of his partakers conspired the Cardinals death, they being the
rather animated thereunto, through the Council of some great men of the Realm,
that had conceived some deadly hatred against him. The effecting of which
conspiracy, Hist. of the church of Scotland.
proceeded after this sort, as is set down in the said Ecclesiastical
history. The 29. of May 1546, the said Norman, with 16, or 17. more, entered by
a wile into the Castle of S. Andrews, (where the Cardinal dwelt) early in the
morning: and after some course taken for possessing themselves of the castle,
Norman Lesly, James Meluin, and Peter Carmichaell, got into the Cardinals
chamber, where finding him set in his chair, and crying unto them: I am a
Priest, ye will not slay me? the said Leesly stroke him first, once or
twice, and so did the said Peter. But James Meluin (a man, you may be sure, of
nature most gentle and most modest,) perceiving them both in choler, withdrew
them, and said: This work and judgment of God, (although it be secret,)
ought to be done with greater gravity. And presenting unto him the point of
the sword, said. Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of the
shedding of the blood, of that notable instrument of God, M. George Wisehart,
which albeit the flame of fire consumed before men, yet cries it a vengeance
upon thee, and we from God are sent to revenge it. The godly fact and words of
Iam. Meluin.
For here before my God, I protest that neither the hatred of thy person, the
love of thy riches, nor the fear of any trouble, thou could have done to
me in particular, moved, or moves me to strike thee: but only because thou
have been and remainest an obstinate enemy against Christ Jesus and his holy
Gospel. And so he stroke him, twice or thrice through, with a stog-sworde:
and so he fell. The Cardinal being thus murdered, F. Thin. and Buchanan.
they seized upon the Artilllerie and munition, wherewith that fortress was
plentifully furnished, and likewise upon the rich hangings, householde stuff,
of all sorts, apparel, Copes, jewels, ornaments of Churches, great store of
gold and silver plate, besides no small quantity of treasure in ready coin.

Some amongst us in England, have labored very earnestly to qualify
Copingers words, where he said, that God would throw some fearful judgment
amongst the Lords, so as some the chief of them should not go alive out of
the place: as though there had been no violent course intended by him and his
associates, but that (in his fond conceit (he had imagined, that God himself
from heaven, should have showed that judgment, for the deliverance of
Cartwright and the rest. And in my conscience, one gentelman of good credit,
not acquainted at all with the Consistorian doctrine, in these and such like
matters thought so in his heart. But here this mask is plucked from such faces
as could not be ignorant, what was meant, in that the same spirit which Was in
Copinger, speaking before in James Meluin, or rather (as I think) in Knox, and
his fellow-ministers, (according to whose humor he penned that history,) do
term the said cruel murder of the Cardinal, to be the work and
judgment of God, and that for the manner of the execution of it. Besides in
the margent of the Book: over against the Stabbers blasphemous words, this
note is set down, vz. the godly fact and words of James Meluin. But that,
which moves me most, and for the which I have troubled you with this
history, is this: that men are animated to commit the like murders, and the
doctrine thereof is stoutely justified according to the heathenish conceit, of
a certain tyrant, whom Cicero also (a heathen man, but yet of better
judgment) does confute.

Dionisius, having spoiled the temple of Proserpina, at Locris, of Jupiter in
Peloponesus, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, because Proserpina drowned him not,
Cicer. de natura deorum lib. 3.
as he sailed to Syracuse nor Jupiter stroke him in pieces with his
thunderboltes, nor Aesculapius made an end of him by some long and miserable
consumption, both he himself, and many others, accounted such his sacrilege,
to be both just and lawful. And even so it falls out, for the murder I
speak of. He that has eyes to see let him see.

After the foresaid Castle was surprised, and the Cardinal was murdered,
Lesly with his company, Knox and the rest kept the same Castle by force against
the Governor. The hist. of the church Scotland.
But at the last they were compelled to yield it up: and being thereupon sent
(as prisonners) into France, they were (by directions there) committed some of
the^ to the Galleys, and some to other prisons. Howbeit in the end they all
escaped with their lives, by one means or other, saving the said James
Meluin, who dyed in prison, whereupon comes in this notable Consistorian
doctrine, borrowed of the said heathenish conclusions.

This we write, vz. (how all but Meluin escaped) to let the posterities to come
understand, ( says Knox and his fellows) how potently God wrought, in
preserving and delivering of these that had but a small knowledge of his truth,
and for the love of the same hazarded all. That if that, either we (now in our
days,) having greater light, or our posterities, (that shall follow us) shall
see a fearful dispersion of such as oppone themselves to impiety, or take
upon them to punish the same, otherwise then laws of men will permit: if (we
say) we or they shall see such left of men yea as it were despised and punished
of God, yet let us not damn the persons that punish vice, (and that for just
cause:) nor yet despair, but that the same God, that deiects (for causes
unknown to us) will raise up again the persons dejected to his glory, and
their comfort.

Again if our said seditious persons had prevailed with the multitude, (in
their other plot) concerning their purposes of removing some of her majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, from her service in that place: and in
appointing others to succeed them, (whom they fancied to be favorers of their
Discipline): you should have heard (I warrant you) no cries of the brotherhood,
nor complaints in your streets, of any of that faction. It would have been
said, as Goodman taught at Geneua, that seeing the said Counselors were
enemies to Christ's kingdom, and did seduce her Majesty now, that God had
raised them up, an Othoniel or a Jonathan to assist them, why should they not
have joined themselves unto him? Oh (would some have said) the holy discipline,
the holy discipline, the holy discipline: what Prince or Potentate may resist
the holy discipline and prosper? Others. See the hand of the Lord: when men do
fail what God can do. Others, the greatest works, that ever were done in the
behalf of the Church, have been brought to pass by the basest means.
Others, this is the work of God, and it is admirable in our eyes. Others, thus
Iosuah being extraordinarily strengthened by God, threw thirty kings out of the
land of Canaan. Others, sufficient warning was given, and what would they have
had men to have done? Then should you have had such a declaration, or
proclamation, as you have before heard of: penned (no doubt) by some of the
Consistorian ministers in Scotland: vz. of the just and necessary causes,
moving them and their assistantes her Majesty's faithful subjects, Declara^ion
1582. before mentioned.
to repair to her Majesty: for resisting of the present dangers, appearing to
Gods true religion and professors thereof, etc. and to seek redres and
reformation of abuses, removing from her Majesty, the chief authors thereof
etc. that with common consent, redress and remedy might be provided: Or
termed. The repairing toward Greenwitch to the Q. Majesty, Proclamation at
Sterling. 1585. F. Thin.
as else where such attempts have been colored.

Likewise, if yet things had not squared to their likings, and that they had
gone further with good success in any violent course against her majesty, (as
it is confessed they purposed to have done,) then also the Geneua-diuinity must
have borne the brunt, for the justification of such extraordinary judgments
of God. And thus you should have had these matters smoothed over, as partly it
may appear by the assault mentioned at Sterling, wherein the king was present
in person: and partly by the Consistorian propositions, (before set down)
touching this point, with many other things, both to be noted in the premises,
and also in those books, out of the which the said propositions are drawn.

I will not trouble you any further with Ifs, although I could add, that if
the said traitors had proceeded on forward, with their confessed purposes, to
have touched her maisties estate: there wants no less defense, by
Disciplinarian learning, for such a matter, then for the premises. You may
remember the seditious and intolerable propositions before mentioned, as they
are truly collected out of our own country men's books, infected at Geneua
with that pestilent doctrine. Many examples also would have been brought, for
that purpose, out of Buchanan, Beza, Knox and the rest of that humor:
especially the grave resolution given by Knox and Wollocke, Histo. of the
Church of Scotland. pa. 372. 373.
generally against all Princes, but particularly then urged and effected, by
the deposing of the king of Scots grandmother, from her civil government of
that land. And peradventure a part of the said Knox his exhortation to England
written from Geneua the twelfth of January 1559. Exhort page 91. 92.
(as soon as he heard of her majesty's possession of the royal Crown of this
Realm,) would have been justified: where he says, that no power, nor
liberty, ought to be permitted to any state, degree, or authority, (whatsoever
they be:) to live without the yoke of Discipline, etc: and that if Prince,
King or Emperor, would enterprise to change or disanull the same, he ought to
be reputed an ennemie to God, and therefore unworthy to reign above his people.

And thus you see how al these treasons, if they had happened, with what
Consistorian zeal they might have been defended afterward, by the
Disciplinarian doctrine, which has been sent abroad into this Island from
Geneua: and meetely well practiced already, in some parts thereof, by men of
that stamp. Whereupon I do collect, (the premises considered) by Cartwrights
and other the ministers intelligence, with Copingers desperate purposes, that
they cared not what mischiefs had ensued, so they themselves might have been
safe. For (as it is most evident, by the threatening speeches before mentioned,)
there is nothing more labored for, amongst that sect, then to thrust their
many thousands, or some of them into some mutiny or bloody attempt. Their hope
was, that upon any such occasion, their chief favorers would not cease to
solicit her majesty, (for fear of further trouble) to grant their desires, or
(at the least) to take some other course, for their contentment, then hitherto
(in their opinions) there has been taken. They knew, that whatsoever either
could or should fall out, under the pretense of seeking for Christ's kingdom,
and for the extirpation of the present government of our Church (termed by
them to be so abominable and Antichristian,) if it had good success for
their devised platformes, yet the said Consistorian examples, with their
Allobrogicall new learning, would have borne it out sufficiently, and
maintained it. I pray God deliver England from these and such like points of
Discipline.

For mine own part, I would not have, urged matters in this sort, were it not,
that I think (in my conscience) it is more then high time, that her majesty's
faithful subjects should learn to know these practices, and withal to
beware of such sectaries, as (under their many, both godly and goodly
pretenses) do thus seditiously endeavor to disturb the land. And the rather
also, I did it, because I see there are diverse, that will needs hood-winke
themselves, and stop their ears, with the Serpent in the Psalm of purpose,
because they would gladly have these things smoothered up. For hereby it will
be apparent to our posterity, that if any such mischiefs, (which God forbid)
shall happen hereafter, they were sufficiently warned, that both should and
might (in good time) have prevented them, and withal it would then be found
true which Liuie says: vrgentibus rempublicam fatis, Dei and hominum salutares
admonitiones spernuntur. Lib. 5 dec. l
When the Lord for the sins of the people, is purposed to punish any
Country: he blinds the eyes of the wise, so as they shall either neglect, or
not perceive those ordinary means, for the safety thereof, which very simple
men, (or babes in a manner) did easily foresee. Which judgment I pray God
turn far away, and long from this and all other true Christian lands and
kingdoms. Amen.

FINIS.

