A BRIEF CONSIDERATION Of Man's Iniquity, and Gods Justice: Wherein the
distinction of 1. Sins into Venial, Mortal,
2. Sins and Punishments into Aequall, Unequal

Is Scholasticallie Examined.

Miserere mei Domine indigna facientis, and digna patientis.

S. Aug. Imprinted at London, for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
in Fleetstreet, near the Conduit. 1608.

The Author to the Pretended Catholics.
THE CHVRCH (in the principal signification of the word) is a Body united
together, in all the parts joined with the Head by a mystical union. And the
Old Enemy has diversely assaulted both Head and Body, with unplacable
malice, but limited power.

Yet still he attempteth something, and as he is a spiritual Enemy, so are
his weapons spiritual.

Sometimes he provoke us to sin in Moral things, as in sins of action,
Contra bonum.

Sometimes in things Intellectual, as in sins of Opinion Contra verum.

The latter is of two sorts: either haereticall against the Head: Or
schismatic against the Body.

The Heresies against the Head, are either against his Natures or Persons, or
Offices.

The two former were old heresies, and long since condemned.

The latter, are diverse heresies sprung up as tares amongst good wheat in
succeding ages.

Such are diverse of your opinions, and namely against the Priesthood of Christ
consisting in Satisfaction and Intercession.

The former you have sundry ways violated, and not a little by your misapplyed
distinction of Venial and Mortal sins: which I have a little rectified in
this brief Declaration, and also removed that imputation of the Aequality of
sin and punishment, which you say, must necessarily ensue, if your conceit
should vanish.

If you make no answer hereunto, you either want Charity to free me from
error, or ability to discharge your selves from suspicion thereof. And if you
make any answer, let your lines be more full of substance to satisfy the
point, then of malice to disgrace the Author: who entirely wishing your
salvation in Christ's Justice, commends you to Gods mercy in him.

Fare ye well, 14. Octo. 1607.
A Brief Consideration, etc.
VENIAL sins are rather praeter legem, The Papists opinion briefly recited.
then Contra legem.

Venial and mortal are so to be esteemed from their own nature: For venial
condignely deserve only temporal punishments, and mortal deserve a ternall
punishments, and both these in divine justice. And hence is the inaequality of
sin most properly, and principally conceived. In which respect there are
certain temporary punishments also in Purgatory, remaining for those, whose
sins in this life are not sufficiently purged, and for which they have not
worthily satisfied.

The Protestants opinion recited and declared.
ALL sins ex natura sua and merito are mortal, deserving condignly in divine
Justice, eternal death.

These sins are also venial, not proprie, but improprie and ex euentu only.
They are venial by grace according to the quality and manner of our
Repentance, by which we are capable of pardon. Quod verum est in adultis, etc.

But to say Peccatum and yet Veniale simply, and not Mortale properly, it is a
virtuall Contradiction. For they are in that sense, termini incompossibiles,
and can consist together, no more then fire and cold, water and dry, or the
like; the accident being such as is repugnant to the proper, or perpetual
quality of the subject. For there is no composition of merely opposites, nor
construction of mutually destructiues.

And if any man ask, 1. how peccatum can be a subject, it self being in
nature nothing, or 2. being but an accident, how can it be the subject of an
accident?

We answer,

To the first: that though nothing has Being, which is not from God, and so
sin is nothing because it is not from God, yet the form of it, being an
obliquity in the substance, or quality, or action of a reasonable creature,
taking integrity from the same, so far as it proceeds: Sin has esse
priuatinum, in that which has esse positinum from God. And therefore Subiectum
mali est bonum, quia malum subsistit in ente, quod in sebonum est.

To the second, that though mortale in peccato have not so proper an inherency,
as ordinary Accidents have in their subjects, yet it is so naturally in it,
that it is in nature inseparable from it: but vltimum et independens subiectum,
est homo peccans, vel Angelus peccans.

Wherefore the distinction of sins into Venial and Mortal, arises not ex
ipsis Rebus, but Personis: and hence it follows, ^^^t all sins are damnable
in all me^, not to all men; all deserving, (...) not all receiving damnation.
(...) to the Reprobate, no sin is finally venial, and to the Elect, no sin
is finally mortal.

Notwithstanding it must be observed, that one sin simpliciter and
vniuersaliter est mortale, because it is not only punishable, but evermore
punished with eternal death, in all that commit the same and this is Peccatum
contra Spiritum Sanctum.

For though it be not fully cleared (at least in the judgment of many men)
what this Sin is, and wherein the formality of the same consists, yet we
observe this difference betwixt this, and other mortal sins (I call sins
Mortal two ways: first by way of Explication, and so to say a mortal sin,
Mortale, est generaliter nota explicatiua, specialiter est nota distinctiua.
it is to show the nature of all sins: secondly by way of distinction: and so
to say a mortal sin, it is to design this sin, whereof I now speak.)

That Impenitencie makes other remissible sins not to be remitted, but does
not perpetually and necessarily attend those sins: Whereas this sin is
simply irremissible, the party so sinning being evermore obdurate by his own
unjust action, and the just subtraction of Gods grace, so that Impenitency
follows it necessitate ineuitabili: and therefore it is called mortal in an
eminent degree, and is never venial: not because God in his absolute power,
cannot forgive it, but because in his just will he has decreed never to
forgive it.

This is it which our Lord speaks of, Matthew 12.31. and which his beloved
Disciple understands, saying: There is a sin unto death: and there is a
sin not unto death: distinguishing not betwixt some sins mortal in nature,
and others venial in nature; but betwixt one sin simply mortal in nature,
and in necessary effect unto all: and all other sins simply mortal in
nature, but not in necessary effect unto all: and therefore possibly venial.

And if any Papist say, that Venial Sins must be repented of: I answer,
that this Repentance being omitted, makes not a Venial Sin to be a mortal
sin in their judgment: For then they should agree with us, who say that a
mortal sin is venial by repentance, and that a venial sin (as all sins
except one, are, propter possi^ilitatem Poenitentiae) for want of Repentance is
finally mortal. But the Papists say, that sins venial not repented of, are
not mortal, nor meritoriously punishable by eternal death. If they say not
thus, there is no controversy betwixt us: and if they say thus, there is no
reconciliation, as far as I can conceive.

The Ancients speaking of mortal sins, understand great sins, Peccata
vastantia conscientiam, such as usually exclude grace, by which our sins
become venial unto us.

To return a little back again, that we may proceed forward more orderly,
we note that Impaenitency is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, because it
is in Paganes also, who never knew his Divine Person, nor felt his lively
motion. It is not formale huius peccati, but consequens. In all other sins it
is rather contingent, then consequent. For as no sin can be forgiven without
repentance, so this sin excludes possibility of repentance, and therefore
cannot be forgiven. Heb. 6.4.

NOW as Death is the wages of all sins, so Christ only is the propitiation
of all sins, and both by merit.

He takes away Original sin: yet Baptism is required ordinarily as the
instrument.

He takes away Actual sin: yet Repentance is required evermore in those
that are of Capacity.

Neither does he take away some sort of Sins only, and not al sorts. For he
takes away all Kinds of sins, Actual as well as Original: all degrees of
Actual, the lesser, as well as the greater, leaving nothing unsatisfied,
either in the guilt or punishment.

For if he took away some kinds of sin, Original and not Actual: or some
degree of actual, great and not little: Or if he took away the guilt, and
not the punishment: or part of the punishment (as being satisfactory) and not
all, he were not an whole, but an half Redeemer, which is an impious doctrine:
and we not wholly, but half saved, which is an uncomfortable doctrine.

He alone trod the winepresse, etc.
But he has done all these things alone, helping us, not by meriting grace for
us to help our selves withal: and saving us, not by giving us power to save
our selves withal: but performing every part, and parcel of satisfaction, by
active obedience, in fulfilling the law, and passive obedience in suffering for
our transgressing of the law; that every part and parcel of meryt being
entirely in his own person, he might have all the glory in such an excellent
benefyt of his redeemed brethren. Thou art worthy O Lord, etc. Apo. 5.9.

Therefore as it is true, which S. Augustine says: He that made thee without
thy self, does not save thee without the self; because in Creation God
required nothing of us, but in Salvation he requires somewhat of us; a
sanctified heart, But these also are his gifts, Da quod iubes, and iubo quod
uis.
a reformed will, which must be obedient to his divine will: so it is true, He
that made us without our selves, saves us without our selves also: because as
man did not concur operatiuely with God in Creation, so he does not concur
meritoriously with him in Salvation. Wherefore though Man must do something
toward his salvation in the Court of new obedience, after his acquittall in the
Court of Justification, yet he can do nothing by way of merit in either;
because he has not power in the state of sin, or grace, actiuely or
passiuely to satisfy Gods Justice.

For though God afflicts his Children, and though his children must live
conformably to his Law; yet the first being a fatherly and gentle correction,
it loses the property of Punishment, and the second being a filial (but
imperfect) obedience, Poena.
it cannot have the estimation of Righteousness: Iustitia.
so that neither is satisfactorie in the Court of the supreme Judge.

For sin is the transgression of the law (without the law there being no
sin) and no ignorance herein can totally excuse the offender, though
invincible ignorance may mitigate the degree of his offense. Therefore every
sin is committed (mediatly at least) against an infinite Object, God the
Author of the law, who consequently requires an infinite punishment.

Wherefore as it was necessary, that our Redeemer should have our true humane
nature, that sin in it might be punished Justly: So this humane nature was to
subsist in an infinite Person, that sin by it might be conquered fully. And
hence was the incarnation of our blessed Lord, By powerful assumption, not by
natural generation.
who took our nature (sanctified by the holy Ghost) into the unity of his
person.

Such a Redemer we were to have, considering the quality of our sin, and Gods
Justice: that he might make proportionable satisfaction.

But when God is to punish a sinner according to the proper merit of his
unpardoned sin, having not means to satisfy his justice upon any
infiniteness of man's person, which he is to punish, he chooses the
infiniteness of time, wherein he will punish him, thereby to make some manner
of proportion betwixt the sin of man, and his own Justice.

But because the person sinning and punished, is in no manner matchable with
the person (or rather nature) offended and punishing, therefore this punishment
may be truly called Passion, but is not Satisfaction: whereas the
infiniteness of our Redeemers person, made his passion to be a true
satisfaction, sufficient for the sin of ten thousand worlds.

Hence it follows, that all our sufferings in this life, whatsoever, are but
expurgations of the matter of sin, not satisfaction for the guilte thereof,
nor may stand in place of condign punishment: which are both taken away
sufficiently by Christ: the first being imputed to him, and the second
inflicted on him in his death, that we might have the real benefit thereof
effectually by the working power of the Spirit.

And therefore no sin is so venial in its nature, as that any man may
worthily satisfy for the same in this life, or in the life to come.

Secunda Quaestio.
YET notwithstanding we say, that there is inequality in Culpa, and
consequently in poena also.

For if the punishment were equal, we must suppose that all sins are equal,
which is false: or that God is not just, which is impious; or that he does not
punish a greater sin, more then a lesser, because he is merciful, which is a
senseless opinion, obscuring the clear distinction of his Justice. Only, to
make his Justice and mercy consist together in punishing the very Devils, and
other damned miscreants, we say, that he punishes them not so much as their
sins have deserved. Which if it seem an hard saying, it is to those that know
not how to value the sin of man, and the Justice of God.

1. First concerning the Inaequality of sin, we say that it may be
considered principally in three things.

Diuersitas Obiecti in quod peccamus.
1. In respect of the Object against which we sin: so a sin against God, is
greater then a sin against man: a sin against the first Table then the
second. But this must be truly conceived.

For if we compare a sin in the least part of a commandment of the first
Table, with a sin in the greatest part of a commandment of the second Table,
the latter sin is more heinous then the former. For though Charitas primo
ordinatur in Deum, and every breach of the law be a breach of charity,
Peccamus in Deum immediate in quibusdam peccatu and mediate in alijs.
yet some comparison is to be observed, as well in the degree of the act, as
in the order of the act.

Though in the order of the act, charity be more broken in the least sin
against God, then in the greatest against man, yet in the degree and quality of
the act, it is more broken in the greatest sin against man immediately, the^
in the least sin against God immediately. Which is manifest, because the
Sabbath was made dispensable propter opera necessitatis and charitatis, as it
appears by Christ, the interpreter of the law, who was the giver thereof.

Yet if the same lawgiuer did not forbid the greatest sin against man, who
forbids the least sin against himself, this rule could not hold.

But if we compare a sin against the first Table, with a sin against the
second in aquall and parallel acts, the first is simply the greater sin.

Likewise, as generally a sin against God, is greater then a sin against
man for the essential diversity of the Object; so a sin against one man, may
be greater then a sin against an other, for the accidental diversity of
the object: As in the eminency of place against a King: in the propinquity of
blood against a Parent, etc.

For though all men naturally considered are the same, yet ciuilly, and
morally, they are not. And therefore the degree of sin is much varied for
these respects.

2. In respect of the matter wherein we sin: Diuersitas materiae circa qua^
peccamus, vel quantitatis eiusdem materiae.
so murder is a greater sin then theft, because life is more precious then
goods.

Likewise if we compare sins in the same kind or matter, one may be greater
then another, according to the extent, or quantitatiue measure. As to kill
three men it is a greater sin then to kill two: to steal 100 pound, then 10:
if nothing else be interuenient. For great diversity of sin, arises out of
the variety of circumstances.

3. In respect of the manner how we offend: so a sin of malice, Diuersitas
modi quo peccamus.
is greater then a sin of infirmity, a sin of ignorance, then a sin of
negligence.

Th. Aquin. in quae. de ordine praecept: Decalogi, observes, that the last
commandments are well distinguished, Propter peccatum operis, in the
commandment Non furtum facies. Propter peccatum Oris, in the commandment Non
loqueris falsum etc. Propter peccatum Cordis, in the commandment Non
concupisces. But he distinguishes the last into two, without good congruity.
For to covet an other man's wise, and to covet another man's Ox, is the same
manner of coveting, but the matter is not the same which makes not this to be
two commandments: For the manner of coveting, which is concupiscentia sine
consensu, being but one, and the matter coveted be diverse, the commandment is
one, and not diverse: But the same things being forbidden in the seventh and
eighth commandments to be coueted cum consensu, there the commandments are
diverse, because they are broken principally in Opere, not in Cord only. Whereas
this last is broken not in Opere, but only in Cord without full consent to the
tentation.

And whereas some sins consist only in immanent action being finished in the
mind, either properly or fully, as pride, or improperly and casually as murder
(for pride is absolutely complete in the mind, but murder is not) and some in
transient action, being accomplished by the body; the last is greater then the
first, because there is a farther addition in it the^ in the first. The lusting
after a woman is mental adultery, though it proceed no farther, which is for
want of means only. For Adulter animo, non nisi inuito castus est corpore.

A sin in mind is more easily committed then a sin in the body, because it
finds less impediment: and a sin in the order of it, is committed first in
the mind, and secondly by the body, as it appears in the first sin of our
first Parents. Every farther addition, makes the sin more intense in degree.

Now since there is such inaquality in Culpa, there is also inequality in
Poena, because the goodness of Gods Justice, whence it proceeds, has a
relative respect to our sin, which, in what kind soever it be, is meritoriously
punishable by eternal death.

The punishment is double, Privative and Positive.

1. The Privative pain (called Poena Damni) is the want of desirable good.
Such is the exclusion out of heaven, and the conseque^t privation of
unspeakable joys; the most excellent whereof is, the fruition of the sacred
Trinity in blissful vision. This pain is equal to all, Tempore et Gradu.
In time, because it is an eternal deprivation: In degree, because it is a
total deprivation, joined with infallible despair.

2. The positive pain (called Poena Sensus) is partly inward from an inward
cause, and partly outward from an outward cause.

Poena autem vehement, etc. Inuenal.
The inward pain is the sting of conscience, the gnawing of that worm, which
has her life perpetuated in our death.

This pain is equal to all, in duration but not in degree, because it is
varied according to the guilt whence it does proceed.

The outward pain is affliction in the whole man, Body, and Soul, by such
exquisite isntrumental means as God decrees in his wisdom, and executes
by his power, to demonstrate his Justice.

And if any man doubt, how that can be called an outward punishment, which is
inflicted on the Soul, being an inward substance in her conjunction with the
Body: I answer, The Fathers generally are of opinion, that there is Fire (
properly taken in hell: S. Aug. l. 21: de Ciuit. Dei: ca: 10 S. Hieron. ad
Auitum S. Aug. vide. Zanch. de Open. part 1. lib. 4. cap 19. without all doubt
there is outward means of sensible punishment.
That the sensible punishment of Fire, is called outward, because it is
originally extra animam, as the other sensible punishment of the worm is
called inward because it springs within the soul it self.

Likewise the sensible punishment by Fire is outward, as it works on the
body, being an outward substance: and inward as it works on the soul, which
is an inward substance by her union with the body.

And as the soul has one state in her self independe^t, upon her separation
from the body, and an other in the body upon her reunion with it: so in the
first, she suffers outward pain immediately, and in the second, she
suffers outward pain immediately, participating eternal torment, with the
old companion of her momentany pleasure.

And as the outward pain of Fire primarily inflicted on the body, does work
effectually to afflict the soul: so the inward pain of the worm arising, and
dwelling within the soul, works effectually to vex the body: That as they
had mutual offices in the transitory delight of their sins, so they may have
mutual offices in the horror of their excessive pangs.

In this outward pain two things are to be noted as before: Tempus and Gradui.

In time this pain is equal to all men. And this is common in all the payns
of hell, all being equalled in eternity, because in respect of duration, there
is neither more nor less in that with in Infinite.

Hence is that woeful sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.
Everlasting, not temporary, as Origin falsely conceived, preiudicing Gods
Justice in extolling his mercy: both which are one in him, but differ in their
effects toward us.

In degree, this pain is unequal according to the inequality of sin: God in
his distributive Justice, allotting several portions of pain, according to
the several proportions of sin.

For though there be a proper designed place of Hell, and in it some common
instrument of pain, yet God most prouidently orders the execution of his
Justice.

And though we are not directly led by express Scripture to affirm it
confidently, yet we may suppose it very probably, that God either cohibiteth
the active power of the instrument, or strengthens the ability of the
Patient, or both, to make a difference of pain.

Howsoever, this is unquestionable, that for this purpose he uses such wise
means as seem best to his will; which being perpetually accompanied with
singular equity, can purpose nothing unjustly: and being assisted with
illimited might, can enterprise nothing vneffectually.

Concerning all the pains, of what kind, number, or quality soever they are,
we must know (God grant we never feel) that there is neither case in them, nor
release from them. The pitiful unpitied wretches suffer vnsufferably, in
measure of time unmeasurable.

THVS then we acknowledge, that sins are venial by grace, but mortal in
their proper desert: and that sins are unequal many ways, and that the
punishment of all sins is aequall in time, but unequal in degree.

Now to obtain absolution a Culpa and Poena, we must have recourse to Gods
mercy, because his Justice does punish us considering us, as we are of our
selves.

And to find this mercy, we must have recourse to God, in Jesus Christ our
Lord, because we are not worthy of it, for any thing in our selves. This is
both piety and safety.

Neither must we do thus in profession only, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap: 9:
as sometimes the Papists do, but in action also, as sometimes they do not,
as it appears by their opinion before delivered, and farther shall appear in
their doctrine ensuing.

But first we observe, that as Christ only is via meriti, for which we are
meritoriously pardoned, so there is required also via medij, by which we may
actually receive this pardon, because the salve of his merits must be applied
to the soars of our souls. For nothing can produce an effect in that which it
does not Contingere vel substantia, vel virtute saltem. As the Sun being in his
substance placed so far above, cannot produce any effect by working upon
inferior bodies, but by a virtuall contact.

Our Lord has a double operation: Extraordinary and Immediate: or Ordinary and
Mediate.

The first we are to behold and admire, but we cannot safely rely on it. For
we must herein remember an old rule (applyable to other purposes) Notandum si
semel, vtendum vt saepe.

The second therefore is that, whereunto we now bend our eyes.

To this end there are certain Evangelical means, with which Christ does
concur.

They are such, as are assigned by him.

They are assigned by him, which expressly, or consequently are contained in
his word. For we must estimate the things of God, according to a rule
delivered by him, either speaking with his mouth, or dictating by his spirit.

Hereupon we deservedly reject that position of the Church of Rome, Rhem. Test.
annot. in Job. 13.10.
Venial sins may be remitted by holy water, and other sacred Ceremonies:
which sentence has in it a double impiety and falsehood.

The first in diminishing the nature of our sins, which are in their proper
merit condignly punishable by eternal death.

The second in extolling the value of their ceremonies, which cannot have in
them so gracious a power.

Neither is it enough to say, that these ceremonies, as holy water and the
like, work not this effect vi sua, but virtute Christi.

For as the power of remission of sins is only in God (a ministerial office
being in the Church by commission from him) so the means which we must use to
receive the remission by, must be such, as he appoints by his revealed will.

For as to divide the first to any person from him, so to communicate the
second to any means not decreed by him, it is to euacuate the high price of
our Redemption, and to trample under feet, the blessed covenant of happy peace.
Neither is it enough to say, that the Church deuiseth not these things simply
of her self, but that it is Christ's promise to concur with the Church by his
infallible Spirit:

For they must remember, that it is the duty of the Church to concur with him,
according to infallible directions delivered in his word.

As for immediate revelations, none but Enthusiasts rely thereon. But we know
that the Spirit does rather aspirare, then inspirare in these days.

Wherefore leaving unwarrantable aspersions to such Aquarij, as a novel
conceipte, proved only by an ingenious delusion: We acknowledge that Natural
blood and water, issuing out of our Lords sides, do per viam meriti purchase
the remission of all our sins: and that the sacramental blood and water in
the holy mysteries figured therein, do per viam medij, apply, seal, and
confirm the same unto us instrumentally, by the effectual operation of the
Holy Ghost.

He that diminishes the merit of Christ's death, destroieth the hope of his
own life.

I live in him, who died for me.

AMEN.
The Author to the Reader.
COurteous Reader:
If any faults have escaped me, in penning this little discourse (which I may
be occasioned hereafter to call Principium doloris mei) I cannot expect, that
thou should esteem them venial, because I have left that plea, and gained a
loss unto my self.

If I should crave pardon for diuulging it, thou might just he answer,
While it remained, appertained it not unto thee? And after it was printed, was
it not in thine own power?

Though I could fully remove such likely imputations, yet the reason being
private, which caused me to make this public, (and Secreta mea mihi) I must
depend upon thy gentle interpretation. Only thus much I give thee to
understand, that I rather sought profit hereby to learn from others, then
credit to teach any.

But if my success prove answerable to my honest desire, thou shall find in
time, that my Tongue and Pen, are consecrated to thy good. Farewell.

Thine in our Lord JESUS, Theophilus Pyggons.

Page 3. lin. 18.
Whereas it is said, that the form of sin is an obliquity in the substance,
-- dum breuis esse laboro Obscurus fio.
or quality, or action of a reasonable Creature, it is to be understood, that
Malum subiectatur (as the Schoolmen speak) the evil of sin, and the
deformity (which is the form of it) has its subsistence finally in a
Substance, as being the last, and independent subject thereof. But it is
immediately in the action, and corrupt quality of the Agent.

Page 20. this should have bin added as a Marginall note over against the fifth
line.
If the last commandment (as we esteem it) should be divided into two,
propter diuersitatem Obiectorum: by the same reason it should be no
commandment at all, because the same things are forbidden in the seventh and
eighth commandments before. The difference therefore of the manner of
forbidding these things, distinguishes the tenth commandment from the seventh
and eighth: But the difference of the matter in it, does not make it
distinguished into two several precepts, as Papists affirm. But as our Lord
epitomizeth and reduces ten commandments unto two, so here all the
particulars make but one. And as to make the first and second commandments
one, it is to join things separate, so to make this one commandment two, it
is to separate things conjoined. To do the first, it is to match together in
several Tribes, and to do the latter, it is to make a divorce of parties
lawfully married. The Author that made this confusion, and division, is greater
then his reason: for though S. Augustine began it, yet his reason to make
three commandments in the first Table propter Trinitatem, is a witty Analogy
only: and his reason to make seven in the second Table by dividing the last,
is of no solidity. Zanchius his severe, but true censure, touching this
particular, is worthy to be considered: Zanch. de Red. in Tractat. de Decalogo,
Thesi tertia.

Some principal errors in the impression, correct thus:
Page 2. Lin. 12 For Persons (as it is printed in some Copies, and is plain
Nestorianisme) read Person, in the Epistle to the Papists.

Page 20. line 5. For these words, and the matter coueted be diverse, read
(though the matter coueted be diverse)

Page 24. In the margent, these words, S. August. are superfluous.

Page 24. lin. 15. For immediately in the second place, read, mediatelie.

Page 25. lin. 14. For within, read, which is.

FINIS.

