THE DOCTRINE OF FASTING AND PRAYER, AND Humiliation for Sin.

DELIVERED

In sundry Sermons at the Fast appointed by public authority, in the year
1625.

By that Late Faithful and Worthy Minister of Jesus Christ.

ARTH. HILDERSAM.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at
his shop at the great North-doore of S. Paul's at the sign of the Bible. 1633.

THE CONTENTS OF these Sermons.
SERMON I.
Doctrine.
GOds people ought to take to heart the miseries, and calamities of others; the
judgments of God, that are executed upon others. Page 2
Reason.
In respect had. ^ 1. To them that are afflicted. 3 2. To the Lord. 4 3. To our
selves. ^
Use 1.
To exhort us to take to heart, gods judgments upon our brethren, visited with
the pestilence. 8 For. 1. It is a fearful judgment, and their case is
lamentable. 9 2. None of us can tell how far it may go, how near it may
come to us. 11 3. If this be neglected by us, it will prove but a forerunner
of some more fearful judgment. 14 2. To exhort us to make right use of it. 15
1. By examining our own hearts, whether those sins be in us, that are the
special causes of the Plague. 21 2. By taking the right course, speedily to
make our peace with God. 21 3. By increasing our care to reform our families.
23 4. By being more merciful to them in distress. 25
SERMON II.
Doctrine.
A chief duty we are to perform to them in misery, is to pray for them. Page
27. This duty is to be performed. 1. Whereby we do express our love to any
and whereby we may do them good. 27 2. For all that are in misery. 27 3.
Specially for Gods people. 28 4. In an extraordinary manner, when their misery
is extraordinary. 28 5. Publicly and generally, when the calamity is common,
and general. 29
Reason.
1. The Lord is he only that both inflicteth the judgment, and is able to
remove it. 30 2. He commandes, desires, and looks for this duty of us, in this
case. 31 3. There is great power, and force in this, to relieve our afflicted
brethren. 31
Use.
1. To teach us what account is to be made of such as are true Israelites
indeed, gracious and mighty with God in prayer. 33 2. To reprove such as 1.
Either cannot pray, or 35 2. D^e not use to pray, or 36 3. Will not pray. 37 3.
To examine our prayers, and inquire how they have proved, and what the causes
have been, why they have proved noe better, and these are 5. principally. 39
SERMON III.
David did not only pray for his enemies when they were in misery, but he did
it in an extraordinary manner. For his help in this prayer, he clothed himself
with sackcloth. This was used much then in this case, yet not as a religious,
but civil ceremony, which we now are not bound to. 4^. 50
Doctrine.
In the days of humiliation (besides fervent prayer, and the afflicting of our
souls) certain outward and bodily exercises, are to be used by Gods people;
viz. Certain things are to be done and perfermed, as 51 1. Reading, and
preaching of the Word. 52 2. Singing of psalms. 53 3. Almesdeeds. 53 4.
Censuring and reforming of gross sins: 53 Certain things also are to be
forborne, in the day of our humiliation, for our better help in this duty. 1.
All manner of meat and drink. 55 2. All costlinesse, and neatenesse in
apparel. 55 3. Delights of all sorts. 56 4. All works of our calling. And in
these 4. points, this abstinence is to be used for a whole day* 56 5. Yea some
abatement there must be also in our natural rest, and sleep, upon this day.
57 Yet are there 3. Cautions to be observed touching this abstinence. 1.
Outward abstinence is not the chief part of a true fast not the chief help to
our prayers in it. 58 2. The outward signs and helps to humiliation must be
increased, according to the increase, and urgency of the cause thereof. 58 3.
The Law of outward abstinence in the days of humiliation must give place to
the necessity and convenience of man. 59
Reason.
This abstinence is necessary in the days of humiliation. 61 1. To help
forward the inward humiliation of the heart. 61 2. To help forward the
fervency of the heart in prayer. 62 3. To profess, and make outward
protestation both of our submission to God, and of our repentance and desire to
be reconciled unto him. 62
Use.
1. To teach us how to keep our Fasts in the right manner. 64 2. To exhort us
to conscience and care in all these particular outward, and bodily duties, yet
not resting in them, but referring them to the right ends. 65 3. To reprove
sundry abuses which are chief causes of the ill success of our Fasts. 66
SERMON IV.
DAvid afflicted his soul in his fast; And what the meaning of the phrase is.
70
Doctrine.
The chief use of a religious fast is to humble, and afflict the Soul, with
sorrow, and grief; And the chief thing that makes (...) prayers powerful
with God, at our fasts, or any other time, when they proceed from humbled and
afflicted souls. Yet every sorrow, in this case pleases not God. 72
Reason.
Of that sorrow Gods people have expressed at their fasts, etc. And with which
God has been so much pleased. 75 1. The fellow feeling of the miseries of
others. 76 2. When the Lord, either by his judgments or threatenings has
declared himself angry with them. 77 3. When they have seen God dishonored by
the sins of others. 78 4 When themselves have offended, and dishonored God
by their own sins. 79
Reason.
Why the Lord so much desires, and delights to see his people humble themselves
with sorrow, and afflict their souls. 80 1. The cause and root from whence
this sorrow springs. 80 2. The end and effect that it tendes unto. For first,
It makes the soul more capable of every grace, and fit to receive it. 80
Secondly, It works repentance unto salvation. 81^ Thirdly, It makes the Word,
and Christ and all Gods mercies sweeter unto us. 81 Fourthly, It makes us pray
more fervently. 82 Fifthly, It makes us fitter to converse, and walk with God.
82
SERMON V.
1. Use of the former doctrine is to exhort us to strive for this grace of
godly sorrow, and to be able to afflict our own souls as David did. 85
Motives to provoke us unto this. 1. The example of Gods best servants. 86 2.
The promises God has made unto this grace. 91
SERMON VI.
3. THis is the best way to prevent the Lord from humbling, and afflicting of
our souls with his hand. 99 Means to attain to this grace of godly sorrow,
where in we are. To use the help of others. 1. A conscionable frequenting of
the ministry of the Word. 102 2. A willingness to be privately admonished,
and reproved by some faithful friend. 106
SERMON VII.
THe means to attain to godly sorrow, and tenderness of heart, wherein we are
to be principal agents our selves (for we may do much in this work our
selves) are these. 110 1. We must make choice of a fit time, to go about this
work. 111 2. We must separate our selves from company, and make choice of a
fit place to do it. 118 3. We must seriously, and impartially, examine our
own hearts. 119 4. We must cry earnestly to God to help us in this work, to
bless our endeavors in it. 128
SERMON VIII.
NEcessary to have notes, and signs given us, whereby sincere, and saving
sorrow for sin may be discerned. 130 1. He that is truly humbled, mournes
more for the evil of sin, then for the evil of punishment. 133 2. He
mournes for sin, not so much in respect to himself as unto God, because he
is offended and dishonored by his sin. 137 And 3. notes to try whether a man
does so. 141. 142
THE AUTHORS Prayer, before his Lecture.
THy Word (O Lord) is holy and pure, as is thine own Majesty, and being
sincerely preached, works either to the salvation or condemnation of the
hearers. And we all that are here assembled before thee at this time, are of
uncircumcised hearts and ears: utterly unworthy by reason of that sin,
wherein we were conceived and borne; and of those actual transgressions that
we have multiplied against thy Majesty, in thought, word and deed, from our
first being, until this present hour; once to set foot into thy Temple or to
hear thy Word at all* Utterly unfit and unable by reason of our custom in
sin, and the hardness of our hearts to profit by it, when as we hear it. So
that (Lord) we are at this time in danger, to be unprofitable hearers of thy
holy Word, and by being unprofitable bearers of the same, we are in danger of
thy heavy displeasure. Yet forasmuch as it has pleased thee in mercy to
command us this exercise, to appoint it to be the only ordinary means,
whereby thou will work Faith and repentance in thy children, and the
principal means whereby thou will increase them, to promise also graciously
that thou will accompany the outward ministry of thy Word, with the inward
grace and blessing of thy Spirit, in the hearts of them that shall be
reverently and faithfully exercised in the same: We therefore in humble
obedience, to this thy holy commandment, and in full affiance and confidence
in this thy gracious promise, are bold to present our selves before thee at
this time: Beseeching thee in thy sons blood to wash away all our si^^es, so
as they may never be laid to our charge again, either in the world to come to
our condemnation, or at this time to bring a curse upon this our exercise. Good
Lord so sprinckle that blood of thy Son upon our consciences, that we may be
assured of thy love and favor toward us in him. By it sanctify us at this
time, and thy word to our uses, opening and enlightening our understanding so as
we may be able to understand and conceave of thy word aright, strenghtening our
memories so as we may be able to remember it, softning our hard and stony
hearts, so as we may be able to believe it, to yield unto it, to apply it to
our own souls, to meditate and confer thereupon, to practice it in our
lives, and conversations, to stir up one another to the obedience thereof.
That this our exercise may tend to the increase of our knowledge, and of our
obedience, of our Faith, and of repentance, the glory of thy blessed name, and
the everlasting comfort of our own souls: Hear us (O Lord) in these our
requests, in what else soever thou know good for us, or any of thy Church:
for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior. In whose name we continue
our prayers unto thee, as he himself has taught us, Saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

SERMON I.
AUGUST III. MDCXXV.
PSALM. 35. 13. But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth:
I humbled my self with fasting: and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.
NOt to take up time in speaking of the former part of this Psalm: these words
have this coherence, and dependence on that which went before.

David (as a type of CHRIST) having many mortal enemies, does in this Psalm
(by a Prophetical spirit) pray against them, or rather foretell what should
befall them. In this Verse and the former (to show what cause he had to do so)
he aggravateth their sin by their unthankfulness, in dealing so badly with
him, that had deserved so well of them.

The parts of this Verse are two: viz. a profession of 1. The kindness he showed
to these men: wherein observe, the Time when he did it, and the occasion he
took to do it, When they were sick. Duty whereby he expressed his love; he
prayed for them; which is amplified by the extraordinary manner of it; set forth
by the Outward helps he used in it, Sackcloth. Fasting. Inward disposition of
his mind in it: he humbled, or afflicted his soul. 2. The success and comfort
he found in it.

Observe first David's practice; Nota 1.
he was wont when these men were sick to be affected with their misery: which
teaches us, that,

GODS people ought to take to heart the miseries and Doct. 1.
calamities of others, the judgments of GOD that do befall others.

Se^ for proof of this, both the examples of his servants, and then GODS
commandment also.

When Eliphaz, Proof. 1.
Bildad, and Zophar heard of Jobs misery, they came to mourn with him, Job 2.
11. But he was a rare man for piety and authority also, (you will say:) see
therefore another example of this duty performed toward them that were not so:
Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? (says Job, Chap. 30. 25.) was not
my soul grieved for the poor? Yea, see an example of this toward most wicked
men, Judge. 21. 2. The people of Israel came to the house of GOD (as we do now)
to profess their sorrow for the extreme misery that the wicked Benjamites were
most justly fallen into.

Yea we are straityly charged by the LORD to do so, 2.
to remember and think of them, as if their case were our own, Remember them
that are in bonds, (says the Apostle, Heb. 13. 3.) as bound with them: and
them that are in adversity, as being your selves also in the body. Yea to do it
with hearty commiseration, Romans 12. 15. Weep with them that weep. Yea (if the
judgment be famous and exemplary) we are commanded also to make public and
solemn profession (as we do at this day) that we are affected with their
misery, Levit. 10. 6. Let your brethren the whole house of Israel bewail the
burning which the LORD has kindled.

Three special reasons and grounds there be for this Doctrine: for we should
take to heart the miseries and calamities of others.

First, In respect had to them that are afflicted. Reason 1.
For, admit they were not our fellow members in CHRIST, nor our kindred or
acquaintance, nor our countrymen; admit they were mere strangers to us, admit
they were all most wicked men, yet nature binds us to be affected with their
miseries, because they are our own flesh: Esa. 58. 7. Hide not thy self from
thine own flesh. And he that has not humanity and natural affection in him,
certainly has no grace, but is given up to areprobate mind, as the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 1. 31. Yea it is an argument of a cruel heart to be void of
natural commiseration, and careless of other men, whether they sink or swim.
In this Cain first bewrayed his murderous heart when he said of his brother,
Genesis 4. 9. Am I my brothers keeper? And so did the chief Priests and Elders,
when (hearing Judas cry out of himself for his sin, and beholding him in the
pangs of desperation) they said unto him, What is that to us? see thou to that.

Secondly, Reason 2.
In respect had unto the LORD, who by these judgments executed upon others,
does manifest from heaven, that His wrath is kindled, that He is in a fury. So
that not to be affected with His judgments executed upon others, is a double
contempt done to the LORD Himself.

1. In that we are not moved, nor tremble to see Him angry, Amos 3. 8. The Lion
has roared, who will not fear? It is hard to find a man so stout and
courageous, (shall I say?) nay so senseless or profane, that trembles not
sometimes at the fearful thunderclaps and lightnings, because GOD therein
manifests His glorious power; and because that though He strike not many with
them usually, yet some He does; but there is much more cause to tremble, and be
affected with His general and extraordinary judgments upon others; for,
thereby He does not only manifest His glorious power, but His revenging
justice also, and anger against sin; which is much more terrible than the
other. See a proof of this, Ezekiel. 32. 10. The Kings of the nations shall be
horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them, and they
shall tremble at every moment; every man for his own life, in the day of thy
fall. The Heathen (that had no goodness in them at all) when they should
behold how terrible GOD was in His judgments upon His own people, should be
in continual fear that He would destroy them also. As the scholar that is
himself faulty, and obnoxious to the rod, when he sees his master in a fury
against any of his fellows, cannot choose but tremble, unless he be desperate.
This made the Prophet (when GOD had in a vision manifested to him His glory,
Esa. 6. 45. when he saw the posts of the temple door moved at the voice of the
Angel that cried, and the house filled with smoke) to cry out (from the very
consciousnesse of his own sinfulness and deserts) Woe is me, for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of Hosts.

2. There is in this another contempt also done unto GOD; because GOD never
smites some, but to warn all, what is due to them, and what they must look
for, unless they repent. Even those executions which the Magistrate does by
GODS appointment upon foul offenders, are done chiefly to warn others, Deuteronomy.
13. 11. All Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is, amongst you. But much more those judgments, which the
LORD Himself has executed upon any, (either immediately, or by His destroying
Angels) are intended chiefly, for the instruction, and warning of others. The
righteous shall see and fear, says David, Psalm. 52. 6. The LORD consumed the
Sodomites in that fearful manner to make them an example to those that after
should live ungodlily, 2 Pet. 2. 6. And the earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, not only out of that respect GOD had to the glory of His own
justice, in taking vengeance on them for all their sins, but that they might
become a sign unto others, as the HOLY GHOST says expressly, Number. 26. 10.
Every judgment of GOD has a voice, and is a real Sermon of repentance: and
the more general and extraordinary the judgment is, by so much the louder,
and more audible voice it has: and it is therefore a contempt done to GOD,
when we regard it not, nor hearken unto it, Mica 6. 9. Hear the rod, and who
has appointed it.

The third and last reason and ground of the Doctrine, is, Reason 3.
in respect had to our selves. For there is no judgment executed upon others,
(specially if it be any whit public and general, and more than ordinary) but
we all are to take our selves interessed in it: yea to have had a hand in
provoking the LORD unto it. For, as sin is the cause of all GODS judgments
that come upon a land, so we must not judge them the greatest sinners always
upon whom they light. Those eighteen upon whom the tower of Silo fell, think
ye (says our Savior, Luke 13. 4, 5.) that they were sinners above all that
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay. Neither must we think, that the sins of
those whom GOD smites with His judgments, are the only cause of the
judgments, or that He is angry with them only; but know, that He is as well
angry often times with those that He spares, as with those whom he smites: and
the sins of those whom he spares, have often a stronger hand in plucking down the
judgment, than the sins of those whom He smites have had. Two notable
examples we have for this in the time of David. It was a fearful judgment
that GOD executed upon Vzza, 1 Chronicles. 13. 10. The anger of the LORD was kindled
against Vzza, and He smote him, because he put his hand to the arke^ and it is
said, Verse 12. that the judgment upon Vzza much affected David, and made his
heart quake. And why so? Surely, because he knew, that GOD was not angry with
Vzza only, but with the whole congregation. The LORD our GOD (says David, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.) made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him not after the due
order. He knew that the sins of the Priests, and others that were spared,
provoked GOD to that judgment, more than Vzza's did; as appears in the
beginning of that Verse. For, because ye did it not at the first, the LORD our
GOD, etc. The second example is, 2 Samuel 24. It was a fearful judgment that
is mentioned in the fifteenth Verse, When by a pestilence that the LORD sent
upon Israel, in three days there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba
seventy thousand men: and they that were slain, had (doubtless) sin enough
in themselves to deserve it: but was their sin the only or the chief cause
of that judgment? no certainly; the sin of those that were spared was the
chief cause of it, as David confesses Verse. 17. Lo l have sinned, and have
done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? He knew well that (not the
sins of those that perished in that grievous plague, but) his own sins had
a chief hand, in provoking GOD unto that judgment. So that we see that there
is no one man amongst us all, that has not just reason to be affected with
GODS judgments upon the Land, though himself be spared, seeing that he is a
cause of it, as well as they that are smitten, and (it may be) as great a cause
as they, nay, (it may be) a greater cause than any of them were.

And this was that that made good Nehemiah cry thus in his prayer unto GOD,
Neh. 1. 6. Both I and my fathers house have sinned. As if he had said, that
Jerusalem prospers no better, I and my fathers house are as great a cause as
any other.

We have heard the Doctrine which this example of David teaches us, delivered
and confirmed in a general manner; let us now come to make use of it, and to
apply it to our own case, and to the occasion of our meeting at this time.

This Doctrine therefore serves to exhort us unto two duties. 1. That we would
labor to take to heart, and to be rightly affected with this judgment of GOD
that is now upon London, and sundry other parts of the Kingdom. 2. That when
we are rightly affected with it, we would make right use of it to our selves.

For the first. Use 1.
You will say it is a needless exhortation: for, Object.
who is not affected with this plague? who is not afraid of it? and wherefore
come we hither else, if we be not affected with it?

I answer. Answ.
That none of us (I fear) are sufficiently affected with it; and that this is
the fountain and foundation of all good uses we can make of it, either for
their benefit that are visited with it, or for our selves, that we would labor
to be affected with this judgment of GOD, as we ought to be. I will therefore
show you what just causes we have to be deeply affected with this judgment.
And they are principally three.

First, In respect of the grievousnesse of the judgment it self. For, we
shall find this called one of GODS sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14. 21. And when the
LORD threatens that He Himself would fight against Jerusalem with an
outstretched hand, and a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great
wrath, Ier. 21. 5. He tells them in the next Verse, how He would do this, He
would smite the city with a great pestilence. Certainly the LORD therefore now
fights against our Land, yea He fights against it in fury, and in great
wrath. Observe four things in this judgment.

1. What a waster it is, Psalm. 91. 6. it is called the destruction that wastes
at noonday. In a short time, even in three days it consumed seventy thousand
in Israel, 2 Samuel 24. 15. A grievous judgment it must needs be, when GOD
Himself matcheth a pestilence of three days continuance (as a thing of equal
force to afflict, and destroy) with a famine of seven years, and with flying
by the space of three months before their enemies that pursued them: as we
know He does, 2 Samuel 24. 13. And has not the pestilence that GOD has now sent
into our Land, proved a terrible waster, when in one week in one City it has
swept away three thousand, five hundred, eighty two?

2. Consider how suddenly it takes them away that have been smitten with it:
many that were well in the morning have been dead of it before night: it is
therefore called the LORDS arrow, Psalm. 91. 5. It strikes and pierces men
suddenly with a deadly wound: and Verse. 6. it is said to walk in darkness.
And certainly, sudden death (though it be not absolutely to be prayed against,
yet it) is to be esteemed a temporal judgment, and a sign of GODS anger. Let
destruction come upon him at unawares, says the Prophet here, Verse. 8. It must
needs add much to the bitterness of death, when it comes so suddenly, that a
man can neither commend himself to GOD, nor set things in order for the world
before he die.

3. Consider, it is such a judgment as often makes men destroyers of them whom
they most love, and desire to keep alive: the father setting at unawares the
infection upon the child, the husband on the wife, a man on his dearest friend.
A great cause of humbling it is, for a man to have killed any other man at
unawares, as you may see by that law, Numb. 35. 28. and what is it then to have
killed them that are dearest to them?

4. It is such a sickness as does (usually) debar men of many comforts, that
other sick persons do enjoy. First, many that are visited with this sickness,
do want convenient attendance and lodging, dying in the streets and highways*
of whom that may be said, Esa. 51. 20. Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the
head of all streets, the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy GOD. Secondly,
their friends dare not visit them; which, as it is a work of mercy, so it is a
great means of comfort to the afflicted, and such as CHRIST has enjoined us,
Mat. 25. 36. 3. Whereas none have so much need of spiritual comfort as they,
because the very disease makes them more subject to terrors and fears than
others, (and is therefore called the terror by night, Psalm. 91. 5.) they
(poor wretches) can have none to comfort them, but may in anguish of soul cry
out, Lam. 1. 16. The comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me.
So that in respect of this first consideration, the grievousnesse of the
judgment it self, they may cry to us all, and to all GODS people throughout
the Land, as Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Behold and
see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the LORD has
afflicted me in the day of His anger. And will you not be affected with it?

Secondly, if this will not serve, come to a second cause we have, to be deeply
affected with it: because none of us can tell how far it may go; how near it
may come to our own dwellings. In which respect, though we may say as Namb.
16. 46. we are sure wrath is gone out from the LORD, the plague is begun, yet
as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 74. 9. There is not amongst us any that knows
how long it will last, or how far it will spread.

Let no man say, I am far enough from London; I dwell in a good air, and we
have taken good order to prevent all danger of this infectio^s disease; no
carriers shall come from thence to us, no Londoners shall lodge amongst us.
These are good means, I will not deny, (if they be used with that compassion
that becomes Christians to show unto them in misery) and must not be neglected.
But all these cannot secure us from the plague; if we do not first make our
peace with GOD, all these are in vain. If we bear in our bosom the cause of
the plague, if we nourish and increase it daily, (I mean our sins) we cannot
be sure to keep it from our towns and houses, do what we can. Know thou for a
surety it is GOD that sends the pestilence, as He says, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. In
this judgment (above others) we are said to fall into the LORDS hands, as
David speaks, 2 Samuel 24. 14. And as He sends it, so He only guides it
whither it shall go, and whither it shall not go; whom it shall smite, and whom
it shall spare. And though He do usually send it by outward and ordinary
means, yet always He does not so. Some that live in the thickest of them that
are infected, and in a most corrupt air, do escape; some that fly from the
places infected into the purest air, are infected, they know not how. How many
Physicians, and Chyrurgions, and nurses, and keepers that have been wont to
visit the infected, to sweat them, to dress their sores, to wash their linen;
yea, how many that have daily conversed with them, and lain in bed with them
also, have been known to have escaped the infection altogether? Whereas many
that have been most careful to keep themselves from all that have been
infected, and to use all good preservatives against the contagion, have been
taken by it. No man may argue from hence (as some foolishly have done) that
this disease is not in it own nature more infectious than other diseases are.
No more than (from this that the three noble Jews that were cast into
Nebuchadnezzars furnace, received no hurt at all by it, Dan. 3. 27. and that
often times one house in a street, or room in a house escape burning, in the
greatest fires that have been heard of) a man may conclude that fire is not in
it self of a burning and consuming nature. But in this, as in the other; the
finger and power of GOD is to be acknowledged in restraining, and setting bonds
to this heavy judgment, as pleases Him. And this the LORD (doubtless) does,
to hearten and encourage them that are whole, to perform all necessary duties
of mercy and love to them that are sick. And as the LORD can thus limit the
plague of pestilence; so can He (if He please) command it to go through our
whole Land before it cease, as He did through the land of Israel, 2 Samuel 24.
15. from Dan to Beersheba. Though we fly from it, He can follow and pursue us
with it (as He has done many, and threatens) I will persecute (and follow
them) with the pestilence, says He, Ier. 29. 18. Though we shut our doors
against it, He can make it come in at our windows, as they complain, Ier. 9.
21. Death is come up to our windows, and is entered into our palaces. Let no
man think he can be sure to avoid this judgment by flying from it, if he be
not careful to remove the cause of it, and to make his peace with GOD. Do
therefore (before it come nearer to thee) as the LORD Himself counsels
thee, Amos 4. 12. Prepare to meet thy GOD. And because thou can have no
assurance in thy self that thou shall be able to avoid the danger of the
indignation of this King that comes against thee (for ought thou know) with
so great a power, learn that wisdom that our Savior directs thee unto,
Luke 14. 32. While He is yet a great way off, send an embassage, and desire
conditions of peacewith Him. If thou would be free from the fear of the
plague, fear GOD aright. Be not afraid (says the Prophet, Esa. 8. 12, 13.)
sanctify the LORD of hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let Him be
your dread. If we could fear the LORD as we ought, we should not need to fear
any thing else in the world. Be sure to make thy peace with Him; which, how thou
may do, I will tell thee by and by.

Thirdly and lastly, (to cause us to take to heart, and to be affected with
this fearful plague) consider, that if this judgment be neglected, (as great
as it is) it will be but a forerunner of some more fearful judgment than this
is. And as our Savior speaks in another case, Matthew. 24. 8. this will be but
the beginning of our sorrows. There is a judgment (that this nation has
hitherto been preserved from, to the astonishment and admiration of all the
world) that is greater than this; for, it uses to bring this, and the famine
also with it, I mean war. The sword of our bloody and merciless enemies is
worse than the plague. This is plain by David's choice, 2 Samuel 24. 14. Let us
fall now into the hand of the LORD, (for His mercies are great) and let me not
fall into the handof man. And surely we have cause to fear, that if this will
do us no good, GOD cannot endure to have His judgments despised. Hear what He
says, Levit. 26. 18. If you will not for all this hearken unto Me, then I will
punish you seven times more for your sins* And certainly, I may say to all
you that hear me this day, if you regard not, nor profit by this fearful
plague you hear of in London, and in other parts of the Land, GOD will either
bring it home to you, or a worse plague than it, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.

The second duty that this Doctrine serves to exhort us to, is, that we would
make right use of this judgment of GOD that is upon the Land, unto our selves.
And that stands in four points.

First, seeing 1. GOD gives us in this judgment such cause of sorrow, seeing
He is angry: and 2 not with the Londoners only, but with us, with the whole
Land: and 3. it may be more with us, than with them: and 4. seeing we know not
how soon this fire that burns our neighbors house, may light upon ours: We
must therefore examine every one of us our own ways. This direction is given
us, Lam. 3. 39. 40. Wherefore does a living man complain; a man for the
punishment of his sins? As if the Church there should say, why do men mourn,
and fret, and take on so for this judgment of GOD that is justly fallen upon
them? Why do they not betake themselves to the right course for the pacifying
of GODS wrath? Which is this, and this only, Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the LORD. Every one of us should say thus within himself,
surely the LORD is very angry with the whole Land, with every one of us; and
what have I done to anger the LORD thus, to provoke Him to this wrath? Ier. 8.
6, 7. The LORD charge the Jews that they did not know His judgment, because
no man said, what have I done? And so surely will He judge of us. We know not
the meaning of the plague, nor make right use of it, unless every one of us
enter into his own heart, and say, what have I done? To this end it will be
profitable for us to search the Scriptures, and find out what were the special
sins which either have brought the pestilence upon GODS people in former
times, or which the LORD has threatened to punish in this manner, and with this
judgment. For the first, I find five great plagues of pestilence recorded in
the holy Scriptures, and the special sins that were the causes of them, are
also plainly set down. The first great plague we read of, was that which is
spoken of, Numb. 11. 33. The wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people,
and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague. And what was the cause
of that plague? Surely their murmuring and coffeehouse at their present
condition, their unthankfulness to the LORD, who had brought them out of the
land of Egypt, Verse. 20. their loathing of Manna, Verse 6. (which the Prophet
for the excellency thereof calls Angles food, Psalm. 78. 25. and the corn and
bread of heaven, Psalm. 78. 24. 105. 40.) their lusting after the fleshpots of
Egypt, and longing to be there again, Numb. 11. 45. Exodus 16. 3. Secondly,
Another we find mentioned, Numb. 14. where, although the LORD was stayed by the
prayer of Moses from smiting the whole congregation with the pestilence, and
from dis-inheriting them, as He threatened to do, Verse. 6. yet often of those
men that were sent to search out the Land, it is said Verse. 37. that they died
of the plague before the LORD. And the cause of this is said to be, Verse 36,
37. that they did bring up a slander and evil report upon the promised Land,
and thereby made all the congregation to murmr against Moses, who had spoken
so much good of it. Thirdly, Another great plague, Moses has set down the
story of, Numb. 16. 49. wherein there died fourteen thousand and seven
hundred; and yet then so soon as wrath was gone out from the LORD: so soon as
the plague was begun, as we read, Verse. 46, -- 48. Aaron (the true ^ype of our
only High Priest, and effectual Intercessour for us unto GOD) went with his
incense, and stood between the dead and the living, and made an atonement for
the people, and so the plague was stayed. How fearful a pestilence would that
have been, if it had continued any time, if it had not been presently stayed?
And the sin that provoked GOD to send this pestilence among His people, we find
to have been their murmuring and rebelling against Moses and Aaron the
Ministers and servants of the LORD; as it is plain by the 41 and 42 Verses of
that Chapter. Fourthly, The fourth memorable pestilence that we read of, is
that which is recorded, Number. 25. of which there fell in one day (as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 10. 8.) three and twenty thousand. Moses in setting down that
story says Numb. 25. 9. those that died in the plague were twenty and four
thousand; putting all together in that sum, that perished at that time, and
for that sin; as well those whom himself and the judges had put to death
according to the commandment of GOD, Verse. 4, 5. (which may seem to have been
in number about a thousand) as those that perished by that plague which the
LORD (in His fierce anger, as it is said Verse. 4.) did send amongst them, which
were the three and twenty thousand that the Apostle speaks of. For that most
of them that then perished, died of an extraordinary pestilence, (and not all
by the sword of the Magistrate, as some learned men judge) may appear by that
which the HOLY GHOST speaks of it in other places, as Numb. 31. 16. There was
a plague among the Congregation of the LORD; and Josh. 22. 17. where the very
same words are used by Phinehas, who had a chief hand in the staying of it;
and Psalm. 106. 29, 30. The plague brake in upon them, then stood up Phinehas,
and executed judgment, and so the plague was stayed. And what was the cause of
this strange and fearful pestilence that consumed in one day three and twenty
thousand? Surely it was whoredom, as both Moses Numb. 25. 1, 6. and the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 8. do expressly teach us. Fifthly, the fifth and last plague
we read of in holy Scripture was in David's time, the story whereof is set
down, 2 Samuel 24. 15. this went thorough all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba
in three days, and consumed in so short a time no less than seventy thousand
men. And the cause of this plague was the pride of David's heart, and the
confidence he reposed in his own strength, and in the outward means he had to
defend himself by, and to provide for his own safety. And besides these five
great plagues, I find also mention made of another dangerous and strange
sickness wherewithal the LORD in his just judgment did smite and afflict his
people in the Church of Corinth; which, though I cannot certainly say it was
the pestilence, (because the text does not expressly say so) yet I may boldly
say, it was an epidemicall disease, and grievous mortality, most likely to be
it. Many are weak and sick among you, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 30.) and
many sleep, that is, die of it. And the cause of this sickness and mortality
the Apostle tells us, was this, that they came carelessly, unreverently, and
without due preparation unto the holy Sacrament.

Thus you see what sins have brought the plague upon men in former times, yea
upon such as have been GODS people by profession, as well as we. And, This
happened unto them for ensample (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. 11.) and
all the seen* samples are written and recorded in Scripture of purpose for our
admonition.

And although we read of no plagues that are recorded in the holy Scriptures,
but those that I have mentioned, and for those sins; yet find we diverse
other sins also which GOD has threatened to punish this way. GODS people were
afraid that He would fall upon them, and consume them with the pestilence, (as
we read, Exodus 5. 3.) even for their negligence of His solemn worship and
service; though they were then in Egypt where they could not perform it
without extreme danger. And because Pharaoh had despised and hardened his heart
against former and smaller judgments, the LORD threatens (Exodus 9. 15.) to
smite him and his people with the pestilence. To conclude, the LORD did by His
Prophet Jeremiah 21. 5, 6. threaten in anger, and fury, and in great wrath to
smite the inhabitants of Jerusalem both man and beast, and that they should die
of a very great pestilence; because they stood out in rebellion against the
King of Babylon, and refused to yield unto him as GOD had commanded them:
whereby it appears, that an obstinate refusing to obey the Word and
commandment of GOD in any thing, though it be such, as may be colored with the
best pretenses, will provoke Him to punish men this way.

So then (to apply all this unto our selves) seeing it is Applic.
evident that we and our nation are guilty of all these sins, for every one
of which, we find in the Word, that GOD has brought and threatened to bring
this judgment upon His people in former times; seeing we have been 1. most
unthankful unto GOD for our deliverance out of that spiritual Egypt, and
house of bondage wherein our forefathers lived: and have showed too much
desire to return thither again; and have loathed so long the heavenly food of
the Gospel of CHRIST more than ever they did that Manna; and 2. have brought
up and entertained a most slanderous and evil report of the promised Land, and
of that strait way that leads unto it; speaking evil of and scorning the life
and power of godliness, and discouraging others from it; murmuring against,
and hating (to the death) such of GODS servants, as either by doctrine, or
example, do press and provoke us unto it; and 3 are so ready (upon every
occasion) to murmr and rebel against the servants and Ministers of the LORD;
content (indeed) to give them the hearing, but apt to tell them (if they shall
deal particularly and roundly with us, and require of us obedience to the
truth, and practice of that that we hear and profess) that they take too much
upon them; seeing 4. whoredom does every where so increase and abound in our
Land; and 5. we are every whit as proud of our own strength, and as apt to put
trust in the arm of flesh, as David was; and 6. the holy Sacrament is (in all
places) so commonly profaned, and those holy things given to and received
(without difference) by such dogs and swine as have no care at all d^ly to
prepare themselves thereunto; seeing 7. the public and solemn worship of GOD
is every where so much neglected; and 8 we have so hardened our hearts against,
and profited so little by many other judgments, whereby the LORD has
witnessed His wrath from heaven against us, and sought to bring us unto
repentance; and 9. we do continually (with so great obstinacy) refuse to yield
obedience to many of the express commandments of GOD.

Seeing (I say) we are guilty of all these sins that are the proper causes of
this judgment, let us therefore impute this fearful plague whereby GOD ^ath
smitten the chief City, and many other parts of our Land, unto these our
sins; and justify the LORD in this judgment, the causes whereof are so
evidently to be found amongst us: yea let us all fear, that He will execute
His fierce wrath upon us in the same manner, except we repent us of, and
forsake these sins. And this is the first way whereby we must make right use
unto our selves of this heavy judgment of GOD that is upon the Land.

The second is this, that seeing the LORD does thus declare and proclaim that
His anger and fury is kindled and inflamed against us all, it behooves us
(without delay) by all means to make our peace with GOD, and to seek
reconciliation with Him. Acquaint thy self now with Him (says Eliphaz to Job.
Chap. 22. 21.) and make peace with Him, thereby good shall come unto thee.
This, and this only is the way unto true safety and comfort. And mark that he
advises him to do it now. Now is the time to do it, if ever we will do it, now
that His hand is so stretched out against us. And we are strangely hardened in
our sins, if (howsoever we have wretchedly neglected it hitherto) we will do it
now. If any shall ask me what must I do, and what course must I take to make
my peace with GOD?

I answer briefly and plainly, that there be three things thou must do, if thou
would obtain peace with GOD: and if thou can do these three things, thou
need not doubt to obtain it.

1. Thou must freely, and fully, and particularly confess thy sins unto GOD,
even those sins which I have showed to be the chief causes of this
judgment. I said (says David, Psalm. 32. 5.) I will confess my transgressions
unto the LORD, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

2. Thou must unfainedly and fully resolve with thy self to cast off and
forsake these and all other thy sins, Prove. 28. 13. Who so confesses and
forsakes his sin, shall find mercy. Though thou can not quite leave them
(as who can do that in this life?) yet if thou can unfainedly and without
dissimulation desire, and purpose, and resolve with thy self to leave them
all, begging strength of GOD, that thou may be made able to do it, then have
thou forsaken them in GODS account; and they shall not hinder thy peace and
reconciliation with GOD. In this David took comfort. I am purposed, (says he,
Psalm. 17. 3.) that my mouth shall not transgress: and Psalm. 39. 1. I said (I
fully resolved and determined with my self) I will take heed to my ways.

3. And lastly, Thou must strive (by a lively faith) to lay hold on GODS mercy
in CHRIST, and to get His blood sprinkled upon thy heart. CHRIST is our peace,
as the Apostle calls Him, Ephesians. 2. 14. Neither can we (with all that we are able
to do) make our peace with GOD, but only through faith in Him. When the
destroying Angel saw the blood of the lamb sprinkled upon the lintell and
side-posts of any door, he passed by that house, and smote none in it, Exodus
12. 23.

The third way whereby we must make right use to our selves of this judgment
that we see upon others, is this; it must increase our care to reform (not our
selves only, but) our families. It is a vain thing for any man to bless
himself or take comfort in his repentance without this care; say not, if I use
all good means to make peace with GOD for my self, I hope the faults of my
family shall never be imputed unto me. Search the Scriptures, and you shall
find there was never any man that was himself reconciled and at peace with
GOD, but his care was, that his family might fear GOD, and be in favor with
Him, as well as himself. Cornelius (though he were a Centurion, and kept a
great family, and had soldiers to serve him, yet) feared God with all his
house, Acts 10. 2. So soon as Zacheus himself was become a son of Abraham
(a true believer) salvation came unto his house too, Luke 19. 9. Christ
promised he should have a faithful and a religious family. So speaks Eliphaz
also to Job, Job 22. 23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built
up, thou shall put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles. No man that is
himself truly returned unto the Almighty, need to be discouraged in this; if
he do his endeavor, God has promised, that he shall be able (through His
gracious assistance and blessing) to reform his family; though not to convert
the heart of every one in it, yet to keep them from open and scandalous
offenses. Certainly we do not make the right use we ought, of this heavy
scourge of God, unless we be made thereby more careful to reform our
families. For this cause the Lord said He would not conceal from Abraham His
purpose against the Sodomites, because He knew that he would make this use of
it. For I know him (says the Lord, Genesis 18. 19.) that he will command his
children, and his household after him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord
to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which
He has spoken of him. 1. Abraham (upon the knowledge and observation of Gods
wrath even upon the Sodomites) would become more careful to look to his whole
family, and to reform it. 2. God would assist and bless him in this his
endeavor, and he should see the fruit of it in his family. 3. This care that
Abraham had of his family should be a principal means to make good unto him
all Gods promises, to bring upon him, and make sure unto him all the blessings
and good things that God had promised unto him, and without this he could have
had no assurance of them.

O that we could once believe and take to heart Applic.
these things. Certainly one maine cause of this, and all other judgments that
are upon our Land, is the want of care that is in them that profess themselves
to be the people of God, in reforming their families; whether they of their
family be drunkards, or sober persons; blasphemers, or such as fear an oath;
unclean, or chaste; profane, or religious; is all one to them.

The fourth and last way whereby we must make right use to our selves of this
judgment, is this: it must make us more merciful to them that are in
distress, and more ready to relieve them. Nothing will give us more assurance
to be freed from the plague our selves, or to find comfort and strength in it,
if God shall please to visit us by it, than this. When Gods heavy hand did hang
over Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel speaks thus unto him, Dan. 4. 27. Wherefore O
King, let my counsel be acceptable unto the, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy unto the poor; if it may
be a lengthning to thy tranquillity. As if he should have said, if any thing
will lengthen thy tranquillity, and keep off the judgment threatened, this is
likely to do it. Remember what ourblessed Savior has said of this, Mat. 5. 7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Nothing will give a
man more assurance to find mercy with God in the time of his distress, than
this will. Remember also what His holy Apostle says of this, Iam. 2. 13. He
shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy. If either the plague,
or any other judgment seize upon that man that has been void of mercy, it
shall be upon him without all mixture of mercy, he shall have no comfort of Gods
mercy in it; and mercy rejoices (or boasts) against judgment. The merciful
man shall not fear this or any other judgment before it come, as other men
do: and if it do light upon him, he shall rejoice, and find a comfortable sense
of Gods mercy in it. And remember this at this time especially, now you have
kept a day of humbling your selves before God; know that there is nothing that
will more grace our solemn services before God, (specially services of this
kind) nothing will make them more acceptable unto Him, than when we shall
therein manifest and declare our selves to be merciful and bountiful unto the
poor, Is not this the fast that I have chosen? (says the Lord, Esa. 58. 6,
7.) to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thine
house? When thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own flesh?

SERMON II.
Aug. 17. 1625.
Follows the duty whereby David expressed his love and compassion to these
men, Nota. 2.
he prayed for them. For, though this be not expressed in the first part of the
verse where the duty is mentioned that he performed toward these men in their
misery, yet is it evident, 1. By the express words of the last clause of the
verse, where he mentions the success he had in the duty he performed for
them: and 2. by this also that he says he fasted, and humbled his soul for
them: for, in all fasts and exercises of humiliation that Gods people have
kept, prayer was the chief duty they performed; and all other things they did
in those exercises, they did only to help and further themselves in prayer,
Esa. 58. 3. To make their voice to be heard on high: and Ion. 3. 8. to make
them cry more mightily unto God. The Doctrine then that we are to learn from
this example of David, is this.

That a chief duty we are to perform to them that are in misery, Doct. 2.
is to pray for them. See the proof of the point in five degrees.

1. This is a chief duty whereby we do express the truth of our love unto
any, and whereby we may do them good. When our Savior had commanded us to love
our enemies, and to do good to them that hate us, M^t. 5. 44. He adds, And pr^y
for them.

2. This is duty that is to be performed by us ^owards all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Yea even toward the wickedest men that live upon ^arth: See how importunate
Abraham was with God for the beastly Sodomites, Genesis 18. 32.

3. This duty is to be performed specially for such as are Gods people, though
it be but in outward profession. This course Moses took to relieve Israel in a
great extremity. When God threatened He would destroy Israel, Moses st^od before
Him in the breach, (by maine force to keep Him out) to turn away His wrath,
Psalm. 106. 23. How stood he in the breach? How did he turn away Gods wrath
from them? By prayer, Ex^d. 32. 11. Moses besought the Lord his God. This
course David took to relieve Gods people in the time of a fearful
pesti^ence, that in a short time had consumed seventy thousand, 2 Sa^. 24. 15.
He was deeply affected with their misery, (as appears by the story) but what
course took he to help them? he prayed for them, 1 Chro^. 21. 16, -- 18. and
so stayed the plague. So did Moses in the very like case of the pestilence,
when ^r^th was g^n^ out from the Lord, and the plague was (...), he charge
Aar^n to t^ke his ce^ser, and put fire therein from the (...), (...) put
ince^se on it, and go quickly to the co^greg^tio^, t^ make an atonement for
them, N^^b. 16. 46. True it is, that signified the intercession of Christ for
the people, which indeed is that that did the deed: but know, 1. that when
incense was offered, Gods people also prayed, L^ke 1. 10. And 2. that Christ's
intercession goes with our prayers also, and is that that makes them
effectual. He off^eth His incense with the prayers of all Saints, Rev, 8. 3.

4. In strange and extraordinary judgments that are upon Gods people, we are
bound not only to pray for them, but to do it in an extraordinary manner. When
the decree was sealed for the destruction of all the Jews, and Ester resolved
to venture her life for the revoking of it, then ordinary prayer would not
serve the turn; but Ester commanded extraordinary prayer to be used in such a
case, and that for sundry days together, Ester 4. 16. Go fast ye for me, and
neither eat no^ drink three days, night nor day.

5. In public and general calamities that are upon Gods people, or hang over
them, public and general prayers should be used for them. This course
Ie^os^phat took in that case, 2 Chro^. 20. 13. All luda stood before the Lord
in that fast. And so did the Ninivites likewise, Ion. 3. 5. They pr^cl^imed a
fast and put on sa^kcloth from the greatest of them to the le^st of them. And
the more public and solemn the prayers are that are made in this case, the
more pleasing they are unto the Lord. This appears, l^dg. 20. 26. they had
before gone up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, Verse. 18. they
had gone up the second time to seek the Lord, and then did weep also before
the Lord, Verse. 23. but prevailed not: the third time they prevailed. Why? What
did they more now, than they did before? 1. They fasted. 2. All the children of
Israel, and all the people went up. An evident proof of this, that when Gods
judgments are public and general upon Gods people, our prayers and
humiliations should be as public and general as is possible: and the more
public, the more pleasing unto God.

Reason. First, Reason 1.
The Lord is He that both lays the judgment upon any of our brethren, and He
that must take it off, and therefore the best way we have to help them, is to
seek to Him in their behalf. It is the Lord that sends the pestilence, I have
sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt, says the Lord, Amos 4
10. And it is He, and He only that moderates and sets bounds unto it. He says
to it as to the sea, Job 38. 11. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further: and
here shall thy proud waves ^e stayed. He has set down in His counsel and
decree, whom it shall smite, and whom it shall spare. The just number that He
has appointed shall die of it, use they what means they can (which they are
bound to do, because this is a secret unto them) to avoid it. Ier. 15. 2. Such
as are for death, (that is, for the pestilence, as it is expounded, Ier. 21.
7.) to death; and such as are for the s^^rd, to the sword; and such as are for
the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity.
And it shall not touch any of them whom He will have to be spared, though they
live in never so much danger, Psalm. 91. 7. A thousand shall fall at Thy side,
and ten thousand at Thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh Thee. And it is
the Lord only that removes it when He pleases, that says to the destroying
Angel, It is enough, stay now thy hand, 2 Samuel 24. 16. And lastly, it is He
only that can cure those that are smitten with it, 1 Samuel 26. The Lord
kills, and ^aketh alive; He brings down to the grave, and brings up
again. So that to conclude this reason, we may say with the Prophet, Amos 3.
6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? The plague is
in the City, and that is one great evil; secondly, it increases there
wonderfully, that is another evil; thirdly, the people in the out-parishes
will not be restrained, nor kept in, that is another evil; fourthly, many
perish with famine, that is another evil. And has not the Lord done all this?
What better course then can we take for their good, than to seek to the Lord
for them?

Secondly, 2.
The Lord has commanded us to do this; He desires and looks for this at our
hands, and is highly pleased with it, when we (seeing his judgments upon our
brethren) become suitors to Him in their behalf. He has commanded, 1 Timothy 2.
1. Before all things, let supplications, etc. be made for all men. Yea He
desires it greatly, and looks for it, even when He is most offended with a
people, to be thus sought unto in their behalf, Ezekiel. 22. 30. I sought for a
man amongst them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before Me
for the land, that I should not destroy it: Es^. 59. 16. He wondered that there
was no intercessour. Yea He is highly pleased with this, in which respect
Jeremy desires God to take notice of this grace in him, and remember it, Ier.
18. 20. Remember that I stood before Thee to speak good for them, and to turn
away Thy wrath from them. So that it is a sin against God to neglect this
duty unto our brethren, 1 Samuel 12. 23. God forbid that I should sin against
the Lord in ceasing to pray for you.

Thirdly, 3.
The force and efficacy that there is in the prayers of Gods people to help
and relieve them that are in misery, is very great. The prayers of Gods people
have prevailed wonderfully with Him, even for wicked men. How often did Moses
prayer remove Gods plagues even from Pharaoh, Exodus 8. 13. 31. 9. 33. 10. 18,
19. When Ah^^ and his land were almost consumed with a drought and famine,
Elias prayer delivered him from that judgment, and brought rain; yet he was a
man subject to the like passi^ns that we are, lam. 5. 17, 18. Yea in this very
judgment of the pestilence, ye shall see the force of prayer. For, when God
has drawn out this terrible sword of His in His fierce displeasure, and
consumed many by it, and stretched out His arm to smite more, the prayers of
Gods people have even stayed Him, and held His hand, and prevailed so with Him,
that they have even overcome Him, and compelled Him to change His mind, and put
up His sword. When wrath was gone out from the Lord, and the plague was begun,
A^r^n stood with his incense between the dead and the living, and the plague
was stayed, Numb. 16. 48. When God had said unto Moses (against Israel for
their idolatry) Exodus 32. 10. Let Me alone, that my wrath may wax ^ot against
them, and that I may consume them: Upon Moses prayer, Verse. 14. The Lord
repented Him of the evil which He thought to do unto His people. The like He
did upon David's prayer, 2. Sam. 24. 16. The Lord repented Him of the evil, and
said to the Ange^^ that destroyed the people, it is enough; stay now thine
hand. Is it in the power of man to overcome God, to withstand Him when He comes
to take vengeance, to cause Him to change His mind? Yes verily; Jacob had tha^
power, Genesis 32. 26.when the Lord had wrestled with Him, and said, Let Me go* he
would not let Him go; but Verse 28. as a prince he had power with G^d, and
p^ev^iled. And how did he overcome God th^s? By prayer, as you may see Hos. 12.
4. He h^d power ^ver the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, (...) mad^
supplication unt^ him. Say not, those were rare men; for all Gods people have
this name given them, they are all called the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. and
therefore (as Princes) may prevail with God this way. And no marvel, though
Gods people may thus prevail with God for the staying of His hand inte^porall
judgments, or removing of them from their brethren, seeing they are able to
prevail with God even for the pardon of their sins, which are the causes of
those judgments, and for the converting and saving of their souls, Iam. 5.
15. The prayer of faith shall s^ve the sick, and if he have committed sin^^s,
they shall be forgiven him. And 1 Io^. 5. 16. If any (...) see his bro^^er sinne^
sin which is not unto death; he shall ask, and he shall give him life for
them that sin not (...) death.

The Use this Doctrine serves unto, is for Instruction. R^proofe. Examination.

First, Use 1.
for instruction. To teach us what account is to be made of such as are true
Israelites. And know thou have two reasons to mo^e thee to make much of such.

1. They are a blessing to the place where they live, Esa. 19. 24. Israel shall
be a blessing in the midst of the land. They are the props and pillars of the
Land; for their sakes the Land is spared. If there had been butten such in
Sodom, Sodom had been spared, Gen* 18. 32.

2. They are able (as Princes) to prevail mightily with God, by their prayers;
to stand in the breach, and to hold Gods hands; they are the chario^s of
Israel, and the horse^e^^ thereof, as they are called, 2 King. 13. 14. Indeed
there are but a few such true Israelites, which makes the Prophet speak in
that manner, Psalm. 25. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord? But where thou
know such, make much of them. Why should not Gods favourit^s be as much
honored, as the favorites of the greatest King? Get as many such into the
town thou live in, as thou can. They are as L^ts in Sodom, Genesis 19. 22.
till Let was gone out of Sodom, the Angel could not destroy it. Get as many
such into thy family as thou can. As David professed he would do, Psalm. 101.
6. Mi^e eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land, that they may dwell with
me. Genesis 39. 5. The Lord blessed the Egypti^ns house for Joseph's s^ke. Get such
friends as these are. Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear
Thee. Verse. 79. Let those that fear Thee turn unto me, and those that have
known thy testimonies. I tell thee, Paul (as great an Apostle as he was) knew
how to esteem and make use of such friends, Romans 15. 30. N^w I beseech you,
brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the l^ve of the spirit, that
you strive together with me in your pr^yers to God for me.

I know I shall offend many of you, in speaking so much for such, whom (above
all others) you detest most, and are ready to show it upon every occasion. And
I have wondered much to see the bitter hatred that many (who are otherwise
civil men) bear to such as fear God. For think I, Psalm. 11. 3. and What h^th
the righteous done? B^t I have found in Gods Book, the true cause of it, and
that is this; that every natural man hates God, and is an enemy to Him, Romans
5. 10. and that God has put enmity between the seed of the serp^^, and the
seed of the wom^n, Genesis 3. 15. and therefore, so long as thou continuest an
enemy unto God, and one of the serpents seed, thou must needs hate all such as
truly fear God. The good Lord be merciful to thee, and give thee an heart to
take notice of thy wretched estate, that thou may repent and come out of it.

The second Use is for reproof of three sorts of men. Use 2.
I Of them that cannot pray. 2. Of them that do not use to pray. 3. Of them
that will not pray.

First of them that cannot pray. O consider how miserable a man thou art.
First, thou want that whereby thou should help thy poor brethren in
their misery. A grief it is to an honest mind, to see his brother in extreme
want and misery, and he has nothing to relieve him with. Therefore is that
commandment given Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him labor in some honest calling, that be
may have to give. How much more just cause of grief is this, when thou can
not so much as pray for him? Secondly, thou want that whereby thou should
keep off Gods judgments from thy self, or remove them, or yield thee comfort
in them. For my love th^^ were mine ^dversaries, (says David, Psalm. 109. 4.)
but I gave my self to prayer. That was his chief comfort in all his
afflictions. Thirdly, thou want that that should give thee comfort in thy
present estate. For, thou can have no assurance that thou art Gods child, or
that thou have any truth of grace in thee, if thou cannot not pray. The spirit
of grace is the spirit of s^pplication, Zac. 12. 10. Because ye ^re sons
(says the Apostle, Gal. 4. 6.) God has sent f^rth the spirit of His S^nne
into your hearts, crying Abb^ Father. No man is the child of God, nor has the
spirit of Christ in him, that is not able feelingly and fervently to call
God^Father, and to pray unto Him. Learn therefore to cry earnestly unto God as
the Disciples did, L^k. 11. 1. Lord teach me to pray.

The second sort that are to be reproved by this Doctrine, are such as can, but
(through laziness and propha^e negligence) do not use to pray. Many there be
that seldom or never pray; it may be in their sickness, or extreme danger
they will, but they bear upon them that brand of an hypocrite that Job
spea^eth of, (...) 27. 10. Will he call upon God at all times? that is,
constantly, and not by fits and starts only. Many that did once use constantly
to pray with their families, and in secret, have now given it over. To whom the
Lord will one day say as Esa. 43. 22. Tho^ have not called upon (...), O (...),
but th^^ ^ast bee^e ^eary of ^e, O Is^^^l* they that neglect their calling upon
God, and are (...) of prayer, are weary of God. Ma^y never po^^ed out prayer to
God for our armies, nor for our brethren visited with the plague: the most of
us have neglected it too long, to seek to God for them in this extraordinary
manner. Go quic^ly with thy censer, the plag^e i^ beg^^, says M^se^ to (...),
N^^b. 16 46, so soon as the plague did begin, we should without delay have
importuned the Lord for ou^ brethren. Unto these I will say but two words. 1.
That God may justly impute to thee the blood both of our soldiers that died so
miserably, and of the many thousands that have perished by the plague, because
thou have not striven by thy prayers with God for them. According to that rule
of our Savior, Mar. 3. 4. He that uses not means to save life when it lies
in his power, is a murderer. 2. That this neglecting of prayer is a dangerous
sign that thou have no fear of God in thee. Thou castest off fear (^aith
Eliphaz, Job 15. 4.) and restrainest prayer before God. It is a sign thou
believe not Gods providence. The fool has said in his heart, There is no
God; (says the Prophet, Psalm. 14. 1.) and one argument to prove this, he gives
Verse. 4. They call not upon the Lord. Lastly, this is a sign that thou have no
comfort at all in God, no assurance of His favor. Will the hypocrite (says
Job, Chap. 27. 10.) delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon
God? The cause why men keep not a constant course in prayer, is because they
have no delight nor comfort in God. O let us therefore make conscience of this
duty to pray, and to pray constantly; praying always, as the Apostle requires,
Ephesians. 6. 18. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Pr^y without ceasing, not giving over so good
and necessary a duty, when we have once begun to take it up.

The third sort of them whom this Doctrine reproves, are such as (through
profaneness or worldliness) will not pray. Though the State have first
enjoined us to keep these days of humiliation, and 2. gone before us in it
themselves, and 3. published for our help a book of prayers, as ample, holy,
effectual, and fit for the present occasion, as ever were in any Liturgy that
I have seen; (for all which we are greatly bound to praise the Lord) yet will
they not upon these days lend their help to their distressed brethren, nor
join with us in prayer for them. These men certainly are of the mind either of
those profane worldlings that say as Io^ 21. 15. What profit shall we have if
we pray unto him? Can we get in our harvest, or provide for our families by
coming to Church, and joining with you in prayer? Or will our praying keep
away the plague from us? Or else they are of the mind of those desperate
Atheists that said, Es^. 22. 13. Let us eat and drink; for, to morrow we shall
die. This plague increases strangely, and is like enough to reach unto us; let
us therefore while we live be merry, and make as much of our selves as we can.
I grant, every man is not fit to keep a fast every week, specially in this
time of harvest; neither did the State intend to enjoyne him to do it: but not
to join with Gods people sometimes in this duty, specially on these solemn
days of humiliation, is, First, a great sin against our distressed brethren,
for whom our prayers would the more prevail, the more general they were, and
the more of us did join together in them, as I have proved before out of 2 Chronicles. 20. 13. Secondly, a matter of great danger to themselves, as that which
will provoke Gods displeasure against them. Levit. 23. 29. Whatsoever soul it
be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, (that the congregation kept
their fast on) he shall be cut off from among his people. In which respect God
commanded them to keep it in all their dwellings, Levit. 23. 3. And Zeth. 1.
6. The Lord threatens to stretch out His hand against, and to cut off them
that have not sought the Lord, then much more such as refuse to do it, being
thus called, Use 3.
and provoked thereunto.

The third and last Use is for examination whether our prayers heretofore have
been, or now be such, so powerful and effectual as have been described in
this Doctrine; whether we be such Israelites as (like Princes) have prevailed
with God in them. Gods children should inquire after their prayers how they
speed. David prays often for an answer, Psalm. 143 1. In thy faithfulness
answer me: and protests it would be a death to him to find God silent to his
prayers, Psalm. 28. 1. And what answer has God given to our prayers? First, we
have prayed for the good success of our armies against the enemies of the
Gospel. But the enemy has still prevailed, so that we may complain as Psalm.
44. 9, 10, 12. Thou have cast off, and put us to shame; and go not forth
with our armies; thou make us turn back from the enemy; and they which hate
us spoil for themselves, thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not
increase thy wealth by their price. Secondly, We have prayed for the good
success of our Parliament, that the King, and Nobles, and Commons might agree
together (as one man) for the settling of God's Ark and Religion among us, as
they did in Solomon's time, 1 King. 8. 1. But the Parliament (for all our
prayers) has received such an end, as every good heart has cause to lament.
Thirdly, We have prayed unto God to stay His hand in the noisome pestilence.
When ^^ron stood with his incense between the living and the dead, the plague
ceased, Numb. 16. 48. and David's prayer stayed the plague, 2 Chro. 21. 17, 18.
Our D^vid, and our Aarons, and the whole Land, have often prayed against this
judgment, and ever since we began to pray, the plague has increased
wonderfully. So that we may complain with the Church, La^. 3. 8. When I cry
and shout, He sh^tteth out my prayer. And Psalm. 80. 4. O Lord God of hosts, how
long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? What is the cause of
this? I answer, surely (though there may be other causes) yet this is the
chief, Iam. 4. 3. We have asked, and have not received, because we have asked
amiss. And that we may the better discern, what has been amiss in our
prayers, I will show you how those prayers should be qualified that should
prevail with God.

First, We must pray fervently and importunately, as they that will receive no
nay in their suits. The effectu^ll fervent prayer of a righteous man (says the
Apostle, Iam. 5. 16.) ^vail^th much. The pray^r of the most righteous man that
is, cannot be effectual, nor avail much, unless it be fervent. And to such
prayer only is the promise made, Ier. 29. 13. Ye shall seek for me, and find
me, when ye shall s^arch for me with all your heart. The want of this fervency
in prayer the Prophet complains of, as of the chief cause why God did hide
His face from His people, and consumed them with His judgments, Esa. 64. 7.
There is no^e that c^lleth upon Thy Name, that stirs ^p h^mself to take h^ld
of Thee. By prayer the faithful may as it were take hold on God, they may hold
His hands from (...) them, as Mo^^ did when God said to him, Ex^d 32. 10. Let
Me ^lone. But none does thus effectually call upon God, and take hold of Him,
that prays coldly and drowsily, but he only that stirs up, and row^eth
himself unto this duty, that he may do it fervently. And ^urely this may be
one cause why God has given no better answer to our prayers hitherto, because
he sees how cold and drows^e we have been in them, how little affected we
have been with the miseries of our brethren, whom we have seemed to pray for.
When our blessed Savior was in His agony, and his soul was exceeding
sorrowful even unto death, Mat. 26. 38. His Disciples Peter, and James, and
John, whom He desired to watch with Him, and to be some help to Him in that
His distress, fell asleep; so little sense had they of His extreme misery,
Mat. 26. 40. And even so have we carried our selves toward our brethren, the
members of Christ, we have pretended a willingness to yield them our help in
the miseries they are in, but alas in the prayers that we have seemed to make
for them, we have been overtaken with drowsinesse and sleepiness, we have
been in them little or nothing at all touched with the sense of their
distress. But as our Savior said then unto those His Disciples, Mat 26. 41.
Watch and pray: So say I unto you beloved, you can never do your selves or your
brethren good by your prayers, unless when you pray you watch, and look well
to your hearts, to keep them from drowsinesse and senslesnesse, from wandering
and roving, that when you pray, you may pray with fervency, and feeling of your
own necessities, and of the necessities of them that you do pray for. Let us
not think that (because we see no better fruit of our prayers) the Lord has
been displeased with us for keeping these fasts, and presuming to become
s^itors to Him for our brethren. But let us rather judge, that He has
therefore delayed to answer us hitherto, that He might cause us hereby to cry
louder, and to be more importunate and fervent with Him in our prayers. For, so
dealt He with the good woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 22, 24. 26. He did not only
delay to help her, but by His neglecting of her, and the rough answers He gave
her, seemed angry with her, and willing to discourage her, not out of any
dislike He had to her or her suit, (wherewith doubtless He was much pleased)
but only to increase her fervency and importunity in prayer.

Secondly, We must pray in faith, and confidence to be heard, Let him ask in
faith (says the Apostle, Iam. 1. 6, 7.) else let him not think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. And surely we have just cause to pray in faith
and confidence that we shall prevail with God in these prayers that we make
for our distressed brethren. Many good grounds of confidence we have.

1. We have heard that it is the will and commandment of God that we should
pray for them. And this is the confidence that we have in Him (says the
Apostle I I^h. 5. 14.) that if we ask any thing according to His will, He
hears us.

2. These extraordinary prayers and fasts that we keep, are enjoined us by
public authority of our gracious Sovereign, and of the State. And even that
is a thing highly pleasing unto God, and will much further the success of our
prayers. Therefore also it is mentioned by the Holy Ghost as a matter of no
small impor^ance, in two of the most succesfull fasts; that is, in that of
I^dah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Iehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord,
and proclaimed a fast throughout all ludah. And in that of the Ninivites, Ion.
3. 7. He caused it to be proclaimed and published through Niniveh, (by the
decree of the King and his Nobles) saying, etc.

3. These fasts are kept generally, and every where throughout the Land; and
that is also a thing that God is much pleased with; such prayers, and days of
humiliation that have been so universal, have been wont much to prevail
with God: as we have already heard out of Judge. 20. 26. and 2 Chronicles. 20. 3, 13.
and Ion. 3. 5, 7, 8.

4. The nation and people that we pray for, are Gods own people, and such as
bear His Name. Admit our Land be as sinful as Sodom was, yet remember that if
there had been but ten such in So^om, as we have many thousands of in our
Land, God had heard Abraham's prayer even for Sodom, because of them, Genesis 18.
32. Of our Land (blessed be God) we may yet say, there is no nation in the
world at this day, that has so many righteous persons in it; or that has the
Gospel preached in it in that sincerity and power as we have. Nay, there is no
City in the world where the Gospel is so plentifully and so faithfully
preached, nor wherein God is so purely worshipped, as in that City that we meet
together this day to pray for. And what an encouragement that may be unto us in
our prayers, is plain by that speech of the Prophet in his prayer unto God for
Judah, Ier. 14. 9. Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy Name, leave us not.

And this must be acknowledged for another cause why our prayers hitherto have
sped no better, we have not prayed in faith. Many have joined with us, whose
persons God never yet accepted, or was well pleased with. And till God have
respect to Abel himself, He will never have respect to any off^ing of his,
Genesis 4. 4. And such of us as are in the state of grace, yet have we not stirred
up our faith, and confidence to speed, in the prayers we have made. Do it
hereafter, and thou shall be sure to speed the better in thy prayers for it.
Say unto thy soul when thou preparest thy self to pray, as David did, Psalm.
42. 11, Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. Put thy confidence in God, hope and expect to receive
a gracious answer from Him when thou prayest unto Him, and thou shall find
better success in thy prayers, than thou have been wont to do.

Thirdly, We must pray in sense of our own unworthiness; no man is fit to
pray for Gods people, but he that feels the plague of his own heart, as
Solomon speaks, I King. 8. 38.

But how can that be? (will you say) if I have when I pray, a deep
apprehension and sense of mine own unworthiness and sin, how can I be
import^nate with God in my prayer? How can I pray in faith, or be confident
that He will hear me? This must needs deprive a man of all boldness,
discourage, and make him afraid to speak unto God. This effect the sense of
sin seems to have had in David, when he cried Psalm. 40. 12. Mi^e iniquities
have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up: they are more than
the hairs of mine head, therefore mine heart fails me.

But to this I answer, that no faithful man has cause to fear this. For,
Gods people have never been so strong with Him in prayer, as when they were
most abased and dejected in themselves, insense of their own weakness and
unworthiness. When I am weak (says the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 10. weak, and
dejected in my self through sense of mine own infirmities and afflictions)
then am I strong: strong in the Lord, and fittest to do Him service in an
acceptable manner. See an example and type of this in I^cob, Genesis 32. 25, 26
Never was he so strong with God, as when the hollow of his thigh was out of
joint. He had power over the Angel (over Christ the Angel of the covenant,
says the Prophet, Hos. 12. 4.) and prevailed. He wept and made supplication
unto Him, He found Him in Bethel. Why wept he so? Certainly from the sense of
his own infirmity and unworthiness; but he prevailed with God in his
supplications nevertheless, but much the more for that. See this also in the
good woman of Canaan; do you not think she was much abased in her self upon
those three repulses that she had received, Mat. 15. 27. yet was her prayer
then most strong and effectual with God, Verse. 28. And this is surely another
cause, why our prayers for our brethren have been so weak, and without force
with God; we are too strong, too well persuaded of our selves, to do Gods
people any good with our prayers.

Fourthly, We must bring with us unto prayer an unfeigned desire, and a full
purpose and resolution of heart to reform that that is amiss both in our
selves and others, and so to remove the cause of Gods displeasure that is
kindled against us. Certainly, this would give wonderful force unto our
prayers. This was that that gave such force unto the fasting and praying of the
Ninivites, Ion. 3. See their care and desire. Let them turn every one from his
evil way, (say the King and his Nobles in their proclamation, Verse 8.) and
from the violence that is in their hands. See also both the performance of that
they resolved to do; and how nothing so much prevailed with God for the
success of their prayers as this, Verse 10. God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that He had said He
would do unt^ them, and He did it not. Therefore has it been usual with Gods
people in their solemn fasts, not only to make full and particular confession
of their sins, but also to vow unto God that they would leave and forsake
them; yea they were wont solemnly to bind themselves unto this. All this is
evident, ^eb. 9. 12, 38. and 10. 29. When Phinehas stood up and executed
judgment (upon Zimri and Cozbi, as Moses and the Judges had before done of
many others that were joined unto Baal-Peor, Numb. 25. 4, 5. and so removed the
cause of Gods displeasure) the plague was stayed, says the Prophet, Psalm. 106.
30. All the weeping of the whole congregation before the door of the
tabernacle (of which we read Numb. 25. 6.) could do nothing without that. O
that God would put into the hearts of all our Magistrates, not only to appoint
and keep solemn and general fasts, but also (by severe execution of the
laws) to remove the causes of all our plagues. Our King and State (blessed be
God) have made good Laws against idolatry, swearing, profanation of the
Sabbath, murder, and drunkenness; but (alas) we want such as Phinehas, to see
the laws executed upon any of these offenders; and therefore it is no marvel
though the plague be not stayed. While these foul sins are winked at, and go
unpunished, what hope can we have that either our own prayers, or the prayers
of all the Saints upon earth, should prevail with God for our Land? Till the
Achans be found out and punished, (as found they may easily be, for they do
every where declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, as the Prophet
speaks, Esa. 3. 9.) but till they be punished, as God did say to Joshua,
Icsh. 7. 10, 11. Get thee up, wheref^re lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel
has sinned; so will He to us: why do you thus fast, and pray, and make such
show of humiliation as you do? find out the sins, and punish them that are
the causes of Mine anger, and then I will be appeased toward you, and your Land.

Certainly one chief cause why our fasting and praying has done so little
good, is because this ^a^h not been done. Nay, many of these lewd men that are
guilty of these foul sins, intrude themselves into our assemblies, and join
with us in these holy duties. And we know that the sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination unto the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. Let me therefore exhort you (beloved)
that as you desire to please God in this profession of humiliation that you
make, and to benefit your selves or your brethren by your prayers; resolve both
to forsake every known sin, and vow unto God this day amendment of life, in
such particulars as thine own heart can tell thee thou have most offended God
by; (and which of us all is it that has not something to reform?) remembering
always that speech of the Prophet, Psalm* 66. 18. If I regardiniquity in my
heart; the Lord will not hear me; as also 2. to do what lies in thee to
reform others.

Fifthly and lastly. We must join works of mercy with our prayers. 1. Let no
man think he shall be a looser by that that he gives (out of conscience
toward God) unto the poor. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto
the Lord (says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 19. 17.) and that that he has given,
will He pay him again. 2. Of all alms that is given, that is best and most
pleasing unto God, that is given in our Church Assemblies: for, it is an
ordinance of God (and even a Sabbath-duty) that collection should be made for
the poor when we meet together, as is plain by that speech of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2. And of that that is thus given, you may have much more
assurance, that it shall be given to them only that have need, than you can have
of much of that that you give at your doors. 3. There is great force in this
work of mercy to further the good success of our prayers: else would not the
Angel have said thus unto Cornelius, Acts 10. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms
are come up for a memorial before God. His almsdeeds made his prayers more
available with God, than otherwise they would have been.

SERMON III.
Sept. 7. 1625.
THe two first points observed in this Verse we have already dispatched: that
is, first the time wherein he showed his kindness unto them, and the occasion
he took to do it, when they were sick: secondly, the duty and means whereby
he expressed his kindness unto them, he prayed in an extraordinary manner for
them. Now this extraordinary prayer he made for them is s^t forth 1. by the
outward and bodily helps he used in this prayer; 2. by the inward disposition
of his mind and heart in it. The outward and bodily helps he used in this his
prayer were two, the clothing of him^^lfe with sackcloth, and fasting. For the
first of these, we shall find it was much used by Gods people in their
extraordinary prayers, Nehem. 9. 1. The children of Israel were essembled with
fasting, and with sackcl^athes, and earth upon them: and Ion. 3. 5. The people
of Niniveh proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them
even unto the least of them. Yea the Lord Himself sometimes commanded them to
do so, Esa. 22. 12. The Lord God of hosts called them to girding with
sackcloth. Joel 1. 13. Lie all night in sackcloth ye Ministers of my God. And
least you should from hence conceive that we also are now bound to use it; you
must understand,

First, that in those days it was neither enjoined, nor used as a religious
ceremony appropriated to this part of Gods worship, but as a civil sign
whereby men were wont to testify their sorrow; as wearing of black is now
among us. So in that mourning for Abner (wherein there was no prayer nor
religious duty performed) David commanded, 2 Samuel 3. 31. Rent your clothes, and
gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. So Hezechia and his nobles
upon the hearing of Rabshakehs blasphemy, to testify their sorrow, (though
they kept no fast then) covered themselves with sackcloth, 2 King. 9. 1, 2. Yea
Benhad^ds servants (though they knew not what extraordinary prayer meant) when
they were to sue to Ah^b for mercy, to profess their sorrow and humility, put
sackcloth on their l^ines, and ropes on their heads, 1 King. 20. 32.

But how should it be so much used in this so solemn a part of Gods worship,
Object.
and enjoined also by the Lord, if it were merely a civil thing, and no
religious ceremony?

I answer: Answ.
We are now enjoined in our Church Assemblies to wear such apparel as is
comely, decent, and fit for our estate and condition; I will (says the
Apostle, speaking of the behavior of all Gods people in the public
assemblies, 1 Timothy 2. 9.) in like manner also that women adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety; and yet is that no
Ecclesiastical ceremony, no matter of religion, but a thing merely civil.

Secondly, We must understand, that in these civil things, that might be
decent and fit in one Country, (and consequently commanded of God) which in
another Country is utterly undecent, and consequently forbidden. It was a great
sin among the Corinthians for a woman to come into the congregation with her
head uncovered; that is, without a veil to cover her whole head, 1 Cor. 11. 5.
In our congregations (because it is undecent) it were a sin for a woman to
come so attired. In which respect, though we have often in the New Testament
mention of fasts both public and private; of sackcloth used in them, we have
no mention at all.

Now this being premised for the understanding of the words, Nota. 3.
the thing we have to observe in them for our instruction is this; that David
in his extraordinary prayer used these outward and bodily exercises as helps
to his prayer: and from this we have to learn what we should do in the like
case: that is,

That in the days of our humiliation, Doct. 3.
besides fervent prayer, and the inward afflicting of the soul, there are
certain outward and bodily exercises to be used by Gods people.

As in our ordinary prayers there be certain outward things may help us much,
and consequently may not be neglected; (as 1. fit time and place, wherein we
may be freest from distraction. Our blessed Savior himself in the morning
before day, went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed, as
we read, Mar. 1. 35. and commands us (Mat. 6. 6.) to go into a closet to make
our private prayers, and to shut the door to us: and 2. fit gestures also; as
kneeling when we can. O come let us worship and fall down; let us kneel
before the Lord our maker, says the Prophet, Psalm. 95. 6. and standing up when
we cannot conveniently kneel. The Publican (though he were much humbled and
dejected in himself) stood when he prayed even in the Temple, as we read, Luke
18. 13. For, that also is a sign of reverence and humility. When Eglon heard
Ehud say, he had a message to him from God: he arose out of his seat, Judge. 3.
20.) so in our extraordinary prayers there be certain outward and bodily
exercises that may help us much, and are therefore not to be neglected by us.
And those are of two sorts; some consist in doing and performing certain
duties; and some in forbearing some such things as at other times we may use.

Four things I find performed by Gods people at the times of their
extraordinary prayers, and days of humiliation, specially such as have been
public and solemn.

First, The reading and preaching of the Word. Two notable examples we have for
this. Neh. 9. 3. They stood up in their place, and read in the Book of the Law
of the Lord their God one fourth part of the day. And how did they read? That
you shall find Neh. 8. 8. They gave the sense, and caused them to understand
the reading. Yea they applied it so effectually, that it wrought marvellously
upon the peoples hearts, as appears Verse 9. The other example is Ier. 36. 5,
6. Jeremiah commanded Baru^h, saying, I am shut up, I cannot go into the house
of the Lord: therefore go thou, and read in the roll which thou have written
from my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people, in the Lords
house; upon the fasting day. And why did they use this? Not so much for the
inlightning and informing of the judgment, as 1. for to work upon the heart,
and further it in humiliation: for, the Word is powerful that way, Ier. 23.
29. Is not my Word like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? It is like
Aarons rod, that is able to fetch water out of the rock, Exodus 17. 6. And 2.
to quicken the heart to fervent prayer: This reason Jeremy gives why he would
have preached to them on the day of their fast; and when he could not do that,
would needs have Baruch read the Word to them, Ier. 36. 7. It may be they will
present their supplication before the Lord: this will stir them up to pray
fervently.

Secondly, I find singing of Psalms used in a most public and solemn fast, 2 Chronicles. 20. 19. For, as there be Psalms of all sorts, of mourning and
lamentation, as well as of thanksgiving; so is the exercise of singing them a
singular means to stir up holy affections of all sorts, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Be
ye filled with the Spirit: speaking to your selves in Psalms.

Thirdly, I find Gods people have used to join with their extraordinary
prayers (as a means to make them the more effectual) almsdeeds and giving
to the poor, Acts 10. 4. Thy prayers and thine almsdeeds are come up for a
memorial before God. And no marvel: for, see what testimony our Savior gives
unto this, Luke 11. 41. Give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all
things are clean unto you.

Fourthly and lastly, I find that in their solemn fasts they have been wont
to examine and inquire what foul sins have been committed amongst them,
that might be the causes of Gods judgments; and to censure and reform them.
This to have been the custom of Gods people, may appear by the fast that was
kept in Iezrel, 1 King. 21. 8, -- 10. Iesabel wrote to the Elders and Nobles
there, to proclaim a fast: (upon occasion pretended (as it seems) of some
great judgment on the land, or on that city, present, or feared) In this fast
inquiry was made (as it may appear) what should be the cause of that
judgment. Two false witnesses step up, (suborned for the nonce) and charge
Naboth to be the cause of that judgment; for he had blasphemed God and the
King. And indeed of all things that can be done at a fast, this has been held
by Gods people the principal, and that that would give more force to their
prayers than any thing else. See it in Ezra 10. 1, -- 3. so Ne^. 9. 2. The seed
of Israel (upon the day of their fast) separated themselves from all strangers.
And Verse 38. they made a solemn covenant with God, and (Cap. 10. 29, 30.)
bound themselves by an oath to walk in Gods Law, and to observe, and do all
His commandments, and that they would no more match with idolaters. Where this
was not done (by those whom it concerned) where no care was taken to find out
and amend those things that did provoke God to wrath, the prayers of the best
men in the world could never prevail much with God. See a notable example of
this, Josh. 7. A better man than Joshua could not pray; a more fervent and
effectual prayer could no good man make than he did, Josh. 7. 6, -- 9. yet the
Lord was so far from hearkening to him, that He checks him for it, Verse 13.
Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and
shall never stand before their e^emies, till they have found out, and purged
themselves from this sin. And as soon as Achan was found out and punished,
Ioshuahs prayer was heard presently, Josh 8. 1.

I have showed you what these helps are that are ^o be used in our
extraordinary prayers, which consist in doing and performing of certain
duties. There are some other helps to be used which consist in forbearing and
wai^ing our selves from some things upon that day which at other times we may
lawfully use. Therefore the fast day is called a day of restraint, Joel. 1. 14.
and Z^c. 7. 3. The Jews say that on every fast that they had kept (four times
a year during the whole time of their captivi^y, Zac. 8. 19.) they had
separated themselves. Now the things we must forbear on the fast day are five
in number.

First, All manner of food; all kind of meat and drink whatsoever. So in the
fast that Esther enjoined they might neither eat nor drink while the fast
lasted, Est. 4. 16. And so in the fast of Niniveh, Ion. 3. 7. Let them not
taste any thing, let them not feed, nor drink water. So of Ezra (Chap. 10. 6.)
it is said that on the fast day he did eat no bread, nor drink water.

Secondly, All costlinesse and neatness in our apparel and attire must be
forborne on that day. See such examples for this as are beyond all exception,
even of great Princes. In a private and domestical fast (I mean not a secret
fast, of which our Savior says Mat. 6. 17. When thou fast^st, anoint thine
head, and wash thy face) it is said of David, 2 Samuel 12. 20. and of Esther,
Chap. 5. 1. that when their fast was ended, they changed their apparel, and
put on that that befitted their degree; which argues plainly, that while their
fast lasted they had forborne to wear it. And in a public fast we have the
like example of the King of Nin^veh, Ion. 3. 6. He laid his robe from him, and
c^vered himself with sackcloth. For, as bravery, costlinesse, and neatness in
apparel has great cause to puff up our flesh, and make it proud: so the
neglect of the costlinesse and neatness of our apparel, (when it is
voluntary) is a special means both to testify and increase the humiliation
of the heart. So Mephibosheth shows his sorrow for David's trouble, 2 Samuel 19.
24. He had neither trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day that
the King departed, till he came again in peace. So Exodus 33. 4. When the
people had heard those evil tidings, (that God would not go with them into
Canaan) they mourned, and no man did put on his ornaments: and this they did by
Gods express commandment, as appears in the n^x^ Verse.

Thirdly, we must abstain (while the fast lasts) from delights of all sorts,
from all means of joy and gladness, which at other times are most lawful:
Even from the delight which is taken in the marriage bed, 1 Co. 7. 5. even the
new-maried couple must do it, Joel 2. 16. much more from music, Dan. 6. 18.
and from all recreations whatsoever. It is spoken of therefore as a foul
sin, Esa. 58. 3. Behold in the day of ^our fasting ye find pleasure.

Fourthly, We must also abstain from the works of our calling, not only
servil^; (as on other holy days, Levit 23 7, 8, 21, 25, 35.) but on the
Sabbath, and on the fast day all works are forbidden, Levit 16. 29, and 23,
28, 31. and that upon no small penalty, Levit. 23. 30. Whatsoever soul it be
that does any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among
his people.

Fifthly, and lastly, We must also upon the fast day make some abatement of our
natural rest, and sleep, 2 Samuel 12. 16. David fasted, and went in, and lay all
night upon the earth; and Joel 1. 13. Ly all night in sackcloth, ye ministers
of my God; which it was not possible for them to do without some abatement of
their ordinary rest, and sleep. And the reason of this is evident, because as
ordinary, and much sleep is a great means of satisfaction, and contentment to
the body (I said my bed shall comfort me, says Joel 7. 13. my couch shall ease
my complaint) so does the want of it afflict the body much, as appears also
by Jobs complaint. VVearisome nights are appointed to me (says he Job 7. 3,
4.) when I lie down, Isay, when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
fall of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.

And this separation, and restraint of our selves from these four things must
continue during the space of one whole day, that is four and twenty hours. No
fast we read of in Scripture continued for any less time. And we have express
commaundment we should keep it as a Sabbath, Levit. 16. 31. It shall be a
Sabbath of rest unto you. Yea in this very point we should keep it as a
Sabbath, Levit. 23. 32. It shall begin in the ninth day (of the seventh mo^^h)
at even; from even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. Now before I
proceed to give you the reasons why this abstinence, and restraining of our
selves in these four things should be so necessary upon the day of our fast, I
must give you certain cautions to prevent the mistaking of this Doctrine.

First; Caution 1.
That this outward abstinence is not the chief part of a true fast, not the
chief help to our prayers, the inward humiliation of the soul is far more
acceptable to God, and has more force to make our prayers pierce the Heavens
then all this. Bodily exercise profits little (says the Apostle 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and such are all these four parts of abstinence that you have heard of) But
godliness (whereof the inward afflicting of the soul, and mortifying of our
lusts is a chief part) is profitable unto all things. Rent your hearts, and not
your garments, says the Prophet Joel 2. 13. Nay the restraining of our selves
in these four things is in it self no service of God nor acceptable at all
unto him, further then as it is a help to the inward humiliation of the heart,
and even animated by it. That that is said of the one of these may be fitly
said of all, Mat. 15. 11. That which goes into the mouth defiles not a man:
and Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God (consists not in) meat or drink.

Secondly, Caution 2.
That these outward signs, and helps to humiliation must be increased
according to the increase, and urgency of the cause. As there be degrees in
Gods judgments on a land, or family, or person, some more general then other
some, some more extreme then other some, seven times more grievous as the Lord
speaks, Levit. 26. 24. and such as do more deeply affect the heart; so ought
these outward signs, and helps of our humiliation, be proportionable
thereunto. Whereas ordinarily the fasts we read of lasted but a day (Levit.
23. 32. from even to even. Judge. 20. 26. they fasted that day until even. 2 Samuel 1. 12. they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even) the fast we read
of, Esth. 4. 16. was kept three days and three nights together.

If any man shall ask me, does not that example bind us? I answer three
things. 1. That we in these Northern Climates are not able to forbear meat so
long as they in those Countries were. (Experience teaches us that the Spaniard
and Italian needs not meat so much as we.) 2. We have not (blessed be God) the
like occasion. That judgment was so extreme, general, presently imminent, as
they might well hold out their fast so long with feeling, and affection; which
is the maine thing to be looked unto in this case, and without hope, and
likelihood of that, the injoyning of the other were but gross hypocrisy, as
is plain by that speech of our Savior, Matthew. 15. 7, 8. 3. From that example
we learn, that though we cannot keep so long a time without any intermission
as they did, yet when God shall increase the causes and occasions of our
humiliation, we may and ought to increase and multiply our fasts in that manner
as the men of Iabesh Gilead did, 1 Samuel 31. 13. they f^sted seven days. Which
also justifies this most Christian and religious decree of our King and State,
in injoyning (during this time of so great calamity) a general fast to be kept
every week.

Thirdly, Caution 3.
That this law of outward abstinence in the days of our humiliation must give
place to the necessity of man; necessity (said I) yea even unto decency and
convenience also in some sort. Though we must on the fasting day abridge our
selves in our apparel, yet may we have respect to comeliness in our apparel
even on that day. We may not disguise our bodies, or make them ridiculous, as
our Savior notes it to have been the fashion of hypocrites to do. They
disfigure their faces (says He, Mat. 6. 16.) that they may appear unto men to
fast. It is required even of the Minister, and so likewise of other men, to be
(...), comely and decent even that way, 1 Timothy 3. 2. So though we must for the
whole day of our humiliation abstain from all food, yet such as cannot fast so
long without evident danger 1. either of their health, or 2 of making
themselves unfit to perform the spiritual duties of the day, may lawfully eat
something upon the fast day. Two things will make this evident.

First, The rest of the Sabbath (which is as strictly enjoined as abstinence at
a fast, yet) might be lawfully broken for the preservation of a man's life, as
we see in Eliahs travel (1 King. 19. 8.) five or six Sabbaths together; yea
for the preservation of the life of a beast, Luke 14. 5. yea for the
preservation of the health of a beast, Luke 13. 15. For, God delights more in
mercy, than in any external works even of His own s^rvice, Mat. 12. 7.

Secondly, This abstinence is enjoined but for a help to our prayers, and
other spiritual duties; when once it cease to be a help, and proves an
hinderance to them, then is it of no worth with God. I grant that such as
cannot thus abstain, cannot keep a fast; but yet may they keep a day of
humiliation in as acceptable and effectual a manner, as they that can fast
best. Provided, 1. that they abuse not this liberty, and pretend necessity when
there is none; but remember that they have herein to deal with God which
knows their heart, 1 These. 2. 4. Gal. 5. 13. Brethren, ye are called unto
liberty, only use not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh. 2. That that
which they eat upon the day of humiliation, be neither for quantity nor quality
such, but that they may still preserve in themselves such a feeling of the want
of food as may afflict nature, as we see Daniel did, Dan. 10. 3. I eat no
pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine within my mouth, neither did I
anoint my self at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.

Now for the reasons and grounds of the Doctrine, Reason
why such bodily exercises (especially this abstinence) must be used upon the
days of our humiliation, I need go no further than this; that God has
ordained them in His Word, as you have heard; and therefore we may be assured,
1. They are useful and profitable for us* For, whatsoever He commands us to
do, is for our good, Deuteronomy. 10. 13. 2. That He will make them effectual to His
people unto those ends He has ordained them for. Teach them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you (says our Savior, Mat. 28. 20.) and
lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. And those ends are
three principally.

First, to further and help forward the inward Ier. 5. 7, 8. When I fed them
to the full, then they committed adultery, etc. they were as fed horses in the
morning, etc. so the abridging of it in these things is effectual to weaken
and abate the strength of sin, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body, and bring
it into subjection. By this we take revenge of our selves, which is a great
help unto true repentance, as the Apostle shows, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

Mar. 9. 29. This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

Ahab, 1 King. 21. 29. Because he humbles himself before me, therefore I will
not bring the evil in his days; and of Rehoboam and his Princes, They have
humbled themselves (says the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7.) therefore I will not
destroy them: and Verse 12. When Rehoboam humbled himself, the wrath of the
Lord turned from him; and yet had these no truth of grace in them. In which
respect (Though 1. No man can please God in his fast, nor find sound comfort to
his soul in it, that is not in his heart troubled for his sin, does not
unfainedly repent, that cannot pray, that does not believe. We know (says the
man that was borne blind, Ioh. 9. 31.) that God hears not sinners. And
without faith it is impossible to please God, says the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6. 2.
Though no man be fit to keep a private and voluntary fast, that is a novice in
religion, and has not attained to some good measure of grace, for fear of
taking hurt, and being made the worse by it; according to that speech of our
Savior, Luke 5. 36, 37. The new piece will make the rent greater, the new wine
will burst the bottels. Yet) in public and general calamities they may be
enjoined to keep a fast that have no such measure of grace in them, as we see,
Joel 1. 14. Gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the land into the
house of the Lord: and 2 16. Gather the children, and those that suck the
breasts. Yea it has g^eatly furthered the efficacy of the prayers of Gods own
people, when in such a case all have come (tag and rag, as we say) to join
with them in this service, as I noted to you the last day out of Judge. 20. 26.

If any man shall object, Object.
God will not hear hypocrites and wicked men, Job 27. 9. Will God hear his
cry? and if I regard iniquity in my heart (says David, Psalm. 66. 18.) the Lord
will not hear me.

I answer, It is true; such can have no assurance that God will hear them or
respect their prayers, Answ.
because they have no promise. Godliness has the promises, says the Apostle,
1 Timothy 4. 8. All Gods promises belong to the godly, and to them only. But yet
for temporal blessings God has often had respect to the cries even of such as
have had no truth of grace; as is plain Genesis 21. 17. God heard the voice of
Ishmael: and Psalm. 78. 38. Many a time (upon their prayers whom he had
described, Verse. 37.) turned He His anger away.

For, 1. in this they were thus far no hypocrites, because they were heartily
sensible of Gods judgments, and desired unfainedly to be eased of them.
Therefore it is said, 2 Chronicles. 12. 6. The Princes of Israel and the King
humbled themselves.

2. This taking to heart of Gods judgments, and professing their humiliation,
and their yielding to the commandment of authority in this case (as in the
days of the Judges and Iehoshaphat we heard all the people did) these (I say)
were good things, and remainders of Gods image in them. In which respect the
Holy Ghost says, 2 Chronicles, 20. 12. In Judah the hand of God was to give them
one heart, to do the commandment of the King and of the Princes by the Word of
the Lord. And these remainders of His own image God loves wheresoever He sees
them, Mark 10. 21. Jesus beholding him loved him.

The Use this Doctrine serves unto, is,

First, Use 1.
For instruction to direct us how we should keep our fasts. Though this be a
Doctrinall point, and not so fit happily to work upon our affections as some
other might be, and such as does also concern but the outside of the true fast,
yet have I been the larger in it, because it may serve for a preparation to
all the fasts we shall keep hereafter; and the fruit and success of our fasts
depends on our performing of them in that manner God has appointed. Many that
are willing to obey God in this duty, may through ignorance fail in the right
manner of performing it, and so not only lose their labor, but offend God
further, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Lord our God (said David) made a breach upon us,
because we sought Him not in due order. And though God have in our fasts a
principal respect to our hearts, 1 Samuel 16. 7. yet looks He also for the
service of our bodies, specially in such exercises of public and solemn
profession, 1 Cor. 6. 28. Glorify God in your bodies, says the Apostle. And
though these you have heard be not the chief dutys to be performed at a fast,
yet are they duties commanded, and he that makes not conscience of the least
Commandment of God, can have no comfort in his estate, Psalm. 119. 6. Then
shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy commandments.

Secondly, For exhortation to us all to make conscience of every one of these
outward duties that have been commanded to us; that is

1. Of joining with the congregation in hearing the Word, even read as well as
preached. See what a reverend respect Gods people showed even to the Word read,
Nehem 8, 3. The ears of all the people were attentive unto the book of the
Law; and ver. 5. When Ezra opened the book (to read it) all the people stood
up. Make conscience to join with the congregation in those prayers that are
read as well as in those that are co^ceaved. For those that are read are holy,
and good prayers, and all the congregation should make their prayers and
supplications with one accord, as they did, Act. 1. 14. Hold thy self bound to
join with the congregation in singing of Psalms also. See how well God showed
himself to be pleased with this duty, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22. When they began to
sing, and to praise; the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon,
etc.

2. Of giving according to thy ability some what to the poor, Luke 21. 23.
Christ took notice of them that contributed, and praised the poor widow.

3. To make it a day of restraint in the matter of food of all sorts, so far
as thy health will permit; in the matter of thy apparel so far as decency
will permit; in the matter of thy delights of all sorts; and in the matter of
thy worldly affairs.

Yea 4. Of holding out in these duties a whole day.

5. Take heed of hypocrisy, and thinking that thy performance of these outward
things will serve thy turn, and merit at Gods hands. When our Savior saw what
an innumerable multitude of people came to hear him, in so much that they
trod one upon another (Luke 12. 1.) he began to say to his Disciples, first
of all, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy. And this
caveat we have all just cause to give to you in such great assemblies as this
is (specially at our solemn feasts) take heed of hypocrisy, Rest not in, nor
bless your selves in the deed you have done; but refer these outward things
unto those right ends, which I have told you they were ordained for. And
remember always that speech of the Apostle, Romans 2. 29. He is a lew which is
one inwardly, and circumcision (so is humiliation also) is that of the heart,
in the spirit not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

Thirdly, Use 3.
For reproof of sundry abuses which are chief causes why our fasts prevail no
more with God.

First, Such are to be reproved as refuse to join with Gods people in this
duty, and will not separate themselves from their profits, and delights, no not
so much as one day in a month, though God calls them to it, and the King also
commands them to do it. But like them of Ephraim and M^nasseh (of whom we
read, 2 Chronicles. 30. 10.) are ready to laugh the officers to scorn, and to mock
them that in the Kings name require them to do it.

Let no man say, had we not better have their room then their company? What
good can we hope to receive by having such as they, to join with us in our
fasts? For (as you have heard) the coming of all in this case, would do us
good, and further our prayers; and this open contempt that such men in all
parts do show, may make us all fare the worse. You therefore that are officers
do what you can to restrain them from their labors, and to bring them
hither. Remember that you are also comprehended in the number of those servants
to whom the charge is given, Luke 14. 23. Go out, and compel them to come in
that my house may be filled.

Secondly, Such as do come, and join with us (though they do that also but
by the halves) but so soon as they are gone forget the occasion of our fasts,
remember no longer the affliction of Ios^ph, give themselves as full liberty to
all delights and jollity as if there were no judgment at all upon the land.
Mark well how God complains of them that in a time of common calamity, did
give themselves liberty even in lawful delights. Mark well that speech, that
you shall find, Esa. 22. 14. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you
till ye dye, says the Lord of Hosts. Why what had they done? See that verse,
13. Behold joy, and gladn^sse, slaying of Oxen, and killing of Sheep, eating of
Flesh, and drinking of Wine. Why what evil, or unlawfulness was there in all
this? True; but this was that that so much provoked the Lord that they gave
themselves to this jollity at such a time as the Lord God of Hosts did (by his
judgments) call them to weeping, and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding
with sack cloth; as we read, verse 12. That they did this, with contempt of
Gods judgments, saying and resolving with themselves thus profanely, and
desperately, as verse 13. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall dye.
And what unlawfulness was there in that which Amos so much complains of Ames
6. 4. 6. In lying upon beds of lvory, or in stretching themselves upon their
couches, or in eating the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the stall; or in chaunting to the sound of the Viol, and inventing to
themselves instruments of music like David; or in drinking Wine in bowls, and
anointing themselves with the chief ointments? Were any of these things
unlawful? No, but because they did this in such a time, as Joseph (the Church
of God) was in great affliction; because they did hereby declare that they were
not grieved for the affliction of Joseph; because they did by th^se means put
far away from them the evil day, as the Prophet speaks, verse. 3. and made
themselves forgetful, and senseless of Gods judgment; therefore was the Lord
so highly offended with them for it. Consider of these places (well beloved)
and you will easily discern, that in such evil times as these are, in times
of great calamity, either upon our selves or upon our brethren, we must all of
us some what abridge our selves both in our feasts, and in our bravery, and in
our lawf^ll delights of all sorts whatsoever. When the Lords sword is sharpened
to make a sore slaughter (says the Prophet Eze. 21. 10.) when it is furbished
that it may glister (much less when we see it has a^^eady made a great
slaughter among our brethren, as we now see it has, and is even dyed red with
their blood) should we then make mirth? And if the Lord will not allow us in
such times the free use of our most lawful delights, what will the Lord say
then to the mirth used even in this time of common calamity in our alehouses,
and at our wakes where lewd men of all sorts assemble themselves by troops,
Ier. 5. 7. to provoke one another to all kind of lewdness? Will there be any
hope our fasts shall do much good while our disordred wakes are continued, and
frequented so in such times as these are?

Thirdly, Such as having power in their hand do not endeavor to find out, and
reform the causes of the plague. Though Joshua, and all the Elders of Israel
should fall upon their faces, and cry never so fervently, they can do no good
till Achan be found out, and punished, Josh. 7. And what hope then can we have
to prevail in our fasts, while no care is taken to find out Achan? The
idolater is an Achan; and so is the murderer; and so is the adulterer, and so
is the bl^sphemer, and so is the drunkard. And there is power not in Joshua
only, but in every officer among us, yea in every man almost to find out our
Achans, and bring them to punishment. Our Achans are not so close as that man
was; our Achans do not hide their accursed things as he did, Josh. 7. 21.
Endeavor every one of you to find them out and suppress them, or else our
fasts will be of small force with God.

SERMON IV.
Sept. 14. 1625.
NOw it follows that we observe further the inward affection, and disposition
of David's heart in this his extraordinary prayer, he humbled, or afflicted his
soul. And here we must (for the opening of the words and phrase) see what is
meant by the humbling, and afflicting of his soul; and how that is done, for
the understanding whereof three things must be observed.

first, That the soul as well as the body is subject both to prosperity (a
blessed, and comfortable estate) and to adversity also, a woeful and afflicted
state and condition; and that not only in the life to come but even in this
life also. For the first, See 3. Ioh. 2. I wish thou may prosper, and be in
health even as thy soul prospers; and for the other, See Psalm. 31. 7. Thou
have considered my trouble, thou have known my soul in adversities.

Secondly, That as the prosperity, happiness, and glory of the soul consists
in inwardpeace, tra^quility and joy, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God is
righteousness, and peace and joy of the Holy Ghost; so that which humbles,
and afflicts it is sorrow and fear, and such like affections, which are
therefore called the passions and perturbations of the soul, Prove. 12. 25.
Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, that is that that humbles it.
Yea these affections of sorrow and fear do afflict the soul, and put it to
pain even as pricks, and wounds and the stinging of a Serpent would do the
body. So it is said. Act. 2. 37. They were pricked in their hearts, when by
Peter's sermon they were brought to sound grief of heart for sin, and fear
of Gods wrath. So Prove. 23. 32. Sin is said at last to bite like a Serpent,
and sting like an Adder, by reason of the extreme anguish which through
sorrow, and fear i^ puts the soul unto.

Thirdly, That sometimes the Lord himself does thus afflict, and humble the
soul with sorrow, and fear, Job 5. 18. He wounds, and his hands make
whole; and the strokes that he gives prove usually extreme, and intolerable,
Psalm. 51. 8. That the bones that thou have broken may rejoice. The Lords
strokes broke his bones, Prove. 18. 14. A wounded spirit who can bear? That is
when the wound is given by Gods hand, Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God; and sometimes Gods people (for the
preventing of this) have voluntarily afflicted, and humbled their own souls,
by provoking themselves to sorrow, and fear whereby their souls might be
humbled, knowing well, 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves we should
not be judged of the Lord. And so did David in this place, I humbled, and
afflicted my soul by fasting. So says he also, Psalm. 69. 10. I wept and
chastned my soul by fasting. And this the Apostle in joines the faithful to
do, Iam. 4. 9. Be afflicted (he means not bear or suffer the afflictions God
lays upon you, but afflict your selves, as appears in the next words) and
mourn and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning and your joy into
heaviness.

So then if we would know the reason why David did fast at this time, (...). 4.
it was to humble, and afflict his soul, to work his soul to sorrow, and
grief: And what meant he in this his extraordinary prayer for these men to
afflict his soul thus? Surely it was to make his prayer more available with
God for them. And from this his practice and example, this Doctrine arises for
our instruction.

That the chief use of a religious fast is to humble, Doct. 4.
and afflict the soul with sorrow, and grief; and a chief thing that makes our
prayer effectual with God is the inward humiliation, and sorrow of our souls
from whence they do proceed. Two branches there be (you see) of this doctrine,
and I will handle them distinctly.

First, Branch. 1.
A religious fast serves chiefly to this end, to humble, and afflict the soul.
So Esa. 58. 5. The fast that God has chosen (is called) a day for a man to
afflict his soul in. This is a duty commanded upon the fast day, Joel 2. 13.
Rend your hearts, and not your garments. See how this is enjoined, Levit. 23.
29. Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted upon that day, shall
be cut off from his people. So our Savior gives this for a reason why his
Disciples could keep no fasts because they could not mourn while the
bridegroom was with them, Math. 9. 15. So that no man can keep a fast well
that cannot mourn, that has not an humbled and troubled soul in him on that
day.

Therefore we read that Gods people in their fasts were wont to weep much, and
that not only in private, and secret fasts, as Nehem. 14. I sat down, and
wept, and mourned certain days and fasted, and prayed before the God of
Heaven; but in public also, Ezr. 10. 1. When Ezra prayed, and made confession
of sins weeping, and casting himself down before the house of God, there
assembled unto him a very great congregation, and the people wept very sore.
Yea God commands his people to do so at such times. When God calls us to
keep fasts he calls us to weeping, and to mourning, Esa, 22. 12. So Joel 2. 12.
Turn you to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning.

And for the second branch of the Doctrine. A chief thing that makes the
prayers of Gods people at a fast or at any other time most powerful and
effectual with God, is the humiliation, and sorrow of the soul, from which
those prayers do proceed. See the proof of this in the most powerful fasts
that we read of, I^dg. 20. 26. In that fast wherein Israel prevailed with God
for success against the Benjamites after two notable foils before, there were
many tears shed, all Israel wept before the Lord, yet were there above ten
thousand of as valiant men as ever drew sword. In the fast that was kept in
Samuels time at Mizpeh, whereby Israel obtained a mavelous victory against
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7. 10. The Lord thundered with a great thunder upon the
Philistines on that day, the people wept so abundantly that they are said,
verse 6. to have drawn water (as by bucket fuls) and to have powered it out
before the Lord. Neither has this been found true at fasts only, but at all
times the more the heart of him that prays is humbled, the more power shall
his prayer have with God. See this in four notable examples.

1. It was a powerful prayer that Jacob made when he had power over the
Angel, and prevailed, Hos. 12. 4. But mark the story and you shall find he was
marvellously humbled, when he did so marvellously prevail: Christ wrastled
with him, and smote his thigh out of joint, Genesis 32. 25. and Hos. 12. 4. it is
said he wept, and prayed.

2. It was a powerful prayer that Hannah the mother of Samuel made, when she
that was barren by nature, obtained a son by it; but Anna was greatly
humbled, and afflicted in soul when she made that prayer, 1 Samuel 1. 10. She
was in bitterness of soul, and prayed to the Lord, and wept sore.

3. It was a powerful prayer that Hezekiah made in his sickness, which
reversed the sentence that God had given him notice of, by his Prophet, and
procured fifteen years more to be added to his life, 2 King. 20. But what
was it, that made it so powerful? Surely it was the sorrow, and humiliation of
his heart. For so the Lord bids the Prophet tell him, 2 King. 20. 5. I have
heard thy prayer and have seen thy tears.

4. Lastly, It was a most powerful prayer whereby Manasseh (one of the
horriblest sinners that ever lived) prevailed so far that God was entreated
of him, and heard his supplication, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. But when made he that
prayer? See verse 12. When he had humbled himself greatly before the Lord.
Therefore it is noted by the Prophet to be the ordinary course of the
afflicted soul, that he may prevail in his prayer, Lam. 3. 29. He puts
his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. To breed hope in himself,
that God will regard and show respect to his prayer, he abaseth, and humbles
himself in the lowest manner that he can. In so much as upon these manifold
experiments, Gods people have grown wonderfully confident in this, that when
they could bring their hearts to this humiliation and sorrow, their prayers
then should certainly prevail with God. See therefore how they have pleaded
tears even before God, Psalm. 39. 12. Hear my prayer O Lord, give care to my
cry, hold not thy peace at my tears, and Psalm. 6. 6. All the night long I make
my bed to swim, I water my couch with my tears, and verse 8. The Lord has
heard the voice of my weeping. As if he should have said, My tears cried
louder then my tongue could do, and the Lord had more respect to my tears
then to my words. The Lord (I tell you) makes precious account of the tears of
his people, Psalm. 56. 8. Put thou my tears in thy bottle, are they not in thy
book?

The reasons, Two sorts of reasons.
and grounds of this Doctrine are worthy to be inquired into; and the reason
of two things must be inquired of. 1. What have been the causes of that
sorrow, and humiliation that Gods people have been wont to afflict their
souls with, and which God has had so much respect unto. 2. What are the
reasons why God has had such delight in this to see his people thus humbled,
and afflicted in their souls.

For the first, we shall find that the reason, and ground of the sorrow of Gods
children, that God has been so much delighted in, has been no wordly thing.
I deny not but they have also their worldly sorrows, but those make them never
a whit the more acceptable to God. We read of diverse that have had their
hearts afflicted, and humbled in great measure, and yet their sorrow pleased
God never a whit, nor made their prayers ever a whit the more powerful with
him. Nabals heart was heavy, and sorrowful enough, 1 Samuel 25. 37. It dyed
within him, for grief, and fear, and became as a stone: and so was Judas his
heart heavy enough, Mat. 27. 34. And when Esau had lost the blessing, and
birthright irrecoverably, Genesis 27. 34. He cried out with a great and exceeding
bitter cry. Yea, even at fasts many have afflicted their souls with sorrow,
and pleased God never a whit, nor prayed ever a whit the better, Esa. 58. 3.
Wherefore have we afflicted our soul and thou take no knowledge? and Zach.
7. 3. Should I weep in the fifth month separating my self as I have done these
so many years? The Lord denies not that they afflicted their souls, and wept
in their fasts, but says, Zach. 7. 5. they did it not unto him, they respected
not the Lord, but themselves in their sorrow, it was not a sorrow according to
God. Mark therefore the difference of this sorrow of the godly, from the other
in four grounds, and reasons of their sorrow.

First, The godly have afflicted their souls with sorrow, for the afflictions
of others out of a compassion, and fellow f^eling they have had of their
miseries. So did David here. This pleases God well as we may see, in the
comfort that Job took in it, Job 30. 25. Did not I weep for him that was in
trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor? So Ier. 13. 17. Mine eye shall
weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lords flock is carried away
captive. This would please God well, if we could afflict our selves. 1. For
that fearful sickness, whereby God sweeps away so many of our brethren, in
so uncomfortable a manner, they dye in our high ways, and in our fields
without all means of comfort. 2. For the poverty this brings on them that
escape. 3. For the captivity of the Lords flock in Bohemia, and the Palatinate.

Secondly, The godly have afflicted their souls with sorrow, when the Lord
has showed himself to be angry with them, either by threatening them by his
Word and Prophets, or by executing his judgments upon them.

For the first, see two notable examples. The one, Judge. 2. 2, 5. When the Lord
by his messenger had chidden Israel, for making a league with the Cananites,
and not throwing down their altars; and threatened that therefore he would not
drive them out of their land, but they should be as thorns in their sides,
and their Gods should be a snare to them, they lift up their voice and wept,
and there was such weeping there, as the name of that place was called Bochim.
The other example is Iosia, he was humbled in his soul, and wept when he but
heard the Lords threats against Judah, read out of the book of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Because thine heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self
before the Lord thy God, when thou heardst his words against this place, and
humbledst thy self before me, and did rent thy clothes, and weep before me,
I have even heard thee says the Lord. Wherein also we may observe, how well
God is pleased to see his people fall into these passions of fear, and sorrow
when he by his word does rebuke and threaten them. Which the Lord also
professes, Esa. 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even to him that is
poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word. So when God has
showed himself to be angry, and displeased with them by executing any of his
judgments upon them, they have then been wont, and it was their duty then, to
afflict their souls. If her father (says the Lord of Miriam, Number. 12. 14.)
had but spit in her face should she not be ashamed seven days? See a plain
proof of this, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. If I send pestilence among my people, if my
people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face. Mark, not their
own loss by the judgment should trouble them so much, as Gods anger, and
therefore in their prayer they seek Gods face, and favor above all things.
And this is very pleasing unto God, to see his people humble themselves so
under the strokes of his hand. See a notable example of this, 2 Chronicles. 12. 3,
4. Shishak King of Egypt came against Jerusalem with a mighty Army, and took
the fenced Cities that pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem. See what
followed, 2 Chronicles. 12. 6. The Princes of Israel, and the King humbled
themselves, and they said, the Lord is righteous. And what followed upon that,
verse 7. And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the
Lord came to Shemajah, saying, they have humbled themselves, therefore I will
not destroy them.

Thirdly, When they have seen God dishonored by the sins of others, then have
they also mourned, and afflicted their souls. Jeremy professes, 13* 17. If
you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. So
David professes, that the Zeal of Gods house (the inward vexation of his
soul through zealous sorrow, and indignation for the neglect, and profanation
of Gods worship) had even eaten him up, and consumed him, Psalm. 69. 9.
Specially the foul sins that they have known in the places (Towns,
Congregations, Families,) where themselves lived. So it is said of Lot, 2 Pet.
2. 8. That righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing, and hearing vexed his
righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. So Paul says, the
Corinthians should have done, 1 Cor. 5. 2. Ye are puffed up and have not rather
mourned. And see how highly God is pleased with this when his people can mourn
for this cause, Ezekiel. 9. 4. And the Lord said unto him (that was clothed with
linen, and had the writers inkhorne by his side) Go through the midst of the
City, through the mids of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the
men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof.

Fourthly and lastly, The chief cause why they have been so given to mourning,
and weeping, why they have afflicted themselves so much, has been their own
sins, whereby themselves have offended, and dishonored God. This David
professes was the cause why his sorrow was continually before him, he was
sorry for his sin, Psalm. 38. 16. 17. This was the cause why Mary Magdalen
wept so abundantly that she was able to wash Christ's feet, with her tears,
she was a sinner, Luke 7. 37, 38. This sorrow God wonderfully delights in more
then in all outward worship whatsoever, Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are
a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

Now come we to the second inquiry, to find out the true causes and reasons of
this, why God should so much desire and delight to see His people humbled with
sorrow, to see them afflict and chasten their souls in this manner. It is said
of Him, that He has pleasure in the prosperity of His servants, Psalm. 35 27.
that He does not afflict willingly, Lam. 3. 33. that in all the afflictions of
His people He is afflicted, Esa. 63. 9. And indeed it is true that our sorrows
in themselves please not God, but only in respect.

First, of the causes and fountains from whence they proceed; that is, 1. They
are the work of His own Spirit. It is the Spirit of God only that gives to
any man such a fleshy and soft heart, as we may see by that promise, Ezekiel. 11.
19. I will give them one heart, and will put a new spirit within you: and I
will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of
flesh: And I will power upon them my spirit, and they shall mourn abundantly,
says the Lord, Zach. 12. 10. And God must needs take pleasure in the work of
His own grace and holy Spirit. 2. These tears proceed from our love to God.
Kindness (you know) causes tears more than any thing else; so it is in this
case. Christ says of the woman that wept so abundantly, that she loved much,
Luke 7. 47. And that which makes men most of all to mourn for sin, is the
Spirit of grace, which persuades us of Gods free love to us, and that Christ
was pierced by and for us, Zach. 12. 10. And this (above many other works of
His Spirit) God greatly delights in, 1 Cor. 8. 3. If any man love God, the
same is known of Him.

Secondly, In respect of the end that this sorrow tends unto, the issue and
effect of it the Lord greatly delights in it. He sees we have need of it, 1
Pet. 1. 6. Now for a season (if need be) you are in heaviness. The Lord sees
it will do us much good, and therefore He is so well pleased with it, Eccles.
7. 3. By the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. 1. It makes
us more capable of every grace of God, and fitter to receive it. As the vessel
that is full can receive no good liquor, but all is spilt that is powered upon
it, and the emptier it is, the more it will receive. So is it in this case,
Iam. 4. 6. God will give grace to the humble. For knowledge, Psalm. 25. 9. The
meek will He teach His way: and for comfort, 2 Cor. 7. 6. God comfort those
that are cast down. 2. It works repentance unto salvation; and the heart is
never wont to be truly turned unto God and changed, but the change begins here,
2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation not to be repented
of. 3. It makes Christ and Gods Word and Promises sweet unto us, and all Gods
mercies to relish well, as hunger makes us relish our meat, and thirst our
drink, Prove. 27. 7. The full soul loatheth an hony-combe, but to the hungry
soul every bitter thing is sweet. The prodigal, when he had been pinched
with hunger, would have been glad with all his heart to have fared as his
fathers servants did, Luke 15. 19. O what sweetness found Paul in Christ? I
determined (says he) not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and
Him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. And what made his taste so good? He had been deeply
humbled in sense of his sins, as appears plainly by this, that he counted
himself less than the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. and the chiefest of all
the sinners that Christ came to save, 1 Timothy 1. 15. And what sweetness did
David find in Gods Word, and promises, Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet are thy words
unto my taste? Yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. And how came he to this? O he
had been greatly humbled with sense of sin as appears, Psalm. 40. 12.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me so that I am not able to look up: they are more then the hairs of mine
head, therefore my heart fails me. Yea this makes all Gods mercies relish
well, and our hearts to rejoice, and be thankful for them; a farthing token,
is to a very poor man most acceptable. This we shall see in Jacobs example,
he vowed great thankfulness to God if he would give him but bread to eat
and raiment to put on, as we see, Genesis 28. 20. because he was so humbled in
the sense of his own unworthiness, and could say, Genesis 32. 10. I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies.

4. It makes them seek to God more earnestly, and pray more fervently. As it
is said of our Savior himself, Luke 22. 44. that being in an agony, he prayed
more earnestly; his inward abasement through anguish of soul did add much to
the fervency of his prayer; So it is also with all his members, they never pray
so fervently, as when they are most humbled and afflicted in spirit: Lord in
trouble have they visited thee (says the Prophet Esa. 26. 16.) they poured out
a prayer when thy chastning was upon them.

5. And lastly, It makes a man fit to walk, and converse with God, no man can
be fit to do so till then, Mic. 6. 8. The Lord requires we should humble our
selves to walk with our God. We can never walk, nor converse with God til we
can humble our selves. And that both, 1. In respect of the Lord, who can not
delight to converse with any till he be humbled; as no great man will be
familiar with a saucy unmannerly fool, that knows not how to carry himself
before his betters, nor to give due respect unto him. God cannot abide that
flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. and 2 Samuel 22. 28. The
afflicted people thou will save: but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou
may bring them down. The more we are humbled in our selves, the more the
Lord delights in us, to be, and converse with us. Though the Lord be high
(says the Psalmist, Psalm. 138. 6.) yet has he respect unto the lowly, but
the proud he knows afar of. And Esa. 57. 15. He will dwell with him that is
of a contrite, and humble spirit.

2. In respect of our selves we are never fit to walk with God, till we be
truly humbled. We cannot serve God so as to please him till we can do it with
reverence, and fear, Heb. 12. 28. Till then we cannot hear the word as we
should. All thy saints are in thine hands (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 3.) and they
are humbled at thy feet, to receive thy words. Till then we can never pray as
we should. Till we can consider* God is in the heaven (of high and
incomprehensible majesty) and we upon earth, base and vile worms, we shall be
apt to be rash with our mouths, and our heart will be hasty to utter any thing
before God, as Solomon speaks, Eccle. 5. 2. Till then men will never be
fearful to offend him; no we can never know him nor our selves rightly till
we have been soundly humbled. I have heard of thee (says Job 42. 4.) by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee. Job had a true, and saving
knowledge of God before (as he had also been truly humbled in soul before)
but nothing to that he had, when God had thoroughly humbled him. And so it is
said of Manasseh. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. 13. That when he was in affliction, and had
humbled himself greatly; then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. Till
then we cannot yield any acceptable and constant obedience unto God. Ier. 44.
10. They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor
walked in my Law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you, and before your
fathers.

SERMON V.
October. 12. 1625.
TWo Uses this Doctrine serves unto principally, Use.
First for exhortation, and then for comfort.

And first to exhortus, 1.
that we would all of us strive to a^teine to this grace that David here
speaks of, and has been commended unto us in this Doctrine; that is, to be
able to afflict our own souls with godly sorrow. And for my better proceeding
in handling of this use, and for the help of your memory, and edification, I
will deliver unto you, 1. The motives whereby you may be provoked to seek this
grace. 2. The means you must use for the atteyning of it. 3. The signs and
tokens whereby you may discern it.

First, Motives, I say; for you had need to have forcible reasons showed you
why you should desire it; none of us desire it as we ought, most men abhor
all sorrow; they put far away the evil day, Amos 6. 3. and give themselves to
all means of mirth, that they can devise Amos 6. 5, 6. And even in these times
wherein the Lord by so many means calls to mourning, and to weeping, behold
joy, and gladness, every where as it was in the Prophets time, Esa, 22. 12,
13. Every man's heart is in the house of mirth, Eccle. 7. 4. You had need
therefore have forcible motives given you to persuade you to seek, and labor
for godly sorrow, for an afflicted and humbled heart. In the stone of the kidny
or bladder men need not be persuaded to desire or seek remedy, but in the
stone of the heart they do.

First, Motive 1.
Consider the examples of Gods servants, whom God in his Word has commended to
us, and whom we count happy men, as the Apostle speaks, Iam. 5. 11. and we
shall see they were men of tender hearts, they were deeply humbled, and much
given to mourning and weeping for their sins, David was much given to weeping
for sin, he spent whole nights in weeping abundantly, Psalm. 6. 6. And Peter
when he repented wept bitterly, Mat. 26. 75. and Paul was so humbled all his
days for the sins he committed before his calling, that he counted himself
not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15 9 Yea he judged himself less
then the least of all Saints, Ep. 3. 8. Yea they have been brought to the very
point and brink of despair, before they could come to comfort. So was Asaph
when he cried, Psalm. 73, 26. My flesh and my heart fails. And so was Heman
when he complained, Psalm. 88. 15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted.
And so was David also when he said thus in his prayer unto God, Psalm. 40. 12.
Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so as I am not able to look up, they
are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me.

But these were fouler sinners (thou will say) then ever thou were. I will show
thee therefore examples of such as whose sins were as small as thine. Job was
never tainted with so foul sins as thou have been; and yet his eyes were
wont to pour out tears unto God, 16. 20. He for that very forwardness and
impatiency he showed in so great affliction abhorred himself, and repented in
dust, and ashes, Job 42. 6. David's heart was so soft and tender, that it smote
him when he had but cut off the skirt of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5. The poor
man whose child Christ dispossessed burst out into tears even for the
weakness of his faith, Mar. 9. 24. Paul was marvellously humbled even for his
original sin, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

Consider these examples well, and thou must needs conclude with thy self; 1.
Surely it must needs be a good thing; 2. Surely it must needs be a necessary
thing, that all Gods people have been so much given unto; Surely I have as
much cause as they had to weep, and be deeply humbled for my sins.

But I will give thee another example far greater then all these thy blessed
Savior that had no sin, was much given to mourning, and weeping for the the
sins that thou, and such as thou art have committed, Mar. 3. 5. He mourned
for the hardness of the hearts, even of his enemies; He wept over Jerusalem,
Luc. 19. 41. His soul was exceeding sorrowful, unto death, Mat. 26. 38. He
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying, and tears, Heb. 5. 7.

Say not I have the less cause to grieve for my sins, because he grieved so
much for them, Esaias 53. 4. Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our
sorrows.

For thou must become conformable unto him in his sufferings, or thou shall
never have comfort in them, Romans 8. 29. and 6. 5.

Say therefore to thine own soul, if all Gods people have been so apt to
weep and mourn, what am I?

But before I proceed to the second Motive, two questions and doubts must be
ansvered, that may arise from the first.

Can I not be in the state of grace, Object. 1.
unless I match these examples, and be so tender hearted, and apt to mourn as
they?

I answer, Answ. 1.
first thou may. All Gods children have not been humbled, nor broken in
heart in the same measure, and degree, and two reasons there be of the
difference.

First, In the persons themselves. Some of them have been more heinous sinners
then others. And according to the proportion of men's sins has, and must be the
measure of men's humiliation. The hainouser the sin, the deeper, and of the
longer continuance must the sorrow be.

Of Manaf^es it is said, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. He humbled himself greatly before
God. Of David, Psalm. 51. 8. that his anguish and sorrow for sin, was like to
the pain a man feels that has his bones broken. Of Mary Magdalen that she
wept so abundantly as she could wash Christ's feet with her tears, Luc. 7. 38.
Think upon this thou that have been guilty of murder, persecution,
whoredom, or such like heinous sins, thy sorrow must be proportionable to
the heinousness of thy sins.

The second reason of the difference is in the Lord, who is the only worker and
giver of this grace. For as in other graces he is pleased to give them in
greater measure to some of his elect, then to others, Mat. 13. 23. In some
elect ground, the seed of the Word yields but thirty, in some sixty, in some an
hundred fold. So is it in this.

Ordinarily the Lord uses by the spirit of bondage, and legal terrors to
prepare men to their conversion, and deeply to humble them, to give them the
spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15. But we read of no such thing in the first
conversion of Matthew: though he had been a Publican. For at his very first
conversion he made a great feast to Christ, Mat. 9. 9, 10. nor in those that
Peter converted, for though they were pricked in their hearts and deeply
humbled before they believed, Act. 2. 37. Yet did their sorrow, and fear
continue nothing so long upon them, as David's did, they quickly attained to
comfort in the assurance of pardon, Act. 2. 41. 46 Lydias example I do of
purpose omit, for she (though she believed not in Christ till she heard Paul,
Act. 16. 14. yet) was converted, and feared God before Verse 13.

Secondly, Answ. 2
Yet know this that all Gods elect. 1. Find in themselves this humiliation even
with legal terrors at one time or other. For Christ was sent to preach the
Gospel to none, but to the brokenhearted, to the captives, to the bruised,
Luke 4. 18. that is to such as had the spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15.

2. All Gods faithful, and true hearted people are in some true measure
humbled, and can mourn, and afflict their souls for sin, for they are all
often in scripture styled by this title. They are called the humble, Psalm. 34. 2.
an afflicted and poor people, Zeph. 3. 12. the poor of the fl^ck, Zac. 11. 7.
11. poor (he means) in spirit, Man. 5. 3. Psalm. 34 6, 3. They hold themselves
bound to aim at the best marks, and to strive to be like them that have most
excelled in this grace of brokennesse of spirit, and ability to mourn for sin,
Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be followers together of me, and mark them that walk
so, as ye have us for an ensample. Thou art then in a woeful case if thou
neither can mourn for thy sin, nor strivest to do it.

But yet there is a second question to be resolved. Quest. 2.
For we hear (may some say) that Job, and David, and Peter, and Paul, and
Hezechia, and Iosia, and Christ, have been much given to weeping, in their
mourning for sin they have wept much. Can I not be in the state of grace,
can I not have truly repented, nor been humbled for my sin, unless I can
do as they did, unless I can weep for my sin?

I answer* Answ. 1.
First, That the grief, and mourning for sin be absolutely necessary unto
unfeigned repentance, tears are not always so. And I will show you two reasons
of the difference that is to be observed between Gods people in this point.

First, The constitution of some men's bodies makes them much more unapt to
weep then others are.

Secondly, The very extremity of grief sometimes so oppresses, and
overwhelmeth men's hearts (as David complains of himself, Psalm. 143. 4. My
spirit is overwhelmed within me, my heart within me (...) desolate) as they
cannot ease themselves either by words or tears. Gods people have been often in
that extremity of grief as they could not pray, I mean not express in words
the desires of their heart, but with sighs, and groanings, Romans 8. 26. In
extremity of sorrow some men cannot weep. It is said of David, and his
company, 1 Samuel 30. 4. they had no more power to weep. So that I may say to
thee that if thou can, by the signs that I shall by and by give thee,
approve that thou art able soundly to mourn, and be humbled for thy sins,
though thou can not weep for them, thou may be in the state of grace for
all that.

But secondly, Answ. 2.
I answer, That if the constitution of thy body will serve thee to weep for
other things and yet thou could never weep for thy sins, surely thy case is
fearful. As to the man that can remember other things well enough, a tale, a
play, but a sermon, a chapter of the Bible, he cannot remember, and excuses
the matter thus, my memory is naught, I may say it is naught indeed with a
witness, it is sinfully, it is damnably naught; so to thee that can weep for
other things but not for sin, I may say, flatter not thy self but strive to
be able to do as thou hear other the good servants of God have done, and
that God has been so highly pleased with them for, strive to be able to
weep for thy sins.

The second motive to persuade you to seek for this grace, Motive 2.
is the consideration of the manifold promises God has made in his word to
them that can afflict their souls, and be rightly humbled for sins, and the
great benefit that this grace will bring with it.

First, Promise 1
This sorrow shall not be everlasting, Rev. 7. 17. but it shall end in comfort,
John 16. 20. Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy,
Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. It is appointed unto
them that mourn in Zion, that they shall have the ^ile of joy given them for
their mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heavines, Esa. 61. 3.
The Lord who is the father of mercies, and God of all consolation is called a God
that comfort al those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7. 6. Never found Gods
people that comfort in Gods mercy and in the assurance of the pardon of their
sins as when they have been most humbled, and able to weep most for their
sins, Esa. 29. 19. The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the
poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel. The day of humiliation
when Gods people afflict their souls before him, is called a day of
atonement, Levit. 23. 27. For so is Gods promise, Zac. 13. 1. In that day
there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness.

First, No man need fear he shall bring himself to desperation if he give
way to this tenderness of heart, and sorrowing for sin. For there is no such
medicine in the world to free thy heart from legal, and desperate fears, and
sorrows, and to bring thy heart to sweet peace, and comfort in God, as this
is, if thou could rightly mourn, and be humbled for thy sin. When those
poor wretches that had crucified Christ, and were pricked in their hearts,
with intolerable fears, and sorrows, and anguish of soul for it, and cried
out to the Apostles what shall we do? Act. 2. 37. Mark what remedy Peter
prescribes them, verse 38. Repent, says he. Why? Did they not repent already,
of that they had done? Yes, with legal repentance for endaungering themselves,
but his meaning is, repent and mourn that you have offended God. And indeed so
is Gods promise. Esaias 57. 15. I will dwell with him that is of a contrite, and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. He may be sure to have his heart revived, and comforted that
can be humbled enough.

Secondly, Yea there is no such remedy against wordly sorrow as this; if when
we feel our hearts dejected with any sorrow for any worldly cross, we would
labor to turn our heart from the consideration of the cross, to the
consideration of our sin that has been the cause of it. And this remedy you
shall find prescribed, Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does a living man complain,
(chafe, and fret, and disquiet himself) a man for the punishment of his
sins? let us search, and try our ways.

I beseech you lay this second Motive to your hearts every one of you. Applic.
1. Many of you never yet had any comfort in God, in the assurance of the
pardon of your sins, never found sweetness in Christ nor in Gods promises.
2. Many of you are much disquieted with legal and desperate fears. 3. Many of
you are always heavy hearted, sometimes by reason of crosses you meet with, and
sometimes you know not why. And what is the true cause of all this? You were
never yet rightly humbled for your sins. Why will you continue in this
uncomfortable estate? Learn to mourn and weep for thy sins, and that will
help all.

The second promise made unto it, Promise 2
and benefit this sorrow will bring, is, that it will make us capable of, and
able to thrive in every saving grace. This benefit you shall find pressed as a
motive unto this, 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6. God gives grace to the humble, humble your
selves therefore (says the Apostle) under the mighty hand of God. Iam. 4. 6,
7, 9. God gives grace to the humble, submit your selves therefore to God, be
afflicted, and mourn and weep. Men use not to come to the rock to be well
grounded, and settled in grace till they have dug deep, Luke 6. 48. Such
shall attain to a clear and certain, and sanctified knowledge of the truth,
Psalm. 25. 9. The humble he will teach his way. Such shall get power over their
corruptions, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation not
to be repented of. Eccle. 7. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter: for by the
sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better. These tears are of a
purging, and cleansing nature; no soap, no nitre is so effectual to get the
spots, and stains out of cloth, as these are to wash out the spots of thy
soul. That which Solomon says of a slanderer, Prove. 25. 23. An angry
countenance will drive him away; may be said of this: if sin be not cockerd,
and made much of, if we would show our selves discontented, sad, and heavy,
while it tarrieth with us, this would drive it away.

Take this also to heart, Applic.
I pray you. 1 Many of you complain, or have just cause to complain, you
thrive not in any saving grace, you are like Pharaohs kine, though you live in
never so good pasture, yet are you still as ill favored, and lean as ever you
were, Genesis 41. 19. 21.

2. Many of you are extremely ignorant, and unsettled in your religion,
unstable souls, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

3. Many of you complain you cannot overcome nor get power over any
corruption; you cry with the Apostle (though not with that success that he
did) Romans 7. 15. That which I do I allow not; for what I would that I do not,
but what I hate that do I. Learn to know the true cause of all this, you were
never yet rightly humbled for sin. If thou could be humbled and learn to
mourn for thy sin, God would give thee more grace.

Thirdly, Promise 3
The Lord has promised his special protection, assistance and mercy in the
evil day, the day of his wrath, and judgments, unto such as are rightly
humbled, and can mourn for their sins, Psalm. 18. 27. Thou will save the
afflicted people, and 34. 18. He saves such as be of a contrite spirit, Job
22. 29. When men are cast down then thou shall say, there is a lifting up, he
shall save the humble person. And this promise God has been wont to make good,
one of these three ways.

1. Either by turning away the judgment that he had threatened as 2 Chronicles. 32.
26. Hezechia humbled himself for the pride of his heart (both he, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem) so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in
the days of Hezechia. Yea to show what sound humiliation is able to do, the
very counterfeit of it has been very effectual this way for the turning away
of judgments, 2 Chronicles. 12. 12 When Rehoboam humbled himself, the wrath of the
Lord turned from him, so that he would not destroy him altogether, and also in
Judah things went well. The like we may see in the example of a worse man then
he, 1 King. 21. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? therefore
I will not bring the evil in his days.

Or 2. by hiding his servants from the judgment, and providing for their
safety in the common calamity, as he did Just Lot, that was vexed with the
filthy conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 7. This our God can do, verse
9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of tentations; For to him
belong the issues of death, Psalm. 68. 20.

Or 3. (if he see it not good to do either of the former) by sealing them, and
setting his mark upon them, giving them by his spirit further assurance of his
favor, and strength of grace to endure the calamity (for that is Gods seal,
and mark, Ep. 1. 13.) and so did the Lord with those humbled souls that went
into captivity, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Go through the midst of the City, through the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh,
and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

Consider well of this benefit I pray you. Applic:
1. We live now in an evil time: The plague has devoured many thousands
already; and we all may see cause enough to fear, it may come nearer to every
one of us then yet it has done.

2. The Lord does also threaten us with the sword. You have heard of the
intentions of our enemies abroad.

3. All men's hearts are disquieted with fear; few have any inward peace, and
security in their minds. Learn therefore to know how we might remedy this.
Certainly if we could learn to afflict our selves and mourn for our sins,
we need not fear either the plague, or the papists: God would be a refuge for
us, a refuge in times of trouble, Psalm. 9. 9. O that Gods people throughout the
land could humble themselves more for sin, for the sins of the land, and for
their own sins. O that we could do it, that are here now. Remember what is
said, Prove. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his
children shall have a place of refuge.

Fourthly, Promise 4
The Lord has promised that the prayers of such shall prevail mightily with
him both for themselves, and others. You know what is said of Jacob, Hos. 12.
4. He had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made supplications
unto him. And of Hezechiah, Esa. 38. 5. I have heard thy prayers, I have seen
thy tears, behold I will add unto thy days 15. years. And what need we more
examples when we have the Lords express Word, and promise for this, Psalm. 10.
17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, Psalm 34. 17. When the Prophet had
said, The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, he gives this for the
reason, verse 18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, 2 Chronicles.
7. 14. If my people that are called by my name, shall humble themselves and
pray, then will I hear from Heaven. Yea for others also, God will hear them,
Job 42. 8. My servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept.

1. We all complain, Applic.
and not without cause, as Job did, Job 30. 20. I cry unto thee, and thou do
not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not.

2. And we account it (if we be as we should be) the chief privilege, and
comfort we have in this life to have audience and respect with God in our
prayers, 1 John 5. 14. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

3. Take notice of a chief cause thereof: and as thou desire God should have
more respect to thy prayers, labor thou to be more humbled for thy sins.

SERMON VI.
November. 9. 1625.
Follows now the third and last motive; Motive 3.
that this is the best way to prevent the Lord from afflicting, and humbling
our souls with his own hand, when we have learned to humble, and afflict our
own souls. For this is a certain truth; sin will bring sorrow sooner or
later, that cannot be avoided. Sin is therefore called sorrow; because
sorrow is an inevitable effect, and consequent of it, Eccl. 11. When he had
said, verse 9. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes, but know thou, that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment: he adds verse 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart,
and put away evil from thy flesh. When sin has gone before, sorrow (even
sorrow and affliction of soul for sin) will follow, Prove. 29. 6. In the
transgression of a wicked man there is a snare; that is, that that will fill
their hearts with deadly sorrow and heaviness, as appears by the next words,
but the righteous sing, and rejoice, Ier. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall
correct thee, know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing, and bitter
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee. Thy
sins certainly will be bitter to thee one day, sooner or later. Take this for
an undoubted truth, thou must either temporally here or eternally hereafter in
hell, lament, and be wail, and weep for thy sins, Luc. 13. 28. There shall
be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and your selves
thrust out. How much more when they shall see, and feel the torments that are
prepared in hell for them? Now when God as an angry judge strikes, and afflicts
the soul with sorrow for sin, even in this life; o that sorrow is terrible,
and intolerable, when he smites the heart, he so sets it on as no man is able
to abide it, Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, Prove. 18. 14. A wounded spirit (that is, which God in his anger
has wounded) who can bear? Nah. 1. 6. Who can stand before his indignation?
and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is powered out like
fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.

And the best way to prevent the Lord from wounding, and afflicting our souls,
is to smite, and afflict our own hearts for our sins; the way to prevent
those intolerable, and everlasting sorrows which God in his fury will bring
upon wicked men, is to work our hearts to this godly sorrow our selves, and to
humble our own souls: this is plain by that speech of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
11. 31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord,
he means as appears in the next verse.

O think of this thou merry Greek, Applic.
that art all for mirth, and pleasure; thou drunkard and whoremaister that
find such joy, and sweetness in thy sin; thou pleasant witted fellow,
that can so wittily break jests upon religion, and the servants of God, that
thou can set all the company on laughing; the time will come when thy sins
which thou can not abide to think of, shall be set in order before thine
eyes, that thou shall not be able to look of from them, they shall never out
of thy thought, Psalm. 50. 21. Thou that can not abide to hear of thy sins,
nor to be told of them, nor reproved for them by any of Gods servants, who are
(as Elihu speaks, Job 33. 6, 7, 8.) in Gods stead unto thee, formed out of the
clay, as well as thy self: whose terror need not make thee afraid, shall one
day hear the Lord himself reproving thee for them, Psalm. 50. 21. I will
reprove thee, says he, and that will be such a kind of reproving as is
mentioned, Psalm. 2. 5. Then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure; better to have an hundred of Gods poor servants, to
reprove thee, then to have the Lord do it. Thou that can not abide to let
any sadness or sorrow for sin to come near thy heart, but hate sorrow as
the Devil, and abandonest it from thee with all thy might, do what thou can
sooner or later it will seize upon thee. When Gods servants (that have been
much given to mourning for sin) shall sing for joy of heart, thou shall cry
for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit, Esaias 65. 14. Luke 6. 25.
Woe unto you that laugh now; for ye shall mourn and weep.

Yea 2. think of this all you that fear God, were it not much better for you
to take pains with your own hearts to humble, and afflict them, then to leave
it to God to do it in his wrath. You have heard he will certainly do it if
you do it not, and the way to prevent him from doing it, is to do it your
selves.

And these are the motives that may stir up in every one of us a desire to
seek for this grace, of an humbled and broken heart.

It follows now, Means of 2 sorts.
that I show you the means whereby you may atteine it. And these are of two
sorts.

1. Some such as wherein you must use the help of others.

2. Some such as wherein you must be the agents your selves.

Of the first sort, 1 Sort.
I will name to you, but two.

The first is the ministry of the Word. 1.
If thou would have a soft heart, able to mourn for sin, thou must
conscionably frequent the faithful ministry of the Word, strive to live under
a forcible ministry, such as will search thy heart. No means in the world
have ever wrought so mightily to the saving, humbling, and afflicting of the
soul as this has done. By this means they that had crucified Christ, and
were so hardened in their sin, that when they saw that wonderful miracle, even
the Apostles that were poor Galileans speak in all languages the wonderful
things of God, they mocked them, and said, these men are full of wine, Act. 2.
13. were so pricked, and wounded in their hearts, that they knew not what to
do till the same hand that wounded them had healed them again, as you may
read, Act. 2. 37, 41. And what was it that brought David to such a saving sense
of his sin in numbering of the people, that his heart smote him for it, and he
cried, I have sinned greatly in that I have done, I have done very foolishly? 2 Samuel 24. 10. Surely God had sent G^d the Prophet unto him, as you may see in
the next words, verse 11. For when David was up in the morning, the Word of the
Lord came unto the Prophet G^d, David's Seer, saying, etc. and though it be said
of Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. that when he was in affliction he besought the
Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before him: yet if you look into
the 18. verse of that chap. you shall find, he had a mightier and stronger
mean to work that humiliation in his heart, then his affliction was, the Lord
had sent to him Seers, and Prophets that spoke unto him in the name of the
Lord. His affliction was but a subordinate means, to make him the better able
to receive profit by the word; the words and ministry of the seers, was that
that wrought this mighty work. There is more force in the ministry of the
Word, to work sound, and saving humiliation then in all the afflictions in the
world, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law. See a notable experiment of this in Rehoboam, and
the Princes of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 12. 2, 6. When God had for their apostasy, sent
Shishak King of Egypt, with a mighty and invincible army against them, and
brought them thereby into extreme peril and distress, he sent Shemaj^h the
Prophet unto them, to declare unto them the true cause of that judgment, and
to bring them to an effectual sight and sense of their sin, and then (not
before) they humbled themselves, and confessed that the Lord was righteous.
Gods judgments and corrections without the word, use not to work savingly.
Indeed they serve, 1. to prepare and make the heart fitter to receive, and
profit by the word, 2. to stir up those sparks, and make them to burn,
which the word had before cast into the heart, and were covered as with ashes;
but without the word, they use not to work savingly. But the word even without
affliction, has done mighty things this way, Ier. 23. 29. Is not my Word like
as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?
Would thou then have thy heart softened? Bring it to this fire, if it be as
hard as iron it will soften it, and make it pliable; bring it to this anvile
where the hammer smites, and it will break it. For first this is ordained, and
sanctified of God to be a glass that will clearly, and evidently discover to
us all our spots and deformities, as the Apostle teaches us, Iam. 1. 23.
Secondly, God has promised to accompany this ordinance of his, with the divine
power and efficacy of his holy Spirit, I will be with you (says our Savior,
Mat. 28. 20.) unto the end of the world. And therefore it is no marvel though
it be so mighty this way.

A likely matter will you say: Object.
for where have you harder, and profaner hearts, then such as are daily beaten
upon by this hammer?

I answer, Answr. 1.
First, That the hardened, and reprobate heart is made the harder by the strokes
of this hammer specially such hearts as once were softened, and are grown hard
again: even as the Smiths iron is. To (...) the word is a savor of death unto
death, 2 Cor. (...)

Secondly, Answ. 2.
The true cause why so many hear us daily, and their hearts are never a whit
mollified by it, is this, in many of our hearers the Lord works not with us, no
alas, in these days the Lord works with us, but in few; and if he be not with
us, if he work not with us, we can do nothing. When God bad Moses take his
rod, and smite the rock in Horeb, he told him he would stand before him on the
rock; and then when God stood upon the rock Moses smote the rock, and water
gushed out of it abundantly, Exodus 17. 5, 6. If God had not been there, Moses
smiting the rock would have done nothing; so is it in this case.

Thirdly, Ans. 3.
This I say, that such as God has in mercy ordained to give a soft heart unto,
shall feel their hearts mollified more by this then by any other means. And
if this will not soften thy heart, I assure thee nothing will do it.

This being so; Applic: 1.
Oh that we who are Gods ministers would more diligently, and carefully apply
our selves to this work, and stir up our selves in our ministry not only to
reprove sin, but to do it feelingly and conscionably, so as may be most
effectual, to bring Gods people to sound humiliation for sin. If we would
bring them to lament for sin, we must mourn to them our selves, as our
savior speaks, Mat. 11. 17. and not by our Epicurisme, and riotous lives
proclaim unto them, that we are far from having humbled souls, in our selves
for our own sins.

And O that you that are Gods people, 2.
would seek for, and desire this help from us in our ministry to soften your
hearts, and further you in this work of humiliation of foul for sin.
Certainly you should desire and seek for all good helps this way. When God
denounced against his people the heavy judgment of the Babilonish captivity,
and provokes them to humiliation, and repentance for the preventing of it.
Consider ye (says he, ler. 9. 17, 18.) and call for the mourning women, that
they may come, and send for cunning women that they may come, and let them make
have, and take up a wailing for us that our eyes may run down with tears,
and our eyelids gush out with waters. He alludes to the custom they had in
funerals, and such occasions of mourning to hire certain women, that by their
skill in singing doleful songs might increase their heaviness, and make them
more apt to mourn. But his meaning is to teach them that in such a time as that
was, wherein they had also just cause to mourn, and humble themselves, they
should use all the best helps they could to provoke themselves unto sorrow. And
surely we should all learn to do so in this case, seeing humiliation for
sin is so necessary, and the ministry of the word is a singular means to
work our hearts to it, we should therefore desire (so far as the good order
that God has established in his Church will permit) to hear such as whose
ministry is most powerful, and effectual for the softning of a hard heart.

The second mean wherein we must use the help of others is the benefit of
private admonition, and reproof. They that would have their hearts softened to
be able to mourn, and weep for sin must not be unwilling to be admonished
and reproved for sin in private by some faithful friend, either Minister or
other, but count it a great benefit, and desire it rather.

First, certainly God has given authority and a straight charge to all his
people to watch one over another; and to call upon, and admonish, and reprove
one another, Heb. 10. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and
to good works. 2 These. 3. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him
as a brother. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

Secondly, God has sanctified and ordained this for a means to reclaim poor
sinners, to bring them to a saving sight and sense of their sin, and keep
them from hardening their hearts in it, Matthew. 18. 15. If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go, and tell him his fault between thee and him alone:
if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; but if not, then (Verse
16. 17.) take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to
thee as a Heathen man, and a Publicane. As if he had said, count not his case
desperate till this course have been taken with him.

Thirdly, God has often blessed this course wonderfully, Mel. 3. 16. Then they
that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and
heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. This was the mean whereby
Gods people were kept from the profaneness and security of those times, and
God was wonderfully pleased with it. Yea many a heart has been mollified this
way, which the public Ministry could not soften. Nathans private dealing with
David prevailed more with him than all the public means he had enjoyed in a
whole year, 2 Samuel 12. 7. 13.

Fourthly, Count it therefore a great blessing of God to thee to have such a
friend or such a Minister as will watch over thee, and deal thus privately and
plainly with thee: yea seek for such friends. It is said of Ion^than, 1 Samuel
20. 8. that he had brought David into a covenant of the Lord with him. We
should labor to get such friends as we might make this covenant with* Yea we
should beg of God to give us such a friend, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous
smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil that shall not break my head. And we have all great need of it: for
selfe^ love so blinds us, as we cannot see that that is amiss in our selves.
In these last times especially men shall be lovers of themselves, as the Apostle
teaches us, 2 Timothy 3. 2.

And what marvel then if there be now adays so much security and hardness of
heart among Christians. Applic.
No man holds himself bound to watch over his brother, to admonish or reprove
him, but every man says in his heart as Cain, Genesis 4. 9. Am I my brothers
keeper? The Papists shall rise up in judgment against us in this: for, they
take all opportunities to gain others to Antichrist. They (like the Scribes
and Pharisees of whom our Savior speaks, Mat. 23. 15.) do compass sea and
land to make one proselyte; but we have no care at all to gain any unto
Christ. And on the other side, all men are unwilling to be admonished and
plainly dealt with in private, even by the Minister of God: but are apt to say
to any that would admonish them, as the Sodomites did to Lot, Genesis 19. 9. Stand
back, this fellow will needs be a Judge. But know for a certainty, that thou
that art so unwilling to hear of thy sin, and to be plainly dealt with about
it, art in love with thy sin, and have no desire to bring thy heart to godly
grief and sorrow for it.

SERMON VII.
December. 7. 1625.
IT follows now that we come to those Second sort of means.
means wherein we are to be principal agents our selves.

For, though this (to speak properly) be the mighty work of God to humble and
mollify the heart of man, and make it able to mourn for sin, according to
that promise Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and
I will give them an heart of flesh; yet may we (after we are once regenerated)
do much to further this great work of God in our selves. Therefore we see
David professes here that he afflicted his own soul: and Psalm. 69. 10. that
he chastned his soul. And of Iosi^h it is said, that he did humble himself
before God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. and of Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. that he humbled
himself greatly before the God of his fathers. Yea Gods people are commanded
in the day of their fast Levit. 23. 27. to afflict their own souls: and Joel
2. 13. to rent their hearts. And I^^. 4. 3, 4. to break up their fallow
ground, and to circumcise and take away the foreskin of their own hearts. By
all which places it appears we may our selves do much in this work, yea that
we must be doers in it our selves, or else it will never be well done. And
certainly, if we would do what we might, our hearts would be much softer, and
better able to mourn for our sins, than they are.

If any of you shall ask me, Quest.
Why what can we do, or what should we do to work our hearts to this godly
sorrow?

I answer: Answ.
There are four principal things that we may do, and that we must do, if we
would get broken and humbled hearts. For, 1. We must make choice of a fit time.
2. Of a fit place. 3. When we have so done, we must examine our hearts
seriously and impar^ially. 4. We must pray to God for his assistance in this
business.

First, 1. A fit time
We must take a fit time to go about this work. For, though this be but a
matter of circumstance, yet have Gods people found much help unto spiritual
duties even in this. Daniel for his private prayer made choice of the time that
God had appointed for the evening sacrifice, Dan. 9. 21. And so did Cornelius,
as will appear if you compare Act. 10. 30. and 31. together. Our blessed
Savior made choice of the evening for this purpose sometimes, Mat. 14. 23. and
sometimes of the morning early before day, Mar. 1. 35. And as all our time is
not to be spent in mourning; so are there some times and seasons fitter for
this purpose, and such as will yield us more help in this work, than
other-some will do. Eccles. 3. 4. There is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance. And it is the wisdom of a
Christian, to discern and take the fittest time for this purpose. Eccles. 8.
5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, says Solomon. Ephesians. 5.
15, 16. Walk not as fools, but as wise men, redeeming the time. The wisdom
of a man (you see) consists much in the husbanding of his time well, and
making choice of the fittest time fore every purpose and action that he takes
in hand.

And what times are the fittest (may you say) for this purpose?

I answer, it is profitable for a man every day to be doing somewhat in this
work, by observing his own ways, and calling himself to an account for
them. For,

First, The Apostle tells us we are in danger to be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin if we do not exhort or stir up our selves daily, Heb.
3. 13.

Secondly, The time of our death is very uncertain; and such servants (we
know) as have great dealings for their master, and look to be called to a
strict account they know not how soon, will look every day into their
accounts, and have them in areadinesse continually. And surely this is our
case; we know not how soon our accounts will be called for, Mar. 13. 35, 36.
Watch ye therefore (for ye know not when the master of the house will come)
least coming suddenly, he find you sleeping.

Thirdly, This would help us greatly in our daily prayers unto God. The more
sense and sorrow for sin we have when we pray, the more acceptable certainly
would our prayers be unto God. Psalm. 34. When David had said Verse. 17. The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears them; he tells us Verse 18. what cries and
prayers of the righteous they be that the Lord has such respect unto. The Lord
is nigh (says he) to them that are of a broken heart. If we would strive in
our daily prayers when we make confession of our sins to do it with
feeling, and not formally, it would not onley make our prayers more effectual
with God, but keep our hearts from hardening, and bring them to a good temper,
Luke 18. 13, 14. When the Publican made confession of his sins with that
feeling, smiting upon his breast, and saying, God be merciful to me a sinner;
It is said, ^ee went home to his house justified rather then the other.

Fourthly, This daily accustoming our selves unto this work of calling our
selves to account, and afflicting our hearts for our sins, would make it more
easy and familiar unto us, when we shall have extraordinary occasion to betake
our selves to it. That which is said by the Prophet of the Lords chastening of
us, may fitly be applied to this chastening of ourselves, Lam. 3. 27. It is
good for a man that he bear the yoke, in his youth; and to have been
accustomed to stoop unto, and to bear patiently the Lords afflicting hand. By
this that has been said you see it is good for us to be doing somewhat in
this work every day.

Yet are there five special times, Five times.
and seasons that will yield us great help in this business more then other
times will do.

The first fit time to work our hearts to godly sorrow, is presently after
some fall we have received some gross sin we have slipped into. A great
advantage it will be unto us, to humble our souls for it presently and without
delay.

For first, sin newly committed may be better known, and remembered, with all
the circumstances whereby it is aggravated. And that is a great help to the
humiliation of the soul, as we may perceive in David's speech, Psalm. 51. 3.
For I ac^nowledge my transgressions, and my si^^e is ever before me.

Secondly, The heart will not be so hardened by sin that is newly committed,
but more easily wrought upon, and softened then when sin has lain long upon it.
As a bone that is out of joint the longer it is neglected, will be set again
with more difficulty and pain. A Leopard may as soon leave his spots, an
Ethiopian his blackness as he can do his sin, that has lain long in it,
Ier. 13. 23.

Secondly, Another fit season for this work is, when we prepare our selves to
renew our covenant with God in the holy Sacrament.

For 1. at that time God requires of us a special care to examine our selves
and call to mind our sins, and to judge our selves for them, else it is not
possible we should receive worthily, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 29, 31. When thou bring
thy gift to the altar (says our Savior, Mat. 5. 23. as at the Lords table we
do offer, and present our selves unto God, our souls, and bodies as a holy,
reasonable, and lively sacrifice unto him) and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee. Teaching us that at that time specially we
should remember, and call to mind what our brother and much more what our
heavenly father has against us.

2. At that time men (if they have any spark of grace in them) are apt to find
in themselves some stirrings of their affections unto goodness, some motions
of Gods spirit, some dispositions unto devotion, and remorse for sin.
Ministers that use to deal privately with their people at that time shall find
them more easy to be wrought upon (and so shall every man his own heart) then
at other times. These good motions should be followed without delay. As it is
said that they that lay at the poole of Bethesda, strove to get in so soon as
ever the Angel had stirred the water, John 5. 4. And Iosuah so soon as God by
a vision had stirred him up to search and find out the sin that had provoked
God against Israel, Josh. 7. 16. went without delay immediately about it. So
should we do in this case. When we feel God begins to soften our hearts, and
to stir up these good dispositions to devotion in us, then should we set our
selves seriously to this work, of calling to mind our sins, and bringing our
hearts to sorrow for them.

For 1. when God stirs up such motions he knocks at the door of our hearts,
and shows himself willing to enter in, Rev. 3. 20.

2. Satan will be ready to quench the spirit in these good motions. As it is
said, he watched the infant to devour it so soon as ever it should be borne,
Rev. 12. 4.

Thirdly, The days, and times we set apart for fasting, and prayer (upon
whatsoever just occasion) are a most fit season for us, to go about this work.

For 1. we find Gods people have had their hearts wonderfully softened at such
times. The Israelites in the fast that they kept for success against Benjamin,
came into the house of God, and wept, Judge. 20. 26. And in the fast they kept
as Mispeh, they wept so abundantly that they are said, 1 Samuel 7. 6. to have
drawn water, as by buckets full, out of their hearts, and to have poured it
out before the Lord.

2. This exercise of a religious fast is a great help, and furtherance to this
work. As we see here in David's example, Psalm. 35. 13. I humbled my self with
fasting, and 69. 10. I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting.

Fourthly, When any judgments of God lie heavy upon our selves or our
brethren, that is a fit season to go about this work. When these men were in
misery David fell here to afflicting of his soul, Psalm. 35. 13.

For 1. the Lord by every one of his judgments, does testify from Heaven that
he has matter against us, as Nao^i says, Ruth 1. 21. Why do you call me
Naomi, seeing the Lord (by taking away my husband and my children) has
testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me?

2. God by his judgments does call upon us to examine our ways, and humble
our selves before him, Hag. 1. 5, 6, 7. Now therefore says the Lord of Hosts,
consider your ways; ye have sown much, and brought in li^le, thus says the
Lord of Hosts, consider your ways. And Esa. 22. 12. In that day did the Lord
God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning.

3. God by his judgments softneth the hearts of men, and works in them more
remorse, more pronenesse and aptnes to repent then at other times, Job 23. 16.
God makes my heart soft (says Job) and the Almighty troubles me. A man
shall find himself fitter to pray then, then at other times: and we should
take the advantage, and opportunity of this time for it, Iam. 5. 13. Is any
afflicted? let him pray. This has been often seen even in many notable
hypocrites, who (how profane soever their hearts have been at other times yet)
in their affliction have found in themselves a disposition to pray, and to
repent, Psalm. 78. 34. When he slew them then they sought him and returned. And
Esa. 26. 16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer
when thy chastning was upon them. And we find by experience that at such a time
a faithful Minister may much better work up. on the hearts of men to bring
them to remorse and repentance then at another time. According to that speech
of Elihu, Job 33. 22, 24. When a man's soul draws near to the grave; if
there be then a messenger with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, to show
unto man his uprightness, then he is gracious unto him. And so speaks David
^lso, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest o Lord, and teach
him out of thy Law.

This is a singular favor of God, when correction, and instruction go
together. And herein we are bound to acknowledge the great mercy of God to our
Land, that (in the time of so general, and grievous visitation as has been
upon it) he has put it into the Kings heart, to command so much preaching that
thereby the hearts of the people might be effectually wrought upon, now the
Lord has so by his judgment prepared them. And certainly if in such a time
the word do not work upon men's hearts, it will never do them good.

Fifthly, and lastly, When we feel a secret pensiveness, and sadness to come
upon our hearts so as they even melt within us like ground that thaweth after a
frost, so as we could even weep abundantly, this is an excellent season, and
opportunity, to bring our hearts unto godly sorrow in.

For 1. sadness and heaviness, makes the heart more apt to be wrought to
goodness, Eccle. 7. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of
the countenance, the heart is made better.

2. This is the way to turn the stream, and current of our sorrow the right
way, by making our sin our greatest sorrow (as indeed it ought to be) because
it is the only just cause of all other our sorrows, Lam. 3. 39. 40. Wherefore
does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us
search, and try our ways and turn again unto the Lord.

And surely (to conclude this first point) in this we Applic.
have all cause to acknowledge our own folly, and to be humbled for it; and
to impute that want of grace, and ability that is in us to mourn for our sins,
unto this, that we have neglected these times, and seasons whereby we might
have been so much helped in this work.

We know the fittest seasons for the plowing, and breaking up of our ground,
and we carefully observe them; but we know not, or care not to observe the
fittest seasons for the breaking up of the fallow ground of our hearts, which
(yet) concerns us much more then the other does. Break up your f^llow ground
(says the Prophet Ier. 4. 3.) and sow not among thorns.

The second thing we must do to work our hearts to godly sorrow is this; 2 A
fit place.
after we have made choice of a fit time to go about this work, we must also
make choice of a fit place for it, even such as wherein we may be most free
from all distractions. For though this also be but a circumstance yet may it
yield us some help in all exe^cises of devotio^* Christ bids us make choice of
a secret place for our private prayer. Mat. 6. 6. And so did he himself, Mar*
1. 35. He went out, and departed into a solitary place and there prayed. And
Act. 10. 9. Peter went up to the top of the house to pray. So though it be no
shame for a man to weep for his sins as we have heard Gods people have done
abundantly in their solemn fasts, yet is a solitary, and secret place the
fittest to work our hearts unto godly sorrow, Commune with your own hearts
upon your beds (in secret says David, Psalm. 4. 4.) and be still. H^Zechiah
turned his face to the wall when he prayed, and wept so sore, Esa. 38. 2, 3.
And Jeremiah 13. 17. says, his soul should weep in secret. And Z^ch. 12. 12.
it is said, they should mourn every family apart, the husband apart, and the
wife apart. And Jeremy describing the man that is humbled under Gods hand
aright, says Lam. 3. 28. He sits alone, and keeps silence.

Thirdly, When we have made choice of a fit time, and a fit place also for
this business, then must we examine our hearts seriously, and impartially. And
in this examination two things are to be performed by us.

1. We must labor to find out, and call to mind our sins, for which we
should be humbled.

2. We must lay them to our hearts, and so consider, and weigh with our selves
the heinousness of them, and aggravate them against our selves, that we may be
affected with them.

For the first, He that desires to have his heart humbled, and to be able to
mourn for his sins, must labor by diligent search, and examination to find
out his sins, and call them to mind, and set them before his face. Bring it
again to mind o ye transgressors, says the Lord, Esa. 46. 8. Let not man be
afraid or unwilling to do this. To commit sin is dangerous, and hurtful to
thy soul, but to call thy sins to remembrance has no danger in it, will do
thee no hurt at all; to have an enemy, or a mortal disease upon thee is
dangerous, and hurtful, but to be aware of them, to know them, when thou have
them, may do thee much good. Job knew this well and therefore prays
earnestly to God to help him in this, Job 13. 23. Make me to know my
transgression, and my sin.

For 1. till then thou can never truly mourn for thy sin, and repent of it,
Ier. 8. 6. No man repented himself of his wickedness, saying what have I
done? To know in general, and in gross that thou art a sinner will never
humble thee aright, thou must know thy sins in particular, or thou can never
truly repent. This was that that humbled Gods people so, in the days of
Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 19. We have added to allour other sins, this evil, to
ask a King. This was that that humbled those 3000. mentioned, Act. 2. 36, 37.
and pricked them at the heart, God made known to them their sin in
particular, even that heinous sin of crucifying the Lord of life.

2. It is profitable for us in another respect. For the more careful we are to
remember our sins, and call them to mind, the more ready will the Lord be to
forget them, and cast them behind his back. This is plain by that prayer David
makes, Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 3. Have mercy upon me o God, wash me thoroughly from my
iniquity, for I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. But if
thou strive to forget them, never to think of them, to cast them behind thy
back, be thou sure God will remember them, and never have them out of his eye,
Thou have, (says Moses, Psalm. 90. 8.) set our iniquities before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance).

But thou will say to me. Quest.
What sins should I call to mind? all? that is an endless work. I know not
where to begin, nor where to make an end, Psalm. 40. 12. They are more in number
(says David) then the hairs of my head. How much more (will thou say) are my
sins innumerable?

I answer, Answ. 1.
1. The more sins thou can call to mind the better it will be for thee.
This we may see, Ezekiel. 20. 43. where this is promised as a singular grace, God
would work in his peoples hearts. You shall remember your ways, and all your
doings, you have been defiled and ye shall loath your selves in your own
sight, for all your evils that ye have committed. Therefore also when the Lord
prescribes unto Aaron the course he should take in making an atonement
between God and the people, he tells him, Levit. 16. 21. he must confess over
the live goat, all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions, in all their sins. And therefore it is good when thou go
about this work to take the help of the glass, set the glass of Gods Law
before thee, and examine thy ways according unto it. Romans 3. 20. By the Law
comes the knowledge of sin.

Secondly, Answ. 2.
take heed thou do not in thy examination willingly forget or pass by any
sin: Either 1. out of a conceit that it is but small. For Gods curse is due
to the smallest, Deuteronomy. 27. 26 Nor. 2. out of favor thou bear to it, and
loathnesse to leave it: For if thou regardi niquity in thine heart: the Lord
will not regard thee, Psalm. 66. 18. and Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sin,
shall not prosper.

Thirdly and l^stly, Ans. 3.
Be thou (yet) in this examination of thy self specially desirous, and
careful to call to mind, the foulest, and grossest of all thy sins that ever
thou commiettdst, though it were long ago. Deuteronomy 9. 7. Remember, and forget not
how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wi^dernesse. Thus did
David in the exercising of him^selfe unto repentance, think often of the sins
of his youth, Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
transgressions: So did Paul often call to mind his foulest sins, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter. For the heart will sooner be brought to
remorse, and sorrow by remembrance of these then of smaller sins; which was
the cause why the Publicans, and Harlots those gross sinners, repented sooner
then the civil Pharisees, Matthew. 21. 32.

No hard matter for you that have been adulterers, Applic:
blasphemers, persecuters, thieves, oppressors, drunkards, to bring your
hearts unto godly sorrow, if you would take but a little pains with them. You
that have lived more civilly (as that rich young man had done, that concerning
the Commandments of the second Table, could say unto Christ, Matthew 19. 20.
All these things have I kept from my youth up) must take the more pains in
this work.

The second thing we must do in this examination of our selves, is this: When
we have found out, and called to mind our sins then must we consider, and
weigh with our selves the heinousness of them, aggravate them against our
selves, and lay them so to heart as we may be affected, and moved to remorse,
and sorrow for them. Men are often blamed for this, that they laid not their
sins to their heart, considered not so of them as to be affected with them,
Esaias 47. 7. The Caldeans are blamed that they did not lay to their hearts the
oppressions they had done to Gods people. And the Jews, Esaias 57. 11. that they
laid not to heart their Idolatry.

Now the way to lay them to our heart, is to consider well the heinousness of
them, and the circumstances whereby they are aggravated. Pa^l did use thus to
aggravate his sins against himself, Ephe. 3. 8. I am less then the least of
all Saints, 1 Timothy 1. 15. I am the chief of all sinners.

The circumstances whereby sin is aggravated Seven aggravations of sin.
are many* I will name a few of them.

First, Consider thy sins have been committed against many, and strong
means of grace. Remember what Christ says, Matthew. 11. 24. to Capernaum
because of this, I say unto thee, that it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom, in the day of judgment then for thee. Oh! consider with thy self
that if the sins of Indians, and other barbarous people that never enjoyed
any ordinary means of grace, shall justly be punished in Hell fire, as
doubtless they shall. For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also
perish without Law, says the Apostle, Romans 2. 12. If the sins of Infants do
justly deserve damnation, as certainly they do. Death has reigned (says he,
Romans 5. 14.) even over them that have not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, that is not actually. What degree and measure of punishment, and
torment think thou, is most justly due to thy sins that have been
committed against such means of grace as thou have enjoyed?

Secondly, Thy sins have not been committed upon ignorance but against thy
knowledge. And if the elect Jews were so pricked in heart for the sin they
committed ignorantly, Act. 3. 17. how much more cause have thou? Remember what
Christ says of this circumstance, Luke 12. 47. That servant which knew his
Lords will and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes.

Thirdly, How voluntary thou have sinned, how weak, and light the tentations
have often been that have drawn thee to it, nay how thou have drawn, and
provoked thy self to it. And say thou to thine own heart, If God were so much
offended with Ahab though he had so strong a tempter as Iesabel his wife, I
Kings 21. 25. Alas what cause has he to be offended with me, that have been
mine own tempter? Remember what the Holy Ghost speaks of this circumstance,
Esaias 33. 1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled: and 5. 18. Woe unto
them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart
rope.

Fourthly, The^ (...) ^^mber of thy sins. Say they were in their (...) so
small, yet the number of them, and thy multiplyi^g of them so of^, makes the
burden ^f them intolerable. Consider how the Lord aggravates sin by this
circumstance, Ier. 5. 6. A Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a Wolf
of the evening^ shall spoil them, a Leopard shall watch over their cities,
every one that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces; because their
transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased. See what weight
this very circumstance gave unto David's sin in the sense of his Conscience,
Mine iniquities (says he, Psalm. 40. 12.) are more then the hairs of mine
head, therefore mine heart fails me. The sands though taken severally they
be very small, yet many heaped together, will make an intolerable burden, Job
6. 3. Job says his grief was heavier then the sand of the Sea* If for one
sin Adam was so terrified that he fled from God, Genesis 3. 8. what cause of
terror have I, may thou well say to thine own soul?

Fifthly, How often thou have relapsed, and fallen back again into the same sin
that thy heart has smitten thee for, and thou have repented of, and covenanted
with God that thou would forsake it, returning with the dog, to that thou
have loathed, and vomited up, 2 Pet. 2. 22. An arm once broken cannot be cured
without pain, but if often, the cure will be more dangerous, and painful. If
thou had broken thy promises, and covenants with men thou would count it a
matter of infamy and shame unto thee, what cause of shame is it then that thou
have broken thy promises unto God? See also how this circumstances does
aggravate sin, Eccle. 5. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God defer not to
pay it, for he has no pleasure in fouls.

Sixthly, How thou have by thy sin corrupted others, whereof it may be some
are in Hell already, and some in the way to H^ll, and thou can not draw them
unto repentance? Indeed if thou can truly repent, this shall not hinder thy
salvation that thou have been a mean of the damning of others, for so was
Paul, Act. 26. 11. Yet must it needs be a heartbreaking to thee, whenever
thou do seriously think of it all the days of thy life: and so was it unto
Paul, If thou had been the mean to undo another in his outward estate,
much more if thou had taken away his life, it would be a just cause of
heaviness to thee, how much more cause of humbling is it that thou have been
a mean of destroying the soul of any, Matthew. 18. 7. Woe to the man by whom
the offense comes, Ier. 6. 28. they are brass and iron, they are corrupters.

Seventhly, consider the person against whom thou have sinned, Psalm. 51. 4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned.

And consider the Lord, 1. in his greatness, and excellency of power, and
justice. If one man sin against another. (says Ely to his sons, 1 S^m. 2.
25.) the judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him?

2. But specially in his goodness toward thy self. Consider that that God
whom thou have offend^d, thou do not only live by, Act. 17. 28. but also he
is of that gracious difposition, that notwithstanding all thy rebellions he
would not have thee perish.

For, 1. he is apt to forgive thee upon thy repen^ance, Esa. 55. 7.

2. He has proclaimed a general p^rdon, and not excluded thee, Ioh. 3. 16.
but will have it offered unto thee, Mar. 16. 15.

3. He se^kes to thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

4 He has done more for thee, he loves thee with the love of a father (for to
such specially I speak) and thou have received the spirit of adoption, whereby
thou art able to cry, Abba father, Romans 8. 15. Consider well of this and it
will have more force to mollify thy heart, then any thing else in the world.

The sense of our desperate estate, without this may make us roar, and rave,
and rage against the Lord, like a wild Bull in a net, as the Prophet speaks
Esaias ^1. 20. but nothing will humble the heart so kindly, nor make it melt in
godly sorrow as the true consideration of this love of God, Psalm. 130. 4. there
is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared. It was not the crowing
of the Cock twice, that made Peter's heart melt, but the gracious look that
Christ cast upon him, Luke 22. 61, 62. The Lord turned, and looked upon Peter,
then Peter remembered the Word of the Lord, and Peter went out, and wept
bitterly. This was that that wrought upon the heart of the prodigal, Luke 15.
18. I will arise, and go to my father, and I will say, father I have sinned.
And so must thou say to thine own heart, if ever thou would have it to melt,
and thine eyes shed tears for thy si^nes, It is my father, my father that I
have so offended. Say to it as Moses does to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Have I
(...) requited the Lord, O foolish, and ungratious wretch that I am, Is he not
my father? has he not made me, and established me?

The fourth and last thing we must do, to bring our hearts unto this godly
sorrow, is fervent prayer.

For thou must 1. complain to God of the hardness of thy heart, as Esa, 63. 17.
O Lord why have thou hardened my heart from thy fear?

2. Beg this grace of him and cry to him for it. That which the Apostle says
of wisdom, may be said of this grace also, Iam. 1. 5. If any of you lack a
soft heart, let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

3. Challeng him with his promise, and (in a holy reverence) charge him with
that covenant mentioned, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And Zach. 12. 10. I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace, and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one that mourns for his only
son, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
first borne.

4. Be importunate in this suite as one that will take no nay, nor give it
over till thou have obtained it, as David, Psalm. 27. 4. and the woman of
Canaan, Mat. 15. 27.

5. Wait for an answer, and pray still; limit not the Lord his time, L^ke 18.
1, We ought always to pray, and not to faint. Consider how often the Lord
called upon thee before thou did answer him, and how long he waited for
thee, Romans 10. 21. All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a
disobedient, and gaine-saying people. Remember that promise, Esaias 49. 23. They
shall not be ashamed (or disappointed) that wait for me.

SERMON VIII.
August 2. 1626.
IT follows now that we proceed to show you the signs and notes whereby we
may be able to discern whether we have been yet rightly humbled for our
sins, whether that sorrow for sin, that we have felt in our selves be
unfeigned yea or no, whether it be that saving sorrow of Gods elect, unto which
all these promises of comfort, and mercy that we have heard of do belong. And
surely it is a matter of great use and necessity to have notes given us out of
Gods Word to try our humiliation, and sorrow for sin by.

First, Because as it is certain, our sins are not pardoned unless we have
truly repented of them, Act. 5. 31. Christ gives repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins: So is it as certain we never truly repented of our
sins, if we have not unfeignedly sorrowed and mourned for them, 2 Cor. 7.
10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation. We must be made (though
not equal, yet) conformable to Christ in his death and passion; as the Apostle
speaks Phil. 3. 10. or we shall never reign with him. This is a faithful
saying, (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 11. 12.) if we ^ee dead with him, we
shall also live with him, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him. And this was a chief part of his passion wherein we must be conformable
unto him. When he suffered for our sins, Mat. 26. 37. He began to be
sorrowful, and very heavy, insomuch as he could not contain but must needs
acquaint his three Disciples with it, verse 38. Then says he unto them, my
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. When he suffered for our sins
he wept abundantly as the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 7. He offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears. We cannot sorrow and weep in that
measure as he did for our sins, but we must sorrow in our measure as he did,
we must be made conformable to him in his passion as you have heard, or we
shall never have part in him. We must either mourn as Peter did with a saving
sorrow, Mat. 26. 75. or we shall mourn as Judas did with a desperate sorrow,
Mat. 27. 3, 5. We must either now in this life mourn for our sinn^s (as we have
heard all Gods servants have done) or we shall certainly herafter cry for
sorrow of heart, (as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 65. 14.) and houle for vexation
of spirit in Hell where shall be nothing but weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth, as our Savior speaks, Luke 13. 28. where their worm
never dies, and the fire never shall be quenched, Mar. 9. 44.

Secondly, Because men are very apt to be deceived in this point and to think
they have been rightly humbled, and have rightly sorrowed for their sins
when indeed they have not. We read of the hypocrites expostulation with God,
Esa. 58. 3. They had afflicted their souls, and God took no knowledge of it,
and Zach. 7. 3, 5. They had mourned, and wept in their fasts, and the Lord
says of them they had not done it unto him, they had their own ends in it.
Yea it is certain many hypocrites do indeed mourn and are exceedingly
humbled sometimes. You know the Lord gives this testimony of Ahab himself
that he was humbled, 1 Kings 21. 29. And yet as good never a whit as never the
better, their sorrow and humiliation is to no purpose at all, because it is not
sound, and sincere.

Thirdly, Because many of Gods children that are indeed true mourners are apt
to doubt of themselves and to complain their hearts are so hard, that they
cannot mourn for their sins, o if they had soft, and melting hearts that
they could sorrow, that they could weep for sin they were in an happy case,
but (alas) they cannot.

Thus Gods Church, and people complain unto God, Es^. 63. 17. O Lord why have
thou hardened our heart? Seeing therefore it is as you see (in these three
respects) a matter of so great necessity to have a sure direction given us out
of Gods Word, how to discern that humiliation of soul and sorrow for sin,
that is sincere and saving from that that is counterfeit, I will give you some
principal notes of differences between them whereby they may be judged of.
And these are to be referred to four heads.

The first is from the object of our sorrow and humiliation, Signs of true
humiliation.
the thing the matter that we are grieved, and humbled for.

The second from the measure, and degree of our sorrow.

The third from the cause that breeds it in us, and fountain from whence it
flows.

The fourth and last, from the effects and fruits that proceed from it.

For the first, If we desire to know whether we were ever yet rightly humbled,
or whether we do still remain in the hardness and impenitency of our hearts
we must examine what it is that has troubled us and made us to mourn.

First, He that is truly humbled mourns for the evil of sin, rather then
for the evil of punishment. It is no ill sign to mourn, and to be humbled
under the judgments of God. Nay it is our duty to be so, and a passing ill
sign it is of an ungratious heart, not to be affected with the judgments of
God, not to be troubled when the Lord shows himself to be angry with us.

The Prophet complains of this as of a great sin, Ier. 5. 3. O Lord thou
have stricken them and they have not grieved. It is said of Gods people, Ezr.
10. 9. that they trembled because of the great rain. And David, and the Elders
of Israel humbled themselves greatly for the plague that God sent upon the
land, 2 Samuel 24. 17. And so did Iehoshaphat, when God threatened an invasion, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. When the state and government of the Kingdom of Israel, in the
days of Saul, was so broken and out of order, had so many breaches in it that
it did even shake and totter as ready to fall, and come to ruin, as the
Prophet complains, Psalm. 60. 2. Gods people were so troubled with the
sensible token of Gods displeasure that they were even astonished with it, thou
have made us to drink the wine of astonishment, as the Prophet speaks, verse
3. And certainly this is a dangerous sign, that our people generally are given
up of God to a mavelous hardness of heart, that the Lord having by all these
tokens of his anger called us to weeping and to mourning, as the Prophet
speaks, Esa. 22. 12. we have been generally given to as much jollity in these
times as ever we were, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till
you dye, says the Lord God of Hosts, as it follows there, verse 14. Yet
though it be a good thing to be humbled under Gods judgments, this is not
enough to prove our humiliation to be sound and sincere. Many an hypocrite
has gone so far. Thus far Ahab went, o how he was humbled at the hearing
of that fearful judgment that God threatened by the Prophet to bring upon him
and his house? 1 King. 21. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself? Thus
far Iehoram his son and as bad a man almost as he went; when a grievous
famine was upon the land, he greatly humbled himself, for though he were a
King, he wore sackcloth, not as his upper garment as the manner was to express
their humiliation outwardly, but secretly next his skin, 2 King. 6. 30. See how
far an hypocrite may go in humbling himself under Gods judgments. But the
true repentant though he is humbled for and can mourn for Gods judgments,
yet, that is neither the only nor the chief cause of his sorrow, his sins
that have provoked God to those judgments trouble him most. I will declare
mine iniquity (says David Psalm. 38. 18.) and be sorry for my sin. And Ezekiel.
7. 16. They shall be on the mountains like the d^ves of the valleys, all of
them mourning, every man for (...) iniquity. Yea even when Gods judgments do
press and humble him most, yet ^he is more troubled for his sin, then for
the affliction that is upon him, as we shall see in that prayer of David,
Psalm. 25. 18. Look upon my affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my
sins. And so it is said of Gods people in Ezras time when the Lord by a
judgment of immoderate rain had testified his displeasure against them, Ezra.
10. 9 They trembled because of this matter (their sin in marrying Idolaters)
and for the great rain. Their sin was the chief thing they trembled for.

Let us then examine our sorrow by this first note, Applic.
alas, many bless themselves in this that they have been much given to sorrow
and heaviness.

1. If sorrow be good (says many a one) I have had enough of that. Yea upon
this they ground their hope that they shall escape the wrath to come because
they have endured so much sorrow in this life. I have had my punishment in this
life, says he. Alas poor wretch of all thy sorrows that thou have endured, I
may say as our Savior does in another case Mat. 24. 8. All these are but the
beginning of sorrows; worldly sorrows are but the beginning of hellish
sorrows. The Devils also believe and tremble, after this sort, as the Apostle
speaks, Iam. 2. 19. They are troubled exceedingly (more then ever thou
could be) with the apprehension and sense of the punishment, which they
undoubtedly b^leeve is prepared for them.

2. Many of you are often troubled with sadness and heaviness of heart, and can
say as Job 23. 16. God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me. O
that thou could turn the stream of thy sorrow the right way from sorrowing
for thy affliction to sorrowing for thy sin. One hour spent in sorrowing for
thy sin, will yield thee more true comfort, then a thousand spent in sorrowing
for thy affliction will do.

3. And we all now assembled to profess our humiliation for the manifold
tokens of Gods anger upon his Church, and this land, must examine the truth of
our hearts in this, whether we can as well mourn for the sins of the land, as
for the judgments of God that are upon it, and are threatened against it. See a
notable example of this in Nehemiah, Chap. 1. when he heard of the great
affliction, and reproach Gods people were in at Jerusalem, verse 3. How the
walls of Jerusalem were broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire, he
sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before
the God of Heaven, as he says, verse 4. But what is it, that most humbled and
troubled his heart in this his fast? Surely not so much the judgment whereby
God had showed himself to be angry with them, as their sins whereby they had
made him angry, as you shall see verse 6. 7. and surely the sins of the land
ought to trouble us more then any of the judgments either persent or imminent
(though they be very great and fearful.)

For 1. they give us cause to fear far heavier then these be, and God has
said of England as he said once of the Kingdom of Judah, Ezekiel. 21. 27. I will
overturne, everturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more.

2. If it were not for the sins of the land, these judgments would vanish,
or do us no hurt at all, 1 Cor. 15. 56. The sting of death is sin. And of
one sin, the sin of Idolatry (specially being openly committed, and alas,
our land stands guilty of that and of many more) it is said, Exodus 32. 25.
Moses saw (though every blind fool could not see it) that the people were
naked, for Aaron had made them naked to their shame before their enemies. Alas,
the sins of the land make us naked to our enemies abroad, and to our
treacherous, and bloody Papists at home; do what we can to defend and arm our
selves, till our sins be repented of, till they be removed we shall be found
to be a naked people. We cannot stand before our enemies, till the accursed
thing (till Ach^n) betaken away, Josh. 7. 13. and alas, we have many Achans
amongst us. So many of you therefore as have hearts that can mourn, that can
be humbled, mourn for the sins of the land, and by the first note approve
unto God and to your own hearts the truth of your humiliation that you
profess this day. And so much for the first note.

Secondly, He that is truly humbled mourns for sin, not so much in respect
to himself, of the hurt, and danger that his sin brings upon himself, as
in respect to God, because he is offended and dishonored by his sin. Saving
sorrow is therefore called, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow, (...) sorrow that
respects God, and is opposed to worldly sorrow that respects only the
crosses and miseries that sin makes us subject unto.

I grant, 1. It is not unlawful to be troubled for sin, even out of
respect to the punishment, and misery that it will bring upon us. As a man may
have respect to this in his fear that keeps him from committing sin; so
may he also in his sorrow for it, after it is committed. Job gives this for a
reason why he durst not sin. For destruction from God (says he, Job 31. 23.)
was a terror to me. And so does Paul. 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing therefore the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.

2. Sound and saving humiliation for sin uses to begin in this legal
compunction and terror, which has respect only to the misery that sin
brings us to. And not one of an hundred do ever come to mourn for sin in
respect to God, till they have first learned to mourn for sin in respect to
themselves: this prepares, makes way for, and draws in the other, as the
prick of the needle does the thread. So it is said of those three thousand that
were converted by Peter, Act. 2. 37. that they were (first) pricked in their
hearts, that is with this legal sorrow and fear. But though this be a
lawful and good thing to mourn, and be troubled for sin, even in respect of
the misery it makes us obnoxious unto, yet is not this sufficient to prove our
humiliation and sorrow for sin to be sound and sincere, for many an hypocrite
has gone so far, they have been greatly humbled and troubled for their
sins. O how Pharaoh complained and cried out of his sin, Exodus 9. 27. He
says to Moses and Aaron, I have sinned, the Lord is righteous and I and my
people are wicked. And so did Judas, Mat. 27. 3. 4. He repented himself, and
cried out, saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed innocent blood. Did
not these men mourn for their sins think you? Yes that they did, but it was
not out of any respect to God whom they had offended, but only out of respect
to themselves and the hurt they had done themselves thereby, as appears
plainly in their stories.

Now the true repentant though he be humbled for his sin in respect to
himself, and the danger and hurt that he fears his sin will do him, yet
he rests not there, but he is also humbled for his sin in respect to God;
and chiefly because he has offended and dishonored God by his sin. This was
that that troubled David most, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned. When God had threatened heavy things against him by God he cries (not
as Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 17. Take away from me this death only but as) 2. Sam.
24. 10. I beseech thee o Lord take away the iniquity of thy servant. Yea he was
well content to bear that punishment, so his sin might be pardoned that he
might have Gods favor verse 17. Let thy hand I pray thee be against me, and my
fathers house. The punishment that his sin has brought or is like to bring
upon him troubles the true penitent nothing so much as the offending of God
and loss of his favor, He lamenteth after the Lord, as it is said, Gods
people did, 1 Samuel 7. 2. And as he mourns for his sin in respect to God
more then to the punishment of his sin, so does he joy and take more comfort
in the assurance of the pardon of his sin, then in deliverance from any
judgment whatsoever. This is the thing that David gloried in Psalm. 32. 5. Thou
forgavest (not the punishment as the old translation reads, but) the iniquity
of my sin.

O let us examine our selves by this second note Applic.
whether we have sorrowed for oursinnes in respect unto God, or to our selves
only. Thy sins do trouble thee because thou know they deserve hell and
damnation, thou know they deserve Gods curse in thy children, in thy estate,
in every thing thou take in hand. Thou do well in this, but if this be the
only thing, or the chief thing that makes thy sin such a burden to thy
heart, thou have not yet repented aright. When those that heard Peter were
pricked in their hearts with these legal sorrows, and asked him what they
should do to come to comfort, he bad them repent, Act. 2. 37. 38. As if he had
said, This is a good preparative, but this is not repentance.

This is a chief note of sincerity in every grace, and so in this, when we do
that that God requires, when we mourn for our sins in respect unto God, and
not to our selves. Thus God upbraideth the hypocrites, Zac. 7. 5. When ye
fasted and mourned, did ye it at all to me, even to me? Romans 14. 6. He that
regards a day, regards it unto the Lord. I will give you therefore three
other notes to try this by whether your sorrow for sin be in respect to the
Lord because you have offended, and dishonored him, or not.

First, Then your sins will trouble you as well in the days of health, and
prosperity as in sickness, and affliction, else you do no more then an
hypocrite may do. For it is said of the wicked Israelites, Psalm. 78. 34. When
he slew them, then they sought him, and returned and enquired early after God.

Secondly, Then you will be troubled for one sin as well as for another, for
every thing you know to be a sin, for God is offended and dishonored by one
as well as by another. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law (says the Apostle,
Iam. 2. 10.) and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. I do not say we
should be troubled so much for one sin as for another, for God in his Law
has put a difference between sins; and as some duties that God requires of
us, so some sins are weightier then others ( Mat. 23. 23. Judgment, Mercy,
and Fidelity are called by our Savior the weightier matters of the Law) and it
is made there the note of an hypocrite to be more troubled for small sins
then for great, Matthew 23. 24. to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

But this is also certain that he that is troubled for sin, because it is
sin in resepect unto God because he is offended and dishonored by it, will
be troubled for one sin as well as for another. So we shall find David was
humbled, not for his adultery and murder only, but for all his sins, Psalm.
51. 9. Hide thy face from my sins; and blot out all mine iniquities.

The Apostle speaking of the loose performing of spiritual duties, of coming
to the sacrament without due preparation says, we must judge our selves even
for that, 1 Cor. 11. 31. And says that even for this sin God struck many
with sickness and mortality, because they would not judge themselves for such
sins God did judge them, 1 Cor. 11. 30. David's heart smote him even for cutting
of the lap of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5. When Saul counted the sparing of
Agag, and of the fattest of the cattle (specially for sacrifice) but a matter
of nothing, Samuel tells him, disobedience to God is as bad as witchcraft and
idolatry, 1 Samuel 15. 23. O therefore know thou art not troubled for any sin
in respect to God, if thy very unprofitablenes, idleness, peevishness,
unconstancy, playing fast and loose with God, do not trouble thee.

Yea the man whose heart is truly humbled for sin is conscious of the sinful
depravation of his nature, and is humbled for that (which is the root) as much
(if not much more) then for his actual sins which are the fruits of it. All
sins that defile a man, come from within from this fountain, Mar. 7. 23. David
was humbled for this, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity and in sin
did my mother conceive me. And so Paul though he had lived a most innocent life
even before his calling to Christ, Phil. 3. 6. Yet see how he was troubled even
for this, Romans 7. 14, 24.

Thirdly, If you be humbled for your sin out of respect to God, because God
is offended, and dishonored by it then will you be able to mourn for the sins
of other men, for God is as well offended and dishonored by them as by your own.
1. I showed you before that the man that is truly humbled for the Judgments of
God upon this land, will mourn more for the sins of the land, then for the
Judgments themselves. So must we, 2. be able to mourn for the sins of the
places, and towns we dwell in, specially if they be of note for religion. This
is prescribed as a duty, 1 Cor. 5. 2. Ye should have mourned, that he that has
done this deed, might be taken away. This is commended by the Holy Ghost as a
great virtue and grace in Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 8. that in seeing and hearing, he
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with the unlawful deeds of the
Sodomites. This has a great promise of special protection in the days of
common calamity. Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of
Jerusalem (says the Lord to the man clothed in linen with the writers inkhorne
by his side, Ezekiel. 9. 4.) and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that
sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.
3. For the sins especially of our own families, for they should trouble us
most; Nehemiah in his fast complained chiefly of his own, and of the sins of
his fathers house, Neh. 16. And it is said that when God should pour the
spirit of grace and of supplications upon his people, they should mourn every
family apart, Zac. 12 12. And Job eve^ out of the fear that his sons in their
feasting might have sinned, offered burnt offerings (which were always
accompanied with profession of humiliation) for them, Job 1. 5.

Certainly he that cares not how much lewdnes there be in the town where he
lives, Applic.
nor in his own family, and that is not unfainedly troubled for it nor
endeavors to reform it, was never yet rightly humbled for any sin of his
own.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED IN Ashby-Chappell, Oct. 4. 1629.

BY ARTH. HILDERSAM.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for Edward Brewster. 1633.

A SERMON PREACHED in Ashby-Chappell.
October. 4. 1629.
Eccl. 11. 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let
him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes
is vanity.
THe occasion of these words, and the dependence they have upon that went
before is this. Solomon in the six first verses of this Chapter, had earnestly
exhorted to the works of mercy and charity, and enforced his exhortation by
many strong and perswasory arguments. In this verse and that which goes before
it, he concludes that exhortation, with another forcible argument, taken from
the consideration of our future estate. And the sum of his argument is, as
if, he should have said thus: Do all that thou art able to do, that thou
may provide well for thy future estate. It is the very same argument in
effect which our blessed Savior uses to the same purpose, Luke 12. 33. Sell
that ye have and give alms: provide your selves bags that wax not old, a
treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts. As if he should say, bestow your goods so while you live here,
as you may have most use and comfort of them in the life that is to come. As
our Merchants that trade into Turkey or Persia will lay out their money there
upon those commodities, that will be most beneficial to them here, when they
shall come home again.

This argument Solomon propounds here by way of answer, to an objection that
men (specially voluptuous men) are apt to make against all this that he had
said to persuade them to works of charity and mercy, and whereby they are made
most backward unto this duty. The Objection is set down in the 7. verse,
Truly the light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the
sun. Where it is to be observed (for the opening of the words) that by light
is meant, a pleasant and prosperous, and comfortable life. For as our life is
called in Holy Scripture, the light of the living, Psalm. 56. 13. because life
it self is sweet and comfortable to man; so is a comfortable estate in this
life often set forth and resembled by this metaphore. When Eliphas would persuade
Job how beneficial a thing it would be unto him to return unto the Almighty,
not only in respect of spiritual and eternal, but even of worldly and
temporal blessings also, that he should be sure to receive by it, he
expresses it thus, Job 22. 28. thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be
established unto thee; and the light shall shine upon thy ways, that is thou
shall prosper in whatsoever thou take in hand, and have comfort in it. The
Jews (says the sacred Story, Est. 8. 16. upon the advancement of Mordecay,
and the reversing of Hamans letters) had light and gladness and joy and
honor. So that the Objection which the voluptuous man makes, verse 7. is in
effect thus much, Certainly life is sweet, and it is a great happiness, to
live plentifully, and prosperously, neatly, and pleasantly in this world, which
I can never do, if I should not be careful to keep that I have, If I should
hearken to thy counsel, and be so liberal and bountiful to the poor, as
thou would have me to be.

This Objection Solomon gives answer to in this verse. And in his answer 3.
points are to be observed.

1. A supposition of two things, 1. Suppose (says he) that a man do live many
years, which (yet) no man (specially no voluptuous man) has cause to look
for, For what is your life? (says the Apostle Iam. 4. 14.) It is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

2. Suppose also that he rejoice in them all; which (yet) is more unlikely and
(in a manner) impossible; for all men (good and bad) are subject in their whole
life, to many occasions of sorrow, which they can by no means avoid. Man is
born unto trouble (says Eliph. Job 5. 7. as the sparks fly upward. Yea every
day of man's life, will bring forth some new occasion of sorrow unto him, or
other sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, says our Savior, Mat. 6.
34. Yea it is thus even with the best men, all the day long have I been
plagued (says the Prophet, (Psalm. 73. 14.) and chastened every morning.

Then follows the 2. point to be observed in the words, and that is a charge
or admonition; as if he should say, admit both those things that I have thus
supposed; yet for all that, I advise and charge him, Let him remember the days
of darkness. Wherein also observe (for the opening of the words) 1. that by
the days of darkness he means all that time that we shall spend in the
estate of the dead. For though the godly (in respect of their souls) be
presently after death, translated into Paradise, according to that speech of
our Savior, Luke 23. 43. this day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and there
is no darkness there, nothing but light and comfort unspeakable, (the
inheritance of the Saints is in light, says the Apostle, Col. 1. 12. In thy
presence is fullness of joy (says David, Psalm. 16. 11) at thy right hand there
are pleasures for evermore) yet (in respect of the bodies of all men) as this
life is fitly compared to light, so is the state of the dead unto darkness.
And so speaks Job of it, Job 10. 21. Before I go whence I shall not return,
even to the land of darkness and to the shadow of death, that is before I dye:
yea even the souls also of all wicked men, shall after death abide in
darkness everlasting. And so their misery is expressed, Mat. 22. 13. Cast him
into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Secondly, Observe the reason why he would have these days of darkness to be
remembered and thought upon, because they are many, says he, a great many more
then the time we can hope to spend here. In which respect death is called, Ier.
51. 57. a perpetual sleep, and we use to call our grave our long home. And
even for this cause it behooves us to be more careful to provide well for our
future estate, then for this present life. As all wise men, will care more for,
and bestow more cost upon that house and land, which they hold in free hold or
by inheritance, then upon that where they are but tenants at will, or hold for
term of life only.

Thirdly and lastly, observe the conclusion which he infers upon this
admonition and charge, all that comes that man gets and enjoys here is
vanity, and emptiness, no sound comfort or contentment of heart is to be found
in it.

The principal point then that is to be observed (you see) in these words is
the admonition and charge, that Solomon gives here, to remember the days of
darkness; and from thence this Doctrine arises for our instruction: That it
is profitable and necessary for all men even in their best health, in their
greatest prosperity, to remember and think often of their death, and of their
future estate.

Two sorts of witnesses I will produce for the confirmation of this.

The first is of good men, who have thus judged of the meditation of death.

This appears 1. by their practice; they have been wont to think much of
their change. This was Jobs daily meditation, All the days of my warfare,
(says he, Job 14. 14. for so I read it with sundry of the best interpreters,
Vetus. Lat. Calvin, Pagnin. Vatablus, Arias Montanus.
) will I wait till my change come. Neither did he only in the times of his
misery and affliction think thus of his change and wait for it, but in the
days of his greatest prosperity also, as appears by that which he says, Job
3. 25. the thing that I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was
afraid of it come unto me. When he was in the height and strength of his peace
and health, he lived in continual fear and expectation of a change.

Secondly, It appears that they judged it profitable and necessary to think
much of their end, by the helps they were wont to use to keep their death
always in their remembrance.

For 1. they counted it their wisdom to visit the sick, and go often to the
house of mourning, even for this purpose. The heart of the wise is in the house
of mourning, says Solomon, Eccl. 7. 4. and why did they account it their
wisdom to do so? he had given us the reason of that in the 2. verse for this
is the end of all men (says he) and the living will lay it to his heart.

Secondly, to this end also they were wont to make their sepulchers in their
lifetime, so did Asa one of the good Kings of Judah, 2 Chro. 16. 14. and so did
good Iosia also, 2 Kings 23. 30. and so did Joseph of Arimathea, Mat. 27. 60.

Thirdly and lastly, they were wont in their prayers earnestly to beg help of
God this way, Teach us to number our days, say Gods people to God in their
prayer, Psalm. 90. 12. that is, teach us to consider the shortness and
uncertainty of our life, as David interpreted that prayer of Moses, in another
prayer of his to the same effect, Psalm. 39. 4. Lord make ^ee to know mine end,
and the number of my days what it is, that I may know how frail I am. Because
they knew well, on the one side, how useful and necessary it was for them, often
to think of the uncertainty and shortness of their life, and on the other
side how hard a thing it was for them to keep this in their mind, how apt they
were to grow forgetful of it, therefore they did earnestly sue unto God that
by his Holy Spirit, he would please to help them in this case. And this is my
first sort of witnesses.

The second is the Lord himself, for he has also declared himself to judge
so of the benefit and necessity of this meditation. 1. By that earnest charge
which our Savior gives to his Disciples concerning this, Mar. 13. 35. Watch
ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house comes, at even,
or at midnight, or at the cockerowing, or in the morning, and verse 37. And
what I say unto you, I say unto all; that is live in a continual expectation
of your end and of the account you must be called unto, because you know not
how soon and sudden it may be.

2. By that patheticall with the Lord utters, Deu. 32. 29. O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! He
wishes his people would understand and consider also, think and meditate
seriously of their latter end, and he accounts it a high point of wisdom for
them, to do so.

I know well that the meditation and thought of death is bitter to the flesh,
Object.
and uses to breed much heaviness and fear in the heart. And this is a chief
thing that makes men unwilling to entertain it.

But as many other bitter things are most wholesome and sovereign, Answ.
even so is this. Thus does Solomon answer this very objection which he knew
men would be apt to make, against that which he had said showing the benefit of
going to those houses, where people are mourning for the sickness or death of
their friends. Alas, (will men say) if we should use to do so, we should never
be merry, but sad, and pensive, and melancholic. O says he, Eccl. 7. 3. but
sorrow is better then laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance, the
heart is made better.

Three great benefits we may receive by thinking often and seriously of our
latter end. Which may serve for the Reasons and Grounds of the Doctrine.

1. This would season all our pleasures and earthly contents, Reason 1
so as we should be kept from surfeiting of them. He that is persuaded of the
necessity of watching continually for the Lords coming, and resolved to do
so, will keep himself sober from being overcome with the immoderate love of
any earthly thing. As he that knows he must keep the watch in a besieged
City, will be sure to keep himself from taking too much drink. Because the
time is short (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 29.) therefore let him that
rejoiceth, be as though he rejoiced not. As if he should say, take heed of
rejoicing too much in any earthly thing, because our time here is but short.
Therefore our Savior at a great feast, Mar. 14. 5. 8. falls into a meditation
and speech of his death and burial.

And this was also (it seems) the reason why sundry good men were wont to make
their sepulchers in their gardens the places of their greatest solace and
delight. So we read that M^n^sses did after his humiliation and repentance, 2
King. 21. 18. And so did Joseph of Arimathea also, as we may see, Ioh. 19. 41.

Secondly, nothing would have more force then this to restrain us from sin;
and to breed in us a care to please God in all things. This reason is given in
that prayer; Psalm. 90. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply
our hearts unto wisdom. If we could number our days well, and consider how
few they are like to be, this would make us apply our hearts to wisdom and
piety more seriously than we do. Experience shows this, even in the worst men.
O what Saints seem many of them to be in their extreme sickness? How fearful
are they then to offend God in any thing? Nay, no man (almost) is so
desperately wicked, that durst do any thing his conscience knew to be sin, if
he thought he must die instantly, so soon as he had done it. Durst any man
give himself liberty to be drunk, if he considered he might die while he is
drunk, as Elah did, 2 King. 16. 9, 10. Or durst any man commit whoredom, if
he could seriously think of this, that God might strike him suddenly, even
while he is in that filthy act, as he did Zimri and Cozby, Numb. 25. 8.
Therefore also we shall find this often noted for a chief cause of many gross
sins that men live in, even the wilful forgetting of their change, and putting
it out of their mind. David speaking of the profane man Psalm. 10. 4. who
through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God; God is not in
all his thoughts; gives this for a reason of all this profaneness, Verse 6.
He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved, I shall never be in adversity.
And the Prophet speaking of unjust and cruel men that did oppress the poor,
gives this for the reason of it, Amos 6. 3. because they did by all means put
out of their minds the thought of their death, and the judgment that they must
come unto, Ye put far away (says he) the evil day, and cause the seat of
violence to come near.

Thirdly and lastly, nothing would be of more force to work in us a care to
prepare our selves for death, that it may not take us at unawares before we be
ready for it, then this, if we would often and seriously think of it. And this
would be (doubtless) a great benefit and advantage unto us. This is a point of
true wisdom, and ought to be the chief care of every Christian, to provide,
that he may die well. Hear couns^ll, and receive instruction (says Solomon,
Proverb. 19. 20.) that thou may be wise at thy latter end. This is one maine
end we should aim at in all our hearing and seeking knowledge, that we may
learn to die well. This was the Apostles chief care, that he might finish his
course with joy, Act. 20. 24.

And on the other side, it is the most dangerous and woeful negligence that a
man can fall into, not to prepare before hand, and provide that he may die
well. O it is a most miserable thing for death to take us at unawares before we
be ready. Take heed to your selves (says our Savior, Luke 21 36.) that that
come not upon you unawares.

Sudden death certainly is a kind of temporal judgment, even unto the best
men (and so far forth may be prayed against) because the best man is not so
well prepared for death in the time of his health and prosperity, but he has
just cause to desire and endeavor also to prepare himself better for it
before he die. True it is we should be at all times (as Gods people were when
they did eat the passover, Exodus 12. 11. with their loins girded, their shoes
on their feet, and their staves in their hand.) ready to pass from this Egypt
unto our heavenly Canaan. But (though every man should be, yet) no man is so
well prepared at all times, as he ought to be. But sudden death is to a wicked
man that is not at all prepared for it, more then a temporal judgment. Though
a man have made his will beforehand, and have it in a readiness lying by him,
yet may he esteem it a good temporal blessing, when his last sickness
whereby God visits him, is not so violent, but he may be able to review it, and
add or alter some small things in it before his death. And on the other side
it may justly be accounted a temporal judgment upon him, when God takes him
away with a dead Palsy or Apoplexy that would disable him from doing so much.
And yet if he do die of such a disease, the matter is not great, because he had
made his will before, and disposed of his maine estate according to his mind.
But it is (we know) a matter of great danger and inconvenience for a rich man
that has not made his will before, to be taken with such a sickness at his
end. And even so is it in this case. Sudden death is no such judgment to Gods
child, who is for the maine prepared for it, as it is to the wicked man, who is
not at all prepared for it. It is certainly a dangerous and fearful thing for
a man to live out of Gods favor, and void of grace, at any time; but to die in
that estate, is the very up-shot of all misery. And so the Holy Ghost speaks
of it. Eliphaz speaking of the extreme unhappiness of wicked men, he concludes
it thus, Job 4. 21. They even die without wisdom, (says he) as if he should
say, and what can be said more to prove them most wretched men? So speaks the
Prophet when he would describe the misery of the man that has gotten a great
deal of wealth by oppression and fraud, Ier. 17. 11. at his end he shall be a
fool, says he; he shall be utterly void of true wisdom and grace, even when he
dies. And this must needs be so, because there is no possibility of repenting
and turning unto God, of recovering his favor, or obtaining any grace from him
after death. He that dies without grace, must to judgment presently so soon
as he is dead, Heb. 9. 27. And hell follows with death, says the Holy Ghost,
Rev. 6. 8. q. d. they go hand in hand; as judgment is immediately passed upon
them that die out of Gods favor, so hell is ready presently ^o receive them.

Now this Doctrine which you have heard thus opened and confirmed unto you,
Use. 1.
is of great use,

First, to reprove and condemn us all of great folly and madness. 1. None of
us are so careful to nourish this thought and meditation in our hearts, so
desirous or willing to think of our death and future estate as we ought to be.
Nay, 2. Most of us do wilfully refuse to think of death, but abandon this
thought by all means, and use our utmost endeavor to keep it out of our
hearts; as the Persian Kings were wont to keep all mourners out of their gates,
Esth. 4, 2. Nay, 3. (which is worst of all) many of us for this very cause,
will not think of our end, but banish by all means this meditation out of our
hearts, that we may sin the more freely. And with those vile men (that I told
you the Prophet complains of, Amos 6. 3.) we put far away the evil day of
purpose, that we may cause the seat of violence to come near, that without
fear and check of conscience we may run headlong into all excess of riot,
that we can devise.

Secondly, Use 2.
this Doctrine serves to exhort us all to prepare for death. For that is the
chief reason (as we have heard) why we should remember and think of it so often.
And this preparation consists in two things principally.

First, We must labor to weane our hearts daily, from the overmuch love of all
earthly things; and inure our selves to bear willingly the daily and ordinary
crosses we are subject to in this life, nothing makes us so unwilling and unfit
to dye, as the immoderate love of earthly things. They are in themselves
(certainly) Gods good blessings, and he does (of his goodness and bounty)
allow us to use and enjoy them, not for our necessity only, but even for our
delight and comfort also he gives us richly all things to enjoy, says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 17. But the love of them is a most deadly enemy to grace,
specially unto this grace of dying willingly and comfortably. That which the
Apostle says of the love of money, 1 Timothy 6. 10. that it is the root of all
evil, and cause why many are even pierced through with many sorrows, (the truth
whereof is never more seen then when they are to dye) may be likewise said of
the love of any other worldly thing. Love not the world (says the Apostle 1
John 2. 15.) neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. For this cause it was that our
blessed Savior, when he would prepare his disciples for persecution and death,
bears so much upon these points

First, That they would take heed of esteeming too highly of, or overloving any
of the comforts of this life.

Secondly, That they would learn to bear willingly the ordinary crosses God
is pleased to exercise them with. He that loves father or mother (says he,
Mat. 10. 37, 38.) more then me is not worthy of me; and he that loves son
or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes not his
cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me. And he said to them all
(Luke 9. 23.) if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me. And so the Apostle says of himself, 1 Cor.
15. 31. that he did dye daily; that is, by his willing forsaking of the
comforts of this life, and bearing of those daily crosses that he was subject
unto, he learned to dye every day.

Secondly, Our preparation for death consists in our care to dispatch without
delay and with all diligence, those things of most importance which must needs
be done before we dye. Because we do not know how soon, nor how suddenly
death may take us.

Thus we see the harvest man, and travailer that are afraid to be benighted,
are wont to do. And we have Christ's own example for this, I must work the
works of him that sent me (says he, John 9. 4.) while it is day, the night
comes when no man can work.

And what is that business of importance (will you say) that we must thus
dispatch without delay, if we would be well prepared to dye? Surely to make
this sure to our selves, that whenever we dye, our souls shall go to
Heaven: When this business is once done, we shall be able to dye confidently
and comfortably, when once we know (as the Apostle speaks of himself and of
others of the faithful also, 2 Cor. 5. 1.) that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were disolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, then we may s^y as he also does there, verse 8.
Therefore we are always confident; knowing that whilst we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord. It is held a good point of wisdom, for a
man (specially, if he be one that has much to dispose) to have his will
always in a readiness. And indeed so it is; for it is commanded of God, set
thine house in order, says the Lord by his Prophet unto Hezechia, Esa. 38. 1.
for thou must dye, and not live.

But there is one thing more needful then that is, even to set oursoules in
order, and to have them always in a readiness. This is that one thing that is
needful, of which our Savior speaks, Luke 10. 42. It stands us upon to make
our peace with God, and to acquaint our selves well with him before we dye, or
else with what comfort can we go unto him, and appear before him then, yea we
had need do it now in time of our health and without delay. Acquaint thyselfe
now with God (says Eliphas to Job 22. 21) and make peace, I because death
comes upon many and may do upon us, suddenly, for man knows not his times
(says Solomon, Eccl. 9. 12.) as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and
as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in
an evil time, when it comes suddenly upon them.

2. When extremity of sickness comes, we shall be most unfit then to set our
souls in order, to begin our acquaintance with God, or to make our peace with
him. Remember now thy Creator (says Solomon, Eccles. 12. 1.) in the days of
thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years drawnigh when thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them. He thought age an unfit time to begin
this work in; but our last sickness is (certainly) a more unfit time for it,
than age is. Then the mind of man is wont to be so distracted and troubled,
what with worldly cares for them that he shall leave behind him, what with the
extremity of pains that use to accompany sickness; and specially with the
terrors that rise from the apprehension of his future estate, and from Satan's
temptations, that he is not made incapable of comfort or direction, by the best
means that can be brought unto him. When Moses that excellent servant of God,
one of a thousand, came to the Israelites at such a time, though the message he
brought to them were as comfortable as any that they could hear, yet could
they receive no comfort or benefit at all by it. Moses spoke so (says the
text, Exodus 6. 9.) unto the children of Israel; but they hearkened not unto
Moses, for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

3. Admit we were never so able and fit to mind this matter then, and to go
about this weighty business; admit we could be then more apt to seek
reconciliation with God, than at any other time, yet have we just cause to
fear that (because we have wilfully neglected this work so long, and
presumptuously put it off till the last hour) the Lord (in his righteous
judgment) will refuse to be found of us at that time. Thus we shall find the
Lord has threatened to do, Prove. 1. 24, 26, 28, 29. Because I have called
(says he) and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and no man regarded,
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. Then
shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord.

Now if you shall ask me, how may this be done?

I answer, That he that would make this sure to himself, that when he dies he
shall go to heaven, must do these three things.

1. He must repent of all his known sins. He must call them to mind, bewail
them unfainedly, confess them to God, and crave earnestly of him the pardon of
them: and resolve with himself to forsake them all. For, 1. Sin is the s^ing
of death, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 15. 56. And if that be once done away
and forsaken, death can never hurt a man, nor has he any cause to fear it at
all. 2. On the other side, no man can hope to go to heaven with his sins
unrepented of. Know ye not (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. 9.) that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Any one of these sins unrepented of, will certainly exclude a man utterly
out of the kingdom of heaven. 3. Though it be dangerous for a man to live in
sin, yet is it a matter of far greater danger to him to die in sin, and
to be over-taken by death before he have repented of it. This our Savior
notes as the extreme unhappiness of the wicked Jews, and repeats it often,
John 8. 21. 24. that they should die in their sins.

2. Get good assurance (by a lively faith) that Christ is thine, and then shall
thou be able to die in peace, and in a certain hope to go to heaven when thou
art dead. When old Simeon had seen Christ, (whom he had waited for by faith,
and longed to see) and was thereby confirmed much in that faith he had in him
before; He blessed God an^ said, (Luke 2. 28, 29, 30.) Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. They that
have once seen and embraced Christ as he did, spiritually by faith, (I mean)
and not corporally only, shall die in peace; and none but they can do so. For,
1. It is Christ only that has overcome death for us, and taken away the sting
of it. When the Apostle had said 1 Cor. 15. 56. that sin is the sting of death.
But thanks be to God (says he, Verse 57.) which gives us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Death is overcome, so that it cannot hurt the true believer
at all; but him that is nor in Christ, it will sting unto death, even unto the
second death. 2. We can have no hope to come to heaven but only through him
Christ is in you (says the Apostle, Col. 1. 27.) the hope of glory. There is
no hope to come to glory, but only by Christ. Nay, there is no hope to come to
glory through him, unless he be in us, unless he dwell in us by a lively
faith.

3. If thou would be sure to go to heaven when thou die, labor whilst
thou live to lead an unblameable, a godly and fruitful life; even to do all
the good that God gives thee power and opportunity to do. As we have
opportunity (says the Apostle Gal. 6. 10. which none of us can tell how soon
it may be taken from us) let us do good unto all men, especially unto them that
are of the household of faith. See what comfort Hezechia found in this when he
was to die. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee (says he, Esa. 38. 3.) how I
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. Now (on his deathbed) his conscience gave this
comforta^^e testimony unto him, that he had lead a holy life; and now does he
(even before the Lord) comfort himself in that against the fear of death. See
also what a testimony the holy Apostle gives unto good works, even to the
works of charity and mercy in this case. Charge them that are (...) in this
world (says he, 1 Timothy 6. 17, -- 19.) that they (...) good, that they be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on eternal life. Works of charity (not as a meritorious cause of
salvation, but) as a sure evidence that by a lively faith we have interest and
title to the merits of Christ, shall be rewarded with stable and durable riches
in time to come, and will make a man able with confidence of hope to lay hold
on eternal life. And that which the Apostle says of certain bad men, 2 Cor.
11. 15. that their end shall be according to their works, may be said of all
good men also, their end shall be according to their works. A good life will
certainly end in a blessed and comfortable death.

Four things are wont to be objected against this, which I will briefly give
answer unto.

Experience shows daily that many do die willingly, Object. 1.
and quietly, and comfortably also, that have neither lived so unblameably and
fruitfully, nor used any such means to prepare themselves for death, as you
have prescribed.

To this I answer, Answ.
1. That we may not think that every one that dies quietly, and speaks
gloriously of his willingness to die, and of the peace and comfort that he
finds in the assurance of his salvation, does die happily and comfortably
indeed. For, the Holy Ghost speaks of some that were most wicked and wretched
men, that have no bands in their death, Psalm. 73. 4. In outward things all
things (as well in death as in life) fall alike to good and bad, as Solomon
says, Eccles. 9. 2. 2. We have just cause to suspect the peace and quietness
of conscience that seems to be in that man, that was never troubled nor
disquieted in his mind for his sins. Because the spirit of bondage and fear
uses to go before the spirit of adoption and comfort, as is plain by the
Apostles speech, Romans 8. 15. 3. And lastly, it is certainly a grievous
judgment of God, and such as we should all tremble at, to see a man that has
been in his whole life time notoriously wicked, to have no sight at all nor
trouble of mind for his sins before he dies. Our Savior pronounces them to
be happy men. Mat. 5. 3, 4, 6. that are so poor in spirit, that they mourn
for it, and hunger and thirst after righteousness. And if this be a blessed
thing in every child of God (how unblameable and civil soever his life has
been) at all times (even in the time of his best health and prosperity) to see
and feel in himself so just cause of mourning and trouble of mind, as breeds
in him an unsatiable desire after the righteousness of God in Christ; then
must it needs be a most woeful and cursed thing in a man that has been
notoriously wicked, to be void of all sight and sense of his sins, of all
trouble of mind for them, even then when he is summoned by sickness and death
to appear before the judgment seat of God; to go to hell in a sleep, and
never to have his conscience awakened till he come there. And indeed so the
Prophet speaks of this as of a most dreadful judgment of God, when he gives
up wicked men unto this blindness and senslesnesse of heart. The Lord has
powered out upon you (says he, Esa. 29. 10.) the spirit of deep sleep, and
has closed your eyes, so as you cannot see nor be sensible of your own estate.

But we see also on the other side in daily experience (say some) that many who
have seemed most religious in all their life time, Ob. 2.
and careful to live well, have (yet) showed very great unwillingnesse and
fear to die; more a great deal then other men usually do.

To this I have two things to answer. First, Ans. 1.
that it is indeed possible enough, even for a faithful and godly man to feel
in himself an unwillingnesse and fear to die. Good Hezechia wept sore, Esa.
38. 3. when the Prophet brought him word in his sickness that he must die and
not live: and David also prayed often against death, and that he might live
still, Psalm. 6. 4, 5. and 30. 8, 9. and 88. 9, 12. It is with many of Gods
people in this case, as it was with Lot when he would leave Sodom. Though Lot
had so small comfort in Sodom while he lived in it, 2 Pet. 2. 8. yet see how
unwilling he was to part with it, Genesis 19. 16. He lingered so, that the Angels
were feign to pull him out (as it were) by strong hand: they laid hold upon his
hand (says the sacred text) the Lord being merciful unto him, and brought him
forth, and set him without the City. Some unwillingnesse to die our Savior
tells Peter he should find in himself, even then when he should suffer
martyrdom for his sake. When thou shall be old (says he, Ioh. 21. 18.) thou
shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not. And there is good reason to be given for this. For,
1. Death being a great enemy to the nature of man, and even the dissolution of
it, there must needs be in all men (naturally) some fear of it. Such as have
been long, and inward, and dear friends, cannot part for adieu (as we say)
without much unwillingnesse, and expression of grief; as we see in the example
of Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 20. 41. And where were ever found in the world so
long and inward and dear friends, as the soul and body have been? 2. Who can
think of his personal appearance before the Majesty of God without some
fear? 3. Lastly, the best of Gods servants, though they know and believe that
when they die they shall not come into condemnation (as our Savior speaks,
John 5. 24.) but are already passed from death unto life; and therefore have no
just cause (in respect of their future estate) to fear death at all, but
rather to welcome it, and to rejoice in it, yet are they regenerated, and
(consequently) do believe but in part. And though the spirit (the regenerate
part) indeed be willing (as our Savior speaks, Mat. 26. 41.) yet the flesh
(the unregenerate part) will be apt to show it self weak and unwilling to die.

But then I answer secondly, 2.
that there is no man that has lead a godly life, but 1. He discernes and
bewailes his own corruption in this his unwillingnesse to die; he yields not
to it, but strives against it by all means; and even in this case finds in
himself that combat between the flesh and the spirit, that the Apostle
speaks of Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lus^eth against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other. 2. He does in
the end overcome this corruption; and is (by Gods grace) made most willing and
desirous to die, before God calls and takes him away, according to that gracious
promise made unto all Gods people, to all that have been careful to serve and
please him, Psalm. 29. 11. The Lord will give strength unto his people, the Lord
will bless his people with peace.

But then there is yet another thing objected against this that has been said
touching the assurance Object. 3.
they may have to die happily and well, that have been careful to live
religiously and well; namely, that many who have been most precisely
religious, have not only been void of comfort when they should die, but full
of terror in their conscience, calling in question the truth of their faith,
and of whatsoever goodness has seemed to be in them, apt to despair utterly
of the mercy of God in Christ.

My answer to this objection must consist of three branches. Answ.


1. 1.
It is possible indeed even for a man that has lived a most innocent and holy
life, to express in his last sickness much terror, and to break forth into
speeches that tend unto desperation, and even unto blasphemy also against God.
For, 1. There is no disease so violent and extreme, but the child of God may be
subject unto it, and die of it also as well as any other man. All things come
alike to all in this respect, as Solomon speaks, Eccl. 9. 2. And these things
that are objected (as causlesse fears and terrors, ravings, blasphemies,
fierce speeches and actions both against themselves and others) are known to
be the very natural effects of some violent and extreme diseases. 2. It cannot
be denied but that Satan also is wont to show the uttermost of his fury and
power against Gods servants in their last sickness. The last combat that they
have with him, is wont to be the sharpest of all other. The Apostle tells us
Col. 2. 15. that our blessed Savior spoiled the principalities and powers, and
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in his cross. All the
principalities and powers of hell did then set upon him, and showed their
uttermost strength and rage against him. This Christ did foresee, and told his
Disciples of also before hand, The prince of this world comes (says he, John
14. 30.) and has nothing in me: as if he should say, I know well that Satan in
my passion (which is now at hand) will come and assault me with all his forces,
but he has nothing (nothing of his own, no corruption at all) in me, and
therefore shall lose his labor, and do me no hurt at all. And as he did with
Christ our head, so has he been wont to deal also with the best of his
members and servants, even to set upon them most fiercely in their ^ast
sickness: and that for two causes. 1. Because he sees his time and opportunity
that he can have with them is now so short, having great wrath (says the voice
from heaven, Rev. 12. 12.) because he knows that he has but a short time. 2.
Because he knows we are then (through pains, and fears, and distempers of
body and mind) like to be most weak and unable to resist him.

Secondly, though godly men may have such conflicts with Satan, and experience
of his most fiery assaults upon their deathbeds; yet the Lord, the God of
peace is wont to tread down Satan under their feet, (as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 6. 20.) before they die. He uses to make them (even in this life) more
then conquerours over that distress and anguish which his assaults has
brought them unto. In all these we are more than conquerours (says he, Romans 8.
37.) through him that loved us. Yea the experience of many of Gods servants
has proved, that these bitter conflicts of theirs have ended in more abundance
of peace and comfort, than ever they found in their lives before; and that not
inwardly only in their own feeling; but God has made them able also to
express it outwardly, to the exceeding comfort and admiration of them that
have been about them.

Thirdly and lastly, although it should so fall out, that the Lord (for the
further hardening of wicked men, or for some other causes best known to
himself, whose judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. 33.) should take away any of his servants in
these fearful fits and conflicts, and utterly disable them from expressing by
word or gesture the victory over them, and the comfort that they have ended in;
yet are we to rest confidently assured of this, that every one that has lead a
good and godly life, does certainly die blessedly and comfortably, though we
cannot perceive it. Because we are to walk by faith and not by sight, as the
Apostle teaches us, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and more credit is to be given to the word of
God, than to all sense and experience of men: and therefore whatsoever we hear
them speak, or see in the manner of their death, we should resolve with
Solomon Eccl. 8. 12. Yet surely, I know that it shall be well with them that
fear God, which fear before him. For the Lord has expressly said of every
godly man, Prove. 14. 32. The righteous has hope in his death. And commanded us
Psalm. 37. 37. to mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, assuring us
that the end of that man is peace.

The fourth and last thing that may be objected against that which has been
said, Object. 4.
is this; if the death of all the godly be so blessed and happy, why has there
been such mourning and lamentation for their death among Gods people, as we
see there was both in the old Testament for the death of Jacob, Genesis 50. 10.
and of Samuel, 1 Samuel 25. 1. and of many more: and in the new Testament also,
for the death of Steven, Acts 8. 2. and of Tabitha, Acts 9. 36. and sundry
others?

To this I answer, Answ. 1.


1. That the happiness of the godly in their death makes nothing against our
mourning for them; but it is both lawful and fit for us to mou^ne for the
death of our Christian friends, (for all that.) 1. Out of the respect we owe
unto them, and out of that love and affection we are bound to show unto them.
And the Apostle notes it (Romans 1. 31.) for a sign of one that is given up of
God to a reprobate mind, to be void of natural affection toward them that God
has linked him unto. 2. Out of respect to our selves, and therein unto the
Lord also: for, we are to take it for an argument of Gods displeasure against
us for our sin; when he deprives us of such friends as were his good
instruments of our comfort any way. So Naomi, when God had taken from her her
husband and her two sons, said Ruth 1. 21. that the Lord had testified
against her, and the Almighty had afflicted her.

Secondly, 2.
though it be lawful and fit we should mourn for the death of our Christian
friends, yet may we not mourn for them immoderately, but take heed that we
exceed not this way. They that weep (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 30.) should
be as though they wept not. They must take heed their hearts be not too much
taken up and oppressed with grief: I would not have you to be ignorant
brethren (says he 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.) concerning them which are asleep, that ye
sorrow not even as others which have no hope. And we should moderate our grief
in this case, 1. Out of our respect unto the Lord, who is the doer of this. It
is he that gives, and it is he also that takes away our friends from us. This
quieted Jobs mind, and moderated his sorrow when he had lost all his sons and
daughters; The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, says he, Job 1. 21. It
becomes us all to stoop and submit our selves to his will in all things, and
to say with old Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. And immoderate sorrow in any of our losses, must needs argue a kind of
murmuring and impatiency against God. 2. Out of our respect unto our Christian
friends whom we mourn for: for death is to them (we know) a great advantage:
to die is their gain, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1. 21. Death makes them
happy and blessed, Write, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, says the
voice from heaven, Rev. 14. 13. For, 1. Death puts an end to all their
sorrows, afflictions and tentations that they were vexed with continually in
this life; now they rest from their labors, Rev. 14. 13. 2. Death puts an end
to all their infirmities, which they so much complained of; and perfecteth
their sanctification, which they so much longed after while they lived: The
spirits of just men (says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 23. when they are once
separated from their bodies and translated to heaven, and not before then) are
made perfect. 3. And lastly, their works follow them, Rev. 14. 13. Death puts
them in possession of their eternal happiness, and of that blessedness
whereby God has promised to reward their obedience, and all that care they
have had to please him. Certainly the least thing that any child of God has
done in love and obedience unto him, shall not be forgotten, nor unrewarded of
God: no not the dutifulness, and diligence, and faithfulness of a poor
servant to his master. Knowing (says the Apostle to such, Col. 3. 24.) that of
the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance; for ye serve the Lord
Christ. And whosoever (says our Savior, Mat. 10. 42.) shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. But this
reward is many times not given to Gods servants in this life. When the even is
once come, and we have done working, then will the Lord of the vineyard (as we
read Mat. 20. 8.) give unto all his laborers the wages he has covenanted to
give unto them.

Now because of this great advantage and benefit that (in all these three
respects) comes to our Christian friends by their death, we fail much in the
love we pretend to have borne unto them, if we mourn immoderately for their
departure from us. Old Barzillai was willing (even out of his love to his
son) to part with him, and forgo the great help and comfort he might have
had from him in his age, because of the great preferment he knew it would be to
his son to leave him, and live with David in his court, 2 Samuel 19. 37. And
what comparison is there between that preferment and this, that every child of
God is advanced unto by his death? 3. And lastly, out of respect unto
ourselves, we should moderate our grief for the departure of our Christian
friends; because we have not quite lost them, but we shall be sure to enjoy them
again, with much more content and comfort in their society than ever we did
here. By this consideration David moderated his sorrow for the death of his
child, 2 Samuel 12. 23. I shall go to him, but he shall not return unto me. For,
though we shall not know one another, nor enjoy the society and company one of
another in the life to come in that natural and carnal manner as we did in
this life; yet shall we certainly rejoice much more one in another, than ever
we did in this world. And this comfort that the faithful shall have in heaven
in their mutual society, is often mentioned in the holy Scripture as one part
and degree of that unspeakable happiness that they shall enjoy there. They
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (says our Savior, Matthew 8.
11.) in the kingdom of heaven. They shall be admitted into the general
assembly and church of the firstborn which are written in heaven, -- and to
the spirits of just men made perfect. And the Apostle says of the
Thessalonians (who were won to God by his ministry, and in whom he had taken
great comfort in this life) 1 Thessalonians. 3. 19, 20. that he knew well that in the
life to come, even in the presence of our Lord Jesus, and at his coming they
should be his glory, and joy, and crown of rejoicing: he should take far
more comfort in them then, than ever he had done in this world. And this may
suffice for answer to all th^se four things that have been objected; and to
settle your hearts in this truth, that the man that lives a godly and fruitful
life, may be sure to die happily and comfortably; and none but he. And thus
much also shall serve to have been spoken at this time. Let us now praise God
for his mercy, and commend this that we have heard to his blessing by humble
and faithful prayer.

FINIS.
TO HIS MOST WORTHY, AND MVCH HONORED Patron Master William Cokayne,
Merchant, at his house in Austine Friars in London.
SIR,
I Hope the world will not blame me, for increasing the crowd of
Englishwriters, with which, it is so much troubled: nor censure me of folly for
thrusting this little Book into the throng, where it is like to be smoothered,
if I may be admitted to put in this plea. To the first, that as a dutiful
son, in honor of my dear fathers Name and memory, I strive for some place
for this Monument, which may be some means to perpetuate the same in Gods
Church: as a faithful Executor, I am careful to discharge this part of his
(though but nuncupative) will, to endeavor the publishing of this, and some
other of his Works, which himself intended and had prepared for the press*
To the latter, I plead, that though it be in it self but small, yet will it
find in the throng, a book to which it is nearly allied, a child of the
same Authors brain and heart (the Lectures on Saint John 4.) which having
found free and speedy passage, will make way for this, and easily procure it
welcome and entertainment, where it self has found the like; and I presume
elsewhere also: for so much as the company of this may be procured at a far
easier charge then the former, and as it has one already to lead the way, so
(God willing) ere long (I hope) it shall be seconded by another of later b^^th,
but greater growth. It no way becomes me to commend this, or any other work
of his (let me rather strive to imitate him my self, then to commend him, or
any thing of his to others) his very name will commend them. And least under
that name, the reader should suspect he may be abused: I here solemnly
promise, that what is or shall be* by me published under his name, shall not be
loose notes (that have been taken by some ignorant Scribe) nor shall it be
made up with additions, and alterations of my own* bu^ the Copies under his
own hand carefully transcribed.

And as for publishing these Sermons, I have good reason, so for dedicating
them, to your self. The occasion of them was that heavy Visitation, which was
then upon your City; the drift of one part of them, was to moove his auditors,
to commiserate the (then) woeful estate of it, to you therefore as a Citizen
(of no mean note) have I directed them, but principally to you as my Patron I
have not, nor expect anything of mine own worthy public view: this I own
not as Author, but as Heir to the Author: and it being in mine hands, I
thought it my duty (being the first book* I had to dispose of) to present it
first into those hands, which freely bestowed the Presentation to this
Parsonage upon me. I have been for above these four years, covetous of some
fair opportunity to witness to the world, my thankful acknowledgement of
your favor to me; and to give public testimony of your worthy and exemplary
integrity, in discharging the trust reposed in you (to dispose of this
Benefice) without respect to your own gain, or pleasuring of your friends,
neglecting bribes of breath or money. You intended not to enrich your self by
this part of the Churches Patrimony, nor to make up other losses by gaining by
this. It was your care not only to shun the grievous sin of Simony and
corruption, but to avoid all suspicion of it, you passed by the near relation
of kindred, the importunate solicitation of friends, the mediation of great
Personages, and were pleased in your choice to crave the direction of your
pious, learned and most industrious Pastor, the great blessing and ornament of
your City and Parish: his love (which I may never forget, though I shall not in
any degree requite) induced him to nominate me, your confidence in his
judgment and uprightness, made you upon his commendation to make choice of
me a mere stranger, for your Clarke. Never had any Parson or Parish more
cause thankfully to acknowledge the religious care, and pious integrity of a
Patron, then we here have: or take any occasion to lay this your good work
open to wide report, and to propound you as a pattern, to them that are
entrusted with such charges. I do and shall praise GOD, as long as I live, for
raising you (beyond my thoughts and expectations) an instrument of so great
good to me: by your means he has freed me from those snares, wherein many
of our coat are (in these corrupt times) entangled* I do not eat the bread
of (either direct or indirect) Simony, but that which by GODS providence, your
incorrupt hand has reached out to me, a morsel of which will give me more
content, then abundance of the former sort. I doubt not, but GOD will
abundantly requite your kindness to his house, that he will bless you in
your Merchandise, and exchanges, who have been so careful not to make
Merchandise of the Souls of men, or to make sale of the Patrimony of the
Church, and portion of GODS Ministers; that he will continue and increase your
comfort in your hopeful children, who have been so faithful a Guardian to
this people; but principally that he will bless you in your Soul with
Spiritual and Heavenly graces and comfort, the means of which, you have been
so careful to provide for this place. For all which (as I hope) so I shall
continually pray; and such prayers are the best, and only requital, I can
make, and that I know, which you will accept of, together with this mine
acknowledgement, before witness, and upon record, that I am

West-Felton in Salop. December. 8. 1632. Yours in the bonds of thankfulness
most obliged, SAMVEL HILDERSAM.


