BEING A TRVE CHRONICLE HISTORY OF THE Untimely death of such unfortunate
Princes and men of Note, as have happened since the first entrance of BRVTE
into this Island, until this our latter Age,

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED THE FAMOVS LIFE AND DEATH OF QVEENE ELIZABETH, with a
declaration of all the Wars, Battles and Sea Fights, wherein at large is
described the Battle of 88. with the particular service of all such Ships, and
men of note in that action.

Contre fortune nulne peut. AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for William Aspley,
and are to besold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Parrot.
1619.

Love and live.

TO THE NOBILITY AND ALL OTHER IN OFFICE, GOD GRANT Increase of wisdom, with
all things necessary for preservation of their estates. Amen.
AMongst the wise (right Honorable) whose sentences (for the most part) tend
either to teach the attaining of virtue or eschewing of vice, Plotinus Plotinus.
that wonderful and excellent Philosopher has these words: The property of
Temperance is to covet nothing which may be repented: not to exceed the bands
of measure, and to keep Desire under the yoke of Reason. Which saying if it
were so well known, as it is needful; so well embraced, as is wished; or so
surely fixed in mind, as it is printed in his works: then certes many
Christians might by the instruction of an Ethnicke Philosopher, shun great and
dangerous perils. For to covet without consideration, to pass the measure of
his degree, and to let will run at randon, is the only destruction of all
estates. Else how were it possible, so many learned, politic, wise, renowned,
valiant, and victorious personages, might ever have come to such utter decay?
For example, we have Alexander the Great, Caesar, Pompey, Cyrus, Hannibal, etc.
All which (by desire of glory) felt the reward of their immoderate and
insatiable Quintus Curtius.
lusts: for if Alexander had bin content with Macedonie, or not been puffed up
with pride after his triumphs, he had never been so miserably poisoned. If
Caesar and Pompey had been satisfied with their victories, and had not fell to
civil dissension, the one had not been slain in the Senate with daggers, nor
the other abroad, by their friends procurement. If Cyrus had bin pleased
^ustinus ^^b. 1.
with all Persia, and Media, and not thirsted for blood, he had never come to
so unfortunate a fall. So if Hannibal had not so much delighted in glory of
warfare, his country had neither fell in ruin, Plutarchus. ^iuius. Colybius.
nor he bin miserably forced to poison himself. But you will say, desire of
fame, glory, renown, and immortality (to which all men well nigh by nature
are inclined, especially those which excel or have any singular gift of
fortune or the body) moved them to such dangerous, great, and hardy
enterprises, which must needs be confessed as an infallible verity: and
therefore I surely deem those Princes above specified (considering their
fortunes, fame, and exploits) had never come to such end, but for want of
temperance. And now since there are three other Cardinal virtues which are
requisite in him that should be in authority: that is to say, Prudence,
Justice, and Fortitude, which so wonderfully adorn and beautify all estates
(If Temperance be with them adjoined, that they move the very enemies with
admiration to praise them) some peradventure (as affection leads) will commend
one, some another: as Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers names Prudence, the
mother of virtues, but Cicero Aristot. Cicero. Prudence.
defines her the knowledge of things which ought to be desired and followed,
and also of them which ought to be fled and eschewed; yet you shall find that
for want of Temperance, some which were counted very wise, fell into wonderful
reproach and infamy. But Justice that incomparable virtue, (as the ancient
Ciuilians define her) is a perpetual and constant will which gives to every man
his right, yet if she be not constant, which is the gift of Fortitude; nor
equal in discerning right from wrong, wherein is Prudence; nor use proportion
in judgment and sentence, which pertains to Temperance: she can never be
called equity or justice, but fraud, deceit, injustice and injury. And, to
speak of Fortitude, which Cicero defines, a considerate undertaking Fortitude.
Cicero.
of perils, and enduring of labors; if he whom we suppose stout, valiant, and
of good courage, want Prudence, Justice, or Temperance, he is not counted wise,
righteous and constant, but sottish, rude and desperate. For Temperance (says
Cicero) is of reason in lust and other evil Cicero. Temperance.
assaults of the mind, a sure and moderate dominion and rule. This noble virtue
is divided into three parts, that is, Continency, Clemency, and Modesty,
which well observed and kept (if grace be to them adjoined) it is impossible
for him that is endued with the above named virtues ever to fall into the
unfortunate snares of calamity, or misfortune. But Ambition, which is
immoderate desire of honor, rule, dominion, and superiority, (the very
destruction of nobility and commonweals, as among the Romans; Sylla, Marius,
Carbo, Cinna, Catiline, Pompey and Caesar, are witnesses) has brought great
decay to our country, and contrymen. But I have here (Right Honorable) in
this book only reproved folly in those which are heedlesse: Injury in
extortioners, rashness in venterers, treachery in traitors, riot in rebels,
and excess in such as suppress not unruly affections. Now I trust you will so
think of it (although the style deserve not like commendation) as you thought
of the other part. Which if you shall, I doubt not but it may pleasure some; if
not, yet give occasion to others which can do better, either to amend these, or
to publish their own. And thus wishing your Prudence to discern what is meet
for your callings, Justice in the administration of your functions, Fortitude
in the defense of your Country, and Temperance in moderation of all your
affections, with increase of honors, and everlasting felicity: I bid you in
Christ Jesus farewell.

At Winceham the 7. day of December. 1586. Your most humble in the Lord, JOHN
HIGINS.

TO THE READER.
TO acquaint you in brief with what is done in this impression: know that the
verse is in proportion by measure, and in symphonie or rithmos, in diverse
places amended; the story in some places false and corrupted, made
historically true; the tragedies wrongly inserted, disposed in their proper
places, according to just computation of time; those never before collected in
one volume, published in this impression: for the form and frame of the whole
history I did intend to have reduced it into the same order, which I have
observed in my Additions; but prevented by other occasions, I have thus
digested it. The tragedies from the time of Brute to the Conquest I have left,
with dependencie upon that Induction written by M. Higins: Those from the
Conquest to this our last age, that is, to the fall of the Lord Cromwell,
excellently well penned by M. Drayton, has reference to that golden Preface
called M. Sackuils Induction. After these I have placed my Additions, the
falls of such Princes as were before omitted, and my Poem or Hymn of the late
dead Queen of famous memory. In all which I require no other gratification
for my pains, but a gentle censure of my imperfections.

THE CONTENTS of the book.
HOw King Albanact the youngest son of Brutus, and first King of Albanie (now
called Scotland) was slain by King Humber. Page 1. 2 How Humber the King of
Huns minding to conquer Britain, was drowned in the arm of sea now called
Humber. 18. 3 How King Locrinus the eldest son of Brutus lived viciously, and
was slain in battle by his wife Queen Guendoline. 22. 4 How Queen Elstride
the Concubine of King Locrinus, was miserably drowned by Queen Guendoline.
27. 5 How the Lady Sabrine daughter of King Locrinus and Elstride, was drowned
by Queen Guendoline. 38. 6 How King Madan for his evil life was slain by
wolves. 44. 7 How King Malin was slain by his brother King Mempricius. 47. 8
How King Mempricius given all to lust, was devoured by wolves. 50. 9 How King
Bladud taking on him to fly, fell upon the Temple of Apollo, and brake his
neck. 53. 10 How Queen Cordila in despair slew her self. 59. 11 How King
Morgan of Albany was slain at Glamorgan in Wales. 69. 12 How King Iago died of
the Lethargy. 72. 13 How King Forrex was slain by his brother King Porrex.
74. 14 How King Porrex which slew his brother, was slain by his own mother
and her maidens. 78. 15 How King Pinnar was slain in battle by Mulmucius
Donwallo. 80. 16 How King Stater was slain in battle by Mulmucius Donwallo.
82. 17 How King Rudacke of Wales was slain in battle by Mulmucius Donwallo.
83. 18 How the noble King Brennus after many triumphant victories, at the siege
of Delphos in Greece slew himself. 86. 19 How King Kimarus was devoured by
wild beasts. 103. 20 How King Morindus was devoured by a monster. 106. 21 How
King Emerianus for his tyranny was deposed. 110. 22 How King Cherinnus given
to drunkenness, reigned but one year. 111. 23 How King Varianus gave himself
to ye lusts of ye flesh. 112. 24 How the worthy Britain Duke Nennius
encountered with Julius Caesar, and was unfortunately slain. 114. 25 How the
Lord Irenglas cousin to King Cassibellane, was slain by the Lord Elenine cousin
to Androgeus Earl of London. 123. 26 How Caius Julius Caesar, which first made
this Realm tributorie to the Romans, was slain in the Senate house. 129. 27
How Claudius Tiberius Nero Emperor of Rome, was poisoned by Caius Caligula.
139. 28 How Caius Caesar Caligula Emperor of Rome, was slain by Cherea and
others. 145. 29 How Guiderius King of Britain, the elder son of Cimbaline,
was slain in battle by a Roman. 146. 30 How Lelius Hamo the Roman Captain
was slain after the slaughter of Guiderius. 148. 31 How Claudius Tiberius
Drusus Emperor of Rome, was poisoned by his wife Agrippina. 149. 32 How the
Emperor Domitius Nero lived wickedly and tyrannously, and in the end
miserably slew himself. 152. 33 How Sergius Galba the Emperor of Rome (given
to slaughter, ambition, and gluttony) was slain by the soldiers. 155. 34 How
the vicious Siluius Otho Emperor of Rome, slew himself. 157. 35 How Aulus
Vitellius Emperor of Rome, came to an unfortunate end. 159. 36 How Londricus
the Pict was slain by King Marius of Britain. 161. 37 How Seuerus the
Emperor of Rome and Governor of Britain was slain at York, fighting
against the Picts. 163. 38 How Fulgentius a Scythian or Pict, was slain at the
siege of York. 167. 39 How Geta the younger son of the Emperor Seuerus once
Governor of Britain, was slain in his mothers arms, by his brother Anthony
Emperor of Rome. 170. 40 How Aurelius Antonius Bassianus Caracalla Emperor of
Rome, was slain by one of his own servants. 174. 41 How Carrassus a
Husbandmans son, and after King of Britain, was slain in battle by Alectus a
Roman. 185. 42 How Queen Helena of Britain married Constantius the Emperor,
and much advanced the Christian faith through the whole world. 289. 43 How
Vortiger destroyed the young King Constantine, and how he obtained the crown:
and how after many miseries he was miserably burnt in his Castle by the
brethren of Constantine. 203. 44 How Vter Pendragon was inamoured on the wife
of Gorolus Duke of Cornewal, whom he slew, and after was poisoned by the
Saxons. 213. 45 How Cadwallader the last King of the Britains, was expelled by
the Saxons, went to Rome, and there lived in a religious house. 219. 46 How
Sigebert for his wicked life was thrust from his throne and miserably slain
by an heardsman. 225. 47 How Lady Ebb did flea her nose and upper lip away to
save her virginity. 235. 48 How King Egelred for his wickedness was diversely
distressed by the Danes, and lastly died for sorrow. 239. 49 How King Harrold
had continual war with the Danes, with the Norway King, with his brother
Tostius, and was at last slain in battle by William the Conqueror. 245.
From the Conquest.
50 M. Sackuils Induction. 255. 51 How the two Rogers surnamed Mortimers, for
their sundry vices ended their lives unfortunately. 271. 52 The fall of Robert
Tresillian Chief Justice of England, and other his fellows, for misconstruing
the Laws, and expounding them to serve the Princes affections. 276. 53 How Sir
Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester uncle to King Richard the second, was
unlawfully murdered. 281. 54 How the Lord Mowbrey, promoted by King Richard
the second to the state of a Duke, was by him banished the Realm, and after
died miserably in exile. 287. 55 How King Richard the second was for his evil
governance deposed from his seat, and murdered in prison. 293. 56 How Owen
Glendour seduced by false prophesies, took upon him to be Prince of Wales, and
was by Henry Prince of England chased to the mountains, where he miserably
died for lack of food. 296. 57 How Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, was
for his covetous and traiterous attempt put to death at York. 303. 58 How
Richard Plantagenet Earl of Cambridge, intending the Kings destruction, was
put to death at Southhampton. 307. 59 How Thomas Montague Earl of Salisburie,
in the midst of his glory was unfortunately slain at Oleance with a piece of
Ordnance. 309. 60 How Dame Eleanor Cobham Duchess of Gloucester, for practicing
of Witchcraft and sorcerie Suffered open penance, and afterward was banished
the Realm into the I Will of Man. 317. 61 How Humfrey Plantagenet Duke of
Gloucester, Protector of England, during the minority of his nephew King Henry
the sixth, commonly called the good Duke, by practice of enemies was brought to
confusion. 327. 62 How Lord William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, was worthily
banished for abusing his King, and causing the destruction of the good Duke
Humfrey. 340. 63 How Jack Cade naming himself Mortimer, traitorously rebelling
against his King, was for his treasons and cruel doings worthily punished.
345. 64 The tragedy of Edmund Duke of Somerset, slain in the first battle at
S. Albons, in the 32. year of Henry the sixth. 350. 65 How Richard Plantagenet
Duke of York, was slain through his rash boldness, and his son the Earl of
Rutland for his lack of valiancie. 360. 66 How the Lord Clifford for his
strange and abominable cruelty, came to as strange and sudden a death. 365. 67
The infamous end of Lord Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, for cruelly executing his
Princes butcherly commandments. 367. 68 How Sir Richard Neuil Earl of
Warwick, and his brother John, Lord Marquess Montacute, through their too
much boldness were slain at Barnet. 371. 69 How King Henry the sixth a
virtuous Prince, was after many other miseries cruelly murdered in the Tower
of London. 375. 70 How George Plantagenet third son of the Duke of York, was
by his brother King Edward wrongfully imprisoned, and by his brother Richard
miserably murdered. 380. 71 How King Edward the fourth through his surfeiting
and intemperate life, suddenly died in the midst of his prosperity. 392. 72 How
Sir Anthony Wooduile Lord Rivers and Scales, Governor of Prince Edward, was
with his nephew Lord Richard Gray and other causeless imprisoned and cruelly
murdered. 394. 73 How the Lord Hastings was betrayed by trusting too much to
his evil counselor Catesby, and villanously murdered in the Tower of London
by Richard Duke of Gloucester. 411. 74 The complaint of Henry Duke of
Buckingham. 433. 75 How Colingborne was cruelly executed for making a Rhyme.
455. 76 The wilful fall of the Blacksmith, and the foolish end of the Lord
Audley. 463. 77 How the valiant Knight Sir Nicholas Burdet, Chief Butler of
Normandy, was slain at Pontoise. 477. 78 How Shores wife, King Edward the
fourths Concubine, was by King Richard despoiled of her goods, and forced to do
open penance. 494. 79 How Thomas Woolsey did arise unto great authority and
government, his manner of life, pomp and dignity, and how he fell down into
great disgrace, and was arrested of high treason. 506. 80 How the Lord Cromwell
exalted from mean estate, was after by the envy of the Bishop of Winchester
and other his accomplices brought to untimely end. 520.
The Additions.
81 The life and death of King Arthur. 561. 82 The life and death of King
Edmund Ironside. 585. 83 The life and death of Prince Alfred. 603. 84 The life
and death of Godwin Earl of Kent. 617. 85 The life and death of Robert
surnamed Curthose Duke of Normandy. 631. 86 The life and death of King Richard
the first surnamed Coeur de Lion. 659. 87 The life and death of King John. 681.
88 The life and death of King Edward the second. 703. 89 The life and death of
the two young Princes, sons to Edward the fourth. 736. 90 The life and death
of King Richard the third. 750. 91 The Poem annexed called Englands Eliza. 783.
The end of the Contents.
THOMAS NEWTON TO THE Reader, in the behalf of this book.
AS when an arming sword of proof is made,
Both steel and iron must be tempred well:
(For iron gives the strength unto the blade,
And steel, in edge does cause it to excel)
As each good Blade-smith by his Art can tell:
For, without iron, brittle will it break,
And without steel, it will be blunt and weak:
So books, that now their faces dare to show,
Must mettald be with nature and with skill:
For nature causes stuff enough to flow,
And Art the same contriues by learned quill
In order good, and current method still.
So that, if Nature frown, the case is hard:
And if Art want, the matter all is marred.
The work, which here is offered to thy view,
With both these points is full and fitly fraught;
Set forth by sundry of the learned Crew:
Whose stately styles have Phoebus garland caught,
And Parnasse mount their worthy work have raught:
Their words are thundered with such majesty,
As fitteth right each matter in degree.
Read it therefore, but read attentively,
Consider well the drift whereto it tends:
Confer the times, perpend the history,
The parties states, and eke their doleful ends,
With odd events, that divine justice sends.
For things forepast are presidents to us,
Whereby we may things present now discuss.
Certes this world a Stage may well be called,
Whereon is played the part of every wight:
Some, now aloft, anon with malice gal'd,
Are from high state brought into dismal plight.
Like counters are they, which stand now in sight
For thousand or ten thousand, and anon
Removed, stand perhaps for less then one.
Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

THE AVTHORS Induction.
WHen Summer sweet, with all her pleasures past,
And leaves began to leave the shadie tree,
The winter cold increased on full fast,
And time of year to sadness moved me:
For moistie blasts not half so mirthfull be,
As sweet Aurora brings in springtime fair,
Our joys they dim, as winter damps the air.
The nights began to grow to length apace,
Sir Phoebus to the Antarctique began to fare:
From Libraes lance to the Crab he took his race
Beneath the line, to lend of light a share.
For then with us the days more darkish are,
More short, cold, moist, and stormy cloudie clit,
For sadness more then mirths or pleasures fit.
Devising then what books were best to read,
Both for that time, and sentence grave also,
For conference of friend to stand in stead:
When I my faithful friend was parted fro,
I gate me straight the Printers shops unto,
To seek some work of price I surely meant,
That might alone my careful mind content.
Amongst the rest, I found a book so sad,
As time of year or sadness could require:
The Mirour named for Magistrates he had,
So finely penned, as hear could well desire:
Which when I read, so set my heart on fire,
Eftsoons it me constrained to take the pain,
Not left with once, to read it once again.
And as again I viewed this work with heed,
And marked plain each party paint his fall:
Me thought in mind, I saw those men indeed,
Eke how they came in order Princely all;
Declaring well, this life is but a thrall,
Since those on whom for Fortunes gifts we stare,
Often soonest sink in greatest seas of care.
For some perdie, were Kings of high estate,
And some were Dukes, and came of regal race:
Some Princes, Lords, and Judges great that sat
In counsel still, decreeing every case:
Some other Knights that vices did embrace,
Some Gentlemen, some poor exalted hie:
Yet every one had played his tragedy.
A Mirror well it might be called, a glass
As clear as any crystal under Sun:
In each respect the Tragedies so pass,
Their names shall live that such a work begun.
For why, with such Decorum is it done,
That Momus spite with more then Argus eyes,
Can never watch, to keep it from the wise.
Examples there for all estates you find,
For Judge (I say) what justice he should use:
The noble man to bear a noble mind,
And not himself ambitiously abuse;
The Gentleman ungentleness refuse:
The rich and poor, and every one may see,
Which way to love, and live in due degree.
I wish them often well to read it than,
And mark the causes why those Princes fell:
But let me end my tale that I began.
When I had read these Tragedies full well,
And past the winter euenings long to tell,
One night at last I thought to leave this use,
To take some ease before I changed my Muse.
Wherefore away from reading I me gate,
My heavy head waxt dull for want of rest:
I laid me down, the night was waxed late,
For lack of sleep mine eyes were sore oppressed:
Yet fancy still of all their deaths encreast,
Me thought my mind from them I could not take,
So worthy wights, as caused me to wake.
At last appeared clad in purple black
Sweet Somnus, rest which comforts each alive;
By ease of mind, that wears away all wrack,
That noisome night from weary wits does drive,
Of labors long the pleasures we atchieue.
Whereat I joyed, since after labors past,
I might enjoy sweet Somnus sleep at last.
But he by whom I thought my self at rest,
Revived all my fancies fond before:
I more desirous, humbly did request
Him show the unhappy Albion Princes yore:
For well I wist, that he could tell me more,
Since unto diverse, Somnus erst had told
What things were done in elder times of old.
Then straight he forth his servant Morpheus called,
On Higins here thou must (quoth he) attend;
The Britain Peers to bring (whom Fortune thral'd)
From Lethean lake, and the ancient shapes them lend;
That they may show why, how, they took their end.
I will (quoth Morpheus) show him what they were;
And so me thought I saw them straight appear.
One after one, they came in strange attire,
But some with wounds and blood were so disguised,
You scarcely could by reasons aid aspire,
To know what war such sundry deaths devised;
And severally those Princes were surprised.
Of former state, these States gave ample show,
Which did relate their lives and overthrow.
Of some the faces bold and bodies were
Distained with woad, and Turkish beards they had:
On the over lips mutchatoes long of hair,
And wild they seemed, as men despairing mad;
Their looks might make a constant heart full sad:
And yet I could not so forsake the view,
Nor presence, ere their minds I likewise knew.
For Morpheus bad them each in order tell
Their names and lives, their haps and hapless days,
And by what means from Fortunes wheel they fell,
Which did them erst unto such honors raise.
Wherewith the first not making more delays,
A noble Prince broad wounded breast that bare
Drew near, to tell the cause of all his care.
Which when me thought to speak he might be bold,
Deep from his breast he threw an vnquoth sound:
I was amazed his gestures to behold:
And blood that freshly trickled from his wound,
With echo so did half his words confound,
That scarce a while the sense might plain appear:
At last, me thought, he spoke as you shall hear.
Faults escaped.
PAge 555. lin. 17. brows, read bows. p. 566. l. 10. left, r. let. p. 579.
l. 3. sh r. shore. p. 583. l. 13. speele, r. steel. p. eadem l. 15 veins
flow, r. veins did flow. p. 588. l. 3. nor, r. not. p. 599. l. 28. approth, r.
approach, p. 600. l. 11. t'abate, r. to abate p. 629. l. 23. this, r. his. p.
636. l. 5. foe, r. woe. p. 657. l. 16. soee, r. loare. p. 671. l 32. with
Austrian, r. with the Austrian. p. 682. l. 7. let, r. lets. p. 683. l. 37. to
obtain, r. t'obtaine. p. 706. l. 15. I, r. O. p. 728. l. 15. But, r. Blunt, in
some copies. p. 793. marg. Anno Reg. 51. r. 15. p. 834. l. 13. recoiled r.
recoile. p. 855. l. 30. throne, r. chair. 866. l. 25. house tops, r. houses
tops.

HOW KING ALBANACT THE YOVNGEST SON OF BRUTUS, AND FIRST KING OF Albany (now
called Scotland) was slain by king Humber, the year before Christ, 1085.
Since flattering Fortune slily could beguile
Me first, of Britain Princes in this land:
And yet at first on me did sweetly smile,
Behold me here, that first in presence stand.
And when thou well my wounded corpse have scand,
Then shall thou hear my hap to pen the same
In stories called Albanactae by name.
Lay fear aside, let nothing thee amaze,
Ne have despair, ne scuse the want of time:
Leave off on me with fearful looks to gaze,
Thy pen may serve for such a tale as mine.
First I will tell thee of my fathers line,
Then why he flying from the Latin land
Did sail the seas and found the Briton strand.
And last I mind to tell thee of my self,
My life and death, a Tragedy so true
As may approve your world is all but pelf,
And pleasures sweet, whom sorrows aye ensue.
Hereafter eke in order comes a crew,
Which can declare, of worldly pleasures vain
The price we all have bought, with pinching pain.
When Troy was sacked, and brent, and could not stand,
Aeneas fled from thence, Anchises son,
And came at length to King Latinus land:
He Turnus slew, Lauinia eke he won.
After whose death, Ascanius next his son
Was crowned King, and Siluius then his heir,
Espoused to a Latin Lady fair.
By her had Siluius shortly issue eke,
A goodly Prince, and Brutus was his name.
But what should I of his misfortune speak,
For hunting, as he minded strike the game,
He struck his father, that beyond it came.
The quarrel glaunst, and through his tender fide:
It flew, where through the noble Siluius did.
Lo thus by chance though princely Brutus slew
His father Siluius, sore against his will,
Which came too soon, as he his arrow drew,
Though he in chase the game, did mind to kill,
Yet was he banished from his country still,
Commanded thither to return no more,
Except he would his life to lose therefore.
On this, to Greece Lord Brutus took his way,
Where Trojans were, by Grecians, captives kept:
Helenus was by Pirrhus brought away
From death of Trojans, whom their friends bewept.
Yet he in Greece this while no business slept,
But by his facts, and feats obtained such fame,
Seven thousand captive Trojans to him came.
Assaracus a noble Grecian eke,
Who by his mother came of Trojan race,
Because he saw himself in Greece too weak,
Came unto him to aid him in this case,
For of his brother he could find no grace,
Which was a Greek by both his parents sides.
His Castles three the Trojan Brutus guides.
While he to be their Captain was content,
And as the Trojans gathered to his band,
Embassage to the Grecian King he sent,
For to entreat they might depart his land.
Which when King Pandrasus did understand,
An army straight he did therefore address,
On purpose all the Trojans to suppress.
So as King Pandrasus at Spartane town
Thought them in deserts by, to circumuent,
The Trojans with three thousand beat them down,
Such favor lo, them Lady Fortune lent.
By Mars his force, their rays and rancks he rent,
And took the brother of the Grecian King,
With others more, as captives home to bring.
The taken town from which the King was fled,
Sir Brutus with six hundred men did man,
Each prisoner was unto his keeper led
To keep in town, the noble Trojans wan:
And into woods the Troiane gate him than
Again with his, he kept him there by night
To quail the Grecians if they came to fight.
The King which called to mind his former foil,
His flight, and brother dear by Trojans take,
The town he lost, where Brutus gave the spoil,
He thought not so the field and fight forsake,
But of his men a muster new to make,
And so again for to besiege the town
In hope revenge, or win his lost renown.
By night the ambush, that his purpose knew,
Came forth from woods, whereas they waited by,
The Trojans all the unarmed Grecians slew,
Went through their camp, none could their force deny,
Unto the tent where Pandrasus did lie,
Whereas Lord Brutus took their King that night,
And saved his life as see'md a worthy wight.
"This great exploite so wisely well at chiu'd,
"The Troiane victour did a counsel call,
"Wherein might be for their estate contrived
"By counsel grave, the public weal of all.
"Now tell (quoth he) what ransom ask we shall?
"Or what will you for our avail devise?
"To which Mempricius answered, grave and wise.
"I cannot (Brutus) but commend thine act
"In this, thou noble Captain worthy praise:
"Which deemest well, it were an heinous fact,
"T'abridge the Grecian king of vital days,
"And that we ought by clemency to raise
"Our fame to sky, not by a savage guise,
"Since Gods and men both, cruelty despise.
"The cause we fought, was for the freedom all
"Of Trojans taken, we have freedom won,
"We have our purpose, and their king withal,
"To whom of rigor nothing ought be done:
"Though he the quarrel with us first begone.
"And though we owe the fall of Troyes requite,
"Yet let revenge thereof from gods to light.
"His subjects now bewail their proud pretense,
"And weapons laid aside, for mercy cry:
"They all confess their plagues to come from thence,
"Where first from faith of Gods they seemed to fly.
"Their Nobles dare not come the case to try,
"But even for peace, with all their hearts, they sue,
"And meekely grant, whence all their mischiefs grew.
"The Princess fair, his daughter, who surmounts
"For virtues rare, for beauty brave, and grace
"Both Helen fine, of whom they made accounts,
"And all the rest that come of Grecian race,
"She for her father sues, bewailes his case,
"Implores, desires thy grace, and gods above,
"Whose woes may them and thee to mercy move.
"Some Trojans say he should deposed be
"From kingdom quite, or else be slain he should,
"And we here bide, eke this misliketh me,
"Nay rather while we stay keep him in hold,
"Or let him pay a ransom large of gold,
"And hostage give, and homage do of right
"To thee, that wonst the field by Martial fight.
"For kingdoms sake a captive king to kill,
"Our names for aye with foul defame would brand;
"For us in Greece to dwell were even as ill,
"The force of Greece we cannot still withstand.
"Let us therefore both cruelty aband,
"And prudent seek both gods and men to please:
"So shall we find good luck at land and seas.
"Or since the Grecians will thee for to take
"The noble Lady Iunogen to wife,
"If thou so please, let him her dowry make
"Of gold, ships, silver, corn, for our relief,
"And other things, which are in Graecia rife.
"That we so fraught may seek some desert shore,
"Where thou and thine may reign for evermore.
This pleased both Brutus and the Trojans all,
Who wil'd forthwith that Pandrasus the King
Should reverently be brought into the hall.
And present when they told him of this thing,
So grief and sorrow great his heart did sting,
He could not show by countenance or cheer
That he it liked, but spoke as you shall hear.
"Since that the wrath of gods has yielded me,
"And eke my brother, captives to your hands,
"I am content to do as pleases ye,
"You have my realm, my life, my goods and lands,
"I must be needs content as Fortune stands.
"I give my daughter, gold, and silver fine,
"With what for dowry else you crave is mine.
To make my tale the shorter if I may,
This truce concluded was immediately:
And all things else performed by a day,
The King restored that did in prison lie.
The Trojans proud of spoils and victory,
Did hoise up sails, in two days and a night
Upon the I Will of Lestrigons they light.
And leaving of their ships at road, to land
They wandering went the country for to view:
Lo there a desert city old they fand,
And eke a temple (if report be true)
Where Dian dwelt of whom the Trojan crew
In sacrifice their captain counsel gave
For good success, a seat and soil to crave.
And he no whit misliking their advice
Went forth, and did before the altar hold
In his right hand a cup to sacrifice,
Filled both with wine, and white hinds blood scarce cold.
And then before her stature straight he told
Devoutly all his whole petition there,
In sort (they say) as is repeated here.
O goddess great in groves that putst wild boares in fearful fear,
And may go all the compass paths of every ayrie sphere,
Eke of the infernal houses too, resolve the earthly rights,
And tell what country in to dwell thou give us Trojan wights.
Assign a certain seat where I shall worship thee for aye,
And where repleat with virgins, I erect thy temples may.
When nine times he had spoken this, and went
Four times the altar round, and staid again,
He powered the wine and blood in hand he hent
Into the fire. O witless cares of men,
Such folly mere, and blindness great was then.
But if religion now bids toies farewell,
Embrace that is good, the vice of times I tell.
He laid him then down by the altars side,
Upon the white Hinds skin espred therefore:
It was the third hour of the night, a tide
Of sweetest sleep, he gave himself the more
To rest surely. Then seemed him before
Diana chaste, the goddess to appear,
And spoke to him these words that you shall hear.
O Brute, far under Phoebus fall, beyond of France that reign,
An Island in the Ocean is, with sea it is compast maine,
An Island in the Ocean is, where Giants erst did dwell:
But now a desert place that is fit, will serve thy people well.
To this direct thy race, for there shall be thy seat for aye,
And to thy sons there shall be built another stately Troy.
Here of thy progeny and stock, shall mighty Kings descend.
And unto them as subject, all the world shall bow and bend.
On this he woke, with joyful cheer, and told
The vision all, and oracle it gave:
So it reioyst their hearts a thousand fold.
To ships they got, away the shores they drove,
And hoysing sails, for happy winds they crave.
In thirty days their voyage so they dight,
That on the coast of Aphrica they light.
Then to Philaenes altars they attained,
(For so men call two hills erected are
In Tunise land) two brethren ground that gained
For Carthage once, and went it is said too far,
On Cyren ground for bounds, there buried were.
Because they would not turn again, but strive
With Cyren men, they buried them alive.
From thence they sailed through the middle lake,
Between Europa fair and Aphrica the dry:
With wind at will, the doubtful race they take,
And sailed to Tuscane shores, on Europe coast that lie.
Where at the last amongst the men they did descrie
Four banished bands of Trojans in distress
To sail with them, which did themselves address.
Companions of Antenor in his flight.
But Corinaeus was their captain than,
For counsel grave a wise and worthy wight:
In wars the praise of valiantness he wan.
Lord Brutus liked well this noble man,
With him full often confer of fates he would,
And unto him the oracles he told.
The Trojans so in number now increast,
Set on to sea and hoysed sails to wind.
To Hercules his pillars from the East
They cast by compass ready way to find:
Where through once past to Northward race they twind,
To Pirene cleeues, tweene Spain and France the bound,
Rejoicing near the promised I Will so found.
Eke unto Guyne in France they failed thence,
Where at the haven of Loire they did arrive,
To view the country was their whole pretense
And victuals get, their soldiers to revive.
Eke Corinaeus lest the Galls should strive,
Led forth two hundred of his warlike band,
To get provision to the ships from land.
But when the King Goffarius heard of this,
That Trojans were arrived on his shore,
With Frenchmen and with Guynes their power and his,
He came to take the prey they gate before,
And when they met, they fought it both full sore,
Till Corinaeus rusht into their band,
And caused them fly: they durst no longer stand.
First might you there seen hearts of Frenchmen broke:
Two hundred Trojans gave them all the soil
At home, with odds, they durst not bide the stroke,
Few Trojans beat them in their native soil,
Eke Corinaeus followed in this broile,
So fast upon his foes before his men,
That they returned and thought to spoil him then.
There he alone against them all, and they
Against him one, with all their force did fight.
At last by chance his sword was flowne away,
By fortune on a battle axe he light,
Which he did drive about him with such might,
That some their hands, and some their arms did leese,
Some legs, of some the head from shoulders flees.
As thus amongst them all he fought with force
And fortune great, in danger of his life,
Lord Brutus had on him there with remorce,
Came with a troop of men to end the strife.
When Frenchmen saw the Trojans force so rife
They fled away, unto their loss and pain,
In fight and flight nigh all their host was slain.
And in that broile, save Corinaeus, none
Did fight so fiercely, as did Turnus then,
Sir Brutus cousin with his sword alone
Did slay that time well nigh six hundred men.
They found him dead as they returned again,
Amongst the Frenchmen, wounded void of sense,
And bare his noble corpse with honor thence.
On this they bode awhile revenge to yield,
And to interre the dead, and Turnus slain,
They took a town not far from place of field,
And built it strong, to vex the Galls again.
The name they gave it still does yet remain,
Since there they buried Turnus yet men call
It Tours, and name the folk Turones all.
Which town they left at last with Trojans mand,
When as their ships were stored with what they need
Aboard, they hoise up sails and left the land,
By aiding winds they cut the seas with speed.
At length the shining Albion cleeues did seed
Their gazing eyes, by means whereof they fand
Out Totnes haven, and took this promised land.
The country seemed pleasant at the view,
And was by few inhabited, as yet,
Save certain Giants whom they did pursue,
Which straight to Caves in Mountains did them get:
So fine were Woods, and Floods, and Fountains set,
So clear the air, so temperate the clime,
They never saw the like before that time.
And then this I Will that Albion had to name,
Lord Brutus causde it Britain called to be,
And eke the people Britans of the same,
As yet in ancient Records is to see,
To Corinaeus gave he frank and free
The land of Cornwall, for his service done,
And for because from Giants he it won.
Then since our Troiane flock came first from Troy,
The Chieftaine thought that duty did him bind,
As Fortune thus had saved him from annoy,
The ancient town again to call to mind.
He built new Troy, them Trojan laws assignde,
That so his race to his eternal fame,
Might keep of Troy the everlasting name.
And settled there, in perfect peace and rest,
Deuoid of war, of labor, strife, or pain,
Then Iunogen the Queen, his joys increast,
A Prince she bare, and after other twain.
Was never King of noble Impes so feign,
Three sons which had so shortly here begat,
Locrinus, Camber, last me Albanact.
Thus having wealth, and eke the world at will,
Nor wanting ought that might his mind content:
To Increase his power with wights of warlike skill
Was all his mind, his purpose and intent.
Whereby if foes, invasion after meant,
The Britans might not fear of foreign lands,
But keep by fight, possessions in their hands.
Eke when his people once perceived his mind,
(As what the Prince does often most embrace,
To that the subjects all, are straight inclinde,
And reverence still in each respect his grace)
They gat in war such knowledge in short space,
That after they their force to try begun,
They cared for naught by wit or wight not won.
Those mighty people borne of Giants brood,
That did possess this Ocean-bounded land,
They did sub due, who often in battle stood
Against them in field, until by force of hand
They were made subject unto Brutes command.
Such boldness then did in the Briton dwell,
That they in deeds of valor did excel.
Whereby the King had cause to take delight,
And might be bold the less to fear his foes:
Surely each Prince may recke his enemies spite,
Thereafter as his force in fight he knoes.
"A princely heart the liberal gifts disclose.
He gave to each such guerdons for their facts,
As might them only move to noble acts.
No labors great his subjects then refusde,
No travels that might like his regal mind:
But each of them such exercise well used,
Wherein was praise, or glory great to find.
And to their liege bare faithful hearts so kind,
That what he wild they all obeyed his hest,
Naught else was current, but the Kings request.
What Prince alive might more rejoice then he?
Had faithful men, so valiant, bold, and stout:
What pleasures more on earth could lightly be
Then win an I Will, and live deuoid of doubt?
An I Will said I? nay named the world throughout
Another world, since sea does it divide
From all, that wants not all the world beside.
What subjects eke, more happy were then these?
Had such a King of such a noble heart,
And such a land enjoyed and lived at ease,
Whereof each man almost might choose his part.
No fear of foes, unknown was treasons art,
No faining friends, no fauning Gnatoes skill,
No Thrasoes brags, but bearing each good will.
But as each summer once receives an end,
And as no State can stable stand for aye,
As course of time does cause things bow and bend,
As every pleasure has her ending day,
As will can never pass the power of may:
Even so my father happy days that spent,
Perceived he must by sickness last relent.
As does the shipman well foresee the storm,
And knows what danger lies in Syrtes of sand:
Eke as the husbandman prouides beforne,
When he perceiues the winter cold at hand:
Even so the wise, that course of things have scand,
Can well the end of sickness great presage,
When it is joined with years of stooping age,
His sons and Counsel all assembled were,
For why he sent for us and them with speed.
We came in have, this news did cause us fear,
Since so he sent, we thought him sick indeed.
And when we all approcht to him with speed,
Too soon alas, his Grace right sick we found,
And him saluted as our duties bound.
And casting of his woeful eyes aside,
Not able well to move his painful head,
As silent we with tears his minnde abide,
He wild himself be reared in his bed.
Which done, with sight of us his eyes he fed,
Eke pausing so a while for breath he staid,
At length to them and us, thus wise he said.
No marvel sure, though you here with be sad
(You noble Britains) for your Brutus sake.
Since whilom me your captain stout you had,
That now my leave and last farewell must take,
Thus nature wills me once an end to make,
And leave you here behind, which after me
Shall die, as me depart before you see.
"You wot wherefore I with the Grecians fought,
"With dint of sword I made their force to fly:
"Antenors friends on Tuscane shores I sought,
"And did them not my promised land deny.
"By Martial power I made the Frenchmen fly,
"Where you to save, I lost my faithful friend
"For you; at Tours my Turnus took his end.
"I need not now recite what love I bare,
"My friendship you, I trust, have found so well,
"That none amongst you all which present are,
"With tears does not record the tale I tell.
"Eke whom I found for virtues to excel,
"To them I gave the price thereof, as due
"As they deserved, whose facts I found so true.
"Now must I prove, if pains were well bestowed,
"Or if I spent my grateful gifts in vain,
"Or if these great good turns to you I owed,
"And might not ask your loyal loves again.
"Which if I wist, what tongue could tell my pain?
"I mean, if you ungrateful minds do bear,
"What means death to let me linger here?
"For if you shall abuse your Prince, in this
"The gods on you for such an heinous fact,
"To take revenge, be sure will never miss.
"And then too late you shall repent the act,
"When all my Realine, and all your wealths are sacked:
"But if you shall as you begun, proceed,
"Of kingdoms fall, or foes, there is no dreed.
"And to avoid contention that may fall,
"Because I wish this Realm the Britans still:
"Therefore I will declare before you all
"Since you are come, my whole intent and will.
"Which if you keep, and wrest it not to ill,
"There is no doubt but evermore with fame
"You shall enjoy the Britans Realm and name.
"You see my sons, that after me must reign,
"Whom you or this have liked and counsail'd well.
"You know what erst you wished they should refrain,
"Which way they might all vices vile expel,
"Which way they might in virtues great excel.
"Thus if you shall, when I am gone ensue,
"You shall discharge the trust reposed in you.
"Be you their fathers, with your counsel wise.
"And you my children take them even as me,
"Be you their guides in what you can devise,
"And let their good instructions teach you three:
"Be faithful all: as brethren ought agree:
"For* concord keeps a Realm in stable stay:
"But discord brings all kingdoms to decay.
"Record you this: to the eldest son I give
"This middle part of Realm to hold his own,
"And to his heirs that after him shall live.
"Also to Camber, that his part be known,
"I give that land that lies welnigh oregrowne
"With woods, Northwest, and mountains mighty hie,
"By South whereof, the Cornish sea does lie.
"And unto thee my youngest son, that art
"Mine Albanact, I give to thee likewise
"As much to be for thee and thine apart,
"As North beyond the arm of sea there lies,
"Of which lo here a Map before your eyes.
"Lo here my sons my kingdom all you have,
"For which (remember) naught but this I crave:
"First, that you take these fathers grave for me,
"Embrace their counsel even as it were mine:
"Next, that between your selves you will agree,
"And never one at others wealth repine.
"See that ye bide still bound with friendly line.
"And last, my subjects with such love retain,
"As long they may your subjects eke remain.
"Now faint, I feel my breath begins to fail,
"My time is come, give each to me your hand,
"Farewell, farewell, to mourn will not prevail,
"I see with Knife where Atropos does stand.
"Farewell my friends, my children and my land,
"And farewell all my subjects, farewell breath,
"Farewell ten thousand times, and welcome death.
And even with that he turned himself aside,
Vpyeelding gasping gave away the ghost:
Then all with mourning voice his servants cried,
And all his subjects eke, from least to most.
Lamenting filled with wailing plaints each coast,
And so the Britans all as nature bent,
Did for their King full dolefully lament.
But what auailes, to strive against the tide,
Or else to drive against the stream and wind?
What booteth it against the Cliues to ride,
Or else to work against the course of kind?
Since Nature has the end of things assigned,
There is no nay, we must perforce depart,
Against dint of death, there is no ease by art.
Thus reigned that worthy King, that found this land,
My father Brutus, of the Trojan blood,
And thus he died when he full well had manned
This noble Realm with Britans fierce and good.
And so a while in stable state it stood,
Till we divided had this Realm in three,
And I too soon received my part to me.
Then straight through all the world began Fame to fly,
A monster swifter none is under Sun
Increasing: as in waters we descry
The circles small, of nothing that begun,
Which at the length unto such breadth do come,
That of a drop which from the skies does fall,
The circles spread, and hide the waters all:
So fame in flight increases more and more:
For at the first she is not scarcely known,
But by and by she fleetes from shore to shore,
To clouds from the earth her stature straight is grown,
There whatsoever by her trumpe is blown,
The sound that both by sea and land out flies,
Rebounds again, and verberates the skies.
They say, the earth that first the Giants bred,
For anger that the gods did them dispatch,
Brought forth this sister, of those monsters dead,
Full light of foot, swift wings the winds to catch;
Such monster erst did nature never hatch.
As many Plumes she has from top to toe,
So many eyes them vnderwatch, or more.
And tongues do speak, so many ears do hark,
By night tweene heaven she sties and earthly shade,
And shrieking, takes no quiet sleep by dark
On houses roofes; on towers as keeper made
She sits by day, and Cities threats t'inuade:
And as she tells what things she sees by view,
She rather shows that is fained false, then true.
She blazed abroad perdy a people small,
Late landed here, and found this pleasant I Will,
And how that now it was divided all,
Made tripartite, and might within a while
Be won by force, by treason, fraud, or guile,
Wherefore she moves her friends to make assay
To win the prize, and bear our pomp away.
A thousand things besides, she bruits and tells,
And makes the most of every thing she hears,
Long time of us she talks, and nothing else,
Eke what she sees, abroad in haste she bears,
With tatling toies and tickleth so their ears,
That needs they must to flattering fame assent,
Though afterward they do therefore lament.
By East from hence a country large does lie,
Hungaria eke of Hunnes it has to name,
And has Danubius flood on South it bye,
Dividing quite from Austria the same.
From thence a King was named Humber came:
On coasts of Albany arrived he,
In hope to be the King of Britanie.
When by report of subjects I did hear
How foe-men were arrived on my shore,
I gathered all my soldiers void of fear,
And back the Hunnes by force and might I bore.
But in this battle was I hurt so sore,
That in the field of deadly wounds I did,
My soldiers lost their noble Prince and guide.
Such was my fate to venture on so bold,
My rashness was the cause of all my woe:
Such is of all our glory vain the hold,
So soon we pomp and pleasures all forgo,
So quickly are we reft our kingdoms fro:
And such is all the cast of Fortunes play,
When least we think, to cut us quite away.
I deemed myself an heavenly happy wight,
When once I had my part to reign within:
But see the chance what hap did after light,
Or I could scarce t'inioy my glee begin.
This Hunne did seek from me my Realm to win,
And had his will: O flattering fortune, fie,
What meanest thou to make thy self so sly?
You worthy warriers by my fall beware,
Let wisdom work, lay rashness all apart,
When as with enemies you encountered are,
You must endeavor all your skillful art
By witty wiles, with force to make your mart.
Wit naught auailes late bought with care and cost,
Too late it comes when life and all is lost.
HOW HVMBER THE KING OF Hunnes minding to conquer Britain, was drowned in the
arm of sea now called Humber, about the year before Christ, 1085.
THough yet no foreign Princes in this place
Have come to tell their hapless great mishap,
Yet give me leave a while to plead my case,
And show how I slipped out of fortunes lap.
Perchance some other will eschew the trap
Wherein I fell, and both themselves beware,
And also seek the less their countries care.
I am that Humber King of Hunnes, that came
To win this Island, from the Britains fell:
Was drowned in Humber, where I left my name.
A just reward for him that lived so well
At home, and yet thought others to expel
Both from their Realm or right: well served was I,
That by ambition thought to elime so hie.
But I must blame report, the chiefest cause
Of my decay: beware of rash report:
It Is wisdom first to take a while a pause,
Before to dint of dangers you resort:
Lest when you come in haste to scale the fort,
By rash assault some engine, shaft or fire
Dispatch you quite, or make you soon retire.
For unto me the rumors daily flew,
That here a noble Island might be won:
The King was dead: no wars the people knew,
And eke themselves to strive at home begone,
It were (quoth I) a noble act well don
To win it then: and therewithal did make
Provision good, this famous I Will to take.
A warlike regal camp provided was,
And ships, and victual, for my Hunnes and me,
By sea to Britain conquest for to pass,
If Gods thereto or heavenly stars agree.
At length we came to shores of Albany,
And there to fight, with Britans, pitched our field,
In hope to make them flinch, fly, fall, or yield.
They met us, long we fiercely fought it out,
And doubtful was the victours part of twain:
Till with my Hunnes, I rusht among the rout,
And fought till that King Albanact was slain.
Then they to yield or pardon crave were feign,
And I with triumphs great received the pray,
And marched forward, flesht with such a fray.
I past an arm of sea, that would to God
I never had bin half so bold at first,
I made, to beat my self withal, a rod,
When so without their Realm I venture durst.
But mark my tale, thou heard'st not yet the worst:
As sure I thought the rest to circumuent,
By spies before, they knew my whole intent.
And or I wist, when I was come to land,
Not far from shore two Princes were prepared
Their scouts conveyed away my ships they fand,
And of my shipmens flesh they nothing spared.
To rescue which, as back again I fared,
The armies twain were at my heels behind,
So closde me in, I wist no way to wind.
On the East Loerinus with an army great,
By West was Cambre with another band:
By North an arm of sea the shores did beat,
Which compast me and mine within their land,
No way to escape was there but Water fand,
Which I must taste, or else the sword of those
Which were to me and mine full deadly foes.
So when I saw the best of all mine host
Beat down with bats, shot, slain, or forced to swim,
My self was feign likewise to fly the coast,
And with the rest the waters entered in.
A simple shift for Princes to begin.
Yet far I deemed it better so to die
Then at my foe-mens feetan abiectlie.
But when I thus had swam with hope to escape,
If I might wend the water waves to pass:
The Britans that before my ships had gate
Began watch me, where amidst the surge I was.
Then with my boats they rowde to me (alas)
And all they cried keep Humber, keep their King,
That to our Prince, we may the traitor bring.
So with my boats beset, poor Humber I
Wist no refuge, my weary arms did ache,
My breath was short, I had no power to cry,
Or place to stand, while I my plaint might make.
The water cold made all my joints to shake,
My heart did beat with sorrow, grief, and pain,
And down my cheeks, salt tears they gusht amain.
O must thou yield, and shall thy boats betray
Thy self (quoth I) no mercy Britans have:
O would to God I might escape away,
I wot not yet if pardon I may crave,
Although my deeds deserve no life to have.
I will, I nill, death, bondage, beast am I
In waters thus, in foreign soil to die.
With that I clapped my quauering hands abroad,
And held them up to heaven, and thus I said:
O Gods that know the pains that I have bode,
And just reuengement of my rashness paid,
And of the death of Albanact betrayed
By me and mine, I yield my life therefore
Content to die, and never grieve ye more.
Then straight not opening of my hands, I bowde
My self, and set my head my arms between:
And down I sprang with all the force I could,
So duckt, that neither head nor foot were seen,
And never saw my foes again I ween,
There was I drowned: the Britans, to my fame,
Yet call that arm of sea by Humbers name.
Take heed by me, let my presumption serve,
And let my folly, fall, and rashness, be
A glass wherein to see if thou do swerue:
Thou mai'st thy self perceive somewhat by me.
Let neither trust, nor treason, train forth ye,
But be content with thine estate, so shall
No wrath of God, procure thy hapless fall.
If thou be foreign, bide within thy soil
That God has given to thee and thine to hold:
If thou oppression mean, beware the foil,
Bear not thy self of thee or thine too bold,
Or of the feats thy elders did of old.
For God is just, injustice will not thrive:
He plagues the proud, preserues the good alive.
HOW KING LOCRINVS the eldest son of Brutus lived vitiously, and was slain in
battle by his wife, Queen Guendoline, the year before Christ, 1064.
IF ever any noble Prince might rue
My hapless deeds of yore, the same may I,
That would to God it were not far too true,
Or that I justly could my faults deny.
* The truth of things the end, or time, does try,
As well by me is seen: my hapless fall
Declares whence came my great misfortunes all.
I am Locrinus, second Britain King,
The eldest son of him that found this land:
Whose death, to me my mischiefs all did bring,
And caused why first I took my death in hand.
He chiefly wil'd me when he gave this land
I should be ruled, by all his Counsels will,
And use their judgments in my dealings still.
But what do I accuse my fathers hest,
What mean I here the unfaultie for to blame?
All he commanded even was for the best,
Though in effect, of best the worst became.
So things often times well meant, unfitly frame,
So often times the counsel of our friend
Apparent good, falls faulty in the end.
For as he wished, I used his Counsels aid,
In each thing that I deemed was good for me:
I never ought that they desired, denaide,
But did to all their minds and hests agree.
And Corinaeus saw my heart so (...),
By diverse means he sought the match to make,
That to my wife I might his daughter take.
So I that wist not then what marriage meant,
Did straight agree his Guendoline to have:
Yet afterward suspecting his intent,
My friends to me this point of counsel gave,
That * whosoever does of Prince alliance crave,
He means thereby to work some point of ill,
Or else to frame the Prince unto his will.
It may well be he meant no ill at all,
But * wise men always use to dread the worst.
And since it was the fountain of my fall,
From whence the spring of all my sorrows burst,
I may well think was some of us accursed.
For why, * the end does always prove the fact:
By end we judge the meaning of the act.
I made no haste to wed my spoused wife,
I wist I could (as yet) without her bide:
I had not tasted joys of trained life,
I deemed them fools by Cupids dart that did.
I Venus vile and all her feats defide,
I lived at rest, and ruled my land so well,
That men delighted of my facts to tell.
My brethren eke long weilded well their parts,
We feared no foes, we thought our state would stand:
We gave our selves to learned skillful arts,
Wherein we either fruit, or pleasure fand,
And we enjoyed too fine a fertile land,
That few in earth might with our states compare,
We lived so void of noisome carke and care.
But see the chance: when least we thought of ill,
When we esteemed our state to be most sure,
Then came a flaw to bridle all our will,
For strangers far began us to war procure.
And even when first, they put their pranke in ure,
On Albaine shores my brother there they slew,
Whose death we after made the Hunnes to rue.
When he was dead they hoped to win the rest,
And over Aby stream with have did hie.
But I, and eke my brother Camber, dressed
Our armies straight, and came their force to try.
We brake their rays, and forced the King to fly
Into the arm of sea they over came,
Where Humber drownde the waters took their name.
We either slew, or took them captives all,
Amongst the which (O mischief great to tell!)
The Gods to work mine overthrow and fall,
Sent Ladies three, whose beauties did excel.
Of which, because I liked one so well,
I took her straight, nor she did ought deny,
But each thing granted so she might not die.
Thus Humber we this hateful hungry King,
In Humber drencht, and him deprived of pride,
And of his lovely Ladies he did bring
He lost the pray, and all his men beside,
And we the spoils of all his host divide.
But I that thought I had the greatest share,
Had caught the cause of all my woeful care.
They called this Lady, Elstride, whom I took,
Whose beauty brave did so my wits confound,
That for her sake my promise I forsook,
Whereby I was to Guendoline first bound.
Me thought no Lady else so high renound
That might have causde me change my conflate mind,
So was I caught by snares of Cupid blind.
Was never none before so li'kd mine eye,
I loved her more then I could love my life:
Her absence still me thought did cause me dye,
I surely meant to take her for my wife.
But see how beauty breeds deadly strife,
Lo here began my whole confusion, here
Sprang out the shaft from whence this wound I bear.
For Corinaeus had no sooner heard,
That I did mean his daughter to forsake,
But straight as one that did naught else regard,
In have his voyage toward me did take.
Where he declared what promise I did make,
From which he said if once I sought to slide,
It would by dint of sword, and blood, be tried.
But if I would her take, as erst I said,
And not this stranger choose against his mind,
His help he promised at each time, and aid
To be so ready, as I wished to find.
He further said my country did me bind,
To take such one as all my subjects knew,
Since strangers to their foes are seldom true.
I waide his words, and thought he wished me well,
But yet because his stock should gain thereby,
I reckt them less: and yet the truth to tell,
I durst not dare my promise made deny.
For well I wist if once it came to try,
It would both weaken all this noble land,
And doubtful be who should have the upper hand.
Thus needs perforce I must his daughter take,
And must leave off to love where I delight:
I was constraind, contented to forsake
The form that most did captiuate my sight.
What luck had I on such a lot to light?
What meant you Gods that me such fortune gave,
To cast my mind on her I might not have?
To short my tale: his Guendoline I took,
I was content against my will: what then?
Nor quite for this mine Elstride I forsook.
For why, I wrought by skill of cunning men
A Vault along under the ground, a den
Her company wherein I used still,
There we accomplished our unhappy will.
There I begat my Sabrine silly child,
That virgin small, mine Elstride bare to me:
Thus I my wife full often times beguilde,
Which afterward did bear a son to me,
Named Madan: yet we never could agree.
And he that was the cause she was my Bride,
The while, her father Corinaeus did.
Which when I heard, I had my hearts desire,
I craved no more, there was my end of grief:
At least I thought to quench Cupidoes fire,
And eke to work my lusting loves relief,
I meant no more to stcale it like a thief:
But married Elstride, whom I loved as life,
And for her sake I put away my wife.
Likewise my Elstride I as Queen ordained,
And took her as my lawful wife by right:
But Guendoline that saw her self disdained,
Straight fled, and moved the Cornish men to fight.
To them when she declared her piteous plight,
In have they raisd an army, for to be
Reuengers of my new made Queen and me.
And I likewise an army did prepare,
I thought to quail their courage all by force:
But to my cost I found too late beware.
There is no strength in armor: men, ne horse
Can veil, if Jove on wronged take remorce.
Since he on whom the deadly dart does light,
Can never escape, by ransom, friend, or flight.
So when our armies met nigh Habrine stream,
The trumpets blew and I denide the peace:
I minded to expel them all the Realm,
Or else to make them ever after cease.
And they, except I Elstride would release
(They said) and take my Guendoline again,
They would revenge the wrong or else be slain.
On this we met, and valiantly we fought
On either side, and neither part did yield:
So equally they fell it was great doubt,
Which part should have the better of the field.
But I too bold rusht in with sword and shield,
To break their rays, so hasty men get smart,
An arrow came, and stroke me to the heart.
Thus was I brought to bale, unhappy, there,
My body pierst that wicked life had led:
When I had reigned all out twenty year,
And had my corpse with many pleasures fed,
The earth received my corpse as cold as led.
And all my pomp, my princely troop and train,
On earth no more shall see their Prince again.
To all estates let this for wedlock serve,
Beware of change, it will not hold out long.
For * who so minds from his mate to swerue,
Shall sure at length receive revenge for wrong,
It Is folly fight with God, h'is far too strong.
For though ye color all with coat of right,
No false deceit deceiues or dimmes his sight,
He guides the good, and wrekes the wrongs of might.
HOW QVEENE ELSTRIDE, THE Concubine and second wife of King Locrinus, was
miserably drowned by Queen Guendoline, the year before Christ, 1064.
ANd must I needs my self recite my fall,
Poor Princess I? must I declare my fate?
Must I the first of Queens amongst us all,
Show how I thrice fell from my princely state?
And from the lofty seat on which I sat?
If needs I must, then well content, I will,
Lest here my place in vain I seem to fill,
I am that Elstride whom Locrinus loved,
A Prince his daughter, came from Germans land.
My fame of beauty many Princes moved
To sue for grace, and favor at my hand.
Which brute once blown abroad in every land,
One Humber King of Hunnes with all his train,
To come to me a suitor, was full feign.
What need I tell the gifts to me he gave,
Or show his suite, or promise he me plight,
Since well you know a Prince need nothing crave,
May nigh command each thing as twere his right?
For * as the foul before the Eagles sight,
Even so we fall, submit, and yield us still
At Prince his call, obeysant to his will.
And for that time the Hunnes full mighty were,
And did increase by martial feats of war:
Therefore our Germane Kings aghast, did bear
Them greater favor, then was need by far.
My father durst not Humbers hest debar,
Nor I my self, I rather was content
In hope of crown, with Humber to consent.
Two Princely dames with me came then away,
He bragged to win these country parts all three.
We Ladies rather were this Prince his pray,
Because he promised that we Queens should be.
We came to cost, these country coasts to see,
Since he on whom our hope did wholly stand,
Was drowned, named Humber waters, lost the land.
For as you heard before when he supposed
He had won all, because he won a part,
Straightway he was again thereof deposed,
Constrained to fly and swim for life poor heart:
Lo here the cause of all my doleful smart:
This noble King with whom I came to reign,
Was dreucht, and drowned unto my grievous pain.
Then were his soldiers taken, slain, or spoild,
And well were they, that could make suite for life.
Was never such an army sooner foild:
O woeful war, that flowd'st in floods of strife,
And card'st not whom thou cut'st with cruel knife.
So, had not Venus fraught my face with hue,
I had no longer lived my form to rue.
But as I came a captive with the rest,
My countenance did shine as brave as Sun,
Each one that saw my native hue, were pressed
To yield themselves, by beams of beauty won.
My fame straight blown, to gaze on me they run,
And said I past each worldly wight, as far
As Phoebus bright excels the morning star.
Like as you see in night, if light appear,
Straightway to that each man directs his eye:
Even so among my captive mates that were,
When I did speak, or make my plaints with cry,
Then all on me they stared by and by,
Bemoning of my fates, and fortune, so,
As they had bin partakers of my woe.
My form did praise my plea, my sighs they sued,
My tears enti'st their hearts, some ruth to take.
My sobs in sight a seemly hue renewed,
My wringing hands, wan suitors shift to make,
My sober soothes did cause them for my sake
Me to commend, unto their noble King,
Who wild they should me into presence bring.
TO whom when I came, in cords as captive bound,
" O King (quoth I) whose power we feel too strong,
" O worthy wight, whose fame to skies does sound,
" Do pity me, that never wished thee wrong.
" Release me, one, thy captives all among,
" Which from my friends, by fraud am brought away,
" A Prince his daughter, drowned in deep decay.
" Now as thou art a Prince thy self, of might,
" And may do more then I do dare desire:
" Let me (O King) find favor in thy sight,
" Assuage somewhat thy deadly wrath and ire.
" No part of knighthood it is for to require
" A Ladies death thee never did offend,
" Since that thy foe, has brought her to this end.
" But let me rather safely be conuay'd,
" O gracious King, once home before I die:
" Or let me live thy simple waiting maid,
" If it may please thy royal Majesty.
" Or let me ransom pay for liberty.
" But if you mind revenge of vnwraught ill,
" Why spare you Britains my dear blood to spill?
With that the King: Good Lady fair, what is it
Thou can desire or ask but must obtain?
Eke would to God with all my heart I wist
Best way to ease thee of thy woeful pain.
But if thou will, do here with me remain.
If not content, conductors shall thou have,
To bring thee home, and what thou else wilt crau^*
" O King (quoth I) the gods preserve thy grace,
" The heavens requite thy mercy showed to me,
" And all the stars, direct thy regal race,
" With happy course, long length of years to see.
" The earth with fertile fruits enrich so thee,
" That thou may still like Justice here dispose,
" And evermore tread down thy deadly foes.
The noble King commanded to unbind
Mine arms, and give me liberty at will.
With whom such favor I did after find,
That as his Queen I was at elbow still:
And I enjoyed all pleasures at my fill.
So that they quite had quenched out my thrall,
And I forgot my former Fortunes all.
Thus lo by favor I obtained my suite,
So had my beauty set his heart on fire,
That I could make Locrinus even as mute,
Or pleasant as my causes did require.
And when I knew he could no way retire,
I prayed he would his favor so extend,
As I might not be blamed in the end.
For if (quoth I) you take me as your own,
And eke my love to you has constant been:
Then let your love likewise again be shown,
And wed me as you may your spoused Queen.
If since in me misliking you have seen,
Then best depart betime, before defame
Begin to take from Elstride her good name.
No wavering heart (said he) Locrinus bears,
No fained flattery shall thy faith deface:
Thy beauty, birth, fame, virtue, age and years,
Constrains me mine Elstride to embrace.
I must of force, give thy requests a place,
For as they do with reason good consent,
Even so I grant thee all thy whole intent.
Then was the time appointed and the day,
In which I should be wedded to this King.
But in this case, his Counsel causde a stay,
And sought out means at discord us to bring.
Eke Corinaeus claimed a former thing,
A precontract was made and full accord
Between his daughter, and my sovereign Lord.
And yet the King did give me comfort still,
He said he could not so forsake my love:
He evermore would bear me all good will,
As both my beauty and deserts did move.
Yet faithless in his promise he did prove:
His Counsel at the last did him constrain
To marry her, unto my grievous pain.
At which I could not but with hate repine,
It vexed me, his mate that should have been:
To live in hate a Prince his concubine,
That ever had such hope to be his Queen.
The steps of state are full of woe and teene,
For when we think we have obtained the throne,
Then straight our pomp and pride is quite orethrowne.
Lo twice I fell from hope of Princely crown,
First, when unhappy Humber lost his life:
And next I laid my peacocks pride adowne,
When I could not be King Locrinus wife.
But often they say the third does end the strife,
Which I have proved, therefore the sequel view,
* The third paies home, this proverb is too true.
The King could not refrain his former mind,
But used me still, and I my doubtful years
Did linger on, I knew no shift to find,
But past the time full often with mourning tears.
* A concubine is never void of fears,
For if the wife her at advantage take,
In rage revenge with death she seeks to make.
Likewise I wist if once I sought to fly,
Or to entreat the King depart I might:
Then would he straight be discontent with me.
Yea if I were pursued upon the flight,
Or came deflour'd into my fathers sight,
I should be taken, kept perforce, or slain,
Or in my country live in great disdain.
In such a plight what might a Lady do,
Was ever Princess poor, in such a case?
O wretched wight bewrapt in webs of woe,
That still in dread wast tossed from place to place,
And never foundest mean to end thy race,
But still in doubt of death in carking care
Did live a life deuoid of all welfare.
The King perceiving well my changed cheer,
To ease my heart with all devised deceates,
By secret ways I came deuoyde of fear,
In vaults, by cunning Masons crafty feats.
Whereas we safely from the Queen her threats,
So that the King and I, so used our art,
As after turned us both to pain and smart.
By him I had my Sabrine small, my child,
And after that his wife her father lost.
I mean he died and she was straight exilde,
And I made Queen unto my care and cost.
For she went down to Cornwall straight in post,
Anc caused all her fathers men to rise
With all the force and strength they might devise.
My King and hers, with me, against her prepared
An army strong: but when they came to fight,
Dame Guendoline did wax at length too hard,
And of our King us both deposed quight.
For from her camp an arrow sharp did light
Upon his breast, and made him leave his breath:
Lo thus the King came by untimely death.
Then I too late, began in vain to fly,
And taken was presented to the Queen:
Who me beheld with cruel Tigers eye.
" O queen (quoth she) that cause of wars have been,
" And deadly hate, the like was never seen,
" Come on, for these my hands shall rid thy life,
" And take reuengement of our mortal strife.
" I longed long to bring thee to this day,
" And thou likewise have sought to suck my blood:
" Now art thou taken in my spoils, a pray
" For thee my life full long in danger stood.
" I will both teach thy self and others good,
" To break the bands of faithful wedlock plight,
" And give thee that which thou deseruest right.
" O harlot whore, why should I stay my hands?
" O painted picture, shall thy looks thee save?
" Nay, bind her fast both hand and foot in bands,
" And let her some strange kind of torments have.
" What strumpet, think for that thou seem brave,
" Or for thy tears, or sighs, to escape my sight?
" My self will rather vanquish thee by fight.
Thou rather should my vital breath deprive
Then ever escape, if none were here but we.
But now I will not file my hands to strive,
Or else to touch so vile a drab as she.
Come on at once, and bring her after me,
With hand and feet (as I commanded) bound,
And let me see her here, as Humber, drowned.
A thousand things beside she spoke in rage,
While that a caitiffe did with cords me bind.
No tears, nor sobs, nor sighs, might ought assuage
The ielous Queen, or mollify her mind.
Occasions still her frantic head did find,
And when she spoke her eyes did seem as fire,
She looked as pale as chalk, with wrathful ire.
Ne stood she still, but fearcely me defide,
Raung'd up and down, and often her palms she struck.
Locrinus now (quoth she) had not thus did,
If such an harlot whore he had not took.
And therewithal she gave a Tigers look,
That made me quake, what lettes (quoth she) my knife
To rid this whore, my husbands second wife.
H'is dead, I live, and shall I save her life?
O Queen (quoth I) if pity none remain,
But I be slain or drowned as Humber was:
Then take thy pleasure by my pinching pain,
And let me hence as thou appointest pass.
But take some pity on my child, alas,
Thou know the infant made no fault but he
That Is dead, and I, therefore revenge on me.
No bastards here shall live to dispossess
My son, (she said) but since thou soughtest same,
I will provide for her a kingdom less,
Which shall hereafter ever have her name.
Thou know whereof the name of Humber came,
Even so Sabrina shall this stream be called,
Since Sabrine me, as Humber Locrine thral'd.
With that my child was Sabrine brought in sight,
Who when she saw me there in bands to lie,
Alas (she cried) what means this piteous plight?
And down she fell before the Queen, with cry:
O Queen (quoth she) let me more rather die
Than she that is guiltless should: for why, thy king
Did as his captive her to leaudnes bring.
Which when I saw the kindness of the child,
It burst my heart much more then doom of death:
Poor little lamb, with countenance how mild
See pleaded still: and I for want of breath,
(With woeful tears that lay her feet beneath)
Could not put forth a word our lives to save,
Or if therefore I might a kingdom have.
Her piteous plaints did somewhat death withdraw,
For as she long beheld the Queen with tears,
(Quoth she) let me have rigor void of law,
In whom the sign of all thy wrath appears.
And let me die, my fathers face that bears.
Since he is dead, and we are void of stay,
Why should I thee for life or mercy pray?
My mother may to Germany return,
Where she was borne, and if it please thy grace:
And I may well lie in my fathers tomb,
If thou will grant his child so good a place.
But if thou think my blood is far too bace,
(Although I came, by both, of princely line)
Then let me have what shroud thou will assign.
With that the Queen replied with milder cheer,
And said the child was wondrous feate, and witty*
But yet she would not her revenge forbear,
For why (quoth she) the proverb says, * that pity
Has lewdly lost full many a noble City.
Here Elstride now i will wreke my greefes on thee
To die, take leave, but talk no more to me.
On this my leave I took, and thus I said,
Farewell my country Germany, farewell:
Adieu the place from whence I was conveyed.
Farewell my father, and friends there dwell.
My Humber drowned, as I shall be, farewell.
Adieu Locrinus dead for thee I die:
Would God my corpse might by thy coffine lie.
Adieu my pleasures past, farewell, adieu.
Adieu the cares and sorrows I have had.
Farewell my friends that erst for me did sue,
Adieu that were to save my life full glad.
Farewell my fauning friends I lately had,
And thou my beauty, cause of death, farewell,
As often as heart can think, or tongue can tell.
Adieu you heavens, my mortal eyes shall see
No more your lights and planets all farewell,
And chiefly Venus fair that paintedst me,
When Mercury his tale to me did tell,
Eke afterward when Mars with us did dwell.
And now at last thou cruel Mars adieu,
Whose dart my life and love Locrinus slew.
And must I needs depart from thee my child?
If needs I must, ten thousand times farewell:
Poor little lamb, thy friends are quite exilde?
And much I fear thou shall not long do well.
But if they so with boiling rancour swell
As thee to slay which never wroughtest ill,
How can they stay my stained corpse to kill?
With that, my Sabrines slender arms imbrast
Me round, and would not let me so depart.
Let me (quoth she) for her the waters taste,
Or let us both together end our smart.
Yea rather rip you forth my tender heart:
What should I live? But they the child withdrew,
And me into the raging stream they threw.
So in the waters as I strived to swim,
And kept my head above the waves for breath:
Me thought I saw my child would venture in,
Which cried amain, O let me take like death.
The waters straight had drawn me underneath,
Where diuing, up at length again rose I,
And saw my child, and cried farewell, I die.
Then as my strength was wasted, down I went,
Eke so I plunged twice or thrice yet more:
My breath departed, needs I must relent.
The waters pierst my mouth and ears so sore,
And to the bottom with such force me bore,
That life, and breath, and mind, and sense was gone,
And I as dead and cold as marble stone.
Lo thus you hear the race of all my life,
And how I past the pikes of painful woe:
How twice I thought to be a Princes wife,
And twice was quite deprived my honor fro,
The third time Queen, and felt foul ouerthro.
Let Princely Ladies view mine history,
Mine haps, and woes, and hateful destiny.
Bid them beware, lest beauty them abuse,
Beware of pride, for have a fall it must:
And bid them Fortunes flattery refuse,
Her turned wheel is void of steadie trust.
Who reckes no mean, but leaves all to lust,
Shall find my words as true as I them tell:
Bid them beware in time, I wish them well.
HOW THE LADY SAbrine, daughter of King Locrinus and Elstride, was drowned by
Queen Guendoline, the year before Christ, 1064.
BEhold me Sabrine orphane erst bereft
Of all my friends, by cruel case of war:
When as not one to treat for me was left,
But jealousy did all their powers debar.
When as my father eke was slain in war,
And when my mother even before my sight
Was drowned to death, O wretch in woeful plight.
Trust who so will the staff of high estate,
And bring me word what stay thereby you have:
For why, if Fortune once displeasure take,
She gives the foil, though looks be neu'r so brave.
* It Is wisdom when you win, to win to save:
For often who trusts to get a Prince his train,
Would at the length of beggars life be feign.
This might the Hunne erst Humber well have said,
And this my mother Elstride proved too true,
When as his life by striving streams was staid,
And when the tyrants her in waters threw.
What I may say, my self reports to you,
Which had more terror showed then twice such twain:
Give ear, and judge if I abode no pain.
First when my fathers corpse was stricken down
With deadly shaft, I came to mourn and see:
And as he lay with bleeding breast in sown,
He cast aside his watring eyes on me.
Fly, fly, (quoth he) thy stepdame seeks for thee,
My woeful child: what flight may thou to take
My Sabrine poor, I must thee needs forsake.
See here mine end, behold thy fathers fall,
Fly hence, thy stepdame seeks thy staylesse life:
Thy mother eke ere this is wrapped in thrall,
You cannot escape of jealous grief her knife.
Farewell my child, mine Elstride and my wife,
Adue (quoth he) I may no longer bide:
And even with that he gasped breath, and did.
What bird can fly, and soar, if storms do rage?
What ship can sail if once the winds resist?
What wight is that can force of wars assuage?
Or else what war can bridle fortunes list?
What man is he, that dare an host resist?
What woman only dare withstand a field?
If not? what child but must to enemies yield.
My fathers soldiers fled away for fear,
As soon as once their Captains death they scand:
The Queen proclaimed a pardon every where
To those would yield and crave it at her hand:
Excepting such as did her aye withstand.
For so the course always of pardons goes
As saues the soldier, and entraps the foes.
Then wist I flight could nothing me prevail,
I feared her pardon would not save my life:
The storm was such I durst not bear a fail,
I durst not go t'intreate my fathers wife,
Although I never was the cause of strife:
For iealosie, deuoid of reasons reign,
With frenzies fume enragde her restless brain.
But see the chance: thus compast round with fear
In broiles of blood, as in the field I stand,
I wished to God my corpse were any where
As out of life, or off this hateful land.
No sooner wished, but there was even at hand
A soldier vile, in haste (quoth he) come on,
Queen Elstride will before thou ^^me begone.
The rascal rude, the rogue, the clubfist grept
My slender arm, and plucktme on in have:
And with my robes the bloody ground he swept,
As I drue back he haled me on full fast.
Under his arm my careful corpse he cast.
Since that (quoth he) thou put'st me to this pain,
Thou shall thereby at length but little gain.
So at the length we came where we descri'd
A number huge of folks about the Queen:
As when you see some wonder great betide,
Or else the place where some strange sight has been:
So might you there the people standing seen,
And gazed all when as they see me brought,
Then sure I deemed I was not come for naught.
And in the prease, some praisde my comely face,
In beauty Elstride which resembled right:
Some said I looked like my fathers grace,
But others said it was a piteous sight
I should so die: the Queen me pardon might.
They said the beast me bore did me abuse,
Which not so rudely ought a Princess use.
But what did this redress my woeful care,
You wot the Commons use such proverbs still:
And yet the captives poor no better are,
It rather helps their pained hearts to kill.
* To pity one in grief does work him ill.
Bemone his woe, and cannot ease his thrall,
It kills his heart, but comforts none at all.
Thus past we through the prease: at length we came
Into the presence of the jealous Queen,
Who naught at all the rascal rude did blame
That bare me so, but asked if I had seen
My father slain, that cause thereof had been.
O Queen (quoth I) God knows my whole intent
Of slaughter guiltless: I am innocent.
With that I saw the people look aside,
To view a mourning voice: I heard thereby
It was my woeful mother by that cried,
Lo Sabrine, bound at brinke of death I lie.
What pen, or tongue, or tears with weeping eye
Could tell my woes, that saw my mother bound
On waters shore, wherein she should be drowned.
With that I fell before the Queen, and prayed
For mercy, but with fiery eyes she bent
Her brows on me, out bastard vile (she said)
Thou wot'st not yet wherefore for thee I sent.
O Queen (quoth I) have pity, be content,
And if thou mind of mercy ought to show,
Drown me, and let my mother harmless go.
For why, she was a Prince his daughter, borne
In Germany, and thence was brought away
Perforce, by Humber, who by wars forlorn
Thy King as captive took her for his pray:
Thou may full well her case with reason way.
What could she do, what more then she or I
Thy captives now, thine own to live or die?
Take pity then on Princely race, O Queen,
Have pity, if remorce may ought require,
Take pity on a captive thrice has been,
Let pity pierce the rage of all thine ire.
But if thy breast burn with revenging fire,
Then let my death quench out that fuming flame,
Since of thy husbands blood and hers I came.
Much more I said while tears out streaming went,
But naught of ease at all thereby I gained.
My mother eke, did, as she lay, lament,
Wherewith my heart a thousand fold she pained.
And though the Queen my plaints to favor feigned,
Yet at the last she bad she should prepare
Her self to die, and end her course of care.
Then all her friends my mother Elstride named,
And pleasures past, and bade them all adue
Eke as she thus her last farewell had framed,
With loss of him from whom her sorrows grue.
At length to me (which made my heart to rue)
She said farewell my child, I fear thy fall,
Ten thousand times adue, my Sabrine small.
And as the cruel caytiffes came to take
Her up, to cast and drown her in the flood,
I fast mine arms about her clipped did make,
And cried, O Queen let mercy meek thy mood,
Do rather reaue my heart of vital blood,
Then thus I live: with that they slackt my hold,
And drencht my mother in the waters cold.
For love to aid her, venture in would I,
That saw my mother strive aloft for wind.
To land she looked and said farewell, I die,
O let me go (quoth I) like fate to find.
Said Guendoline, come on likewise and bind
This Sabrine here likewise, for so shall she
At once receive, her whole request of me.
Eke as I wish to have in mind her fame,
As Humbers is, which should her father been:
So shall this flood of Sabrine have the name,
That men thereby may say, a righteous Queen
Here drowned her husbands child of concubine.
Therefore leave Sabrine here thy name and life,
Let Sabrine waters end our mortal strife.
Dispatch (quoth she) with that they bound me fast,
My slender arms and feet, with little need:
And sau's all mercy, me in waters cast,
Which drew me down, and cast me up with speed,
And down me drencht the Sabrine fish to feed:
Where I abode till now from whence I came,
And there the waters hold as yet my name.
Lo thus this ielous Queen, in raging sort,
With bloody hate bereft her husbands health:
And eke my mother Elstrides life (God wot)
Which never meant to hurt this Commonwealth.
And me, Locrinus child, be got by stealth.
Against all reason was it for to kill
The child, for that her parents erst did ill.
But here you see, what time our pomp does bide,
Hereby you see, the vnsteadie trust in war,
Hereby you see, the stay of States etride,
Hereby you see, our hope to make does mar,
Hereby you see, we fall from bench to bar.
From bench (quoth I) yea from the Princely seat,
You see how soon us Fortune down does beat.
And here you see, how lawless love does thrive,
Hereby you see, how ielous folks do fare:
Here may you see, with wisdom they that wiue,
Need never recke Cupidoes cursed snare.
Here may you see, diuorcement breeds care,
Here seldom thrive, the children may you see,
Which in unlawful wedlock gotten be.
Declare thou then our fall and great mishap,
Declare the hap, and glory we were in:
Declare how soon we taken were in trap,
When we supposde we had most safest bin.
Declare what loss they have that hope to win.
* When Fortune most does sweetly seem to smile,
Then will she frown: she laughes but even a while.
HOW KING MADAN FOR HIS EVIL LIFE was slain by Wolves, the year before
Christ, 1009.
AMong'st the rest that sat in hautie seat,
And felt the fall, I pray thee pen for me
A Tragedy may some such wisdom geat
As they may learn, and some what wiser be.
For in my glass when as themselves they see,
They may beware: my fall from Fortunes lap
Shall teach them how t'eschew the like mishap.
I am that Madan, once of Britain King,
The third that ever reigned in this land:
Mark well therefore my death: as strange a thing,
As some would deem could scarce with reason stand.
Yet when thou have my life well thoroughly scand,
Thou shall perceive, not half so strange as true,
* Ill life, worse death, does after still ensue.
For when my mother Guendoline had reigned
In my nonage, full 15. years, she did:
And I but young, not well in virtues trained,
Was left this noble Island for to guide:
Whereby when once my mind was puffed with pride,
I past for naught, I used my lust for law.
Of right, or iustiee, reckt I not a straw.
No mean I kept, but ruled all by rage,
No bounds of measure could me compass in.
No counsel could my meekelesse mind assuage:
When once to fume I fiercely did begin.
And I excelled in nothing else but sin.
So that my subjects all did wish my end,
Save such to whom for vice I was a friend.
And pleasures plunged I took my whole repast,
My youth me led deuoide of compass quite:
And vices were so rooted in at last,
That to recure the ill, it past my might.
For * who so does with will and pleasure fight,
(Though all his force do strive them to withstand)
Without good grace they have the upper hand.
* What licour first the earthen pot does take,
It keeps still the savor of that same.
Full hard it is a Cramocke straight to make,
Or crooked Logges with wainscot fine to frame.
It Is hard to make the cruel Tiger tame.
And so it fares with those have vices caught:
* Naught once (they say) and ever after naught.
I speak not this as though it past all cure
From vices vile to virtue to retire:
But this I say, if vice be once in ure,
The more you shall to quite your self require.
The more you plunge your self in fulsome mire.
As he that strives in soakte quick sirts of sand,
Still sinkes, scarce ever comes again to land.
The gifts of grace may nature overcome,
And God may grant the time when we repent.
But I did still in laps of lewdnes run,
At last my self to cruelty I bent.
But who so does with bloody acts content
His mind, shall sure at last find like again,
And feel for pleasures thousands pangs of pain.
For in the midst of those untrusty toils,
When as I nothing fearde, but all was sure:
With all my train, I hunting rode for spoils
Of those, who after did my death procure.
These lewd delights did boldly me allure,
To follow still and to pursue the chase,
At last I came into a desert place.
Beset with hills, and monstrous rocks of stone,
My company behind me lost, or stayde:
The place was eke with hautie trees oregrowne,
So vast and wild it made me half afraid.
And straight I was with ravening wolves betrayed,
Came out of caves, and dens, and rocks amain,
There was Irent in pieces, kilde, and slain.
Woe worth that youth (in vain) so vily spent
Should ever cause a King to feel such smart:
Woe worth that ever I should here lament,
Or show the hurt of my poor Princely heart.
I think the clown that drives the mixen cart
Has better hap then Princes, such as I:
No storm of Fortune casts him down so hie.
A man by grace and wit may shun the snare.
It Is said * a wiseman all mishap withstands:
For though by stars we borne to mischieues are,
Yet grace and prudence bayles our careful bands.
* Each man (they say) his fate has in his hands,
And what he marres, or makes to leese, or save
Of good or evil, is even self do, self have.
This thing is seen by me, that led my days
In vicious sort, for greedy wolves a pray.
I wish, and will, that Princes guide their ways:
Lo, here by this eschew like chance they may,
And vices such as work their whole decay.
Which if they do, full well is spent the time
To warn, to write, and eke to shun the crime.
HOW KING MALIN WAS SLAIN BY HIS BROther King Mempricius, the year before
Christ, 1009.
IF Fortune were so firm as she is frail,
Or glosing glory were still permanent:
If no mishap men's doings did assail,
Or that their acts and facts were innocent:
If they in hope no hurt nor hatred meant,
Or dealings aye were done with duty due,
They never need their great misfortunes rue.
If pomp were pain, and pride were not in price,
Or hautie seat had not the highest place:
If they could learn by others to be wise,
Or else eschew the dangers of their race:
If once they could the golden mean embrace,
Or banish quite ambition from their breast,
They never need to recke or reap unrest.
But they do think such sweetenes in renown,
Upon this earth is all the greatest hap:
They nothing fear the hurt of falling down,
Or little room in Lady Fortunes lap.
They give no heed before they get the clap:
And then too late they wish they had bin wise,
When from the fall they would, and cannot, rise.
As if two twins, or children at the teate
Of nurce, or mother, both at once might be,
And both did strive the better dugge to geat,
Till one were down, and slipped beside her knee:
Even so it fares, by others as by me,
In fortunes lap they have so little hold,
She cannot stay both striving if she would,
I am that Malm one of Madans sons,
Which thought to reign and rule this noble I Will,
And would so done: but see what chance there comes
Where brethren love and friendship quite exile.
* Who thinks in trust no treason neither guile,
Is soonest clean bereaved of life and all,
In stead of rule he reapes the crop of thrall.
My youngest brother then Mempricius hight,
Whose hautie mind, and mine, were still at square:
We evermore as foes hight other spite,
And deadly ire in hateful hearts we bare.
He sought all ways he might to work me care,
And each regarded others envy, so,
As after turned both to painful woe.
Because my father loved him well, therefore
I feared my brother should obtain my right:
Likewise on favor boldned he him bore,
And neither had in virtues ways delight.
What need I here our inward griefs recite?
We, not as brethren, lived in hatred still,
And sought occasion other each to kill.
I having hope for to preserve the crown,
And he for that he feared my title bred
Such friendship, as might always keep him down
And both deprive him of his crown and head.
But when it chaunst our father once was dead,
Then straight appeared all his envy plain:
For he could not from his attempt refrain.
Some wished we should divide the realm in two,
And said my father eke was of that mind:
But neither of us both, that so would do,
We were not each to other half so kind.
And vile ambition made us both so blind,
We thought our reign could not be sure and good
Except the ground thereof were laid with blood.
At last a time of parle chosen was,
And truce concluded for our titles right:
Wherein I hoped might be brought to pass
That I enjoy in peace my kingdom might.
But secretly by policy and slight
He slew me with his sword, before I wist:
Where crown, peace, kingdom life and all I mist.
Thus was I by my wicked brother slain,
Which with my death his cruel eyes did fill.
This oftentimes they use to get and gain,
That cannot shun misfortune as they will.
Was never man pretended such an ill,
But God to him like measure shortly sent
As he to others erst before had meant.
Usurping wrong incurres the curse of heaven,
And blood cries out for vengeance at his hand,
Who still in care of humane good is given
The good to aid, and graceless to withstand.
If either vice or virtue we aband,
We either are rewarded as we serve,
Or else are plagued, as our deeds deserve.
Let this my warning then suffice each sort,
Bid them beware: example here you see:
It passes play, it is tragical disport
To clime the steps of stately high degree.
For though they think good fortune served not me,
Yet did she use me as she used the rest:
And so full often she serves even the best.
HOW KING Mempricius given to all lust, was devoured by Wolves, the year
before Christ, 989.
It Is often said, a man should do likewise
To other, as he would to him they did.
* Do as thou would be done to, says the wise,
And do as conscience and as justice bid.
There Is no man ought for Empire, as I did
His impious hands with cruel blood distaine:
For * blood does always cry for blood again.
Eke lustful life, that sleeps in sinkes of sin,
Procures a plague: fie, fie on Venus vile:
We little wot the mischiefs are therein,
When we with poisons sweet our selves beguile.
The pleasures pass, the joys endure but while,
And naught thereby at all we get or gain
But dreadful death, and everlasting pain.
Me thinks thou harkenest for to hear my name,
And musest what I am that thus do come.
I would or this have told it, but for shame:
And yet to give example here to some,
I will no longer feign my self so dome,
But even as others I will tell my fall:
Take here my name, my life, my death, and all.
I am Mempricius, Madans younger son,
Once King of Britain, that my brother slew:
Whereby the crown, and kingdom all I won,
And after nourisht vices more that grew.
Not natures laws, nor Gods, nor man's I knew,
But lived in lust not recking any thing,
I deemed all things lawful for a King.
First when I had my brother brought on bear,
I thought in rest to keep the Kingdom long:
I was deuoid of doubt, I had no fear,
Was none durst check me, did I right or wrong.
I lived at large, and thought my power so strong
There could no man prevail against my will,
I steed of law that used rigor still.
Then wickedly I fell to slothful ease,
A vice that breeds a number more beside.
I was so testie none durst me displease,
And eke so puffed with glory vain, and pride.
My senseless sense, as ship without a guide,
Was tossed with every fancy of my brain,
Like Phoebus chariot under Phaetons reign.
I deemed them foes that me good counsel gave,
And those my chiefest friends could gloss and lie:
I hated them that were so sage and grave,
And those I loved were lusty, lewd, and sly.
I did the wisest wits as fools defy,
Such sots, knaves, ruffians, roysters I embraste,
As were unwise, dishonest, rude, unchaste.
I lusted eke, as lasie lechers use,
My subjects wives and daughters at my will
I did so often as me pleased abuse,
Perforce I kept them at my pleasure still.
Thus gate I queanes and concubines at fill,
And for their sakes I put away my wife:
Such was my lewdness, lust, and lawless life.
But shame forbids me for to tell the rest,
It me abhors to show what did ensue:
And yet because it moves in my breast
Compunction still, and was God wot too true,
I Will farther tell whence my destruction grue.
To Sodom sin I foulely fell, and than
I was despised both of God and man.
Could I long prosper thus, do you suppose?
Might any ill exceed these vices told?
Think you there is any wight on ground that goes
Might escape revenge of vice so manifold?
No sure: * who is in sinfulnes so bold,
His vices fare like weeds, they sprout so fast
They kill the corpse, as weeds the corn, at last.
My great outrage, my heedlesse head, the life
I beastly led could not continue so:
My brothers blood, my leaving of my wife,
And working of my friends and subjects woe
Cried still to God, for my foul ouerthroe,
Who hears the wronged, who viewes their careful case,
And at the length does all their foes deface.
Yet I mistrusting no mishaps at hand,
(Though I were worthy twenty times to die)
I lewdly lived, and did my wealth withstand.
I never thought my end was half so me.
For my disport I rode on hunting, I,
In woods the fearful Heart I chased fast,
'Till quite I lost my company at last.
And or I wist, to cost I found my foes,
By chance I came whereas the Wolves they bred:
Which in a moment did me round enclose,
And mounted at my horse his throat and head.
Some on the hinder parts their panches fed.
Yet fought I still to escape, if it might be,
Till they my panting horse pulled down with me.
Then was I hopeless to escape their jaws,
They fastened all their holders fast on me:
And on my royal robes they set their claws:
My Princely presence, nor my high degree
Moved them no more obeysant for to be,
Nor of my corpse to take no more remorce,
Then did the grievous groaning of my horse.
But rauenously they rent my breast and throat,
Forsook my steed, came all at once and tare
My Kingly corpse, from which they fleid my coat,
And of my flesh they made at all no spare,
They never left me till my bones were bare.
Lo thus I slew my brother, left my wife,
Lived vilely, and as vilely ended life.
Beware of bloody broiles, beware of wrong,
Embrace the counsel of the wise and sage:
Trust not to power though it be nere so strong,
Beware of rashness rude and roisters rage.
Eschew vile Venus toys, she cuts off age,
And learn this lesson often, and tell thy friend,
By sudden death, pockes, begging, harlots end.
HOW KING BLADVD, TAKING ON HIM TO FLY, fell upon the Temple of Apollo, and
brake his neck, the year before Christ, 844.
I Pray thee Higgins take in hand thy pen,
And write my life and fall among'st the rest:
A warning set me down for curious men,
Whose wits the work of nature seek to wrest.
I was Prince Bladud pregnant as the best.
Of wisdom, wealth, and learning I had store,
Of regal race: or what I craved more?
But this in all the sorts of men we see,
An discontented mind, when much they have:
The learned yet would more profounder be,
The richest most t'encrease their wealth do crave.
The finest Dames do slike their faces brave.
The noble higher climes and to the skies
T'aduance his name he daily does devise.
In Britain though I learned had full well
The arts, and could among'st the wise confer:
Yet when of Athens I the fame heard tell,
(Though it in Greece so far hence distant were)
I trauail'd thither, writers witness are,
I studied there, thence learned men I brought,
That noble Arts in Britain might be taught.
But after he was dead that was my stay,
My father grave, I mean the worthy King:
Then all the Britains shortly by a day,
To royal seat elected me did bring.
Where I to place in order every thing,
Received both crown and scepter in my hand,
With right and equity to rule this land.
Then, for because the sway of all the I Will
Depended on my government to rest:
I did consult with all the Peers a while,
And of my fathers Counselors the best.
I order took for matters vnredrest,
Giving to each such place as best did fit,
Their birth, their wealth, their persons and their wit.
The learned Greeks, whom I from Athens brought,
Conferring with the British learned men:
A place, as I commanded them, had sought
Amid'st the Realm, and brought me word again.
At Staneford there I built a College then,
And of my land I gave the fertil'st parts,
To foster learning and the famous Arts.
By this, of skillful men the land had store,
And all the arts were read in Britain well:
No country was for learning praised more.
We did in noble science so excel,
From other nations hither came to dwell
The wisest wits, commending us to skies:
Deeming us people valiant, learned and wise.
And for that time, of Gods we honored all,
Apollo high for wisdom, art, and skill:
At Troynouant a Temple special
I built to him, for sacrifices still.
Whereon I fell, as after speak I will.
Such was our use and superstition then,
To deem as Gods the images of men.
By arts I made the wholesome Baths at Bathe,
And made therefore two Tons of burning brass:
And other twain seven kinds of salts that have
In them in closde, but these be made of glass,
With sulphur filled, wild fire emixt there was,
And in four wells these Tons I did assay,
To place by art that they might last of aye.
Which waters heat and clensing perfect power,
With vapors of the sulphur, salts, and fire,
Has virtue great, to heal, and wash, and scowre
The bathed sores therein that health desire.
If of the virtues, more thou do require,
I will recite what old experience tells,
In causes cold the virtues of these wells.
The bathes to soften sinews virtue have,
And also for to cleanse and scowre the skin
From Morphewes white and black, to heal and save
The bodies freckled, faint, are bathed therein:
Scabs, lepry, sores both old and festered in,
The scurfe, botch, itch, gout, pox, and humors fell,
The milt and liver hard it heals well.
I must confess by learned skill I found
Those native wells whence ye have help for men.
But well thou know there runs from under ground
Springs sweet, salt, cold, and hot even now as then,
From rock, saltpeter, alume, gravel, fen,
From sulphur, iron, lead, gold, brass and tin:
Springs virtue take of veins that they been in.
Then who so knows by natures work in these,
Of metals or of mines the force to heal,
May sooner give his judgment in disease,
For curing by the bath, and surer deal
With sickly people of the public weal,
And also find of fountains hot, and cold,
To heal by them the sick, both young and old.
The City eke of Bathe, I founded there,
Renouned far by reason of the wels:
And many monuments that ancient were
I placed there, thou know the story tells.
I sought renown and fame and nothing else.
But when our acts extols us to the skies,
We look not down from whence we first did rise.
There are but few, whom Fortune bathes in bless,
But blinded are, and dazelingly they look:
They see naught else but worldly happiness,
At that they only fish with Fortunes hook.
Ambition will not wisdoms counsel brook,
Pride sets her thoughts on things that vade away,
Forsaking virtue which does nere decay.
Men's vain delights are wondrous to behold,
For that that reason nils, nor nature sowes
They take in hand on science far too bold,
Deceived by subtle snares of devilish shows.
From which attempts a flood of mischief flows,
An heap of hurts, a fry of foul decaies,
A flock of fears, and thrals a thousand ways.
If that the water fish forsake the stream
Against his kind, feels he no hurt ensues?
Or if the brocke would learn to play the breame,
And leave the lambs at land, were this no news?
A fethered foul in the earth a den to choose,
Or flounder say to fly the lark to catch,
We might admire what monsters time did hatch.
But since we see that nature has assigned
The foul to fly, the air, as seems well,
The fish to swim, the sea, as fits his kind,
The earth for men and beasts to breed and dwell:
Of right a man, which does the rest excel,
Should even so far surpass in his degree,
As all the rest in wisdom weaker be.
All this I speak to warn the rest that hear,
And eke to show the blindness of delites.
Herein my folly vain may plain appear,
What hap they heap which try out cunning slights,
What hurt there hits, at such vain shows and sights,
Where men for pleasure only take much pain,
To alter natures gifts for pleasure vain.
Were not it strange, think you, a King to fly,
To play the tombler, or some iugling cast?
To dress himself in plumes, as erst did I,
And under arms to knit on wings full fast?
A sport you think that might the wise aghast.
But Magic art had taught me points of skill,
Which in the end did prove my future ill.
I decked my corpse with plumes (I say) and wings,
And had them set, thou see, in skillful wise
With many feats, fine poyseing equal things,
To aid my self in flight to fall or rise,
Few men did ever use like enterprise,
Against store of wind, by practice rise I could,
And turn and wind at last which way I would.
But ere the perfect skill I learned had,
(And yet me thought I could do passing well)
My subjects hearts with pleasant toys to glad,
From Temples top, where did Apollo dwell,
I said to fly, but on the Church I fell,
And in the fall I lost my life withal.
This was my race, this was my fatal fall.
What vainer thing could any Prince devise,
Then so himself a foolish foul to show?
Learn you by me, that count your selves so wise,
The worst to doubt of things, what ere you know.
Fly not so high for fear you fall so low.
Be wise in arts, exceed not wisdoms bound,
The depth of art by wit may not be found.
These curious arts allurements have alone,
They profer much in recompense of pain:
But yet among'st a thousand scarce is one
In practice, ought by them can save or gain.
In their effects they are but false and vain,
Sophistical, deceitful, and untrue,
That nothing have, yet promise all to you.
I speak not of the rest that are in use
Amongst the wiser sort, Philosophy,
Nor of the parts thereof, but of the abuse
That comes by magic arts of Imagerie,
By vile inchauntments, charms, and parnpestrie,
All which by nature are abhorred as evil,
Practisde by fools, invented by the devil.
To make an end: you noble Kings content
Your selves with studies serving for the State:
You Lords also with all your wits invent
What way t'eschew the Prince and peoples hate.
Ye Subjects love your Prince, eschew debate.
I wish you all beware of climing high,
Lest that you helpelesse fall, as erst did I.
HOW QVEENE CORDILA IN DESPAIR SLEW her self, the year before Christ, 800.
IF any woeful wight have cause to wail her woe,
Or griefs are past do prick us Princes, tell our fall:
My self likewise must needs constrained eke do so,
And show my like misfortunes and mishaps withal.
Should I keep close my heavy haps and thrall?
Then did I wrong: I wronged my self and thee,
Which of my facts a witness true maistbee.
A woman yet must blush when bashful is the case
Though truth bid tell the tale and story as it fell:
But since that I mislike not audience, time, nor place,
Therefore, I cannot keep my woes in counsel well.
* No greater ease of heart then griefs to tell,
It daunteth all the dolours of our mind,
Our careful hearts thereby great comfort find.
For why to tell that may recounted be again,
And tell it as our cares may compass ease:
That is the salve and medicine of our pain,
Which cures corsies all and sores of our disease:
It does our pinching pangs and pains appease:
It pleads the part of an assured friend,
And tells the trade, like vices to amend.
Therefore if I more willing be to tell my fall,
With my mishaps to ease my burdened breast and mind:
Some others happily may avoid and shun the thrall,
And thereby for distress more aid and comfort find.
They keeping measure, whereas I declined,
May be as prompt to fly like brute and blame
As I to tell, or thou to write the same.
Wherefore if thou will afterward record
What Queen Cordila tells to ease her inward smart:
I will recite my story tragical each word
To thee that give an ear, and ready art.
But lest I set the horse behind the cart,
I mind to tell each thing in order, so,
As thou may see and show whence sprang my woe.
My grandsire Bladud hight, that found the bathes by skill,
A fethered King that practisde high to soar:
Whereby he felt the fall, God wot against his will,
And never went, road, reigned, nor spoke, nor flew no more.
After whose death my father Leire therefore
Was chosen King, by right apparent heir,
Which after built the town of Leircestere.
He had three daughters fair, the first hight Gonerell,
Next after her his younger Ragan was begot:
The third and last was I the youngest, named Cordell.
Us all our father Leire did love too well God wot.
But minding her that loved him best to note,
Because he had no son t'enioy his land,
He thought to guerdon most where favor most he fand.
What though I youngest were, yet men me judged more wise
Then either Gonerell, or Ragan more of age:
And fairer far: wherefore my sisters did despise
My grace and gifts, and sought my wrecke to wage.
But yet though vice on virtue die with rage,
It cannot keep her underneath to drown:
For still she flittes above, and reapes renown.
My father thought to wed us unto Princely peers,
And unto them and theirs divide and part the land.
For both my sisters first he called (as first their years
Required) their minds, and love, and favor t'vnderstand.
(Quoth he) all doubts of duty to aband,
I must assay your friendly faithes to prove:
My daughters, tell me how you do me love.
Which when they answered him they loved their father more
Then they themselves did love, or any worldly wight:
He praised them, and said he would therefore
The loving kindness they deserved in fine requite.
So found my sisters favor in his sight,
By flattery fair they won their fathers heart,
Which after turned him and me to smart.
But not content with this, he asked me likewise
If I did not him love and honor well.
No cause (quoth I) there is I should your grace despise:
For nature so does bind and duty me compel,
To love you, as I ought my father, well.
Yet shortly I may chance, if Fortune will,
To find in heart to bear another more good will.
Thus much I said of nuptial loves that meant,
Not minding once of hatred vile or ire:
And partly taxing them, for which intent
They set my fathers heart on wrathful fire.
She never shall to any part aspire
Of this my Realm (quoth he) among'st you twain:
But shall without all dowry aie remain.
Then to Maglaurus Prince, with Albany he gave
My sister Gonerell, the eldest of us all:
And eke my sister Ragan height to Hinniue to have,
And for her dowry Camber and Cornwall.
These after him should have his kingdom all.
Between them both he gave it frank and free,
But naught at all he gave of dowry me.
At last it chanst a Prince of France to hear my fame.
My beauty brave, my wit was blazed abroad each where.
My noble virtues praisde me to my fathers blame,
Who for I could not flatter did less favor bear.
Which when this worthy Prince (I say) did hear,
He sent embassage liked me more then life,
And soon obtained me to be his wife.
Prince Aganippus reau'd me of my woe,
And that for virtues sake, of dowries all the best:
So I contented was to France my father fro
For to depart, and hopt t'enioy some greater rest.
Where living well beloved, my joys encreast:
I gate more favor in that Prince his sight,
Then ever Princess of a Princely wight.
But while that I these joys so well enjoyed in France,
My father Leire in Britain waxt vnwealdie old.
Whereon his daughters more themselves aloft t'aduance
Desired the Realm to rule it as they would.
Their former love and friendship waxed cold,
Their husbands rebels void of reason quite
Rose up, rebeld, bereft his crown and right:
Betwixt their husbands twain they causde him to agree
To part the Realm, and promised him a guard
Of sixty Knights that on him should attendant be
But in six months such was his hap too hard,
That Gonerell of his retinue bard.
The half of them, she and her husband reft:
And scarce allowed the other half they left.
As thus in his distress he lay lamenting sates
When as my sister so, sought all his utter spoil:
The meaner vpstart courtiers thought themselves his mates,
His daughter him disdained and forced not his foil.
Then was he feign for succor his to toil
With half his train, to Cornwall there to lie
In greatest need, his Ragans love to try.
So when he came to Cornwall, she with joy
Received him, and Prince Maglaurus did the like.
There he abode a year, and lived without annoy:
But then they took all his retinue from him quite
Save only ten, and showed him daily spite.
Which he bewailed complaining durst not strive,
Though in disdain they last allowed but five.
What more despite could devilish beasts devise,
Then joy their fathers woeful days to see?
What vipers vile could so their King despise,
Or so unkind, so cursed, so cruel be?
Fro thence again he went to Albany,
Where they bereaved his servants all save one:
Bad him content himself with that, or none.
Eke at what time he asked of them to have his guard,
To guard his noble grace where so he went:
They called him doting fool, all his requests debard,
Demanding if with life he were not well content.
Then he too late his rigor did repent
Against me, my sisters fawning love that knew
Found flattery false, that seemed so fair in view.
To make it short, to France he came at last to me,
And told me how my sisters ill their father used.
Then humbly I besought my noble King so free,
That he would aid my father thus by his abusde.
Who naught at all my humble hest refusde,
But sent to every coast of France for aid,
Whereby King Leire might home be well conueide,
The soldiers gathered from each quarter of the land
Came at the length to know the noble Princes will:
Who did commit them unto captains every band.
And I like wise of love and reverent mere good will
Desired my Lord, he would not take it ill
If I departed for a space withal,
To take a part, or ease my fathers thrall.
He granted my request: Thence we arrived here,
And of our Britains came to aid likewise his right
Full many subjects, good and stout that were.
By martial feats, and force, by subjects sword and might,
The British Kings were feign to yield our right.
Which won, my father well this Realm did guide
Three years in peace, and after that he did.
Then I was crowned Queen this Realm to hold,
Till five years past I did this Island guide:
I had the Britains at what beck I would,
Till that my loving King mine Aganippus did.
But then my seat it faltered on each side.
My sisters sons began with me to jar,
And for my crown waged with me mortal war.
The one hight Morgan Prince of Albany,
And Conidagus King of Cornwall and of Wales:
Both which at once provided their artillery,
To work me woeful woe, and mine adherents bales.
What need I fill thine ears with longer tales?
They did prevail by might and power, so fast,
That I was taken prisoner at last.
In spiteful sort they used then my captive corse,
No favor showed to me, extinct was mine estate:
Of kindred, Princes, blood, or peer was no remorce,
But as an abject vile, and worse, they did me hate.
To lie in dark some dungeon was my fate
As it were a thief, mine answers to abide,
Against right and justice, under Iailours guide.
For liberty at length I su'd to subjects were:
But they kept me in prison close, deuoid of trust
If I might once escape, they were in dread and fear
Their fawning friends with me would prove untrue and just.
They told me take it patiently I must,
And be contented that I had my life:
Since with their mothers I began the strife.
Whereby I saw might nothing me prevail to pray,
To plead, or prove, defend, excuse, or pardon crave.
They heard me not, despisde my plaints, sought my decay,
I might no law, nor love, nor right, nor justice have.
No friends, no faith, nor pity could me save:
But I was from all hope of freedom bard,
Condemned, my cause like never to be heard.
Was ever noble Queen so drencht in wrecks of woe,
Deposde from Princely power, bereft of liberty,
Deprived of all these worldly pompes her pleasures fro,
And brought from wealth to need, distress, and misery,
From Palace proud in prison poor to lie,
From Kingdoms twain, to dungeon one, no more,
From Ladies waiting, unto vermin store?
From light to dark, from wholesome air to loathsome smell,
From odor sweet to smart, from ease to grievous pain,
From sight of Princely wights, to place where thieves do dwell:
From dainty beds of down, to be of straw full feign:
From bowers of heavenly hew, to dens of daine:
From greatest haps that worldly wights atchiue,
To more distress then any wretch alive?
When friends I left in France that did me first exalt,
And eke my noble King, mine Aganippus true:
And came to England: for their heinous facts and fault
Which from his right and kingdom quite our father threw
To take his Realm: to reign and treason knew
I think of all misfortunes was the worst:
Or else I deem the causers all accursed.
For mark my hapless fall that fortune did me send,
As thus in prison vile alive I lingering lay,
When I had mourned long, but found no faithful friend
That could me help, or aid, or comfort any way,
Was served at meat as those that Kings betray
With fare God wot was simple, bare, and thin
Could not sustain the corpse it entered in.
And when the sighs, and tears, and plaints nigh burst my hea^^
And place, and stench, and fare nigh poisoned every pore:
For lack of friends to tell my seas of guiltless smart,
And that mine eyes had sworn to take sweet sleep no more,
I was content, since cares oppress me sore,
To leave my food, take mourning, plaints, and cry,
And lay me down, let grief and nature try.
Thus as I pining lay, my carcass coucht on straw,
And felt the pain erst never earthly creature knew:
Me thought by night a grizely ghost in darkes I saw,
Eke nearer still to me with stealing steps she drew.
She was of color pale and deadly hew,
Her clothes resembled thousand kinds of thrall
And pictures plain of hastened deaths withal.
I musing lay in pains, and wondered what she was,
Mine eyes stood still, mine hair rose up for fear an end,
My flesh it shook and trembled: yet I cride (alas)
What wight art thou? a foe? or else what fawning friend?
If death thou art, I pray thee make an end,
But the art not death. Art thou some fury sent,
My woeful corpse, with pains, to more torment?
"With that she spoke: I am (quoth she) thy friend Despair,
"Which in distress each worldly wight with speed do aid:
"I rid them from their foes, if I to them repair.
"Too long from thee by other captives was I staide.
"Now if thou art to die no whit afraid,
"Here shall thou choose of Instruments (behold)
"Shall rid thy restless life, of this be bold.
And therewithal she threw her garments lap aside,
Under the which a thousand things I saw with eyes:
Both knives, sharp swords, poinadoes all bedide
With blood, and poisons pressed which she could well devise.
"There is no hope (quoth she) for thee to rise,
"And get thy Crown or Kingdom refte again:
"But for to live long lasting pining pain.
"Lo here (quoth she) the blade that Did' of Carthage hight,
"Whereby she was from thousand pangs of pain let pass:
"With this she slew her self, after Aeneas flight,
"When he to Sea from Tirian shoares departed was.
"Do choose of these thou see from woes to pass,
"Or bide the end, prolong thy painful days
"And I am pleased from thee to pack my ways.
With that was I (poor wretch) content to take the knife,
But doubtful yet to die, and fearful feign would bide.
So still I lay in study with my self, at bate and strife
What thing were best of both these deep extremes untried.
Good hope all reasons of Despair denide:
And she again replide to prove it best
To die: for still in life my woes increast.
She called to mind the joys in France I whilome had,
She told me what a troop of Ladies was my train:
And how the Lords of France, and Britains both were glad
Of late to wait on me, and subjects all were feign.
She told I had bin Queen of kingdoms twain,
And how my kinsmen had my seat and Crown.
I could not rise, for ever fallen down.
A thousand things beside recited then Despair,
She told the woes in wars, that I had heapt of late:
Rehearst the prison vile in steed of Palace fair,
My lodging low, and moldy meats my mouth did hate.
She showed me all the dongeon where I sat,
The dankish walls, the darkes, and bade me smell,
And bide the savor if I likt it well.
Whereby I wretch deuoid of comfort quite and hope,
And pleasures past compard with present pains I had:
For fatal knife slipped forth my fearful hand did grope,
Despair in this to aid my senseles limbs was glad,
And gave the blade: to end my woes she bad.
I will (quoth I) but first with all my heart
I Will pray to Gods, revenge my woeful smart.
If any wrong deserve the wrecke, I pray you skies
And stars of light (if you my plight do rue)
O Phoebus clear I thee beseech and pray likewise,
Bear witness of my plaints well known to Gods are true.
You see from whence these injuries they grue.
Then let like vengeance hap and light on those
Which undeserved were my mortal foes.
God grant immortal strife between them both may fall,
That the one the other may, without remorce, destroy:
That Conidagus may his cousin Morgan thrall,
Because he first decreast my wealth, bereft my joy.
I pray you Gods he never be a Roy:
But caytife may be pai'd with such a friend,
As shortly may him bring to sudden end.
Farewell my Realm of France, farewell, Adieu,
Adieu mes nobles tous, and England now farewell:
Farewell Madames my Ladies, car ie suis perdu
Il me fault aler desespoir m'adonne consell
De me tuer, no more your Queen farewell.
My cosins me oppress with maine and might
A captive poor, against Justice all and right.
And there withal the sight did fail my dazeling eyne,
I nothing saw save sole Despair bad me dispatch:
Whom I beheld, she caught the knife from me I ween.
And by her elbow carian death for me did watch.
Come on (quoth I) thou have a goodly catch.
And therewithal Despair the stroke did strike,
Whereby I di'd, a damned creature like:
Which I too late bewail. Let those alive beware,
Let not the loss of goods or honors them constrain
To play the fools, and take such careful carke and care,
Or to despair for any prison, pine, and pain.
If they be guiltless let them so remain.
Far greater folly is it for to kill
Themselves despairing, then is any ill.
Since first thereby their enemies have that they desire,
By which they prove too deadly foes unawares a friend:
And next they cannot live, to former bliss t'spire,
If God do bring their foes in time to sudden end.
They lastly, as the damned wretches, send
Their souls thereby to darkesome Stygian lake
Which kill the corpse that mighty Jove did make.
HOW KING MORGAN OF ALBANY was slain at Glamorgan in Wales, The year before
Christ, 766.
I Wot not well what reason I may use,
To quit my self from lasting infamy:
Wherefore I must perforce my self accuse,
I was in fault I cannot it deny.
Remorce of conscience pricks my heart so nie.
And me torments with pangs of pinching pain,
I can no longer me from speech refrain.
I am that Morgan son of Gonerell
The ungrateful daughter of her father Leire:
Which from his kingdom did him once expel,
As by the British stories may appear.
Ragan and she conspired (both sisters were)
But were subdued again and causde to yield
Their fathers Crown: Cordila wan the field.
I need not here the stories all recite,
It were too long, but yet I briefly shall:
The cause Cordila ought her sisters spite
Was, they procured her, and their fathers thrall.
Yet it was her chance at length t'out live them all,
Both sisters elder, and her father grave,
And eke at length the kingdom all to have.
That time was I, of Albany, the King,
Called Scotland now, and eke my cousin then,
Of Cornwall and of Wales, whom I did bring
To war, against Cordila and her men:
We said we would our title win again,
And that because our fathers had it yore,
We meant to get it ours again therefore.
I must confess I was the cause of war,
I was not pleased with that was lotted me:
Even so our minds ambitious often are
And blinded, that we cannot reason see.
We think no men, but Gods on earth we be,
Yet worse are we then beasts which know their kind:
For we have naught but mischief often in mind.
We think, if so we may our wills attain
By right or wrong, by might or malice, we
Could never live like Fortune for to gain:
Or if on foes we once revenged be,
If that our foe-mens fall we chance to see,
O then we joy, we lift our selves to sky,
And on the poor we crucifige cry.
I deemed if that I might once put her down,
The Kingdoms all were Conidags and mine:
And I could easly after win the crown,
If also I his state might undermine.
I thought, indeed, to have it all in fine:
By force or fraud I did intend alone
To sit as King upon the Britain throne.
To speak in few, we waged war so long
Against her, at last we put her unto flight:
We warriers for our Aunt were far too strong,
Pursude and took, deprived her of her right.
We thought it ours what so we wan by might:
Eke so play tyrants: Traitors all do watch
To get by spoil, and count their own they catch.
Not so contented were we with the pray,
But fearing lest she should recover aid:
I sent in have to prison her away,
And all recourse of messengers denaid.
Thus when she saw her Majesty decaid,
And that her griefs and sorrows daily grew:
In prison at the length her self she slew.
O caytife vile, that did constrain a Queen,
That Justice meant, her kingdom to forsake?
Nay traitor I, her cause of death have been,
That would my self by bloodshed ruler make.
How could revenge on me but vengeance take?
Before the seat of God her blood did call
For vengeance still, and so procured my fall.
Lo here Gods justice: see my treason, see:
Behold and see, to reign was my delight:
And mark, and make a mirror here of me,
Which afterward was served by justice right.
We wan the crown between us both in fight:
And then because I was the elder son
Of the elder Queen, I claimed all we won.
So were my dealings naught in peace and war,
But by my force and fortunes used in fight,
I past, that time, the Britains all by far:
I was of person, fortitude, and might
Both comely, tall, strong, seemly eke in sight,
Whereby I won men's favor, glory, wealth,
And, puffed with pride, at length forgate my self.
I said it was my right the crown to have,
But Conidagus stoutly it denied:
Wherefore I went to Wales, my right to crave,
With all mine army, and to have it tried.
Where long we fought it stoutly on each side,
Till at the last unto my woeful pain,
I was deprived of kingdom quite, and slain.
And for to keep in memory for aye
That there unfaithful Morgan lost his life,
The place is called Glamorgan to this day.
There was I pierst to death with fatal knife:
There was the end of all my hateful strife.
So Morgan, where he thought to win the crown,
Was at Glamorgan traitor stricken down.
Thus may thou tell how proud ambition proves,
What hap have tyrants, what we Traitors have:
What end he has that cruel dealing loves,
What subjects get that Diadem do crave.
It Is better, then to win, thine own to save:
For so orethwartly trade of Fortune goes,
When win thou would, then art thou sure to lose.
HOW KING IAGO DIED OF THE LETHARGY, about the year before Christ, 612.
Have I oreslept my self, or am I wake?
Or had thou late oreslept thy self that wrote?
Could thou not for the Letharge pains to take:
And with the rest his sleepie life to note?
Was I amongst the wicked wights forgote?
Well then, awaked since we are both twain,
To write my sleepie sinful life, take pain.
I am that Iago, once of Britain King,
That ruled all this noble British I Will:
No fame of me the writers old do bring,
Because my life and government was vile.
Yet, Higgins, here take pains for me a while,
Enregester my mirror to remain,
That Princes may my vices vile refrain.
At first, a while, I ruled well the land,
I used justice, right took regal place:
No wight but found just judgment at my hand,
And truth durst show, without rebuke, her face.
I gave my self to all good gifts of grace,
My subjects lived in rest within my reign:
No cause of Prince compelled them to complain.
But as in calm a storm we nothing fear,
When as the seas are mild and smooth as glass:
And as in peace no thought of wars we bear,
Which least suppose of mischiefs come to pass:
Even so my still and rightful reigning was.
The calm, a tempest boads: the shine, a rain:
Long peace, a war: and pleasure, pinching pain.
For rest, and peace, and wealth abounding thoe,
Made me forget my Justice late well used:
Forsaking virtues, vices began to floe,
And formernoble acts I quite refusde.
My gifts, my treasures, wealth and will misusde,
Began all goodness quite at length disdain,
And did my facts with filthy vices stain.
Misgouern'd both my Kingdom and my life,
I gave my self to ease, to sleep, and sin:
And I had clawbackes even at Court full rife,
Which sought by outrage golden gains to win.
For * Kings no sooner well or worse begin,
But even at hand the good or bad take pain,
For virtues sake, or meede, the Prince to train.
As vices grew increasing more and more,
So virtues fled and bad their friends a dew:
Diseases bad likewise, and sickness sore
Began to wax, and griefs about me grew.
I may full well my naughty surfets rue,
Which pestered so at length my drousie brain,
I could not scarce from sleeping ought refrain.
A sleepie sickness named the Lethargy,
Oppressed me sore, till death took life away:
This was the guerdon of my gluttony,
As with the candles light the fly does play,
Though in the end it work her lives decay:
So of the gluttons cup so long I drunk,
Till drowned in it with shameful death I sunk.
Physicians wise may take on them the cure,
But if Iehoua smite the Prince for sin,
As erst of me, then is the help unsure,
That Is not the way for health to enter in.
No potions then, nor powders worth a pin:
But even as we, they must to die be feign.
Bid them in time from vices now refrain.
HOW KING FORREX WAS SLAIN by his brother King Porrex, about the year before
Christ 491.
TO tell my story on the tragic stage
Compeld I am amongst the rest that fell:
I may complain that felt god Mars his rage,
Alas that fate to State should be so fell
Had I been meaner borne I know right well
There had no envy vndermin'd my State,
Nor fortune foild the seat whereon I sat.
While that my Kingly Sire Gorbodug reigned
I had no care, in honor I did live:
Would God I had in that estate remained,
But what us fortune wonted is to give,
Good hap that holds as water in a sieve:
She shows a glimpse of thousand joys, and more,
Which hides in it ten thousand seas of woe.
That hateful hellish hag of ugly hue,
With rustie teeth and meygre corpse misshape,
I mean that monstervile, the worst in view,
Whom some call Discord, envy, ire and hate:
She set my brother first with me at bate:
When we five years had reigned jointly well,
By her entisements, foul at strife we fell.
We lived that space well in this noble I Will,
Divided well we jointly did enjoy
The Princely seat, while Fortune fair did smile,
Without disdain, hate, discord or anoy:
Even as our father reigned the noble Roy
In wealth, peace, praise, purport, renown and fame,
Without the blots of everlasting blame.
But when ambition bleared both our eyes,
And hasty hate had brotherhood bereft:
We friendship fair and concord did despise,
And far a part from us we wisdom left:
Forsook each other at the greatest heft.
To rule the kingdom both we left, and fell
To warring, iarring like two hounds of hell.
For bounds we banded first on either side,
And did incroach each one on others right.
T'inlarge the limits of our kingdom wide,
We would not stick often times in field to fight,
The wretched ground had so bewitched our sight.
For why, * the earth that once shall eat us all,
Is the only cause of many Princes fall.
* On the earth we grieve the ground for filthy gain,
On the earth we close the earth t'inlarge our land,
In the earth we moile with hunger, care, and pain,
We cut, we dig thence silver, gold, and sand.
Into her bowels by the force of hand,
With steel and iron we do dig profound,
Working her woe to make our joys abound.
For the earth forget we God, (unfaithful fools)
For ground forsake we faith and all our friends:
For the earth we set our selves to subtle schools,
Of ground like swine we seek the farthest ends.
We spoil the ground that all our living lends,
Of ground to win a plat a while to dwell
We venture lives, and send our souls to hell.
If we behold the substance of a man,
How he is made of Elements by kind,
Of earth, of water, air, and fire: than
We would full often call unto our mind,
That all our earthly joys we leave behind:
And when we pass to the earth we turn to rot:
Our pomp, our pride, and glory is forgot.
The fire first receives his heat again,
The air the breath bereaues away by right:
The watrie and the earthly parts remain,
Of Elements composed scarce so light.
And in the ground a place is for them dight.
The moistures dry, the bones consume to dust,
The worms with flesh suffice their greedy lust.
But we forget our composition old,
Both whence we came, and whereunto we shall:
We scarce remember we be made of mould,
And how the earth again consumes all.
This great forgetfulness breeds Princes thrall.
While present joys we gaze upon, mean while
A fading bliss does all our wits beguile.
All this I speak to the end it may advise
All Princes great, and noble peers that are,
To learn by me the rather to be wise,
And to abandon hate and malice far.
To banish all ambitious bloody war:
To live content in peace, with their estate:
For * mischief flows from discord and debate.
And now I Will tell what discord vile has done
To me King Forrex. Thus the case it stood:
I thought indeed to have some castles won
And holds, which were my brothers, strong and good.
So might I intercept his vitailes, forage, food,
Abate his pride, obtain the kingdom all:
Me thought the half a portion was too small.
There Is no man takes an enterprise in hand,
But he persuades himself it is not ill:
He has of reasons eke in steed to stand
As he supposes framed wise by skill.
So I was led by reason rude, to kill
My brother, if I caught him at the nicke,
Because the quarrel first he began to pick.
And for because I was the elder Prince,
The elder son, and heir unto the crown:
Me thought no law, nor reason could convince
Me from the fact, though I did beat him down.
This was my way to win and reap renown.
I did provide an army strong for field,
Not far from where I hoped to cause him yield.
And sundry sharp assaults on each we gave,
On purpose both enflamed for to fight:
We had in parle heard the counsel grave
Of wise and worthy men, persuading right.
It pity was (they said) so foul a sight
That brethren twain, both Princes of a land,
Should take at home such woeful wars in hand.
But where ambition dwelles is no remorce,
No countries love, no kindred holden kind,
No fear of God, no sentence wise of force
To turn the heart, or mollify the mind.
Good words are counted wasting of your wind.
The gain proposde, the crown and scepter hie,
Are the only things where at men gaze and pry.
At length my brother for to end the strife,
Thought best to work the surest way to win:
He found the means to take away my life,
Before which time the wars could never lin.
How much might better both contented bin!
For * hope will slip, and hold is hard to snatch.
Where blood embrues the hands that come to catch.
Thus our ambition bred our subjects smart,
Our broiles powered out their guiltless blood on ground:
Which vile device of mine ambitious heart
Procured Jove my purpose to confound.
Therefore beware ye wights whose wealths abound,
Content your selves in peace to spend your days,
By virtues good aloft your names to raise:
HOW KING PORREX WHICH SLEW HIS brother, was slain by his own mother and her
maidens, about the year before Christ, 491.
CAn cursed Caine that caitiue scuse himself,
That slew his brother Abel innocent?
Or Typhon who for state and worldly pelf
His dear Osiris down to Lymbo sent?
King Dardan then to do the like may try,
They slew their brethren each: and so did I.
The witch Medaea rent in pieces small
Absirtus limbs her brother, did not she?
She threw him in the way dismembered all,
That so her fathers journey stayed might be.
Orodes slew his brother Mithridate:
And so did I my brother in debate.
Learchus slew his brother for the Crown,
So did Cambrses fearing much the dream:
Antiochus of infamous renown
His brother slew, to rule alone the Realm.
Ardieus did the like for Kingdoms sake:
So I my brothers life away did take.
Mempricius Iewde of life likewise did kill
His brother Manlius, for the same intent:
These Princes vile were brother slayers ill,
For kingdoms sake unnaturally bent.
But read the stories, thou shall find it plain
The bloody wretches all were after slain.
Even so I Porrex eke, which slew my brother,
And ruled once the Britain land with him,
Unkindly killed was by my cruel mother,
Which with her maideus chopped me every limme.
As I lay sleeping on my bed at rest,
Into my chamber full and whole they pressed.
Appointed well they were with weapons sharp,
And boldly laid on me with all their might:
Often quite and clean they thrust me through the heart,
And on my corpse each where their weapons light.
They chopped me small (I say) as flesh to pot,
And threw me out, my limbs yet trembling hot.
Can I complain of this revenge she raught,
Since I procured the slaughter of her son?
Can I excuse my self deuoid of faut,
Which my dear Prince and brother had fordonne?
No; it is too true that * who so slayes a King
Incurres reproach, and slaughter blood does bring.
The traitors to their Prince have always bin
As slayers of their parents, vipers brood:
The killers of their brothers, friends, and kin,
In like degree well nigh of treason stood.
But what by this win they, save death, defame,
Distaine their blood, and shroud themselves with shame.
Example take you Princes of this land,
Beware of discord, shun ambitious pride:
By right take ye the scepter in your hand,
Let not your sword with sovereigns blood be did.
The mighty Jove, that reigns eternal aye,
Cuts off the Kings that enter in that way.
Usurpers may persuade themselves a while
There is no God, no laws of sacred crown:
No wrong they do, no murder seems vile,
Nor no respect of Princely high renown.
But if they could consider well the case,
They would not so aspire to Princes place.
They would example take by Lucifer,
That was cast down, the father first of pride:
And all his impes how high so ere they were,
Usurping Realms and Kingdoms far and wide.
From light to dark, from throne to thrall they fell:
From bale to bliss and down from heaven to hell.
Sufficient here is said to warn the wise,
For he by prudence often forecasts the doubt:
The fool is bent all warnings to despise,
He runs headlong with the rascal rout.
Then if thou cast to live at rest a subject good,
Touch not the Prince, crown, scepter, nor his blood.
HOW KING PINNAR WAS SLAIN IN Battle by Mulmucius Donwallo, about the year
before Christ, 441.
MIght oftentimes right ouerrunnes too fast,
Right after comes and hopes to have his own:
And when he ouertakes might at the last;
Then is the truth of all the quarrel known.
Men never reap no other, then was sown,
If good be gain, the better comes the crop,
The grape grows on the vine and not the hop.
Of this now spoken, this would I infer,
Men may by might a kingdom long withhold
Not due to them: but they far better were
To yield unto the right, what reason would.
Good metals bides the touch, which tries the gold,
When copper counted counterfeit in cast,
Is deemed but dross and called in at last.
I am that Pinnar, who when Brutus blood
Extincted was in bloody Porrex reign,
Amongst the Princes in contention stood,
Who in the Britain throne by right should reign
Among whom by might a part I did obtain,
That part of Albion called Logria hight,
I did long time usurp against all right.
Stater who stepped into the Scottish throne,
And Rudacke, that usurped the Cambrian crown
Their minds to mine did frame and joined in one,
To keep the Cornish Prince stout Cloten down,
Twixt whom and us in fighting, for renown
Fair Lady Albion Europes wondered I Will,
Robbed of her beauty was, alas the while.
Duke Cloten, though a man of worthy praise,
Who claimed the crown as due to him by right:
Could not prevail till death did end his days,
His son Mulmucius that undaunted Knight
Pursued his fathers claim with all his might,
And meeting us in many a bloody field,
At length in manly fight did make us yield.
He Lion-like himself with his tall troop
Of nimble Cornish met us on the way,
And to his conquering arm did cause us stoop,
The price of treason I with blood did pay,
My wrong deemed right appeared in my decay.
Who so by violence scales the throne of State,
Seldom sits sure, but falls by violent fate.
HOW KING STATER OF SCOTLAND was slain by Mulmucius Donwallo, about the year
before Christ, 441.
DEsist not in histories truly to tell
The fall of usurpers the mirrours of pride.
Recite of our treasons, and how that we fell,
Intruders untrusty the Realm for to guide:
Of wit and of reason recklesse and wide,
That took so upon us to rule all the land,
No Princes presumed yet with scepter in hand.
How stately I Stater of Scotland the King,
Did bear me full stoutly when I had the crown:
And what a great army of Scots I did bring,
Against Lord Donwallo, of noble renown.
I deemed dame Fortune would never so frown,
Who made me a Prince, that kingdom my pray,
Of late but a subject and simple of sway.
But here now behold how steadie the state
Of climbers aloft is above their degree,
And how they do fall from fortune to fate,
Example are such as my fellow and me.
The fruit gives a taste of the sap of the tree,
The seed of the herb, the grape of the vine:
The work wrayes the man, seem he never so fine.
For when I had levied an army to fight,
I joined with Pinnar, my power to prevail:
And Rudacke of Wales came eke with his might,
Mulmucius Donwallo the King to assail.
Our purpose the Prince by prowes did quail,
Which came out of Corn wall, us vanquished in field,
Our soldiers were slaughterd, or forced to yield.
O fortune I blame thee, my self more un wise:
Thou gave me a kingdom, with life I it lost.
My soldiers were killed before mine own eyes,
Or forced to yield, or abandon the coast.
I need not of honor or dignity boast,
Or tell of my triumphs, or crake of my crown:
* The vaunt of usurpers is void of renown.
HOW KING RVDACKE OF WALES WAS slain by Mulmucius Donwallo about the year
before Christ, 441.
RVde are the reuelles royalty that rape,
Restless the reigns of rebels in the robe,
Reck less the rage where cruelty does scrape,
Roundnesse esteemed but little of the globe,
No man ambitious prudent with the probe,
Crownerape accounted but cunning and skill,
Bloodshead a blockehouse to beat away ill.
The rudeness of rebels reaching the crown,
May be compared to Bladhuds fond diuice.
Better sit still then fall so far adowne,
By my mishaps let other men be wise.
My self of climbing have pai'd well the price,
That rudely in throne my self did install
Aloft, not regarding how low I might fall.
When Britain was restless, wanting a King,
(For Forrex hight and Porrex both were slain)
The land many peers ambitious did wring,
Endeavoring each the Kingdom to gain.
The heirs to forsake it wrong did constrain,
The subjects were armed, we nobles did strive,
At length we amongst us division contriue.
Then recklesse we were when all was at rest,
And each had a kingdom allotted his part:
The vice of the subjects daily increast,
And justice and right were laid quite apart.
The laws ouerlashed by couine and craft,
And we that did govern did wink at this gear:
The worser thereby, our faithful friends were.
The ball that dame Fortune emparteth of bliss
Is golden to gaze on, but voluble round:
If once of your handfast in holding you miss,
Away then it roleth, and you are on ground.
Of watchers thereon so many abound,
And catchers thereat, with snatching therefore,
That if once you leese it, you catch it no more.
A Chirurgian that takes a wound for to cure,
If skillful and careful he searches it furst:
The seaman does sound to take the depth sure,
By wisdom well taught for fear of the worst.
But our vile ambition, blind, blockish, accursed,
Not proving the sore, nor reckoning the sound,
Our ships and our science we sink and confound.
Ambition out searches to glory the greece,
The staire to estate, the graple of grace:
But in her is hid of peril a piece,
Which all our attempts does dim and deface.
We do enjoy her vain joys but a space,
Short, brittle as glass: false fair giving light:
Not golden, though glittring brave in the sight.
For when she has brought us unto the throne,
And Fortune has fraught us with honor at fill:
Then there to sit stedie and rule all alone
We rack our devices, and send with our skill.
We cut off occursions; we prole, pole, and pill:
We bolster, we band out, to bribe, banish, slay
The pillars of prudence that stand in our way.
Our race is then restles, our sleeping unsound:
Our waking is warfare, our walking has woe:
Our talking is trustles, our cares do abound:
Our fauners deemd faithful, and friendship a foe.
Which troubles our fancies so tossed to and froo,
That scarcely we never enjoy any rest
Tormented, whom Fortune exalted and blessed.
This thing can I witness what troubles ensue.
What cares do us compass enhaunsed aloft:
I therefore wish rebels to take better view
Of the falls of iutruders, recorded so often.
Who climeth so high his fall is not soft.
If once he do stagger or falter aside,
He cannot recover the rest for to guide.
When I who with others did think my self sure,
Here ruled the realm, there fell out a flawe:
Donwallo did seek the Crown to procure,
Alleging a title thereto by the law.
Who, when to field our powers we did draw,
Came straight with an host prepared to fight,
With sword for to try out whose title was right.
Our number was great, our title unjust:
Our consciences guilty, our soudiers aghast:
Donwallo with honor had soldiers of trust:
And Fortune was friendly to them as they past.
They slew of our men by manhood full fast,
Or forced them to fly: in the field we were feign
To Oppose them (poor Princes) and so we were slain.
First Pinnar, then Stater, I Rudacke likewise
At last was with number oppressed dispatched.
Let Lordings beware how aloft they do rise,
By Princes and commons their climing is watched.
No sooner they have at the scepter once snatched,
But guilty themselves they deem worthy to die,
And Gods powerful justice such sentence does hie.
HOW THE NOBLE King Brennus, after many triumphant victories, at the siege of
Delphos in Greece slew himself, about the year before Christ, 375.
AMongst the noble martial worthy men,
Renowned far, victorious great of fame,
Though Authors sound my praise: eftsoons again
Amongst the Britain Princes write the same.
I am that Britain once that Brennus had to name:
My facts, exploits in war, my conquests life and end
Do write as I recite, when time does leisure lend.
The mighty Monarch of this noble I Will
Mulmucius who with conquering blade did free
The Britans troubled state from tyrants vile,
Was father both to Belinus and me.
His noble acts and laws commended be.
This Belinus (mine elder brother) was his heir,
And Queen Corwenna was our mother wise and fair.
When after him my brother had the crown,
He was content to make me eke a king:
He gave me Albany, where with renown
I ruled a while by Justice every thing.
But at the last ambition made me bring
An army thence, against my brother for to fight:
Which rather ought to have honored him with homage right.
When Belinus perceived me approach
Unto his Realm, an army he addressed:
He warned me I should not seek t'incroach
That was not mine, for he was ready pressed
Me to repel: he wild me be at rest.
I marched on, the armies met, we fearcely fought:
My soldiers slain, to save my self by flight I fought.
To Norway then, I fled for succor hence,
Where good Elsingus reignde the gentle King:
I told him what I was, and eke of whence,
Desirde his aid, me home again to bring.
And he not only granted me this thing,
But eke his daughter Samye fair to be my wife,
With me in Albany to lead a Princely life.
But while we were providing ships and men,
The fame abroad of my return was spread:
And Guthlake that was King of Denmark then,
Provided with a navy me forlead.
His eye on Samyes beauty had so fed,
That for her sake he must perforce my ships forlay,
By force of arms to bear the Lady fair away.
And when our nauies met, he wild me yield
This Lady straight, or else defend the cause:
A thing (quoth I) requested erst but seelde,
Against of Gods and men the sacred laws.
It has not erst been heard'mongst wise men sawes,
That any King should claim the like by strife,
Or make assault by wrong to win a Princes wife.
From words to fight we fell on either side,
But on his side the conquest did appear:
I yielded her that listed scarce abide,
For she to him before did favor bear.
By tempest then our nauies severed were,
And he perforce by storm on shores of Britain cast,
For tribute hostage gave to Beline ere he past.
At seas turmoilde five days with raging wind,
Sore wearied with the fight, the foil, and loss:
And casting with my self in woeful mind,
The cause why so God Neptune did me toss:
And why false fortune my attempt did cross:
I made a vow to kill the man that causde me fly,
Or with my blood, the kingdom all from him to buy.
The Seas alaid, at last my ships I found,
And rigde again, at seas we met our foes
The wandering Danes, where we beset them round
In warlike sort, we did them all enclose,
Even so the wheel of Lady Fortune goes,
Abiects, casts down, turns topsie toruie quight,
The men of late extold with all her maine and might.
These ships my wants in some respect supplied
With tackle, armor, vitailes and the rest:
And so to Britain land apace I hide,
For kingdom lost to make again request:
Or else by might and force away to wrest
The scepter from my brother Beline, and the crown,
Which lay that time by North at Euerwike the town.
To land I came, and threatened Beline sore,
But he an army did with speed address:
Which met me straight at the entry on the shore,
Our battles ioind and fought with valiantness.
But I was put in the end to such distress
To ships I flew, and took a few with me beside,
And hoising sails, for hap to Callia strands I hide.
Arrived there, I trauaild long to see
The nature of the Country and the men:
And for my purpose I disposed me,
To please the Princes and the people then,
In hope to see my country once again.
To win my noble kingdom, or to wreacke the wrong
That I sustaind exilde from native soil so long.
When I had told the great mishaps I had
Unto the Peers of France, some aid to crave:
I could obtain no succor me to glad,
Nor men, munition, ships, ne vittailes have.
I gate me thence to Duke Seginus grave,
Of Prouence then the Prince, renowned noble far,
For prudence prompt in peace, and wisdom great in war.
This worthy Duke received me with joy,
(For of afflicted wights he had remorce)
He heard me often declare the great anoy
That I had felt, and of my brothers force.
How Guthlacke did my wife and me divorce:
The broiles at Sea, the toiles I taken had at land:
Which never could the face of Fortunes foil withstand.
Thou Britain tall (quoth he) I rue thy fate
Thou noble Prince (for so thou art in show)
If I could now restore thee thine estate,
Thou should perceive what favor I thee owe.
It Is Fortunes use t'exalt and overthrow.
My counsel then is this, expect her grace a while,
Till where she frowns she turn her friendly face and smile.
So in his court he did me intertaine,
Where long I lived and bare my self full well:
Sometimes to play the captain I was feign,
To win some praise, as causes did compel,
For when his subjects either did rebel,
Or confines made inroads, to spoil or pray his land,
Then appointed was to take the war in hand,
In armor fearce, and stout, and strong was I,
God Mars me gave a stearne and stormy look:
With feats of arms by land or seas to try,
Experience taught me what I undertook.
No pain, no toil nor danger I forsook,
That might content the noble Duke of Sauois mind,
Whose bounteous grace, for aye my love to him did bind.
In peace full mild I was, of comely grace,
And wise in talk, as time occasion gave:
And (though I say it) I had a Princely face,
I could both hunt and hawke, and court it brave.
Eke Fortunes past had made me sage and grave:
More heedy all attempts to prosecute with skill:
Rashness (by poofe I found) incurs the greatest ill.
When Duke Seginus saw my humble heart,
A regal Britain Prince, of royal blood,
How I emploide my self and all my art,
Mine active feats with grace and prowes good
To serve, and quail his foes that him withstood:
He gave his Daughter unto me, a peerlesse dame,
With her his Dukedom after him to guide the same.
By her (when he was dead) I Sauoye had,
A country fertile, famous for the soil.
With liberal gifts the soldiers hearts I glad.
To win the rests good will I took some toil,
By banquets, jewels, gifts, or warlike broile:
Still using all the means t'obeisance the^ to move,
Eke all the ways that might allure them me to love.
And settled so in honor great at rest,
Without the fear of foreign foes, or nie:
I mused what for Britain wars was best,
Which way I might again my quarrel try.
Such restles heads have they that sit on hie.
O poor estate, how blessed were thou that sitst below,
How happy, safe and sure, if thou thy state could know?
A council called for the same intent,
I told the Lords my purpose for the war:
How I to have my kingdom here was bent.
They all agreed to leuy near and far,
Such soldiers good and captains stout that were.
They offered service eke themselves to fare with me,
To win the crown by sword, or else revenged be.
Concluding thus, a power provided was,
Munition good, and vitailes, shipping strong:
On voyage so with hoised sails we pass,
We cut the seas, and came apace along
To Britain shores: In hope to wrecke the wrong
That often before was done, or win the land again:
Whence whilome twice I was to fly with danger feign.
When we were landed here, I Herolds sent
To claim my Kingdom at his hands, my right:
I bad them, if he were not so content,
To sound defiance, fire, and sword, and fight.
But of my message he esteemed light.
He brought an army strong, appointed was the day
Of battle, then to try who bears the Crown away.
This when our mother saw Corwenna wise,
That mortal wars we wage for kingdom sake:
She with her self did many ways devise,
A peace between her Martial sons to make,
And with the Lords full often did counsel take.
Yet all in vain: there could no parle of peace prevail,
But on we marched agreed each other to assail.
The feelds once pight, and time of battle come,
In place where should be tried this quarrel sad,
In armor eke the soldiers all and some,
With all the force that might so soon be had,
We captains using speech our men to glad,
T'incourage them with promise proud of lasting fame:
Tweene the armies Corwenna stood that noble dame.
And thus she spoke:
"O out alas my sons what means this broile?
"Will you in field my tender bowels harm?
"What furies force you thus t'unkindly toil?
"What mean your men for slaughter here to swarm?
"Did not this womb once both enclose you warm?
"And cannot now all Britain hold you brethren twain,
"But needs by one of you his brother must be slain?
"Cannot the fear of Jove's immortal hate,
"Your mothers tears, nor woeful wailings move?
"Nor naked breasts you sucked your malice slake?
"Nor cause t'imbrace the sacred lore of love?
"O everlasting Jove that live above!
"Then I protest ere you do fight the feelde this day,
"You shall in field (ungrateful sons) your woeful mother slay,
"Between you both you shall bereave my life.
"What woes (my sons) alive shall I sustain,
"When I shall after this ambitious strife,
"So many see of both your subjects slain?
"And you with brothers blood your swords distaine.
"I shall (I say) in the end of fight take woeful vewe,
"Of that my son, which this my son his brother slew.
"O rather now, my sons, leave off to iar,
"Lay weapons both aside, take truce a while:
"If you do love to spend your time in war,
"Destroy not here at home your native I Will:
"The present cause and quarrel is too vile.
"Join friendly both your armies faith, and firm the same,
"To take some conquest great in hand of lasting fame.
"Therein you may with greater honor deal,
"By this you shall defame your selves for aye.
"Thereby you may enlarge your public weal,
"By this your selves and it shall quite decay.
"Thereby you shall mine age with honor stay.
"Thereby you shall most like your noble father be:
"Which ere he wore the crown did conquer kingdoms three.
"Once for my sake then join yet hands again,
"Let me enjoy once both before I die.
"I would to see you friends my sons be feign,
"And hope I have you will not this deny.
"I ask a thing shall never hurt perdy.
"For if you now surcease, and love as brethren well,
"Then all the world of this your concord aye shall tell.
"And turning then to me thus wise she said:
"Thou know, my son, how twice thou have been foild:
"Thou twice to escape with life wast well apaide,
"And since full far to countries strange have toild.
"If now thou should of life and all be spoilde,
"(When live thou may in Princely sort with peerless joy)
"What tongue can tell thy mothers grief and great anoy.
"I hear thou have in France a Dukedom good,
"Of subjects good thou have an army here:
"Thou have a wife that came of noble blood,
"Thou need'st at home no foes at all to fear.
"What mean thou then such mortal hate to bear,
"Against my son thy brother here, which gave to thee
"His kingdom half, the noble land of Albany?
"Since thine ambition first procured the strife,
"Which did in armor rise against thy King,
"Against thy brother loved thee more then life,
"Thou did thy subjects his against him bring,
"Think thou it was a wise or worthy thing?
"If not: thou have good cause thy treason all confess:
"And though he drove thee hence, to love him never the less.
"Thou shall therefore submit thy self to me,
"And take a truce, a peace I will conclude:
"Thy brother eke shall so contented be,
"No quarrels old shall be again renewed.
"These broiles have often my cheeks with tears bedewed,
"My heart is rent, my hope bereaved, my joys are gone,
"My life is lost, if you conioyne not both in one.
"Then turning unto Belinus she spoke:
"My noble son (quoth she) thou twice have quail'd
"Thy brothers power, and made him twice forsake
"His native land, which I have often bewailed.
"What though thou have so often before prevailed,
"Think thou again the third time eke to win the field?
"Or art thou sure to slay my son, or force him yield?
"What glory can thou get thereby in the end?
"Will not the world of your foul slaughters tell?
"Will not they all that live, still discommend
"The man that did his own dear brother quell?
"Mempricius shameful acts are known too well,
"And Porrex Britains both, their noble brethren slew,
"Confounded after both, examples good for you.
"Now further this again to both I say:
"Do not you rue these noble soldiers good?
"Do not you see how many you shall slay?
"Have you no care to shed their guiltless blood?
"The state of tyrants never stable stood,
"By bloodshed they do build, and prop their tottering State,
"Reign, live and die despisde, in never dying hate.
"You noble men, in brief I speak to you,
"And unto all the Captains of your bands:
"And eke to all you soldiers good and true,
"Which have the sway of bloodshed in your hands.
"Consider well the state of both our lands:
"You shall decrease your force, by discord and by strife,
"Distaine your bloods, and reaue Corwennas of her life.
"Then if that either Jove's immortal ire,
"(Which ever hated slaughters such as these)
"Or fear of Plutoes everlasting fire,
"Or dangers threatened both by land and seas,
"Or mothers mind (which both you ought to please)
"Or countries love, or peace (which all are bound t'imbrace)
"May ought persuade, then let my just request have place.
"If not, lo here my naked breast (quoth she)
"Which once you both did suck in tender age.
"Let both your swords in these first bathed be,
"Perhaps this slaughter shall your thirsts assuage.
"It shall be counted even as small outrage
"To slay your mother pleading for a righteous peace,
"As wage the wars which gods commands you to surcease.
Much more she said which were too long to tell:
And proffred forth to swords her naked breast.
But when we both considered had full well
Her woeful tears, her wise and grave request,
They so to peace our hautie hearts addressed,
We laid our weapons down: we met, and did embrace,
All war was set aside, and Lady peace took place.
We joined hands, our captains did the like,
And eke the soldiers linked all in love:
There was not one that did our truce mislike,
Our peace did all to joy and marvel move.
With many triumphs feats of arms we prove,
Our subjects all rejoice, in songs we sound Corwennas praise,
Her fame to skies, aloft with many shouts and cries they raise.
The Galls and Senons then supposing me
In Britain from my Dukedom hard at fight,
Thought great occasion offered them to be,
And set themselves in arms and order right.
My subjects eke of Sauoy day and night
They did entice, persuade, solicit and constrain,
To choose another Duke at home with them to reign.
Whereof when I heard tell in Britain I Will,
Eke when my brother Beline thereof knew,
We laid aside our sports and plays a while,
And of our soldiers took a muster new.
Of both our hoasts we chose a noble crew.
We past the seas, as brethren ought, in concord knit:
And both our force in one to conquer France we fit.
Without resistance much we spoiled the land
At the entry in, and after many fights
We conquered all the Realm, my foes we fand,
Which were in arms stout, valiant, noble wights.
By sword they fell, or flew before our sights.
The Germans force, likewise that did them succor send,
We made to fall therefore, and to our scepters bend.
Three hundred thousand we in armor had,
An army great renowned Europa through:
The Kings and Princes of our peace were glad,
We were in fight so puissant fierce and rough.
Munition, victuals, money eke enough,
We had of tributes store, of duties in that came:
Through all the world of Brenne and Beline flew the fame.
To us came soldiers out of many parts,
And captains worthy for the fame of war,
Of fierce Bellona brave we had the arts,
Whereof we wanne the praise both near and far.
But not with this we so contented are.
As Hercules to scale the Alps did first contend:
So we again (a work of toil) the cloudie Alps ascend.
The craggie mountains that do touch the skies,
With aged heads are ever white with snow,
The seas allow do rore, whence vapors rise,
And from the hills great streams of waters floe.
The paths so strict to pass which few do go.
The ice, snow, cold, clouds, rombling storms, and sights above,
Are able constant hearts with doubtful fear to move.
For as you go, sometimes you are feign to reatch
And hang by hands, to wend aloft the way:
And then on buttocks down another breatch,
With elbowes and with heels your self to stay.
Down under well behold the streams you may,
And waters wild which from the mountains falling flow:
Ore head the rocks hang threatening death to them below.
When we these Alps had past with dangers great,
To Clusium town in Tuscane land we came:
The Tuscans as we drove our herds of neat.
Did issue out to intercept the same.
Embassage to the Romans eke they frame,
To help them against the Galls (so us they counted there)
Because I was of France, and Frenchmen with us were.
The Romans then, because that our success
Reported was to them in wars before,
Fearing their own estate could do no less,
But aid their neighbors now at need the more.
To treat of peace they sent to us therefore.
We answered we desired but space wherein to dwell,
Because our peopled country could not hold us well.
But they forgetting quite of arms the law,
Did arm themselves, ambassadors full stout:
With Clusians came to bring us all in awe,
Without respect of any further doubt.
Whereon, the siege from Clusium walls about
We raised straight, at Rome we sounded loud alarmes,
To wreake revenge for breach done against the law of arms.
Yet first we thought it best embassage send,
To have truce breakers such delivered us
By law of arms as ought no weapons wend,
And yet against the laws came armed thus.
They said we were a people barbarous,
They neither punish would nor yield those Romans good,
But honor them: they came of Fabius noble blood.
Full swiftly on we marched then in haste,
And toward Rome with all our power we hide:
At Alia flood began forty thousand taste
Of Romans that us met what might betide.
We slew them fast, the rest durst not abide.
We had the spoil, to Rome we came, which we possess:
A thousand weight of gold the Romans paid for peace.
Pannonia eke with broiles of wars we tame,
And many years we kept them under yoke:
The Princes all about that heard our fame
Desired peace, not daring us provoke.
We Britains made Europa all to smoke.
To part our armies then in twain we took no doubt,
And several conquests took in hand, as captains stout.
To Macedonie Belme took the way,
Where reigned Ptolome the tyrant fell,
Which did his sisters sons unjustly slay
Before their mothers face, and her expel,
Arsinoe that used him erst so well:
Though by the gods he swear to take her to his wife,
And love her sons, and here he them bereft of life.
Even so that wicked King at first refusde
To purchase peace with price, or hostage send,
That had before the faith of Gods abusde,
Was destinate to have a noughtie end.
Let Princes well beware what they pretend.
* Who for a crown breaks faith, and murders foul commits,
He will be sure to fall, on sliperie throne he sits.
Our custom was that time to send each where
Our Hearolds offering peace for tribute gold:
But from King Ptolome these news we hear,
No peace he craved, no tribute pay he would,
Ne friendship craved (as he the Hearold told)
Except our weapons laid adowne we would submit,
No arguments of peace he would admit.
King Beline smiled to hear the heedlesse King
Rash witted, so selfe-wild, and after this
The Dardanes offered twenty thousand bring
Of soldiers armed for aid, to join with his.
Quoth he, not lost all Macedonie is.
If we once conquered by Alexanders hand,
Need we the Dardanes aid, these strangers to withstand?
We have (quoth he) some soldiers sons of those
Which served in pay with them that vanquished all:
And for our selves we nothing fear our foes,
Although our army seem to Dardane small.
This when the ambassadors related all
To good King Dardane, then this noble Realm (quoth he)
By this young princox pride, will all dispoiled be.
With that alarm they cry, and armies join,
Where Britains slay the Macedonian crew:
And have for spoil their victuals, armor, coin,
Took Ptolomey their King, and him they slew.
His head above the camp they bear for view
On spear, to make the rest of Greeks in doubt to stand,
Before they enterprise to take such wars in hand.
On this the fame of Britains far was spread,
All Macedonie held their country spoiled:
To Alexander (erst their armies led)
And unto Philip, Princes never foiled,
As unto Gods they cry in wars tormoil'd.
O help (quoth they) our country falls, we are undone,
Without your powerful aides: whose acts the world have won.
But Sosthenes a Macedonian stout,
When as the Britains bathed in their bliss,
Gate unto him a warlike worthy rout,
And set again on Beline there and his,
Put him to foil for all his worthiness.
For which the soldiers all did choose him for their King,
But them as captain he against their foes would bring.
When this in Greece I heard, and their success
First of the field they won, and folly then
Enricht with spoils, given all to idleness,
Which were before approved valiant men:
I sound retreat, and backwards gate again,
With seven score and ten thousand footmen for the fight,
And fifteen thousand horse, which made a goodly sight.
With these appointed well my friends to aid
The Britains good, and Beline in that case,
To Macedone I martcht with vengefull blade
To take revenge for Belines late disgrace.
Whereto when as we came, in little space
We wan the field in fight, we spoiled the land at will,
In pleasures plunged we had of wealth, and fame, our fill.
So I that had all Macedone in awe,
With spoil of mortal men was not content:
I past not of these conquests all a straw,
The temples of the gods to spoil I meant,
And toward Delphos with mine army went.
On high his temple stood most glorious to behold,
And god Apollos shrine enricht with gifts of gold.
The rich and wealthy gods (quoth I) may lend
To mortal men some of their treasures great:
They have no need thereof for to dispend
For clothing, victuals, armor, drink or meat.
But yet we must therefore their priests entreat.
There is enough for them, and many more beside,
Of offerings great, from Princes brought both far and wide.
This Delphos is on mount Parnassus fair
In Greece, well fenst with rising rocks about,
By nature plaste aloft in pleasant air,
So high to scale they need no foes to doubt.
No watch, no ward to keep the walls about.
So strong steep pendent are the rocks whereon it stands:
As not the like could since be made with mortal hands.
When in this city shoutes aloude they make,
Or when the trumpets sound therein is heard,
The Echoes shrill so cause the skies to shake,
That strangers staring stand and muse affeard.
The words and tunes resound again so hard,
So oftentimes about from every rock so plain,
As if to one that cride, one cride to him again.
This made the men that came from far to maze,
To marvel much, to fear and wonder still:
And at the sight thereof to stare and gaze,
Devising often the high and mighty hill,
A building founded first by heavenly skill
In city built, and costly grau'd with work of hand,
Apolloes temple high above the rest does stand.
It Is round theater wise so brave within
And large aloft, without pendant upright,
So high it seems impossible to win,
With comely form the gazers to delight.
The majesty whereof did them inuit
That chose that seat, t'erect a temple in the same,
Whereof for Oracles was spread a wondrous same.
Amid'st the height of this Parnassus mount
A turning way there is, and in the plain
A den through rocks for deepnesse does surmount,
And turning vaults far in, whence answers vain
The Priests receive from sprites to tell again.
When any come for counsel there, of things to know:
The answer of deluding sprites the Priests do show.
Wherefore the Kings and peoples offerings brought,
From all the world and coasts of nations far:
With many gifts of gold and silver wrought,
The gold of Kings and jewels rich were there.
To Delphos all they run that doubtful are.
This was the madness then that mortal men bewitched:
Whereby Apolloes Temple was with gold so inricht.
Lo now I tell at Delphos what I did,
For toward it as with my mates I went,
Them be of courage good naught fear Ibid,
With Delphos spoil them to reward I meant.
But now I asked how they would give consent,
Stout Exridane and Thessalone I did assay,
Where it were good to scale, or else a while to stay.
The Captains counsel was alarm to call,
Before the Grecians did provide defense:
And straight to scale with skill the mighty wall,
Before the city knew of our pretense.
The soldiers stout abroad encamped thence,
And said they must refresh their wearied limbs a space,
Unable else to scale, or meet their foes in face.
The Greeks in villages to make them trip
Entreated them to make no spare of wine:
The Britain soldiers fell thereon to sip,
Forgate their feats of war and played the swine.
Against their captains eke they began repine.
So that full long it was or we could them persuade
To fly from Bacchus boothes, and fall again to blade.
Of soldiers thousands sixty five I had,
But of our foes scarce fourteen thousand were:
The stately town they see, their hearts to glad,
I bad them not at all to stand in fear.
Behold (quoth I) what does in fight appear,
Those charets glittering brave, and statures all of gold
Of sollid mass, more rich then glorious to behold.
For on the Temple stood fair golden shapes,
And in the walls thereof their pictures shone:
Not one of these (quoth I) the Britains scapes,
We soldiers shall possess them every one.
Let us therefore not linger here upon,
But give the assault: for here the God Apolloes pride,
In price of gold, and gemmes, surmounts all Greece beside.
We have or this the wealth of men possessed
(Yet worthy Princes all) of mortal men:
But here the treasures of the Gods are pressed
To look for us: shall we refuse them then?
We shall not so be proffered often again.
Within the walls hereof are greater far by odds:
The attire, crowns, scepters, plate and garnish of the Gods.
We sound Alarame, the assault the rocks assayes,
Our soldiers brainsicke, heedlesse up ascend:
The Delphos men had fenst the easiest ways,
So that against the rocks our force we bend.
With stones the scaling Britains down they hend.
An earthquake eke by vows the sacrificers rear.
Which on my soldiers down a mighty rock did tear.
The ground did shake, and rent, and tempests rise,
The hailestones mighty fall, the thunders rore:
The lightnings flashing dazzled all our eyes,
The Britains from the assault were ouerborne.
My soldiers slain discomfit me before.
And I sore wounded, foul amazde, overcome with smart,
^'escape the Greekish sword, did pierce my self to the heart.
You noble captains now that know my facts,
Learn valiantly in wars the sword to wend:
Let fame extol your wise and warlike acts,
And let report your fortitude commend.
But let your warfares have a wiser end,
And let what Bochas writes and Higgins here does pen,
Declare what good we gate, to war with Delphos men.
HOW KING KIMARVS WAS DEVOVred by wild beasts the year before Christ, 321.
NO place commends the man unworthy praise.
No Kingly state does stay up vices fall:
No wicked wight to woe can make delays,
No lofty looks preserve the proud at all.
No brags or boast, no stature high and tall,
No lusty youth, no swearing, staring stout,
No bravery, banding, cogging, cutting out.
Then what auailes to have a Princely place,
A name of honor or an high degree,
To come by kindred of a noble race?
Except we princely, worthy, noble be.
The fruit declares the goodness of the tree.
Do brag no more, of birth or lineage than,
For virtue, grace, and manners make the man,
My self might brag, and first of all begin,
Mulmucius made and constituted laws:
And Belinus and Brenne his sons did win
Such praise, that all the world give them applause,
Gurgunstus Readbeard with his sober sawes.
The son of Beline and my Grandsire grand
Was fortunate, what ere he took in hand,
His son my grand fire Guintheline did pass
For virtues praise, and Martia was his wife,
A noble Queen that wise and learned was,
And gave her self to study all her life,
Devising laws, discust the ends of strife
Amongst the Britains to her endless fame:
Her statutes had of Martian laws the name.
My father eke was sober, sage and wise,
Cicilius hight, King Guintheline his son:
Of noble Princes then my stock did rise,
And of a Prince of Cornwall first begone.
But what thereby of glory have I won?
Can this suffice to answer eke for me,
I came by parents of an high degree?
Or shall I say I was forsooth the King?
Then might I live as lewdly as I lust.
No sure, I cannot so avoid the sting
Of shame, that pricks such Princes are unjust.
We rather should unto our virtues trust.
For * virtue of the ancient blood or kin,
Does only praise the men that virtuous bin.
And nobles only borne (of this be sure)
Without the virtues of their noble race,
Do quite and clean themselves thereby obscure,
And their renown and dignities deface.
They do their birth and lineage all deface.
For why, indeed they ever ought so well
In virtues grave, as titles brave excel.
But often (God wot) they fare as erst did I,
They think if once they come of Princely stock,
Then are they placed safe and sure, so hie
Above the rest, as founded on a rock.
Of wise men's warnings all they make a mock,
They counsels grave, as abiectreeds, despise,
And count the brave, men gracious, worthy, wise.
This Kingdom came to me by due descent,
For why my father was before me King:
But I to pleasure all, and lust was bent,
I never reckt of Justice any thing.
What purpose I to pass did mean to bring,
That same t'accomplish I with all my might
Endeuour'd ever, were it wrong or right.
I deemed the greatest joys in earthly hap,
I thought my pleasures ever would abide,
I seemed to sit in Lady Fortunes lap,
I reckt not all the world, me thought, beside.
I did by lust my self and others guide,
Whereby the fates to work my bane withal
And cut me off, thus wise procured my fall.
As I was always bent to hunting still,
(Yet hunting was no vice to those I had)
When I three years had ruled this Realm at will,
In chase a chance did make my heart full sad.
Wild cruel beasts as desperate and mad
Turned back on me, as I them brought to bay,
And in their rage my sinful corpse did slay.
A just reward for so unjust a life,
No worse a death, then I deserved yore.
Such wreckes in the end to wretches all are rife,
Who may and will not call for grace before.
My wilful deeds were naught, what will thou more?
For wanton wildenesse, witless, heedlesse toys:
The brutish beasts bereaved me of my joys.
HOW KING MORINDVS WAS Devoured by a monster, the year before Christ. 303.
LEt me likewise declare my facts and fall,
And eke recite what means this slimie glere:
You need not feign so quaint a look at all,
Although I seem so fulsome every where.
This blade in bloody hand, which I do bear,
And all his gore bemingled with this glue,
In witness I the dreadful monster slew.
Then mark my tale: beware of rashness vile,
I am Morindus, once a Britain King,
On whom long time did Lady Fortune smile,
Till to her wheels steep top she did me bring.
My fame both far and near she made to ring,
And eke my praise exalted so to sky,
In all my time more famous none then I.
Some say I was, by birth, a bastard bace,
Begotten of the Prince his concubine:
But what I was declared well my grace,
My fortitude, and stature Princely mine.
My father eke that came of Princely line
King Danius gave not so bace degree,
Nor yet the noble Britains unto me.
For feats of arms and warlike points I past,
In courage stout there lived not then my peer:
I made them all that knew my name aghast,
And hea^ thou great mine enterprises were,
To shrink and slinke, and shift aside for fear.
All which at length did me such glory bring,
My father dead, the Britains made me King.
But see how blind we are, when Fortune smiles,
How senseless we, when dignities increase:
We ever use our selves discreetly whiles
We little have, and love to live in peace.
Subjected thoughts does wicked pride suppress:
We use no rigor, rancour, rapine, such
As after, when we have our wills too much.
For whiles that I a subject was, no King,
While I had nothing, but my facts alone:
I studied still, in every kind of thing
To serve my Prince, and vnderfang his fone:
To use his subjects friendly euerychone:
And for them all adventures such to take,
As might them all my person favor make.
But when I once attained had the Crown,
I waxed cruel, tyrannous and fell:
I had no longer mind of my renown,
I used my self too ill, the truth to tell.
O bace degree in happy case full well!
Which art not puffed with pride, vainglory, hate,
But art beneath, content to bide thy fate.
For I aloft, when once my heat was in,
Not raind by reason, ruled all by might:
Ne prudence reckt, right, strength, or mean a pin,
But with my friends, in anger all would fight.
I stroke, killed, slew who ever were in sight,
Without respect, remorce, reproof, regard,
And like a mad man in my fury fared,
I deemed my might and fortitude was such,
That I was able thereby conquer all:
High kingdoms seat encreast my pomp so much,
My pride me thought impossible to fall.
But God confounds our proud devices all,
And brings that thing wherein we most do trust,
To our destruction, by his judgment just.
For when three years I ruled had this I Will
Without all law, as was my lawless life,
The rumor ran abroad within a while,
And chiefly in the Norwest country rife,
A monster came from The irish seas, brought grief
To all my subjects in those coasts did dwell,
Devouring man and beast, a monster fell.
Which when I knew for truth, I straight prepared
In warlike wise my self to try the case:
My haste thereto a courage bold declared,
For I alone would enter in the place.
At which, with spear on horse I fet my race,
But on his scales it enter could no more,
Then might a bulrush on a brazen door.
Again I proved, yet naught at all prevailed
To break my spear, and not to pierce his side:
With that the roaring monster me assailed,
So terrified my horse I could not ride.
Wherewith I lighted, and with sword I tried
By strokes to find a passage to his life,
But now I found in vain was all my strife.
And when I wearied was, and spent with fight,
That kept my self with heed his danger fro:
At last almost ashamed I wanted might
And skill, to work the beastly monster woe.
I gate me nearer with my sword him to,
And thought his flanckes or under parts to wound,
If there, for scales, might any place be found.
But frustrate of my purpose, finding none,
And eke within his danger entering quite:
The grizely beast straight seized me upon,
And let his talants on my corpse to light.
He gript my shoulders, not resist I might:
And roting with a greedy ravening look,
At once in jaws my body whole he took.
The way was large, and down he drew me in,
A monstrous paunch for roomth and wondrous wide:
But (for I felt more softer there the skin)
At once I drew a dagger by my side.
I knew my life no longer could abide
For rammish stench, blood, poison, slimy glere
That in his body so abundant were.
Wherefore I laboring to procure his death,
While first my dagger digde about his heart,
His force to cast me welnigh drew my breath.
But as he felt within, his wounds to smart,
I ioyed to feel the mighty monster start,
That roard, and belcht, and groande, and plungde, and cride,
And tossed me up and down, from side to side.
Long so in pangs he plungde, and panting lay,
And drew his wind so fast with such a powere,
That quite and clean he drew my breath away,
We both were dead well nigh within an hour.
Lo thus one beastly monster did devour
Another monster moodles, to us pain:
At once the realm was rid of monsters twain.
Here may thou see of fortitude the hap,
Where prudence, justice, temperance has no place:
How suddenly we taken are in trap,
When we despise good virtues to embrace.
Intemperance does all our deeds deface,
And lets us heedles headlong run so fast,
We seek our own destruction at the last.
For he that has of fortitude and might,
And thereto has a kingdom ioind withal:
Except he also guide himself aright,
His power and strength prewaileth him but small,
He can not escape at length an haples fall.
You may perceive a myrrour plain by me,
Which may with wisdom well sufficient be.
HOW KING EMERIANVS FOR HIS TYRANNY WAS DEPOSED, ABOUT THE year before
Christ, 225.
THe woeful wight that fell from throne to thrall,
The wretch that woue the web wherein he goes:
A doleful black bad weed still wear he shall
In woeful sort, and nothing blame his foes.
What need such one at all his name disclose?
Except the rest of Britain princes should,
Not here for shame resite his name he would.
I am Emeriane King that reigned a space,
Scarce all one year, in Britain Isle long sense,
But for I was in manners void of grace,
Fierce, tyrannous, and full of negligence,
Blood thirsty, cruel, vain, deuoide of sense,
The Britains me deposed, from seat and crown,
And reau'd me quite, of riches and renown.
I was despisde and banished from my blisle,
Discountnanst, feign to hide my self for shame:
What need I longer stand to tell thee this?
My self was for my woeful fall too blame.
My reign was short in few my fall I frame.
My life was loathsome, soon like death that found.
Let this suffice a warning blast to sound.
HOW KING CHRINNVS GIVEN TO DRVNKENNES reigned but one year. He died about the
year before Christ, 137.
THough I my surfets have not yet out slept,
Nor scarce with quiet brows begin my tale,
Let not my drowsy talk be over leapt,
For though my belching sent of wine or ale,
Although my face be fallo, puffed, and pale,
And legs with dropsy swell, and panch resound:
Yet let me tell what vice did me confound.
Perhaps thou think so gross a blockhead blunt,
A sleepy swinish head can nothing say:
The greatest heads and smallest eke were wont
To bear in them the finest wits away.
This thing is true, thou can it not denay,
And Bacchus eke ensharps the wits of some,
Foecundi calices quem non fecere desertum?
Yet since long since both brains and all were spent,
And this in place amongst my mates I speak:
I trust thou will be herewithall content,
Although indeed my wits of talk are weak.
So old a vessel cannot choose but leake.
A drunken sot whose faltering feet do slip.
Must pardon crave, his tongue in talk will trip.
Chirinnus was my name a Britain King,
But ruled short time: Sir Bacchus was my let:
Erinnus eke my senses so did swing,
That reason could no seat amongst them get.
Wherefore the truth I pray thee plainly set.
I gave my self to surfets swilling wine,
And led my life much like a dronken swine.
Diseases grew, distemprance made me swell,
My parched liver lusted still for baste:
My timpane sounded like a taber well,
And naught but wine did like my greedy taste.
This vice and more my life and me defaste,
My face was blown and blubd with dropsy wan,
And legs more like a monster then a man.
So not in shape I only altered was,
My dispositions changed in me likewise:
For vices make a man, a goat, an ass,
A swine or horse, (as Poets can comprise)
Transforming into beasts by sundry wise
Such men as keep not only shape of men,
But them mishapeth also now and then.
Wherefore let who so loves to live long days
Without diseases, strong, in youthful state,
Beware of Bacchus booth which all betraies,
The veil of vices vain, the haven of hate,
The well of weak delights, the brand of bate,
By which I lost my health, life, Realm and fame,
And only won the shrouding sheet of shame.
HOW KING VARIANVS GAVE HIMSELF TO THE lusts of the flesh, and dyed about the
year before Christ, 136.
WHere no good gifts have place, nor bear the sway,
What are the men, but wilful castaway?
Where gifts of grace do garnish well the King,
There is no want, the land can lack nothing.
The Court is still well stored with noble men,
In Towns and Cities Governors are grave:
The common wealth does also prosper then,
And wealth at will the Prince and people have.
Perhaps you ask, what Prince is this appears?
What means his talk in these our golden years?
A Britain Prince that Varianus hight,
I held sometime the Scepter here by right.
And though no need there be in these your days
Of states to tell, or virtues good discriue,
Good counsel yet does stand in stead always,
When time again may vices old revive.
If not: yet give me leave amongst the rest
Which felt their fall, or had their deaths addressed:
My cause of fall let me likewise declare,
For * falls the deaths of vicious Princes are.
They fall, when all good men rejoice or see
That they short time enioide their places hie.
For Princes which for virtues praised be,
By death arise, extold they scale the sky.
I will be short, because it may suffice
That soon is said, to warn the sage and wise.
Or if that they no warning need to have,
This may perchance somewhat their labor save
With those, that will not hear their faults them told,
By such as would admonish them for love:
When they my words and warnings here behold,
They may regard and see their own behoue.
About my time the Princes lived not long,
For all were given almost to vice and wrong:
My self voluptuous was abandond quite,
To take in fleshly lust my whole delight:
A pleasure vile, that draws a man from thrift and grace,
Does just desires, and heavenly thoughts expel:
Does spoil the corpse, defiles the soul, and fame deface,
And brings him down to Plutoes pains of hell.
For this my sin my subjects hated me,
Repining still my stained life to see.
As when the Prince is wholly given to vice,
And holds the lewder sort in greatest price,
The land decaies, disorder springs abroad,
The worser sort do rob, pill, pole, and spoil
The weaker force to bear the greatest load,
And leese the goods for which they erst did toil.
How can Iehoua just abide the wrong?
He will not suffer such have scepter long.
As he did strike for sinful life my seat,
And did me down from royal kingdom beat:
The like examples are in stories rife,
No wicked wight can govern long in rest:
For either some bereaues him of his life,
Or down his throne and kingdom is deprest.
Bid Princes then and noble Peers the like delights detest.
There is no way the wrath of Jove to wrest.
HOW THE WORTHY Britain Duke Nennius as a valiant Soldier and faithful
Subject encountered with Julius Caesar, was by him death-wounded: yet
nevertheless he gate Caesar's sword, put him to flight, slew therewith Labianus
a Tribune of the Romans, endured fight till his country men wan the field, and
now encourages all good Subjects, to defend their country from the power of
foreign and intruding enemies. He was slain about the year before Christ, 52.
I May by right, some later writers blame,
Of stories old, as rude or negligent:
Or else I may them well unlearned name,
Or heedlesse in those things about they went.
Some time on me as well they might have spent,
As on such tyrants, who as bloody foes,
Unto their country wrought such deadly woes.
As for my self I do not this recite:
(Although I have occasion good thereto)
But sure, me thinks it is too great despite
That to the dead these modern writers do,
For there are Britains, neither one or two,
Whose names in stories scarcely once appear:
And yet their lives examples worthy were.
T's worthy praise (I grant) to write the ends
Of vicious men, and teach the like beware:
For what has he of virtue that commends
Such persons lewd, as naught of virtues care?
But for to leave out those praise worthy are,
Is like as if a man had not the skill
To praise the good, but discommend the ill.
I crave no praise, although my self deserved
As great a laud as any one of yore:
But I would have it told how well I served
My Prince and Country. Faith to both I bore.
All noble hearts, hereby with courage more
May both tall foreign force in fight withstand,
And of their foes may have the upper hand.
Again, to show how valiant then we were
(You Britains good) to move your hearts thereby
All other nations less in fight to fear,
And for your country rather so to die
With valiant hauty courage as did I,
Then live in bondage, service, slavery, thrall
Of foreign powers, which hate your manhood all.
Do give me leave to speak but even a while,
And mark, and write the story I thee tell.
By North from London more then fifty mile,
There lies the Isle of Ely, known full well,
Wherein my Father built a place to dwell:
And for because he liked well the same,
He gave the place height Ely of his name.
He reigned forty years as stories tell,
And fame did bear his name both wide and far.
By Justice guided he his subjects well,
And lived in peace, without the broiles of war.
His childrens noble acts in stories are,
In vulgar tongue: but naught is said of me,
And yet I worthy was the yongst of three.
His eldest son and heir was after King,
A noble Prince, and he was named Lud:
Full polliticke and wise in every thing.
And one that wished his Country always good.
Such uses, customs, statutes he withstood.
As seemed to bring the public weals decay,
And them abolisht, brake, repeald away.
So he the walls of Troy the new renewde,
Them sortified with forty Towers about:
And at the west side of the wall he vewde
The Towers strong gate to keep the foemen out,
That made he prisons for the poor bankrout,
Named Ludgate yet, for free men debtors, free
From hurt, till with their creditours they gree.
Some say the City also took the name
Of Lud my brother: for he it reparde:
And I must needs as true confess the same,
For why, that time no cost on it he sparde,
He still increast and peopled every ward,
And bad them aie Kaerlud the City call,
Or Ludstone, now you name it London all.
At length he did, his children under age,
The elder named was Androgeus,
Committing both unto my brothers charge,
The younger of them hight Tenancius.
The Britains wanting aged rulers thus,
Chose for that time Cassibellane their King
My brother, Justice meant in every thing.
The Roman then the mighty Caesar fought
Against the Galls, and conquered them by might:
Which done, he stood on shores where see he might
The Ocean Seas, and Britain clieues full bright.
(Quoth he) what region lies there in my sight?
Me thinks some Island in the Seas I see,
Not yet sub dued, nor vanquist yet by me.
With that they told him we the Britains were,
A people stout, and fearce in feats of war.
(Quoth he) the Romans never yet with fear
Of nation rude, were daunted of so far:
We therefore mind to prove them what they are.
And there withal these letters he did frame,
Brought by ambassadors which hither came.
C. JULIUS CAESAR Consul of Rome, to Cassibellane, King of Britain, sends
greeting.
Since that the Gods have given us all the West
As subjects to our Roman Empire hie
By war, or as it seemed Jove the best,
Of whom we Romans came, and chiefly I:
Therefore to you which in the Ocean dwell,
(As yet not underneath subjection due)
We send our letters greeting: wete ye well,
In warlike cases thus we deal with you.
First, that you, as the other regions, pay
Us tribute yearly, Romans we require:
Then, that you will with all the force you may
Withstand our foes, as yours, with sword and fire:
And thirdly, that by these you hostage send
Tassure the covenants once agreed by you:
So with your danger less, our wars may end:
Else bid we war. Cassibellane adieu.
Caesar.


No sooner were this Caesar's letters seen,
But straight the King for all his nobles sent:
He showed them what their ancestors had been,
And prayed them tell in this their whole intent.
He told them whereabout the Romans went,
And what subjection was, how servile they
Should be, if Caesar bare their pomp away.
And all the Britains even as set on fire
(My self not least enflamed was to fight)
Did humbly him in joyful wise desire,
That he his letters would to Caesar write,
And tell him plain we past not of his spite:
We past as little of the Romans, we,
And less, then they of us, if less might be.
Wherefore the joyful King again replied,
Through counsel wise of all the nobles had:
By letters he the Romans hests denide,
Which made the Britains hautie hearts full glad:
And eke the Roman Consul proud as mad
To hear these letters written: thus they went,
Which he again to mighty Caesar sent.
CASSIBELLANE KING OF BRITAIN TO C. JULIUS Caesar Consul of Rome.
AS thou, O Caesar, writ'st the Gods have given to thee
The West: so I reply, they gave this I Will to me.
Thou sai'st you Romans, and thy self of Gods descend:
And dare thou then, to spoil our Trojan blood pretend?
Again, though Gods have given thee all the world as thine,
That Is parted from the world, thou get'st no land of mine.
And since likewise of Gods we came a Nation free:
We owe no tribute, aid, or pledge to Rome or thee.
Retract thy will, or wage thy war: as likes thee best,
We are to fight, and rather then to friendship, pressed.
To save our country from the force of foreign strife,
Each Britain here, is well content to venture life.
We fear not of the end, or dangers thou do tell:
But use thy pleasure if thou may: thus fare thou well.
Cassibellane.


When Caesar had received his answer so,
It vexed him much: he thereupon decreed
To wage us war, and work us Britains woe.
Wherefore he hasted hitherward with speed.
The Britains eke, prepared themselves with heed
To meet the Romans all, in warlike guise,
With all the force, and speed they might devise.
And here the wiser deemed it meeter much
T'assaile them first at the entry on this land,
Then for to give arrival here to such,
Might with our victuals aid, our selves withstand.
It Is better far the enemies t'aband
Quite from thy borders, to a foreign soil,
Then he at home, thee and thy country spoil.
Wherefore we met him at his entry in,
And pitched our camps directly in his way:
We minded sure to lose, or else to win
The praise, before we past from thence away.
So when that both the armies were in ray,
And trumpets blast on every side was blown,
Our minds to either each, were quickly known.
We joined battle, fiercely both we fought,
The Romans to enlarge their Empires fame:
And we with all the force and might we might,
To save our country, and to keep our name.
O worthy Britains! learn to do the same.
We brake the rays of all the Roman host,
And made the mighty Caesar leave his boast.
Yet he the worthiest Captain ever was,
Brought all in ray, and fought again a new.
His skillful soldiers he could bring to pass
At once, for why his traynings all they knew.
No sooner I his noble corpse did view,
But in I brake amongst the captains band,
And there I faught with Caesar hand to hand.
O God thou might have given a Britain grace,
To Have slain the Roman Caesar noble then:
Which sought the noble Britains to deface,
And bring in bondage valiant worthy men.
He never should have gone to Rome again,
To fight with Pompey, or his peers to slay,
Or else to bring his country in decay.
It joyed my heart, to strike on Caesar's crest.
O Caesar that there had been none but we,
I often made my sword to try thy breast:
But Lady fortune did not favor me.
I able was me thought with Caesar's three
To try the case: I made thy heart to quake,
When on thy crest, with mighty stroke I struck.
The strokes thou strook'st me, hurt me naught at all:
For why, thy strength was nothing in respect.
But thou had bathed thy sword in poison all,
Which did my wound, not deadly else, infect.
Yet was I or I parted thence bewreckt.
I gate thy sword from thee, for all thy fame:
And made thee fly, for fear to eat the same.
For when thy sword was in my target fast,
I made thee fly, and quickly leave thy hold:
Thou never wast in all thy life so gast,
Nor durst again be ever half so bold.
I made a number Romans hearts full cold.
Fight, fight, you noble Britains now (quoth I)
We never all will unrevenged die.
What Caesar though thy praise and mine be od,
(The ancient stories scarce remember me)
Though Poets all of thee do make a God,
(Such simple fools in making Gods they be)
Yet if I had my quarrel tried with thee,
Thou never had returnde to Rome again,
Nor, of thy faithful friends, bin beastly slain.
A number Britains might thou there have seen
Wounded in fight, and spoil their spiteful foes.
My self maimde, slew and mangled mo (I ween)
When I was hurt, then twenty more of those.
I made the Romans stout their courage lose.
In all the camp no Roman scarce I spide
Durst half the combat against a Britain bide.
At length I met a noble man, they called
Him Labienus, one of Caesar's friends,
A Tribune erst had many Britains thrald,
Was one of Caesar's Legates forth he sends:
Well met (quoth I) I mind to make the amends,
For all thy friendships to our Country crew.
And so with Caesar's sword, his friend I slew.
What need I name you every Britain here,
As first the King, the nobles all beside,
Full stout and worthy wights in war that were,
As ever erst the stately Romans tried.
We fought so long they durst no longer bide.
Proud Caesar he for all his bragges and boast
Flew back to ships, with half his scattered host.
If he had been a God (as sots him named)
He could not of us Britains taken foil:
The Monarch Caesar might have been ashamed,
From such an Island with his ships recoile,
Or else to fly and leave behind the spoil.
But life is sweet, he thought it better fly,
Then bide amongst us Britains, here to die.
I had his sword, was named Croceamors,
With which he gave me in the head a stroke:
The venime of the which had such a force,
It able was to pierce the heart of oak:
No medcines might the poison out revoke.
Wherefore though scarce he pierced had the skin,
In fifteen days my brains it ranckled in.
And then too soon (alas) therefore I did.
Yet would to God he had returnde again,
So that I might but once the dastard spide
Before he went, I had the serpent slain.
He plaide the coward cutthrote all too plain.
A beastly serpents heart that beasts detects,
Which, or he fight, his sword with bane infects.
Well, then my death brought Caesar no ronowne,
For both I gate thereby eternal fame,
And eke his sword to strike his friends adowne,
I slew therewith his Labiene by name.
With Prince, against my Country foes I came,
Was wounded, yet did never faint nor yield,
Till Caesar with his soldiers fled the field.
Who would not venture life in such a case?
Who would not fight, at Countries whole request?
Who would not meeting Caesar in the place,
Fight for life, Prince, and Country, with the best?
The greatest courage is by facts expressed:
Then for thy Prince, with fortitude, as I,
And Realms defense, is praise to live or die.
Now write my life when thou have leisure, and
Will all thy countrymen to learn by me,
Both for their Prince and for their native land
As valiant, bold, and fearelesse for to be,
A pattern plain of fortitude they see:
To which directly if themselves they frame,
They shall preserve their Country, faith, and fame.
HOW THE LORD IRENGLAS COUSIN TO KING CASSIBELLANE, was slain by the Lord
Elimine, cousin to Androgeus Earl of London, about the year before Christ, 51.
AMongst the rest that whilome sat aloft,
Amongst the rest, that once had happy chance,
Amongst the rest, that had good fortune often,
Amongst the rest, that could themselves advance,
Amongst the rest, that led in wars the dance,
And wan the palm, the praise, renown, and fame,
Leave in thy book a place to put my name.
I will be brief and truly tell thee all
The cause why I from grave do now appear,
I will recite to thee my sudden fall,
And what in life mine exercises were.
To which since I do see thee set thine ear,
Mark now my tale, and bear it well away,
Mark what me brought so sudden in decay.
Let who so stands trust to a steadfast hold,
If steadfast hold he think that he may find,
Presume not on thy strength, nay yet be bold
On Fortunes gifts, nay let her guide thy mind
In hope of hap, for she is counted blind:
To praise her prankes occasion gives no cause.
Do wisely, or you praise her take the pause:
Some love to boast what fortune they have had,
Some other blame misfortune theirs as fast:
Some tell of fortunes there be good and bad,
Some fools of fortune make themselves aghast.
Some show of fortune coming, present, past,
And say there is a fate that rules all:
But sure it seems their wisdom is but small.
No fortune is so bad but we it frame,
There is no chance at all has us preserved:
There is no fate whom we have need to blame,
There is no destiny but is deserved,
No luck that leaves us safe or vnpreseru'd.
Let us not then complain of Fortunes skill:
For all our good descends from Gods good will.
If so a man might stay on Fortunes hold,
Or else on Prince, as pillar of defense:
Then might my self to have done the same be bold,
In every peril, purpose, or pretense.
Cassibellane as much as any Prince
Loved me his Cousin Irenglas by name,
For feats in arms, for favor and for fame.
I came (by parents) of his regal race,
Lived happy days (if happy mortal be)
Had (as I said) his favor, bare the grace,
I was his loyal servant frank and free.
But what of this at all prevailed me?
Yet furthermore the feats of arms I knew,
I fought in field, when mighty Caesar flew.
Shall I for this praise Fortune ought at all?
Did Fortune ought in this? no whit be sure.
Or shall I blame her after for my fall
That never could me any hurt procure?
It Was glory vain did sweetly me allure.
Wherefore give ear, and then with pen disclose
How seeming friends did prove my chiefest foes.
Full happy were our Country men that did,
(As noble Nennius) in the field that sought:
When first both Britains, and the Romans tried
With dint of sword, if titles theirs were ought.
They did in their defense: no pomp they sought:
They lived to see their Country conquer still:
They did before they felt of private ill.
When Caesar so with shameful flight recoiled,
And left our Britain land unconquered first:
Which only thought our Realm and us to have spoiled,
We came to see (of all our field the worst)
Our soldiers slain. O cruel Caesar cursed,
(Quoth we) by thee did all these Britains die,
That durst not bide, but like a dastard fly.
But then to see them in array to lie,
And for to see them wounded all before,
Not one but in his place his life did try:
To see the Romans bloody backs that bore
Their wounds in flight all scattered on the shore,
What thousand tongues our joy to light could bring,
This made our hearts revive, this pleased our King.
With trompets mourning tune, and wayling cries,
And drums, and fluits, and shawmes we sound adieu:
And for our friends we watered all our eyes,
As loath to lose the lives of such a crew.
To the earth we bare them all in order dew,
According unto each man's noble name,
And as their birth required and worthy fame.
Of noble triumphs after was no spare,
We Britains erst were never half so glad:
That so we made the Romans hence to fare,
No tongue can tell the hearty joys we had.
We were therewith for battle bent as mad,
Our fingers tickled still, which came from fight:
We had before our eyes our foes foul flight.
So fares it when the meaner give the spoil,
And make the mighty all their force revoke:
So fares it when great victours feel the foil,
And men less deemed do give the conquering stroke,
That pierces even the hardest heart of oak.
For where the weaker win the wage of fame,
The victours hearts a thousand joys inflame.
A solemn Iusts proclaimed was for those
Who would to win renown their valor try,
Where the Earl of Londons cousin did expose
Himself to purchase praise, against whom I
To win the prize did all my powers apply:
But fatal was the scope I did intend,
The effects bewrayed my folly in the end.
For why, when glory vain stirs men to strife,
When hope of praise prouokes them once to ire:
Then they at all regard no goods nor life,
From faithful friendship rudely they retire:
They are so set with glories gloss on fire,
That quite they rule and reason wrest awrie,
They turn away their former friendly eye.
O God that workest all the wonder wrought,
(And have the power to turn the hearts alive)
Grant grace to those that labor so for naught
But flitting fame, and titles hautie strive.
Let not ambition so the earth deprive
Of worthy wights, give them some better grace,
That they may run for countries weal their race.
Let them not break the bond of friendly love
In broiles of bate, but friendly faults redress:
Let not them so their manhood seek to prove
By private hate, to work their own distress:
So shall they need their foes to fear the less.
Friends worse then foreign foes themselves do make,
That fall at odds for fond vain glories sake.
But what need I on those alive to stay?
They have examples good before their eyes:
By which (if they have grace) beware they may,
* The happiest men by others harms are wise.
Let them not then our warning words despise,
Do will them wisely of these things debate:
For why, the foolish aye the warning hate.
We spent the day in iusting (as I said)
Appointed erst among our selves before:
And all the feats of arms in field we played
Aenaeas taught our ancestors of yore.
What need I fill thine ears with talking more?
My men and I had put those feats in ure,
And he likewise (but nothing yet so sure)
For as with fortune still I gave the foil,
To him that thought the glory all to have,
When he perceived he could not keep the coile,
Nor yet with equal match himself to save:
Occasion of dissension great he gave.
In stead of jest he offered earnest play,
In lieu of sport he spite did still display:
The traitor vile, the tyrant (so he proved)
With coward, cankered, hateful, hasty ire
And caytife dealing, showed how me he loved.
When as he could not to his hope aspire,
To win the praise of triumph, his desire,
He challenged me: and here began the broile:
He thought with banding brave to keep the coile,
And that because men's judgment favored me.
Report almost of all the common rout
Ran still that I was worthy praisde to be,
And often times they gave me all a shout.
This made my foes to stare and look about,
And often wish them ill aloude that cride:
* Such is the nature still of naughty pride.
We twain (quoth he) between our selves will try
Alone our manhoods both, if thou consent.
We ought not break the Prince his peace (quoth I)
His grace would not therewith be well content.
And since no hurt was here, nor malice meant,
You ought not so on choler take it ill,
Though I to win the prize put forth my skill:
With that quoth Elenine (for so he hight)
That was the Earl his cousin, then my foe,
I mean (quoth he) to try the case in fight,
Before thou pass again my presence froe:
And even with that he raught to me a bloe.
My friends nor I could not this wrong abide:
We drew, and so did those on the other side.
But I was all the mark whereat he shot,
The malice still he meant to none but me:
At me he cast, and drew me for the lot
Which should of all revenge the ransom be.
Wherefore he set them at me frank and free
Till me they took, so compast round about,
As I could not escape from among them out.
To make it short: I singled was therefore,
Even as the Dear to find his fatal stroke:
I could not escape, in number they were more,
My pageant was in presence there bespoke.
A pillow they prepared me of oak,
My hands they bound, along my corpse they led,
From off my shoulders quite they stroke my head.
If ever man that served his Prince with pain,
And well deserved of his public weal:
If ever Knight esteemed it greatest gain,
For Prince and Country in the wars to deal:
My self was such, which venter'd life and heal
At all assayes, to save my native soil,
With all my labor, travel, pain and toil.
Yet here you see, at home I had my fall,
Not by my fiercest foes that came in war:
But by my friend I gate this griping thrall,
When folly framed us both at home to jar,
Oh that my friend of yore should range so far
From wisdoms way, to wed himself to will,
From reasons rule, to wrest his wits to ill.
Well, bid the rest beware of triumphs such,
Bid them beware for titles vain to strive:
Bid them not trust such sullen friends too much,
Bid them not so their honors high atchieue.
For if they will preserve their names alive,
There is no better way to work the same
Then to eschew of tyranny defame.
HOW CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR, which first made this Realm tributarie to the
Romans, was slain in the Senate house, about the year before Christ, 42.
ALthough by Bocas I have whilom told my mind,
And Lydgate have likewise translated well the same:
Yet since my place in order here again I find,
And that my facts deserved in Britain worthy fame:
Let me again renew to memory my name:
Recite my mind; which if thou grant to me,
Thou shall therefore receive a friendly fee.
If ever erst the fame of ancient Roman facts
Have come to pierce thine ears before this present time,
I think amongst the rest, likewise my noble acts
Have showed themselves in sight, as Phoebus fair in prime.
When first the Roman state began aloft to clime,
And wanne the wealth of all the world beside,
When first their force in warlike feats were tried.
I Caius Julius Caesar Consul had to name,
That worthy Roman borne, renownd with noble deeds.
What need I here recite the lineage whence I came,
Or else my great exploites? surelyt's more then needs:
But only this to tell, of purpose now proceeds:
Why I a Roman Prince, no Britain, here
Amongst these Britain Princes now appear.
And yet because thou may perceive the story all
Of all my life, and so deem better of the end:
I will again the same to mind yet briefly call,
To tell thee how thou may me praise or discommend.
Which when thou have, in brief, as I recite it, pend,
Thou shall confess that I deserved well,
Amongst them here my tragedy to tell.
What need I first recite my pedigree well known?
No noble author writes that can forget the same:
My praise I know in print through all the world is blown,
There Is no man scarce that writes, but he recites my fame.
My worthy father Lucius Caesar had to name,
Aurelia fair my mother also hight,
Of Caius Cotta daughter borne by right.
How I was trained up in youth what need I tell?
Since that my noble Aunt (that Iulia hight) me taught,
Who could with moral discipline instruct me well,
And saw the frame in me that natures skill had wrought,
By her instructions aye I wit and favor sought.
I was accounted comely of my grace,
I had by natures gift a Princely face.
Of stature high and tall, of color fair and white,
Of body spare and lean, yet comely made to see:
What need I more of these impertinent recite,
Since Plutarch has at large described it all to thee,
And eke thy self that think thou see and hear me,
May well suppose the rest, and write the truth,
Of all my noble actions from my youth.
In journey swift I was, and prompt and quick of wit,
My eloquence was likte of all that heard me plead,
I had the grace to use my terms, and place them fit,
My roling Rhetoric stood my Clients often in stead:
No fine conueyance past the compass of my head.
I wan the spurs, I had the laud and praise,
I past them all that pleaded in those days.
At seventeen years of age a Flamin was I chose,
An office great in Rome of Priesthood Princely hie,
I married eke Cossutia, whereof much mischief rose,
Because I was diuorc'st from her so speedily.
* Diuorcement breeds despite, defame is got thereby.
For such as fancies fond by chance fulfill,
Although they think it cannot come to ill.
Of these the stories tell, what need I more recite,
Or of the wars I waged Consul with the Galls?
The worthiest writers had desire of me to write,
They plac'st my life amongst the worthies and their falls.
So Fame me thinks likewise amids the Britains calls
For Caesar with his sword, that bare the sway,
And for the cause that wrought his swift decay.
When I in France had brought the valiant Galls to bend,
And made them subject and obeysant unto me:
I then did think I had unto the world his end
By West subdued the Nations which were whilome free.
There of my famous wars I wrote an history,
I did describe each places and sequels of my war,
The Commentaries called of Caesar's acts that are.
At length I did perceive there was an Island yet
By West of France, which in the Ocean sea did lie:
And that there was likewise no cause or time to let,
But that I might with them the chance of fortune try.
I sent to them for hostage of assurance, I,
And wil'd them tribute pay unto the Roman stout,
Or else I would both put their lives and goods in doubt.
But they a people fierce and recklesse of my powers,
Abused those which brought the embassage that I sent:
Now since (quoth they) the land and region here is ours,
We will not Caesar to thy rightlesse hestes assent.
By doom of friendly Gods this Island first we hent,
Of Priames blood we are, from Greece we Trojans came,
As Brutus brought us thence, and gave this land his name.
This land reported was full fertile for the soil,
The wealthy warlike sort of Britains stout within,
Were rather able well to give, then take the foil,
To those which came by wars, their freedom for to win.
My self made first assault, with them I did begin,
Of all the Romans first I waged with them war:
And this I can report, they valiant people are.
It was reported eke that in my wars in France
Some Britains thither came amongst the Galls to fight,
And that for pleasure sake, to try of Mars the chance,
And for to have in field of Roman wars the sight:
That they no labor sparde by day nor yet by night,
In camp, in scoute, for hunger, heat, or cold:
But were in all attempts of arms both stout and bold.
This fame enflamed me, displeasure eke I took,
That glory hopte to get so doughtie hearts to daunt:
On which, with winds at will, I Gallia shores forsook,
Full minded for to make the Britains tribute grant,
Since at my message sent, they seemed so to taunt.
With armor, soldiers good, and of munition store,
I went appointed well, with fifty sails or more.
But so the noble Britains plaide the valiant men
By policies, and force to hurt my ships and me,
That I was forced after my return again,
To rigge my shipppes: again a wondrous thing to see:
For in the strands and in the seas, where havens be,
Sharp posts they pight, whereon our ships we ron:
When many diu'd the deep before the land we won.
Being hardly come to land, at length we met the host,
And sharply fought with them, whose praises erst we hard:
I have no cause of Britane conquest for to boast,
Of all the Regions first and last with whom I ward.
A people stout and strong, enduring chances hard,
And desperate, wild and fearce, and recklesse found I then,
Not soon aghast with dint, or fright with fall of men.
For when our armies met, no dangers they forsook,
But so behau'd themselves in every place of fight,
As though to Martial feats they only had betook
Themselves, and for the palm did all their dealings dight.
Though with my Romans I waged all my warlike might,
I was not able there, to cause them yield or flee,
Or for a space to take a time of truce with me:
The toiles we took to enter at the first on land,
And for to save our shattered ships and armor brought,
To wey them out that else had bulg'd themselves in sand,
Hereon before the field with might and maine we wrought,
Beside at skirmish often, upon the shore we fought.
These labors tired so my men and me that tide,
That we could not endure the battles brunt to abide,
They followed hard the chase, with scath and loss we scapte,
And shipped, we hoised sails, to France we made retire:
Where for an army new, another road we shapte,
If winter cold were past, to come the following year:
And so we did indeed, and bought our coming dear:
For they provided had so well to fight, that I
With all mine armies stout could find no victory.
Again to ship my mates I bad my Captains stur,
Eke from this people fearce with speed to shift away:
The chance of war is hard and doubtful for t'assure,
Where the enemies neither dint of death nor dangers fray.
They reckt not of their wealth nor loss of goods decay,
But for their freedom fought, on Princes case they stood,
With joyful hearts they waged warlike life and blood:
Almost I had no hope at all to make return,
The people were so fearce, so stubburne, stout, and bold:
No time of rest I wrought amongst them to soiurne,
They could not by our power be ruled nor controld.
They said they would us pay no silver, brass, nor gold.
To our indictions sent, they would not set their hand,
But for to try the case, with all their power to stand.
When to the coasts of Gallia again with loss we come,
That never erst with such repulse to foes did turn the back,
The Britains they rejoice with triumphs all and some,
And fame does sound report, they make the Romans pack:
Where we no men, no coin, nor no munition lack,
No captains good, no art, no victual, heart to fight,
A goodly spoil, the land a pray before our sight.
Now mark the hap we had: while I in Gallia lay,
The Britains past the time in triumphs and in feasts,
And for our second flight with sports they spend the day,
Accounting us in their respect but coward beasts.
Amongst their other sport of Iusts and pleasant jests,
A civil discord fell between two worthy peers,
Of courage both so good, that neither best appears:
The one hight Irenglas, of kindred to the king,
A worthy wight in war, and prudent, wise and sage:
The other Elenine, whose praise no stories bring,
But stoutnesse in his fight, as ruled all by rage.
Yet both against the Romans with the king did wage
The British war full well, and served as they ought,
Till time at home the praise of triumphs vain they sought.
This Elenine was stout, for he was near of kin
Unto Androgeus which was the Earl of London then,
And claimed eke the palm (they say) that he did win
In triumphs at the iusts amongst the noble men.
But as they went about to try the line again,
They fell from words to sharp, and laid on load amain,
Until at length in fight hight Irenglas was slain.
The King did send for Elenine, but he was fled
Unto the Earl his cousin, whence he would not come:
He feared lest he should have lost his hated head.
'The guilty heart conceau's before the Judge do doom.
He wist if once he went, there needed him no toome.
Wherefore he it refused, and the Earl was discontent:
Who message sharp again unto the King had sent.
Cassibellane displeased much that subjects should
Both slay his friend, and eke refuse to bide the law,
And also in rebellious wise, endeavor what they could
To cut themselves unjustly from the Princes awe,
Though it him grieved to see at home so foul a flawe,
He could not yet abide the injuries were shown,
But armde himself and his, against subjects once his own.
When the Earl Androgeus saw that he was far too weak,
Against his Prince to wage rebellious wars begone,
He sent to me in France, desiring help to wreake
The injuries and wrong Cassibellane had don.
He also Sceua sent, for pledge, his only son,
And thirty youths beside, of honor great well borne*
I would not trust his talk, nor message sent beforne.
On this I expedition made the third and last,
(For he did warrant me my purpose to obtain)
I shipped my men, and hide me thitherward full fast,
Had wind at will, and came to see the shining shores again:
And of my coming so the Earl was glad and feign.
We joined hands and league and armies for the fight:
And sought, and put Cassibellane the noble King to flight.
Yet he repaird his host again, that fiercely faught,
And often assaid to slay or take the Earl or me:
And when he saw at length his labor veiled naught,
And Britanes with the Romans linked so to be,
Great grief he had in them such treason for to see.
His loss in doubtful war not grieved him half so sore,
His peoples base revolt he chiefly did deplore.
To make it short: the King was feign at length to yield,
The tribute granted was three thousand pound a year:
We bare away the price, we wan the worthy field,
And made them friends again that bought our favor dear.
I need no longer stay to tell the story here,
Nor yet to give my friend the Earl of London blame,
Since by his means I wan to Rome eternal fame.
From France I after sent to Rome, reporting how
Amongst the warlike Galls and Britains I had sped:
I made request; by friends, I might be Consul now
On my return again: but Pompeyes hautie head
Did join himself with Peers and armies which he led,
Alleging plain I meant the public weal t'inuade:
They would repress my pride with might and dint of blade.
With speed I came and force, which made them all to fly
To Greece from Rome in haste, where they prepared war:
For in Epyrus then with soldiers they did lie.
This Pompey proud that made the Romans with me iar,
He at Dyrrachium staid, to which (though it were far)
I led my conquering host: I skirmisht often there:
But from the fight to fly we soon contented were.
On this he followed fast, in hope to win the field,
To Thessalie he came, where I did stay therefore:
Our armies met and fiercely faught, not bent to yield,
Till fifteen hundred men were slain in fight, or more.
But in the end they fled, we took of prisoners store,
They durst not dare to abide the chance of Mars to try,
But either fell in fight or from the field did fly.
Thence Pompey fled the field, and into Egypt came
To Ptolemie the King as then but young of age,
Where of his slaughter foul Septimius has the blame,
He was his end that did these wars against me wage.
Even so by course we come to play upon the stage,
Our travels have an end when we do feel the fall:
For all our life is but a race of misery and thrall.
But Pompeyes friends and sons by might did often assay
When he was done to death, to take revenge on me,
And I by dint of sword repel'd their force away,
Gate offices of rule, and governed each degree,
At Caesar's beck and call obeysant all they be:
Enacted laws, directed each estate,
Emperially the first aloft I sat.
But glory won, the way to hold and keep the same,
To hold good fortune fast, a work of cunning skill:
Who so with prudent art can stay that stately dame,
Which sets us up so high upon her hautie hill,
And constant aye can keep her love and favor still,
He wins immortal fame, thrice blessed is the crown:
If once misfortune kick and cast the scepter down.
For when in Rome I was alone Dictator chose,
And Emperor or Captain sole to be for ay:
My glory did procure me many secret foes,
Because above the rest I bare the sovereign sway.
By sundry means they sought my ruin and decay.
For why, there could no thing in state determined be,
Unless it likte me first, and were approved by me.
This they enui'd at me that su'd aloft to clime,
As hautie Cassius, which the Pretorship did crave,
And Brutus eke his friend which bare the chiefest crime
Of my dispatch and death, for they did first deprave
My life, mine acts, my reign, and sought my blood to have,
Full secretly amongst themselves conspired, decreed
To be attemptors of that cruel bloody deed.
Yet I forewarned was by Capis fatal tomb
His Epitaph my death did long before foreshow:
Cornelius Balbus saw mine horses headless run
Without the guide of man, forsaking food for woe.
Spurina warned me that sooth of things did know,
A little wren in beak with Laurel green that flew,
Foreshew'd my doleful death, as after all men knew.
The night before my fall in slumber I did dream
I carried was, from earth and flew the clouds above,
And sometime hand in hand I thought I walked with Jove supreme,
My wife Calphurnia, Caesar's only love,
Did dream she saw her crest of house to fall,
Her husband thrust through breast a sword withal,
Eke that same night her chamber doors themselves flew open all.
These things did make me much that mourning to mislike,
And Iacrazed was and thought at home to stay:
But who is he can void deaths dart when he does strike,
Where so great number seeks his life for to betray?
The traitor bloody Brutus bad me not delay,
Nor yet to frustrate there so great assembly sat,
At last I went and there did meet untimely sat.
To Senate as I went, behold a Roman stood,
Presenting me a scrole of every traitors name:
And all their whole device that sought to spill my blood,
That presently decreed to execute the same.
But I blind wretch supposde that for some suite he came,
I heedlesse bare this scrole in my unhappy hand,
For which I lost my life, as you shall understand.
Spurina as I came at sacrifices was,
Near to the place where I was after slain:
Of whose diuinings true I then did little pass,
To warn me of my death the Priest did seek in vain,
My hautie heart grown proud these warnings all disdain.
(Quoth I) the Ides of March be come, yet harm is none,
(Quoth he) the Ides of March be come, yet the are not gone.
As Soon as I was set, the traitors all arose,
And one approached near, as to demand some thing:
To whom as I gave ear, at once my cruel foes
Beset me round about, their weapons hid they bring.
Then I too late perceived my deaths approaching sting.
O this (quoth I) is violence: then Cassius pierst my breast:
And Brutus thou my son (quoth I) whom erst I loved best?
Ye Princes all, and noble men beware of pride,
Wrack not the Commonwealth for wealthy kingdoms sake:
Be warned by me, that see my self the world to guide,
Beware what bloody wars for rule you undertake.
Ere three and twenty wounds had made my heart to quake,
How many thousands fell for Pompeyes pride and mine?
How many valiant Knights did loved life resign?
Full many nobie men, to rule alone, I slew,
And some themselves again for grief of heart did slay:
For they would never yield though I did them subdue:
Some I did force to yield, some trauail'd far away,
As loath to stay and see their countries swift decay.
The world on Aphrike coasts, and Asia distant far,
And Europe also knew my bloodsheds great in war.
But since my whole pretense was naught but glory vain,
To have renown and rule amongst men above the rest,
Without remorce in mind of many thousands slain,
Which, for their own defense, their wars so often addressed:
I justly deem therefore my stony heart and breast
Received so many wounds this sentence long has stood
That who so slayes, he paies the price of blood for blood.
HOW CLAUDIUS TIBERIUS NERO EMPEROVR OF Rome, was poisoned by Caius Caligula,
the year of Christ, 39.
WHat boots it hautie hearts depend so much
On high estate, auailes it ought think ye?
The gold is tried when it is brought to tuch:
So trial tells what worldly triumphs be.
When glory shines, no dangers deep we see,
Till we at ast find true the proverb old:
* Not all th at shines is pure and perfect gold.
While valiant men so burn with hot desire
Of royal rule, and thirst so sore for seat,
No springs of Pernasse mount can quench the fire,
Nor Boreas blast allay the hautie heat.
On high renown so much their brains they beat,
And toil so much for fading flickering fame,
On earth for aye to leave behind a name.
But if they would mark Fortunes double face,
And how she turns about the tottering wheel:
How she does change her mind and turn her grace,
How blind of sight she is, how light of heel:
They would not rue the fatal falls they feel,
They would not after blame her blindness so,
But look before, and leap her lightness fro.
All men that in affairs themselves employ,
Do praise Dame Fortune first if they speed well:
But if thereby fall after some annoy,
They curse her then, as hateful hagge of hell:
If Fortune firm had stood, they had not fell.
They ban her then, and yet themselves were cursed,
Which took her bait so freely at the first.
For while her idle impes do bathe in bliss,
They count her gifts and pleasures all good hap:
But if at last she frown (as custom is)
And let them slip again beside her lap,
They then confess her baits did boad some trap.
As I have proved, what Fortune gives to men,
For pleasure each, she brings displeasures ten.
Augustus great that good Octauius hight,
The Emperor which in peace did rule so long,
In whose good reign was borne the Lord of light
Named Jesus Christ, in power and works so strong,
Whom in my days the Jews oppressed with wrong,
Of which good Christ anon I have to tell:
But first unto Augustus what befell.
This noble Emprour did my mother wed
Which Liuia hight, a fair and noble dame:
His daughter Iulia I likewise did bed,
And put away my wife of better fame
Agrippa great with child, the more my blame:
I was through this and the Empress Liuias skill,
Adopted Emprour by Augustus will.
When he was dead, then I Tiberius reigned
Adopted thus, and for my noble acts,
I was both unto war and peace well trained,
The Illyrians must confess my famous facts:
In three years space my power their pride subacts.
On them and Germans triumphed near and far,
Save Punike fight the greatest Roman war.
Now (for it was my hap a victour so
To Rome return a year before his end)
Throughout the world the fame of me did go,
The Romans all to favor me did bend.
To them Augustus did my wars commend,
Adopted me, and (as I said) for this
The Romans heapt on me all worldly bliss.
So when I had obtained my desire,
Who then but Caesar? I did rule alone:
By nature proud, presuming to aspire,
Dissembling that which afterward was known.
For when the fathers mind to me was shown,
Of their electing mine Imperial place,
I seemed to stay, refusing it a space.
And thus to prove my friends before I did,
And eke to hear what every one would say,
Which was the cause why some I after rid,
The best'mongst them I made as foes away.
By slaughter so I thought my throne to stay,
But otherwise then I had thought it fell,
As time does try the fruit of things full well.
Another grief conceived I will recite,
Which made me with the Senate discontent:
About that time did Pontius Pilate write
His letters how the Jews, to malice bent,
Had put to death one Christ full innocent,
The Son of God, of might, of power no less,
Which rose from death, as Christians all confess.
Thus wise he wrote:

PONTIVS PILATE TO HIS LORD CLAUDIUS, wishes health.
OF late it chanst, which I have proved well,
The Jews through wrath by cruel doom have lost ^his letter is ^^ Flores
hi^^oriarum; but ^^^ may not ^^inke that I do (...) it down ^^ereby to
af^^^me that he ^^rote it. For ^ ^^ persvva^^d he would ^^t write so ^^ell,
and yet ^^ appears by ^rosius and o^^ers, that ^^audius should have ^^de
Christ to ^^ue bin taken Rome for a ^^d, and that Senate and ^^ ^ell so at
va^^^nce about ^^^ same mat^^^.

Themselves, and all their offspring that ensue.
For when their fathers promise had that God
Would send to them from heaven his holy one,
That might deseruingly be named their King,
And by a virgin him to the earth to send,
Lo now when as the Hebrews God was come,
And they him saw restore the blind to sight,
To cleanse the leapers, cure the palsies eke,
To cast fiends out of men, and raise the dead,
Command the winds, on sea with dry feet walk,
And many maruels great beside to do,
When all men called him the Son of God,
The Priests in envy brought him unto me,
And bringing many forged fained faults
Named him a wisard, against their laws to do:
Which I believing whipped him for the cause,
And gave him up to use as they thought best.
They crucified him, buried him, his tomb,
They kept three days with soldiers stout: yet he
The third day rose again, and came to life.
Which when they heard, they bribed the soldiers all,
And bad them say, his corpse was stolen away.
The soldiers yet, when they the money had,
Could not the truth keep silent of the fact:
For they did witness he did rise again,
And of the Jews, that they money taken had.
I write the truth; if any otherwise
Do bring report, account it but vain lies.

THe letters read, I did thereon confer,
Booh with the Fathers grave in high degree,
And with the nobles who of Senate were
That Christ in Rome as God might counted be,
To which they only did not disagree,
(Because the letters came not first to them)
But by edict did punish Christen men.
To their accusers threaten death I did,
Although Seianus from my party fell:
The Senate which the Christians sought to rid,
By me were after served in order well.
For as Christ's Godhead they would Rome expel,
And would not serve the God of meekness sent,
To pot apace their hautie heads were pent.
I banished some, and some to death I put,
And four and twenty Fathers grave I chose:
From shoulders eke most of their heads I cut,
And left likewise alive but twain of those.
Seianus I did slay, all Drusus deadly foes.
I eke Germanicus with poison slew,
His sons likewise, my poisons force well knew.
The men that did Iehouaes son refuse,
The King of Jews, the Lord of life and health,
Were governed thus: Tiberius thus did use
The men that were the Gods in Commonwealth,
Forsaking so their heavenly saving health.
The Emprour I which should their lives defend,
Sought all the means to bring their lives to end.
Yet to religion I was nothing bent,
Dissembled things that least I favored still:
I never used to speak the things I meant,
But bare in mind the ways to work men ill.
I seemed to some to bear them great good will,
And those I took away as time did serve,
Inconstant unto each, yet seldom seemed to swerue.
To drunkenness and riot, sports and ease,
And pleasure all I gave my study then:
Naught more then subtle shiftings did me please,
With bloodshed, crafty, undermining men.
My Court was like a Lions lurking den.
The Iesters named me Caldius Biberius Mero,
In stead of this my name, Clandius Tiberius Nero.
I will no more my life describe this time,
For why, my facts at last deserved defame,
Infected with so many a fulsome crime,
As may not here repeated be for shame.
I have no cause the Lady blind to blame,
But mine own self, who did abuse my place,
Which might full well have used the gifts of grace.
Three things in fine I tell, that wrought my fall,
First vile dissembling both with God and man:
For bloodshed then, which havoc made of all,
Blood cries to him that well revenge it can.
For filthy life I much offended than:
Wherefore alive thus poisoned with these three,
Caligula at last did poison me.
To Princes this I say, and worthy Peers,
I wish them wisely weigh that hear me shall,
And poise my first exploits with latter years,
And well consider one thing in my fall:
* Abuse of power abaseth Princes all.
In throne on earth, a Prince as God does sit,
And as a God no justice should omit.
HOW CAIUS CAESAR CALIGVLA EMPEROVR OF Rome was slain by Cherea and others,
the year of Christ, 42.
Unhappy Princes have in wealth no grace,
To see how soon their vices bring them under,
But run unruly, reckelesse of their race,
Till at the length they make themselves a wonder,
When from aloft their traces fall asonder,
There is no hope to hold aright the trace:
They cannot keep aloft the Imperial place.
Behold my hap, on whom the Roman rout
With joy did gaze, when bloody slain I lay.
Here lies (quoth they) thrust thirty times throughout,
The monster vile, that beast Caligula,
Which did so many guiltless Romans slay.
The nobles now the matrons need not doubt.
The worthy writers may their works set out.
I was (I grant) full leaudly led by lust,
I forced naught of virtue, faith, nor law:
In power I put my confidence and trust,
Regarding right nor Justice strict a straw.
My facts infarst my life with many a flawe,
Did me to deeds of foul lust incest draw:
Which had of God nor natures hests the awe.
To make my self a God I did devise,
That Jupiter to name my self did dare,
For incests vile, which all good wights despise,
Named Bacchus eke a drunken shrine I bare.
To call me God some flatterers did not spare.
By message I commanded them likevise,
My statue in the Temple to comprise.
I would not have my slaughters here enrolde,
And murdrous mischieues mingled with the rest,
Without regard of sex, of young or old,
For which the Romans did my life detest.
To vices vile my deeds were all addressed:
Which mine own servants loathing at the last
With their own hands my timelesse death did have.
My life was naught, and thus at last I did,
My life procured both Gods and men my foes:
Let Princes then beware of pomp and pride,
And not themselves to vices such dispose.
The throne will soon a Princely mind disclose,
The tyrants heart at once in throne is tried:
The Princely robe no tyrant thoughts can hide.
HOW GVIDERIVS KING of Britain, and the elder son of Cimbaline was slain in
battle by a Roman, the year of Christ, 44. or as some write, 46.
TAke, Higgins, now in hand thy pen for me,
Let not my death and story lie forgote:
Good cause there is I should remembered be,
If thou the falls of Britain Princes note.
Aloft I sat in Princely place aflote,
I had the sword, I bare the scepter right:
I was accounted aye a worthy wight.
Guiderius was my name, the son of yore
Of noble Cimbaline, and after King:
The Roman tribute I would pay no more,
Me thought it was too base a servile thing.
No Roman should me in subjection bring,
I stoutly did deny what they did claim,
Though many counseld me to yield the same.
When Claudius sent this tribute for to have,
I sent him word again, I would not pay:
I would not grant, unjustly he did crave,
That might in time procure my Realms decay:
He should not bear our freedom so away:
By force and fraud proud Caesar here did reign,
But now by might my right I would maintain.
On this addressed himself in warlike sort,
The noble Claudius came to try the case:
Which had before received high report,
Both of my wealth, my force, and noble grace.
So thinking well he might my fame deface,
From Rome he came to Britain with his host,
And landed here upon my Southern coast.
Now mark my tale, and hereby shall thou know
The subtle sleights of Romans in their war:
The sly deceits of such do make a show,
Whereby to try the people what they are.
Note well such foes in dealing near and far,
Amidst the field, in scout, or fight alone:
Of all the rest example take by one.
Amongst his men, a Captain stout he had,
With whom in fight I made my party good:
Hamonius men him called, who for his blade
In single fight so often I withstood:
At last did work a wile to shed my blood,
He clad himself as he a Britain wear,
Like armor, sword, and target did he bear.
He marched with us as he a friend had been,
And when we came to fight he showed a face
Of comfort and bold courage against his men:
And when they fled, and we pursued the chase,
Pursue (quoth he) the Romans fly apace,
In British tongue he cride, they fly, they fly,
Our hostages had taught him so to cry.
As we pursude, in me he thrust his blade,
Between my armor splints he gave the wound:
And fast away for life to shift he made,
Thus by deceits my life he did confound.
Of my decay this was the fatal ground:
Which thou must pen, that I a miror be
For men to shun the flights of treachery.
HOW LAELIVS HAMO THE ROMAN CAPTAIN was slain, after the slaughter of
Guiderius, about the year of Christ, 46.
A Roman Captain I in Britain armor clad,
Disguisde therefore, in field did slay their noble King,
I ventred in their host, and I my purpose had:
To venture so for Countries sake a worthy thing.
But whosoever weenes to win by slaughter high renown,
Has often times the sat, to fall by slaughter down.
Even so my self that slew, short time my joys did last,
In flight I taken was, and hewde in pieces small,
Which down the cleeues they did into the waters cast,
And by my name as yet the haven and harbor call.
Who thinks by slaughters praise, to win immortal fame
By treason vile, deserves a shrowding sheet of shame.
HOW CLAUDIUS TIBERIUS DRVSVS EMPEROVR of Rome, was poisoned by his wife
Agrippina, The year of Christ, 56.
SAy not the people well, that fortune favors fools?
So well they say, I think, which name her beetle blind.
I need not tell thee here what I have learned at schools,
But may by proof express the madness of my mind.
My mother by her proverbs me a fool defined,
Which often said when any foolishly had done:
In faith you are as wise as Claudius my son.
It pleased her not only so to name me sot,
But also me in ire a monster often she named,
Imperfect all, begun by nature, but begot
Not absolute, not well, nor fully complete framed.
Since thus my mother often in anger me defamed,
What meant the men of Rome, which so elected me,
A fool, a monster foul, their governor to be?
The Imperial blood and high descent was partly cause,
That I (unfit therefore) attained the supreme throne:
And yet the bloody Senate took a while the pause,
Determining in mind t'abolish every one
Of Caesar's ancient lineage, as their mortal fone.
For why they could, they thought, receive no quiet rest,
But still by our proud reign were cruelly oppressed.
The soldiers which me found where I my self had hid,
Lo from a place obscure, unfit for Caesar's grace,
They brought me forth by force, there me proclaim they did,
Because I seemed in heart much meekness to embrace,
And could dissemble eke t'obtaine the Imperial place,
Whereby the warriers stout were unto me inclinde,
Supposing I was meek, and of a gentle mind.
The wily wolf that seeks to slay the silly sheep,
Does feign himself often times to bear a simple eye:
The crafty fox likewise would take of lambs the keep,
If that he do perceive the mastiue lying by:
The Crocodile in Nile will feign to weep and cry:
But if the sheep, her young, or wandering man be caught:
Wolf, Fox, and Crocodile, have even the prey they sought.
So I could wisely feign, as though I did refuse
To take the Empires sway, a charge for me too great,
But well in mind I wist, if the army did me choose,
The Senate could not me by force thereof defeat:
They had no power to stay me from the hautie seat.
Thus though I seemed at first so simple, meek and plain:
Yet was I subtle, sly, and glad of glory vain.
But after I was throned, I gave my self to ease,
To wine, to women eke, to sport, and belly chere,
And foolish fearful was, my wife for to displease
Who Messalina hight, whose manners homely were.
She made not only me the cuckolds horn to bear,
But also did allure good matrons unto vice,
And virgins chaste to sin, or made them pay the price.
For if that either they did seem t'abhor the fact,
Or if that men with her adulterate would not be,
Some famous crime was feigned or else some heinous act,
For which not they nor theirs from slaughter could be free.
My household servants were preferred in place by me,
Their wealth was more then mine: the proverb went as then,
* I need no treasure want, if I would please my men.
On this I caused her for to be made away,
And made a vow no more with women for to wed,
Because my vicious wives sought either me to slay,
Or else with whoredom vile to violate my bed.
But blind at length with folly from my vow I fled,
And Agrippina hight my brothers daughter brave
Incestuously I chose, for spoused wife to have.
So leading then my life in sloth and loath some sin,
I gave my self to riot, drinking, cards and dice:
And I so skillful was by practice grown therein,
That I of dicing art did write a work of Price.
This may full well declare if I were grave and wise.
Grown old in all my deeds so credulous was I,
That in each doubtful place I had some secret spy.
So bloody was I grown, that every light offense
Was cause enough to take away the offenders life:
I so forgetful was, and such my negligence,
I would enquire for those that causde my former grief
For Messalina fair, of late my wanton wife:
Eke for such others dead I would enquire again,
As I in rage before commanded to be slain.
I fondly did extol the meaner sort of men,
Adorning their degrees with titles of estate,
Even such as servants were and served my diet then,
Amongst the ancient men in Senate often sat,
For which the Romans me unto the death did hate.
And for the cruel deeds and beastly life I lead,
Full often times they wished that I their Prince were dead.
My Agrippine persuaded me t'adopt her hopeful son,
That after my decease the Empire he might have:
Which when too soon at length I had unwisely done
At her unjust request, as she the same did crave:
In recompense to me she deadly poison gave,
Whereof at last I di'd: this was my life and end:
Which as a mirour here to thee I do commend.
HOW THE EMPEROVR DOMITIVS NERO LIVED wickedly and tyrannously, and in the end
miserably slew himself, the year of Christ, 70.
MVst I that lead so loose a life speak here,
Amongst the wreckes whom Fortunes tempests tore?
Well, then I see I must, the case is clear,
But blame I must my only self therefore.
I am that Nero rule in Rome that bore,
My mother Agrippine so wrought for me,
Her husband poisned, I might Emprour be.
A while I gave my self to govern well,
As Senec grave instructed me thereto:
But after, I to shameless dealings fell,
At random lived in lust as Lechers do,
To slaughters fell, of friends and kindred too,
Not sparing those in fleshly lusts desire,
Whom natures impes dumb beasts will not require.
A shame it were to tell my hateful life:
But he that wanted shame, whose face was brass,
That spared neither men, maid, virgin, wife,
Not mother, sister, kind, nor kin that was:
Whose facts both care and shame did always pass:
What should he shame to do, speak, think, or say,
Which all his life cast bashful shame away?
For wantonness, I past the filthy stues:
For gluttony, I had no where my peer:
No kind of cruelty but I did use,
No wickedness from which my life was clear,
My pride did pass them all, both far and near.
Against the trade of kind in shameless life,
One man had me for bride and for bride-wife.
With golden nets in riot I would fish.
And purple lines to draw my nets I had:
I used eke for pleasures many a dish,
And was with naught but lust and mischief glad.
Though these things made the Romans hearts full sad,
They durst not speak: for whosoever did complain,
Without respect or sentence more, was slain.
For pleasures sake to see the flames arise,
I causde that Rome should then on fire be set:
And for to feed therewith my gazing eyes,
On high Maecenas Tower to stand I get.
So, six days fire and seven nights waste I let,
And sang there while, beholding it with joy,
The Iliades sweet of Grecians burning Troy.
Then I restrained that no man should resort
To the ruins great, when as the fire was past:
Nor should therefrom the relics left transport,
But to my self reserved them all at last.
The Merchants causeless from their goods I cast,
And Senators deprived of all they had,
Some slain, the rest with life to escape were glad.
Still out the sword to slay all sorts I drew,
My mother could not escape amongst them free:
My brother dear, and sisters eke I slew,
And of my wives likewise a two or three.
My kinsemen eke I killed of each degree,
Rejoicing in so heinous bloodshed still,
Naught else with Nero then but, kill, them kill.
And for that Seneca me counsel gave
(My tutour good in youth) to leave my vice,
I bad him choose what death him liked to have,
Which now should pay, for then, my stripes the price.
In water warm to stand was his device,
And there to bleed: a mild and gentle death:
Even so I causde them reaue his vital breath.
So with almighty Jove I began to war,
The Christians good I did torment and flay:
Commanding all my subjects near and far,
Their lives and goods to spoil and take away.
Which they accomplished straight without delay:
Both Paul and Peter Christ's disciples twain,
The Apostles, both by mine edict were slain.
But what endures long that is violent?
The thunder seems some time to tear the skies,
At seas full often the storms are vehement,
To clouds aloft the waves and waters rise,
Soon after the air is clear, the water lies:
Experience and the proverbs old do show,
* Each storm will have his calm, each tide his flow.
For when I went for to destroy the state,
And all the Romans noble fame t'obscure:
The Senate all, and people did me hate,
And sought which way they might my death procure.
Mine outrage they no longer could endure,
They me proclaimed a foe to public weal,
To save my self away by night I steal.
The judgment was, such foes should pillered be
By neck, in forke made fastfull sure to bide:
And should with rods so long there beaten be,
Until therewith the woeful caytiues did:
From this correction therefore fast I hide,
From Galba then proclaimed Emprour new,
For fear of death, by deeds deserved due.
By night (I say) forsaken quite, I fled,
And Sporus the Eunuch most impure likewise,
With others three, like filthy life that led.
To slay my self I desperate then devise,
Whom all the world did so for sin despise:
And thirsting sore in fight, full feign I drank
The waters foul, which in the ditches stanke.
At my request my friends would me not kill:
Have I (quoth I) no foe, nor yet no friend,
To reaue me from this fear of conscience ill?
Will no man make of Nero yet an end?
With that my breast to point of sword I bend,
With trembling hand, which Sporus help to stay,
And on the same my self assai'd to slay.
With that, of Galbaes servants one drew nie
With fained cheer, as though he help me would:
Too late you come, call you this help (quoth I)?
Is this the friendship firm and faith you hold?
My life was filthy, vile for to behold,
My death more vile, more filthy I depart:
So mine own sword I ran quite through my heart.
HOW SERGIVS GALBA THE EMPEROVR OF ROME (given to slaughter, ambition, and
gluttony) was slain by the soldiers, the year of Christ, 71.
AMongst the hautie Emprours down that fell,
I Sergius Galba may be placed here:
Where who so sees and marks my dealings well,
To him may soon the fruits of fraud appear.
All murders great are bought with price full dear.
Foul slaughters done, procure as foul a fall,
As he deserves that works the woeful thrall.
In Rome sometime I Pretour chosen was,
And then obtained of Spain the Province fair:
To govern there, I brought by friends to pass,
In hope to be the Emprour Neroes heir,
For when the Romans did of him despair,
So bent at home to slaughter, lust and vice,
By wars abroad I wan the praise and price.
To get the soldiers favor I took pain,
For in the Emprours choice they gave the stroke:
I therefore sought some spoils for them to gain,
Though thereby often the laws of arms I broke.
But who may words or actions done revoke?
The stain abides, where evil strikes the good,
And vengeance wrecks the waste of guiltless blood.
In Lusitania while that time I lay,
I causde the people there assemble should,
Reporting I had somewhat for to say,
Which in effect procure them profit would:
To which they came as many near as could,
Full thirty thousand, thinking naught of ill:
All which I causde the soldiers there to kill.
I sought by death to post proud Nero hence,
Not for his vicious life, but for his place:
Although his vice, were made the chief pretense,
Whom all good men accounted void of grace.
But yet I could not stay so long a space:
I causde in Spain the soldiers me proclaim,
Which straight they did, and gave me Caesar's name.
To Rome I hide, and Nero gate him thence,
He stole away for fear of sentence past,
A public foe proclaimed for negligence,
For slaughters done, for fire of Rome the wast:
Eke for because he was of me aghast
He slew him self, before my man could come,
Which slaughter else my servants there had done.
When I my master thus subverted had,
The Romans eke began mislike with me,
They said I was ambitious, nigh so bad
And cruel, given to pride and gluttony.
How I was ruled all by Romans three,
Cornelius, Julius, Celius, for the State
My schoolemasters, for which they did me hate.
And Siluius Otho sought the Empire then,
That vicious beast, and coward varlet vile:
He dealt by gifts so with mine armed men,
That factions rose in camp within a while.
Which when I came them for to reconcile,
To Curtius lake, near which the army lay,
Of Siluius friends the soldiers did me slay.
Struck off my head, and bare it to my foe,
Who causde it should be set upon a spear:
So through the camp they bare it to and fro,
Saluting it, now dead, a sort there were,
Which late thereof, alive, did doubt and fear.
O Galba, ioifull days the Gods thee give,
God send thee Galba well long time to live.
This was the guerdon of my hautie pride,
To have mine head thus wise extold aloft:
Thus I the gains of hasty climing tried,
To leese mine head, and after have it scoft:
A thing indeed that chances wonders often.
* Who thinks that gain is sweet by sheading blood,
In purple gore often yeeldes like gainful good.
HOW THE VICIOVS SILVIVS OTHO EMPEROVR OF Rome slew himself, the year of
Christ, 71.
LIke will to like (for so the Proverb says)
Such are the men, as those with whom they use:
The Goat with Goat together is always,
The Wolf of Wolf no friendship does refuse,
The crafty Fox the Fox for friend does choose:
And every living creature loves his kind,
As well the shape as qualities of mind.
And yet all men that come in company,
Are not indu'd with qualities alike:
One loves soft music and sweet melody,
Another is perhaps Melancholic,
Another fumish is and Cholerike,
Another dull and sottish in his sense,
And all (in some what) full of negligence.
Now then Complexion is somewhat in case,
Concerning chief the disposition:
But yet the learned writers have a place,
That manners alter our Complexion.
So some say also of correction.
And sure I think if that they say be true,
I after was the worse for Neroes crew.
His Courtisane brought me in favor first,
Into his Court and fellowship I came:
To me recount his villainies he dirst,
Not fit to tell, he thought which had no shame.
I will no more recite of his defame:
The day was cursed to me which brought me in,
At Neroes house, such infamy to win.
But yet another did me more infect,
Seleucus seen in Mathematiques well:
He of my birth a figure did erect,
Of many haps and chances he did tell:
Incited me against Galba to rebel,
With warrant if I would invade the throne,
I might aloft with Scepter sit alone.
To seek revenge for Neroes death likewise,
Incited me his enemy to kill:
Then with my Soldiers all I did devise,
The wayt' accomplish mine endeavor still,
Whom well I might persuade almost to any ill.
Eke so indeed the Soldiers did him slay,
And brought to me his head with them away.
I caused them to set it on a spear,
About the Camp to bear it as a show,
To put the rest mine enemies in fear:
So they before their punishment might know.
Great gifts amongst the Soldiers I bestow,
Where with they all in camp with one assent,
To choose me for their Caesar, were content.
But now to hold it fast a work of skill,
I cast about and many ways did try
With prudent forecast to prevent all ill:
Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri.
The hautie seat has many a greedy eye.
The election was mislikte, and in short space,
Vitellius sought to undermine my grace.
In arms we were, and he me battle gave,
First at Placentia, where I had the foil:
From Bebriacke by force he next me drove,
And did mine army vanquish quite, and spoil.
There I not able farther to recoile,
Despairing quite, I wist to fly no way,
As Nero erst, with sword my self I slay.
HOW AVL US VITELLIVS EMPEROVR OF ROME, came to an unfortunate end: the year
of Christ, 71.
TO tread the staire to state, who takes in hand,
And thereon enters first, by bribes or blood:
On slippery ground he cannot firmly stand,
Ne fixed is he, his hold is nothing good.
Though he knew erst, how firm on ground he stood,
And think to fix his seat with better hold:
He cannot escape yet scotfree uncontrolled.
To see before his face, the fall of such
As climb up so, and cannot yet take heed,
But must of force the imperial title tuch,
Wherein so many doubts of danger breed:
A point of peevish pride, a rage indeed
By blindness blunt, a sortish sweame he feels:
With joys bereft, when death is hard at heels.
Hence Fortune well took name, accounted blind,
Because men fortunat, unfitly see:
To pleasures sweet, and honors all inclined,
Without respect the most addicted be,
Regarding naught but titles of degree,
Whereby mishaps, infortunes of their race,
In high prospects, of view can take no place.
This blindness is not of the eyes alone,
But of the mind, a dimnesse and a mist:
For when they shift to sit in hautie throne
With hope to rule the scepter as they list,
There Is no regard nor fear of had-I-wist.
The present pleasure, glory, wealth, and joy
Bereaues their gaze, the fear of all annoy.
The trade of men is such, too late the are wise,
Too late they know which way mischances tell.
At first the Phrygians counsel did despise,
At last they knew the way to have help it well.
When Grecians did their noble Princes quell,
Had fier'd and sacked their town of worthy fame,
Then they too late knew how to have saved the same.
Our Caesar saw too late his cause of fall,
And Drusus poisned, had as fortune ill:
Domitius Nero hated most of all,
Eke Galba, which his master sought to kill.
So Siluius Otho, whose blood I did spill,
And I Vitellius may affirm with these,
Illud verum, Sero sapiunt Phryges.
We all assaild, and gate the throne by sword,
So each we saw how they before us sped:
The only fruit which treason has t'afford,
Is loss of pleasures, goods, lands, life or head.
The gain we get, stands us small time in stead:
The Fame we crave, becomes defame and shame,
And rusts for aie, devouring our good name.
Of slaughters mine what need I here descry,
Or how the Romans reft away my life?
When I seven months had reigned wickedly,
Which entered in by blood and civil strife.
But this I find too late a sequel rife,
Who takes by sword from Prince the scepters guide,
By sword from him the scepter so shall slide.
LONDRICVS THE Pict, slain by King Marius of Britain, about the 80. year of
Christ.
FOrtune was wont in state to lift her children high,
And give the^ kingdoms great, and conquests at her will,
And place the^, as they thought, above ye gods welnigh.
She blindly leads them forth, as is her custom still,
With pleasures all a while, she does their fancies fill,
And at the last does let them fall adowne again.
She sets aloft, and pulles them down with might and maine.
When we the glory see of those that have renown,
We are enflamed straight, the like attempts to make:
But when we see mischance again to drive them down,
We are not able yet example there to take.
The storms of envy black the hautiest housen shake,
The basest sort contend, with all their force t'aspire:
The meaner persons eke, the lofty rooms require.
Amongst the states of men best is the meaner sort,
And golden mean is best in every trade of life:
For though a mighty man do keep a stately port,
And yet with men as great do daily live in strife,
His pleasure is but pain, and all his joy but grief.
When we not with our own contented can abide,
With avarice we clime, but fall again with pride.
So though a noble borne could get an higher seat
By conquest, or by weal, by favor or by fight,
And would from mighty Jove his petegree repeat,
Yet ought he not advance himself above his height,
He ought not make a claim to that he has no right,
Or trust to Fortune so (although she seem to smile)
As though she did not turn her self within a while.
When with my Picts I came first to the Scottish shore,
I bare my self in hand that I could Britain win,
Because that Scythes of whom I came had won before
Right many noble Realms, which they had entered in:
Yet I no sooner could my conquest here begin,
But straight King Marius came with all his warlike band,
And met with me and mine in fruitful Westmerland.
I trusted sure that Fortune would me guide so well
As she before had done, in battles whilome fought:
But proof does teach me now the certain truth to tell,
What I by Fortune false with death so dearly bought.
Whom she sometimes sets up, she brings soon to naught.
As I that thought this land from Britains to regaine,
In field with all my Picts were vanquished and slain.
It Is folly or the end, for men to praise their chance,
Or brag what luck they have, or tell their happy fate,
Or boast how Lady Fortune does their deeds advance:
For unto change of chance subjected is their state:
Whom first she loves, she afterward does hate,
She flings them headlong down, whom erst she made excel,
She makes them bare and poor, whom she enriched well.
HOW SEVER US THE EMPEROR of Rome and governor of Britain was slain at
York, fighting against the Picts, about the year after Christ, 206. after
others, 213.
THe stay of stately throne is nothing sure,
Where great estates on bribes or bloodshed build:
As Didius Julian put for proof in ure,
The Imperial seat he bought, and soon was killed.
So Niger after him assaide the same,
Albinus then, from Britain armed came.
These three stood in my way to high estate,
Which I sore thirsted for, but yet at last
I made thereto, by bloodshed bold, a gate,
And unresisted to the throne I past.
The soldiers Julian slew, for insufficient pay:
My servants eke at Antioch Niger slay.
Then was my seat, me thought, assured to bide,
There could no tempest tear my sails adowne:
No shower could cause my fixed foot to slide,
Nor vndercreeper take from me the Crown,
Which had the guide of all Europaes might,
He needed not to fear the force of fight.
Encouraged with love of lasting fame,
I entered with an army into the East,
Armenia can full well report the fame,
Whereas my warlike glory first increast.
Angarus I subdude by fight the noble King,
And did his sons to Rome for hostage bring.
Arabia foelix felt my force likewise,
Although those wars had not so good success:
Yet made I them with bows (goood archers) rise,
Or else they had been driven to great distress.
Their shafts from Arras shot, made us to smart,
They poisoned of my men by policy and art.
To Parthia thence, against the law of arms,
We gate, forgot the truce before was plight:
And when occasion fit we found to work our harms,
King Artabane we did subdue in fight.
With fire and sword we brent, and spoiled his land,
Took captives, slew his men that did withstand.
To Rome I came, and caused mappes be drawn
Of iournies mine, by land and seas the plats:
Not erst before such expedition sawne,
Nor of those Countries seen so perfect maps.
The world did wonder at my heaps of haps,
Rome honored me with triumphs when I came,
They unto me of Parthique gave to name.
But when can princes best assure themselves?
What state without the storms of strife does stand?
What bark bears sail in tempest on the shelues?
What bliss abides and lasts, by sea or land?
Who takes to reign the scepter in his hand,
Is like to him, in stern to stir that sits,
Commanding all the rest, their race he fits.
For while that I abroad for glory hunt,
My sons at home in pleasures spent the time:
And as their father erst before was wont,
Endeuourd how aloft they both might clime.
The elder fierce and cruel Antonine,
The younger Geta far more mild then he,
Could not at any time in peace agree.
So I endeavored to appeaze the strife,
But naught at all I could therein prevail:
This made me woe and weary of my life,
Which erst so many Kingdoms did assail.
I had the hap mine enmies force to quail,
To rule the Romans well, and all the rest:
But for to rule my sons, I was unblessed.
Perceiving then some persons leaud there were,
Which counseled often my sons embracing vice,
(As still is seen in Court enueiglers are,
Procurers of despite, and avarice,
That flattery hold for gain a gift of price)
I causde be put to death those Thrasoes vile,
And some were sent or banished to exile.
My elder son did think my life too long,
The younger loved the elders life as ill:
They studied both to make their parties strong,
Which grief my griped heart well near did kill.
Such are the mischiefs of the stately still.
In Britain eke the Picts rebelling rose,
Some Britains there became our secret foes.
First to be absent from the force at home,
And partly greater glory to attain,
My wicked children sought my death in Rome,
But chiefly Antonine took herein pain,
I should by guard or Physic drugs be slain,
That by my death the Empire he might sway,
T'obtaine the same he often gave the assay.
Yet no man would accomplish his intent,
For my Physicians bare me loyal hearts:
My servants eke full true no treason meant,
But played in each respect their faithful parts.
They knew themselves so bound by due deserts,
They ought not, servants, such a Lord betray,
That gave so great rewards and gifts always.
To Britain over seas from Rome went I,
To quail the Picts that ruffled in that I Will:
And tame the stout that tribute did deny,
Which were withheld from Romans there a while,
And to be absent from my sons so vile.
But see what haps befall us in the end,
Which so in throne to reign alone contend:
For when I was to Britain come that land,
Where people stout, untamed vnuanquisht dwelt:
Although once Caesar Fortunes favor fand,
That erst before their valiant valor felt:
I found the people nothing pressed to pelt,
To yield, or hostage give, or tributes pay,
Or covenants to accept, or fearfully to fray.
They said that we did tributes sore exact,
Whereby their Isle impouerisht greatly was:
The Picts likewise them robbed, and spoiled, and sacked,
Whereof the Romans seemed naught to pas.
We ought (they said) to tame the Galloglasse,
The ranging Scythian Pict that them did spoil,
If we would reap our tribute of their toil.
On which at length, I did conclude a peace,
And joined in league with them against the Pict:
But yet the wilful people did not cease,
My Britains good by inroads to afflict:
Whereon to wall them out I made edict.
Long six score miles and twelve, the bank I made
From sea to sea, that Picts should not invade.
By help of this, I chaste the Picts away,
And drove them into Albany to dwell:
Whereon Fulgentius stout without delay
To Scythia sailed, and there his chance did tell:
And with an host of Picts appointed well,
He did return with speed to Britain strand:
(That time I lay by North to guide the land)
At length to York with all his host he came,
Besieging it full sharp assaults he gave:
Where I likewise for to defend the same,
And from our foes the castle good to save
Came with my power, as destnies on me drove:
But in that field it was my chance to fall,
I took my deadly wound, there ended all.
The Scythian eke received a deadly wound,
Which came to conquer us, and lost his feeld:
Thus fortune fares her children to confound,
Which on her wheel their bastiles bravely beeld.
Let noble Princes then to reason yield,
The dainefull Lady dainty and demure,
Dame Fortunes favor fickle and unsure.
Some say that I returned to Rome again,
Sore troubled with the gout, desiring death:
And that I would have taken poison feign,
Which me denied, to reaue my vital breath.
I took a surfeit great, which wrought my death.
The Britains say, at York my bones do lie,
The Romans say at Rome in Italy.
But this I wish, all noble wights to view
How I by slaughter gate the throne at first,
My soldiers noble men for Empire slew,
This way to rise, of all I proved worst:
For why, his hand of gods and men is cursed,
To rise aloft that lays the ground with blood:
The states of such unstable still have stood.
HOW FVLGENTIVS A SCYTHIAN, OR PICT, WAS slain at the seige of York, about
the year of Christ, 206. or 213.
I Am that valiant Scythian Prince the Pict,
That vanquished often the Britains in this I Will:
Against the noble Romans power I kicked,
And kept them play in Britain both long while,
I forced them make a wall an hundred mile,
From sea to sea, with towers to keep me out,
Which of us Picts did daily stand in doubt.
Our ancient race (as I can show with skill)
Had right by due descent to claim this land:
Of which repeat some proof therefore I will,
That so thou may our title understand.
When all mankind felt Jove's almighty hand,
That drencht all nations quite, for their foul sin,
Then straight in Scythia did the world begin.
The Egyptians hold forsooth that they restord
The world again; but, how unlikely, see:
For Scythiaes site is high as all accord,
From us the fountains great'st derived be.
The ancient writers all likewise agree,
That on Armenia mount the Arc did rest,
Till Jove again the earth with drowth addressed.
But they allege again their Zone is mild,
And fertile, temperate, meet to foster men:
Our Scythian hills (they say) are frostie, wild,
Which cannot breed but ruder people then.
To which I may well answer make again,
As God did make the Zones hot, mild, and cold,
So did he make like men the same to hold.
They say we are nigh neighbors to the Pole,
Or frozen point: more near the fire are they:
What poisons breed with them, and Lybians sole
In parching sands the writers wise display.
Can nature fraine mankind more deep decay?
Where parching heat, where serpents ugly breed,
Is no fit clime, whence man should first proceed.
But now I Will tell why Scythians should possess
This noble Isle: first, Lord Neptunus gave
The Islands to his sons, both more and less,
Eke Albion first of all this Isle should have:
He not with this content, the Firm did crave.
Wherefore in France him Hercules dispatched,
When as he would a Kingdom there have caught.
Now as from Noah (of Scythia) by descent,
Down unto Albions time they held the land:
From Scythe to Scythian as of right it went,
And after him no Scythian Prince it fand,
When as usurpers took the reign in hand,
Was it not reason we should undertake,
This noble Realm our own again to make?
The Romans this deny, but even themselves likewise
(If they from virtue stray, as they do use,
And do Iehouaes laws and hests despise,
And right, and truth, and justice so refuse)
Shall find how much their Scepter they misuse.
The Scythian shall their lofty seat assail,
The Prince of Picts against them shall prevail.
But of Proud Romes Seuerus now I tell,
When he the wall had made to keep me out,
To Scythia hence I sailed, and stored me well
With men, munition good, a warlike rout,
Of youthful Picts full strong in armout stout
A Navy good I brought, and taking land,
Of stately York I took the siege in hand.
The Emperor great Seuerus Parthique proud,
With Romans, Galls, and Britain soldiers came:
To make me raise the siege of York he vowed,
And I likewise to win and race the same.
To win the prize we both our armies frame:
But he was sly, his soldiers skillful trained,
My men to fly by ambush, he constrained.
Again to fight we fell afresh, the battle grew,
About I brought my wings, and now they sound
Tantara tears alarm, the fluits fight, fight anew,
And there a while the Romans fell to ground.
The cries and shouts of men to skies resound,
They fall, fall, fly, the fluits; down down the droms do cry:
Whereon the Romans sound retraite, and saine to fly.
My soldiers all too rash had broke array,
The Roman rereward cast about with speed,
And both their wings enclosed us each way,
Their maine likewise to keep array gave heed.
Which when I saw, it made my heart to bleed,
And to Seuerus self I made my way,
Where with my Picts the Parthique I did stay.
So when the Emperor fell, a shout arose,
The Romans blancke, amazed, woeful were:
Fulgentius fast recoiled, death wounded goes,
And of my crew a troop to aid me there.
I bought my British conquest all too dear.
No conquest yet: for as I conquest sought,
With my life blood the conquest dear was bought.
You noble men, ye see what trust there is
In Fortunes gifts, how mischief makes the marts,
And how our hoped haps in wars do miss,
When back the brave and blinded Lady starts.
High reaching heads swim often in seas of smarts.
The man content, is blessed, and best at ease,
Which in mean state both God and man do please.
HOW GETA THE YOUNGER SON OF THE Emperor Seuerus once Governor of Britain,
was slain in his mothers arms by his brother ANTONINE, Emperor of Rome,
about the year of Christ, 214.
IF ever Prince had cause his state to rue,
Or by his end might move men moan his chance,
My woeful tale may show the like to you,
Whom fortune erst, and birth did high advance.
In Rome, in Britain, Germany, and France
I favor had, and lived beloved always,
I Emprour was, what need I more to say?
In Britain while my father waged fight
By North against the Picts, I ruled the South:
Seuerus so appointed it my right,
And Britain Justice had from Getaes mouth.
I gave not then my self to idle sloth,
But gave an end to causes great of strife,
With doom so just, that men reioyst my life.
The Senate honored me for virtues sake,
Abroad the Britains blessed me for their bliss,
The soldiers stout of me account did make.
Let stories tell if I do feign in this:
Lest some suspect, that I report amiss.
For what is he, which is not counted vain,
When for himself he speaks, though nere so plain?
In peace I prudent was, and grave of grace,
In wars as stout, but not so fierce withal:
Not forced with fear to turn from foes my face,
Nor bought with bribes to let Dame Justice fall,
I not oppressed the weaker sort with thrall,
But sought to pleasure all, both near and far:
More prone to peace I was, then bent to war.
What heart so hard but will for pity bleed,
To hear a Prince which meant to each so well,
Should have such cause to live in fear and dreed
Of sword, of bane, of force, or poison fell,
Not daring Emprour nere his brother dwell,
Whom Romans loved, and strangers honored still,
But brothers treason caused all our ill.
Hight Antonine, I hate his name and facts,
Since he my butcher was, as may appear:
The world detests his vile and viprous acts,
And subtle shifts to kill his father dear:
So void of grace, so void of honest fear,
He durst attempt the guard to bribe and fee,
That so by them his fire might poisoned be.
This when our Sire Seuerus wist and saw
How Antonine that bloody beast was bent,
Against the order quite of natures law,
Eke how to take the Empire whole he meant;
For both of us at York he often sent,
Persuading us true concord for to hold,
And of the fruits of discord often he told.
Yet Antonine regarded naught his hest,
Nay yet the charge of wars he had in hand:
TO enlarge his power for the Empire he addressed.
Which when Seuerus old did understand,
All pleasures quite and joys he did aband,
Pursuing war: near York he took his end
By sword of Picts, or by some traitor friend.
Then Antonine made spoil of all his men,
Physicians nil'd before at his request
Dispatch their Lord, to death he put them then,
And so he served of faithful guard the rest.
What villainy was in this vipers breast?
Was not content with death of those he sought,
But after brings their friends likewise to naught.
I was foretold my life he thirsted sore,
And that the Empire sole he sought to have,
As we to Rome did pass I feared more,
I from his courts and diets did me save:
I knew my life and the Empire he did crave,
Wherefore in Rome my court I kept likewise
Apart from his, that did my death devise.
My servants were allured by sundry gifts
By poison to procure my life's decay:
He tried to cut me off a thousand shifts,
What marvel, since he sought his sire to slay?
He made his Fathers friends for spite away,
Because they would not to his will be wrought,
To bring them unto death he daily sought.
His sleights for me could take no sure success,
For still his trains and treasons were descri'd:
In danger I was forced to seek redress
By like attempts, but that likewise was spide.
* Pretended murder no man close can hide,
But out it flies, the rumor runs a pace,
The spot thereof all virtues else deface.
When this was known that I likewise assai'd
His life to reaue (though it were my life to save)
Not long to wrecke the same the butcher stayed,
He had the thing so long he sought to have,
Cause of revenge the rumor small him gave,
That in the even he came to spill my blood,
As I unarmed with my mother stood.
There she perceiving him with sword approach,
In arms me caught to save my life and blood,
But he deserving all the worlds reproach,
No whit in doubt to end my slaughter stood.
She him besought (as seemed an Empress good)
While he without remorse of her request,
Between her arms did run me through the breast.
These were the acts of that vile monster then
For Empire sake, to reign alone aloft:
Despisde that was, abhorred of Gods and men,
And cursed to hell by all good men so often,
You see the fall of Geta, mild, and soft,
Whose line of life no longer fates could stretch,
Cut off by sword of Antonine that wretch.
Now may thou deem of my deserts and his,
He to his sire of sons was most unkind:
His mothers joys he reau'd away her bliss,
That Dame which bare to both so mild a mind:
And let my dealings aye due favor find,
Whose murder may give plain prospect and show
What monster wrought his faithful friends such woe.
HOW AURELIUS AN TONIVS BASSIANVS CARACALLA Emperor of Rome, was slain by one
of his own servants, about the year of Christ, 209.
WHo thirsts to throng unto the highest throne,
Ne wisely winds Dame Fortunes subtle snare:
Or who in Court would rule the roast alone,
And sees not what he heaps himself of care,
Let him well weigh my case, and then beware:
Whom forth the stately seat did first allure,
Which after did my hasty death procure.
And, Higgins, here in purpose since thou have
The hapless haven where Fortunes impes arrive,
A mirour make likewise of me thou may,
If thou my life and dealings wilt discriue.
It may perhaps much profit some alive:
Which when themselves plain painted forth they see,
They may presage their fatal falls in me.
I am that Antonine, Seuerus son,
That once of mighty Rome did bear the sway,
Which in my fathers life a strife begone
With Geta, thirsting often him to slay.
I sought to have my father made away,
To reign alone so great desire I had,
Naught but their deaths my wicked heart could glad.
My father often exhorted both to peace,
Declared by stories old what came by strife,
Dehorted both from civil discord cease,
But I sought means to rid him of his life.
I banished to Sycilia Isle my wife,
Encreast mine host, reckt not my British charge,
But how I might enjoy the Empire large.
And first when as my father once was dead,
I gave my self to all revenge of foes,
The servants late which stood me not in stead,
And some who did my treachery disclose,
Or such to save their Prince themselves dispose,
Or reconcile us brethren took sore pain,
I causde them all without respect be slain.
The captains all my friends I sought to make,
In Britain then desiring them to choose
Me Emprour sole, and Geta to forsake:
Which they to do for duties sake refuse.
Our mother eke all means with us did use,
Persuading us to love and concord bend,
To which in show I granted in the end.
We both in Empire like from Britain pass,
A truce concluded there, and hostage take:
His relics shrinde (as then the custom was)
To Rome therewith our voyage fast we make.
And yet the malice could not so aslake:
For in our iournies we durst neither trust,
But several Courts and Diets keep we must.
Both fearing poison, force or treason wrought,
Both craving all the Empire to enjoy,
Both working all the ways that might be sought,
To work to each some secret great annoy,
Both seeking how his partner to destroy.
The brother which to brother should be stay,
Endeavors how to make him quite away.
And those that bare of dignities degree,
The officers, were diversely distract:
Some favored Geta, some did favor me,
In him no point of courtesy there lackt:
He was of manners mild, of doom exact,
To studies good addict, of comely grace,
In wars and peace discharging well the place.
But I was rough, and violent, and fierce,
Of fiery Mars affected all to blood:
What need I more my qualities rehearse,
Which were so far unlike my brothers good?
On threatenings, force, and fear, my Empire stood,
Whereby indeed of fauning friends I had,
For fear or gain were of my favor glad.
Our mother long persuading us to peace,
And both perceiving our attempts but vain,
Did both agree our discords to surcease,
And for to part the Empire into twain:
My self should hold of Europe all the maine
With the Isles thereof, and Geta all the East,
Of Asia all the Islands most and least.
As thus we parle amongst the Counsel all,
And so decree, full purposed thereto,
The Senate, which foresaw mishaps might fall,
Still sadly sat, durst nothing say nor do:
But Iulia then the mother of us two,
When she perceived the Senate pause for fear,
Arose to speak, and said as you shall hear.
"The sea and land (quoth she) my sons you get,
"You find a way how you may them divide:
"The Pontique flood between you both is set
"For bounds of both it buts on either side:
"But how will you your mother now divide?
"How shall my hapless corpse be parted, put
"Between you both, shall I likewise be cut?
"If needs in twain you part this Empire must,
"I see what discord after may betide:
"How Empire makes men guiltless blood to thrust,
"What noble Peers for this betrayed, have did.
"It Were better both the Romans well to guide,
"Then separate far, without so firm a stay,
"Your severed force some treason should decay.
"One man himself may much by wit foresee,
"But twain may more perceive then one alone:
"One friendly man by favor much may be,
"But two in friendship knit, need fear no sone.
"Two brethren then to rule the world alone
"As brethren should, and live in faithful sort,
"The world their love and honors will report.
"But if divide the Empire all you will,
"First ere you go for to enjoy your reign,
"My woeful corpse I pray you here to kill,
"And it divide between you both in twain,
"That I may eke with both of you remain.
"Do bury each apart so distant far,
"Divided as your seats, selves, Kingdoms are.
So when she spoken had, with tears she came,
And sobs, beseeching both, embracing us,
And wil'd we should our selves to friendship frame,
Not bearing hate in heart, and envy thus:
On which the Senate nothing durst discuss,
But all arose, departing did lament,
Which viewed our thirsting sore, to bloodshed bent.
Our hatred still increased more and more,
For when that Captains new elected were,
Or officers in place we did restore,
In these, our minds to all men plain appear,
We diversely affected favor bear:
Of right in sentence eke, of diverse minds,
As hate full often the eyes of Justice blinds.
Our own we sought, and not the public weal,
Yet both the public wealth alone to have:
We nothing reckt to hap the public heal,
But to enjoy the public wealth we straue.
To Cooks and Butlers gifts of price we gave,
To poison each: when yet not these proceed,
I hired some by force to do the deed.
When this likewise had not success aright,
My self, to slay my brother, I addressed:
I rusht into his chamber even or night,
While of my force I think he feared lest:
There with my sword I stroke him through the breast.
Eke while our mothers lap his wounds embrew,
Her Geta dear between her arms I slew.
Which done, I flew the place, and called the guard,
Cried treason, told I scarce escapt unslain,
Commanding soldiers well to watch and ward,
And me convey unto the camp amain,
Where I might safe from violence remain:
I said I should by foes be forced to die,
If in the Court I longer time did lie.
So they supposing all was truth I told,
(Not weeting what was done to Geta than)
Made speed to run with me unto the hold:
The people hearing this, to flock began,
Enquiring why the Prince and soldiers ran:
In tent I kneeled encampt, the gods to praise
With promised vows, which had prolonged my days.
The soldiers all resorted to my tent,
Where I the Gods with honor served tho:
On which I forth amongst them boldly went,
Told them great dangers I had escaped fro,
And of mine enmies fall and ouerthro.
By Fortunes gift (quoth I) our foe is slain,
And the Empire wholly does to me remain.
I promised if the soldiers me would save,
My Empire stablish sure, and safety see,
Each twenty hundred Attique grotes should have,
More corn then erst by half allowed should be,
The temples wealth and treasures should be free
For them to use at large, in that one day
Seuerus treasure I did make away.
The soldiers all perceiving well my mind,
(And slaughter blazed by those in house that fled)
I was by them the Emperor sole assigned,
And he an enmie named that now was dead.
All night in temple forth with vows I led,
Next day to Senate house with the host I gate,
And service done, thus wise in throne I spoke:
I Know right well (quoth I) domestique slaughters hateful seem,
And even the name thereof makes men full ill of parties doeme:
For why, the unhappy slain moves milder men to mercy still,
And noble Peers are enui'd when compelled their foes they kill,
The vanquished injured seem, and victours deemed unjustly ill,
But whosoever shall this case it self with truth perpend
Not partially that deemes, ensearching what he did pretend:
He shall perceive and find it better far and needful more
To wrecke the wrong, then wincke thereat, and after smart therefore.
For, to the slain beside his woe, there comes a dastards name,
The victour has beside his health, of fortitude the fame.
But certes how by poisons he, and all means sought my spoil,
You may right soon by tortures try without of farther toil.
And therefore I commanded all his servants present be,
That you the truth may know, when their confessions plain you see:
While I was at my mothers house, he brought with swords his train,
Forwarn'd, so armed, by fight my foe, I have mine enmie slain.
Since he about a mischief went, no brothers heart that bore,
To take revenge on such, is due: as custom tells of yore.
The founder right of Rome, not with his brother flouting bare:
I leave to speak what Germanique and Titus erst did dare,
And Marcus wise and mild, his daughters husband did not spare.
But I, for me when poisons were and swords to slay me dressed,
Revenged my foe, (of foe the name his works assigned him best)
Therefore thank you the Gods, that they one Prince preserved you,
Behold the same, him loyal love, to him be just and true:
For even as Jove above, amongst the gods does rule alone,
So he in earth the Empire all, allottes and gives to one.
Thus having said aloud, with irefull mood,
And bloody countnance cast about the place,
The assembly pale and trembling, fearful stood,
And I returned to the Palace thence a space.
My brothers house and fame I did deface,
His friends, his servants all, young, old, and new,
And the infants eke, without respect I slew:
The Wrastlers and the Waggeners likewise,
Musicians, players, which did please his mind:
Of the order of the Senators full wise,
In whom was noble blood or wealth to find.
Not one of Getaes friends I left behind:
Also my wife whom I exiled away
To Sicile I Will, I caused them to slay.
Lucilla eke that ancient noble Dame,
To Marcus wise the daughter sage and grave,
Of Commodus that sister great of fame,
Which honor much in Rome deserved to have,
I say, she did my deeds therein deprave,
Because to Getaes mother she wept sore,
For Getaes death: I causde her die therefore.
Her son likewise, I caused should be slain,
And of the Imperial blood (to make all sure)
I left not one alive, that might remain,
Or unto whom they might my place procure.
By night likewise I put like acts in ure:
For day and night I ceased not to slay,
Of Getaes friends to root the rest away.
I Vestall virgins buried eke alive,
And made the soldiers multitudes to kill,
Because I deemed they were in words too bliue.
Against my coach wherein I trauell'd still,
The soldiers slew the men that thought no ill,
Or made them buy their lives with all they had,
Which were, to escape with life alone, full glad.
This done, for fear from Rome with speed I gate:
The town like life at home misliked me:
For why the City did my murders hate,
Where soldiers held their slaughters frank and free,
And were enricht by spoil of each degree.
I gate therefore with all my Martial crew
From Itayle land, Danubian shores to view.
Where, unto hunting I applide my self,
To ride abroad in couch, and give them laws:
In few dispacht their pleas about but pelf,
Not given to hear long pleading plaints for strawes.
I counted such but cau'lling caitiue dawes
As spent their substance, time, and goods in suite,
About such things as could not yield them fruit.
I clad my self much like the Germans then,
So trimde my hair, chose them my guard to serve:
So framde my self to please these ruder men,
As might them cause of me full well deserve,
From labor none with them I seemed to swerue,
To dig, lift, bear, to grind, mould, knead or bake
In painful sort, and simple fare to take.
The Germans much reioyc'd my kind of life,
My sufferance great in during labors long:
The name of mate with us was holden rife,
I seemed a fellow soldier them among:
Of stature small, yet was I wondrous strong,
So that few men which in mine armies were,
Could with like strength such weighty burdens bear.
When at Danubius I had placed strength,
To Thracia thence with speed apace I went:
There Monuments again I made at length
To Alexanders fame: to Rome I sent
Likewise of statues for the same intent,
In Capitole and Temples them to place,
For honor great of Alexanders grace.
I made me garments eke of Thracian guise,
And Captains me to Alexander call:
To Pergame thence in Asia great that lies
I gate, Achilles tomb with honors all
With eye to view, as stories witness shall:
Whence (order set) to Antioch I farde,
Where my receipt with honor was preparde.
To Alexandria then I fared fast,
For they had scoft full often before at me:
My mother they had named Queen Iocaste,
Achilles great and Alexander me.
They smilde my folly great herein to see,
Which though I were a dwarf of stature small,
Durst take the name of Captains great and tall.
Ne Getaes murder spared often to spread,
As is their nature given to taunt and jest:
Wherefore as though Religion had me lead,
I offered sacrifice with solemn feast
At Alexanders tomb, where most and least
Of all the youth were present to behold
The offerings great I brought, and gifts of gold.
This done, I wil'd the youth should all prepare
To show themselves in field: for I would choose
A band by Alexanders name to fare,
As erst in Thrace and Sparta I did use.
They came reioicing all, to hear the news:
Where I with soldiers come to take the view,
Them compast in, and all the people slew.
The valley all did swim with streams of blood,
So great that time a slaughter was there made:
It stainde the mighty mouths of Nilus flood,
And on the shores you might blood wetshod wade:
My piners eke were pressed with showle and spade
Tinterre the dead, a monstrous trench that fill,
And on them dead, they reard a mighty hill.
But then desiring glory more to get
By Parthian name, which erst my father had,
I sent to Artabane, without of let,
Embassage great, with gifts his mind to glad:
And for his daughter them persuade I bad,
Desiring him to give her me to wife,
The cause of lasting love, and end of strife.
By this both ioind in one, we might for ay
Of all the world the Diadem possess:
And might to each in all attempts be stay,
In fight our foes by firmer force suppress.
When they my message thus did there express,
At first he feared deceit: again I sent:
Wherewith he was at last full well content.
By gifts I wrought, and plight my faith withal
For truth to him, and for his daughters love,
And he began me son in law to call.
Which new report, did all the Parthians move
Us to receive, our friendships firm t'approue,
Rejoicing now such league at last to see,
Whereby they might from Roman wars be free.
And so I entered Parthia as mine own,
The Parthians me received with triumphs great:
When mine approach to Artabane was known,
In plain before the City of his seat
He came to meet me, with a number great
Ware garlands gay, in golden vestures clad,
With all the joy, and triumphs might be had.
So when great multitudes assembled were,
Their horses left behind and bows laid down,
Amongst their cups deuoide of force the fear,
By numbers great the chief of all the town,
Which came to see the bridemans high renown,
Disorderly unarmed as so they stand,
I gave my soldiers sign, to use their hand.
And down by sword they fell, they could not fly,
The King scarce escaped, conueid by horse away:
Their solemn garments long, their flight did tie,
A slaughter great of Parthians was that day,
We sackte their Towns, and noble men did slay.
From thence I past t'Azamia after this
To hunt, and gave my self to bathe in bliss.
Thus having run my recklesse race unkind,
And doubting both of treason and my thrall,
I sought by curious arts of sprites to find
Who should procure in the end my fatal fall:
Maternian at Rome should search for all,
He should enquire my fate, of all wise men,
And write hereof, what was their minds again.
What he did write again; I wot not I,
From Carras I to Lunaes Temple went:
And for because it near the Camp did lie,
To sacrifice with few was mine intent:
For why to town from thence return I meant,
And so from thence to Camp likewise again
I might retire, without a greater train.
Amongst the which, one Martial of my guard,
Whose brother (not conuinst, accusde) I slew,
Thus wise my caytiue corpse did watch to ward,
(For when therefore convenient time he knew,
While I apart me gate for natures due,
And bad the rest aside a space depart)
He came and stabde me stiffly through the heart.
Seuerus servants I corrupted often,
Them fee'd to make their Lord my fire away:
With Getaes men the like attempts I wrought,
To bane their Lord, and brother mine to slay.
How I the Alexandrians did betray,
And Parthians eke, before to you I told,
Deserving death for those a thousand fold.
But since those faithful servants I did kill,
Which would not sley their noble Lords for gold,
I worthy was to have a guard so ill,
As should to pierce my hateful heart be bold.
The Justice great of Ioua here behold:
* Unjustly who so seeks to slay the good,
The sword at length shall justly shed his blood.
FINIS.
HOW CARASSVS A HVSBANDMANS SON, AND AFTER King of Britain, was slain in
battle by Alectus a Roman, Anno Dom. 293.
Since men be borne by Nature naked all,
With their estates why are not men content?
Why do they deem the want of wealth a thral?
Why should they loath the lot, which God has sent?
Adam himself I find, at first was sent,
As one who did disdain his poor estate,
To disobey, with God to be a mate.
Thou may be made a God, (quoth satan than,)
If on the fruit forbidden thou will feed:
The senseless wight the feeble forcelesse man,
Did taste thereof, supposing that with speed
He should in have have been a God indeed.
He not content, hoping for higher place,
Brought bitter bale to him and all his race.
And I the son of Adam by descent,
Did seek to set my self in princely seat,
With mine estate I could not be content,
For which I felt the force of hatreds heat.
As at the first, my good success was great,
So at the last, by fancies fond desires,
I groapt for grapes amidst the bramble briers:
Let such as would by virtue them advance,
Mark by what means I did my self address,
To fly at first my poor allotted chance
By honest means: let them from wickedness
Which feign would fly, learn this by my distress,
That he who does from right and reason stray,
Destruction shall destroy him with decay.
For I by birth borne next to beggars door,
Was stayed aloft with staff of high estate:
But whilst that I so high a pitch did sore,
I left the means which made me rise of late,
I vices loved, I did all virtues hate.
For which, Carassus ran a race in vain,
And nothing got, but death and deep disdain.
When civil strife had Britain quite undone,
So that her strength was now of none avail,
The faithless Picts with ruth did ouerrunne
That royal Realm: and did so far prevail,
That sorrow did on every side assail
My native soil: and being thus dismayed,
To Rome we sent for succor, help, and aid.
Seuerus then by Bassianus sent,
To bring this Realm unto some quiet stay,
The Romans and the Britains both were bent,
To bring the barbarous Picts to their decay,
Them to return again to Scythia.
And at the last, by good Seuerus aid,
We them destroi'd, when we were most afraid.
Whose force though twice the Romans felt too strong,
Yet at the last we got a goodly day,
Even by my means, who thrust into the throng
Of the armed Picts, I desperate there did play
The part of him, whom fear did never fray.
And at the last to end this mortal strife,
I did deprive King Lodricke of his life.
And when the Picts did see their king deprived
Of vital life, Lord, how they fled the field!
They made me muse, to see how fast they strived,
With stailesse steps, each one his life to shield:
Who could not fly, he there with care was kilde.
So by my means, my country did obtain
Her ancient state, and liberty again,
At my return I to Seuerus said,
See here how I with wounds am all bestead?
I cannot live, I feel how life does fade,
Lodricke himself did carue and cut my head,
For which my blade his luke warm blood has shed:
He cut my cap, and I have got his crown,
He lost his life, and I have found renown.
Seuerus then unto his Surgion said,
Heal him, and bring him safe and sound again,
Thou for thy pains with pounds shall well be paid,
And he shall have such honor for his pain,
As unto him for ever shall remain:
For by the Gods which rule the skies above,
His noble acts deserve eternal love.
When by the skill of Surgions curious art,
My hurts were healed, and wholesome health ensude,
Seuerus then reioicing at the heart,
Made me a Lord, with wealth he me indude,
Yea, he although my learning were but rude,
Sent me to Rome, as Legate of this land,
To make report how here our state did stand.
My deeds at Rome, inricht me with renown,
My talk abroad with proper filed phrase,
Adornd my head even with a Laurel crown.
The Emperor did much commend my ways,
So that I was bedeckt with double praise.
I could not read, my learning was but weak,
Yet they of Rome did muse to hear me speak.
As learned Art does give a goodly grace
To some: so some by natures gifts do get
Eternal fame, and purchase them a place
Above the place where learned men do sit.
We find the fine dexterity of wit
In them which be both wise and full of skill:
Yet never strived to clime Pernassus hill.
So I with praise a time at Rome did stay,
And tract of time returned me back again,
The Emperor, he gave my right away
Within a while, which made me storm amain:
I had great cause me thought for to complain,
Seuerus, he was made the king of all:
The gifts he gave to me were very small.
I was but made the Captain of the coast,
From Foreign force to keep my realm in rest,
Seuerus, he was crowned king in post,
Which did so boil within my warrelike breast,
That I with grief most strangely was distressed.
Shall he (said I) thus reap the high renown
Which I deserve? Shall he enjoy the Crown?
I won the wreath, and he will wear the same:
I got the goal, and he will get the gain.
For me in faith it were a deadly shame,
If I in this his regal royal reign,
Without repulse should suffer him remain.
Which if I do, then let the dreadful dart
Of Vulcans wrath, torment in twain my heart.
For why, I see what servile servitude
Shall then ensue, if he may reign in rest:
Shall Brittane brave by Romans be subdude?
It shall no doubt, by Romans be distressed,
Except my might against his might be pressed.
My might as yet cannot his strength constrain,
Yet may my might compel him to complain.
The draining drops do make the Marble yield
In time: the seas the cragged rocks do rend:
And Courtly Kings by tearing time be killed.
For time does make the mighty Oaks to bend,
And time does make the little twigs ascend:
So I in time, such power may prepare,
As shall constrain Seuerus death, with care.
But whilst I did endeavor to destroy
Seuerus strength, the Picts were pricked with pride,
For their revenge us Britains to annoy.
Which when I heard, in post I did provide
A power great, then I in haste did ride,
And kept the coast so strong with men of war,
That no man could arrive, to make or mar.
The Picts prevented of their wished pray,
In waltering waves did bouse their bitter baine,
They dig'd a ditch, and caught their own decay,
On rocks their Barks, in seas themselves were slain.
The Western winds with woe did them constrain,
By Britain banks to make so long delay,
I, and the Seas, brought them to their decay.
By means whereof my credit did increase:
Seuerus did esteem me as his stay,
I from my first devices could not cease,
For aye I hoped to have a happy day,
To bring the Roman rule to their decay,
With fauning face good fortune smiled so,
I had my wish, what might I hope for mo?
For into Spain the Roman soldiers sent,
I had at home the might him to deprive,
Then wisely I all perils to prevent,
Provided so that no man could arrive,
No Pict, nor Scot, nor Roman then could strive
With me at home, then I the Lords with speed
Of Britain called, and thus I did proceed:
The Roman rule us subject slaves has made,
You see my Lords, a Roman here does reign,
Whom to destroy my power shall invade,
I do indeed this servile life disdain:
And you your selves do much thereof complain.
If you with help will me assist, I swear,
The Roman rule shall have no power here.
Then they most glad with one consent replied,
We will assist thee with what might we may,
And we our selves most willing will provide,
No Britain borne against thee shall display
His shield, but all at the appointed day,
As pressed to please thy hest, shall thee assist:
Win thou the crown, and wear it at thy list.
Which when I heard them say with one consent,
Blame not though pride did then possess my heart
For Princely crown: the dreadful diery dent
Of wrackfull war, who would not feel the smart
Of griping grief? who would not feel the dart
Of dreadful death? or who regards pain?
If he a crown and kingdom may obtain?
For his gray grotes the country clown does care,
Restless with ruth, the Rusticke gets his gain:
The Merchant man for wealth does send his ware
About the world, with peril and great pain.
And all the world for wealth does not disdain,
Amidst the surge of mighty mounting seas,
To cast themselves their own delights to please.
If to obtain such triffles they do toil,
And never cease to bring their drifts about:
Why should I fear the force of foreign foil?
Why should I not assay with courage stout,
To wreake my wrath upon the Romish rout
Which here remain? whom to the bale to bring,
Were me to crown my native countries King.
One thing there is which greatly does me grieve,
Seuerus, he who did inhance my state,
He did in my distress with life relieve
My dying days, he never did me hate:
Yet now with him I must be at debate.
Even him with might I greatly must disgrace,
Ere I can set my self in Princely place.
Untimely death shall not destroy his days:
For if he will return to Rome again,
Or if he will resign his crown with praise,
Or if he will amongst us still remain.
If he can like of these, we will refrain
From sheading blood: which if he does disdain,
I then against my will, must work his pain.
So forth I past with all my power pressed,
Seuerus did at Durham then delay,
Whereas I meant his state to have distressed:
But some I think my secrets did bewray,
For he to York in haste did take his way.
Which when I had besieged on every side,
With care and grief of mind, Seuerus did.
See here the force of cruel fretting care?
See here how sorrow does dismay the mind?
For when he heard Carassus did prepare
To reaue his crown, he judging me unkind,
With sobbing sighs of sorrow, he resigned
Before his time his mind from manly breast:
Behold with care how sorrow reaues man's rest.
Thus he entombed in his untimely chest,
It was decreed Carassus should be King,
The three estates of all my Realm were pressed,
With one consent they all to me did bring
The kingly crown, then thus they all did sing,
The due deserts of this renowned wight,
Deserves to be the Britain King by right.
Mark by what steps I did the top obtain,
With keeping sheep my youthful years were spent:
Then with the whip I pli'd the plow amine,
In Mars his fields to fight my mind was bent,
As Legate then to Rome my self was sent,
I dubbed was a Lord of high renown,
And now at last I have obtained the Crown.
The end of the act (the Plaudite) does prove,
And all is well, whose ending is not ill:
Who sits aloft had never need to move,
For fear lest he should fall against his will.
Though creeping he did gain the top with skill,
Yet at the last, by turning of his toe,
A sudden fall may work his wretched woe.
Which fall I felt, and how? I here will show:
When I as King did all the Realm command,
I fearful did suspect mine overthrow:
The place (me thought) did shake where I did stand.
Then for my guard I did provide a band
Of warlike wights, to guard my noble grace,
I lastly did my noble men displace.
From forth the fields I for my father sent,
Him of a clown a noble man I made:
My Brethren all even for the same intent,
Like Courtiers there in Court with me they stayed,
And all my stock were glad and well apai'd:
For they of late which ruled the painful plow,
Of Britain land they be the Rulers now.
From cart to Court, a country man to call,
With brave attire to deck a dunghill Dicke,
Is like a painted Image in a wall,
Which does deceive, and seems to be quick,
Though workmanship most trimly does it trick,
Yet of a stone, a stone will still remain*
A clown cannot from clownish deeds refrain
As hard it is of quarried Marble stone,
For man to make a lively moving wight,
As of a Lout, or else of such a one
Who daily does employ his whole delight
To dig and delue, it passes mortal might,
To make him serve the Court a Kings behest:
Turn him to plow, the cart for him is best.
For though thou can by cunning art compel
Nature a time to leave her wonted place,
She will return, in spite of heaven or hell:
No Alcumist Dame Nature can displace,
Except that God does give abundant grace.
The Caske will have a taste for evermore,
With that where with it seasoned was before.
Why did I then my courtlesse court maintain
With Hob and John, Ralph Royster, and his mate?
Whose greedy jaws aye gaping after gain,
Did pole, and pill, and bred such stern debate:
Men much unmeet to maintain mine estate.
Why did I them so near mine elbow place?
Because my self by birth was borne but bace.
Like will to like, the Mule does claw her mate,
With horned beasts the Ienite cannot jest,
Those bauling Hounds, the haughty Heart does hate,
With Bears the Bear in safety counts her best.
So I amongst my like did look for rest,
Their deeds by me were always well allowed,
By them likewise my doings were auow'd.
But as you see the Husbandman with care
From new sown fields the ravening rookes to drive,
So did the Gentry of my Realm prepare,
My country Court and me for to deprive.
But Gentlemen were then too weak to strive
With me, and mine, for which they did prepare
A new found snach, which did my feet ensnare.
In surgelesse seas of quiet rest when I
Seven years had sailed, a perrie did arise,
The blasts whereof abrig'd my liberty:
For whilst I did with busy brain devise
Them to destroy, which did my Court despise,
The boistrous blasts of hatred blew a gale,
My cables crakt, my Bark was bong'd with bale.
For they (I mean the Gentry of my land)
Both me, and mine, theirs, and themselves had sold
Subjects to Rome, from whence a mighty band
They had conuey'd, to make my courage cold:
Into my Realm they could not be controld,
But when they were arrived, they quickly brought
Both me and mine, and all the rest to naught.
Alectus then the Chiefetaine of the rest,
Spoiling my friends, he forced me to the field,
The day was come, we both in fight were pressed.
His trustlesse train, did seem to me to yield,
But all the fields with great ambushments filled,
I could not flee, Alectus had the day,
With his own sword for breath he made me bray.
As due desert did force my ship to flote,
So vices vile me drencht in waves of woes.
O false suspect, why did thou make me dote?
Fearing my fall, my friends I deemed my foes:
Fearing the worst, the best I did depose,
And was deposde: let other learn hereby,
The crooked Crab will always walk awry.
And let them know which do not loathe to learn,
That Kings in Court, be combred most with care.
The Pilots charge, who sits at the stearne,
Does make him watch, when other do prepare
Themselves to sleep: so Kings distressed are
With doubtful dread, and many other things.
The sheepheards life is better then the Kings.
By Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW QVEENE HELENA OF BRITAIN MARried CONSTANTIVS the Emperor, and much
advanced the Christian faith through the whole world, An. Dom. 289.
Men's due deserts each Reader may recite,
For men of men do make a goodly show,
But women's works can never come to light,
No mortal man their famous facts may know,
No writer will a little time bestow,
The worthy works of women to repeat,
Though their renown and due deserts be great.
For Iby birth to Coel daughter dear,
King Lucy was my good Grand-mothers son,
My father dead, I rull'd his kingdom here,
And afterward, the World so wide I won.
I Empress was of all under the Sun,
I lived long, I di'd with perfect bliss,
Yet writers will repeat no word of this.
But now at last I have obtained leave,
My spotless life to paint in perfect white:
Though writers would all honor from me reaue,
Of all renown they would deprive me quite,
Yet true report my deeds shall burnish bright,
And rub the rust which did me much disgrace,
And set my name in her deserved place.
From Roman rule who Britain did redeem?
Who planted first Gods word in Britain land?
Who did so much virginity esteem?
Who did the force of foreign foes withstand?
Who all the world subdued without a band
Of Martial men? who did these noble acts?
I Helena, have done these famous facts.
And now have here the story of my state:
The Britain Queen inheritage me crowned,
Even then when Romans had so great debate
Amongst themselves for Caracallas wound,
An Emperor, who highly was renowned,
As then at Rome, whose death undoubtedly,
Diminisht much the Roman Emperie.
The Romans then were stored with civil strife,
And many Realms against them did rebel,
Their trouble turned me to a quiet life,
My Commonweal did prosper passing well,
When all the world agreed like devils in hell,
Then I and mine becalmed from hatreds blast
In happy haven harbored we at last.
Then I a maid of tender youthful years,
Report did say, of beauty fresh and fair,
Refusde the suit of many noble Peers,
Which daily did unto my court repair.
What thought there were unto my crown no heir?
Yet I who did regard my Commons good,
Refusde to link my self with foreign blood.
On foreign coasts, on kingdoms to incroch,
With wrath of wrackfull wars I did despise,
And fearing aye the ruth of rude reproach,
With carking care I daily did devise,
How I with peace might make my kingdom rise,
And how by law of God and man, I might
Give Caesar his, and unto God his right.
No God of heaven, no Christ my people knew:
Wherefore to Rome for learned men I sent,
King Lucies laws decayed I did renew,
Then preaching made my people so repent
Their former faults, that all incontinent
Were baptized, and so within a space,
The faith of Christ they firmly did embrace,
That nothing seemed current in their sight,
But that which holy writers would allow:
And that they would embrace with all their might.
To shed their blood, the same for to auow,
They did not fear, at Verolane even now,
Amidst the force of fiery flashing flame:
Albon the Protomartyr proved the same.
As careful merchant men do much rejoice,
When from those Isles Molocchi, they have brought
Their fraighted ships, for then they have great choice
Of Merchandise, which traffic long has sought,
To find the ware, which trial true has taught
Will get most gain, which being got they give
And cast their care, how they thereby may live:
So I, whom both Sir Neptunes surging Seas,
And Eoles winds, even God himself above
Did favor much, my laboring mind to please,
Giving those things were best for my behoue,
Gods word I mean, which all my men did love.
The Pearls which Christ commanded to be bought,
Must here be found, and no where else be sought.
Then they and I made haste, post have, to lead
Our sinful lives as Scripture did allow.
We knowing God, him loved with fear and dread,
Devotion made us crouch, and creep, and bow
Our hearts, our heads; we savage were but now,
Yet by and by such was the good success,
In fiery flames the truth we did profess.
Then flitting Fame the truth to testify,
Against my will, at Rome made such report,
That Constatinus thence did hither hie,
And being come unto my Britain Court,
With lovers looks he strived to scale the Fort
Of my good will: but when it would not be,
He sighing, thus addressed his talk to me:
O Queen quoth he, thy deeds deserve great fame,
The goodly gifts that God has given to thee
Be such, as I cannot thee greatly blame,
Though thou without desert disdainest me,
Who for thy sake does loathe all cruelty.
But for thy love, with Mars his cruel knife,
I could command thy Realm, and reaue thy life.
But (out alas) whilst breath does lend me life,
My heart shall hate to thrall thy happy state,
What though thou do refuse to be my wife,
Thy hatred tho, shall never cause me hate:
But whilst I live, I will thee love, let Fate
And Fortune fell power on me all their spite,
To die for thee shall greatly me delight.
Then I replied, O Duke, without desert
Thou do me love, a little Islands Queen,
I know thou to the Emperor heir art,
Thy valiant acts I diverse ways have seen,
I like thy deeds, most noble which have been,
And thee I love: yet private pleasures lust
May never make me throw my Realm to dust.
If thou (quoth he) wilt daine my Queen to be,
Thy Britains shall to Rome no tribute yield,
You if you please, to Rome may go with me,
Your mighty mate the world so wide may wield,
Or if you please, I here with you will bilde
My biding place, and in this little land,
I will remain yours, here at your command.
His comely grace, his friendly promise plight,
His famous acts, his Noble royal race,
Some other things which here I could recite,
The Romans heart within my breast did place.
And when my wit had weighed well the case,
Then for the chief of all my Realm I sent,
And thus I spoke to know the whole intent.
My loving Lords, and you my subjects, see
This Roman heir, whom I indeed do love,
He will restore your ancient liberty,
If I will bend my hest to his behoue:
Which benefits they chiefly do me move,
To love at last, a man by whom you may,
Receive a Shield to keep you from decay.
Perhaps you think I love, because I see
His comely shape, and seemly sanguine face,
You be deceived, no outward bravery,
No personage, no gallant courtly grace.
What though he be by birth of royal race?
I recke it not, but this I do regard,
My Commonweal by him may be preserved.
For if he will from tribute set you free,
And end the work which I have well begone,
That Christ's Gospel preached still may be,
God may by him send unto me a son,
To you a King: what wealth then have you won?
What great renown? what honor will ensue?
Speak you your minds, these things me think, be true.
O Queen, quoth they, the Lord preserve thy grace:
Do thou the thing that seems to thee the best,
We do allow the match in every case:
If by that means we may have quiet rest,
With what great good shall this our Realm be blessed?
Do thou therefore O noble Queen, we pray,
The thing which best may keep us from decay.
The Roman Duke he nothing would deny,
But granted more then I could ask or crave,
So that there was proclaimed by and by,
A famous feast, a banquet passing brave.
There to the Duke the Britain crown I gave,
With sacred spousall rights, as man and wife
We wedded, lived in love, for term of life.
And whilst we meant to rule this little I Will,
A greater good unlooked for befell,
Death did destroy his Sire with hateful hand:
For which we both at Rome must now go dwell,
And so we did: things prospered passing well,
My Feere was made the Emperor, Lord and king
Of all: and I the Queen of every thing.
His mighty Mace did rule the Monarchy,
My wit did rule (some writers say) his Mace,
And to increase with joy our merry glie,
I brought him forth a babe of Royal race,
The boy he had an amiable face.
O Rome thou may rejoice, for this was he,
Which did at Rome erect Divinity.
Whilst thus in bliss I did at Rome remain,
A Britain still my mind her care did cast,
For which I caused my husband to ordain,
That evermore those ancient Laws should last,
Which heretofore amongst them there I past,
And that to Rome no Britain borne, for aye,
Should tax, or toll, or tenth, or tribute pay.
Though there at Rome an Empress life I led,
And had at hand what I could wish or crave,
Yet still me thought I was not well bestead,
Because I was so far from Britain brave.
Which when my loving Lord did once perceive,
He set a stay in all the Emperie,
To Britain then he did return with me.
We reigned of years thrice seven with good success,
Then Dolor and Debilitie did drive
My loving Lord with fainting feebleness,
For vital life with braying breath to strive:
He felt, how death of life would him deprive,
He called his Lords, his child, and me his wife,
And thus he spoke, even as he left his life:
The haughty Pines of lofty Libanus,
From earth, to earth, in tract of time return:
So I whose spreading praise were marvelous,
Must now return my flesh to filthy slime,
On Fortunes wheel I may no longer clime.
Therefore my Lords, although my glass be run,
Yet take remorse on Constantine my son.
My Monarch, Court, my Kingdoms all,
(O stately Rome) farewell to them, and thee,
Farewell my Lords, which see my final fall,
Farewell my child, my wife, more dear to me
Then all the world, we must depart I see:
And must we needs depart? O Fortune fie,
We must depart, adue, farewell, I die.
Wherewith he sighed and senseless did remain,
Then I his death as women do, did wail:
But when I viewed, that weeping was but vain,
I was content to bear that bitter bale,
As one who found no means for her avail.
His corpse at York in Princely Tomb I laid,
When funeral sacred solemn rites were paid.
And when report his death about had blown,
Maxentius then the triple crown to wear,
Did challenge all the Empire as his own,
And for a time that mighty Mace did bear:
Which when my son, my Constantine did hear,
The youthful Lad, indeuour'd by and by,
To claim his right by Mars his cruelty.
I then his tender youthful years to guide,
Went with my son to see his good success,
He being Campt by fruitful Tybers side,
To spoil his foe he did himself address,
He knew that God did give all happiness.
Therefore to God, even then the youth did pray,
With mighty hand to keep him from decay.
Behold how God does godly men defend,
And mark how he does beat Usurpers down.
Maxentius now he all his force does bend,
For to defend his Diadem and Crown.
But froward Fate upon the Prince did frown:
For why his men were scattered every where,
In Tyber he did drown himself for fear.
To Rome then we and all our host did hie,
The Romans they with joy did us receive,
To Constantine they gave the Emperie,
But he of them most earnestly did crave,
That I the rule of all the world might have:
It is (quoth he) my mothers right to reign,
Till dreadful death has shred her twist in twain.
I grant my son, the Monarchy is mine,
For at his death thy father gave it me
For term of life: but let it now be thine,
I aged must go pay the earth her fee,
I am content to live with less degree.
O loving son, give ear unto my hest,
I will not rule, that charge for thee is best.
And when he might not rule his mothers mind,
Against his will he willing did assent,
That all should be as I had then assigned,
To rule the world, he grieved was content.
And whilst that there my happy days I spent,
Rejoicing much to see my sons success,
I di'd and had a heavenly happiness.
Thrice happy I who ran this royal race,
And in the end my wished Goal did get:
For by my means all people did embrace
The faith of Christ, the orders I did set
They were obeyed with joy, which made me ier.
Even in this bliss a better bliss befell,
I di'd, and now my soul in heaven does dwell.
So now you see the happy hap I had:
Learn then thereby to do as I have done,
To praise Gods name let every Prince be glad:
To persecute the truth let all men shun,
By virtuous ways great honor may be won.
But he who does to vices vile incline,
May be compared unto a filthy swine.
Who does not love the plain nor pleasant way,
He cannot fear to sleep amidst the green,
But in the mire he does delight to lay:
So Princes such as vile and vidious been,
Do tumble aye amidsta sink of sin,
Whose names on earth, whose souls in hell remain
In infamy, the other pincht with pain.
Let them that seek for everlasting fame,
Tread in the steps that I before have trod,
And he who would avoid reproachful shame,
And flee the smart of Plutoes ruthful rod,
Let him not cease to learn the law of God,
Which only law man's stumbling steps does guide:
Who walks therein, his feet can never slide.
HOW VORTIGER DESTROYED THE YOUNG KING CONSTANTINE, and how he obtained the
Crown: and how after many miseries, he was miserably burnt in his Castle, by
the brethren of Constantine, Anno Dom. 446.
BY quiet peace of Ianus iollitie,
Their happy havens some with forewinds have,
By wrackfull war of Mars his cruelty,
With much ado some get the Goal they crave,
But subtle sleights and fetches bolstred brave,
My hapless hand did hit with leuelled line,
The aimed mark, the more mishap was mine.
By gifts of grace some men have happy hap,
By blessed birth to Kingdoms borne some be:
Succession sets some men in Fortunes lap,
By wisdom, wit, and prudent policy:
Some clime aloft by trustlesse treachery:
And courage does a multitude advance,
Drifts finely filde they did my state inhance.
I Vortiger by birth was borne a Lord,
King Constantine his Cousin did me call,
I cride amain, and clapped his crown abord,
And for a time til Fortune forced my fall,
With restless bliss I sat in stately stall:
But men of war of much more might then I,
For my desert my careful corpse did fry.
As furions force of fiery flashing fame,
With Cinders brought my body to decay,
So smuldering smokes of everlasting shame
Choakt my renown, and wipte my fflame away.
What may I more of my misfortune say?
I sigh to see, I silent ccase to tell
What me destroid, and drowned my soul in hell.
Here to repeat the parts that I have played,
Were to vnrippe a trusse of trumpery,
For me to show how I aloft was staid,
Were to erect a school of Treachery:
Silence is best, let no man learn by me
Nor by my means, how they by wicked ways,
From low estate, aloft themselves may raise.
As good men can by wicked works beware,
So wicked men by wicked works be wise,
If ill men read my deeds which wicked were,
They by my means will compass their surmise:
For wicked workers daily do devise,
To make examples vile and vicious,
To stand in stead, to serve their lawless lust.
The Serpent thence his venim vile does draw,
From whence the Be her honey sweet does get,
Leaud livers learn to break the written law,
By that, whereby good men do learn much wit.
For wicked men each fetch is thought most fit,
To serve their turn: therefore I count it best,
To leave my faults and follies vnconfest.
Give leave therefore good Memory, I may
Not here repeat my tedious Tragedy,
Inquiry, let me now depart away.
My Commonweal subverted was by me,
I leaudly lived, and di'd in misery,
And for my faults I felt disdainful smart,
Let this suffice, and let me now depart.
With that he seemed as one that would away,
But Memory (stay stay thy steps, quoth she)
Let wicked men procure their own decay,
We recke it not, if warned once they be.
Let that suffice, and let thy misery
Make just report, how vain, and vile a thing
It is, to live as a usurping King.
Since needs I must repented faults forerunne
Repeat, and tell the fall and foil I felt,
Patience perforce, to speak shame bids me shun,
To think thereof does make my heart to melt.
But since I needs must show how here I dealt,
I am content to tell the truth of all,
Let wise men learn to stand, which read my fall.
For first I causde the young King Constantine,
Of faithless Scots and Picts to make his guard,
They by my means did kill their King in fine,
For which, with speed I sent them all to ward,,
And hanged them all, their cause was never heard:
So I who first did cause them kill their King,
To stop their mouths, the mall to death did bring.
Where Rancor rules, where hatreds heat is hot,
The hurtlesse men with trouble be turmoil'd:
Where malice may send forth her Cannon shot,
There might is right, there reasons rules are foiled.
For ruthful Rancor evermore has boiled
With griping grief: her smuldring smokes of spite
Would gladly choke all justice, law, and right.
So might, not right, did thrust me to the Throne,
I sixteen years did wear the royal Crown,
In all which time with grief I aye did groan,
As one who felt the fall from high renown.
My Noble men deuisde to thrust me down
In all this time, and many did protest,
I laid the King in his untimely chest.
At last, my foes my friends were made, and I
Had quiet peace, and lived a happy King:
Yea, God who rules the haughty heaven a high,
Inricht my Realm with foyson of each thing,
Abundant store did make my people sing.
As they of yore were pressed with penury,
So now they hate their great fertility.
My people had of corn and oil such store,
That country men of tillage left the toil,
The rich man fed no better then the poor,
For all did reap the fatness of the soil,
No man for meat nor money then did toil,
But all rejoice with joyful Jubilee,
And all were soust with sinful gluttony.
As clouds dissolved fair Phoebus does deface,
So plague my plenty dimmed with dark disease:
For whilst my Realm in riot ran her race,
They played, not prayed, and did their God displease.
For which they drowned in sorrows surging seas,
Like rotten sheep by thousands di'd so thick,
The dead could not be buried by the quick.
When thus the plague my people did oppress,
That few were left alive within my land,
The barbarons Picts, with speed themselves addressed,
Knowing their time, they raisde a mighty band,
They knew right soon, how here my state did stand.
And to revenge the wrong that erst I wrought,
They meant to bring both me and mine to naught.
See how abuse breeds blake and bitter bale,
Misuse does make of plenty, loathsome lack,
Amidst his bliss with woe it makes man wale,
Only abuse does work man's wretched wrack:
Amidst my joys, from joy it beat me back.
For I and mine misusde our present bless,
Which brought both me and mine to wretchedness.
We first misusde our present pleasant plenty,
For which we whipped in thrall with scourges three,
Had Pestilence, which made my kingdom empty,
It did destroy my men of each degree,
Then fainting Famine plaide her Tragedy,
Bellona then that beastly bloody Queen,
Did blow her Trumpe to dash my courage clean.
When sickness had consumde my subjects quite,
The Picts with pride did haste to spoil my land,
I had no men, nor means with them to fight,
For which I sent and did obtain a band
Of Saxons, such as did the Picts withstand.
Whose help that I when need required might have,
I gave them Kent, a country passing brave.
These Saxons were a crew of warrelike wights,
They lived by spoil, and had no biding place,
They were of truth a troop of Martial knights,
Which served for pay where Mars extold his Mace.
Saxons indeed they were of royal race,
They Angli hight, a stock of worthy fame,
Of them this realm of England took her name.
These Angli brought the Britains to the bay,
We Welchmen called, to Wales they did us drive,
They brought six sorts of Saxons to decay,
And got the Goal for which they long did strive.
Of other stocks they left not one alive,
They all this Realm did plant with Angli then,
And termed themselves of Angli, Englishmen.
But how they brought this enterprise about,
Mark well the sequel which I shall recite:
Hengestus he the Chiefetaine of the rout,
A subtle Sir, an undermining wight,
To seed my veins he took a great delight.
His crafty head did deem it the best way,
With pleasant baits to make my crown his pray.
He me his King invited to a feast,
A feast in faith, which forced my final fall:
Where Cupids curse constrained me like a beast,
From Pallas Prince to give the golden Ball.
For Venus vants to Helene threw my thrall,
Whose heavenly hue, whose beauty fresh and fair
Was burnisht bright like Phoebus in the air.
I being set at Bacchus banqueting,
His daughter decked with Natures Tapistrie,
And trimly trickt with every other thing,
Which might delight a lovers fantasy:
Why should man's mind to love thus subject be?
I had a wife, a passing princely piece,
Which far did pass that gallant Girl of Greece.
Yet from my wife (the worthiest Queen alive,)
My fancies fell, I loathed her lovely bed:
How I Hengestus daughter might atchieue
Was all my care, I did this Damsel wed,
My wife diuorst, I had her in the sted.
Her lovely looks, her pretty pleasant cheer,
Made me esteem her only love most dear.
I wore the crown, her will did rule the rest,
And her demand I never did deny:
What she allowed I did esteem that best.
Which when her Father Hengest did epsy,
He had the pray for which he long did pry.
He made his hay whilst weather faier was,
And by her means he brought it thus to pass:
That Britains we with toil should till the ground,
They Saxons would defend our wealth with war:
Which granted once, they did inhabit round
About my realm, and might both make and mar.
New Saxons in my realm arrived were,
By means whereof my Britains did suspect
The Saxons sleights, and did their deeds detect.
Then they good men to me their king complaind,
These men, quoth they, from us our realm will win,
Except they from our frontiers be refraind.
Which when they told, my wife she was within,
O husband dear, they be (said she) my kin,
Cease of thy force thy faithful dreades to fear,
They mean no hurt, by Jove the just I swear.
So I esteemed not my subjects health,
That I might still my Ladies love enjoy,
They viewed me careless of my common wealth,
To save themselves they meant me to annoy,
Mine eldest son a proper pretty boy,
They made their king, and me for my desert,
They did deprive: with pain which pincht my heart.
Then Vortiger my son and king pursude
The Saxons sore, and did amaze them much,
For which my wife his mother law indude
With devilish spite, against the youth did grutch,
She him destroi'd, her good success was such:
When he seven years had reigned with great renown,
With poison she deprived him of his crown.
I to obtain the seat from whence I fell,
With sacred oath I solemnly did swear,
To end the work, which was begun so well,
And to subdue the Saxons every where.
The Britains to my Kingly crown did rear
Me quickly then, I at the first, by might
Defaste my foes in every fray and fight.
Then loathsome Luck did turn her whirling wheel,
With treason trust intrapt did me betray,
Hateful Mishap she had me by the heel,
And clapped me close in dungeon of decay,
To Hengest now I must a ransom pay.
And if I loved my life and liberty,
I needs must grant all he does ask of me.
For changed chance of Mars his wars, has made
Me of a King a Captains prisoner,
To whom there must now four Shires be paid,
Northfolke, Southfolk, Southsex and Kent they were,
Me to release from out my cave of care.
Which being done, I led my life in doubt,
And fled for fear to Wales with all my rout.
Whereas I found a place that pleased me much,
The situation seemed so passing strong,
The world me thought might not annoy it much,
A castle there I built: it were too long
Here to repeat, silence shall do no wrong
To Marlain, he who wonders there has wrought,
If ancient writ to us the truth has taught.
When I had built my Princely bower there,
In bloody fields I meant no more to strive:
But true report did dash my present cheer.
In Totnesse haven two brethren did arrive,
Which quickly would from that my fort me drive,
The brethren both of Constantine the King,
Peccaui they did mean to make me sing.
From worse to worse, seldom is better seen,
Our present joys hereafter thralles do thret,
And he who now does flourish fresh and green,
Must fade and fall as Hyems frosts do fret
Dame Floraes fields, or as the rain with wet
In dropping days the pleasant plains does drown,
So ruthful men bereave us of renown.
Men may therefore like Marmaids ever mourn,
The shining Sun who do so much delight,
That aye they wail like Furies quite forlorn.
When Sol does shine, when Titans beams be bright,
They fear the storms that may hereafter light,
They weep because they must the Sun forgo,
When storms do fall, they wail their present woe.
So mortal man with malice all bested,
When good success does sound a blessed blast,
With brinish tears then may they eat their bread.
For happy days from man does flee as fast
As powders force from piece does pellet cast,
And troubles tedious time with paselesse stay,
Once won (alas) will never walk away.
How I in maze of trouble here did toil,
Judge you which see me trauise in the same,
And how I was inforst to final foil,
Not now, for now although it does me shame,
I will declare, how I was fri'd with flame.
For Ambrose he and Vter Pendragon,
My castle burnt, me and my men each one.
Then Ambrose with his brothers crown was crowned,
Which I from him had reaft against all right.
So now you see upon what slipperie ground
They stand, which do extol themselves by might,
Their wandering feet do walk as in the night,
Their stumbling steps their guilty minds do fear,
They daily see the block of bale appear.
With scalding sighs they do themselves consume,
For fear to fall does yield none other fruit,
They rage with wrath, they daily fret and fume,
Ruthful revenge them always has in suit,
And right in time makes might both mum and mute:
For that which might by secret means has wrought,
By tract of time to open show is brought.
Usurpers then do reap their right reward,
The foil once felt, they feel how vile and vain
It is, to be to high degrees preferred
By lawless means they find what pinching pain,
Amid'st the minds of such men do remain,
They always thronged with cruel thretting thrall,
Do feed upon none other food but gall.
A proof whereof a plat, a pattern plain,
The ruthful race I Vortiger have run,
Desciphers so, that man may see how vain
A thing it is his former Fate to shun:
Honor obtained (alas) what have we won?
A hidious heap of cruel carking care,
Which to consume man's life does never spare.
Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW VTER PENDRAGON WAS INAMOVRED ON the wife of Gorolus Duke of Cornwall,
whom he slew, and after was poisoned by the Saxons, Anno Dom. 500.
WE lead our lives by fancies fond delight,
For kingdoms some do busy much their brain,
But Cupids curse that wretched little wight,
That blinded boy unto my pinching pain,
Dubbed me a Knight of dainty Venus train,
Where beams of Beauty brought me by and by,
To cast my care to please my Ladies eye.
O Beauty brave, thy gladsome glittering gleames,
With smiling cheer and wildie winking eyes,
Does drown with dole amidst the surging streams
Of deep despair, the wights which be most wise.
Aye me, my wit, my pen cannot devise
Of Beauty brave to make a true discourse,
To think thereof I feel my self the worse.
I Pendragon of Britain crowned King,
The fretting force of Beauties hateful hew,
Those frying flames I felt, that hateful sting,
That wounds my fame, which now too late I rue,
Whilst with delight I did thy vanting view,
I like the Hawk which soars in good estate,
Did spy a Stale, I stoopt, and took a Mate.
For at what time the Saxons did assail
My Britain state, and took each man a share,
My kingdom they even for their best avail,
Did then divide: for which with carking care
Them thence to drive, I did my power prepare.
And being come to Cornwall with my band,
I meant to have Duke Gorolus helping hand.
There in the Church I set to sacrifice,
Those holy vows, which victories require:
Even whilst I did with all my heart devise,
How to subdue my foes with sword and spear,
Even then there did this peerless Pearl appear,
Duke Gorolus wife, whose gallant gate and grace,
Stealing mine heart, my honor did deface.
When Vortiger my brother did oppress,
In exile then my youthful years were spent,
At my return his fault he did confess,
And from his crown the crown in haste I sent.
Then my delight was in the dierie dent
Of wrackfull war, but now transformed I stand,
The ancient Oak must grow now like a wand.
I maruail'd much how Sirens songs might please,
But now I muse that Circes forcerie,
Does not from every man bereave his ease.
Calipsoes cups with poisoned treachery,
Cannot so much abridge man's liberty,
As Sirens songs, and Circes subtle art,
Whose chaunting charms inwrapt with woe my heart.
Ulysses sailing by the perilous place,
Where these to please the passers by, did play,
Where Lady Love does vant with garish grace,
Her dainty Damsels gallant Girls, and gay,
Enticing trulles, they causde the Greek to say,
With cables come and tie me to this Mast,
Lest I my self to pleasures Court me cast.
Muse not therefore though feature fine of face,
Though comely corpse, and trim enticing cheer,
Made me obey Sir Cupids mighty Mace:
The force whereof Ulysses wise did fear.
He sailed aloof, he from these banks did bear
His shaking ship, but other many more
Did there arrive, and weau'd the web of woe.
There Solomon did reap the crop of care,
There David loved as I, Vrias wife,
There Samson strong was snarled in the snare,
There Paris lived, even there he lost his life,
There Helens hate, brought Troy her final strife,
Alcides he the mighty Hercules
There to arrive, did find it dangerous.
I learned with loss of my renown at last,
That he who does delight in lawless love,
Must play the fool ere all the parts be past,
And taste the sauce prepared for his behoue.
Let men take heed how they their fancies move,
Let man beware where he does cast his eye,
The limed bird does prove in vain to fly.
O ancient Rome, thou did'stordaine of yore,
That women should no banqueting frequent,
At Rome she was esteemed a harlot whore,
If from her house without her veil she went,
Which laws no doubt were made to good intent,
For why the beams of beauties sanguin'd sight,
Like Basiliske does spoil the gazing wight.
Therefore the maids, and Roman matrons all,
A shadowing veil before their face did wear,
Their heavenly hue did throw no man to thrall,
They were content with plain and decent gear,
They huft it not with painted frisled hear.
The married wife, the matron, and the maid,
They of their veiles were glad and well apaid.
If women thus had walked in my time,
I had not stoopt unto that painted lure,
Which did entice me to commit the crime,
Which to the perch of lewdness ti'd me sure,
For her disport my Lady could procure
The wretched wings of this my muting mind,
Restless to seek her empty fist to find.
I thus arrived in Pleasures cursed court,
I lothed Mars, I hated Mercury,
It was me thought a passing pleasant sport,
Leaving the fields at Bacchus bravery,
Sometime to sit upon my mistress knee,
Where that I might be at my pleasure plaste,
I sent the Duke away to wars in haste.
You which have played with pleasures banding balls,
You know the life which lingering lovers lead,
You know how sweet it is to scale the walls
Of her good will, who lived in fear and dread,
You know right well how well those wights have sped,
Who have at last by drifts of long delay,
Their hoped meed, and wished pleasant pray.
Unconquered beauty whence had thou that power
To make stout Vter stoop to his own shame,
That never stoopt to foes? why for that flower
Of sweet delight in Igren that fair Dame
Did I forgo the golden flower of fame?
Victorious beauty and base yielding lust
Did cast great Vters conquests in the dust.
Yet no such blame as writers do record
Do I deserve for this unhappy deed:
Proud Gorolus the bright-cheekt Igrens Lord
Received no wrong but his own merits meed,
When in the field I made his heart to bleed,
If thoughts of treason merit death and shame,
His treacherous deeds did well deserve the same.
His graceless treason he in act did show
For when I sent him to Nathaliod hight
In bloody field against the Saxon foe,
He swollen in heart with envy and despite
Of his associates good did leave the fight,
And leaving stout Nathaliod for a pray
Unto the foes, from field he fled away.
By which enforced I was with Mars to rise
From Venus bed, and arm me for the field,
Where like a storm in thunder clad from skies
Upon my foes I fell, they could not shield
Themselves from death, few escaped that did not yield.
Occa and Ossa both I down did bring,
And led them captive like a conquering King.
Again I then began think upon my love
Upon mine Igren dear, against whose Lord
I finding cause, for that he late did prove
Faithless to me, did with my lust accord
Against him, as 'against my foe to draw my sword,
Whom by his castle called Dunilioc,
I slew with blade in battles bloody stroke.
Then did I take mine Igren as mine own
And crowned her Queen in my Imperial chair,
On whom great Arthur I begot anon.
And after him my Anna hight the fair,
In seeming bliss I long lived void of care,
For thrice nine years with Igren I did reign,
And against the Saxons did my state maintain.
But for the rape of Gorolus his wife
The heavens did power down vengeance on my head,
I by untimely death did end my life,
My said soul hence enforced by poison fled,
By Saxons wrought, who often wished me dead,
And left behind for all my deeds of fame
Just cause for writers pens to speak my shame.
Learn they which live in high or low degree,
To flee the foil which I by folly felt:
Let them refrain those lofty Dames to see,
They know how lofty looks with me have dealt,
You see how sight did make my honor melt.
Let all men know, man's heart did never rue
The thing which he with sight did never view.
But how may men the sight of Beauty shun
In England, at this present dismal day?
All void of veiles (like Lays) where Ladies run
And rome about at every feast and play,
They wandering walk in every street and way:
With lofty luring looks they bounsing brave,
The highest place in all men's sight must have.
With pride they pranke to please the wandering eye,
With garish grace they smile, they iet, they jest:
O English Dames, your lightness verily,
The Curtizans of Rome do much detest,
In closets close to live they count it best.
They give not grace to every wandering wight,
Your smiling cheer does every man delight.
The Poets gods Saturn, and Jupiter,
To Beauties beck their highness did obey,
Pluto of hell did plead at Beauties bar,
And Phillis causde Demophoon to stay:
Pasiphae a Bull brought to the bay.
So gods and devils, both men and beasts, they all
By women's wiles are slaves to Beauties thrall.
What gain is got by light and wanton ways?
You reap reproach, a guerdon got thereby:
Men by your means do cause their own decay,
And you your selves all soust in sin must die.
Refrain therefore to please man's gazing eye,
Let men likewise the baited hooks refrain
Of luring looks, their vanting vows be vain.
Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW CADWALLADER THE LAST KING OF THE Britains was expelled by the Saxons,
went to Rome, and there lived in a religious house.
YOu mourning Muses all, where ever you remain,
Assist my sobbing soul this driery tale to tell:
You furious Furies fierce of Lymbo Lake below,
Help to unlade my breast of all the bale it bears:
And you who felt the fall from honors high renown:
From graves you grizlie ghosts send forth, to help me mourn.
O Pallas, give thou place, that mourning Clio may
On Lute lamenting, sound and sing my doleful dumps.
Let riming meetered lines and pleasant music cease:
Let Satyrs solemn sound send forth the fall I felt:
And when the truth of all my Tragedy is known,
Let them that live then learn, all things must have an end,
The Persian Monarch and the Medes it down did fall,
That of Assyria, in tract of time did end:
Yea Alexanders force in fight subdued them both,
And brought the world so wide into one Monarchy.
What though the fretting force of Fate did him dismay?
He felt at last the foil, his vanting was in vain,
He dead, the world it was divided as before.
The Roman Emperie came tumbling down at last.
And where is Troy, and Greece, and mighty Macedon?
They flourisht for a time like this my little I Will:
The Soldion brought them down, and did their states destroy:
Even so the Saxons brought the Britains to the bay,
Even these mine eyes did see, that hateful hidious sight,
These feeble hands, when long they labored had in vain,
Did yield their interest: then thus I did complain:
Who can refrain the force of mighty mounting seas?
When billows make a breach and beat the banks adowne,
Does not the saltish surge then beat the banks adowne?
Then man may not withstand the rigor of their rage.
But wisdom would have kept the waves within their bounds:
Counsel does come too late, when hope of help is past.
Such was my filthy fate, my leaud and loathsome luck:
I sought a salve to cure and help the helpelesse wound.
For long before my time, seven Kings were settled here,
The Saxons such as dwelt by East, Sibertus ruled,
The Angles in the East, Redwallus ruled as King,
Then Ethelbert was King of all the coast of Kent,
In Southsex Ethelwolfus wore the regal crown:
Then Quincillinus was a Saxon King by West,
Of Martia in the midst King Penda was the Prince,
And Edwin in Northumberland did rule and reign,
How did my Grandsire grand renowned Arthur he
These seven destroy with deadly field of wrackfull war?
But Mordred made the mean, that brought them in again:
Vortiporus with war almost consumed them all.
Then Malgo he with peace restored again their state,
Cariticus the sin of civil strise did love,
For which Gurmundus did the Britains much annoy.
Then Cadwin out of Wales King Etheldred did spoil,
Cadwalline then did force King Penda to a foil,
And I Cadwallader at last did press in place,
Then Lothar king of Kent in war that wretch I slew.
And Ethiwolne the king of South saxons I spoilde,
The other five did me invade with cruel fight,
With whom in diverse wars, I diversely did speed.
Sometime Bellona blew a blessed blast for me,
And changed chance sometime did force my men to flee.
Whilst thus I waged my wars in secret silent night,
The very voice of God, it thus to me did speak:
Thou striu'st against the stream, the tide does beat thee back,
Strike thou thy sails, take ancor hold, else must thou feel a wrack.
Which saying did indeed amaze me more by much,
Then all the force that man against my will might bend:
For who the will of God with weapons may resist?
And when as sin has sold a country to decay,
Then prayer must prevail, for weapons will not help.
And when the end is come, when all the glass is run,
Who can resist the force of Fate and destinies?
Who things forerun to fall from falling can refrain?
It passes mortal might to bring such things about.
Let man content himself to do what best he may,
By trying too too much, no man his God may tempt,
But mortal man must think that God the best does know,
Who can depresse to dust and raise when best him please.
And as I thus amidst my musings did remain,
I did resign my crown, and deemed al honors vain.
And though it grieved me much to feel the fall I selt,
Yet was I well content, I could not as I would:
For which I left my land, my people, and my place.
The Saxons they obtained the wage for which they war'd.
When I three years had reigned, without one day of rest,
Even then in mourning robes at Rome I did arrive,
And there contemning all the world, and worldly things,
I made my self a Monk, (cease Memory to muse)
A Monk I made my self, thou know it passing plain:
Amongst the Friars there, I led my lingering life.
And til my dying day I daily did devise,
How by my means it might to all the world be known.
That mortal flesh is frail, and every thing must fade:
And even amongst those things which Nature does create,
Nothing so vile as man amongst the rest is found,
Which made Heraclitus with ceaseless sighs to wail,
He to his dying day did nothing else but weep,
Affirming all the world under the heaven, to be
A path of penitence, maze of misery.
What is the life of man but care and daily toil,
Bearing always about a burden of mishappes?
All his delights repentance daily does pursue:
Nothing but death does bring him peace and quiet rest.
Yet that which brings him bliss, he most of all does hate,
Which made Democritus with mirth to spend his days;
He laughing aie, did mock the madness of mankind,
Whose love is long to live, and fears much to die:
Death reaues us from disease, Death ends the fear of death.
When Midas did demand Silenus, what was best
For mortal man to wish, the Satyr thus did say,
Not to be borne, if borne, not long our lives to lead,
For life I most do loathe, and death I least do dread.
And how did Timon lead with savage beasts his life?
How did that Hermit poor, his loathsome life detest?
Affirming with the wise Aurelius Emperor,
That if a man should make a true discourse of all
The wretched woes he felt, from birth to dying day,
The feeble flesh would faint to feel so sharp a fight,
The heart would quake to hear Dame Fortunes sharp assaults.
And I Cadwallader a king, can make report,
That nothing may content the mind of mortal man:
The more my self did eat, the hungrier ay I was,
The more I drank, the more thirst did me still distress.
The more I slept, the more I sluggish did remain,
The more I rested me, the more I wearied was,
The more of wealth I had, the more I did desire,
The more I still did seek, the less I aye did find.
And to conclude, I found I never could obtain
The thing, but in the end it causde me to complain:
My present good success, did threaten thrall to come;
And changing chance did still with sorrow me consume,
For which my royal robes, my crown I laid aside;
Meaning to prove by proof the pains of poverty,
Which poverty I felt all riches to exceed,
It bears much more bliss, then high and courtly state,
Codrus and Irus poor for wealth did far surpass
Midas and Croesus king, for wealth who did surpass.
And I amongst my mates the Romish Friars, felt
More joy and less annoy, then erst in Britain brave.
For there I doubted still, the Saxons subtle sleights,
I feared there the fall from royal regal seat:
But here at Rome I lived not fearing force of foe,
I had for mine estate, what I could wish or crave,
And this I there did find: they of the Clergy be,
Of all the men that live the least in misery.
For all men live in care, they careless do remain.
Like buzzing Drones they eat the honey of the Be,
They only do excel for fine felicity:
The king must wage his wars, he has no quiet day,
The noble man must rule with care the commonweal,
The Countreyman must toil to till the barren soil,
With care the Merchant man the surging seas must sail,
With trickling drops of sweat the handcrafts man does thrive*
With hand as hard as board the woorkeman eats his bread,
The soldier in the field with pain does get his pay,
The serving man must serve and crouch with cap and knee,
The Lawyer he must plead and trudge from bench to bar,
Who Physic does profess, he is not void of care:
But Churchmen they be blessed, they turn a leaf or two,
They sometime sing a Psalm, and for the people pray,
For which they honor have, and sit in highest place,
What can they wish or seek, that is not hard at hand?
They labor not at all, they know no kind of pain,
No danger does with dread their happy lives distress,
Cease you therefore to muse what madness made me leave
The Court and courtly pomp of wearing royal crown,
No madness did that deed, but wisdom wished it so,
I gaind thereby the bliss which few before me felt.
I nine years led my life, and never felt annoy.
And certainly if now I might be king again,
Refusing all that pomp, I would become a priest,
A Deacon, or a Deane, Prebend, or Minister.
For these men lead their lives with livings two or three:
Some have their substitutes in Universities,
Some lead the brauest lives that any man may have,
They feed upon the fleece, they force not of the flock:
Three hours in the year, with beastly bosomde stuff
They spend, and that is all that law of them requires.
Muse not though many thrust and shoulder for degrees,
For happy man is he, who has a Preachers sees.
But let me now return unto my Romish rout,
Who fed like Bacon fat, did naught but play and pray.
With whom for nine years space, when I my life had led,
I song my Requiem, and paid the earth her fee.
Then in Saint Peter's Church at Rome they did me lay,
Booted and spurd, even as you see me here this day.
So now you have the whole of all my Tragedy.
Of Brutus blood the last I lived that ruled as king:
My Britains driven to Wales they Welchmen then were called,
And I at Rome their king, a mumbling Monk instal'd.
The Saxons had the day, for which they longed long.
They England called the I Will, of Brute which took her name.
Some men be borne to bliss, and some to hateful hap:
Who would have thought, that I in war a raging king,
Should by the force of Fate, at Rome have did a Monk?
Let all the world then know, that nothing is so sure,
That can afford and say, I thus will aye endure.
For that which seems best, is soonest brought to naught,
Which plainly does appear by that which I have taught.
The worthiest in the world, princes, philosophers,
Will teach that I have taught, and prove it passing plain.
Paulus Aemilius did die but wretchedly:
And was not Scipio even to his dying day
Constraind, to help his need, the painful plow to ply?
Caesar and Silla both, did not they taste the whippe?
And made not Hannibal a miserable end?
And how was Socrates before his time destroyed,
And Anaxagoras imprisoned long with pain?
For cruel beastly coin divine Plato was sold,
And Aristotle sent to exile, where he di'd:
And so was Solon sage, and that Lycurgus wise,
And many more, which here I could at large repeat.
But let these few suffice to teach for certain truth,
That all the men that live, are subjects all to ruth.
And seeing so it is, then let them learn the mean,
That if the bark do break, they safe may swim to land.
Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW SIGEBERT FOR HIS WICKED LIFE was thrust from his Throne, and miserably
slain by a Heardsman, Anno Dom. 755.
TWo parts in one a Heardsman here must play,
My tale must tend each Princes life to mend,
And this my talk most plainly must display,
How far a subject may himself defend
Against his Liege, his Sovereign Lord and King,
If his default his Commonweal does bring
To misery: therefore a little while
Attend, and know the tenor of my style.
A subject I of base and low degree,
This headless corpse of life I did deprive,
(King Sigebert it was) with cruelty.
Whose lust was law, whilst he was here alive,
To feel my force it was his destiny:
Then cruelty I wrackt with cruelty,
And to revenge the wrong that erst he wrought,
With loss of life his lawless lust he bought.
This Sigebert the Saxons ruled by West,
Their ancient laws he at his list did change,
For which his Commons did him much detest.
The Duke of Cornwall would not let him range
Thus at his will, but wished him like a friend,
To mend his faults, or else his life to end.
Then he in rage this Duke my masters life,
His cruel hands bereaved with bloody knife.
A lawless life to lawless death does hale,
When witless will, will pass the power of may:
Then ill mishap does drown in dolours dale
The perverse Prince, whose wit does bear the sway.
Just Abels blood to God for vengeance called,
For blood with blood the Bloodsheader is thrald,
And him whom here before you I present,
For sheading blood, my blade his life has hent.
As he three years his people did oppress,
Then they whose back that burden could not bear,
With one consent they did his state distress,
To reaue him of his Crown they did not fear,
They him deposde from honor and renown:
His hateful hap so frowardly did frown,
That he who had a kingdom but of late,
Forlorn he now must beg from gate to gate.
Do nothing muse at his deserved hap,
For many more as he their lives have led:
Jove's vengeance just such wretches does inwrap
With change most strange, when he their blood will shed.
Of Dionyse of Syracusia,
Of Neroes death, of Phalaris decay,
Who list to read, he passing plain shall find,
That he of heaven their sorrow has assignde.
And out of doubt God did ordain the fall
Of him, whom here I headless have in hand,
Who wandering in a wood amidst his thrall
I met by chance, of whom I did demand
His name, and place: who thus replide with fear?
O friend, I am for meat now staruen well near,
Give me therefore I thee beseech and pray
Some meat, to keep my carcass from decay.
Some Pilgrim poor, or waifaring man him straight
Liudg'd, and gave him what my scrippe would yield;
And whilst we both thus on a bank did bait,
From sighs and sobbes himself he could not wield,
Which made me ask again his name and place,
But silent he did mourn with frowning face:
Yet at the last by urging to and fro,
He thus declared the cause of all his woe.
O miser I, more wretch then thee by much,
I never could compare with thine estate.
This heard of Swine against thee never grutch;
I kept a heard, which did their Heardsman hate,
A hateful heard of murmuring men I mean,
Which did deprive me of mine honor clean.
And now I lead my loathsome life you see,
Impaled amidst a maze of misery.
With changed chance (aye me) I chased am,
And frowning Fate such sorrow has assignd,
That lothing life, most like a quiet Lamb,
My naked neck to block of bale I bind.
With cruel knife (O care) come shread my twist,
So shall my soul by corpse decay be blist.
But since that Care nor Fate will do this deed,
Do thou the same I thee beseech, with speed.
First hateful hope with flattering face did fawn,
With dread when deep despaier would me have drowned,
Then changed chance did check me with the pawn
Of woeful want, when good success did sound
A blessed blast: and now (to tell the truth)
I have the mate, by raging Rooke of truth.
Lo thus I live, which daily wish to die:
And life (alas) does make my misery.
If loathsome life (of this my corpse the king)
Does move one way, the Bishop bids me back:
If to that point, the Queen me back does bring,
On the other side, the Knight does work my wrack,
The other points with Pawnes be all possessed,
And here the Rooke of ruth does reaue my rest.
And being brought into this strange estate,
I do confess my self to have a mate.
Since sorrow so has seasde upon my bones,
That now too late I do lament my loss,
And since no means may turn my gastfull groans
To joyful glie, since trouble still does toss
Me to and fro, in waltring waves of woe:
Death is my friend, and life I count my foe:
Which death though once my feeble flesh did fear,
Yet now I feign would feel his murdring spear.
In gurging gulf of these such surging seas,
My poorer soul who drowned does death request,
I wretched wight have sought mine own disease,
By mine own means my state it was distressed.
For whilst I meant to make my lust a law,
Justice me from my high estate did draw.
So that I find, and feel it now with pain,
All worldly pomp, al honor is but vain.
Which honor I to fiery flames compare,
For when they flash and flourish most of all,
Then suddenly their flamings quenched are.
For proof whereof, to mind now let us call
Antigonus, and Ptolemeus Great,
Caesar, and Mithridate, we may repeat,
With Darius, and great Antiochus,
Cambises eke, and conquering Pyrrhus.
And I the last might first have had my place,
They all as I with flaming fiery show
Were quenched quite: Dame Fortune did deface,
Yea hateful hap, even then did overthrow
Us most, when most we had our hearts desire:
When most we flourisht like the flames of fire,
Even then the seas of sorrow did prevail,
And made us wear a black lamenting sail.
And here before my death, I will repeat
To thee the thing which I of late did dream,
That thou and all the world may see, how great
A care it is to rule a royal realm.
My dream shall show, that bliss does not consist
In wealth nor want: but he alone is blessed,
Who is content with his assigned fate,
And never strives to clime to higher state.
When seemly Sol had rest his glittering gleames,
And night the earth did with her darkness veil,
Dame Cinthia then with her bright burnisht beams,
The shadowed shades of darkness did assail,
Then Somnus caused my senses all to quail.
On careful couch then being laid to rest,
With doubtful dreams I strangely was distressed.
In cottage cold where care me thought did keep,
With naked need and want of wherewithal:
Where poverty next beggars door did creep,
And where expenses were so passing small,
That all men deemed that man forethrong'd with thrall,
Which there did dwell, even there from bondage free,
I viewed a man all void of misery.
And whilst I musde how he in bliue of bliss
Could lead his life amid'st that cave of care,
From Princely Court proceeded ere I wist,
A man, with whom there might no man compare.
His wealth, his wit, his courage were so rare,
That none before nor since were like to him:
Yet he me thought in waves of woe din swim.
This man had all that men could wish or crave
For happy state, yet naught he had in deed:
The other, he had naught that men would have,
Yet had he all, believe it as thy Creed.
This saying of that happy man I read,
That having naught, yet all things so I have,
That having naught, I nothing more do crave.
The King me thought with all his Courtly train,
Past to the place where poverty did dwell,
With frowning face and with a troubled brain,
With woe and want, his vexed veins did swell,
With mirth and joy the poor man did excel.
And being come unto his house ymade
Of one poor hogshead, thus to him he said:
Diogenes, thou lead'st a loathsome life,
Me think thou might much better spend thy time
Within my Court, both thou and eke thy wife:
Thou by that means to high estate may clime:
I have the wealth, and thou art void of crime,
And lo, before thy face I here am pressed
To give thee that, which thou shall now request.
Stand back (Sir King) thy vaunting vows be vain,
I nothing recke thy promise, goods, nor land,
And Titans stately streams would me sustain
With heat, if thou from this my door would stand:
Thou takst away much more then thy command
Can give again: thy gifts so vile I deem,
That none but fools such follies do esteem.
With conquest thou have wone the world so wide,
And yet thou can not win thy wandering will:
Thou would win an other world beside:
But tush, that fact does far surpass thy skill.
Thou never wilt of Conquest have thy fill,
Til death with daunting dart has conquered thee,
Then must thou leave behind, thy Monarchy.
With great assaults my self I have subdude,
In all respects, I have my hearts desire,
With a contented mind I am endude,
To higher state I never will aspire.
More like a Prince then any poor Esquire,
I lead my life: and since my state is such,
Ask thou of me, for I can give thee much.
All dashed with dread me thought in fuming heat
He said, departing thence in have with speed,
If I were not Alexander the Great,
I would become Diogenes indeed,
Who leads his life all void of woeful dread.
He has the wealth which I cannot obtain,
I have the wealth which wise men do disdain.
I live in fear, I languish all in dread,
Wealth is my woe, the causer of my care,
With fear of death I am so ill bestead,
That restless I much like the hunted Hare,
Or as the canuist Kite, does fear the snare.
Ten hundred cares have brought me to the baie,
Ten thousand snares for this my life men lay.
When Philip he of Macedon the King,
One Realm me left, I could not be content,
Desire pricked me to an other thing,
To win the world it was my whole intent,
Which done, an other world to win I meant.
When least I had, then most I had of bless,
Now, all the world, and all unquietness.
No woe to want of contentation;
No wealth to want of riches and renown,
For this is seen in every nation,
The highest trees be soonest blown down:
Ten kings do die before one clubbish Clown.
Diogenes in quiet Tun does rest,
When Caesar is with carking care distressed.
Wherewith me thought he was departed quite,
And Morpheus that sluggish God of sleep,
Did leave my limbs, wherewith I stood upright,
Devising long what profit I could reap
Of this my dream, which plainly did express
That neither want nor wealth does make man's bless;
Who has the mean with a contented mind,
Most perfect bliss his God has him assignde.
But I, who lived a crowned King of late,
And now am forced of thee to beg my bread,
I cannot be content with this estate,
I loathe to live, I would I wretch were dead:
Despaier she does feed me with decay,
And patience is fled and flowne away.
Do thou therefore O Heardsman play thy part,
Take thou this blade, and thrust it to my heart.
O Sir, I said, the gods defend that I
Should causeless kill a man in misery,
Tell me thy name and place, then by and by
I will provide for thine adversity.
Then he replied, my name is Sigebert,
I am the man which wrought thy masters smart:
I ruled of late this Realm even at my list,
Take thou revenge with that thy friendly fist.
And well content: I will revenge with speed
The death of him whom causeless thou did kill.
King Sigebert, and art thou he indeed?
Since he thou art, dispatch and make thy will;
For to my Lord this day I will present
Thy head: therefore thy former saults repent,
Thou see the block on which thy life must end,
Call thou for grace that God may mercy send.
Wherewith he kneeling by the block of bale,
Dispatch (quoth he) and do that friendly deed:
O welcome death, and farewell Fortune frail,
Dispatch good friend, dispatch my life with speed.
Wherewith, on block he stretched his neck outright,
And said no more, but praying me to smite,
I gave the stroke which ended all his care,
A bloody stroke, which did my death prepare.
For I who hopte to have some great reward
For killing of my Masters fathers foe:
Was hanged straight, my cause was never heard,
Such was my chance and well deserved woe.
For when my Lord had heard me tell the tale,
How I his King and mine did there assail,
His frowning face did put me in great fear,
He sighed and sob'd, and said as you shall hear.
O Caitiffe vile, O Impe of Satan's seed,
And have thou killed our Sovereign Lord and King?
His due desert deserves death indeed,
Yet what made thee to do so vile a thing?
What though he did my father causeless kill?
What though he ruled the Realm with lawless will?
Shall we therefore, with cruel bloody knife,
Deprive our Lord and King of vital life?
O wicked deed, may subjects false surmise,
With murdering minds their Governor resist?
That may not be: for Tully wondrous wise,
Plato, in whom true knowledge does consist,
They both agreed that no man ought to kill
A Tyrant, though he has him at this will.
Yet thou (thou wretch) this bloody deed have done,
The like was never seen under the Sun.
When God will plague the people for their sin,
Them then to scourge he does a Tyrant send:
We should therefore that subjects be, begin
With earnest mind our former saults t'amend:
Which if we do, it is to great avail,
Man's force is fond, fighting cannot prcuaile.
And he who does resist the Magistrate,
Resists God, repenting all too late.
If subjects be by perverse Prince oppressed,
They then must pray that God the change may make:
Which God no doubt rebellion does detest,
No subject may his sword or armor take
Against his Prince, whom God has placed there.
Yet has this wretch all void of subjects fear,
Destroyed a King whom God did thrust from throne:
Alas poor King, thy death I do bemone.
But he who has thy lingering life destroi'd,
Shall be destroi'd, and find it passing plain,
That no man may a Princes life annoy.
Although the Prince desiers to be slain,
Yet subjects must from sheading blood refrain.
From which, seeing that this wretch could not abstain,
Let him be hanged as I before decreed,
A just reward for his so vile a deed.
Then I forthwith to end my life was led,
I hopte to have preferment for my deed,
I was preferred, and hanged all save the head:
Did ever man the like example read?
Not one I think: therefore good Memory,
In register inrole thou this for me,
That they who live and read the fall I felt,
May find how fate most strangely with me dealt.
Yet my desert no doubt did death deserve,
Though hatred did not make me kill my King,
Yet lucre leaud did force my feet to swerue,
That hateful hap, me to this bale did bring.
Let them then learn that heedlesse live by hope,
Her hateful hests will bring them to the rope:
And happy he, who void of hope can lead
A quiet life, all void of Fortunes dread.
Perillus he who made the Bull of brass,
Like him I hopte to have some great reward,
But he in brazen belly broyled was,
And to a skarfe of hemp I was preferred.
So they that mean by others harms to rise,
Their dying day shall end with doleful cries.
And here I end, approving that most true,
From wicked works no goodness can ensue.
Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW LADY EBB DID FLEA HER NOSE AND UPPER lip away, to save her Virginity,
Anno Dom. 870.
DO nothing muse at my deformed face,
For Nature it in perfect mould did make:
And when your wits have weighed well the case,
You will commend me much for virtues sake.
With these my hands which from my face did take
Mine ouer-lippe, and eke my seemly nose,
So to avoid the rage of all my foes.
For I by birth a Princes daughter borne,
An Abbiesse by my profession,
Of which estate I never thought it scorn,
It greatly did delight me to be one,
Which might erect divine religion.
At Collingam I took this charge in hand,
And fifty more of chaste Dianaes band.
All Ladies borne by birth of high degree,
Which there did vow with me their lives to lead,
And to avoid carnal fragilitie,
We all did vow as you right well may read,
With single lives to live in fear and dread
Of God our Lord, so to refrain the vice
Of fleshly lust, which does to sin entice.
Then did the Danes the Saxon state invade,
And they who did the Britain state destroy,
To sue for grace were glad and well apaid,
So strangely did the Danes us then annoy,
That Saxons like the men of broyling Troy,
Amazed, they gazed, not knowing what was best,
So straightly were the Saxons then distressed.
These dreadful Danes they had no fear of God,
But savage, they did make their lust a law,
Whom God did send for a revenging rod,
To make us Saxons live in fear and awe
Of him, who did from servile bondage draw
Us out, and made us live at liberty,
When as we served with cruel slavery.
Not much unlike the murmuring Israelites,
Sometime we served our Lord with fear and dread,
In trouble we imploi'd our whole delights,
To fast and pray: but when we quiet were,
We restless led our lives, all void of care,
Forgetting him who did in each distress,
With helping hand us bless with good success.
See here the fruit of health and good success,
It makes man both proud and insolent:
In health we hate the God who has us blessed,
Trouble does make us mortal men repent
Our former faults: in sickness we be bent
To fast and pray, and in adversity,
To pray to God, is man's felicity.
And for this fault abusing this our bless,
The Danes with ruth our Realm did ouerrunne,
Their wrath inwrapt us all in wretchedness,
There was no sin from which those men did shun.
By them the Commonweal was quite undone.
They did destroy the state of every town,
They Churches burnt, they plucked the Abbeys down.
Yet not content, us Nuns they did annoy,
O cruel deed, our belts they did unbind,
With rapine they did ravish and destroy,
Deflowring all that ever they could find.
I seeing then what sorrow was assigned
To me and mine, my vowed virgins I
Did call, then thus I spoke with weeping eye.
Alas alas my loving Ladies all,
These hard mishaps do press us too too near:
What shall we do, how may we escape the thrall
Which has destroyed the Nunries every where?
Alas, my feeble flesh does quake for fear:
Alas, how shall we escape their cruelties,
Which thus be plaste amidst extremities?
For if we do their hateful hests deny,
Then dreadful death shall presently ensue:
And if we grant unto their villainy,
Our sinful souls in hell that deed shall rue.
Believe me then my Ladies, this is true,
Much better 'twere for us to die with fame,
Then long to live, with everlasting shame.
And for because the faces form does move
With beauties beams and comely countenance,
The mind of man to lust and lawless love,
I have devised, my honor to advance,
With face deformed to try my hard mischance:
For these my hands from this my face shall rip
Even with this knife, my nose and ouerlip.
They which will fly reproachful infamy,
To do the like will them beseem the best,
You shall preserve your vowed virginity
Thereby, and live perhaps with quiet rest.
My daughters dear, give ear unto my hest.
Wherewith, with Rasors sharp I first, then they,
Each one her nose, and lip did flea away.
Whilst thus we lived deformed to outward show,
Yet vessels garnisht gay before Gods sight,
The Danes did us invade, who straight did know
Our feate, them to defeat of their delight:
For which they wrackt on us their wicked spite.
With fiery flames they burnt our Nunnerie,
And us therein: O wretched cruelty!
The ear of man the like has never heard,
No pen, nor tongue the like has ever told,
Had ever man a heart that was so hard,
That with his iron breast durst be so bold,
To do the like against the Femine kind?
Not one in faith that ever I could hear,
But these all void of mercy, love, and fear.
Thus we content to leave this present life,
In hope to have hereafters better bless,
Were brent and broild, and so did stint the strife
Which might have made us live in wretchedness:
We gainde thereby a heavenly happiness.
Which happiness they doubtless shall obtain,
Which do from sin and wickedness abstain.
Thomas Blener Hasset
HOW KING EGELRED FOR HIS WICKEDNESS WAS diversely distressed by the Danes, and
lastly died for sorrow, Anno Dom. 1016.
THe mind and not the Man does make or mar,
For as the stearne does guide the Argocy:
So by their minds all men they guided are.
From out the mind proceeds fantasy,
All outward acts, virtue or vanity,
Not from the man, but from the mind proceed:
The mind does make the man to do each deed.
For Phalaris with beastly bloody mind,
And Nero did in murder much delight,
To mercy Antoninus was inclined,
Midas for gold extended all his might.
For worldly pomp how did Pompeius fight?
The mounting mind of Alexander, made
Him win the world, his fame can never fade.
How did the mind move Calicratides,
Xerxes, Cyrus, and Argantonius?
Philip of Macedon, Theramines,
Ajax, Jason, and Aurelianus,
Achilles, and the old king Priamus,
Hector, and Hercules, with false Sino,
Their minds did make them weaue the web of woe.
The twig does bend as Boreas blasts do blow,
So man does walk even as his mind does move:
Then happy he who has a mind to know
Such things as be the best for his behoue:
No doubt the mind which virtuous acts does love,
Does make a man even Caesar to surpass
For noble deeds, who Prince of prowess was.
But he who has his mind to mischief bent,
All his delight from virtue does decline,
Like me too late he shall his faults repent,
His sinful soul shall feel the fall in fine
That I have felt: which makes me to repine
Against my mind: for Nature did her part,
My mind inclined to ill, did spoil my heart.
What though I were of comely personage?
Jointly my ioints were ioin'd with perfect shape,
Adorned eke with so sweet a visage,
That never yet from Natures hands did escape
A work ymade of such a perfect shape:
But what of that? these gifts for want of grace,
Deformed quite the feature of my face.
For why, my mind to ruthful ruin bent,
I did delight in loathsome lechery:
I never did my odious deeds repent,
In drunkenness, in extreme cruelty,
I did delight in all impiety.
As for delight in princely exercise,
The feats of arms I did them most despise.
By means whereof my subjects did me hate,
And foreign foes, to burn my Realm were bold:
With war the Danes did alter straight the state.
First Fortune did my commonweal unfold,
Then pestilence did make my courage cold:
And last of all, my foes the dreadful Danes
Did make me pay them tribute for their pains.
Even now the Realm of England did decay:
For when the Danes their tribute had consumed,
Forthwith they made us greater sums to pay.
From ten to fifteen thousand they presumed
Of pounds to make us pay: so I redeemed
With money bags my careful commonwealth,
The only means reserved for my health.
When thus the want of courage on my part
Had given my foes so sure a footing here,
And when disease with her destroying dart
Had wipte away my subjects every where:
Even then too late my wisemen did appear,
Whom heretofore I always did detest
Their counsel grave, at last they thus expressed.
O Egelred the fruit of fearfulness,
Of riot thou the right reward do reap:
But if thou will avoid this wretchedness,
Be wise, and look about before you leap.
Of hateful haps you see a hideous heap
Before your face, therefore in time give ear,
And wisely weigh the words which thou shall hear.
That noble Duke Richard of Normandy,
A Sister has, whom thee we wish to wed,
By means whereof from this captivity
We may be brought, and that without bloodshed.
For why these Danes these Normans so do dread,
That if from thence an aid we can procure,
Thy foes no doubt can never long endure.
The maid she may a Princes fancy please,
Her brother is a man of great renown:
This way O King may make thy subjects ease,
It may restore the freedom of thy Crown:
This only way will bring thy fomen down.
If thou thy Crown and commonweal do love,
Do thou the thing so much for thy behoue.
So by their means I married the maid,
She Emma hight, the flower of Normandy,
Of whom I was so glad and well apaid,
That all the world with my prosperity
Could not compare: and in that iollitie
I did devise by trains of secret treason,
To bring the Danes to death, in a good season.
I did a feast through all my Realm proclaim,
At which both Danes and Englishmen did meet,
Then secretly my friends and I did frame,
That Englishmen the Danes should friendly greet,
And at the feast that they should do their feate.
And that they might the better work their will,
They thus were plast according unto skill.
Two before one, and three before five,
Here two, and there two, and four then beliue:
Here one, and there one, and three at a cast,
Then one, and twice two, and one at the last.
They mingled thus, the watch word wisely given,
And Englishmen with weapons well bestead,
The Danes amidst their cups were shaven and shriuen:
Five hundred thousand in one day were dead.
Now note the end of blood so heastly shead:
For Swane the king of Denmark did arrive,
He for revenge did me to Richard drive.
Mark here how lawless polices prevail,
Their good success do promise present pain.
What? May man's vain devices ought avail?
Dishonest deeds no honor can obtain,
Al murdering Massacres be vile and vain,
Such subtle slights have never good success;
The proof whereof with pain I here express:
For Swane with sword and fire did here destroy,
Both man and beast, and every earthly thing,
He did that noble London much annoy,
He won the Realm and was the English king.
When tract of time him to his bear did bring,
Canutus then his son did him succeed,
Whom to displace I did dispatch with speed.
My brother Richard Duke of Normandy,
Of Normans gave to me a goodly band,
By help of whom Canutus forced to flee,
I got again the kingdom of England,
But out (alas) what thing may firmly stand,
Whose underprop is of so little might?
That want of strength does let things drop downright.
Canutus did from Denmark now return,
The wrathful wight appointed passing strong,
My subjects slew, my Cities he did burn;
Which when I heard I lived not very long,
My fainting heart was thronged with a throng
Of cares, which broke it in my fearful breast,
And so at last death brought my bones to rest.
Twice ten and eight I ran my ruthful race,
And then in Paul's my cursed corpse was laid,
Canutus did my commonweal deface,
The Danes were kings, my kingdom was decaid,
This world is frail, and every thing must fade,
But always that which wants government,
That first does feel the force of dangers dent.
Thomas Blener Hasset
HOW EDRICVS EARL OF MERCIA, DESTROYED THE VALIANT KING EDMUND IRON side, in
hope of advancement, and how he was rewarded, Anno Dom. 1018.
YOu hellish hags of Limbo Lake below,
Which daily do my cursed corpse torment,
Come forth, come forth, come forth, (I say) and show
How I on earth my dismal days have spent.
And will you not you wretched wights assent
To help me here to tell that drierie tale,
Which may amongst men living much prevail?
O cursed ghost condemned to endless thrall,
Since they refuse to aid thee in this need,
Do thou declare and tell the truth af all,
That men alive my wretched works may read,
And see the fruit of subtle Satan's seed,
Avoiding vice, and fancies fond delight,
Note well my tale, the truth I shall recite.
When Etheldred had given Canutus place,
Edmund his son surnamed Ironside,
Devising how he might his foe deface,
By wrath of war the cause they did decide:
And in the end the Realm they did divide.
Edmund had half, Canutus had the rest,
Then they with peace and quietness were blessed.
O blind belief, O hope of higher hope,
Why did you move my mind to meditate,
How I in woe king Edmund might in wrap,
And how I might depresse my kings estate?
Thou blind belief, thou breeder of debate,
I wanting grace did let thee move my mind,
Causeless to kill a courteous king, and kind,
He being killed, I to Canutus went
To whom I said, See here a faithful friend,
I for thy love with bloody blade have hent,
And brought my King to his untimely end:
Thou by that means shall rule thy realm with rest,
My friendly ^ist with happy good success,
Has thee inricht with bliss and happiness.
Have thou (quoth he) destroyed thy sovereign King?
Thou faithless sawning friend, for love of me?
Thou verlet vile, and could thou do the thing
The which might more a bridge my liberty?
O heinous act! O bloody cruelty
But since that love did move thee do that deed,
Thou for thy pains shall be preferred with speed.
Wherewith in haste he to the hangman said,
Let this man's head the highest place obtain
On London walls: wherewith I never staid,
But on a block my neck was cut in twain,
In all men's sight, my head did long remain.
See here what wit the grape of hope does yield,
See on what sand such busy brains do build.
O hateful thing that fancies fond delight,
The sense of mortal man should senseless make:
When vices vaunts with virtues deeds dare fight,
Then does the soul the happy heavens forsake:
Then man makes haste to Plutoes loathsome lake.
Why should man love that sugared sour sweet,
Which wisedoms lore to loathe has thought most meet?
Thomas Blener Hasset.
HOW KING HAROLD REIGNING BUT NINE MONTHS, had continual war with the
Danes, with the Norway King, with his brother TOSTIVS, and was at last slain
in battle by William the Conqueror, An. Dom. 1095.
WOuld he have war, and we to war proclaim?
O Bastand Duke, and do thou dare to fight?
My Noble men, come forth, and purchase fame.
Ciue me my sword, let me defend my right.
Step forth with speed my Martial men of might:
With Bows and Bills, let us their course restrain:
And teach them that their vanting vows be vain.
But that we may with wisdom wisely work,
It us behoues in Normandy to fight
With him, and not to let his soldiers lurk
Here in my Realm, we shall thereby atchiue
No noble act, though hence we him do drive.
But if we deal with him in Normandy,
We shall receive renown and victory.
It is the best with foreign foes to fight
Abroad, as did the haughty Hannibal,
And not at home to feel their hateful spite.
Of all the rest it is the greatest thrall,
That foes arrived should spoil our subjects all:
And for a truth this always has been found,
He speedeth best which fights on foreign ground.
My men of war were mustred out of hand,
But all my haste was then of none avail:
My brother Tostius with his rebel band,
In every place my subjects did assail,
And every where did cause their hearts to quail.
Whose wretched state from farther spoil to shield,
I by my power did force him fly the field.
He fled to Norway whence a cloud did rise
That did obscure the shine of my content,
When lo the Norman Duke did then devise,
If I to yield my Scepter would assent,
For which betwixt us to and fro there went
Despightfull letters, which I will recite,
Wherein he claims, and I defend my right.
WILLIAM DVKE OF NORMANDY, AND RIGHT heir to the English Crown, to Harold
the Usurper.
THough birthright cannot cause thee yield to me my Crown,
Yet have thou some respect of honor and renown,
For thou by oath did swear to yield to me my right,
When as I thee preferred, and stal'd thee there by might.
Mine uncle Edward he, thy fathers faithful friend
Gave me his Crown, and thou thereto did condescend,
Yet now thou would feign defeat me of my right,
And prove thy self forsworn of former promise plight.
Shall Harold have his hest: shall Godwines son be guide?
Shall William want his will, and have his right denied?
Well Harold, if thou can with wars determine so,
I am content: if not, provide, I am thy foe.
My sons and all my kin shall never stint to strive,
To pluck thee from thy place, whilst one is left alive:
But if thou will bewise, to me my right resign,
And thou shall have the place belonging to thy line.
If not, with fire and sword I mean thy Realm to spoil,
I never thence will start till I have forced thy foil.
And now thou know my will, determine for the best,
Thou may have wars, and if thou will, thou may have rest.
WILLIAM Duke of Normandy.


THese letters were of little might, to make
My manly mind to grant him his request,
For which I did to Fortune me betake,
To wage new wars with him I deemed it best,
So from his fist his threatening blade to wrest.
But see the force of Fortunes changing cheer,
Another cloud before me did appear.
My brother Tostius who from me was fled,
Did now return, and brought the Norway King:
They did devise to have from me my head,
Which made me to indite another thing
Unto the Duke, then plain and true meaning.
I gave him hope of that I never meant,
These were the lines which to the Duke I sent.
HAROLD THE ENGLISH KING, TO THEE WILLIAM Duke of Normandy.
HArold the English King, thee William Duke does greet.
Thy letter being read, I have not thought it meet,
Without a Parliament to do so great a thing,
As of a foreign Duke, to make an English King:
But if my three estates will follow my advice,
Thou shall receive the Crown, and bear away the price.
Therefore delay a time, thou shortly shall receive
With full consent the thing, which now thou seek'st to have.
HAROLD.


I Armed in haste all danger to avoid,
For why, I heard my brother Tostius train,
Two of my Earls had in the North destroyed,
And many a thousand men he there had slain:
But when we met, his triumph was in vain.
For I and mine the Norway King there kilte,
And I my self my brothers blood there spilte.
Now when the Duke my friendly lines had read,
And heard how I my men did muster new,
There lies a Snake within this green grass bed,
Quoth he, therefore come forth my warlike crew,
We will not stay to see what shall ensue.
By long delays, from foreign coasts he may
Procure an aid, to scourge us with decay.
But when he heard with whom I had to deal,
Well done (quoth he) let him go beat the bush,
I and my men to the lurch line will steal,
And pluck the Net even at the present push,
And one of them we with decay will crush.
For he who does the victor there remain,
Shall never rest, till he has dealt with twain.
So I in vain who had the victory,
Within few days was forced again to fight,
My strength half spoiled, my wounded men were weary,
His camp was comne unawares within my sight,
There was no hope to flee by day nor night.
I Harold then, a Harauld sent in haste,
To know the plot where he his camp had plaste.
He sent me word, my ifs and ands were vain,
And that he knew the drifts of my delay,
For which he said he would yet once again
Make trial, who should bear the crown away.
If I would yield, he said his men should stay,
If not, he then was present presently,
To try the cause by Mars his cruelty.
Which when I heard, and saw him march amain,
His Trumpets did defy me to my face,
In haste I did appoint my very train,
And souldier-like I all my men did place,
I never su'd, nor prayed, nor gapte for grace.
For having plaste my men in battellray,
I with loud voice to them these words did say.
My mates, in arms see here the last assault,
Win now the field, and be you ever blessed.
This Bastard base borne Duke, shall he exalt
Himself so high? give ear unto my hest,
This day no doubt we shall have quiet rest:
For good success shall set us free from fear,
Or hateful hap shall bring us to our bear.
Even here at hand his power does appear,
March forth my men, we must no longer stay:
Let every man abandon fainting fear,
And I as guide will lead you on your way.
Even I my self the foremost in the fray,
Will teach you how you shall abate his pride.
Fight fight my men, your King shall be your guide.
His Cros-bow men my Archers did assail
With three to one, yet were they all too weak:
And when his forlorn hope could not prevail,
Them to assist his Horsemen out did break,
Three troops I sent on them the wrath to wreake,
And by and by the battles both did join,
With many a thrust, and many a bloody foine.
Of three maine battles he his army made,
I had but one, and one did deal with three:
Of which the first by me were quite dismaide,
The other two they did discomfort me,
Not yielding, but in yielding blows we be
(With loss of life) constrained at last to yield
The crown, the kingdom, and the foughten field.
Note now the lot which on my limbs did light,
Nine months no more, I wore the English Crown,
In every month I in the field did fight,
In every fight, I won a fresh renown,
Yet at the last my strength was beaten down,
And here before you, now I do protest,
I never had one day of quiet rest.
To the Reader.
Having hitherto continued the story (gentle Reader) from the first entrance
of Brute into this Island, with the falls of such Princes, as were never before
this time in one volume comprised, I now proceed with the rest, which take
their beginning from the Conquest, whose penmen being many and diverse, all
diversely affected in the method of this their Mirror, I purpose only to follow
the intended scope of that most honorable personage, who, by how much he did
surpass the rest in the eminence of his noble condition, by so much he has
exceeded them all in the excellency of his heroical style, which with a
golden pen he has limmed out to posterity in that worthy object of his mind,
the Tragedy of the Duke of Buckingham, and in his preface then entitled
Master Sackuils induction. This worthy President of learning, intending to
perfect all this story himself from the Conquest, being called to a more
serious expense of his time in the great State-affaires of his most royal
Lady and Sovereign, left the dispose thereof to M. Baldwine, M. Ferrers and
others, the composers of these Tragedies, who continuing their method which
was by way of dialogue or interlocution betwixt every Tragedy, gave it only
place before the Duke of Buckinghams complaint, which order I since having
altered, have placed the Induction in the beginning, with every Tragedy
following according to succession and the just computation of time, which
before was not observed; and lest any one think me envious of others deserts,
I have subscribed the names of all such as I could hear of, under such
Tragedies as each one particularly has written; which at the request of the
Printer, I have briefly perused as the former. In which (friendly Reader) if I
have done amiss, I crave pardon for my oversight, hoping if pains will in
stead of penance pacify thee, to yield thee satisfaction and content in my
additions following, to which I refer thee.

R. N.

Mr. SACKVILS INDVCTION.
THe wrathful winter hastening on apace,
With blustering blasts had all ybard the treene,
And old Saturnus with his frosty face
With chilling cold had pearst the tender green:
The mantles rent, wherein enwrapped been
The gladsome groves that now lay overthrown,
The tapets torn, and every tree down blown.
The soil that erst so seemly was to seen,
Was all despoyled of her beauties hew,
And soote fresh flowers (wherewith the summers Queen
Had clad the earth) now Boreas blasts down blew.
And small fowls flocking, in their fong did rue
The winters wrath, wherewith each thing defaste,
In woeful wise bewaild the summer past.
Hawthorne had lost his motley livery,
The naked twigs were shiuering all for cold;
And dropping down the tears abundantly,
Each thing (me thought) with weeping eye me told
The cruel season, bidding me with hold
My self within, for I was gotten out
Into the fields, whereas I walked about.
When lo the night with mistie mantels spread
Began dark the day, and dim the azure skies,
And Venus in her message Hermes sped
To bloody Mars, to will him not to rise,
While she her self approcht in speedy wise:
And Virgo hiding her disdainful breast,
With Thetis now had laid her down to rest.
Whiles Scorpio dreading Sagittarius dart,
Whose bow pressed bent in fight, the string had slipped,
Down slide into the Ocean flood apart.
The Bear that in the Irish seas had dipped
His grizly feet, with speed from thence he whipped:
For Thetis hasting from the Virgins bed,
Pursude the Bear, that ere she came was fled.
And Phaeton now near reaching to his race
With glistring beams, gold streaming where they bent,
Was pressed to enter in his resting place.
Erythius that in the cart first went,
Had even now attained his iourneys stent:
And fast declining hid away his head,
While Titan coucht him in his purple bed.
And pale-faced Cinthea with her borrowed light,
Beginning to supply her brothers place,
Was past the Noonesteed six degrees in sight,
When sparkling stars amid the heavens face,
With twinkling light shone on the earth apace,
That while they brought about the nights black chare,
The dark had dimmed the day ere I was ware.
And sorrowing I to see the summer flowers,
The lively green, the lusty lease forlorn:
The sturdie trees so shattred with the showers,
The fields so fade that florisht so beforne,
It taught me well all earthly things be borne
To dye the death, for naught long time may last,
The summers beauty yields to winters blast.
Then looking upward to the heavens leames
With nights bright stars thick powdered every where,
Which erst so glistred with the golden streams,
That cheerful Phoebus spread down from his sphere,
Beholding dark oppressing day so near.
The sudden sight reduced to my mind,
The sundry changes that in earth we find.
That musing on this worldly wealth in thought,
Which coms and goes more faster then we see
The flickering flame that with the fire is wrought,
My busy mind presented unto me
Such fall of Peers as in the realm had be:
That often I wished some would their woes descriue,
To warn the rest whom Fortune left alive.
And strait forth stalking with redoubled pace,
For that I saw the night drew on so fast,
In black all clad there fell before my face
A piteous wight, whom woe had all forewast,
Forth on her eyes the crystal tears out brast,
And sighing sore her hands she wrung and fold,
Tare all her hair that ruth was to behold.
Her body small forwithered and forespent,
As is the stalk that summers drought oppressed,
Her wealked face with woeful tears be sprent,
Her color pale (at it seemed her best)
In woe and plaint reposed was her rest.
And as the stone that drops of water wears,
So dented were her cheeks with fall of tears.
Her eyes full swollen with flowing streams aflote,
Where with her looks thrown up full piteously,
Her forcelesse hands together often she smote,
With doleful shrikes, that eckoed in the sky:
Whose plaint such sighs did straight accompany,
That in my doom was never man did see
A wight but half so woe begone as she.
I stood aghast, beholding all her plight,
Tweene dread and dolor so distraind in heart,
That while my hairs vpstarted with the sight,
The tears outstreamd for sorrow of her smart:
But when I saw no end that could appart
The deadly dole, which she so sore did make,
With doleful voice then thus to her I spoke:
Unwrap thy woes what ever wight thou be,
And stint in time to spill thy self with plaint,
Tell what thou art, and whence, for well I see
Thou can not dure with sorrow thus attaint.
And with that word of sorrow all forfaint,
She looked up, and prostrate as she lay,
With piteous sound, lo thus she began to say:
Alas, I wretch whom thus thou see distrain'd
With wasting woes that never shall aslake,
Sorrow I am, in endless torments pained
Among the Furies in the infernal lake:
Where Pluto God of Hell so grizly black
Does hold his throne, and Laetheus deadly taste
Does reave remembrance of each thing forepast:
Whence come I am, the drery destiny
And lucklesse lot for to bemone of those,
Whom Fortune in this maze of misery,
Of wretched chance, most woeful Mirors chose,
That when thou see how lightly they did lose
Their pomp, their power, and that they thought most sure,
Thou may soon deem no earthly joy may dure.
Whose rufull voice no sooner had out-brayed
Those woeful words, wherewith she sorrowed so:
But out alas, she shright and never stayed,
Fell down, and all to dashed her self for woe.
The cold pale dread my limbs began ouergo;
And I so sorrowed at her sorrows eft,
That what with grief and fear my wits were reft.
I stretched my self, and straight my heart reuiues,
That dread and dolor erst did so appale,
Like him that with the seruent fever strives,
When sickness seeks his castle health to scale,
With gathred sprites so forced I fear t'auale.
And rearing her with anguish all foredone,
My sprits returned, and then I thus begone:
Sorrow, alas since Sorrow is thy name,
And that to thee this drere does well pertaiue,
In vain it were to seek to cease the same:
But as a man himself with sorrow slain,
So I alas do comfort thee in pain,
That here in sorrow art foresunke so deep,
That at thy sight I can but sigh and weep.
I had no sooner spoken of a stike,
But that the storm so rumbled in her breast,
As Eolus could never rore the like,
And showers down rained from her eyes so fast,
That all bedreint the place, till at the last
Well eased they the dolor of her mind,
As rage of rain does swage the stormy wind.
For forth she pased in her fearful tale:
Come, come (quoth she) and see what I shall show:
Come hear the plaining, and the bitter bale
Of worthy men, by Fortunes overthrow:
Come thou and see them rewing all in row.
They were but shades that erst in mind thou rold:
Come, come with me, thine eyes shall them behold.
What could these words but make me more aghast,
To hear her tell whereon I mused while ere?
So was I mazed therewith: till at the last,
Musing upon her words, and what they were,
All suddenly well lessoned was my fear:
For to my mind returned how she teld
Both what she was, and where her wun she held.
Whereby I knew that she a Goddess was,
And therewithal resorted to my mind
My thought, that late presented me the glass
Of brittle state, of cares that here we find,
Of thousand woes to silly men assignd:
And how she now bid me come and behold,
To see with eye that erst in thought I told.
Flat down I fell, and with all reverence
Adored her, perceiving now that she
A Goddess sent by godly providence,
In earthly shape thus showed her self to me,
To wail and rue this worlds uncertainty:
And while I honored thus her Godheads might,
With plaining voice these words to me she shright:
I shall thee guide first to the griesly lake,
And thence unto the blisfull place of rest,
Where thou shall see and hear the plaint they make,
That whilome here bare swinge among the best.
This shall thou see, but great is the unrest
That thou must bide, before thou can attain
Unto the dreadful place where these remain.
And with these words as I vpraised stood,
And began to follow her that straight forth paste,
Ere I was ware, into a desert wood
We now were come: where hand in hand imbraste
She led the way, and through the thick so traste,
As but I had been guided by her might,
It was no way for any mortal wight.
But lo, while thus amid the desert dark,
We passed on with steps and pace unmeet,
A rumbling rore confused with howl and bark
Of Dogs, shook all the ground under our feet,
And struck the din within our ears so deep,
As half distraught unto the ground I fell,
Besought return, and not to visit hell.
But she forthwith vplifting me a pace
Removed my dread, and with a steadfast mind,
Bad me come on, for here was now the place,
The place where we our travails end should find.
Wherewith I rose, and to the place assingde
Astond I stalkt, when straight we approached near
The dreadful place, that you will dread to hear:
And hideous hole all vaste, withouten shape,
Of endless depth, orewhelm'd with ragged stone,
With ougly mouth, and griesly jaws does gape,
And to our sight confounds it self in one.
Here entered we, and yeeding forth, anon
A dreadful lothly lake we might discern
As black as pitch, that cleped is Auerne.
A deadly gulf where naught but rubbish grows,
With foul black swelth in thickened lumps that lies,
Which up in the air such stinking vapors throws
That over there, may fly no foul but dies,
Choakt with the noisome lauours that arise.
Hither we come, whence forth we still did pace,
In dreadful fear amid the dreadful place:
And first within the porch and jaws of hell
Sat deep Remorse of conscience, all besprent
With tears: and to her self often would she tell
Her wretchedness, and cursing never stent
To sob and sigh: but ever thus lament,
With thoughtfull care, as she that all in vain
Would wear and waste continually in pain.
Her eyes unsteadfast rolling here and there,
Whurl'd on each place, as place that vengeance brought,
So was her mind continually in fear,
Tossed and tormented with tedious thought
Of those detested crimes which she had wrought:
With dreadful cheer and looks thrown to the sky,
Wishing for death, and yet she could not die.
Next saw we Dread, all trembling how he shook,
With foot uncertain proffered here and there,
Benumbed of speech, and with a ghastly look
Searched every place all pale and dead for fear,
His cap borne up with staring of his hear,
Soyn'd and amazed at his own shade for dreed,
And fearing greater dangers then was need.
And next within the entry of this lake
Sat fell Revenge gnashing her teeth for ire,
Devising means how she may vengeance take,
Never in rest till she have her desire:
But frets within so farforth with the fire
Of wreaking flames, that now determines she
To die by death, or veng'd by death to be.
When fell Revenge with bloody foul pretense
Had showed her self as next in order set,
With trembling limbs we softly parted thence,
Till in our eyes another sight we met:
When from my heart a sigh forthwith I fet,
Ruing alas upon the woeful plight
Of Misery, that next appeared in sight.
His face was lean, and somedeale pined away,
And eke his hands consumed to the bone,
But what his body was I cannot say,
For on his carkas raiment had he none,
Save clouts and patches pieced one by one,
With staff in hand, and scrip on shoulder cast,
His chief defense against the winters blast.
His food for most, was wild fruits of the tree,
Unless sometime some crumbs fell to his share,
Which in his wallet long God workepthe,
As one the which full daintily would fair.
His drink the running stream: his cup the bare
Of his palm closde, his bed the hard cold ground.
To this poor life was Misery ybound.
Whose wretched state when we had well beheld,
With tender ruth on him and on his feeres,
In thoughtfull cares, forth then our pace we held:
And by and by, another shape appeeres
Of greedy Care, still brushing up the breers,
His knuckles knob'd, his flesh deep dented in,
With tawed hands, and hard ytanned skin.
The morrow gray no sooner has begun
To spread his light even peeping in our eyes,
When he is up and to his work yrun.
But let the nights black mistie mantles rise,
And with foul dark never so much disguise
The fair bright day, yet cease he no while,
But has his candles to prolong his toil.
By him lay heavy Sleep cousin of Death
Flat on the ground, and still as any stone,
A very corpse, save yielding forth a breath.
Small keep took he whom Fortune frowned on,
Or whom she lifted up into the throne
Of high renown, but as a living death,
So dead alive, of life he drew the breath.
The bodies rest, the quiet of the heart,
The travails ease, the still nights feere was he.
And of our life in earth the better part,
Reuer of sight, and yet in whom we see
Things often that tide, and often that never be.
Without respect esteeming equally
King Croesus pomp, and Irus poverty.
And next in order sad Old Age we found,
His beard all hoare, his eyes hollow and blind,
With drouping cheer still poring on the ground,
As on the place where nature him assigned
To rest, when that the sisters had vntwin'd
His vital thread, and ended with their knife
The fleeting course of fast declining life.
There heard we him with broke and hollow plaint
Rue with himself his end approaching fast,
And all for naught his wretched mind torment,
With sweet remembrance of his pleasures past,
And fresh delites of lusty youth forewast.
Recounting which, how would he sob and shreek?
And to be young again of Jove beseeke.
But and the cruel fates so fixed be,
That time forepast cannot return again,
This one request of Jove yet prayed he:
That in such withred plight, and wretched pain,
As eld (accompanied with loathsome train)
Had brought on him, all were it woe and grief,
He might a while yet linger forth his life,
And not so soon descend into the pit:
Where Death, when he the mortal corpse has slain,
With wretchlesse hand in grave does cover it,
Thereafter never to enjoy again
The gladsome light, but in the ground ylaine,
In depth of darkness waste and wear to naught,
As he had nere into the world been brought.
But who had seen him, sobbing how he stood
Unto himself, and how he would bemone
His youth forepast, as though it wrought him good
To talk of youth, all were his youth foregone,
He would have musde and maruail'd much whereon
This wretched Age should life desire so feign.
And knows full well life does but length his pain.
Crookebackt he was, tooth shaken, and blere eyde,
Went on three feet, and sometime crept on four,
With old lame bones, that ratled by his side,
His scalpe all pil'd, and he with eld forlore:
His withred fist still knocking at Deaths door,
Fumbling and driueling as he draws his breath,
For brief, the shape and messenger of Death.
And fast by him pale Malady was plaste,
Sore sick in bed, her color all foregone,
Bereft of stomach, savor, and of taste,
Ne could she brook no meat but broths alone.
Her breath corrupt, her keepers every one
Abhorring her, her sickness past recure,
Detesting physic, and all physickes cure.
But oh the doleful sight that then we see,
We turned our look, and on the other side
A griesly shape of Famine might we see,
With greedy looks, and gaping mouth that cried,
And roared for meat as she should there have died,
Her body thin, and bare as any bone,
Whereto was left naught but the case alone.
And that alas was gnawne on every where,
All full of holes, that I ne might refrain
From tears, to see how she her arms could tear,
And with her teeth gnash on the bones in vain:
When all for naught she feign would so sustain
Her staruen corpse, that rather seemed a shade,
Then any substance of a creature made.
Great was her force, whom stonewall could not stay,
Her tearing nails snatching at all she saw:
With gaping jaws, that by no means ymay
Be satisfied from hunger of her mawe,
But eats her self as she that has no law:
Gnawing, alas, her carcass all in vain,
Where you may count each sinew, bone, and vain.
On her while we thus firmly fixed our eyes,
That bled for ruth of such a driety sight,
Lo suddenly she shrinkt in so huge wise,
As made hell gates to shiuer with the might.
Wherewith a dart we saw how it did light
Right on her breast, and therewithal pale Death
Enthrilling it to reaue her of her breath.
And by and by a dumb dead corpse we saw,
Heavy and cold, the shape of death aright,
That dants all earthly creatures to his law:
Against whose force in vain it is to fight.
Ne Peers, ne Princes, nor no mortal wight,
No Town, ne Realms, Cities, ne strongest Tower,
But all perforce must yield unto his power.
His dart anon out of the corpse he took,
And in his hand (a dreadful sight to see)
With great triumph eftsoons the same he shook,
That most of all my fears affrayed me.
His body dight with naught but bones perdie,
The naked shape of man there saw I plain,
All save the flesh, the sinow, and the vain.
Lastly stood War in glittering arms yelad,
With visage grim, stern looks, and blackely hewed,
In his right hand a naked sword he had,
That to the hilts was all with blood embrued:
And in his left (that King and kingdoms rued)
Famine and fire he held, and therewithal
He raced towns, and threw down towers and all.
Cities he sacked, and Realms that whilome flowred
In honor, glory, and rule above the best
He ouerwhelm'd, and all their fame devoured,
Consumed, destroyed, wasted and never ceast,
Till he their wealth, their name and all oppressed.
His face forehew'd with wounds, and by his side
There hung his targ, with gashes deep and wide.
In midst of which, depainted there we found
Deadly Debate, all full of snakie hear,
That with a bloody fillet was ybound,
Out breathing naught but discord every where.
And round about were portrai'd here and there
The hugie hosts, Darius and his power,
His Kings, Princes, his Peers, and all his flower;
Whom great Macedo vanquished there in sight,
With deep slaughter, despoiling all his pride,
Pierst through his Realms, and danted all his might.
Duke Hannibal beheld I there beside,
In Cannas field, victor how he did ride,
And woeful Romans that in vain withstood,
And Consul Paulus covered all in blood.
Yet saw I more the fight at Trasimene,
And Treberie field, and eke when Hannibal
And worthy Scipio, last in arms were seen
Before Carthago gate, to try for all
The worlds Empire, to whom it should befall.
There saw I Pompey, and Caesar clad in arms,
Their hosts allied and all their civil harms,
With Conquerers hands forbath'd in their own blood,
And Caesar weeping over Pompeyes head.
Yet saw I Scilla and Marius where they stood,
Their great cruelty, and the deep bloodshead
Of friends: Cyrus I saw and his host dead,
And how the Queen with great despite has flong
His head in blood of them she overcome.
Xerxes the Persian King yet saw I there,
With his huge host that drank the rivers dry,
Dismounted hills, and made the vales vprere,
His host and all yet saw I slain perdie.
Thebes I saw all rac'd how it did lie
In heaps of stones, and Tyrus put to spoil,
With walls and towers flat euened with the soil.
But Troy alas (me thought) above them all,
It made mine eyes in very tears consume:
When I beheld the woeful werd befall,
That by the wrathful will of God was come:
And Jove's unmoved sentence and foredoome
On Priam King, and on his town so bent,
I could not lin, but I must there lament.
And that the more, fith dest'ny was so stern
As force perforce, there might no force avail,
But she must fall: and by her fall we learn,
That cities, towers, wealth, world, and all shall quail.
No manhood, might, nor nothing might prevail,
All were there pressed full many a Prince and Peer,
And many a Knight that sold his death full dear.
Not worthy Hector worthiest of them all,
Her hope, her joy, his force is now for naught:
O Troy, Troy, there is no boot but bale,
The hugie horse within thy walls is brought:
Thy turrets fall, thy Knights that whilome fought
In arms amid the field, are slain in bed,
Thy gods defiled, and all thy honor dead.
The flames vprising, and cruelly they creep
From wall to roof, till all to cinders wast,
Some fire the houses where the wretches sleep,
Some rush in here, some run in there as fast.
In every where or sword or fire they taste.
The walls are torn, the towers whurl'd to the ground,
There is no mischief but may there be found.
Cassandra yet there saw I how they haled
From Pallis house, with spercled tresse undone,
Her wrists fast bound, and with Greeks rout empaled:
And Priam eke in vain how he did run
To arms, whom Pyrrhus with despite has done
To cruel death, and bathed him in the baine
Of his sons blood before the altar slain.
But how can I describe the doleful sight,
That in the shield so lively fair did shine?
Since in this world I think was never wight
Could have set forth the half, not half so fine.
I can no more but tell how there is seen
Fair Ilium fall in burning red gledes down,
And from the soil great Troy Neptunus town.
Here from when scarce I could mine eyes withdraw
That filled with tears as does the springing well,
We passed on so far forth till we saw
Rude Acheron, a loathsome lake to tell,
That boyles and bubs up swelth as black as hell,
Where grisly Charon at their fixed tide
Still ferries ghosts unto the farther side.
The aged God no sooner Sorrow spied,
But hasting straight unto the bancke apace,
With hollow call unto the rout he cried,
To swerve apart, and give the Goddess place.
Straight it was done, when to the shore we pace,
Where hand in hand as we then linked fast,
Within the boat we are together plaste.
And forth we lanch full fraughted to the brinke,
When with the unwonted weight, the rusty keele
Began to crack as if the same should sink.
We hoise up mast and sail, that in a while
We fet the shore, where scarsely we had while
For to arrive, but that we heard anon
A three sound bark confounded all in one.
We had not long forth past, but that we saw
Black Cerberus the hideous hound of hell,
With bristles reard, and with a three mouthed Iaw,
Foredinning the air with his horrible yell.
Out of the deep dark cave where he did dwell,
The Goddess straight he knew, and by and by
He peast and couched, while that we past by.
Thence come we to the horror and the hell,
The large great Kingdoms, and the dreadful reign
Of Pluto in his throne where he did dwell,
The wide waste places, and the hugie plain:
The wailings, shrikes, and sundry sorts of pain:
The sighs, the sobs, the deep and deadly groan,
Earth, air, and all resounding plaint and moan.
Thence did we pass the threefold emperie
To the utmost bounds, where Radamanthus reigns,
Where proud folk wail there woeful misery,
Where dreadful din of thousand dragging chains,
And balefull shriekes of ghosts in deadly pains
Tortured eternally are heard most brim
Through silent shades of night so dark and dim.
From hence upon our way we forward pass,
And through the groves and uncouth paths we go,
Which lead unto the Cyclops walls of brass:
And where that maine-broad flood for aye does floe,
Which parts the gladsome fields from place of woe,
Whence none shall ever pass to Elysium plain,
Or from Elysium ever turn again.
With Sorrow for my guide, as there I stood,
A troop of men the most in arms bedight,
In tumult clusterd 'bout both sides the flood:
Amongst whom, who were ordaind t'eternall night,
Or who to blissful peace and sweet delight
I wot not well, it seemed that they were all
Such as by deaths untimely stroke did fall.
Some headless were, some body, face and hands,
With shameful wounds despoiled in every part:
Some strangled, some that did in captive bands,
Some smothred, drowned, some stricken through the heart
With fatal steel, all drowned in deadly smart:
Of hastened death, with shrikes, sobs, sighs and tears,
Did tell the woes of their forepassed years.
We staid us straight, and with a rufull fear,
Beheld this heavy sight, while from mine eyes
The vapored tears down stilled here and there,
And Sorrow eke in far more woeful wise,
Took on with plaint, up heauing to the skies
Her wretched hands, that with her cry the rout
Began all in heaps to swarm us round about.
Lo here (quoth Sorrow) Princes of renown,
That whilome sat on top of Fortunes wheel,
Now laid full low, like wretches whurled down
Even with one frown, that staid but with a smile.
And now behold the thing that thou erewhile
Saw only in thought, and what thou now shall hear,
Recount the same to Kesar, King, and Peer.
Then first came Henry Duke of Buckingham,
His cloak of black all pild and quite forworne,
Wringing his hands, and Fortune often does blame,
Which of a Duke has made him now her skorne.
With ghastly looks as one in manner lorne:
Often spread his arms, stretched hands he ioines as fast
With rufull cheer, and vapored eyes vpcast.
His cloak he rent, his manly breast he beat,
His hair all torn about the place it lay,
My heart so molt to see his grief so great,
As feelingly me thought it dropped away:
His eyes they whurld about withouten stay.
With stormy sighs the place did so complain,
As if his heart at each had burst in twain.
Thrice he began to tell his doleful tale,
And thrice the sighs did swallow up his voice:
At each of which he shriked so withal,
As though the heavens riued with the noise:
Till at the last recovering his voice,
Supping the tears that all his breast beraind,
On cruel Fortune weeping thus he plaind.
FINIS.
HOW THE TWO ROgers, surnamed Mortimers, for their sundry vices, ended their
lives unfortunately, the one, An. 1329. the other, 1387.
AMong the riders of the rolling wheel
That lost their holds, Baldwine forget not me,
Whose fatal thread false Fortune needs would reele,
Ere it were twisted by the sisters three:
All folk be frail, their blisses brittle be:
For proof whereof, although none other were,
Suffice may I, Sir Roger Mortimer.
Not he that was in Edwards days the third,
Whom Fortune brought to boot and eft to bale,
With love of whom, the king so much she sturd,
That none but he was heard in any tale:
And whiles she smooth blew on this pleasant gale,
He was created Earl of March, alas,
Whence envy sprang which his destruction was.
For wealth breeds wrath, in such as wealth do want,
Pride folly breeds in such as it possess,
Among a thousand shall you find one skant,
That can in wealth his lofty heart repress,
Which in this Earl due proof did plain express:
For whereas he was somewhat haut before,
His high degree has made him now much more.
For now alone he rules as him lust,
Ne recks for read, save of king Edwards mother:
Which forced envy foulder out the rust,
That in men's hearts before did lie and smother.
The Peers, the people, the one as well as the other,
Against him made so heinous a complaint,
That for a traitor he was soon attaint.
Then all such faults as were forgot before,
They skowre afresh, and somewhat to them add:
For envy still has eloquence in store,
When Fortune bids to worse things meanly bad.
Five heinous crimes against him soon were had,
First that he caused the King to yield the Scot,
To make a peace, towns that were from him got:
And therewithal the Charter called Ragman,
That of the Scots he bribed privy gain,
That through his means sir Edward of Carnaruan
In Barkely Castle traitorously was slain:
That with his Princes mother he had lain,
And finally, with polling at his pleasure,
Had robbed the King and Commons of their treasure.
For these things lo which erst were out of mind
He was condemned, and hanged at the last,
In whom Dame Fortune fully showed her kind,
For whom she heaues she hurleth down as fast.
If men to come, would learn by other past,
My cousin then might cause them set aside
High climing, bribing, murdering, lust, and pride.
The final cause why I this process tell,
Is that I may be known from this the other,
My like in name, unlike me though he fell,
Which was I think my grandfire or his brother:
To count my kin, dame Philip was my mother,
Daughter and heir of douty Lionell,
The third King Edwards son, as stories tell.
My father hight sir Edmund Mortimer,
True Earl of March, whence I was after Earl,
By just descent these two my parents were,
Of which the one of Knighthood bare the fearle,
Of womanhood the other was the pearl:
Through their desert so called of every wight,
Till death them took, and left me in their right.
For why the attainter of the elder Roger,
(Whose shameful death I told you but oflate)
Was found to be unjust, and passed over,
Against the law, by those that bare him hate:
For where by law each one of free estate
Should personally be heard ere judgment pass,
They bard him this, where through destroid he was.
Wherefore by doom of court in Parliament,
When we had proved our Cousin ordered thus,
The King, the Lords, and Commons of assent
His lawless death unlawful did discuss:
And both to blood and good restored us.
A preside at most worthy, showed, and left,
Lords lives to save, that lawless might be reft.
While Fortune unto me her grace did deigne,
King Richards grace the second of that name,
(Whose looser life did soon abridge his reign,)
Made me his mate in earnest and in game:
The Lords themselves so well allowed the same,
That through my titles duly coming down,
I was made heir apparent to the Crown.
Who then but I was every where esteemd,
Well was the man that might with me acquaint,
Whom I allowed, as Lords the people deemd,
To whatsoever folly had me bent,
To like it well the people did assent:
To me as Prince attended great and small,
I hopte a day would come to pay for all.
But seldom joy continues trouble void,
In greatest charge cares greatest do ensue,
The most possessed are ever most annoid,
In largest seas sore tempests lightly brue,
The freshest colors soonest fade the hue,
In thickest place is made the deepest wound,
True proof whereof my self too soon have found.
For whilst fair Fortune Iuld me in her lap,
And gave me gifts more then I did require,
The subtle dame behind me set a trap,
Whereby to dash and lay all in the mire:
The Irish men against me did conspire,
My lands of Vlster from me to have reft,
Which heritage my mother had me left.
And whiles I there, to set all things in stay,
(Omit my toiles and trouble thitherward)
Among mine own with my retinue lay,
The wilder men whom I did not regard,
(And had therefore the reckles man's reward)
When least I thought, set on me in such number,
That from my corpse my life they rent asunder.
Naught might avail my courage nor my force,
Nor strength of men which were (alas) too few:
The cruel folk assaulted so my horse,
That all my helps in pieces they to hew.
Our blood distaines the ground as drops of dew,
Naught might prevail to fly nor yet to yield,
For whom they take they murder in the field.
They know no law of Arms, nor none will learn,
They make not war (as other do) a play:
The Lord, the boy, the Gallowglas, the Kerne,
Yield or not yield, whom so they take they slay.
They save no foes for ransom nor for pay:
Their chiefest boot is the adversaries head,
They end not w^^^e till the enemy be dead.
Amongst these men or rather savage beasts
I lost my life, by cruel murder slain:
And therefore Baldwine note thou well my geasts,
And warn all Princes rashness to refrain:
Bid them beware their foes when they do feign,
Nor yet presume unequally to strive:
Had I thus done, I had been left alive.
But I despised the naked Irish men,
And, for they flew, I feared them the less:
I thought one man enough to match with ten,
And through this careless unadvisedness
I was destroid, and all my men I guess,
At unawares assaulted by our fone,
Which were in number forty to us one.
See here the stay of fortunate estate,
The vain assurance of this brittle life:
For I but yong-proclamed Prince of late,
Right fortunate in children and in wife,
Lost all at once by stroke of bloody knife:
Whereby assured let men themselves assure,
That wealth and life are doubtful to endure.
FINIS.
THE FALL OF ROBERT Tresilian chief Justice of England, and other his
fellows, for misconstruing the Laws, and expounding them to serve the Princes
affections, Anno 1388.
IN the sad register of mischief and mishap,
Baldwine we beseech thee with our names to begin,
Whom unfriendly Fortune did train unto a trap,
When as we thought our state most stable to have bin.
So lightly leese they all, which all do ween to win.
Learn by us ye Lawyers and Judges of this Land,
Upright and vncorrupt in doom always to stand.
And print ye this president to remain for ever,
Enroll and record it in Tables made of Brass,
Engraue it in Marble that may be raced never,
Where Judges of the Law may see, as in a Glass,
What guerdon is for guile, and what our wages was,
Who for our Princes will, corrupt with meed and awe,
Against Justice wretchedly did wrest the sense of Law.
A change more new or strange when was there ever seen,
Then Judges from the Bench to come down to the Bar,
And Counselors that were most nigh to King and Queen
Exiled their Country, from Court and Counsel far?
But such is Fortunes play, which can both make and mar,
Exalting to most high that was before most low,
And turning tail again, the lofty down to throw.
And such as late before, could stoutly speak and plead
Both in Court and Country, careless of the trial,
As mummers mute do stand without advice or read,
All to seek of shifting, by trauerse or denial,
Which have seen the day, when, for a golden Ryall,
By finenes and cunning, could have made black seem white,
And most extorted wrong to have appeared right.
Whilst thus on bench above we had the highest place,
Our reasons were too strong, for any to confute:
But when at bar beneath, we came to plead our case,
Our wits were in the wane, our pleading very brute.
Hard it is for prisoners with Judges to dispute:
When all men against one, and none for one shall speak,
Who weenes himself most wise, may chance be too too weak.
To you therefore that sit, these few words will I say,
That no man sits so sure, but he may happily stand:
Wherefore whilst you have place, and bear the swing and sway,
By favor without force, let points of Law be skand.
Pity the poor prisoner that holds up his hand,
Ne lade him not with law, who least of law has known,
Remember ere ye die, the case may be your own.
Behold me one unfortunate amongst this flock,
Tresilian called sometime chief Justice of this Land,
A gentleman by birth, no stain was in my stock,
Locketon, Holte, Belknap; with other of my band,
Which the Law and Justice had wholly in our hand,
Under the second Richarda Prince of great state,
To whom and us also, blind Fortune gave the mate.
In all our Common Laws our skill was so profound,
Our credit and authority such and so high esteemd,
That what we did conclude, was taken for a ground,
Allowed was for Law what so to us best seemd,
Both life, death, lands, and goods, and all by us was deemd:
Whereby with easy pain, great gain we did in fet,
And every thing was fish, that came unto our net.
At Sessions and Sises, we bare the stroke and sway,
In patents and commission, of Quorum still chief:
So that to whether side soever we did way,
Were it by right or wrong, it past without repriefe.
The true man we let hang some whiles to save a thief,
Of Gold, and of Silver, our hands were never empty,
Offices, Farms, and Fees, fell to us in great plenty.
But what thing may suffice unto the greedy man?
The more he has in hold, the more he does desire:
Happy and twice happy is he, that wisely can
Content himself with that, which reason does require,
And moileth for no more then for his needful hire:
But greediness of mind does seldom keep the sise,
To whom enough and more does never well suffice.
For like as dropsy patients drink and still be dry,
Whose vnstanch'st greedy thirst no liquor can allay,
And drink they nere so much, yet thirst they by and by;
So catchers and snatchers do toil both night and day,
Not needy, but greedy, still prolling for their pray.
O endless thirst of gold, corrupter of all laws,
What mischief is on mould whereof thou art not cause?
Thou made us forget the says of our profession,
When Sergeants we were sworn to serve the common law,
Which was, that in no point we should make digression
From approved principles, in sencence nor in saw:
But we unhappy wights without all dread and awe
Of the Judge eternal, for worlds vain promotion,
More to man then God did bear our whole devotion.
The Laws we did interpret and statutes of the Land,
Not truly by the text, but newly by a gloss:
And words that were most plain, when they by us were skand,
We turned by construction to a Welchmans hose,
Whereby many a one both life and land did lose:
Yet this we made our mean to mount aloft on mules,
And serving times and turns, perverted laws and rules.
Thus climing and contending always to the top,
From high unto higher, and then to be most hie,
The honey dew of Fortune so fast on us did drop,
That of King Richards counsel we came to be most nie:
Whose favor to attain we were full fine and fly.
Always to his profit where any thing might sound,
That way (all were it wrong) the laws we did expound.
So working Law like wax, the subject was not sure
Of life, of land, nor goods, but at the Princes will,
Which caused his kingdom the shorter time to dure:
For claiming power absolute both to save and spill,
The Prince thereby presumed his people for to pill,
And set his lusts for Law, and will had reasons place,
No more but hang and draw, there was no better grace.
Thus the King outleaping the limits of his Law,
Not reigning but raging, as youth did him entice,
Wise and worthy persons from Court did daily draw,
Sage counsel set at naught, proud vanters were in price,
And roysters bare the rule, which wasted all in vice:
Of riot and excess, grew scarcity and lack,
Of lacking came taxing, and so went wealth to wrack.
The Barons of the Land not bearing this abuse,
Conspiring with the Commons assembled by assent,
And seeing neither reason nor treaty could induce
The King in any thing his rigor to relent,
Maugre his Kingly might they called a Parliament,
Frank and free for all men without check to debate
As well for weal public, as for the Princes state.
In this high assembly, great things were proponed
Touching the Princes state, his regaltie and crown,
By reason that the King (which much was to be moved)
Without regard at all of honor or renown,
Misled by ill advice, had turned all vpside down,
For surety of whose state, them thought it did behoue
His Counselors corrupt by reason to remove:
Among whom, Robert Veer, called Duke of Ireland,
With Michael Delapole of Suffolk new made Earl,
Of York also then Archbishop, dispatched out of hand,
With Brembre of London a full discourteous churl:
Some learned in the Law in exile they did hurl:
But I poor Tresilian (because I was the chief)
Was damned to the gallows most vilely as a thief.
Lo the fine of falsehood, stipend of corruption,
The fee of double fraud, the fruits it does procure:
Ye Judges upon earth, let our just punition
Teach you to shake off bribes, and keep your hands still pure.
Riches and promotion be vain things and unsure,
The favor of a Prince is an untrusty stay,
But Justice has a fee that shall remain always.
What glory can be greater before God or man,
Then by paths of Justice in judgment to proceed?
So duly and so truly the Laws for to scan,
That right may take his place without regard or meed.
Set apart all flattery and vain worldly dreed,
Set God before your eyes, the most just Judge supreme,
Remember well your reckoning at the day extreme.
Abandon all affray, be soothfast in your sawes,
Be constant and careless of mortals displeasure,
With eyes shut and hands close you should pronounce the laws.
Esteem not worldly goods, think there is a treasure
More worth then gold a thousand times in valor,
Reposed for all such as righteousness ensue,
Whereof you cannot fail, the promise made is true.
If Judges in our days would ponder well in mind
The fatal fall of us, for wresting Law and right,
Such statutes as touch life should not be thus defined.
By senses constrained, against true meaning quite,
As well they might affirm the black for to be white:
Wherefore we wish they would our act and end compare,
And weighing well the case, they will we trust beware.
G. Ferrers.
HOW SIR THOMAS OF WOODSTOCKE DVKE OF Gloucester, uncle to King Richard the
second, was unlawfully murdered, An. Dom. 1397.
WHose state stablisht is, in seeming most sure,
And so far from danger of Fortunes blasts,
As by the compass of man's conjecture,
No brazen pillar may be fixed more fast:
Yet wanting the stay of prudent forecast,
When froward Fortune list for to frown,
May in a moment turn vpside down.
In proof whereof, O Baldwine, take pain,
To hearken a while to Thomas of Woodstocke,
Address in presence his fate to complain,
In the forlorn hope of English flock:
Extract by descent from the royal stock,
Son to King Edward, third of that name,
And second to none in glory and fame.
This noble father to maintain my state,
With Buckingham Earldom did me indow,
Both Nature and Fortune to me were great,
Denying me naught which they might allow:
Their sundry graces in me did so flow,
As beauty, strength, high favor and fame,
Who may of God more wish then the same?
Brothers we were to the number of seven,
I being the sixth, and youngest but one:
A more royal race was not under heaven,
More stout or more stately of stomach and person,
Princes all peerless in each condition:
Namely Sir Edward, called the black Prince,
When had England the like before or since?
But what of all this, any man t'assure,
In state vncarefull of Fortunes variance?
Since daily and hourly we see it in ure,
That where most cause is of affiance,
Even there is found most weak assurance.
Let none trust Fortune, but follow reason:
For often we see in trust is treason.
This proverb in proof over true I tried,
Finding high treason in place of high trust:
And most fault of faith where I most affied,
Being, by them that should have been just,
Traitorously entrapt, ere I could mistrust.
Ah wretched world what it is to trust thee,
Let them that will learn now hearken to me.
After King Edward the thirds decease,
Succeeded my nephew Richard to reign,
Who for his glory and honors increase,
With princely wages did me entertain,
Against the Frenchmen to be his Chieftaine.
So passing the seas with royal puissance,
With God and S. George I invaded France.
Wasting the country with sword and with fire,
Ouerturning towns, high castles and towers,
Like Mars god of war enflamed with ire
I forced the Frenchmen to abandon their bowers:
Where ever we marched I wan at all hours,
In such wise visiting both city and village,
That always my soldiers were laden with pillage.
With honor and triumph was my return,
Was none more joyous then young King Richard:
Who minding more highly my state to adorn,
With Gloucester Dukedom did me reward:
And after in marriage I was preferred
To a daughter of Bohun an Earl honorable,
By whom I was of England high Constable.
Thus hoysed high on Fortunes wheel,
As one on a stage attending a play,
See'th not on which side the scaffold does reele,
Till timber and poles and all fly away:
So fared it by me: for day by day,
As honor increased I looked still higher,
Not seeing the danger of my fond desire.
For Fortunes flood thus running with full stream,
And I a Duke descended of great Kings,
Constable of England, chief officer of the Realm,
Abused with desperance in these vain things,
I went without feet, and flew without wings,
Presuming so far upon my high state,
That dread set apart, my Prince I would mate.
For whereas Kings have counsel of their choice,
To whom they refer the rule of their Land,
With certain familiars in whom to rejoice,
For pleasure or profit, as the case shall stand,
I not bearing this, would needs take in hand,
Maugre his will, those persons to disgrace,
And for to settle others in their place.
But as an old book says, who will assay
About the Cats neck to hang on a bell,
Had first need to cut the Cats claws away,
Lest if the Cat be cursed, and not tamed well,
She with her nails may claw him to the fell:
So putting the bell about the Cats neck,
I unadvised caught a cruel check.
Read well the sentence of the Rat renowned,
Which Pierce the plowman describes in his dream,
And whosoever has wit the sense to expound,
Shall find that to curb the Prince of a Reame,
Is even (as who says) to strive with the stream:
Note this all subjects, and construe it well,
And busy not your brains 'bout the Cats bell.
But in that ye be Lieges learn t'obay,
Submitting your wills to your Princes Laws:
It fits not a subject to have his own way,
Remember this proverb of the Cats claws:
For Princes like Lions have long large paws
That reach at randon, and whom they once twitch,
They claw to the bone before the skin itch.
But to my purpose, I being once bent,
Toward the atchieuing of my attemptate,
Four bold Barons were of mine assent,
By oath and alliance fastly confederate:
First Henry of Derby an Earl of estate,
Richard of Arundell, and Thomas of Warwick,
With Mowbray the Marshall, a man most warlike.
At Ratecote Bridge assembled our band,
The Commons in clusters came to us that day
To dant Robert Veere, then Duke of Ireland,
By whom King Richard was ruled always:
We put him to flight, and brake his array,
Then maugre the King, his leave or assent,
We by our power did call a Parliament.
Where not in Robes, but with our Baslards bright,
We came to parle of the public weal,
Confirming our quarrel with maine and might,
With swords and no words we tried our appeal,
In stead of reason declaring out zeal,
And whom so we knew, with the King in grace,
We plainly deprived of power and place.
Some with short process were banished the Land,
Some executed with capital pain,
Whereof whosoever list, the whole t'vnderstand,
In the Parliament roll it appears plain,
And further how stoutly we did the King strain,
The rule of his Realm wholly to resign,
To the order of those, whom we did assign.
But note the sequel of such presumption,
After we had these miracles wrought,
The King inflamed with in dignation,
That to such bondage he should be brought,
Suppressing the ire of his inward thought,
Studied naught else but how that he might
Be highly revenged of this high despite.
Aggreeu'd was also this latter offense,
With former matter his ire to renew:
For once at Windsore I brought to his presence
The Mayor of London with all his retinue,
To ask a reckoning of the Realms revenue:
And the soldiers of Breast by me were made bold,
Their wages to claim when the town was sold.
These griefs remembered with all the remnant,
Hourded in his heart hate out of measure,
Yet openly in show made he no femblant,
By word or by deed to bear displeasure:
But love days dissembled do never endure,
And whosoever trusts a foe reconcild,
Is for the most part always beguild.
For as fire ill quenched will up at a start,
And sores not well salued do break out of new,
So hatred hidden in an irefull heart,
Where it has had long season to brew,
Upon every occasion does easily renew:
Not failing at last, if it be not let,
To pay large usury besides the due det.
Even so it fared by this friendship fained,
Outwardly sound, and inwardly rotten:
For when the Kings favor in seeming was gained,
All old displeasures forgiven and forgotten,
Even then at a sudden the shaft was shotten,
Which pierced my heart void of mistrust;
Alas that a Prince should be so unjust.
For lying at Plashey my self to repose,
By reason of sickness which held me full sore,
The King espying me apart from those,
With whom I confedered in band before,
Thought it not meet to tract the time more,
But glad to take me at such auantage,
Came to salute me with friendly visage.
Who having a band bound to his bent,
By color of kindness to visit his Eame,
Took time to accomplish his cruel intent:
And in a small vessel down by the stream,
Conueid me to Calis out of the Realm,
Where without process or doom of my Peers,
Not nature but murder abridged my years.
This act was odious to God and to man,
Yet rigor to cloak in habit of reason,
By crafty compass devise they can,
Articles nine of right heinous treason:
But doom after death is sure out of season,
For who ever saw so strange a president,
As execution done before judgment.
Thus hate harbored in depth of mind,
By sought occasion burst out of new,
And cruelty abused the law of kind,
When that the Nephue the Uncle flew.
Alas King Richard, sore may thou rue,
Which by this fact preparedst the way
Of thy hard destiny to hasten the day.
For blood axeth blood as guerdon due,
And vengeance for vengeance is just reward:
O righteous God thy judgments are true:
For look what measure we other award,
The same for us again is prepared.
Take heed ye Princes by examples past,
Blood will have blood, either first or last.
G. Ferrers.
HOW THE LORD MOWbrey, promoted by King Richard the second to the state of a
Duke, was by him banished the Realm the year of Christ, 1398. and after died
miserably in exile.
THough sorrow and shame abash me to rehearse
My loathsome life, and death of due deserved,
Yet that the pains thereof may other pearce
To leave the like, lest they be likewise served:
Ah Baldwine mark, and see how that I swerued.
Dissembling, envy, and flattery, bane that be,
Of all their hosts, have showed their power on me.
I blame not Fortune, though she did her part,
And true it is she can do little harm:
She guides goods, she hampreth not the heart,
A mind well bent, is safe from every charm.
Vice, only vice, with her stout strengthlesse arm,
Does cause the heart from good to ill incline,
Which I, alas, do find too true by mine.
For where by birth I came of noble race,
The Mowbreys heir, a famous house and old,
Fortune I thank, gave me so good a grace,
That of my Prince I had what so I would:
Yet neither was to other greatly hold.
For I thought flattery wronged his want on youth,
And his fond trust augmented my untruth.
He made me first the Earl of Notingham,
And Marshall of the Realm, in which estate
The Peers and people jointly to me came,
With sore complaint, against them that of late
Bad officers had brought the King in hate,
By making sale of Justice, right, and Law,
And living naught, without all dread or awe.
I gave them aid these evils to redress,
And went to London with an army strong,
And caused the King, against his will oppress
By cruel death, all such as led him wrong:
The Lord chief Justice suffered these among,
So did the Steward of his household head,
The Chancellor scapte, for he before had fled.
These wicked men thus from the King removed,
Who best us pleased succeeded in their place:
For which both King and Commons much us loved,
But chiefly I with all stood high in grace.
The King ensued my read in every case,
Whence self-love bred: for glory makes proud,
And pride aye seeks alone to be allowed.
Wherefore to the end I might alone enjoy
The Kings good will, I made his lust my law:
And where of late I labored to destroy
Such flattering folk, as thereto stood in awe,
Now learned I among the rest to clawe:
For pride is such, if it be kindly caught,
As stroyeth good, and stirs up every naught.
Pride pricketh men to flatter for the pray,
Toppresse and poll for maint'nance of the same,
To malice such as match vneths it may:
And to be brief, pride does the heart inflame,
To fire what mischief any fraud may frame,
And still at length the evils by it wrought
Confound the worker, and bring him to naught.
Behold in me due proof of every part:
For pride first forced me my Prince to flatter
So much, that whatsoever pleased his heart
Were It nere so ill, I thought a lawful matter,
Which causd the Lords afresh against him clatter:
Because he had his holds beyond sea sold,
And seen his soldiers of their wages pold.
Though unto all these ils I were a friend,
Yet such was luck that each man deemed no:
The Duke of Gloucester for me did send,
With other Lords, whose hearts did bleed for woe,
To see the Realm so fast to ruin go.
In fault whereof, they said the two Dukes were,
The one of York, the other Lancaster.
On whose remove from being about the King
We all agreed, and swear a solemn oath,
And whilst the rest provided for this thing,
I flatterer I, to win the praise of troth,
Wretch that I was, brake faith and promise both:
For I bewraied to the King their whole intent,
For which unawares they all were taken and shent.
Thus was the warder of the Common weal,
The Duke of Gloucester guiltless made away,
With other more, more wretch I so to deal,
Who through untruth their trust did ill betray:
Yet by this means obtained I may pray,
Of King and Dukes I found for this such favor,
As made me Duke of Northfolke for my labor.
But see how pride and envy jointly run,
Because my Prince did more than me prefer,
Sir Henry Bolenbroke, the eldest son
Of John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,
Proud I that would alone be blasing star,
Enuide this Duke, for naught save that the shine
Of his deserts did glister more then mine.
To the end therefore his light should be the less,
I slily sought all shifts to put him out:
But as the poize that would the palm repress,
Does cause the bows spread larger round about;
So spite and envy causes glory sprout,
And aye the more the top is ouertrod,
The deeper does the sound root spread abroad.
For when this Henry Duke of Herford saw,
What spoil the King made of the noble blood,
And that without all Justice, cause, or law,
To suffer him, he thought not sure nor good:
Wherefore to me twofaced in one hood,
As touching this, he fully brake his mind,
As to his friend that should remedy find.
But I, although I knew my Prince did ill,
So that my heart abhorred sore the same,
Yet mischief so through malice led my will,
To bring this Duke from honor unto shame,
And toward my self, my sovereign to inflame,
That I bewraied his word unto the King,
Not as a read, but as a heinous thing.
Thus where my duty bound me to have told
My Prince his fault, and wild him to refrain,
Through flattery lo, I did his ill uphold,
Which turned at length both him and me to pain:
Woe, woe to Kings whose counsailours do feign,
Woe, woe to Realms where such are put in trust,
As leave the Law, to serve the Princes lust.
And woe to him that by his flattering reed,
Maintains a Prince in any kind of vice:
Woe worth him eke for envy, pride or meed,
That misreports an honest enterprise.
Because I beast in all these points was nice,
The plagues of all together on me light,
And due for ill, ill doers does acquit.
For when the Duke was charged with my plaint,
He flat denied that any part was true,
And claimd by arms to answer his attaint,
And I by use that warlike feats well knew,
To his desire incontinently drew:
Wherewith the King did seem right well content,
As one that past not much with whom it went.
At time and place appointed we appeard,
At all points armd to prove our quarrels just,
And when our friends on each part had us cheard,
And that the Heralds bad us do our lust,
With spear in rest we took a course to just:
But ere our horses had run half their way,
A shout was made, the King commanded stay.
And for t'auoid the sheading of our blood
With shame and death, which one must needs have had,
The King through counsel of the Lords thought good
To banish both, which judgment straight was rad;
No marvel then though both were wroth and sad,
But chiefly I that was exilde for aye,
My enmie strang'd but for a ten years day.
The date expired, when by this doleful dome
I should depart, to live in banished band,
On pain of death to England not to come,
I went my way: the King seasde in his hand
Mine offices, my honors, goods and land,
To pay the due (as openly he told)
Of mighty sums, which I had from him pol'd.
See, Baldwine, see, the solary of sin,
Mark with that meed vile vices are rewarded:
Through envy I did lose both kith and kin,
And for my flattering plaint so well regarded,
Exile and shame are justly me awarded:
My wife and heir lack lands and lawful right,
And me their Lord made Dame Dianaes Knight.
If these mishaps at home be not enough,
Adioine to them my sorrows in exile:
I went to Almaine first, a Land right rough,
In which I found such churlish folk and vile,
As made me loathe my life each other while:
There lo I learnd what is to be a gest
Abroad, and what to live at home in rest.
For they esteem no one man more then each,
They use as well the lackey as the Lord,
And like their manners churlish in their speech,
Their lodging hard, their board to be abhorred:
Their pleyted garments therewith well accord,
All iag'd and frounst, with diverse colors decked,
They swear, they curse, and drink till they be fleckt.
They hate all such as these their manners hate,
Which reason would no wise man should allow:
With these I dwelt, lamenting mine estate,
Till at the length they had got knowledge, how
I was exiled, because I did auow
A false complaint against my trusty friend,
For which they named me traitor still vnhend:
That what for shame and what for wearines
I stole from thence, and went to Venice town,
Whereas I found more ease and friendlines,
But greater grief: for now the great renown
Of Bolenbroke whom I would have put down,
Was waxt so great in Britain and in France,
That Vencie through, each man did him advance.
Thus lo his glory grew through great despite,
And I thereby increased in defame:
Thus envy ever does her most acquit
With trouble, anguish, sorrow, smart and shame,
But sets the virtues of her foe in flame:
Like water waves which cleanse the muddie stone,
And soyles themselves by beating thereupon.
Or ere I had soiourn'd there a year,
Strange tidings came he was to England gone,
Had taken the King, and that which touched him near,
Imprisoned him with other of his fone,
And made him yield him up his Crown and throne:
When I these things for true by search had tried,
Grief gripte me so, I pined away and died.
Note here the end of pride, see flatteries fine,
Mark the reward of envy and complaint,
And warn all people from them to decline,
Lest likely fault do find the like attaint.
Let this my life to them be a restraint:
By others harms who lists take no heed,
Shall by his own learn other better reed.
T. Churchyard.
HOW KING RICHARD THE SECOND WAS FOR HIS evil governance deposed from his
seat, in the year 1399. and murdered in prison the year following.
Happy is the Prince, that has in wealth the grace
To follow virtue, keeping vices under;
But woe to him whose will has wisdoms place:
For whosoever renteth right and law asunder,
On him at length all the world shall wonder.
High birth, choice fortune, force, nor Princely mace,
Can warrant King or Keyser from the case.
Behold my hap, see how the silly rout
On me do gaze, and each to other say:
See where he lies, but late that was so stout,
Lo how the power, the pride, and rich array
Of mighty Rulers lightly fade away.
The King which erst kept all the Realm in doubt,
The veriest rascal now dare check and flout.
Me think I hear the people thus devise:
Wherefore Baldwine, since thou will declare
How Princes fell, to make the living wise,
My lawless life in no point see thou spare,
But paint it out, that Rulers may beware
Good counsel, law, or virtue to despise,
For Realms have rules, and Rulers have a sise.
I was a King, who ruled all by lust,
Forcing but light of Justice, right, or Law,
Putting always flatterers false in trust,
Ensuing such as could my vices claw,
By faithful counsel passing not an haw,
As pleasure pricked, so needs obey I must,
Having delight to feed and serve the gust:
Which to maintain, my people were sore pol'd
With Fines, Fifteenes, and loanes by way of pressed,
Blanke Charters, oaths, and shifts not known of old,
For which the Commons did me sore detest.
I also sold the noble town of Breast,
My fault wherein because mine uncle told,
I found the means that he to death was sold.
None aid I lackt in any wicked deed,
For gaping Gulles whom I promoted had
Would further all in hope of higher meed.
There can no King imagine ought so bad,
But shall find some that will perform it glad:
For sickness seldom does so swiftly breed,
As humors ill do grow the grief to feed.
My life and death the truth of this has tried:
For while I fought in Ireland with my foes,
Mine uncle Edmund whom I left to guide
My Realm at home, rebelliously arose
Percies to help, which plied my depose:
And called from France Earl Bolenbroke, whom I
Exiled had for ten years there to lie.
For coming back this sudden stur to stay,
The Earl of Worster whom I trusted most,
(Whiles I in Wales at Flint my castle lay,
Both to refresh and multiply mine host)
There in my hall, in sight of least and most,
His staff did break, which was my household stay,
Bad each make shift, and rode himself away.
My Steward false thus being fled and gone,
My servants sly shranke off on every side,
Then caught I was and led unto my fone,
Who for their Prince no Palace did provide,
But prison strong, where Henry puffed with pride
Causde me resign my Kingly state and throne,
And so forsaken left and post alone.
Yet some conspired their new King to put down,
And to that end a solemn oath they swore,
To render me my royal seat and Crown,
Whereof themselves deprived me before.
But late medcines can help no sothbind sore:
When swelling floods have overflowed the town,
Too late it is to save them that shall drown:
For though the Peers set Henry in his state,
Yet could they not displace him thence again:
And where they soon deprived me of late,
They could restore me by no manner pain.
Things hardly mend, but may be marred amain,
And when a man is fallen in froward fate,
Still mischiefs light one on another pate.
For when the King did know that for my cause,
His Lords in mask would kill him on a night,
To dash all doubts he took no farther pause,
But Pierce of Exton a cruel murdering Knight
To Pomfret castle sent him armed bright,
Who causeless killed me there against all laws,
Thus lawless life to lawless death aye draws.
G. Ferrers.
HOW OWEN GLENDOVR SEDVCED BY FALSE PROPHESIES, took upon him to be Prince of
Wales, and was by Henry Prince of England chased to the Mountains, where he
miserably died for lack of food, An. 1401.
I Pray thee Baldwine since thou do entend
To show the fall of such as climb too hie,
Remember me, whose miserable end
May teach a man his vicious life to fly.
Oh Fortune, Fortune, out on thee I cry:
My lively corpse thou have made lean and slender,
For lack of food, whose name was Owen Glendour.
A Welchman borne, and of the Trojan blood,
But ill brought up, whereby full well I find,
That neither birth nor lineage make us good,
Though it be true that Cat will after kind.
Flesh gendreth flesh, but not the soul or mind,
They gender not, but foulely do degender,
When men to vice from virtue them surrender.
Each thing by nature tends to the same
Whereof it came, and is disposed like:
Down sinkes the mould, up mounts the fiery flame,
With horn the Heart, with hoof the Horse does strike,
The Wolf does spoil, the subtle Fox does pike,
And to conclude, no fish, flesh, foul or plant,
Of their true dame the property does want.
But as for men, since severally they have
A mind, whose manners are by learning made,
Good bringing up all only does them save
In honest acts, which with their parents fade:
So that true gentry stands in the trade
Of vertuouslife, not in the fleshly line:
For blood is brute, but gentry is divine.
Experience does cause me thus to say,
And that the rather for my countrymen,
Which vaunt and boast themselves above the day,
If they may strain their stock from worthy men:
Which let be true, are they the better then?
Nay far the worse, if so they be not good,
For why, they stain the beauty of their blood.
How would we mock the burden-bearing mule,
If he would brag he were an horses son,
To press his pride (might nothing else him rule)
His boasts to prove no more but bid him run:
The horse for swiftness has his glory won.
The braging mule could nere the more aspier,
Though he should prove that Pegas was his sier.
Each man may crake of that which was his own,
Our parents good is theirs, and no whit ours:
Who therefore will of noble birth be known,
Or shine in virtue like his ancestors,
Gentry consists not in lands and towers:
He is a churl though all the world were his,
Yea Arthurs heir if that he live amiss.
For virtuous life a Gentleman does make
Of her possessour, all be he poor as Job,
Yea though no name of elders he can take:
For proof take Merlin fathered by an Hob.
But who so sets his mind to spoil and rob,
Although he come by due descent from Brute,
He is a churl, ungentle, vile, and brute.
Well, thus did I for want of better wit,
Because my parents naughtly brought me up:
For Gentlemen (they said) was naught so fit,
As to attast by bold attempts the cup
Of conquests wine, whereof I thought to sup:
And therefore bent my self to rob and riue,
And whom I could of lands and goods deprive.
Henry the fourth did then usurp the Crown,
Despoiled the King, with Mortimer the heir:
For which his subjects sought to put him down,
And I while Fortune offered me so fair,
Did what I might his honor to appaire:
And took on me to be the Prince of Wales,
Entiste thereto by Prophesies and tales.
For which, such mates as wait upon the spoil,
From every part of Wales unto me drew:
For loytering youth untaught in any toil,
Are ready aye all mischief to ensue.
Through help of these so great my glory grew,
That I defied my King through lofty heart,
And made sharp war on all that took his part.
See luck, I took Lord Raynold Gray of Rithen,
And him enforst my daughter to espouse,
And so perforce I held him still, and sithen
In Wigmore land through battle rigorous,
I caught the right heir of the crowned house,
The Earl of March Sir Edmund Mortimor,
And in a dungeon kept him prisoner.
Then all the Marches longing unto Wales,
By Seuerne West I did invade and burn:
Destroyed the towns in mountains and in vales,
And rich in spoils did home ward safe return:
Was none so bold durst once against me spurn.
Thus prosperously does Fortune forward call,
Those whom she minds to give the sorest fall.
When same had brought these tidings to the King,
(Although the Scots then vexed him right sore)
A mighty army against me he did bring:
Where of the French King being warned before,
Who mortal hate against King Henry bore,
To grieve our foe he quickly to me sent
Twelve thousand Frenchmen, unto the fight all bent.
A part of them led by the Earl of March,
Lord James of Burbon, a renowned Knight,
Withheld by winds to Wales-ward forth to march,
Took land at Plimmouth privily on night:
And when he had done all he durst or might,
After that many of his men were slain,
He stole to ship and sailed home again.
Twelve thousand more in Milford did arrive,
And came to me then lying at Denbigh:
With armed Welchmen thousands double five,
With whom we went to Worcester well nigh,
And there encampt us on a mount on high,
To Abide the King, who shortly after came,
And pitched down his field, hard by the same.
There eight days long our hosts lay face to face,
And neither others power durst assail:
But they so stopped the passages the space,
That vitailes could not come to our avail,
Where through constrained our hearts began to fail,
So that the Frenchmen shranke away by night,
And I with mine to the mountains took our flight.
The King pursued greatly to his cost,
From hills to woods, from woods to valleys plain:
And by the way his men and stuff he lost.
And when he saw he gained naught but pain,
He blew retreat and gate him home again:
Then with my power I boldly came abroad,
Taken in my country for a very god.
Immediately there fell a jolly jar
Between the King and Percies worthy bloods,
Which grew at last unto a deadly war:
For like as drops engender mighty floods,
And little seeds sprout forth great leaves and buds;
Even so small strises, if they be suffered run,
Breed wrath and war, and death or they be don.
The King would have the ransom of such Scots
As these the Percies taken had in the field:
But see how strongly Lucre knits her knots,
The King will have, the Percies will not yield,
Desire of goods some craves, but grants seeld:
Oh cursed goods, desire of you has wrought
All wickedness, that has or can be thought.
The Percies deemd it meeter for the King,
To have redeemd their Cousin Mortimer,
Who in his quarrel all his power did bring
To fight with me, that took him prisoner,
Than of their pray to rob his soldier:
And therefore willed him see some mean were found,
To quite forth him whom I kept vily bound.
Because the King misliked their request,
They came themselves and did accord with me,
Complaining how the Kingdom was oppressed
By Henry's rule: wherefore we did agree
To pluck him down, and part the Realm in three:
The north part theirs, Wales holy to be mine,
The rest, to rest to the Earl of Marches line.
And for to set us hereon more agog,
A Prophet came (a vengeance take them all)
Affirming Henry to be Gogmagog,
Whom Merline does a Mould warpe ever call,
Accursed of God that must be brought in thrall
By a Wolf, a Dragon, and a Lion strong,
Which should divide his Kingdom them among.
This crafty dreamer made us three such beasts,
To think we were the foresaid beasts, indeed:
And for that cause our badges and our creasts
We searched out, which scarsly well agreed:
Howbeit the Herolds apt at such a need,
Drew down such issues from old ancesters,
As proved these ensigns to be surely ours.
Ye crafty Welehmen, wherefore do ye mock,
The Noble men thus with your sained rimes?
Ye Noble men, why fly ye not the flock
Of such as have seduced so many times?
False Prophesies are plagues for diverse crimes,
Which God does let the devilish sort devise,
To trouble such as are not godly wise.
And that appeard by us three beasts indeed,
Through false persuasion highly borne in hand,
That in our feate we could not choose but speed,
To kill the King and to enjoy his Land:
For which exploit we bound our selves in band,
To stand contented each man with his part,
So folly did assure our foolish heart.
But such, they say, as fish before the net,
Shall seldom surfeit of the pray they take:
Of things to come the haps be so unset,
That none but fools may warrant of them make:
The full assured success does often forsake.
For Fortune finds none so fit to flout,
As careless sots, which cast no kind of doubt.
How say thou Henry Hotspur, do I lie,
For thou right manly gave the King a field,
And there wast slain because thou would not fly:
Thine uncle Thomas Percy forced to yield,
Did cast his head (a wonder seen but seeld)
From Shrewsbury town to the top of London Bridge.
Lo thus fond hope did both their lives abridge.
When Henry this great victory had won,
Destroid the Percies, put their power to flight,
He did appoint Prince Henry his eldest son,
With all his power to meet me if he might:
But I discomfit through my partners fight,
Had not the heart to meet him face to face,
But fled away, and he pursued the chase.
Now Baldwine mark, for I called Prince of Wales,
And made believe I should be he indeed,
Was made to fly among the hills and dales,
Where all my men forsook me at my need.
Who trusts loiterers seeld has luckly speed:
And when the Captains courage does him fail,
His soldiers hearts a little thing may quail.
And so Prince Henry chased me, that lo
I found no place wherein I might abide:
For as the dogs pursue the silly Do,
The brache behind, the hounds on every side,
So traste they me among the mountains wide:
Whereby I found I was the hartles hare,
And not the beast the prophet did declare.
And at the last: like as the little roach,
Must else be eat, or leap upon the shore
When as the hungry picketell does approach,
And there find death which it escapt before:
So double death assaulted me so sore
That either I must unto mine enmy yield,
Or starve for hunger in the barraine feeld.
Here shame and pain a while were at a strife,
Pain bad me yield, shame bad me rather fast:
The one bad spare, the other bad spend my life,
But shame (shame have it) overcame at last.
Then hunger gnew, that does the stone wall brast,
And made me eat both grauel, dirt, and mud,
And last of all, my dung, my flesh, and blood.
This was mine end too horrible to hear,
Yet good enough for life that was so ill,
Where by O Baldwine warn all men to bear
Their youth such love, to bring them up in skill.
Bid Princes fly false prophets lying bill,
And not presume to climb above their states:
For they be faults that foil men, not their fates.
Th. Phaer.
HOW HENRY PERCY Earl of NORTHVMBERLAND, was for his covetous and traitorous
attempt put to death at York, Anno 1407.
O Moral Senec true find I thy saying,
That neither kin, riches, strength, or favor
Are free from Fortune, but are aie decaying:
No worldly wealth is ought save doubtful labor,
Man's life in Earth is like unto a tabour,
Which now to mirth does mildly men provoke
And straight to war, with a more sturdy stroke.
All this full true I Percy find by proof,
Which whilom was Earl of Northumberland.
And therefore Baldwine for our peers behoof,
To note men's falls since thou have taken in hand,
I would thou should my state well understand:
For few there were that were so much redoubted,
Whom double Fortune lifted up and louted.
As for my kin their nobleness is known,
My valiant acts were folly for to praise,
Where through our foes so often were overthrown,
That who but I was doubted in my days:
And that King Richard found at all assaies?
For never foes rebelled in his reign,
But through my force were either caught or slain.
A brother I had was Earl of Worcester,
Always in office and favor with the King,
And by my wife Dame Elenor Mortimer,
A son I had which so the foes did sting,
That being young, and but a very spring,
Henry Hotspur they gave him unto name,
And though I say it, he did deserve the same.
We three triumphed in King Richards time,
Till Fortune ought both him and us a spite:
But chiefly me, whom clear from any crime,
My King did banish from his favor quite,
Proclaiming me a most disloyal Knight:
Where through false slander forced me to be,
That which before I did most deadly flee.
Let men beware, how they true folk defame,
Or threaten on them the blame of vices naught,
For infamy breeds wrath, wreke follows shame:
Eke open slander often times has brought
That to effect, that erst was never thought.
To be misdeem'd men suffer in a sort,
But none can bear the grief of misreport.
Because my King did shame me wrongfully,
I hated him and soon became his foe:
And while he did at war in Ireland lie,
I did conspire to turn his weal to woe:
And through the Duke of York and other more,
All royal power from him we quickly took,
And gave the same to Henry Bolenbrooke.
Neither did we this only for this cause,
But to say truth, force drove us to the same:
For he despising God and all his laws,
Slew whom he would, made sin a very game:
And seeing nor age nor consell could him tame,
We thought it well done for the Kingdoms sake,
To leave his rule, that did all rule for sake.
But when Sir Henry had attaind his place,
He straight became in all points worse then he,
Destroyed the Peers, and slew King Richards grace,
Against his oath made to the Lords and me.
And seeking quarrels how to disagree,
He shamelesly required me and my son
To yield him foes which we in field had won.
My nephew also Edmund Mortimer,
The very heir apparent to the crown,
Whom Owen Glendour held as prisoner,
With chains fast bound in dungeon deep cast down,
He would not ransom, but did felly frown,
Against Mortimer and me which for him spoke,
And him proclaimed traitor for our sake.
Thus foul despite did cause us to conspire,
To put him down, as we did Richard erst,
And that we might this matter set on fire,
From Owens Iaile, our cousin we remerst,
And unto Glendour all our griefs rehearst,
Who made a bond with Mortimer and me,
To prive the King and part the Realm in three.
But when King Henry heard of this device,
To Owen Glendour he sped him very quick,
Minding by force to stop our enterprise:
And as the devil would, then fell I sick,
Howbeit my brother and son more politic
Then prosperous, with an host from Scotland brought,
Encountered him at Shrewesbury where they fought.
The one was taken and killed, the other slain,
And shortly after was Owen put to flight:
By means whereof I forced was to feign,
That I knew nothing of the former fight.
Fraud often auailes more then does sturdie might:
For by my faining I brought him in belief,
I knew not that wherein my part was chief.
And while the King thus took me for his friend,
I sought all means my former wrong to wreake,
Which that I might bring to the sooner end,
To the Bishop of York I did the matter break,
And to the Earl Marshall likewise did I speak,
Whose father was through Henry's cause exiled,
The Bishops brother with traiterous death defiled.
These straight assented to do what they could,
So did the Lord Hastings, and Lord Faueonbridge:
Which altogether promised they would
Set all their power the Kings days to abridge.
But see the spite, before the birds were flidge
The King had word, and seized on the nest,
Whereby alas my friends were all oppressed.
The bloody tyrant brought them all to end,
Excepted me, which into Scotland fled,
To George of Dunbar the Earl of March, my friend,
Who in my cause with many more made head:
And when on hope of greater aid I fed,
Both at the Frenchmen and the Flemmings hand,
And could get none, I took such as I fand.
And with the help of George my very friend,
I did invade Northumberland full bold,
Whereas the folk drew to me still on end,
Bent to death my party to uphold:
Through help of these, full many a fort and hold,
The which the King right manfully had manned,
I easily won, and seized in my hand.
Not so content (for vengeance drove me on)
I entered Yorkshire, there to waste and spoil:
But ere I had far in the country gone
The Shiriffe thereof, Raph Rokesbie did assoile
My troubled host of much part of our toil:
For he assaulting freshly took through power,
Me and Lord Bardolph both at Bramham moore.
And thence conveyed us to the town of York,
Until he knew what was the Kings intent:
There lo Lord Bardolph kinder then the Storke,
Did lose his head, which was to London sent,
With whom for friendship mine in like case went:
This was my hap, my fortune, or my faut,
This life I led and thus I came to naught.
Wherefore good Baldwine will the Peers take heed
Of slander, malice, and conspiracy,
Of couetise, whence all the rest proceed:
For couetise joint with contumacie,
Does cause all mischief in men's hearts to breed.
And therefore this to esperance my word,
Who causes bloodshed shall not escape the sword.
HOW RICHARD PLANTAGENET EARL OF CAMBRIDGE INTENding the Kings destruction,
was put to death at Southhampton, Anno Dom. 1415.
HAste makes waste, has commonly been said,
And secret mischief selde has luckie speed:
A murdering mind with proper poyze is way'd,
All this is true, I find it in my creed.
And therefore Baldwine warn all states take heed,
How they conspire another to betrap,
Lest mischief meant, light in the miners lap.
For I Lord Richard heir Plantagenet
Was Earl of Cambridge and right fortunate,
If I had had the grace my wit to set,
To have content me with mine own estate:
But O false honors, breeders of debate,
The love of you our leaud hearts does allure,
To lose our selves by seeking you unsure.
Because my brother Edmund Mortimer
Whose eldest sister was my wedded wife,
I mean that Edmund that was prisoner
In Wales so long, through Owens busy strife,
Because I say that after Edmunds life,
His rights and titles must by law be mine,
For he ne had, nor could increase his line,
Because the right of Realm and Crown was ours,
I searched means to help him thereunto:
And where the Henry's held it by their powers,
I sought a shift their tenures to undo,
Which being force, since force or slight must do,
I void of might, because their power was strong,
Set privy fleight against their open wrong.
But since the death of most part of my kin
Did dash my hope, throughout the fathers days
I let it slip, and thought it best begin,
When as the son should dread least such assayes:
For force through speed, slight speedeth through delays,
And seeld does treason time so fitly find,
As when all dangers most be out of mind.
Wherefore while Henry of that name the fist,
Prepared his army to go conquer France,
Lord Scroope and I thought to attempt a drift
To put him down, my brother to advance:
But were Gods will, my luck or his good chance,
The King wist wholly whereabout we went,
The night before to shipward he him bent.
Then were we straight as traitors apprehended,
Our purpose spied, the cause thereof was hid,
And therefore lo a false cause we pretended,
Where through my brother was from danger rid:
We said for hire of French Kings coin, we did
Behight to kill the King: and thus with shame
We stained our selves, to save our friend from blame.
When we had thus confessed so foul a treason,
That we deserved, we suffered by the law.
See Baldwine, see, and note as it is reason
How wicked deeds to woeful ends do draw.
All force does fail, no craft is worth a straw
To attain things lost, and therefore let them go,
For might rules right, and will though truth say no.
W. Baldwine.
HOW THOMAS MONTAGVE EARL OF SALISBVrie in the midst of his glory, was
chanceably slain at Orleaunce with a piece of Ordinance, the third of
November, Anno Dom. 1428.
WHat fools be we to trust unto our strength,
Our wit, our courage, or our noble fame,
Which time it self must needs devour at length,
Though froward Fortune could not foil the same?
But seeing this Goddess guides all the game,
Which still to change does set her only lust,
Why toil we so for things so hard to trust?
A goodly thing we deem of good report,
Which noble hearts do seek by course of kind:
But seeing the date so doubtful and so short,
The way so rough whereby we do it find,
I cannot choose but praise the Princely mind
That preaseth for it, though we find oppressed,
By foul defame, those that deserve it best.
Concerning whom, mark, Baldwine, what I say,
I mean the virtuous hindered of their brute,
Among which number reckon well I may
My valiant father John Lord Montacute,
Who lost his life I judge through just pursuit,
I say the cause and not the casual speed
Is to be waighed, in every kind of deed.
This rule observed, how many shall we find
For virtues sake with infamy oppressed?
How some again through help of Fortune blind,
For ill attempts atchieu'd, with honor blessed?
Success is worst often times when cause is best:
Therefore say I: God send them sorry haps,
That judge the causes by their afterclaps.
The end indeed is Judge of every thing,
Which is the cause or latter point of time:
The first true verdict at the first may bring,
The last is slow, or slipper as the slime,
Often changing names of innocence and crime.
Duke Thomas death was Justice two years long,
And ever since, sore tyranny and wrong.
Wherefore I pray thee, Baldwine, weigh the cause,
And praise my father as he does deserve:
Because Earl Henry, King against all laws,
Endeavored King Richard for to starve
In iayle, whereby the regal Crown might swerve
Out of the line to which it then was due,
(Whereby God knows what evil might ensue.)
My Lord John Holland Duke of Excester,
Which was dear cousin to this wretched King,
Did move my Sire, and the Earl of Gloucester,
With other Lords to ponder well the thing:
Who seeing the mischief that began to spring,
Did all consent this Henry to depose,
And to restore King Richard to the Rose.
And while they did devise a pretty train,
Whereby to bring their purpose well about,
Which was in mask this Henry to have slain,
The Duke of Aumerle blew their counsel out:
Yet was their purpose good, there is no doubt.
What cause can be more worthy for a Knight,
Than save his King, and help true heirs to right?
For this with them my father was destroid,
And buried in the dunghill of defame.
Thus evil chance, their glory did avoid,
Whereas their cause does claim eternal fame.
When deeds therefore unluckily do frame,
Men ought not judge the authors to be naught,
For right through might is often ouerraught.
And God does suffer that it should be so,
But why, my wit is feeble to decise,
Except it be to heap up wrath and we
On wicked heads that injuries devise.
The cause why mischiefs many times arise,
And light on them that would men's wrongs redress,
Is for the rancour that they bear I guess.
God hates rigor though it further right,
For sin is sin, how ever it be used:
And therefore suffers shame and death to light,
To punish vice, though it be well abused.
Who furthereth right is not thereby excused,
If through the same he do some other wrong:
To every vice due guerdon does belong.
What preach I now? I am a man of war,
And that my lims I dare say does profess,
Of cured wounds beset with many a skarre,
My broken iaw vnheald can say no less.
O Fortune, Fortune cause of all distress,
My father had great cause thy fraud to curse,
But much more I, abused ten times worse.
Thou never flatteredst him in all thy life,
But me thou dandledst like thy darling dear:
Thy gifts I found in every corner rife,
Where ere I went I met thy smiling cheer:
Which was not for a day or for a year,
But through the reign of three right worthy Kings,
I found thee forward in all kind of things.
The while King Henry conquered in France
I sued the wars and still found victory,
In all assaults, so happy was my chance,
Holds yield or won did make my enemies sorry:
Dame Prudence eke augmented so my glory,
That in all treaties ever I was one,
When weighty matters were agreed upon.
But when this King this mighty conqueror,
Through death unripe was both his Realms berest,
His silly infant did receive his power,
Poor little babe full young in cradle left,
Where Crown and Scepter hurt him with the heft,
Whose worthy uncles had the governance,
The one at home, the other abroad in France.
And I which was in peace and war well skilled,
With both these Rulers greatly was esteemed:
Bare rule at home as often as they willed,
And fought in France when they it needful deemed,
And every where so good my service seemed,
That English men to me great love did bear,
Our foes the French, my force fulfilled with fear.
I always thought it fitly for a Prince,
And such as have the regiment of Realms,
His subjects hearts with mildnes to convince,
With Justice mixed, avoiding all extremes.
For like as Phoebus with his cheerful beams,
Does freshly force the fragrant flowers to flourish,
So rulers mildness subjects love does norish.
This found I true: for through my mild behavior,
Their hearts I had with me to live and die,
And in their speech be wrayer of their favor,
They called me still good Earl of Salisburie,
The Lords confess the Commons did not lie.
For virtuous life, free heart, and lowly mind,
With high and low shall always favor find.
Which virtues, chief become a man of war,
Whereof in France I found experience:
For in assaults due mildnes passes far
All rigor, force, and sturdie violence:
For men will stoutly stick to their defense,
When cruel Captains covet after spoil,
And so enforst, often give their foes the foil.
But when they know they shall be friendly used,
They hazard not their heads but rather yield:
For this my offers never were refused
Of any town, or surely very seeld.
But force and furies fit be for the field,
And there indeed I used so the same,
My foes would fly if they but heard my name.
For when Lord Steward and Earl Vantadors
Had cruelly besieged Crauant town,
Which he had won, and kept long time before,
Which lies in Awxer on the River Youne,
To raise the siege the Regent sent me down:
Whereas I used all rigor that I might,
I killed all that were not saved by flight.
When the Earl of Bedford then in France Lord Regent
Knew in what sort I had removed the siege,
In Brye and Champaine he made me Vicegerent,
And Lieutenant for him and for my Liege:
Which causde me go to Brye, and there besiege
Mountaguillon with twenty weeks assaut,
Which at the last was yielded me for naught.
And for the Duke of Britains brother Arthur,
Both Earl of Richmond and of Yuerie,
Against his oath from us had made departure,
To Charles the Dolphin our chief enemy,
I with the Regent went to Normandy,
To take his town of Yuerie, which of spite,
Did to us daily all the harm they might.
They at the first compounded by a day
To yield, if rescues did not come before,
And while in hope to fight, we at it lay,
The Dolphin gathered men two thousand score,
With Earls, with Lords and Captains jolly store:
Of which the Duke of Alanson was guide,
And sent them down to see if we would bide.
But they left us, and down to Vernoile went,
And made their vaunt they had our army slain,
And through that lie, that town from us they hent,
Which shortly after turned to their pain:
For there both armies met upon the plain:
And we eight thousand whom they flew before,
Did kill of them, ten thousand men and more.
When we had taken Vernoile thus again,
To drive the treacherous Dolphin out of France,
The Regent sent me to Aniow and to Main,
Where I besieged the warlike town of Mawns.
There Lord of Toysers, Baldwins valiance
Did well appear, which would not yield the town,
Till all the Towers and walls were battered down.
But here now Baldwine, take it in good part,
Though that I brought this Baldwine there to yield,
The Lion fierce for all his noble heart,
Being ouermatch'd, is forced to fly the field.
If Mars himself there had been with his shield,
And in my storms had stoutly me withstood,
He should have yield, or else have shed my blood.
This worthy Knight both hardy, stout, and wise,
Wrought well his feat: as time and place require,
When Fortune fails, it is the best advise
To strike the sail lest all lie in the mire.
This have I said to the end thou take no ire,
For though no cause be found, so nature frames,
Men have a zeal to such as bear their names.
But to return, in Main wan I at length,
Such towns and sorts as might or help or hurt,
I manned Main, and Suzans town of strength,
Fort Barnard, Thanceaur, and S. Cales the curt,
With Lile sues Bolton, standing in the dirt:
Eke Gwerland, Suze, Loupeland and Mount sure,
With Malycorne, these wan I and kept full sure.
Besides all this I took near forty holds,
But those I raced even with the ground:
And for these deeds, as silly sheep in folds
Do shrink for fear at every little sound,
So fled my foes before my face full round:
Was none so hardy durst abide the fight,
So Mars and Fortune furthered me their Knight.
I tell no lie, so gastfull grew my name,
That it alone discomfited an host:
The boldest Frenchmen well confess the same,
Else will the town which they like cowards lost.
For when they sieged Beauron with great boast,
Being forty thousand well armed in field,
Five hundred men enforced them to yield.
For while the Frenchmen fresh assaulted still,
Our Englishmen came boldly forth at night,
Crying Saint George, Salisbury, kill, kill,
And offered freshly with their foes to fight,
And they as Frenchly took themselves to flight.
Supposing surely that I had been there,
See how my name did put them all in fear.
Thus was the Dolphins power discomfited,
Four thousand slain, their Campetane as it stood,
Whereby our town and soldiers profited,
For there were vitailes plentiful and good:
This while was I in England by the rood,
To Appease a strife that was right foul befall,
Between Duke Humfrey and the Cardinal.
The Duke of Exeter soon after died,
Which of the King at home had governance,
Whose room the Earl of Warwick then supplied,
And I took his and sped me into France.
Where in good hope to conquer Orliance,
With much ado I got the Regents aid,
And marched forth, and siege about it laid.
But in the way I took the town of Yaine,
Where murdered were for stoutnes many a man:
But Baugencey I took with little pain,
For which to show them favor I began:
This causde the towns of Mewne and Iargeman,
That stood on Loyer, to profer me the keys,
Ere I came near them, welnigh by two days.
See here how Fortune froward can allure,
What baits she lays to bring men to their ends:
Who having hap like this, but hops sure,
To bring to bale what ever he entends?
But soon is sower the sweet that Fortune sends:
When hope and hap, when health and wealth is highest,
Then woe and wrack, disease, and need be nighest.
For while I, suing this so good success,
Laid siege to Orliaunce on the River side,
The Bastard (Cuckold Cawnies son I guess,
Tho thought the Dukes) who had the town in guide
Came fiercely forth, when he his time espied,
To raise the siege, but was bet back again,
And hard pursued both to his loss and pain.
For there we wan the Bulwark on the bridge,
With a mighty tower standing fast thereby.
Ah cursed tower that did my days abridge,
Would God thou had been further either I:
For in this tower a chamber stands on hie,
From which a man may view through all the town
By certain windows iron grated down.
Where on a day, now Baldwine note mine end,
I stood in viewing where the town was weak,
And as I busily talked with my friend,
Shot from the town, which all the grate did break,
A pellet came and drove a mighty fleake
Against my face, and tare away my cheek,
For pain whereof I died within a week.
See Baldwine, see the most uncertain glory,
How sudden mischief dasheth all to dust,
And warn all Princes by my broken story,
The happiest fortune chiefly to mistrust.
Was never man that always had his lust:
Then mortal fools, in fancy more then mad,
Which hope to have that never any had.
W. Baldwine.
HOW DAME ELEANOR COBHAM DVCHESSE OF GLOUCESTER, FOR Practicing of Witchcraft
and Sorcery, suffered open penance, and after was banished the Realm into the
I Will of Man.
IF a poor Lady damned in exile
Amongst Princes may be allowed place,
Then gentle Baldwine stay thy pen a while,
And of pure pity ponder well my case,
How I a Duchess, destitute of grace
Have found by proof, as many have and shall
The proverb true, that pride will have a fall.
A noble Prince extract of royal blood,
Humfrey sometime protector of this Land
Of Gloucester Duke, for virtue called (the good)
When I but base beneath his state did stand,
Vouchsaft with me to join in wedlockes band,
Having in Court no name of high degree,
But Eleanor Cobham as parents left to me,
And though by blithe of noble race I was,
Of Barons blood, yet was I thought unfit,
So high to match, yet so it came to pass,
Whether by grace, good fortune, or by wit,
Dame Venus lures so in mine eyes did sit,
As this great Prince without respect of state,
Did worthy me to be his wedded mate.
His wife I was, and he my true husband,
Though for a while he had the company
Of Lady Iaquet Duchess of Holland,
Being an heir of ample patrimony,
But that fell out to be no matrimony:
For after war, long suit in law and strife,
She proved was the Duke of Brabants wife.
Thus of a Damsel Duchess I became,
My state and place advanced next the Queen,
Whereby me thought I felt no ground but swam,
For in the Court mine equal was not seen,
And so possessed with pleasure of the spleen,
The sparks of pride so kindled in my breast,
As I in Court would shine above the rest.
Such gifts of nature God in me had graft
Of shape and form, with other graces mo,
That by the shot of Cupids fiery shaft,
Which to the heart of this great Prince did go,
This mighty Duke with love was kindled so,
As he abasing the height of his degree,
Set his whole heart, to love and honor me.
Grudge whosoever would, to him I was most dear,
Above all Dames advanced in degree,
(The Queen except) no Princess was my peer,
But gave me place, and Lords with cap and knee
Did all honor and reverence unto me.
Thus hoisted high upon the rolling wheel,
I sat so sure, me though I could not reele.
And weening least that Fortune has a turn,
I looked aloft, and would not look allow,
The brands of pride so in my breast did burn
As the hot sparks, burst forth in open show,
And more and more the fire began to glow
Without quenching, and daily did increase,
Till Fortunes blasts with shame did make it cease.
For (as it is said) pride passes on before,
And shame follows, for just reward and meed:
Would God Ladies, both now and evermore,
Of my hard hap, which shall the story reed,
Would bear in mind, and trust it as their Creed,
That pride of heart is a most hateful vice,
And low linesse, a pearl of passing price:
Namely in Queens, and Ladies of estate,
Within whose minds all meeknes should abound,
Since high disdain does always purchase hate,
Being a vice, that most part does redound
To their reproach, in whom the same is found,
And seldom gets good favor or good fame,
But is at last knit up with worldly shame.
The proof whereof I found most true indeed,
That pride before, has shame to wait behind.
Let no man doubt, in whom this vice does breed,
But shame for pride by justice is assigned,
Which I well found, for truly in my mind
Was never none, whom pride did more inflame,
Nor never none received greater shame.
For not content to be a Duchess great,
I longed sore to bear the name of Queen,
Aspiring still unto an higher seat,
And with that hope my self did ouerweene,
Since there was none, which that time was between
Henry the King, and my good Duke his Eame
Heir to the crown and kingdom of this Realm.
So near to be, was cause of my vain hope
And long await when this fair hap would fall;
My studies all were tending to that scope,
Alas, the while to counsel I did call
Such as would seem, by skill coniecturall
Of art Magique and wicked Sorcerie,
For to divine the Princes destiny.
Among which sort of those that bare most fame
There was a Beldame called the Witch of Ey,
Old mother Madge her neighbors did her name,
Which wrought wonders in countries by here-say,
Furies and feends her charming would obey.
And dead corpse from grave she could vpreare,
Such an Inchantresse that time had no peer.
Two Priests also, the one hight Bolenbroke,
The other Suthwel, Clerks in coniuration,
These two Chaplains were they that undertook
To cast and calke the Kings true constellation,
And then to judge by deepest divination
Of things to come, and who should next succeed
To Englands Crown, all this was true indeed.
And further sure they never did proceed,
Though I confess that this attempt was ill,
But for my part, for any thing in deed
Wrought or else thought, by any kind of skill,
God is my judge I never had the will,
By any enchantment, Sorcerie, or charm,
Or otherwise, to work my Princes harm.
Yet nerethelesse, when this case came to light,
By secret spies to Caiphas our Cardinal,
Who long in heart had borne a privy spite
To my good Duke his nephew natural,
Glad of the chance so fitly forth to fall,
His long hid hate, with Justice to color,
Used this case with most extreme rigor,
And caused me with my accomplices all,
To be cited by process peremptory,
Before Judges, in place Judicial,
Whereas Caiphas, sitting in his glory,
Would not allow my answer dilatorie,
Ne Doctor or Proctor to allege the laws,
But forced me to plead in mine own cause.
The Kings counsel were called to the case,
(My husband then shut out for the season)
In whose absence I found but little grace,
For Lawyers turned our offense to treason:
And so with rigor, without ruth or reason,
Sentence was given, that I for the same
Should do penance, and suffer open shame.
Nay the like shame had never wight I ween,
Duches, Lady, ne Damsel of degree,
As I that was a Princess, next the Queen,
Wife to a Prince, and none so great as he,
A Kings uncle, Protector of his country,
With Taper burning, shrouded in a sheet
Three days a row, to pass the open street,
Barelegd, and bare foot, to all the worlds wonder,
Yea, and as though such shame did not suffice,
With more despite then to part asunder
Me and my Duke, which Traitors did devise
By Statute law, in most unlawful wise,
First sending me with shame into exile,
Then murdring him by treachery and guile.
Yea and besides this cruel banishment
Far from all friends to comfort me in care,
And husbands death, there was by Parliament
Ordaind for me a mess of courser fare.
For they to bring me to beggars state most bare,
By the same act from me did then withdraw
Such right of dower, as widows have by law.
Death (as it is said) does set all things at rest,
Which fell not so in mine unhappy case:
For since my death, mine enmies made a Jest
In minstrels rimes, mine honor to deface.
And then to bring my name in more disgrace,
A song was made in manner of a laic,
Which old wives sing of me unto this day.
Yet with these spites their malice could not end,
For shortly after, my sorrows to renew,
My loiall Lord, which never did offend,
Was called in haste, the cause he little knew,
To a Parliament, without sommons due,
Whereas his death was cruelly contrived,
And I his wife of earthly joys deprived.
For all the while my Duke had life and breath,
So long I stood in hope of my restore:
But when I heard of his most causles death,
Then the best salve for my recureles sore
Was to despair of cure for evermore,
And as I could, my careful heart to cure
With patience, most painful to endure.
O Traitors fell, which in your hearts could find,
Like feends of hell, the guiltles to betray,
But ye chiefly his kinsmen most unkind,
Which gave consent to make him so away,
That unto God, with all my heart I pray,
Vengeance may light on him that caused all,
Beaufort I mean, that cursed Cardinal.
Which bastard Priest of the house of Lancaster,
Son to Duke John, surnamed John of Gaunt,
Was first create Bishop of Winchester,
For no learning whereof he might well vaunt,
Ne for virtue, which he did never haunt,
But for his Gold and sums that were not small
Paid to the Pope, was made a Cardinal.
Proud Lucifer, which from the heavens on high
Down to the pit of hell below was cast,
And being once an Angel bright in sky,
For his pride in hell is chained fast
In deep darkness that evermore shall last,
More haut of heart was not before his fall,
Then was this proud and pompous Cardinal:
Whose life, good Baldwine, paint out in his pickle,
A and blase this Baal and Belligod most blind,
An hypocrite, all faithles, false and fickle,
A wicked wretch, a kinsman most unkind,
A Devil incarnate, all diuellishly enclind,
And (to discharge my conscience all at once)
The Devil him gnaw both body, blood and bones.
The spiteful Priest would needs make me a VVitch,
As would to God I had been for his sake,
I would have clawd him where he did not itch,
I would have played the Lady of the Lake,
And as Merline was, closde him in a brake,
Ye a Meridian to lull him by day light,
And a night mare to ride on him by night.
The fiery feends with fevers hot and frenzy,
The Airy hegges with stench and carren sauoures,
The watery ghosts with gowtes and with dropsy,
The earthly Goblines, with Aches at all hours,
Furies and Fairies, with all infernal powers
I would have stird from the dark dungeon
Of hell Center, as deep as Demagorgon.
Or had I now the skill of dame Erichto,
Whose dreadful charms (as Lucan does express)
All feends did fear, so far forth as Prince Pluto
Was at her call for dread of more distress,
Then would I send of helhownds more and less
A legion at least, at him to cry and yell,
And with that charm, herrie him down to hell.
Which need not, for sure I think that he
Who here in earth leads Epicurus life,
As far from God as possible may be,
With whom all sin and vices are most rife,
Using at will both widow, maid, and wife,
But that some Devil his body does possess,
His life is such, as men can judge no less.
And God forgive my wrath and wreakefull mind,
Such is my hate to that most wicked wretch,
Die when he shall, in heart I could well find
Out of the grave his corpse again to fetch,
And rack his limbs as long as they would stretch,
And take delight to listen every day
How he could sing a mass of welaway.
The I Will of Man was the appointed place
To penance me for ever in exile,
Thither in haste they posted me apace,
And doubting escape, they pind me in a Pile
Close by my self in care, alas the while
There felt I first poor prisoners hungry fare,
Much want, things skant, and stone walls hard and bare.
The change was strange, from silk and cloth of gold
To rugged frize my carcas for to cloth,
From Princes fare, and dainties hot and cold,
To rotten fish, and meats that one would loath,
The diet and dressing were much alike boath,
Bedding and lodging were all alike fine,
Such Down it was as served well for swine.
Neither do I mine own case thus complain,
Which I confess came partly by desert:
The only cause which doubleth all my pain,
And which most near goes now unto my heart,
Is that my fault did finally reuert
To him that was least guilty of the same,
Whose death it was, though I abode the shame.
Whose fatal fall when I do call to mind,
And how by me his mischief first began,
So often I cry on Fortune most unkind,
And my mishap most utterly do banne,
That ever I to such a noble man,
Who from my crime was innocent and clear,
Should be a cause to buy his love so dear.
Oh to my heart how grievous is the wound,
Calling to mind this dismal deadly case:
I would I had been doluen under ground
When he first saw or looked on my face,
Or took delight in any kind of grace
Seeming in me, that him did stir or move
To fancy me, or set his heart to love.
Farewell Greenewich my Palace of delight,
Where I was wont to see the Crystal streams
Of royal Thames, most pleasant to my sight:
And farewell Kent, right famous in all Realms,
A thousand times I mind you in my dreams,
And when I wake most grief it is to me,
That never more again I shall you see.
In the night time when I should take my rest
I weep, I wail, I wet my bed with tears,
And when dead sleep my spirits has oppressed,
Troubled with dreams I fantasy vain fears,
Mine husbands voice then ringeth at mine ears
Crying for help, O save me from the death,
These villains here do seek to stop my breath.
Yea and sometimes me thinks his drerie ghost
Appears in sight, and shows me in what wise
Those fell tyrants with torments had embost
His wind and breath, to abuse peoples eyes,
So as no doubt or question should arise
Among rude folk which little understand,
But that his death came only by Gods hand.
I plain in vain, where ears be none to hear
But roaring seas, and blustering of the wind,
And of redress am nere a whit the near,
But with waste words to feed my mournful mind,
Wishing full often the Parcas had vntwinde
My vital strings, or Atropose with knife
Had cut the line of my most wretched life.
Oh that Neptune, and Aeolus also,
The one god of Seas, the other of weather,
Ere mine arrival into that I Will of woe
Had sunk the ship wherein I sailed thither,
(The shipmen saved) so as I together
With my good Duke, might have been dead before
Fortune had wroken her heart upon us so sore.
Or else that God when my first passage was
Into exile along Saint Albons town
Had never let me further for to pass,
But in the street with death had struck me down:
Then had I sped of my desired bowne
That my poor corpse might there have lien with his
Both in one grave, and so have gone to bliss.
But I alas, the greater is my grief
Am past that hope to have my sepulture
Near unto him, which was to me most leefe,
But in an I Will and country most obscure,
To pine in pain whilst my poor life will dure,
And being dead, all honorlesse to lie
In simple grave, as other poor that die.
My tale is told, and time it is to cease
Of troubles past, all which have had their end:
My grave I trust shall purchase me such peace
In such a world where no wight does contend
For higher place, whereto all flesh shall wend:
And so I end, using one word for all
As I began, that pride will have a fall.
G. Ferrers.
HOW HVMFREY PLANTAGENET DVKE OF GLOUCESTER. Protector of England, during the
minority of his Nephew King Henry the sixth, (commonly called the good Duke) by
practice of enemies was brought to confusion.
AS highest hills with tempests been most touched,
And tops of trees most subject unto wind,
And as great towers with stone strongly couched
Have heavy falls when they be vndermin'd:
Even so by proof in worldly things we find,
That such as climb the top of high degree
From fear of falling never can be free.
To prove this true, good Baldwine hearken here,
See and behold me Humfrey hight by name,
Englands Protector, Duke of Gloucester,
Who in the sixth King Henry's rule with fame,
Twice ten years kept the troubled State in frame:
Note well the cause of my unhappy case,
And'mongst thy mirrours let the same have place.
In their most weal, let men beware mishap,
And not to sleep in slumbring sickernesse,
Whilst Fortune false does lull them in her lap
Drowned in dreams of brittle blessedness,
But then to fear her freakes and fickleness,
Accounting still the higher they ascend,
More nigh to be to danger in the end.
And that vain trust in blood or royal race,
Abuse them not with blind security
To trust their state, but weighing well my case,
When she most smiles to have in memory
My sudden fall, who in most certainty
Having most stays which men in state maintain,
Have found the same untrusty and most vain.
Better then I none may the same approve,
Who trusting all in height of high estate,
To bite on fawning flatteries bait did love,
Which never Prince could banish from his gate,
Did little think on such a sudden mate,
Not heeding, less dreading, all unaware,
By foes least feared was trapt in sudden snare.
If noble birth or high authority,
Number of friends, kindred or alliance,
If wisdom, learning, worldly policy
Might have been staiers to Fortunes variance,
None stood more strong, in worldly countenance,
For all these helps had I to high degree,
And yet in fine they all beguiled me.
Of Henry fourth by name, fourth son I was,
Brother to Henry fifth of that same name,
To the sixth Henry uncle; but alas,
What cause had I to build upon the same?
Or for vain glory, to advance my fame,
My self to call in records and writings,
The brother, son, and uncle unto Kings?
This was my boast, which lastly was my bane,
Yet not this boast was it that brought me down:
The very cause which made my weal to wane
So near of kin that I was to the Crown,
That was the rock that made my ship to drown.
A rule there is not failing, but most sure,
Kingdom no kin does know, ne can endure.
When the fifth Henry by his valiancie
Wan by conquest the royal Realm of France,
And of two Kingdoms made one Monarchy
Before his death, for better obeisance,
To his young son, not ripe to governance,
Protector of England I was by testament,
And John my brother in France made Regent.
To whom if God had lent a longer life,
Our house to have kept from storms of inward strife,
Or it had been the Lord Almighties will,
Plantagenet in state had standen still.
But deadly discord which all states do spill
Bred by desire of high domination,
Brought our whole house to plain desolation.
It is for truth in an history found
That Henry Plantagenet first of our name,
Who called was, King Henry the second
Son of Dame Maude, the Empress of high fame,
Would often report, that his ancient Grandame,
Though seeming in shape a woman natural,
Was a Feend of the kind that (Succubae) some call.
Which old fable, so long time told before,
When this Kings sons against him did rebel,
He called to mind, and being grieved sore,
Lo! now (quoth he) I see and prove full well
The story true, which folk of old did tell,
That from a feend descended all our race,
And now my children verify the case.
Whereof to leave a long memorial
In mind of man for evermore to rest,
A Picture he made and hung it in his Hall
Of a Pellicane sitting on his nest,
With four young birds, three pecking at his breast
With bloody beakes, and further did devise,
The youngest bird to pecke the fathers eyes.
Meaning hereby his rebel Children three,
Henry and Richard, bet him on the breast:
(Ieffrey only from that offense was free)
Henry died of Englands Crown possessed:
Richard lived his father to molest,
John the youngest pect his fathers eye,
Whose deeds unkind the sooner made him die.
This King (some write) in his sickness last
Said, as it were by way of prophecy,
How that the Devil a Darnell grain had cast
Among his kin, to increase enmity,
Which should remain in their posterity
Till mischief and murder had spent them all,
Not leaving one to piss against the wall.
And yet from him in order did succeed
In England here of crowned Kings fourteen
Of that surname, and of that line and seed,
With Dukes and Earls, and many a noble Queen,
The number such as all the world would ween
So many impes could never so be spent,
But some heir male should be of that descent.
Which to be true if any stand in doubt,
Because I mean not further to digress,
Let him pursue the histories throughout
Of English Kings whom practice did oppress,
And he shall find the cause of their distress
From first to last, unkindly to begin
Always by those that next were of the kin.
Was not Richard, of whom I spoke before,
A rebel plain until his father died,
And John likewise an enmy evermore
To Richard again, and for a rebel tried?
After whose death, it cannot be denied,
Against all right this John most cruelly
His brothers children caused for to die.
Arthur and Isabell (I mean) that were
Ieffreies children then duke of Britain
Henry's third son, by one degree more near
Then was this John, as stories show most plain,
Which two children were famisht or else slain
By John their Eame called Saunzterre by name,
Of whose foul act all countries speak great shame.
Edward and Richard, second both by name
Kings of this Land, fell down by fatal fate:
What was the cause that Princes of such fame
Did leese at last their honor, life, and state?
Nothing at all, but discord and debate,
Which when it haps in kindred or in blood,
Erynnis rage was never half so wood.
Be sure therefore ye Kings and Princes all
That concord in Kingdoms is chief assurance,
And that your families do never fall
But where discord does lead the doubtful dance
With busy brawles, and turns of variance:
Where malice is minstrel, the pipe ill report,
The mask mischief, and so ends the sport.
But now to come to my purpose again,
Whilst I my charge applied in England,
My brother in France long time did remain,
Cardinal Beauford took proudly in hand
In causes public against me to stand,
Who of great malice so much as he might
Sought in all things to do me despite.
Which proud prelate to me was bastard Eame,
Son to Duke John of Gaunt as they did feign,
Who being made high Chancellor of the Realm,
Not like a Priest, but like a Prince did reign,
Nothing wanting which might his pride maintain,
Bishop besides of Winchester he was,
And Cardinal of Rome, which Angels brought to pass.
Not Gods Angels, but Angels of old Gold
Lift him aloft, in whom no cause there was
By just desert so high to be extold,
(Riches except) whereby this golden ass
At home and abroad all matters brought to pass:
Namely at Rome, having no mean but that
To purchase there his crimz in Cardinal hat,
Which thing the King my father him forbad
Plainly saying, that he could not abide
Within his Realm a subject to be had
His Princes peer, yet such was this man's pride,
That he forth with after my father di'd,
(The King then young) obtained of the Pope
That honor high, which erst he could not hope.
Whose proud attempts because that I withstood,
My bound duty the better to acquit,
This holy father waxed well near wood,
Of mere malice devising day and night
To work to me dishonor and despite,
Whereby there fell between us such a jar,
As in this land was like a civil war.
My brother John, which lay this while in France,
Heard of this hurl, and past the seas in haste,
By whose travel this troublesome distance
Ceased a while, but nerethelesse in waste:
For rooted hate will hardly be displaste
Out of high hearts, and namely where debate,
Happens amongst great persons of estate.
For like as a match does lie and smoulder
Long time before it comes to the train:
But yet when fire has caught in the poulder,
No art is able the flames to restrain:
Even so the sparks of envy and disdain,
Out of the smoke burst forth in such a flame,
That France and England yet may rue the same.
So when of two Realms the regiment royal,
Between brothers was parted equally,
One placed in France for affairs Martial,
And I at home for civil policy:
To serve the state, we both did so apply,
As honor and same to both did increase,
To him for the war, to me for the peace.
Whence envy sprang, and specially because
This proud prelate could not abide a Peer
Within the land to rule the state by laws,
Wherefore sifting my life and acts most near,
He never ceast, until, as you shall hear,
By practice foul of him and his allies,
My death was wrought in most unworthy wise.
And first he sought my doings to defame,
By rumors false, which he and his did sow:
Letters and bills to my reproach and shame
He did devise, and all about bestow,
Whereby my troth in doubt should daily grow,
In England first, and afterward in France,
Moving all means to bring me to mischance.
One quarrel was, that where by common law
Murder and theft been punished all alike,
So as manslayers, which bloody blades do draw,
Suffer no more then he that does but pike,
Me thought the same no order politic,
In setting pains to make no difference,
Between the lesser and greater offense.
I being seen somewhat in civil law,
The rules thereof reputed much bitter.
Wherefore to keep offenders more in awe,
Like as the fault was smaller or greater,
So set I pains more easier or bitter,
Weghing the quality of every offense,
And so according pronounced sentence.
Among'st my other Delicta Iuuentutis,
Whilst rage of youth my reason did subdue,
I must confess as the very truth is,
Driven by desire fond fancies to ensue,
A thing I did, whereof great trouble grew,
Abusing one to my no small rebuke,
Which wife was then to John of Brabant Duke.
Called she was Lady Iaquet the fair,
Delitefull in love like Helene of Troy:
To the Duke of Bauier sole daughter and heir,
Her did I marry to my great annoy:
Yet for a time, this dame I did enjoy,
With her whole lands, withholding them by force,
Till Martin the Pope, between us made divorce.
Yet all these blasts not able were to move
The anchor strong, whereby my ship did stay,
Some other shift to seek him did behoue,
Whereto ere long ill Fortune made the way,
Which finally was cause of my decay
And cruel death, contrived by my foes,
Which fell out thus, as now I shall disclose.
Eleanor my wife, my Duchess only dear,
I know not how, but as the nature is
Of women all, aye curious to enquire
Of things to come (though I confess in this
Her fault not small) and that she did amiss,
By witches skill, which Sorcerie some call,
Would know of things which after should befall.
And for that cause made her self acquainted
With mother Madge, called the witch of Eye,
And with a Clerk that after was attainted,
Bolenbroke he hight, that learned was that way,
With other more, which famous were that day,
As well in Science called Mathematical,
As also in Magic skill supernatural.
These cunning folks she set on work to know
The time how long the King should live and reign,
Some by the Stars, and some by feends below,
Some by witchcraft sought knowledge to attain,
With like fancies, frivolous, fond and vain,
Whereof though I knew least of any man,
Yet by that mean my mischief first began.
Yet besides this there was a greater thing,
How she in wax by counsel of the witch,
An Image made, crowned like a King,
With sword in hand, in shape and likeness sich
As was the King, which daily they did pitch
Against a fire, that as the wax did melt,
So should his life consume away unfelt.
My Duchess thus accused of this crime,
As she that should such practice first begin,
My part was then to yield unto the time,
Giving her leave to deal alone therein.
And since the cause concerned deadly sin,
Which to the Clergy only does pertain,
To deal therein I plainly did refrain.
And suffered them her person to ascite
Into their Courts, to answer and appear,
Which to my heart was sure the greatest spite
That could be wrought, and touched me most near,
To see my wife, and Lady leefe and dear,
To my reproach, and plain before my face,
Entreated so, as one of sort most base.
The Clergy then examining her cause,
Convinced her, as guilty in the same,
And sentence gave according to their laws,
That she and they whom I before did name
Should suffer death, or else some open shame:
Of which penance my wife by sentence had
To suffer shame, of both the two more bad.
And first she must by days together three,
Through London streets pass all along in sight
Bareleg'd and barefoot, that all the world might see,
Bearing in hand a burning taper bright,
And not content with this extreme despite,
To work me woe in all they may or can,
Exiled she was into the I Will of Man.
This heinous crime and open worldly shame,
With such rigor showed unto my wife,
Was a fine fetch further things to frame,
And nothing else but a preparatiue
First from office, and finally from life
Me to deprive, and so passing further,
What law could not, to execute by murder.
Which by sly drifts, and windlaces aloof,
They brought about, persuading first the Queen,
That in effect it was the Kings reproof,
And hers also, to be exempted clean
From princely rule, or that it should be seen
A King of years still governed to be
Like a pupil, that nothing could foresee.
The danger more, considering the King
Was without child, I being his next heir
To rule the Realm, as Prince in every thing
Without restraint, and all the sway to bear.
With peoples love, whereby it was to fear
That my haut heart, unbridled in desire,
Time would prevent, and to the Crown aspire.
These with such like were put into her head,
Who of herself was thereto soon inclined,
Other there were that this ill humor fed,
To neither part that had good will or mind,
The Duke of York our cousin most unkind,
Who keeping close a title to the Crown,
Lancasters house did labor to pull down.
The stay whereof he took to stand in me,
Seeing the King of courage nothing stout,
Neither of wit great peril to foresee,
So for purpose, if he could bring about
Me to displace, then did he little doubt
To gain the Goal, for which he drove the ball,
The Crown (I mean) to catch ere it should fall.
This hope made him against me to conspire
With those which foes were to each other late,
The Queen did ween to win her whole desire,
Which was to rule the King and all the State
If I were rid, whom therefore she did hate,
Forecasting not, when that was brought to pass,
How weak of friends the King her husband was.
The Dukes two, of Excester, and Buckingham,
With the Marquise Dorset therein did agree,
But namely the Marquise of Suffolk William,
Contriuer chief of this conspiracy,
With other more, that sat still and did see
Their mortal foes on me to whet their knives,
Which turned at last to loss of all their lives.
But vain desire of soueraingtie and rule,
Which otherwise (Ambition) has no name,
So stirred the Queen, that wilful as a Mule,
Headlong she runs from smoke into the flame,
Driving a drift, which after did so frame,
As she, the King, with all their line and race,
Deprived were of honor, life, and place.
So for purpose she thought it very good,
With former foes in friendship to confeder,
The Duke of York and other of his blood,
With Neuils all, knit were then all together,
And Delapoole, friend before to neither:
The Cardinal also came within this list,
As Herod and Pilate to judge Jesus Christ.
This cursed league too late discovered was
By Bayards blind, that linked in the line,
The Queen and Cardinal brought it so to pass,
With Marquise Suffolk master of this mine,
Whose ill advice was counted very fine,
With other more which finely could disguise,
With false visours my mischief to devise.
Concluding thus they point without delay
Parliament to hold, in some unhaunted place,
Far from London, out of the common way,
Where few or none should understand the case,
But whom the Queen and Cardinal did embrace:
And so for place they chose Saint Edmundsburie,
Since when (some say) England was never merry.
Summons was sent this company to call,
Which made me muse, that in so great a case
I should no whit of counsel be at all,
Who yet had rule, and next the King in place,
Me thought nothing my state could more disgrace
Then to bear name, and in effect to be
A Cipher in Algrim, as all men might see.
And though just cause I had for to suspect
The time and place appointed by my foes,
And that my friends most plainly did detect
The subtle train, and practice of all those
Which against me great treasons did suppose,
Yet trust of truth with a conscience clear
Gave me good heart, in that place to appear.
Upon which trust with more haste then good speed,
Forward I went to that unlucky place
Duty to show, and no whit was in dread
Of any train, but bold to show my face
As a true man, yet so fell out the case
That after travel seeking for repose,
An armed band my lodging did enclose.
The Vicount Beaumount, who for the time supplied
The office of high Constable of the Land,
Was with the Queen and Cardinal allied,
By whose support he stoutly took in hand
My lodging to enter with an armed band,
And for high treason my person did arrest,
And laid me that night where him seemed best.
Then shaking and quaking, for dread of a dream,
Half waked all naked in bed as I lay,
What time struck the chime of mine hour extreme,
Oppressed was my rest with mortal affray,
My foes did unclose, I know not which way
My chamber doors, and boldly in brake,
And had me fast before I could wake.
Thou look now, that of my secret murder,
I should at large the manner how declare,
I pray thee Baldwine ask of me no further,
For speaking plain, it came so at unware,
As I my self, which caught was in the snare,
Scarcely am able the circumstance to show,
Which was kept close, and known but unto few.
But be thou sure by violence it was,
And no whit bred by sickness or disease,
That felt it well before my life did pass,
For when these wolves my body once did sease,
Used I was but smally to mine ease,
With torments strong which went so near the quick,
As made me die before that I was sick.
A Palsy (they said) my vital spirits oppressed,
Bred by excess of melancholy black,
This for excuse to lay, them seemed best,
Lest my true friends the cause might further rack,
And so perhaps discover the whole pack
Of my false foes, whom they might well suspect
For causes great, which after took effect.
Dead was I found by such as best did know
The manner how the same was brought to pass,
And then my corpse was set out for a show,
By view whereof nothing perceived was:
Whereby the world may see as in a glass,
The unsure state of them that stand most hie,
Which then dread least, when danger is most nie.
And also see what danger they are in,
Which next their King are to succeed in place:
Since Kings most part be jealous of their kin,
Whom I advise, forewarned by my case,
To bear low sail, and not too much embrace
The peoples love: for as Senec says truly:
O quam funestus est favor populi.
G. Ferrers.
HOW LORD WILLIAM DELAPOLE Duke of Suffolk was worthily banished, for abusing
his King, and causing the destruction of the good Duke Humfrey, Anno Dom. 1450.
Heavy is the hap whereto all men be bound,
I mean the death, which no estate may fly:
But to be banished, headed, and then drowned
In sink of shame from top of honors hie,
Was never man so served I think but I.
Wherefore Baldwine amongst the rest by right,
I claim of thee my woeful case to write.
My only life in all points may suffice,
To show how base all baits of Fortune be,
Which thaw like ye, through heat of enuies eyes,
Of vicious deeds which much possessed me.
Good hap with vice, long time cannot agree,
Which bring best Fortunes to the basest fall,
And happiest hap to envy to be thrall.
Called I was William De la Poole,
Of Suffolk Duke in Queen Margarets days,
That found the mean Duke Humfreys blood to cool,
Whose worthy acts deserve eternal praise,
Whereby I note that Fortune cannot raise
Any aloft, without some others wrack:
Floods drown no fields before they find bracke.
But as the waters which do break the walls
Do lose their course they had within the shore,
And daily rotting stink within their stalles,
For fault of moving which they found before:
Even so the state that over high is bore,
Does lose the life of peoples love it had,
And rots it self until it fall to bad.
For while I was but Earl, each man was glad
To say and do the best by me they might:
And Fortune ever since I was a lad,
Did smile upon me with a cheerful sight,
For when my King had doubed me a Knight
And sent me forth to serve at war in France,
My luckly speed mine honor did enhance.
Where, to omit the many feats I wrought
Under others guide, I do remember one,
Which with my soldiers valiantly was fought,
None other Captain save my self alone,
I mean not now the apprinze of Pucell Ione
In which attempt my travail was not small,
Though Burgoyne Duke had then the praise of all.
The siege of Awmarie is the feat I praise:
A strong built Town, with castles, walls, and vaults,
With men and weapon armd at all assaies:
To which I gave nigh five times five assaults,
Till at the last they yielded it for naughts.
Yet Lord Ramburs most like a valiant Knight,
Defended it as long as ere he might.
But what prevailed it these towns to win,
Which shortly after must be lost again?
Whereby I see there is more glory in
The keeping things, then is in their attain:
To get and keep not, is but loss and pain.
Therefore ought me^ provide to save their winnings
In all attempts, else lose they their beginnings.
Because we could not keep the towns we won,
For they were more then we might easily weeld,
One year undid what we in ten had done:
Envy at home, treason abroad, did yield
King Charles his Realm of France, made barren field:
For bloody wars had wasted all increase,
Which caused the Pope help need to sue for peace.
So that in Touraine at the town of Tours
Duke Charles and other for their Prince appeared,
So did Lord Rosse and I then Earl, for ours:
And when we showed wherein each other dered,
We sought out means all quarrels to have clered,
Wherein the Lords of Germany, of Spain,
Of Hungary, and Denmark, took great pain.
But since we could no final peace induce,
For neither would the others covenants hear,
For eighteen months we did conclude a truce:
And while as friends we lay together there,
Because my warrant did me therein bear,
To make a perfect peace and through accord,
I sought a marriage for my sovereign Lord.
And for the French Kings daughters were too small,
I fancied most Dame Margaret his niece,
A lovely Lady beautiful and tall,
Fair spoken, pleasant, and a Princely piece,
In wit and learning matchless hence to Greece,
Duke Rayners heir of Aniow, King by style
Of Naples, Jerusalem, and Sicil I Will.
But ere I could the grant of her attain,
All that our King had of her fathers lands,
As Maunts the town, the county whole of Maine,
And most of Aniow duchy in our hands,
I did release him by assured bands.
And as for do wire with her none I sought,
I thought no peace could be too dearly bought.
And when this marriage throwly was agreed
Although my King was glad of such a make,
His uncle Humfrey hated it indeed,
Because thereby his precontract he brake,
Made with the heir of the Earl of Arminacke,
A noble maid with store of goods endowed,
Which more then this with loss the Duke allowed.
But love and beauty in the King so wrought,
That neither gain or promise he regarded,
But set his uncles counsel still at naught:
And for my pains I highly was awarded.
Thus virtue starues, but lustfood must be larded.
For I made Marquess went to France again,
And brought this bride unto my Sovereign.
At home because Duke Humfrey aye repined,
Calling their match aduoutrie (as it was)
The Queen did move me, erst thereto inclined,
To help to bring him to his Requiem mass,
Which since it could for no crime come to pass,
His life and doings were so right and clear,
Through privy murder we brought him to his bear.
Thus righteousness brought Humfrey to rebuke,
Because he would no wickedness allow,
But for my doings I was made a Duke.
So Fortune can both bend and smooth her brow
On whom she list, not passing why or how.
O Lord how high, how soon she did me raise,
How fast she filled me both with prays and praise!
The Lords and Commons both of like assent,
Besought my sovereign kneeling on their knees,
For to record my deeds in the Parliament,
As deeds deserving everlasting fees.
In which attempt they did no labor leese,
For they set not my praise so fast in flame,
As he was ready to reward the same.
But note the end: my deeds so worthy deemed
Of King, of Lords, and Commons all together,
Were shortly after treasons false esteemed,
And all men cursed Queen Margets coming lither:
For Charles the French King in his feats not lither,
When we had rendered Rayner, Maunts, and Maine,
Found mean to win all Normandy again.
This made the people curse the marriage,
Esteeming it the cause of every loss:
Wherefore at me with open mouth they rage,
Affirming me to have brought the Realm to moss:
When King and Queen saw things thus go acrosse,
To quiet all a Parliament they called,
And caused me in prison to be thralled.
And shortly after brought me forth abroad,
Which made the Commons more then double wood:
And some with weapons would have laid on lode,
If their grand Captain Blewberd in his mood
Had not in time with wisdom been withstood:
But though that he and more were executed,
The people still their worst against me bruted.
And so applied the Parliament with bills,
Of heinous wrongs and open traitorous crimes,
That King and Queen were forced against their wills,
From place to place t'adiourne it diverse times.
For Princes power is like the sandy slimes,
Which must perforce give place unto the wave,
Or sue the windy sourges when they rave.
Their life was not more dear to them then I,
Which made them search all shifts to save me still,
But aye my foes such faults did on me try,
That to preserve me from a worser ill,
The King was feign full sore against his will,
For five years space to send me in exile,
In hope to have restored me in a while.
But mark how vengeance waits upon vice,
To shun this storm, in sailing toward France,
A Pirates Bark, that was of little price,
Encountered me upon the feas by chance,
Whose Captain there took me as in a trance,
Let pass my ships, with all their frait and load,
And led me back again to Dover road.
Where unto me recounting all my faults,
As murdering of Duke Humfrey in his bed,
And how I had brought all the Realm to naughts,
Causing the King unlawfully to wed,
There was no grace but I must lose my head.
Wherefore he made me shriue me in his bote,
And on the brinke my neck in two he smote.
This was mine end: which was by reason due
To me, and such as others deaths procure.
Therefore be bold to write, for it is true,
That whosoever does such practice put in ure,
Of due reward at last shall be most sure,
For God is just, whose stroke delayed long,
Does light at last with pain more sharp and strong.
W. Baldwine.
HOW JACK CADE NAMING HIMSELF MORTIMER, TRAYTEROVSLY rebelling against his
King, in June, Anno 1450. was for his treasons and cruel doings worthily
punished.
SHall I it Fortune call, or my froward folly,
That raised me up and laid me down below?
Or was it courage that made me so jolly,
Which of the stars and bodies greement grow?
What ere it were this one point sure I know,
Which shall be meet for every man to mark:
Our lust and wills our evils chiefly warke.
It may be well that Planets do incline,
And our complexions move our minds to ill,
But such is reason, that they bring to fine
No work vnayded of our lust and will:
For heaven and earth are subject both to skill.
The will of God rul'th all it is so strong,
Man may by skill guide things that to him long.
Though lust be stout, and will inclined to naught,
This forced by mixture, that by heavens course,
Yet through the grace God has in reason rought
And given man, no lust nor will to course,
But may be stayed or swaged of the sourse,
So that it shall in nothing force the mind
To work our woe, or leave the proper kind.
But though this grace be given to some man
To rule the will, and keep the mind aloft,
Yet few there be'mongst men that use it can,
These worldly pleasures tickle us so often:
The spirit weak, and will strong, flesh is soft,
And yeeldes it self to pleasure that it loves,
And hales the mind to that it most reproves.
Now if this hap whereby we yield our mind
To lust and will, be Fortune as we name her,
Then is she justly called false and blind,
And no reproach can be too much to blame her:
Yet is the shame our own when so we shame her,
For sure this hap if it be rightly known,
Comes of our selves, and so the blame our own.
For whosoever lives in the school of skill,
And medleth not with any worlds affairs,
Forsakes pomps and honors, that do spill
The minds recourse to Graces quiet stairs,
His state no Fortune by no mean appaires:
For Fortune is the only foe of those
Which to the world their wretched wills dispose.
Among which fools (mark Baldwine) I am one,
That would not stay my self in mine estate:
I thought to rule but to obey to none,
And therefore fell I with my King at bate.
And to the end I might him better mate,
John Mortimer I caused my self be called,
Whose kingly blood the Henry's nigh had thrall'd.
This shift I used the people to persuade
To leave their Prince, on my side more to stick,
Whereas indeed my fathers name was Cade,
Whose noble stock was never worth a stick,
But touching wit I was both ripe and quick,
Had strength of limbs large stature, comely face,
Which made men ween my lineage were not base.
And seeing stoutnes stuck by men in Kent,
Whose valiant hearts refuse none enterprise,
With false persuasions straight to them I went,
And said they suffered too great injuries:
By mean whereof I caused them to rise,
And battaile-wise to come to Black Heath plain,
And thence their griefs unto the King complain.
Who being deaf (as men say) on that ear,
For we desired release of subsidies,
Refused roughly our requests to hear,
And came against us as his enemies:
But we to stay him sought out subtilties,
Removed our Camp, and back to Senock went,
After whom the Staffords with their power were sent.
See here how Fortune setting us a flote,
Brought to our nets a portion of our pray.
For why, the Staffords with their army hot,
Assailed us at Senocke where we lay:
From whence alive they parted not away.
Which when the Kings retinue understood,
They all affirmed my quarrel to be good.
Which caused the King and Queen whom all did hate,
To raise their camp, and suddenly depart:
And that they might the peoples grudge abate,
T'imprison some full sore against their heart.
Lord Say was one, whom I made after smart,
For when the Staffords and their host was slain,
To Black Heath field I marched back again.
And where the King would nothing hear before,
Now was he glad to send to know my mind:
And I thereby enflamed much the more,
Refused his grants, so folly made me blind,
For this he flew and left Lord Scales behind,
To help the Town and strenghten London Tower,
Toward which I marched forward with my power:
And found there all things at mine own desire:
I entered London, did there what I list.
The Treasurer, Lord Say, I did conspire
To have condemned: whereof when I mist,
(For he by law my malice did resist)
By force I took him in Guildhall from the heap,
And headed him before the cross in Cheap.
His son in law James Cromer Shrief of Kent
I caught at Mile-end where as then he lay,
Beheaded him and on a pole I sent
His head to London where his fathers lay.
With these two heads I made a pretty play,
For pight on poles I bare them through the street,
And for my sport made each kiss other sweet.
Then brake I prisons, let forth whom I would,
And used the City as it had been mine:
Took from the Merchants money, ware and gold
From some by force, from other some by fine.
This at the length did cause them to repine,
So that Lord Scales consenting with the Maire,
For bad us to their City to repair.
For all this while mine host in Southwarke lay,
Who when they knew our passage was denied,
Came boldly to the bridge and made a fray,
For in we would, the townsmen us defied:
But when with strokes we had the matter tried,
We wan the bridge and set much part on fire,
This done to Southwarke back we did retire.
The morrow after came the Chancellor,
With general pardon for my men, half gone,
Which heard and read, the rest within an hour,
Shranke all away each man to shift for one.
And when I saw they left me post alone,
I did disguise me like a Knight of the post,
And into Sussex, rode all hope was lost.
And there I lurked till that cursed coin,
That restless begle sought and found me out,
For straight the King by promise did enjoin
A thousand mark to whomsoever might
Apprend my corpse, which made them seek about:
Among the which one Alexander Iden
Found out the hole, wherein the Fox was hidden.
But ere I fell, I put him to his trumps,
For yield I would not while my hands would hold,
But hope of money made him stir his stumps,
And to assault me valiantly and bold.
Two hours and more our combat was not cold,
Till at the last he lent me such a stroke,
That down I fell and never after spoke.
Then was my carcass carried like a hog,
To Southwarke borow where it lay a night,
The next day drawn to Newgate like a dog,
All men rejoicing at the rufull sight:
Then were on poles my perboil'd quarters pight,
And set aloft for vermin to devour,
Meet grave for rebels that resist the power.
Full little know we wretches what we do,
When we presume our Princes to resist.
We war with God, against his glory to,
That places in his office whom he list:
Therefore was never traitor yet but mist
The mark he shot, and came to shameful end,
Nor never shall till God be forced to bend.
God has ordained the power, all Princes be
His Lieutenants or deputies in Realms,
Against their foes therefore fights he,
And as his enmies drives them to extremes,
Their wise devices prove but doltish dreams.
No subject ought for any kind of cause
To force the Prince, but yield him to the laws.
Wherefore O Baldwine warn men follow reason,
Subdue their wills, and be not Fortunes slaves,
A shameful end does ever follow treason,
There is no trust in rebels, rascal knaves,
In Fortune less, which works as the waves:
From whose assaults who lists to stand free
Must follow skill, and so contented be.
W. Baldwine.
THE TRAGEDY OF EDMUND DVKE OF SOMMERSET, SLAIN IN THE FIRST battle at
Saint Albanes, the 23. day of May, in the 32. year of Henry the sixth, Anno
Dom. 1454.
SOme I suppose are borne unfortunate,
Else good endeavors could not ill succeed,
What shall I call it? ill fortune or fate,
That some men's attempts have never good speed,
Their travel thanklesse, all bootlesse their heed,
Where other unlike in working or skill,
Out wrestle the world, and weald it at will.
Of the first number I count my self one,
To all mishap I ween predestinate,
Believe me Baldwine there be few or none,
To whom Fortune was ever more ingrate.
Make thou therefore my life a caueate,
That whose with force will work against kind,
Saileth (as who says) against the stream and wind.
For I of Sommerset Duke Edmund hight,
Extract by descent from Lancaster line,
Were it by folly, or Fortunes despite,
Or by ill aspect of some crooked sign,
Of mine attempts could never see good fine:
What so I began did seldom well end:
God from such Fortune all good men defend.
Where I thought to save, most part I did spill,
For good hap with me was always at war.
The lineage of York whom I bare so ill,
By my spite became bright as the morning star.
Thus some whiles men make when feign they would mar,
The more ye lop trees, the greater they grow,
The more ye stop streams, the higher they flow.
Maugre my spite, his same grew the more,
And mine, as the Moon in the wane, waxt less:
For having the place which he had before,
Governor of France, needs I must confess,
That lost was Normandy without redress,
Yet wrought I always that wit might contriue,
But what does it boot with the stream to strive?
Borne was I neither to war ne to peace,
For Mars was malign to all my whole trade:
My birth I believe was in Jove's decrease,
When Cancer in his course being retrograde,
Declined from Sol to Saturnus shade,
Where aspects were good, opposites did mar,
So grew mine unhap both in peace and war.
A strange nativity in calculation,
As all my lives course did after well declare,
Whereof in brief to make relation,
That other by me may learn to beware,
Ouerlight credence was cause of my care,
And want of foresight in giving assent
To condemn Humfrey that Duke innocent.
Humfrey I mean that was the Protector,
Duke of Gloucester of the royal blood,
So long as he was Englands directour,
King Henry's title to the Crown was good.
This Prince as a pillar most steadfastly stood,
Or like a prop set under a vine,
In state to uphold all Lancasters line.
O heedlesse trust, unware of harm to come,
O malice headlong swift to serve fond will,
Did ever madness man so much benome
Of prudent forecast, reason, wit, and skill,
As me blind Bayard consenting to spill
The blood of my cousin, my refuge and stay,
To my destruction making open way?
So long as the Duke bare the stroke and sway,
So long no Rebels quarrels durst begin:
But when the post was pulled once away,
Which stood to uphold the King and his kin,
York and his banders proudly preased in
To challenge the Crown by title of right,
Beginning with law and ending with might.
Abroad went bruits in country and town
That York of England was the heir true,
And how Henry had usurped the Crown
Against all right, which all the Realm might rue.
The people then embracing titles new,
Irksome of present and longing for change,
Assented soon because they love to range.
True is the text which we in scripture read,
Va terra illi, cuius rex est puer,
Woe to that land whereof a child is head,
Whether child or childish, the case is one sure:
Where Kings be young, we daily see in ure,
The people awlesse, by weakness of their head,
Lead their lives lawless, having none to dread.
And no less true is this text again,
Beata terra cuius rex est nobilis,
Blessed is the land where a stout King does rain,
Where in good peace each man possesses his,
Where ill men fear to fault or do amiss,
Where a stout Prince is pressed, with sword in hand,
At home and abroad his enemies to withstand.
In case King Henry had been such a one,
Hardy and stout as his fathers before,
Long might he have sat in the royal throne,
Without any fear of common uproar.
But daily his weakness showed more and more,
Which boldness gave to the adversary band,
To spoil him at last both of life and land.
His humble heart was nothing unknown,
To the gallants of York and their retinue:
A ground lying low is soon overflowed,
And shored houses cannot long continue:
Ioints cannot knit where as is no sinew.
And so a Prince, not dread as well as loved,
Is from his place by practice soon removed.
Well might I see, had I not wanted brain,
The work begun to undermine the state,
When the chief link was loosed from the chain,
And that some durst upon blood royal grate.
How tickle a hold had I of mine estate?
When the chief post lay flat upon the flore,
Might not I think my staff then next the door?
So might I also dame Margaret the Queen,
By mean of whom this mischief first began,
Did she (trow ye) her self not over ween
Death to procure to that most worthy man?
Which she and hers afterward might well ban,
On whom did hang (as I before have said)
Her husbands life, his honor and his aid.
For whilst he lived which was our stable stay,
York and his impes were kept as under yoke,
But when the Pillar removed was away,
Then burst out flame, that late before was smoke,
The traitor covert then cast off his cloak,
And from his den came forth in open light,
With titles blind which he set forth for right.
But this to bring about, him first behooved
The King and his kin asunder for to set:
Who being perforce or practice removed,
Then had they avoided the principal let,
Which kept the sought pray so long from the net:
The next point after, was, themselves to place
In rule above the rest, next unto his Grace.
Therefore was I first whom they put out of place,
No cause pretending but the commonweal,
The Crown of England was the very case,
Why to the Commons they burned so in zeal.
My faults were clokes their practice to conceal,
In counsel hearing consider the intent,
For in pretense of truth treason often is meant.
So their pretense was only to remove
Counsel corrupt from place about the King.
But O ye Princes, you it does behoue
This case to construe as no fained thing,
That never traitor did subdue his King,
But for his plat, ere he could surder wade,
Against his friends the quarrel first he made.
And if by hap he could so bring about,
Them to subdue at his own wish and will,
Then would he wax so arrogant and stout,
That no reason his outrage might fulfill,
But to proceed upon his purpose still
Til King and counsel brought were in one case:
Such is their folly to rebels to give place.
So for the fish casting forth a net,
The next point was in driving out the plat,
Commons to cause in rage to fume and fret,
And to rebel, I cannot tell for what,
Requiring redress of this and of that:
Who if they speed, the stander at receipt
Grasp will the pray, for which he does await.
Then by surmise of some thing pretended,
Such to displace as they may well suspect,
Like to withstand their mischief intended,
And in their rooms their banders to elect,
The adverse party proudly to reject,
And then with reports the simple to abuse,
And when these helps fail, open force to use.
So this Dukes trains were covert and not seen,
Which meant no less, that he most pretended,
Like to a Serpent covert under green,
To the weal public seemed wholly bended:
Zealous he was, and would have all things mended,
But by that mendment nothing else he meant
But to be King, to that mark was his bent.
For had he been plain, as he meant indeed,
Henry to depose from the royal place,
His haste had been waste, and much worse his speed,
The King then standing in his peoples grace.
This Duke therefore set forth a goodly face,
As one that meant no quarrel for the Crown,
Such as bare rule he only would put down.
But all for naught so long as I bare stroke
Served these drifts, and proved all vain:
The best help then was people to provoke,
To make commotion and vprores amain:
Which to appease the King himself was feign,
From Black Heath in Kent to send me to the Tower,
Such was the force of rebels in that hour.
The troublous storm yet therewith was not ceased,
For York was bent his purpose to pursue,
Who seeing how speedily I was released,
And ill success of sufferance to ensue:
Then like Judas unto his Lord untrue,
Esteeming time lost any longer to defarre,
By Warwickes aid proclaimed open war.
At S. Albanes town both our hosts did meet,
Which to try a field was no equal place,
Forced we were to fight in every lane and street,
No fear of foes could make me shun the place:
There I and Warwick fronted face to face,
At an Inn door, the Castle was the sign,
Where with a sword was cut my fatal line.
Often was I warned to come in Castle none,
Having no mistrust of any common sign,
I did imagine a Castle built with stone,
For of no Inn I could the same divine:
In Prophets skill my wit was never fine,
A fool is he that such vain dreams does dred,
And more fool he that will by them be led.
My life I lost in that vnluckly place,
With many Lords that leaned to my part:
The stout Earl Percy had no better grace,
Clyfford courageous could not shun the dart,
Buckingham heir was at this mortal mart,
Babthorp the Attorney with his skill in law,
In pleading here appeared very raw.
King Henry thus disarmed of his bands,
His friends and followers wanting assistence,
Was made a prey unto his enemies hands,
Deprived of power and Princely reverence,
And as a pupil void of all experience,
Innocent plain, and simply witted,
Was as a Lamb unto the Wolf committed.
A Parliament then was called with speed,
A Parliament? nay, a plain conspiracy,
When against right it was decreed,
That after the death of the sixth Henry.
York should succeed unto the regaltie,
And in his life the charge and protection,
Of King and Realm at the Dukes direction.
And thus was York declared Protector,
Protector said I? nay, Proditor plain:
A rank rebel the Princes directour,
A vassal to lead his Lord and Sovereign.
What honest heart would not conceive disdain
To see the foot surmount above the head?
A monster is in spite of nature bred.
Some happily here will move a farther doubt,
And as for Yorkes part allege an elder right:
O brainelesse heads that so run in and out.
When length of time a state has firmly pight,
And good accord has put all strife to flight,
Were it not better such titles still to sleep,
Then all a Realm about the trial weep?
From the female came York, and all his seed,
And we of Lancaster from the heir male,
Of whom three Kings in order did succeed,
By just descent: this is no fained tale.
Who would have thought that any storm or gale
Our ship could shake, having such anchor hold?
None I think sure, unless that God so would.
After this hurl the King was feign to flee
Northward in post, for succor and relief!
O blessed God how strange it was to see,
A rightful Prince pursued as a thief:
To thee O England, what can be more repreefe?
Then to pursue thy Prince with armed hand,
What greater shame may be to any land?
Traitors did triumph, true men lay in dust,
Reuing and robbing roifled every where,
Will stood for skill, and law obeyed lust,
Might trod down right, of King there was no fear,
The title was tried only by shield and spear.
All which vnhaps that they were not foreseen,
Suffolk was in fault, who ruled King and Queen.
Some here perhaps, do look I should accuse
My self of slight, or subtlety unjust,
Wherein I should my Princes ears abuse
Against the Duke, to bring him in mistrust:
Some part whereof, though needs confess I must,
My fault only consisted in consent,
Leaning to my foes, whereof I do repent.
If I at first when brands began to smoke,
The sparks to quench by any way had sought,
Never had England felt this mortal stroke,
Which now too late lamenting helps naught.
Two points of wit, too dearly have I bought,
The first, that better is timely to foresee,
Then after over late a counselor to be.
The second is, not easily to assent
To advice given against thy faithful friend,
But of the speaker ponder the intent,
The meaning full, the point, and final end.
A Saint in show, in proof is found a Feend,
The subtle man the simple to abuse,
Much pleasant speech and eloquence does use.
And so was I abused and other more
By Suffolkes sleights, who sought to please the Queen,
Forecasting not the misery and woe
Which therefore came, and soon was after seen:
With glosing tongue he made us fools to ween,
That Humfrey did to Englands Crown aspire,
Which to prevent, his death they did conspire.
What should I more of mine vnhaps declare,
Whereof my death at last has made an end?
Not I alone was void of all this care,
Some besides me there were that did offend.
None I accuse, nor yet my self defend,
Faults I know I had, as none lives without,
My chief fault was folly, I put thee out of doubt.
Folly was the chief, the naughty time was next,
Which made my Fortune subject to the chief:
If England then with strife had not been vexed,
Glory might have grown whereas ensued grief.
Yet one thing is my comfort and relief,
Constant I was in my Princes quarrel
To die or live, and spared for no parrell.
What though Fortune envious was my foe?
A noble heart ought not the sooner yield,
Nor shrink abacke for any weal or woe,
But for his Prince lie bleeding in the feeld:
If privy spite at any time me held,
The price is paid: and grievous is my guerdon,
As for the rest me God (I trust) will pardon.
G. Ferrers.
HOW RICHARD PLANTAGENET DVKE OF YORK, was slain through his over rash
boldness, and his son the Earl of Rutland, for his lack of valiance, An.
Dom. 1460.
TRust not in chance, in whom was never trust,
Of foolish men that have no better grace,
All rest, renown and deeds lie in the dust,
Of all the sort that sue her slipper trace.
What meanest thou Baldwine for to hide thy face?
Thou need not fear although I miss my head,
Nor yet to mourn for this my son is dead.
The cause why thus I lead him in my hand,
His skin with blood and tears so sore bestain'd,
Is that thou may the better understand,
How hardly Fortune has for us ordained,
In whom her love and hate be whole contained.
For I am Richard Prince Plantagenet,
The Duke of York in royal race beget.
From Lionel the third begotten son
Of Kingly Edward by descent I came
From Philip hight his heir we first begun
The crown as due to us by right to clame:
And in the end we did obtain the same,
She was sole heir by due descent of line,
Whereby her rights and titles all were mine.
But mark me now, I pray thee Baldwine mark,
And see how force often ouerbeareth right:
Way how usurpers tyrannously warke,
To keep by murder that they get by might,
And note what troublous dangers do alight
On such as seek to repossesse their own,
And how through rigor, right is overthrown.
The Duke of Herford, Henry Bolenbroke,
Of whom Duke Mowbray told thee now of late,
When void of cause he had King Richard took:
He murdered him, usurped his estate,
Without all right or title, saving hate
Of others rule, or love to rule alone:
These two excepted, title had he none.
The Realm and Crown was Edmund Mortimers,
Whose father Roger was King Richards heir:
Which caused Henry and the Lancasters
To seek all shift our households to appaire,
For sure he was to sit beside the chair,
Were we of power to claim our lawful right,
Against us therefore he did all he might.
His cursed son ensued his cruel path,
And kept my guiltless cousin strait in durance:
For whom my father hard entreated has.
But living hopeless of his lives assurance,
He thought it best by politic procurance,
To slay the King, and so restore his friend:
Which brought himself to an infamous end.
For when King Henry of that name the fifth,
Had taken my father in his conspiracy,
He from Sir Edmund all the blame to shift,
Was feign to say the French King Charles his alley
Had hired him this traiterous act to try,
For which condemned shortly he was slain,
In helping right this was my fathers gain.
Thus when the lineage of the Mortimers
Was made away by his usurping line,
Some hanged, some slain, some pined prisoners,
Because the Crown by right of law was mine,
They began as fast against me to repine,
In fear always lest I should stir some strife,
For guilty hearts have never quiet life,
Yet at the last in Henry's days the sixth,
I was restored to my fathers lands,
Made Duke of York: where through my mind I fixed
To get the Crown and Kingdom in my hands,
For aid wherein I knit assured bands
With Neuils stock, whose daughter was my make,
Who for no woe would ever me forsake.
O Lord what hap had I through marriage,
Four goodly boys in youth my wife she bore,
Right valiant men and prudent for their age,
Such brethren she had and nephues in store
As none had erst, nor any shall have more:
The Earl of Salisbury, and his son of Warwick,
Were matchless men from Barbary to Barwicke.
Through help of whom and Fortunes lovely look,
I undertook to claim my lawful right,
And to abash such as against me took,
I raised power at all points pressed to fight:
Of whom the chief that chiefly bare me spite,
Was Sommerset the Duke, whom to annoy
I always sought, through spite, spite to destroy.
And maugre him, so choice lo was my chance,
Yea though the Queen that all ruled took his part,
I twice bare rule in Normandy and France,
And last Lieutenant in Ireland, where my heart
Found remedy for every kind of smart.
For through the love my doings there did breed,
I had their help at all times in my need.
This spiteful Duke, his silly King and Queen,
With armed hosts I thrice met in the field,
The first unsought through treaty made between,
The second ioind, wherein the King did yield,
The Duke was slain, the Queen enforst to shield
Her self by flight. The third the Queen did fight,
Where I was slain being over matched by might.
Before this last were other battles three:
The first the Earl of Salisbury led alone,
And fought on Bloreheath, and got victory:
In the next I with kinsfolk every one.
But seeing our soldiers stale unto our fone,
We warely brake our company on a night,
Dissolved our host, and took our selves to flight.
This Boy and I in Ireland did us save,
Mine eldest son with Warwick and his father
To Calais got, whence by the read I gave
They came again to London, and did gather
An other host, whereof I spoke no rather:
And met our foes, flewe many a Lord and Knight,
And took the King and drove the Queen to flight.
This done I came to England all in haste,
To make a claim unto the Realm and Crown:
And in the house while parliament did last,
I in the Kings seat boldly sat me down,
And claimed it, whereat the Lords did frown,
But what for that? I did so well proceed,
That all at last confessed it mine indeed.
But since the King had reigned now so long,
They would he should continue till he died,
And to the end that then none did me wrong,
In each place heir apparent they me cried.
But since the Queen and others this denied,
I sped me toward the North where then she lay,
In mind by force to cause her to obey.
Whereof she warnd prepared a mighty power,
And ere that mine were altogether ready,
Came swift to Sandale and besieged my bower:
Where like a beast I was so rash and heady,
That out I would, there could be no remedy,
With scant five thousand soldiers, to assail
Four times so many, encampt to most avail.
And so was slain at first: and while my child
Scarce twelve year old, sought secretly to part,
That cruel Clifford, Lord, nay Lorell wild
While the infant wept, and prayed him rue his smart,
Knowing what he was, with dagger cloue his heart:
This done, he came to the camp where I lay dead,
Despoiled my corpse and cut away my head.
Which with a painted paper Crown thereon,
He for a present sent unto the Queen:
And she for spite commanded it anon
To York fast by: where, that it might be seen,
They placed it where other traitors been.
This mischief Fortune did me after death.
Such was my life, and such my loss ofbreath.
Wherefore see Baldwine that thou set it forth,
To the end the fraud of Fortune may be known,
That eke all Princes well may weigh the worth
Of things, for which the seeds of war be sown:
No state so sure but soon is overthrown.
No worldly good can counterpoize the prise,
Of half the pains that may thereof arise.
Better it were to lose a piece of right,
Then limbs and life in striving for the same:
It is not force of friendship nor of might,
But God that causes things to fro or frame,
Not wit but luck does wield the winners game.
Wherefore if we our follies would refrain,
Time would redress all wrongs we void of pain.
Wherefore warn Princes not to wade in war
For any cause except the Realms defense:
Their troublous titles are unworthy far
The blood, the life, the spoil of innocence:
Of friends, of foes behold my foul expense,
And never the near: best therefore tarry time,
So right shall reign, and quiet calm each crime.
HOW THE LORD CLIFFORD FOR HIS STRANGE and abominable cruelty, came to as
strange and sudden a death, Anno, 1461.
OPen confession asks open penance,
And wisdom would a man his shame to hide:
Yet since forgiveness comes through repentance,
I think it best that men their crimes ascride,
For naught so secret but at length is spide:
For cover fire, and it will never linne
Till it break forth, in like case shame and sin.
As for my self my faults be out so plain,
And published abroad in every place,
That though I would I cannot hide a grain.
All care is bootlesse in a curelesse case,
To learn by others grief some have the grace:
And therefore Baldwine write my wretched fall,
The brief whereof I briefly utter shall.
I am the same that slew Duke Richards child,
The lovely babe that begged life with tears:
Whereby mine honor foully I defiled.
Poor silly Lambs the Lion never tears:
The feeble mouse may lie among the bears:
But wrath of man his rancour to requite,
Forgets all reason, ruth, and virtue quite.
I mean by rancour the parentall wreake
Surnamed a virtue (as the vicious say)
But little know the wicked what they speak,
In boldning us our enmies kin to slay.
To punish sin is good, it is no nay.
They wreake not sin, but merit wreake for sin,
That wreake the fathers fault upon his kin.
Because my father Lord John Clyfford died,
Slain at Saint Albanes, in his Princes aid,
Against the Duke my heart for malice fried,
So that I could from wrecke no way be stayed,
But to avenge my fathers death, assayed
All means I might the Duke of York t'annoy,
And all his kin and friends for to destroy.
This made me with my bloody dagger wound
His guiltless son, that never against me stored:
His fathers body lying dead on ground
To pierce with spear, eke with my cruel sword
To part his neck, and with his head to board
Enuested with a royal paper crown,
From place to place to bear it up and down.
But cruelty can never escape the scourge
Of shame, of horror, or of sudden death.
Repentance self that other sins may purge
Does fly from this, so sore the soul it slays.
Despair dissolues the tyrants bitter breath:
For sudden vengeance suddenly alights
On cruel deeds, to quite their cruel spights.
This find I true, for as I lay in stale
To fight with this Duke Richards eldest son,
I was destroyed not far from Dintingdale,
For as I would my gorget have undone
T'euent the heat that had me nigh undone,
An headless arrow struck me through the throat,
Where through my soul forsook his filthy cote.
Was this a chance? no sure, Gods just award,
Wherein due justice plainly does appear:
An headless arrow paid me my reward,
For heading Richard lying on his bear,
And as I would his child in no wise hear,
So sudden death bereft my tongue the power
To ask for pardon at my dying hour.
Wherefore, good Baldwine, warn the bloody sort,
To leave their wrath, their rigor to refrain:
Tell cruel Judges horror is the port
Through which they sail to shame and sudden pain:
Hell halleth tyrants down to death amain.
Was never yet nor shall be cruel deed
Left unrewarded with as cruel meed.
THE INFAMOVS END OF THE LORD TIPTOFT EARL OF WORcester, for cruelly executing
his Princes butcherly commandments. Anno Dom. 1470.
THe glorious man is not so loath to lurk,
As the infamous glad to lie unknown:
Which makes me Baldwine, disallow thy work,
Where Princes faults so openly be blown.
I speak not this alonly for mine own
Which were my Princes (if that they were any)
But for my Peers in number very many.
Or might report uprightly use her tongue,
It would less grieve us to augment the matter.
But sure I am thou shall be forced among,
To wrench the truth the living for to flatter:
And other whiles in points unknown to smatter.
For time nere was, nor nere I think shall be
That truth vnshent should speak in all things free.
This does appear (I dare say) by my story,
Which diverse writers diversely declare:
But story writers ought for neither glory,
Fear, nor favor, truth of things to spare.
But still it fares as always it did fare,
Affections, fear, or doubts that daily brue,
Do cause that stories never can be true.
Unfruitful Fabian followed the face
Of time and deeds, but let the causes slip:
Which Hall has added, but with double grace,
For fear I think lest trouble might him trip:
For this or that (says he) he felt the whip.
Thus story writers leave the causes out,
Or so rehearse them as they were in dout.
But seeing causes are the chiefest things
That should be noted of the story writers,
That men may learn what ends all causes brings,
They be unworthy name of Chroniclers
That leave them clean out of their registers,
Or doubtfully report them: for the fruit
Of reading stories stands in the suite.
And therefore Baldwine either speak upright
Of our affairs, or touch them not at all:
As for my self I way all things so light,
That naught I pass how men report my fall.
The truth whereof yet plainly show I shall,
That thou may write and others thereby reed,
What things I did whereof they should take heed.
Thou heardst of Tiptofts Earls of Worcester,
I am that Lord that lived in Edwards days
The fourth, and was his friend and counsailour,
And butcher too, as common rumor says.
But peoples voice is neither shame nor praise:
For whom they would alive devour today,
Tomorow dead they'ill worship what they may.
But though the peoples verdit go by chance,
Yet was there cause to call me as they did:
For I enforst by mean of governance,
Did execute what ere my King did bid,
From blame herein my self I cannot rid:
But sie upon the wretched state that must
Defame it self to serve the Princes lust.
The chiefest crime wherewith men do me charge,
Is death of the Earl of Desmunds noble sons,
Of which the Kings charge does me clear discharge,
By strait commandment and injunctions:
The effect whereof so rigorously runs,
That or I must procure to see them dead,
Or for contempt as guilty lose my head.
What would mine foemen do in such a case,
Obey the King or proper death procure?
They may well say their fancy for a face,
But life is sweet, and love hard to recure.
They would have done as I did, I am sure:
For seldom will a wealthy man at ease
For others cause his Prince in ought displease.
How much less I, which was Lieutenant than
In the Irish Isle, preferred by the King:
But who for love or dread of any man
Consents t'accomplish any wicked thing,
Although chief fault thereof from other spring,
Shall not escape Gods vengeance for his deed,
Who scuseth none that dare do ill for dreed.
This in my King and me may well appear,
Which for our faults did not escape the scourge:
For when we thought our state most sure and clear,
The wind of Warwick blew up such a sourge,
As from the Realm and Crown the King did pourge,
And me both from mine office, friends, and wife,
From good report, from honest death and life.
For the Earl of Warwick through a cancard grudge
Which to King Edward causeless he did bear,
Out of his Realm by force did make him trudge,
And set King Henry again upon his chair.
And then all such as Edwards lovers were
As traitors taken, were grievously oppressed,
But chiefly I, because I loved him best.
And, for my goods and livings were not small,
The gapers for them bare the world in hand
For ten years space, that I was cause of all
The executions done within the land.
For this did such as did not understand
Mine enmies drift, think all reports were true:
And so did hate me worse then any Jew.
For seldom shall a ruler lose his life,
Before false rumors openly be spread:
Whereby this proverb is as true as rife,
That rulers rumors hunt about a head,
Frown Fortune once all good report is fled:
For present show does make the many blind,
And such as see dare not disclose their mind.
Through this was I King Edwards butcher named,
And bare the shame of all his cruel deeds:
I clear me not, I worthily was blamed,
Though force was such I must obey him needs.
With highest rulers seldom well it speeds,
For they be ever nearest to the nip,
And fault who shall, for all feel they the whip.
For when I was by Parliament attainted,
King Edwards evils all were counted mine.
No truth auailed, so lies were fast and painted,
Which made the people at my life repine,
Crying Crucifige, kill that butchers line:
That when I should have gone to Blockham feast,
I could not pass, so sore they on me preast.
And had not been the officers so strong,
I think they would have eaten me alive,
Howbeit hardly haled from the throng,
I was in Fleet fast shrouded by the Shriue.
Thus one days life their maliee did me give:
Which when they knew, for spite the next day after
They kept them calm, so suffered I the slaughter.
Now tell me Baldwine, what fault do thou find
In me, that justly should such death deserve?
None sure, except desire of honor blind,
Which made me seek in offices to serve:
What mind so good that honors make not swerue?
So may thou fee it only was my state
That caused my death, and brought me so in hate.
Warn therefore all men wisely to beware,
What offices they enterprise to bear:
The highest always most maligned are,
Of peoples grudge, and Princes hate in fear.
For Princes faults his faultors all men tear.
Which to avoid, let none such office take,
Save he that can for right his Prince forsake.
HOW SIR RICHARD NEVILL EARL OF WARWICK, AND HIS BROTHER JOHN Lord Marquise
Montacute, through their too much boldness were slain at Barnet, the 14. of
April, Anno 1471.
AMong the heavy heap of happy Knights
Whom Fortune stal'd upon her staylesse stage,
Often hoist on high, often pight in wretched plights,
Behold me, Baldwine, A perse of my age,
Lord Richard Neuill, Earl by marriage
Of Warwick Duchy, of Sarum by descent,
Which erst my father through his marriage hent.
Would thou behold false Fortune in her kind?
Note well my self, so shall thou see her naked:
Full fair before, but too too foul behind,
Most drowsy still when most she seems awaked:
My fame and shame her shift full often has shaked,
By enterchange allow and up aloft,
The Lysard like that changes hue full often.
For while the Duke of York in life remaind
Mine uncle dear, I was his happy hand:
In all attempts my purpose I attaind,
Though King and Queen and most Lords of the land
With all their power did often me withstand:
For God gave Fortune, and my good behavior
Did from their Prince steal me the peoples favor.
So that through me in fields right manly fought,
By force mine uncle took King Henry twice:
As for my cousin Edward I so wrought,
When both our fires were slain through rash advice,
That he atchieu'd his fathers enterprise:
For into Scotland King and Queen we chased,
By mean whereof the Kingdom he embraced.
Which after he had held in quiet peace,
(For shortly after was King Henry take,
And put in hold) his power to increase,
I went to France and match him with a make,
The French Kings daughter, whom he did forsake:
For while with pain I brought this suit to pass,
He to a widow rashly wedded was.
This made the French King shrewdly to mistrust,
That all my treaties had but ill pretense,
And when I saw my King so bent to lust,
That with his faith he past not to dispense,
Which is a Princes honors chief defense:
I could not rest till I had found a mean
To mend his miss, or else to mar him clean.
I me allied with his brother George,
Incensing him his brother to malign,
Through many a tale I did against him forge:
So that through power that we from Calais bring
And found at home, we fraied so the King,
That he did fly to Freeselandward amain,
Whereby King Henry had the Crown again.
Then put we the Earl of Worcester to death,
King Edwards friend, a man lo foul defamed:
And in the while came Edward into breath.
For with the Duke of Burgoine so he framed,
That with the power that he to him had named,
Unlooked for he came to England straight,
And got to York, and took the town by sleight.
And after through the sufferance of my brother,
Which like a beast occasion foulely lost,
He came to London safe with many other,
And took the town to good King Henry's cost:
Who was through him from post to pillar tossed,
Till the Earl of Oxford, I and other more,
Assembled power his freedom to restore.
Whereof King Edward warned came with speed,
And camped with his host in Barnet town,
Where we right fierce encountered him indeed
On Easter day right early on the down:
There many a man was slain and stricken down
On either side, and neither part did gain,
Till that I and my brother both were slain.
For we to heart our ouermatched men,
Forsook our steeds, and in the thickest throng
Ran preasing forth on foot, and fought so then
That down we drove them were they nere so strong:
But we ere luck had lasted very long
With force and number were so foulely cloyed,
And rescue failed, that quite we were destroyed.
Now tell me, Baldwine, have thou heard or read
Of any man that did as I have done?
That in his time so many armies led,
And victory at every voyage won?
Have thou ere heard of subject under sun,
That placed and bac'd his Sovereigns so often
By enterchange, now low, and then aloft?
Perchance thou think my doings were not such
As I and other do affirm they were:
And in thy mind I see thou musest much
What means I used, that should me so prefer:
Wherein because I will thou shall not err,
The truth of all I will at large recite,
The short is this: I was no Hypocrite.
I never did nor said save what I meant,
The commonweal was still my chiefest care:
To private gain or good was I nere bent,
I never past upon delicious fare.
Of needful food my board was never bare,
No creditour did curse me day by day,
I used plainness, ever pitch and pay.
I heard poor soldiers and poor workmen whine
Because their duties were not truly pai'd:
Again I saw how people did repine
At those through whom their payment was delai'd:
And proof did often assure (as Scripture said)
That God does wreake the wretched peoples greeues,
I saw the polles cut off from polling thieves.
This made me always justly for to deal,
Which when the people plainly understood,
Because they saw me mind the Commonweal,
They still endeavored how to do me good,
Ready to spend their substance, life, and blood,
In any cause whereto I did them move:
For sure they were it was for their behoue.
And so it was. For when the Realm decayed
By such as good King Henry sore abused,
To mend the state I gave his enemies aid:
But when King Edward sinful prankes still used,
And would not mend, I likewise him refused,
And help King Henry, better of the twain,
And in his quarrel (just I think) was slain.
And therefore Baldwine teach by proof of me,
That such as covet peoples love to get,
Must see their works and words in all agree,
Live liberally and keep them out of det,
On Commonwealth let all their care be set:
For upright dealing, debts paid, poor sustained,
Is mean whereby all hearts are throwly gained.
HOW KING HENRY THE SIXTH, A VIRTUOUS PRINCE, WAS, AFter many other miseries,
cruelly murdered in the Tower of London the 22. of May, Anno, 1471.
IF ever woeful wight had cause to rue his state,
Or by his ruefull plight to move men moan his fate,
My piteous plaint may prease my mishap to rehearse,
Whereof the least most lightly heard, the hardest heart may pierce.
What heart so hard can hear of innocence oppressed
By fraud in worldly goods, but melts in the breast?
When guiltless men be spoiled, imprisoned for their own,
Who waileth not their wretched case to whom ye case is known?
The Lion lickes the sores of silly wounded sheep,
The dead man's corpse may cause the Crocodile to weep,
The waves that waste the rocks refresh the rotten reeds,
Such ruth the wrack of innocence in cruel creatures breeds.
What heart is then so hard, but will for pity bleed,
To hear so cruel luck so clear a life succeed?
To see a silly soul with woe and sorrow sounst,
A King deprived, in prison pent, to death with daggers dounst.
Would God the day of birth had brought me to my bear,
Then had I never felt the change of Fortunes chere:
Would God the grave had gript me in her greedy womb,
When crown in cradle made me King with oil of holy thombe.
Would God the rufull tomb had been my royal throne,
So should no Kingly charge have made me make my moan:
O that my soul had flowen to heaven with the joy,
When one sort cried, God save the King, another, Viue le Roy.
So had I not been washed in waves of worldly woe,
My mind to quiet bent, had not been tossed so:
My friends had been alive: my subjects not oppressed:
But death or cruel destiny denied me this rest.
Alas what should we count the cause of wretches cares,
The stars do stir them up, Astronomy declares:
Our humors says the leach, the double true divines
To The will of God, or ill of man, the doubtful cause assigns.
Such doltish heads as dream that all things drive by haps,
Count lack of former care for cause of after claps,
Attributing to man a power fro God bereft,
Abusing us, and robbing him through their most wicked theft.
But God does guide the world, and every hap by skill,
Our wit and willing power are poized by his will:
What wit most wisely wards, and will most deadly vrkes
Though all our power would press it down, does dash our warest works.
Then destiny, our sin, Gods will or else his wreake
Do work our wretched woes, for humors be too weak,
Except we take them so as they provoke to sin,
For through our lust by humors fed all vicious deeds begin.
So sin and they be one, both working like effect,
And cause the wrath of God to wreake the soul infect,
Thus wrath and wreake divine, man's sins and humors ill
Concur in one, though in a sort, each does a course fulfill.
If likewise such as say the welkin Fortune warkes,
Take Fortune for our fate and Stars thereof the marks,
Then destiny with fate and Gods will all be one:
But if they mean it otherwise, skath causers skies be none.
Thus of our heavy haps chief causes be but twain,
Whereon the rest depend, and under put remain:
The chief the will divine, called destiny and fate,
The other sin through humors help, which God does highly hate.
The first appoints pain for good men's exercise,
The second does deserve due punishment for vice:
This witnesses the wrath, and that the love of God,
The good for love, the bad for sin God beats with his rod.
Although my sundry sins do place me with the worst,
My haps yet cause me hope to be among the first:
The eye that searches all and sees every thought,
Is Judge how sore I hated sin, and after virtue sought.
The solace of my soul my chiefest pleasure was,
Of worldly pomp, of fame, or game I did not pass:
My Kingdoms nor my Crown I prised not a crum:
In Heaven were my riches heapt, to which I sought to come.
Yet were my sorrows such as never man had like,
So diverse storms at once, so often did me strike:
But why, God knows, not I, except it were for this,
To show by pattern of a Prince, how brittle honor is.
Our kingdoms are but cares, our state deuoid of stay,
Our riches ready snares, to hasten our decay:
Our pleasures privy pricks our vices to provoke,
Our pomp a pumpe, our fame a flame, our power a smouldring smoke.
I speak not but by proof, and that may many rue,
My life does cry it out, my death does try it true:
Whereof I will in brief rehearse the heavy hap,
That Baldwine in his woeful warpe, my wretchedness may wrap.
In Windsore borne I was, and bare my fathers name,
Who won by war all France to his eternal fame,
And left to me the crown, to be received in peace
Through marriage made with Charles his heir upon his life's decease.
Which shortly did ensue, yet died my father furst,
And both the Realms were mine ere I a year were nursed:
Which as they fell too soon, so faded they as fast.
For Charles and Edward got them both or forty years were past.
This Charles was eldest son of Charles my father in law,
To whom as heir of France, the Frenchmen did them draw,
But Edward was the heir of Richard Duke of York,
The heir of Roger Mortimer, slain by the kerne of Korke.
Before I came to age Charles had recovered France,
And killed my men of war, so happy was his chance:
And through a mad contract I made with Raynerds daughter
I gave and lost all Normandy, the cause of many a slaughter.
First of mine uncle Humfrey, abhorring sore this act,
Because I thereby brake a better precontract:
Then of the flattering Duke that first the marriage made,
The just reward of such as dare their Princes ill persuade.
And I poor silly wretch abode the brunt of all,
My marriage lust so sweet was mixed with bitter gall.
My wife was wise and good, had she ben rightly sought,
But our unlawful getting it, may make a good thing naught.
Wherefore warn men beware how they just promise break,
Lest proof of painful plagues do cause them wail the wreake,
Advise well ere they grant, but what they grant perform:
For God will plague all doublenes although we feel no worm.
I falsely borne in hand, believed I did well,
But all things be not true that learned men do tell:
My clergy said a Prince was to no promise bound,
Whose words to be no gospel tho, I to my grief have found.
For after marriage ioind Queen Margaret and me,
For one mishap before, I daily met with three:
Of Normandy and France Charles got away my Crown,
The Duke of York and other sought at home to put me down.
Bellona rang the bell at home and all abroad,
With whose mishaps amain fell Fortune did me load:
In France I lost my forts, at home the foughten field,
My kindred slain, my friends oppressed, my self enforst to yield.
Duke Richard took me twice, and forced me to resine
My Crown and titles due unto my fathers line:
And kept me as a ward, did all things as him list,
Till that my wife through bloody sword had taken me from his fist.
But though we slew the Duke my sorrows did not slake,
But like to Hydraes head still more and more awake:
For Edward through the aid of Warwick and his brother
From one field drove me to the Scots, and took me in another.
Then went my friends to wrack, for Edward ware the Crown,
For which for nine years space his prison held me down:
Yet thence through Warwickes work I was again releast.
And Edward driven fro the realm to seek his friends by East.
But what prevails pain or providence of man
To help him to good hap, whom destiny does ban?
Who moileth to remove the rock out of the mud,
Shall mire himself, and hardly escape the swelling of the flud.
This all my friends have found, and I have felt it so,
Ordained to be the touch of wretchedness and woe:
For ere I had a year possessed my seat again,
I lost both it and liberty, my helpers all were slain.
For Edward first by stelth and since by gathred strength
Arrived, and got to York and London at the length:
Took me and tied me up, yet Warwick was so stout,
He came with power to Barnet field, in hope to help me out,
And there alas was slain, with many a worthy knight.
O Lord that ever such luck should hap in helping right:
Last came my wife and son, that long lay in exile,
Defied the King, and fought a field, I may bewail the while.
For there mine only son, not thirteen years of age,
Was taken, and murdered straight by Edward in his rage:
And shortly I my self to stint all further strife,
Stabbed with his brothers bloody blade in prison lost my life.
Lo here the heavy haps which happened me by heap,
See here the pleasant fruits that many Princes reap,
The painful plagues of those that break their lawful bands,
Their meed which may and will not save their friends from bloody hands.
God grant my woeful haps, too grievous to rehearce,
May teach all States to know how deeply dangers pierce,
How frail all honors are, how brittle worldly bliss,
That warned through my fearful fate they fear to do amiss.
HOW GEORGE PLANTAGENET THIRD SON OF THE DVKE OF York, was by his brother
King Edward wrongfully imprisoned, and by his brother Richard miserably
murdered, the 11. of January, An. Dom. 1478.
THe foul is foul men say, that files the nest.
Which makes me loath to speak now, might I choose,
But seeing time unburdened has her breast,
And fame blown up the blast of all abuse,
My silence rather might my life accuse
Then shroud our shame, though feign I would it so,
For truth will out, although the world say no.
And therefore Baldwine I do thee beseech
To pause a while upon my heavy plaint,
And uneath though I utter speedy speech,
No fault of wit nor folly makes me faint:
No headie drinks have given my tongue attaint
Through quaffing craft: Yet wine my wits confound,
Not that I drank, but wherein I was drowned.
What Prince I am although I need not show,
Because my wine bewrayes me by the smell:
For never man was soust in Bacchus dew
To death but I, through Fortunes rigor fell:
Yet that thou may my story better tell,
I will declare as briefly as I may,
My wealth, my woe, and causers of decay.
The famous house surnamed Plantagenet,
Whereat Dame Fortune frowardly did frown,
While Bolenbroke unjustly sought to set
His Lord King Richard quite beside the Crown,
Though many a day it wanted due renown,
God so preferred by providence and grace,
That lawful heirs did never fail the race.
For Lionel King Edwards eldest child,
Both Eame and heir to Richard issulesse,
Begot fair Philip hight, whom vndefil'd
The Earl of March espoused, and God did bless
With fruit assigned the kingdom to possess:
I mean Sir Roger Mortimer, whose heir
The Earl of Cambridge married Anne the fair.
This Earl of Cambridge Richard clept by name,
Was son to Edmund Langley Duke of York:
Which Edmund was fifth brother to the same
Duke Lionel, that all this line does korke:
Of which two houses joined in a forke,
My father Richard Prince Plantagenet
True Duke of York was lawful heir beget.
Who took to wife as ye shall understand
A maiden of a noble house and old,
Ralph Neuils daughter Earl of Westmerland,
Whose son Earl Richard was, a Baron bold,
And had the right of Salisbury in hold,
Through marriage made with good Earl Thomas heir,
Whose earned praises never shall appaire.
The Duke my father had by this his wife
Four sons, of whom the eldest Edward hight,
The second Edmund, who did lose his life,
At Wakefield slain by Clyfford cruel Knight,
I George am third, of Clarence Duke by right:
The fourth borne to the mischief of us all,
Was Glocesters Duke, whom men did Richard call.
When as our fire in suit of right was slain,
(Whose life and death himself declared erst)
My brother Edward plied his cause amain,
And got the Crown as Warwick has rehearst:
The pride whereof so deep his stomach pearst
That he forgot his friends, despised his kin,
Of oath or office passing not a pin.
Which made the Earl of Warwick to malign
My brothers state, and to attempt a way
To bring from prison Henry silly King,
To help him to the kingdom if he may,
And knowing me to be the chiefest stay
My brother had, he did me undermine
To cause me to his treasons to incline.
VVhereto I was prepared long before,
My brother had been to me so unkind:
For sure no canker fretteth flesh so sore,
As unkind dealing does a loving mind.
Loves strongest bands unkindness does unbind,
It moves love to malice, zeal to hate,
Chief friends to foes, and brethren to debate.
And though the Earl of Warwick subtle fire
Perceived I bare a grudge against my brother,
Yet toward his feate to set me more on fire,
He kindled up one firebrand with another:
For knowing fancy was the forcing rother
Which stirs youth to any kind of strife,
He offered me his daughter to my wife.
Where through and with his crafty filed tongue,
He stole my heart that erst vnsteadie was:
For I was witless, wanton, fond and yongue,
Whole bent to pleasure, brittle as the glass:
I cannot lie, In vino veritas.
I did esteem the beauty of my bride
Above my self and all the world beside.
These fond affections joint with lack of skill,
(Which trap the heart, and blind the eyes of youth,
And prick the mind to practice any ill)
So tickled me, that void of kindly truth,
(Which if it want all wretchedness ensues)
I stinted not to persecute my brother,
Till time he left his kingdom to another.
Thus carnal love did quench the love of kind,
Till lust were lost through fancy fully fed:
But when at length I came unto my mind,
I saw how leaudly lightness had me led,
To seek with pain the peril of my head:
For had King Henry once been settled sure,
I was assured my days could not endure.
And therefore though I bound my self with oath
To help King Henry all that ere I might,
Yet at the treaty of my brethren both,
Which reason granted to require but right,
I left his part, whereby he perished quite:
And reconciled me to my brethren twain,
And so came Edward to the Crown again.
This made my fire in law to fret and fume,
To stamp and stare, and call me false forsworn,
And at the length with all his power presume,
To help King Henry utterly forlorn.
Our friendly profers still he took in scorn;
Refused peace, and came to Barnet field,
And there was killed because he would not yield.
His brother also there with him was slain,
Whereby decayed the keys of chivalry:
For never lived the matches of them twain,
In manhood, power, and martial policy,
In virtuous thewes, and friendly constancy,
That would to God if it had been his will
They might have turned to us and lived still.
But what shall be shall be: there is no choice,
Things needs must drive as destiny decrees,
For which we ought in all our haps rejoice,
Because the eye eterne all things foreseeth
Which to no ill at any time agrees,
For il's too ill to us, be good to it,
So far his skilles exceed our reach of wit.
The wounded man which must abide the smart
Of stitching up, or searing of his sore,
As thing too bad, reproues the Surgeons art
Which notwithstanding does his health restore:
The child likewise to science plied sore,
Counts knowledge ill, his teacher to be wood,
Yet Surgerie and sciences be good.
But as the patients grief and scholars pain,
Cause them deem bad such things as sure be best,
So want of wisdom causes us complain
Of every hap, whereby we seem oppressed:
The poor do pine for pelf, the rich for rest,
And when as loss or sickness us assail
We curse our fate, our fortune we bewail.
Yet for our good, God works every thing:
For through the death of these two noble Peers
My brother lived and reigned a quiet King,
Who had they lived perchance in course of years
Would have delivered Henry from the breares,
Or help his son t'enioy the careful Crown,
Whereby our line should have been quite put down.
A careful Crown it may be justly named,
Not only for the cares thereto annexed.
To see the subject well and duly framed,
With which good care few Kings are greatly vexed,
But for the dred wherewith they are perplexed,
Of losing Lordship, liberty, or life:
Which woeful wracks in kingdoms happen rife.
The which to shun while some too sore have sought,
They have not sparde all persons to suspect:
And to destroy such as they guilty thought,
Though no appearance proved them infect,
Take me for one of this wrong punished sect,
Imprisond first, accused without cause,
And done to death, no process had by laws.
Wherein I note how vengeance does acquit
Like ill for ill, how vices virtue quell:
For as my marriage love did me excite
Against the King my brother to rebel,
So love to have his children prosper well,
Provoked him against both law and right,
To murder me, his brother and his knight:
For by his Queen two Pincelike sons he had,
Borne to be punished for their parents sin:
Whose Fortunes calked made the father sad,
Such woeful haps were found to be therein:
Which to avouch, writ in a rotten skin
A prophecy was found, which said a G,
Of Edwards children should destruction be.
Me to be G, because my name was George
My brother thought, and therefore did me hate,
But woe be to the wicked heads that forge
Such doubtful dreams to breed unkind debate.
For God, a Gleue, a Gibbet, Grate, or Gate,
A Gray, a Griffeth, or a Gregory,
As well as George are written with a G.
Such doubtful riddles are no prophesies.
For prophesies, in writing though obscure,
Are plain in sense, the dark be very lies:
What God foresheweth is evident and pure,
Truth is no Harold nor no Sophist sure:
She notes not men's names, their shields nor creasts,
Though she compare them unto birds and beasts.
But whom she does foreshew shall reign by force,
She terms a Wolf, a Dragon, or a Bear:
A wilful Prince, a rainelesse raging horse:
A bold, a Lion: a Coward much in fear,
A Hare or Heart: a crafty, pricked ear:
A leacherous, a Bull, a Goat, a Foale:
An underminer, a Moldwarpe, or a Mole.
By known beasts thus truth does plain declare
What men they be of whom she speaks before.
And whosoever can men's properties compare,
And mark what beast they do resemble more,
Shall soon discern who is the griesly Bore.
For God by beasts expresses men's conditions,
And not their badges, Harolds superstitions.
And learned Merline whom God gave the sprite
To know and utter Princes acts to come,
Like to the Jewish Prophets, did recite
In shade of beasts their doings all and some,
Expressing plain by manners of the dome,
That Kings and Lords such properties should have
As have the beasts whose name he to them gave.
Which while the foolish did not well consider,
And seeing Princes gave for difference
And knowledge of their issues mixed together,
All manner beasts for badges of pretense,
There took those badges to express the sense
Of Merlines mind, and those that gave the same,
To be the Princes noted by their name.
And hereof sprang the false named prophesies,
That go by letters, ciphers, arms or signs:
Which all be foolish, false, and crafty lies
Devised by guess, or guiles untrue divines:
For when they saw that some of many lines
Give arms alike, they wist not which was he
Whom Merline meant the noted beast to be.
For all the brood of Warwickes gave the Bear,
The Buckinghams do likewise give the Swan:
But which Beare-bearer should the Lion tear
They were as wise as Goose the ferry man:
Yet in their skill they seized not to scan,
And to be deemed of the people wise,
Setforth their gloses upon prophesies.
And whom they doubted openly to name
They darkely termed or by some letter meant,
For so they thought how ere the world did frame,
To keep themselves from shame or being shent.
For howsoever contrary it went,
They might expound their meaning otherwise,
As haps in things should newly still arise.
And thus there grew of a mistaken truth,
An art so false as made the true suspect:
Whereof has come much mischief, more the ruth
That errors should our minds so much infect,
True Prophets have often foulely been reject:
The false which breed both murder war and strife
Believed, to loss of many a good man's life.
And therefore Baldwine teach men to discern,
Which prophesies be false, and which be true:
And for a ground this lesson let them learn,
That all be false which are devised new.
The age of things are judged by the hue.
All riddles made by letters, names or arms,
Are young and false, far worse then witches charms.
I know thou musest at this lore of mine,
How I no studient should have learned it:
And do impute it to the fume of wine
That stirs the tongue, and sharpneth up the wit.
But hark, a friend did teach me every whit,
A man of mine, in all good knowledge rife,
For which he guiltless lost his learned life.
This man abode my servant many a day,
And still in study set his whole delight:
Which taught me more then I could bear away
Of every art: and by his searching sight
Of things to come he would foreshew as right
As I rehearse the pageants that were past:
Such perfectnes God gave him at the last.
He knew my brother Richard was the Bore,
Whose tusks should tear my brothers boys and me,
And gave me warning thereof long before.
But wit nor warning can in no degree
Let things to hap, which are ordaind to be.
Witness the painted Lioness, which slew
A Prince emprisoned, Lions to eschew.
He told me eke my yoke fellow should die,
(Wherein would God he had been no divine)
And she being dead I should woo earnestly
A spouse, whereat my brother would repine,
And find the means she should be none of mine.
For which such malice should among us rise,
As save my death no treaty should decise.
And as he said, so all things came to pass:
For when King Henry and his son were slain,
And every broile so thoroughly quenched was,
That then my brother quietly did reign,
I, reconciled to his love again,
In prosperous health did lead a quiet life,
For five years space with honors laden rife.
And to augment the fullness of my bliss,
Two lovely children by my wife I had:
But froward hap whose manner ever is
In chiefest joy to make the happy sad,
Bemixt my sweet with bitterness too bad:
For while I swam in joys on every side,
My loving wife, my chiefest Jewel did,
Whose lack when sole I had bewailed a year,
The Duke of Burgoines wife dame Margaret
My loving sister willing me to cheer,
To wed again did kindly me entreat
And wished me matched with a maiden nete
A step-daughter of hers, Duke Charles his heir,
A noble damsel, young, discreet and fair.
To whose desire because I did incline,
The King my brother doubting my degree
Through Prophesies, against us did repine:
And at no hand would to our wills agree.
For which such rancour pierst both him and me,
That face to face we fell at flat defiance,
But were appeased by friends of our alliance:
Howbeit my marriage utterly was dashed:
Wherein because my servant said his mind,
A mean was sought whereby he might be lasht,
And, for they could no crime against him find,
They forged a sault the peoples eyes to blind,
And told he should by sorceries pretend
To bring the King unto a speedy end.
Of all which points he was as innocent
As is the babe that lacks kindly breath:
And yet condemned by the Kings assent,
Most cruelly put to a shameful death.
This fired my heart, as foulder does the heath:
So that I could not but exclame and cry,
Against so great and open injury.
For this I was commanded to the Tower,
The King my brother was so cruel hearted:
And when my brother Richard saw the hour
Was come, for which his heart so sore had smarted,
He thought it best take time before it parted.
For he endeuour'd to attain the Crown,
From which my life must needs have held him down.
For though the King within a while had died,
As needs he must, he surfaited so often,
I must have had his children in my guide,
So Richard should beside the Crown have coft:
This made him ply the while the wax was soft,
To find a mean to bring me to an end,
For realmrape spares neither kin nor friend.
And when he saw how reason can assuage
Through length of time my brother Edwards ire,
With forged tales he set him new in rage,
Till at the last they did my death conspire.
And though my truth sore troubled their desire,
For all the world did know mine innocence,
Yet they agreed to charge me with offense.
And covertly within the Tower they calde
A quest, to give such verdit as they should.
Who what with fear and what with favor thrald,
Durst not pronounce but as my brethren would.
And though my false accusers never could
Prove ought they said, I guiltless was condemned:
Such verdits pass where justice is contemned.
This feate atchieud yet could they not for shame
Cause me be killed by any common way,
But like a wolf the tyrant Richard came,
(My brother, nay my butcher I may say)
Unto the Tower when all men were away,
Save such as were provided for the seat:
Who in this wise did strangely me entreat.
His purpose was with a prepared string
To strangle me: but I bestird me so,
That by no force they could me thereto bring,
Which caused him that purpose to forgo:
Howbeit they bound me whether I would or no,
And in a But of Malmesey standing by,
New christened me because I should not cry.
Thus drowned I was, yet for no due desert,
Except the zeal of Justice be a crime:
False prophecies bewitched King Edwards heart,
My brother Richard to the Crown would clime.
Note these three causes in thy rufull rhyme,
And boldly say they did procure my fall,
And death of deaths most strange and hard of all.
And warn all Princes prophecies t'eschue
That are too dark and doubtful to be known:
What God has said, that cannot but ensue,
Though all the world would have it overthrown,
When men suppose by fetches of their own
To fly their fate, they further on the same
Like quenching blasts which often revive the flame.
Will Princes therefore not to think by murder
They may avoid what prophecies behight,
But by their means their mischiefs they may further,
And cause Gods vengeance heavier to alight:
Woe worth the wretch that strives with Gods foresight.
They are not wise, but wickedly do err,
Which think ill deeds due destinies may bar.
For if we think that prophecies be true,
We must believe it cannot but betide,
Which God in them foresheweth shall ensue:
For his decrees unchanged do abide.
Which to be true my brethren both have tried,
Whose wicked works warn Princes to detest,
That others harms may keep them better blessed.
HOW KING EDWARD THE FOVRTH THROVGH HIS SVRFETING and intemperate life,
suddenly died in the midst of his prosperity, the ninth of April, Anno 1483.
MIseremini mei ye that be my friends,
This world has formed me down to fall:
How may I endure when that every thing ends?
What creature is borne to be eternal?
Now there is no more but pray for me all,
Thus say I Edward that late was your King,
And twenty two years ruled this Imperial,
Some unto pleasure and some to no liking:
Mercy I ask of my misdoing.
What avails it friends to be my foe?
Since I cannot resist, nor amend your complaining,
Quia ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I sleep now in mould as it is natural,
As earth unto earth has his reuerture:
What ordained God to be terrestrial,
Without recourse to the earth by nature?
Who to live ever may himself assure?
What is it to trust to mutabilitie?
Since that in this world nothing may endure.
(For now am I gone that was late in prosperity)
To presume thereupon it is but vanity.
Not certain, but as a cherie fair full of woe.
Reigned not I of late in great prosperity?
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Where was in my life such an one as I,
While Lady Fortune had with me continuance:
Granted not she me to have victory.
In England to reign and to contribute France?
She took me by the hand and led me a dance,
And with her sugared lips on me she smiled,
But what for dissembled countenance,
I could not beware till I was beguiled.
Now from this world she has me exiled,
When I was lothest hence for to go,
And am in age (who says) but a child,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I had enough, I held me not content,
Without remembrance that I should die:
And moreover to encroch ready was I bent,
I knew not how long I should it occupy,
I made the Tower strong I wist not why.
I knew not to whom I purchased Tartersoll.
I mended Dover on the mountain high,
And London I provoked to fortify the wall.
I made Notingham a place full royal.
Windsore, Eltam, and many other mo,
Yet at the last I went from them all,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Where is now my conquest and victory?
Where is my riches and royal array?
Where be my coursers and my horses hie?
Where is my mirth, my solace, and my play?
As vanity to naught all is withered away:
O Lady Bes long for me may you call,
For I am departed until domes day:
But love you that Lord that is Sovereign of all.
Where be my Castles and buildings royal?
But Windsore alone now have I no more,
And of Eton the prayers perpetual,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Why should a man be proud or presume high?
Saint Bernard thereof nobly does treat,
Saying a man is but a sack of stercorie,
And shall return unto worms meat:
Why, what became of Alexander the great?
Or else of strong Sampson, who can tell?
Were not worms ordained their flesh to freat?
And of Solomon, that was of wit the Well,
Absolon preferred his hair for to sell,
Yet for his beauty worms eat him also,
And I but late in honors did excel,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I have played my pageant, now am I past,
Ye wot well all I was of no great elde.
Thus all things concluded shall be at the last,
When death approaches then lost is the field:
Then seeing the world me no longer vpheld,
(For naught would conserve me here in this place;
In manus tuas Domine my spirit up I yield,
Humbly beseeching thee O God of thy grace.
O you courteous Commons your hearts embrace
Benignely now to remember me also,
For right well you know your King I was:
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
HOW SIR ANTHONY WODVILE Lord Rivers and Scales, governor of Prince EDWARD,
was with his Nephew Lord Richard Gray and other causeless imprisoned, and
cruelly murdered, Anno, 1483.
AS silly suitors let by delays
To show their Prince the meaning of their mind,
That long have bought their brokers yeas and nayes
And nere the nigher, do daily wait to find
The Princes grace, from weighty affairs vntwind:
Which time attained, by attending all the year,
The wearied Prince will then no suitors hear:
My case was such not many days ago.
For after brute had blazed all abroad
That Baldwine through the aid of other mo,
Of fame or shame fallen Princes would unload,
Out from our graves we got without abode,
And preased forward with the rufull rout,
That sought to have their doings boulted out.
But when I had long tended for my turn
To tell my tale, as diverse other did:
In hope I should no longer while soiourne
But from my suits have speedily been rid,
When course and place both orderly had bid
Me show my mind, and I prepared to say,
The hearers paused, arose, and went their way.
These doubtful doings drove me to my dumpes,
Uncertain what should move them so to do:
I feared lest affections lothly lumpes
Or inward grudge had driven them thereto,
Whose wicked stings all stories truth undo,
Often causing good to be reported ill,
Or drowned in suds of Laethes muddie swill.
For hitherto sly writers wily wits
Which have engrossed Princes chief affairs,
Have been like horses snaffled with the bits
Of fancy, fear, or doubts full deep despaires,
Whose raines enchained to the chiefest chaires,
Have so been strained of those that bare the stroke
That truth was forced to chow or else to choke.
This caused such as lothed loud to lie,
To pass with silence sundry Princes lives.
Less fault it is to leave, then lead awrie,
And better droun'd, then ever bound in gives:
For fatal fraud this world so fondly drives,
That whatsoever writers brains may brue
Be it never so false, at length is taken for true.
What harm may hap by help of lying pens,
How written lies may leaudly be maintained,
The lothly rites, the devilish idol dens,
With guiltless blood of virtuous men bestain'd,
Is such a proof as all good hearts have plained,
The taly grounds of stories thoroughly tries,
The death of Martyrs vengeance on it cries.
The freshest wits I know will soon be weary,
In reading long what ever book it be,
Except it be vain matter, strange, or merry,
Well saust with lies, and glared all with glee,
With which because no grave truth may agree,
The closest style for stories is the meetest,
In rufull means the shortest form is sweetest:
And sees the plaints already by thee penned,
Are brief enough, the number also small,
The tediousness I think does none offend,
Save such as have no lust to learn at all:
Regard none such: no matter what they brall.
Warn thou the wary lest they hap to stumble:
As for the careless, care not what they mumble.
My life is such as (if thou note it well)
May cause the witty wealthy to beware.
For their sakes therefore plainly will I tell,
How false and cumbrous worldly honors are,
How cankred foes bring careless folk to care,
How tyrants suffered and not quelled in time,
Do cut their throats that suffer them to clime.
Nor will I hide the chiefest point of all,
Which wisest Rulers least of all regard,
That was and will be cause of many a fall.
This cannot be too earnestly declared,
Because it is so seeld, and slackly hard.
Th abuse and scorning of Gods ordinances,
Is chiefest cause of care and woeful chances.
Gods holy orders highly are abused
When men do change their ends for strange respects:
They scorned are, when they be clean refused,
For that they cannot serve our fond affects:
The one our shame, the other our sin detects.
It is a shame for Christians to abuse them,
But deadly sin for scorners to refuse them.
I mean not this alonely of degrees
Ordaind by God for peoples preservation,
But of his law, good orders, and decrees,
Provided for his creatures conservation;
And specially the state of procreation,
Wherein we here the number of them increase,
Which shall in Heaven enjoy eternal peace.
The only end why God ordained this,
Was for the increasing of that blessed number
For whom he has prepared eternal bliss.
They that refuse it for the care or cumber
Being apt thereto are in a sinful slumber:
No fond respect, no vain devised vows
Can quit or bar what God in charge allows.
It is not good for man to live alone
Said God: and therefore made he him a make:
Sole life said Christ is granted few or none,
All seed-sheders are bound like wives to take:
Yet not for lust, for lands, or riches sake,
But to beget and foster so their fruit
That Heaven and Earth be stored with the suite.
But as the state is damnably refused
Of many apt and able thereunto,
So is it likewise wickedly abused
Of all that use it as they should not do:
Wherein are guilty all the greedy who
For gain, for friendship, lands, or honors wed,
And these pollute the undefiled bed.
And therefore God through justice cannot cease
To plague these faults with sundry sorts of whips:
As disagreement, healths or wealths decrease,
Or lothing sore the never liked lips.
Disdiane also with rigor some times nips
Presuming mates, unequally that match:
Some bitter leaven sowers the musty batch.
We worldly folk account him very wise
That has the wit most wealthily to wed:
By all means therefore always we devise
To see our issue rich in spousals sped.
We buy and sell rich orphans: babes scant bred
Must marry ere they know what marriage means,
Boys marry old trots, old fools wed young queanes.
We call this wedding which in any wise
Can be no marriage, but pollution plain.
A new found trade of humane merchandise,
The devils net, a filthy fleshly gain:
Of kind and nature an unnatural stain;
A foul abuse of Gods most holy order,
And yet allowed almost in every border.
Would God I were the last that shall have cause
Against this creeping canker to complain,
That men would so regard their makers laws,
That all would leave the lewdness of their brain,
That holy orders holy might remain,
That our respects in wedding should not choke
The end and fruit of Gods most holy yoke.
The Sage King Solon after that he saw
What mischiefs follow missought marriages,
To bar all baits, established this law:
No friend nor father shall give heritages,
Coin, cattle, stuff, or other carriages
With any maid for dowry or wedding sale,
By any mean, on pain of banning bale.
Had this good law in England been in force,
My fire had not so cruelly been slain,
My brother had not causeless lost his corpse,
Our marriage had not bred us such disdain,
My self had lacked great part of grievous pain:
We wedded wives for dignity and lands,
And left our lives in enuies bloody hands.
My father hight Sir Richard Woduile: he
Espoused Bedford Duchess, and by her
Had issue males my brother John, and me
Called Anthony: King Edward did prefer
Us far above the state wherein we were:
He 'spous'd our sister Elizabeth,
Whom Sir John Gray made widow by his death.
How glad were we, think you, of this alliance?
So nearly coupled with so great a King.
Who durst with any of us be at defiance
Thus made of might the mightiest to wring?
But fie, what cares do highest honors bring?
What carelessness our selves or friends to know?
What spite and envy both of high and low?
Because the King had made our sister Queen,
It was his honor to prefer her kin:
And since the readiest way (as wisest ween)
Was first by wedding wealthy heirs to win,
It pleased the Prince by like mean to begin:
To me he gave the rich Lord Scales his heir,
A virtuous maid, in my mind very fair.
He joined to my brother John, the old
Duches of Northfolke notable of fame.
My nephew Thomas (who had in his hold
The honor and right of Marquise Dorsets name)
Espoused Cicelie a right wealthy dame,
Lord Bonuiles heir: by whom he was possessed
In all the rights where through that house was blessed.
The honors that my Sire attaind were diverse,
First Chamberlain, then Constable he was:
I do omit the gainfullest, Earl Rivers.
Thus glistred we to glory clear as glass.
Such miracles can Princes bring to pass
Among their lieges whom they mind to heave
To honors false, who all their guests deceive.
Honors are like that cruel King of Thrace,
With new come guests that fed his hungry horses:
Or like the tyrant Busiris, whose grace
Offered his Gods all strangers strangled corses.
To forrenners so hard false honors force is,
That all her bourders, strangers either geasts
She spoils to feed her Gods and greedy beasts.
Her Gods be those whom God by law or lot,
Or kind by birth does place in highest rooms,
Her beasts be such as greedily have got
Office or charge to guide the silly grooms.
These officers in law or charge are broomes,
Which sweep away the sweet from simple wretches,
And spoil the enriched by their crafty fetches.
These pluck down those whom Princes set aloft,
By wresting laws, and false conspiracies:
Yea Kings themselves by these are spoiled often.
When wilful Princes carelessly despise
To hear the oppressed peoples heavy cries,
Nor will correct their polling thieves, then God
Does make those reues the reckles Princes rod.
The second Richard is a proof of this,
Whom crafty Lawyers by their laws deposed.
Another pattern good King Henry is,
Whose right by them has diversely been glosed,
Good while he grew, bad when he was vnrosed:
And as they sodred these and diverse other,
With like deceit they used the King my brother.
While he prevailed they said he owed the Crown,
All laws and rights agreed with the same:
But when by drifts he seemed to be down,
All laws and right extremely did him blame,
Naught save usurping traitor was his name.
So constantly the Judges construe laws,
That all agree still with the stronger cause.
These (as I said) and other like in charge
Are honors horses, whom she feeds with gests,
For all whom Princes frankly do enlarge
With dignities, these bark at in their breasts,
Their spite, their might, their falsehood never rests
Till they devour them, sparing neither blood,
Ne lim, ne life, and all to get their good.
The Earl of Warwick was a pransing courser,
The hauty heart of his could bear no mate:
Our wealth through him waxt many a time the worser,
So cankardly he had our kin in hate.
He troubled often the Kings unsteady state,
And that because he would not be his ward
To wed and work as he should list award.
He spited us because we were preferred
By marriage to dignities so great,
But craftily his malice he deferd
Till traytorously he found means to entreat
Our brother of Clarence to assist his feate:
Whom when he had by marriage to him bound,
Then wrought he straight our lineage to confound.
Through slanderous brutes he brued many a broile
Throughout the Realm, against the King my brother,
And raised traiterous rebels thirsting spoil
To murder men: of whom among all other
Robin of Kiddesdale many a soul did smother,
His rascal rabble at my father wroth
Took sire and son, and quick beheaded both.
This heinous act although the King detested,
Yet was he feign to pardon: for the rout
Of rebels all the Realm so sore infested,
That every way assaild, he stood in doubt:
And though he were of courage high and stout,
Yet he assaid by fair means to assuage
His enemies ire, reueld by rebels rage.
But Warwick was not pacified thus,
His constant rancour causeles was extreme,
No mean could serve the quarrel to discus,
Till he had driven the King out of the Realm.
Nor would he then be waked from his dream:
For when my brother was come and placed again,
He stinted not till he was stoutly slain.
Then grew the King and Realm to quiet rest,
Our stock and friends still stying higher and higher:
The Queen with children fruitfully was blessed:
I gouernd them, it was the Kings desire.
This set their uncles furiously on fire,
That we the Queens blood were assignd to govern
The Prince, not they, the Kings own blood and brethren.
This causde the Duke of Clarence so to chafe,
That with the King he brainelesse fell at bate:
The Counsel warily to keep him safe.
From raising tumults as he did of late,
Imprisoned him: where through his brothers hate
He was condemnd, and murdered in such sort
As he himself has truly made report.
Was none abhord these mischiefs more then I,
Yet could I not be therewith discontented,
Considering that his rancour touched me ny:
Else would my conscience never have consented
To wish him harm, could he have been contented.
But fear of hurt, for sauegard of out state
Does cause more mischief then desert or hate.
Such is the state that many wish to bear,
That or we must with others blood be staind,
Or lead our lives continually in fear.
You mounting minds behold here what is gaind
By coumbrous honor, painfully attaind:
A damned soul for murdring them that hate you,
Or doubtful life, in danger lest they mate you.
The cause (I think) why some of high degree
Do deadly hate all seekers to ascend,
Is this: The clown contented can not be
With any state, till time he apprehend
The highest top: for thereto climers tend:
Which seldom is attaind without the wrack
Of those between that stay and bear him back.
To save themselves they therefore are compeld
To hate such climers, and with wit and power
To compass means where through they may be queld,
Ere they ascend their honors to devour.
This causd the Duke of Clarence frown and lowre
At me and other, whom the King promoted
To dignities: wherein he madly doted.
For seeing we were his dear allied friends,
Our furtherance should rather have made him glad
Then enmy-like to wish our woeful ends.
We were the nearest kinsfolk that he had.
We ioyed with him, his sorrow made us sad:
But he esteemed so much his painted sheath,
That he disdaind the love of all beneath.
But see how sharply God reuengeth sin:
As he maligned me and many other
His faithful friends, and kindest of his kin,
So Richard Duke of Gloucester his own brother,
Maligned him and beastly did him smother,
A devilish deed, a most unkindly part,
Yet just revenge for his unnatural heart.
Although this brother-queller, tyrant fell
Enuide our state as much and more then he:
Yet did his cloaking flattery so excel
To all our friends ward, chiefly unto me,
That he appeared our trusty stay to be:
For outwardly he wrought our state to further,
Where inwardly he minded naught save murder.
Thus in appearance who but I was blessed?
The chiefest honors heaped on my head:
Beloved of all, enjoying quiet rest.
The forward Prince by me alone was led,
A noble impe, to all good virtues bred:
The King my Liege without my counsel known
Agreed naught: though wisest were his own.
But quiet bliss in no state lasts long
Assailed still by mischief many ways:
Whose spoiling battrie glowing hot and strong,
No flowing wealth, no force nor wisdom stays,
Her smoakles powder beaten soldiers slaies.
By open force foul mischief often preuailes,
By secret slight, she seeld her purpose fails.
The King was bent too much to foolish pleasure,
In banqueting he had so great delight:
This made him grow in grossness out of measure,
Which, as it kindles carnal appetite,
So quenches it the liuelines of sprite.
Whereof ensue such sickness and diseases
As none can cure save death that all displeases.
Through this fault furdered by his brothers fraud
(Now God forgive me if I judge amiss)
Or through that beast his ribald or his baud
That larded still these sinful lusts of his,
He suddenly forsook all worldly bliss.
That loathed leach, that never welcome death,
Through Spasmous humors stopped up his breath.
That time lay I at Ludloe Wales his border,
For with the Prince the King had sent me thither
To stay the robberies, spoil, and foul disorder
Of diverse outlawes gathered there together:
Whose banding tended no man wist well whither,
When these by wisdom safely were suppressed,
Came woeful news, our sovereign was deceassed.
The grief whereof when reason had assuaged,
Because the Prince remained in my guide,
For his defense great store of men I waged,
Doubting the storms which at such time betide.
But while I there thus warely did provide,
Commandment came to send them home again
And bring the King thence with his household train.
This charge sent from the Counsel and the Queen
Though much against my mind I beast obayed:
The devil himself wrought all the drift I ween,
Because he would have innocents betrayed:
For ere the King were half his way conuayed,
A sort of traitors falsely him betrapt
I caught before, and close in prison clapped.
The Duke of Gloucester that in carnate devil
Confedred with the Duke of Buckingham,
With eke Lord Hastings, hasty both to evil
To meet the King in mourning habit came,
(A cruel Wolf though clothed like a Lamb)
And at Northampton, where as then I baited,
They took their Inn as they on me had waited.
The King that night at Stonystratford lay,
A town too small to harbor all his train:
This was the cause why he was gone away
While I with other did behind remain.
But will you see how falsely friends can feign?
Not Synon sly, whose fraud best fame rebukes,
Was half so subtle as these double Dukes.
First to mine Inn comes in my brother false,
Embraces me: well met good brother Scales,
And weeps withal: the other me enhalse
With welcome cousin, now welcome out of Wales:
O happy day, for now all stormy gales
Of strife and rancour utterly are swaged,
And we our own to live or die vnwaged.
This proferd service saust with salutations
Immoderate, might cause me to suspect:
For commonly in all dissimulations
The excess of glauering does the guile detect:
Reason refuses falsehood to direct:
The will therefore for fear of being spide
Exceeds mean, because it wants guide.
This is the cause why such as feign to weep
Do houle outright, or wailing cry ah, ah,
Tearing themselves, and straining sighs most deep:
Why such dissemblers as would seem to laugh
Breath not tihhee, but bray out, hah hah hah:
Why beggars faining bravery are the proud'st,
Why cowards bragging boldness, wrangle loud'st.
For commonly all that do counterfeat
In any thing, exceed the natural mean,
And that for fear of failing in their feat.
But these conspirers couched all so clean
Through close demeanor, that their wiles did weane
My heart from doubts, so many a false device
They forged fresh, to hide their enterprise.
They supt with me, propounding friendly talk
Of our affairs, still giving me the praise:
And ever among the cups to me ward walk:
I drink to you good Cuz each traitor says.
Our banquet done, when they should go their ways
They took their leave, often wishing me good night,
As heartily as any creature might.
A noble heart they say is Lion like,
It cannot couch, dissemble, crouch, nor feign.
How villainous were these, and how unlike?
Of noble stock the most ignoble stain.
Their woluish hearts, their traiterous foxly brain
Or prove them base, of rascal race engendered,
Or from hault lineage bastard like degendred.
Such polling heads as praise for prudent policy
False practices, I wish were pact on poles:
I mean the bastard law-brood, which can mollify
All kind of causes in their crafty noles.
These undermine all virtue, blind as Moles,
They bolster wrong, they rack and strain the right,
And praise for law both malice, fraud, and might.
These quench the worthy flames of noble kind,
Provoking best borne to the basest vices:
Through crafts they make the boldest courage blind,
Disliking highly valiant enterprices,
And praising vilely villainous devices.
These make the Bore a Hog, the Bull an Ox,
The Swan a Goose, the Lion a Wolf or Fox.
The Lawyer Catesby and his crafty feeres
A rout that nere did good in any reame,
Are they that had transformed these noble peers:
They turned their blood to melancholic fleumes,
Their courage hault to cowardife extreme,
Their force and manhood into fraud and malice,
Their wit to wiles, stout Hector into Paris.
These glauerers gone, my self to rest I laid,
And doubting nothing soundly fell a sleep:
But suddenly my servants sore afraid
Awaked me: and drawing sighs full deep,
Alas (quoth one) my Lord we are betrayed.
How so (quoth I) the Dukes are gone their ways,
The have barred the gates, and borne away the kaies.
While he thus spoke, there came into my mind
This fearful dream, whereout I waked was:
I saw a river stopped with storms of wind,
Where through a Swan, a Bull, and Bore did pass,
Franching the fish and fry, with teeth of brass,
The river dried up save a little stream,
Which at the last did water all the Reame.
Me thought this stream did drown the cruel Bore
In little space, it grew so deep and broad:
But he had killed the Bull and Swan before.
Besides all this I saw an ugly Tode
Crale toward me, on which me thought I trod:
But what became of her, or what of me
My sudden waking would not let me see.
These dreams considered with this sudden news,
So diverse from their doings over night,
Did cause me not a little for to muse,
I blessed me, rose in all the have I might.
By this, Aurora spread abroad the light,
Which from the ends of Phoebus beams he took,
Who then the Bulls chief gallery forsook.
When I had opened the window to look out,
There might I see the streets each where beset,
My Inn on each side compassed about
With armed watchmen, all escapes to let:
Thus had these Neroes caught me in their net,
But to what end I could not thoroughly guess,
Such was my plainnes, such their doubleness.
My conscience was so clear I could not doubt
Their deadly drift, which less apparent lay,
Because they caused their men return the rout
That rode toward Stonystratford as they say,
Because the Dukes will first be there to day:
For this (thought I) they hinder me in jest,
For guiltless minds do easily deem the best.
By this the Dukes were come into mine Inn,
For they were lodged in another by.
I got me to them, thinking it a sin
Within my chamber cowardly to lie.
And merrily I asked my brother why
He used me so? he stern in evil sadness
Cried out: I arrest thee traitor for thy badnes.
How so (quoth I) whence rises your suspicion?
Thou art a traitor (quoth he) I thee arrest
Arrest (quoth I) why where is your commission?
He drew his weapon, so did all the rest,
Crying: yield thee traitor. I so sore distressed
Made no resistande: but was sent to ward,
None save their servants signed to my guard.
This done they sped him to the King in post,
And after humble reverence to him done,
They traitorously began to rule the roast,
They picked a quarrel to my sisters son
Lord Richard Gray: the King would not be won
T'agree to them, yet they against all reason
Arrested him, they said for heinous treason.
Sir Thomas Vaughan and Sir Richard Hault
Two worthy Knights were likewise apprehended,
These all were guilty in one kind of fault,
They would not like the practice then pretended:
And seeing the King was herewith sore offended,
Back to Northampton they brought him again,
And thence discharged most part of his train.
There lo Duke Richard made himself Protector
Of King and Realm, by open proclamation,
Though neither King nor Queen were his elector,
Thus he presumed by lawless usurpation.
But will you see his deep dissimulation?
He sent me a dish of dainties from his board
That day, and with it, this false friendly word:
Commend me to him, all things shall be weil,
I am his friend, bid him be of good cheer:
These news I prayed the messenger go tell
My Nephew Richard, whom I loved full dear.
But what he meant by well, now shall you here:
He thought it well to have us quickly murdered,
Which not long after thoroughly he furdred.
For straight from thence we closely were conveyed,
From iayle to iayle Northward, we wist not whither:
Where, after a while we had in sunder stayed,
At last we met at Pomfret all together.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe bade us welcome thither,
Who openly, all law and right contemned,
Beheaded us before we were condemned.
My cousin Richard could not be content
To leave his life, because he wist not why,
Good gentleman that never harm had meant,
Therefore he asked wherefore he should die:
The Priest his ghostly father did reply
With weeping eyes: I know one woeful cause;
The Realm has neither righteous Lords not laws.
Sir Thomas Vaughan chasing cried still:
This tyrant Gloucester is the graceless G,
That will his brothers children beastly kill.
And, lest the people through his talk might see
The misciefes toward, and thereto not agree,
Our tormentour that false perjured Knight
Bad stop our mouths, with words of high despite.
Thus di'd we guiltless, process heard we none,
No cause alleag'd, no Judge, nor yet accuser,
No Quest empanel'd passed us upon.
That murdrer Ratcliffe, law and rights refuser,
Did all to flatter Richard his abuser.
Unhappy both that ever they were borne,
Through guiltless blood that have their souls forlorn.
In part I grant I well deserved this,
Because I caused not speedy execution
Be done on Richard for that murder of his,
When first he wrought King Henry's close confusion,
Not for his brothers hateful persecution.
These cruel murders painful death deserved,
Which had he suffered, many had been preserved.
Warn therefore all that charge or office bear,
To see all murdrers speedily executed:
And spare them not for favor or for fear:
By guiltless blood the earth remains polluted.
For lack of Justice kingdoms are transmuted.
They that save murdrers from deserved pain,
Shall through those murdrers miserably be slain.
HOW THE LORD HASTINGS WAS BETRAYED BY TRVSTING TOO MVCH to his evil
Counselor Catesby, and villanously murdered in the Tower of London, by Richard
Duke of Gloucester, the 13. of June, Anno, 1483.
I Am that Hastings whose too hasty death,
They blame that know wherefore I lost my breath,
With others fearing lest my headless name
Be wronged, by partial brute of flattering Fame.
Hearing O Baldwine that thou mean to pen,
The lives and falls of English Noblemen,
My self here present, do present to thee
My life, my fall, and forced destiny.
Ne fear to stain thy credit by my tale:
In Laethes flood, long since, in Stigian vale,
Self love I drowned. What time has fined for true,
And cease not, (though stale) still to renew:
Recount I will: whereof take this for proof,
That blase I will my praise, and my reproof.
We naked ghosts are but the very man
Nor of our selves more then we ought, we scan.
The Heavens high, and Earthly vale below,
Yet ring his Fame, whose deeds so great did grow.
Edward the fourth ye know unnamed I mean,
Whose noble nature so to me did lean,
That I his staff was, I his only joy,
And even what Pandare was to him of Troy:
Which moved him first, to make me Chamberlain,
To serve his sweets, to my most sower pain.
Wherein, to justly praised for secretnesse
(For now my guilt with shriking I confess)
To him too true too untrue to the Queen,
Such hate I wan, as lasted long between
Our families: Shores wife was my Nice cheat,
The holy whore, and eke the wily peat.
I fed his lust with lovely pieces so,
That Gods sharp wrath I purchased, my just woe.
See here the difference of a noble mind.
Some virtue raises, some by vice have climde.
The first, though only of themselves begone,
Yet circlewise into themselves do ron.
Within themselves their force united so,
Both endless is, and stronger against their foe.
For, when end'th it that never has begone?
Or how may that, that has no end, b'vndone?
The other as by wicked means they grue,
And reigned by flattery, so soon they rue.
First tumbling step fro honors old, is vice.
Which once stepped down, some linger, none arise
To former type: But they catch virtues spray,
Which raises them that climb by lawful way.
Beware to rise by serving princely lust.
Surely to stand, one mean is rising just.
(...) learn by me, whom let it help t'excuse,
(...) ^^^hfull now my self I do accuse,
(...) my Prince I ever pleased with such,
As harmed none, and him contented much.
In vice some favor, or less hate let win,
That I ne wried to worser end my sin.
But used my favor to the help of such,
As death in later war to live did grutch.
For as on dirt (though durtie) shin'th the Sun:
So, even amidst my vice, my virtue shoane.
My self I spared with his cheat to stain,
For love or reverence so I could refrain.
Gisippus wife erst Titus would desire
With friendships breach: I quenched that brutish fire.
Manly it is, to loath the pleasing lust.
Small vant to fly, that of constraint thou must.
These faults except, if so my life thou scan,
Lo! none I hurt but furdred every man.
My Chamber England was, my staff the law:
Whereby saunce rigor, all I held in awe.
So kind to all, and so beloved of all,
As, (what ensued upon my bloody fall
Though I ne felt) yet surely this I think,
Full many a trickling tear their mouths did drink.
Disdain not Princes easy access, meek cheer.
We know then Angels statelier port ye bear
Of God himself: too massy a charge for sprits.
But then, my Lords, consider, he delights
To veil his grace to us poor earthly wants,
To simplest shrubs, and to the dunghill plants.
Express him then, in might, and mercies mean:
So shall ye win, as now ye rule the Reame.
But all too long I fear I do delay
The many means, whereby I did bewray
My zealous will, to earne my Princes grace.
Lest thou defer, to think me kind percase.
As naught may last, so Fortunes changing cheer
With pouting looks began lower on my sire,
And on her wheel, aduanst high in his rome
The Warwick Earl, admired through Christendom.
Besides the tempting prowess of the foe.
My Princes brother did him then forgo.
The cause was liked, I was his linked allie.
Yet nor the cause, nor brothers treachery,
Nor enmies force, nor band of mingled blood:
Made Hastings bear any other mind then good.
But taken, and escaped from Warwickes griping paws,
With me he fled through Fortunes froward flawes.
To London come, at large we might have seemed,
Had not we then the Realm a prison deemed.
Each bush, a bar, each spray, a banner splayed,
Each house, a fort, our passage to have stayed.
To Lin we leap, where while w'await the tide,
My secret friends in secret I supplied,
In mouth to further Henry sixth their King,
And use my best means Edward in to bring.
The restless tide, to bar the empty bay,
With waltring waves roames wambling forth. Away
The merry Mariner hales. The bragging boy,
To masts high top up hies. In sign of joy
The wavering flag is vanst. The surging seas
Their swelling cease: to calmest even peace
Sinkes down their pride. With drunkenness against all care
The Seamen armed, await their noble fare.
On board we come. The massy anchors wai'd,
One English ship, two hulks of Holland, aid
In such a pinch. So small though was the train,
Such his constraint, that now, that one with pain
Command he might, who late might many more:
Then ghastly Greeks erst brought to Tenedo.
So naught is ours that we by hap may lose,
What nearest seems, is farthest off in woes.
As banished wights, such joys we might have made.
Eased of aye threatening death that late we drade.
But once our countries sight (not care) exempt,
No harbor showing, that might our fear relent,
No covert cave, no shrub to shroud our lives.
No hollow wood, no flight that often depriues
The mighty his prey, no sanctuary left
For exiled Prince, that shrouds each slave for theft:
In prison pent whose woodie walls to pass
Of no less peril then the dying was:
With the Ocean moated battred with the waves,
(As chained at oars the wretched galley slaves,
At mercy sit of sea and enmies shot,
And shun with death that they with flight may not)
But greenish waves, and heavy lowering skies
All comfort else forclosed our exiled eyes:
Lo lo from highest top the slavish boy
Sent up, with sight of land our hearts to joy:
Descries at hand a fleet of Easterlings
As then hot enmies of the British Kings.
The Mouse may sometime help the Lion in need,
The bittle Be once spilt the Aegles breed.
O Princes seek no foes. In your distress,
The earth, the seas, conspire your heaviness.
Our foe descried by flight we shun in have
And laid with canuas now the bending mast,
The ship was rackt to try her sailing then,
As Squirels climb the troops of trusty men.
The steersman seeks a readier course to run,
The soldier stirs, the Gunner hies to gun.
The Flemmings sweat, the English ship disdaines
To wait behind to bear the Flemmings trains.
Forth flies the Bark, as from the violent Goone
The pellet breaks all stays, and stops eftsoone.
And swift she swindg'th, as often in Sunnie day,
The Dolphin fleetes in seas, in merry May.
As we for lives, so the easterlings for gain,
Thwack on the sails, and after make amain.
Though heavy they were, and of burden great:
A King to master yet, what Swine nold sweat?
So mid the vale the Greyhound seeing start
The fearful Hare, pursues before she flert,
And where she turn'th he turn'th her, there to bear.
The one prey pricketh, the other safeties fear.
So were we chased, so fled we before our foes.
Bet flight then fight in so uneven close.
I end. Some think perhaps, too long he staieth
In peril present showing his fixed faith.
This ventred I, this dread I did sustain,
To try my truth, my life I did disdain.
But, lo! like triall' against his civil foe,
Faiths worst is trial, which reserues to woe.
I pass our escape, and sharp returning home,
Where we were welcomed by our wonted fone.
To battle maine descends the Empires right,
At Barnet join the hosts in bloody fight.
There joined three battles ranged in such array,
As might for terror, Alexander fray.
What should I stay to tell the long discourse?
Who wan the Palm? who bare away the worse?
Suffices say by my reserved band,
Our enemies fled, we had the upper hand.
My iron army held her steadie place,
My Prince to shield, his feared foe to chase.
The like success befell in Tewkesbury field.
My furious force, their force perforc'd to yield
My Princes foe: and render to my King
Her only son, lest he more bate might bring.
Thus have a mirror of a Subjects mind,
Such as perhaps is rare again to find.
The caruing cuts, that cleave the trusty steel,
My faith, and due allegiance, could not feel.
But out alas, what praise may I recount,
That is not stained with spot, that does surmount
My greatest vaunt? bloody for War, to feet
A Tiger was I, all for peace unmeet,
A soldiers hands must often be died with goare,
Lest stark with rest, they finewd wax and hoare.
Peace could I win by War, but peace not use.
Few days live he, who Warlike peace does choose.
When Crofts a Knight presented Henry's Heiro
To this our Prince, in furious mood enquere
Of him he began, what folly or phrensy vain,
With Arms forced him t'inuade his Realm again?
Whom answering, that he claimed his fathers right:
With Gauntlet smit, commanded from his sight,
Gloucester, Clarence, I and Dorset slew:
The guilt whereof we shortly all did rue.
Clarence, as Cyrus, drowned in blood like Wine,
Dorset I furthered to his speedy pine.
Of me, my self am speaking president,
Nor easier fate the bristled Boar is lent.
Our bloods have paid the vengeance of our guilt,
His bones, shall broile for blood which he has spilt,
O deadly murder, that attaint'th our fame,
O wicked Traitors wanting worthy name.
Who as mischieuously of men deserve,
As they merit well, who do men's lives preserve.
If those therefore we reckon heavenly wights,
These may we well deem Feendes, and damned Sprits,
And while on earth they walk, disguised devils,
Sworn foes of virtue, factours for all evils.
Whose bloody hands torment their goared hearts,
Through bloudsheds horror, in sound sleep he starts.
O happy world were the Lions men,
All Lions should at least be spared then.
No suerty now, no lasting league is blood.
A meacocke is he, who dreadth to see blood shed.
Old is the Practice of such bloody strife,
While ij. wear Armies. ij. the Issues of first Wife,
With armed heart and hand, the one bloody brother,
With cruel chase pursues, and murdreth the other.
Which who abhors not? yet who cease to sue?
The bloody Caines their bloody sire renew.
The horror yet is like in common fraies.
For in each murder, brother brother slaies.
Traitors to nature, country kin and kind.
Whom no band serves in brothers love to bind.
O simple age, when slander slaughter was.
The tongues small evil, how does this mischief pass?
Hopest thou to cloak thy covert mischief wrought?
Thy conscience, Caitif, shall proclaim thy thought,
A vision, Chaucer shows difcloasd thy crime.
The Fox descrie the crows and chattring pien,
And shall thy fellow felons, not bewray
The guiltelesse death, whom guilty hands do slay?
Unpunished escaped for heinous crime some one,
But vnaduenged, in mind or body none.
Vengeance on mind, the freating furies take,
The sinful corpse, like earth quake agues shake,
Their frowning looks, their troubled minds bewray,
In have they run, and mids their race they stay,
As gidded Roe. Amids their speech they whist,
At meat they muse. No where they may persist
But some fear netleth them. Ay hang they so.
So never wants the wicked murderer woe.
An infant rent with Lions ramping paws?
Why slander I Lions? They fear the sacred laws
Of royal blood. Ay me more brute then beast.
With infants sides, (Lycaons pie) to feast.
O tyrant Tigers, O insaciate woolues,
O English courtesy, monstrous mowes and gulfes.
Only because our Prince displeased we saw
With him, we slew him straight before all law.
Before our Prince commanded once his death,
Our bloody swords on him we did vnsheath,
Preventing law, and even our Princes hest,
We hid our weapons in the young lings breast.
Whom not desire of reign did drive to field,
But mothers pride, who longd the Realm to wield.
But straight my death shall show my worthy meed,
If first to one other murder I proceed.
While Edward lived, dissembled discord lurked
In double hearts, yet so his reverence worked.
But when succeeding tender feeble age,
Gave open gap to tyrants rushing rage:
I help the Boar, and Bucke, to captiuate
Lord Rivers, Gray, sir Thomas Vaughan and Hawte.
If land would help the sea, well earnd that ground
It self, to be with conquering waves surround.
Their speedy death by privy dome procured,
At Pomfret: tho my life short while endured.
My self I slew, when them I damned to death,
At once my throat I riued, and reft them breath.
For that self day, before or near the hour
That withred Atropos nipt the springing flower
With violent hand, of their forth running life:
My head and body, in Tower twinde like knife.
By this my pattern all ye peers beware.
Often hangth he himself who others weenth to snare:
Spare to be each others butcher. Fear the Kite,
Who soareth aloft, (while frog and mouse do fight
In civil combat, grappling void of fear
Of foreign foe) at once al both to bear.
Which plainer by my pitied plaint to see,
A while anew your listening lend to me.
Too true it is two sundry assemblies kept,
At Crosbies place, and Baynards Castle set:
The Dukes at Crosbies, but at Baynards we.
The one to crown a king, the other to be.
Suspicious is secession of foul friends,
When eithers drift to the others mischief tends,
I feared the end, my Catesbies being there
Discharged all doubts. Him held I most entire.
Whose great preserment by my means, I thought
Some spur, to pay the thankfulness he ought.
The trust he ought me, made me trust him so,
That privy he was both to my weal and woe.
My hearts one half, my chest of confidence,
Mine only trust, my joy dwelt in his presence.
I loved him Baldwine, as the apple of mine eye;
I loathed my life when Catesby would me die.
Fly from thy chanel Thames, forsake thy streams,
Leave the Adamant Iron: Phoebus lay thy beams:
Cease heavenly Spears at last your weary warke,
Betray your charge, return to Chaos dark.
At least, some ruthlesse Tiger hang her whelp,
My Catesby so with some excuse to help.
And me to comfort, that I alone, ne seem
Of all dame natures works left in extreme.
A Golden treasure is the tried friend.
But who may Gold from Counterfaits defend?
Trust not too soon, nor yet too soon mistrust:
With the one thy self, with the other thy friend thou hurt'st.
Who twin'th betwixt, and steareth the golden mean,
Nor rashly loves, nor mistrusteth in vain.
In friendship sovereign it is as Mithridate,
Thy friend to love as one whom thou may hate.
Of tickle credit ne had bin the mischief,
What needed Virbius miracle doubled life?
Credulity surnamed first the Aegean Seas.
Mistrust, does reason in the trustiest raise.
Suspicious Romulus, stained his Walls first reard
With brothers blood, whom for light leap he feared.
So not in brotherhood jealousy may be borne,
The ielous Cuckold wears the Infamous Horn.
A beast may preach by trial, not foresight.
Could I have shund light credit, nere had light
The dreaded death, upon my guilty head.
But Fools aye wont to learn by after read.
Had Catesby kept unstained the truth he plight,
Yet had yet enioied me, and I yet the light:
All Derbies doubts I cleared with his name.
I knew, no harm could hap me without his blame.
But see the fruits of tickle light belief.
The ambitious Dukes corrupt the Traitor thief,
To grope me, if allured I would assent,
To bin a Partner of their cursed intent.
Whereto, when as by no means friendship veiled,
By Tyrant force behold they me assailed,
And summond shortly a Counsel in the Tower,
Of June the fifteenth, at appointed hour.
Alas, are Counsels wried to catch the good?
No place is now exempt from sheading blood,
Since counsels, that were careful to preserve
The guiltelesse good, are means to make them starve,
What may not mischief of Mad man abuse?
Religious cloak some one to vice does choose,
And makes God Protector of his crime.
Omonstrous world, well ought we wish thy fine.
The fatal skies, roll on the blackest day,
When doubled bloodshed, my blood must repay.
Others none forces. To me sir Thomas Haward
As spur is buckled, to provoke me froward.
Derbie who feared the parted sittings yore,
Whether, much more he knew by experience hoare,
Or better minded, clearelier truth could see:
At midnight dark this message sends to me.
Hastings away, in sleep the gods foreshow
By dreadful dream, fell fates unto us two.
Me thought a Bore with tuske so raced our throat,
That both our shoulders of the blood did smoke.
Arise to horse, straight homeward let us hie:
And sees our foe we cannot match, O fly.
Of Chanteclere you learn dreams sooth to know,
Thence wisemen construe, more then the cock does crow.
While thus he spoke, I held within mine arm
Shores wife, the tender piece, to keep me warm.
Fie on adultery, fie on leacherous lust.
Mark in me ye Nobles all, Gods judgments just.
A Pander, Murderer, and Adulterer thus,
Only such death I die, as I ne blush.
Now lest my dame might think appalled my heart
With eager mood up in my bed I start.
And, is thy Lord (quoth I) a Sorcerer?
A wiseman now become? a dream reader?
What though so Chanteclere crowed? I reck it not?
On my part pleads as well dame Partelot.
Vniudg'd hang'th yet the case betwixt them tway.
Nay was his dream cause of his hap I say.
Shall dreaming doubts from Prince my serving slack?
Nay, then might Hastings life and living lack.
He parts. I sleep, my mind surcharged with sin,
As Phoebus beams by mistie cloud kept in,
Ne could misgiue, ne dream of my mishap:
As block, I tumbled to mine enemies trap.
Security causeless through my fained friend,
Reft me foresight of my approaching end.
So Catesby clawed me, as when the Cat does play,
Dallying with Mouse whom straight she means to slay.
The morrow come, the latest light to me,
On Palfray mounted, to the Tower I hie,
Accompanied with that Haward my mortal foe,
To slaughter led, thou God did suffer so.
(O deep dissemblers, honoring with your cheer,
Whom in hid heart you traitorously tear)
Never had Realm so open signs of wrack,
As I had showed me of my heavy hap.
The vision first of Stanley late descried:
Then mirth so extreme, that near for joy I died.
Were it, that Swanlike I foresong my death,
Or merry mind foresaw the loss of breath
That long it coueted, from this earths annoy,
But even as siker as the end of woe is joy,
And glorious light to obscure night does tend:
So extreme mirth, in extreme moan does end.
For why, extremes are haps rackt out of course,
By violent might far swinged forth perforce.
Which as they are piercing'st while they violent'st move,
For that they are near to cause that does them shoue:
So soonest fall from that their highest extreme,
To the other contrary that does want of mean.
So laughed he erst, who laughed out his breath:
So laughed I, when I laughed my self to death.
The pleasing'st means bode not the luckiest ends.
Not aye, found treasure to like pleasure tends.
Mirth means not mirth all time, thrice happy hire
Of wit, to shun the excess that all desire.
But this I pass, I hie to other like.
My palfrey in the plainest paued street,
Thrice bowed his bones, thrice kneeled on the flower
Thrice shunned (as Balams ass) the dreaded Tower.
What? should think he had sense of after haps?
As beasts foreshow the drought or rainie drops,
As humors in them want or else abound,
By influence from the heavens, or change of ground?
Or do we interpret by success each sign?
And as we fancy of each hap divine?
And make that cause, that kin is to the effect?
Not having ought of conse quence respect?
Bucephalus kneeling only to his Lord,
Showed only he was Monarch of the world.
Why may not then the steed foreshew by fall,
What casual hap the sitter happen shall?
Darius horse by braying brought a Realm.
And what lets, why he ne is (as the ass) Gods mean
By speaking sign, to show his hap to come,
Who is dease hearer of his speaking dome?
But forward yet. In Tower-street I stayed,
Where (could I have seen) lo Haward all bewrai'd:
For as I commond with a Priest I met:
Away my Lord, quoth he, your time is ne yet
To take a Priest. Lo, Sinon might be seen,
Had not the Trojans hares foolish forthright eyes,
But since the time was come that I should die,
Some grace it was to die with wimpled eye.
Nay was this all. For even at Tower-wharfe,
Near to those walls within the which I starfe,
Where erst, in sorrow soust, and deep distress,
I emparted all my pining pensiveness
With Hastings: (so my Purseuant men call)
Even there, the same to meet it did me fall.
Who began to me most dolefully renew,
The woeful conference had erst in that lieu.
Hastings (quoth I) according now they fare,
At Pomfret this day dying, who caused that care.
My self have all the world at my will,
With pleasures cloyed, engorged with the fill.
God grant it so, quoth he: why doubtest thou tho
Quoth I? and all in chafe, to him began show
In ample wise, our drift with tedious tale:
And entered so the Tower to my bale.
What should we think of srignes? They are but haps,
How may they then, be signs of afterclaps?
Does every chance foreshew or cause some other?
Or ending at it self, extend'th no further?
As the over flowing flood some mount does choke,
But to his aid some other flood it yoke:
So, if with signs thy sins once join, beware.
Else whereto chances tend, do never care.
Had not my sin deserved my death as wreake,
What might my mirth have hurt? or horses beck?
Or Hawards bitter scoff? or Hastings talk?
What mean then fool Astrologers to calke?
That twinkling stars fling down the fixed fate?
And all is guided by the starrie state?
Perdy a certain charge assigned they have
To shine, and times divide, not fate to grave.
But grant they somewhat give it at one instant
Of every babe the birth in heaven so scand,
That they that restless roll, and never stay,
Should in his life bear yet so violent sway:
That, not his actions only next to birth,
But all his life and death he swayed therewith?
How may one motion make so sundry affects?
Or one impression tend to such respects?
Some rule there is yet. Else, why were deferred
Till now, these plagues, so long ere now deserved?
If for they are trifles, they ne seem of care:
But toys with God the stately scepters are.
Yet in them too plain does appear foreset,
The certain rule and fatal limits set,
Yet think we not, this sure foresetting fate,
But Gods fast providence for each princely state.
And has he erst restrained his providence?
Or is he nigard of his free dispense?
Or is he uncertain foreset drifts to drive?
That not dame Chance but he all goods may give?
A heathen god they hold whom Fortune keep,
To deal them haps while god they ween asleep:
Mocke-gods they are and many gods induce,
Who fortune feign to father their abuse.
How so it be, it might have warned me,
But, what I could not, that in me see ye,
Who run in race, the honor like to win,
Whose fairest form naught may deforme but sin,
Alas, when most I did defy all dread,
By single hair deaths sword hung over my head,
For hark the end and listen now my fall:
This is the last, and this the fruit of all.
To Counsel chamber come, a while we staid
For him without whom naught was done or said:
At last he came, and courteously excused,
That he so long our patience had abused.
And pleasantly began to paint his cheer,
And said: My Lord of Elie, would we had here
Some of the strawberries, whereof you have store:
The last delighted me so as nothing more.
Would, what so you wish, I might as well command,
My Lord (quoth he) as those. And out of hand
His servant sends to Ely place for them.
Out goes from us the restless devil again:
Belike (I think) scarce yet persuaded full,
To work the mischief that did mad his scull.
At last determined, of his bloody thought
And force ordained, to work the wile he sought:
Frowning he enters, with so changed cheer,
As for mild May had chopped foul Ianuere:
And lowering on me with the goggle eye,
The whetted tuske, and fur'wed forehead hie,
His crooked shoulder bristlelike set up,
With frothie jaws, whose foam he chaw'd and supped,
With angry looks that flamed as the fire:
Thus began at last to grunt the grimmest fire.
What merit they, whom me, the kingdoms stay,
Contrived have counsel traitorously to slay?
Abashed all sat. I thought I might be bold,
For conscience clearenesse and acquaintance old,
Their hire is plain, quoth I Be death the least
To whosoever seeks your grace so to molest.
Withouten stay: the Queen and the whore Shores wife,
By witchcraft (quoth he) seek to waste my life.
Lo here the withered and be witched arm,
That thus is spent by those two Sorceresse charm:
And bared his arm and showed his swinish skin.
Such cloakes they use, that seek to cloud their sin.
But out alas, it serves not for the rain,
To all the house the color was too plain:
Nature had given him many a maimed mark
And it amongst to note her monstrous warke.
My doubtful heart distracted this reply.
For the one I cared not. the other nipt so nie
That whist I could not: but forthwith brake forth.
If so it be, of death they are doubtless worth.
If, traitor quoth he? plai'st thou with ifs and ands?
I Will on thy body auow it with these hands.
And there withal he mightly bounced the board.
In rushed his bil-men, one himself bestird,
Laying at Lord Stanley, whose brain he had surely cleft,
Had he not down beneath the table crept.
But Ely, York, and I were taken straight,
Imprisoned they: I should no longer wait,
But charged was to shriue me, and shift with have.
My Lord must dine, and now midday was past.
The Bores first dish, not the bores head should be.
But Hastings head the borish beast would see.
Why stay I his dinner? unto the chapel ioineth
A greenish hill, that body and soul often twineth.
There on a block my head was stricken off,
As Baptists head, for Herod bloody gnoffe.
Thus lived I Baldwine, thus did I, thus I fell,
This is the sum, which al at large to tell
Would volumes fill: whence yet these lessons note
Ye noble Lords, to learn and ken by rote.
By filthy rising fear your names to stain;
If not for virtues love, for dread of pain.
Whom so the minds unquiet state vpheaues,
Be it for love or fear: when fancy reaues
Reason her right, by mocking of the wit,
If once the cause of this affection flit,
Reason prevailing on the vubridled thought:
Down falth he who by fancy climb aloft.
So has the riser foul no stay from fall,
No not of those that raisd him first of all.
His surety stands in mainteining the cause
That heau'd him first, which rest by reasons sawes,
Not only falth he to his former state,
But lives for ever in his princes hate.
And mark my Lords, God for adultery sleath,
Though ye it think too sweet a sin for death.
Serve truly your Prince and fear not rebels might,
On Princes halues the mighty God does fight.
O much more then forswear a foreign foe,
Who seeks your realm and country to undo.
Murder detest, have hands unstained with blood.
Aie with your succor do protect the good.
Chase treason where trust should be wed to your friend
Your heart and power, to your lives last end.
Fly tickle credit, shun alike distrust.
Too true it is, and credit it you must:
The jealous nature wants no stormy strife,
The simple soul aye leads a sower life.
Beware of flatterers, friends in outward show:
Best is of such to make your open foe.
What all men seek, that all men seek to saine,
Some such to be, some such to seem, them pain.
Mark Gods just judgments, punishing sin by sin,
And slipperie state wherein aloft we swim.
The proverb, all day up if we ne fall,
Agrees well to us high heaued worldlings all.
From common sort vprais'd, in honors weed
We shine: while Fortune false (whom none erst feed
To stand with stay and forswear ticklenesse:)
Sowseth us in mire of durtie brittlenesse.
And learn ye Princes by my wronged sprite,
Not to misconster what is meant aright,
The winged words too often prevent the wit,
When silence cease before the lips to sit.
Alas, what may the words yield worthy death?
The words worst is, the speakers stinking breath.
Words are but wind, why cost they then so much
The guilty kick, when they too smartly touch.
Forth irreturnable flies the spoken word,
Be it in scoff, in earnest, or in bourd.
Without return, and vnreceiu'd, it hangs,
And at the takers mercy, or rigor stands.
Which if he sowerly wrest with wrathful cheer,
The shiuering word turns to the speakers fear.
If friendly courtefie do the word expound,
To the speakers comfort sweetly it does redound.
Even as the vapor which the fire repels,
Turns not to earth, but in mid air dwells.
Where while it hangs, if Boreas frostie flawes
With rigor rattle it: not to rain it thawes,
But thunder, lightnings, rattling hail or snow
Sends down to earth, whence first it rose below;
But if fair Phoebus with his countenance sweet
Resolve it, down the dew, or Manna sleete.
(The Manna dew, that in the Eastern lands,
Excell'th the labor of the bees small hands.)
Else for her Memnon gray Auroras tears,
On the earth it stilleth, the partener of her fears.
Or sends sweet showers to glad their mother earth,
Whence first they took their first inconstant birth,
To so great griefs, ill taken words do grow:
Of words well taken, such delights do flow.
This learned, thus be here at length an end,
What since ensued, to thee I will commend.
Now farewell Baldwine, shield my torn name,
From slanderous trumpe of blasting black defame.
But ere I part, hereof thou record bear:
I claim no part of virtues reckoned here.
My vice my self, but God my virtues take.
So hence depart I, as I entered naked,
Thus ended Hastings both his life and tale,
Containing all his worldly bliss and bale.
Happy he lived, too happy but for sin,
Happy he died whom right his death did bring.
Thus ever happy. For there is no mean
Twixt blissful lives and mortal deaths extreme,
Yet feared not his foes to stain his name,
And by these slanders to procure his shame.
In rustie armor as in extreme shift,
They clad themselves, to cloak their devilish drift.
And forth with for substantial citizens sent,
Declaring to them, Hastings forged intent
Was to have slain the Duke: and to have seized
The Kings young person, slaying whom he had pleased.
But God of Justice had withturn'd that fate,
Which where it ought, light on his proper pate.
Then practiced they by proclamation spread,
Naught to forget, that might defame him dead.
Which was so curious, and so clerkely pend,
So long withal: that when some did attend
His death so young: they saw that long before
The shroud was shaped, then babe to die was bore.
So wonteth God to blind the worldly wise,
That not to see, that all the world espies.
One hearing it cried out: A goodly cast,
And well contrived, foul cast away for have:
Whereto another began in scoff reply,
First pend it was by enspiring prophecy.
So can God rip up secret mischiefs wrought,
To the confusion of the workers thought.
My Lords, the tub, that dround the Clarence Duke,
Dround not his death, not yet his deaths rebuke.
Your politic secrets guard with trusty loyalty:
So shall they lurk in most assured secrecy.
By Hastings death, and after fame ye learn,
The earth for murder cries out vengeance stern.
Fly from his faults, and spare to hurt his fame.
The eager hounds forbear their slain game,
Dead, dead, auaunt Curs from the conquered chase.
Ill might he live who loves the dead to race.
Thus lived this Lord, thus died he, thus he slept.
Mids forward race when first to rest he stepped,
Envious death that bounceth as well with mace
At Kesars courts, as at the poorest gates:
When nature seemed too slow, by this sloape mean,
Conueighed him sooner to his lives extreme.
Happy in preventing woes that after happ'd,
In slumber sweet his living lights he lapp'd.
Whose hasty death, if it do any grieve:
Know he, he lived to die, and did to live.
Untimely never comes the lives last met.
In cradle death may rightly claim his det.
Straight after birth due is the fatal beer.
By deaths permission the aged linger here.
Even in the swathbands out commission goes
To loose thy breath, that yet but yongly blows.
Happy, thrice happy, who so loos'th his breath,
That life he gains by his godly death.
As Hastings here. Whom time and truth agree,
To engraue by fame in strong eternity.
Who spares not speaking, with danger of his blood?
Yet lo this noble Lord did think it good
To clear the innocent not to spare to speak,
Although his shoulders with his blood should reake.
Worthy to live, who lived not for himself
But prised his same more then this worldly pelf,
Whose name and line, if any yet preserve,
We wish they live like honor to destrue.
Whether thou seek by martial prowese praise,
Or Pallas policy high thy name to raise,
Or trusty service honor to attain;
Hastings foreled: tracke here his bloody train.
FINIS.
Master D.
THE COMPLAINT OF HENRY DVKE of Buckingham.
WHo trusts too much to honors highest throne,
And warily watch not sly dame Fortunes snares:
Or who in Court will bear the swing alone,
And wisely weigh not how to weild the care,
Behold he me, and by my death beware:
Whom flattering Fortune falsely so beguilde,
That lo she slew, where erst full smooth she smilde.
And Sackuill since in purpose now thou have
The woeful fall of Princes to descriue,
Whom Fortune both vplift and eke down cast,
To show thereby the vnsuretie in this life,
Mark well my fall, which I shall show beliue,
And paint it forth, that all estates may know:
Have they the warning, and be mine the woe.
For noble blood made me both Prince and Peer,
Yea peerless too, had reason purchased place,
And God with gifts endowed me largely here.
But what auailes his gifts where fails his grace?
My mothers sire sprung of a kingly race,
And called was Edmund Duke of Sommerset,
Bereft of life ere time by nature set.
Whose faithful heart to Henry sixth so wrought
That he him nere in weal, or woe forsook,
Till lastly he at Tewkesbury field was cought
Where with an axe his violent death he took:
He never could King Edwards party brook,
Till by his death he voucht that quarrel good,
In which his Sire, and Grand-sire spilt their blood.
And such was erst my fathers cruel chance,
Of Stafford Earl by name that Humfrey hight
Who ever pressed did Henry's part advance,
And never ceast till at Saint Albones fight
He lost his life, as then did many a Knight:
Where eke my Grandsire, Duke of Buckingham
Was wounded sore, and hardly escaped vntane.
But what may boot to stay the Sisters three,
When Atropos perforce will cut the thread?
The doleful day was come when you might see
Northampton field with armed men orespred,
Where fate would algates have my Grandsire dead:
So rushing forth amids the fiercest fight,
He lived, and di'd there in his Masters right.
In place of whom as it befell my lot,
Like on a stage, so stepped I in straightway,
Enjoying there but woefully God wot,
As he that had a slender part to play:
To teach thereby, in earth no state may stay,
But as our parts abridge, or length our age,
So pass we all while others fill the stage.
For of my self the dreerie fate to plain,
I was sometime a Prince withouten peer,
When Edward fifth began his rufull reign,
Ay me, then I began that hateful year,
To compass that which I have bought so dear:
I bare the swinge, I and that wretched wight,
The Duke of Gloucester that Richard hight.
For when the fates had reft that Royal Prince
Edward the fourth, chief mirror of that name,
The Duke, and I fast joined ever since,
In faithful love, our secret dristes to frame:
What he thought best, to me so seemed the same,
My self not bent so much for to aspire,
As to fulfill that greedy Dukes desire.
Whose restless mind sore thirsting after rule,
When that he saw his nephews both to bin
Through tender years as yet unfit to rule,
And rather ruled by their Mothers kin,
There sought he first his mischief to begin,
To pluck from them their Mothers friends assinde,
For well he wist they would wistand his mind.
To follow which he ran so headlong swift,
With eagre thirst of his desired draught,
To seek their deaths that sought to dash his drift,
Of whom the chief the Queens allies he thought,
That bent thereto with mounts of mischief fraught,
He knew their lives would be so sore his let,
That in their deaths his only help he set.
And I most cursed caitiffe that I was,
Seeing the state unsteadfast how it stood,
His chief complice to bring the same to pass,
Unhappy wretch consented to their blood:
Ye Kings, and Peers that swim in worldly good.
In seeking blood the end aduert you plain,
And see if blood ay ask not blood again.
Consider Cyrus in your cruel thought,
A matchless Prince in riches, and in might,
And weigh in mind the bloody deeds he wrought,
In sheading which he set his whole delight:
But see the guerdon lotted to this wight,
He whose huge power no man might overthrow,
Tamiris Queen with great despite has slow.
His head dismembered from his mangled corpse,
Her self she cast into a vessel fraught
With clottered blood of them that felt her force.
And with these words a iustreward she taught:
Drink now thy fill of thy desired draught.
Lo mark the fine that did this Prince befall:
Mark not this one, but mark the end of all.
Behold Cambises, and his fatal day,
Where murders mischief mirror like is left:
While he his brother Mergus cast to slay,
A dreadful thing, his wits were him bereft.
A sword he caught, wherewith he pierced eft
His body gored, which he of life benoomes:
So just is God in all his dreadful doomes.
O bloody Brutus rightly did thou rue,
And thou O Cassius, justly came thy fall,
That with the sword wherewith thou Caesar slew
Murdredst thy self, and reft thy life withal.
A Mirror let him be unto you all
That murdrers be, of murder to your meed:
For murder cries out vengeance on your seed.
Lo Bessus he that armed with murdrers knife,
And traytrours heart, against his royal King,
With bloody hands bereft his masters life,
Aduert the fine his foul offense did bring:
And lothing murder as most lothly thing,
Behold in him the just deserved fall,
That ever has, and shall betide them all.
What booted him his false usurped reign?
Whereto by murder he did so ascend,
When like a wretch led in an iron chain,
He was presented by his chiefest friend,
Unto the foes of him whom he had slain:
That even they should avenge so foul a gilt,
That rather sought to have his blood yspilt.
Take heed ye Princes and ye Prelates all
Of this outrage, which though it sleep a while
And not disclosed, as it does seld befall,
Yet God that suffers silence to beguile
Such guilts, wherewith both earth and air ye file,
At last descries them to your foul disgrace,
You see the examples set before your face.
And deeply grave within your stony hearts,
The dreerie dole that mighty Macedo,
With tears unfolded wrapped in deadly smarts,
When he the death of Clitus sorowed so,
Whom erst he murdered with the deadly blow
Raught in his rage upon his friend so dear,
For which behold lo how his pangs appear.
The launced spear he writhes out of the wound,
From which the purple blood spins in his face:
His heinous guilt when he returned found,
He throws himself upon the corpse alas,
And in his arms how often does he embrace
His murdered friend? and kissing him in vain,
Forth flow the floods of salt repentant rain.
His friends amazed at such a murder done,
In fearful flocks begin to shrink away:
And he thereat with heaps of grief fordone,
Hates himself, wishing his latter day.
Now he likewise perceived in like stay,
As is the wild beast in the desert bred,
Both dreading others and him self adred:
He calls for death, and loathing longer life,
Bent to his bane, refuses kindly food:
And plunged in depth of death and dolours strife,
Had queld himself, had not his friends withstood.
Lo he that thus has shed the guiltless blood,
Though he were King and Kesar over all,
Yet chose he death to guerdon death withal.
This Prince whose Peer was never under sun,
Whose glistening fame the earth did ouerglide,
Which with his power welny the world had won,
His bloody hands himself could not abide,
But folly bent with famine to have did:
The worthy Prince deemed in his regard,
That death for death could be but just reward.
Yet we that were so drowned in the depth
Of deep desire, to drink the guiltless blood,
Like to the Wolf, with greedy looks that lepth
Into the snare, to feed on deadly food:
So we delighted in the state we stood,
Blinded so far in all our blinded train,
That blind we saw not our destruction plain.
We spared none whose life could ought forlet
Our wicked purpose to his pass to come.
Four worthy Knights we headed at Pomfret,
Guiltelesse (God wot) withouten law or dome.
My heart even bleedes to tell you all and some,
And how Lord Hastings when he feared least,
Dispiteously was murdered and oppressed.
These rocks vpraught, that threatened most our wreck,
We seemd to sail much surer in the stream:
And Fortune faring as she were at beck
Laid in our lap the rule of all the Realm.
The Nephues straight deposde were by the Eame.
And we aduanst to that we bought full dear,
He crowned King, and I his chiefest Peer.
Thus having won our long desired pray,
To make him King that he might make me chief,
Down throw we straight his silly Nephues tway,
From Princes pomp, to woeful prisoners life:
In hope that now stint was all further strife.
Since he was King, and I chief stroke did bear,
Who ioied but we, yet who more cause to fear?
The guiltles blood which we unjustly shed,
The royal babes deuested from their throne,
And we like traitors reigning in their stead,
These heavy burdens passed us upon,
Tormenting us so by our selves alone,
Much like the felon that pursued by night,
Starts at each bush, as his foe were in sight.
Now doubting state, now dreading loss of life,
In fear of wrack at every blast of wind,
Now start in dreams through dread of murders knife,
As though even then reuengement were assinde,
With restles thought so is the guilty mind
Turmoild, and never feels ease or stay,
But lives in fear of that which follows aye.
Well gave that Judge his doom upon the death
Of Titus Celius that in bed was slain:
When every wight the cruel murder lays
To his two sons that in his chamber lain,
The Judge, that by the proof perceives plain,
That they were found fast sleeping in their bed,
Has deemd them guiltles of this blood yshed.
He thought it could not be, that they which brake
The laws of God and man in such outrage,
Could so forth with themselves to sleep betake:
He rather thought the horror and the rage
Of such an heinous guilt could never swage,
Nor never suffer them to sleep or rest,
Or dreadles breath one breath out of their breast.
So gnawes the grief of conscience evermore,
And in the heart it is so deep ygraue,
That they may neither sleep nor rest therefore,
Ne think one thought but on the dread they have.
Still to the death foretossed with the wave
Of restles woe, in terror and despeare,
They lead a life continually in fear.
Like to the Dear that stricken with the dart,
Withdrawes himself into some secret place,
And feeling green the wound about his heart,
Startles with pangs till he falt on the grass,
And in great fear lies gasping there a space,
Forth braying sighs, as though each pang had brought
The present death, which (...) dread so often:
So we deep wounded with the bloody thought,
And gnawing worm that grieved our conscience so,
Never took ease, but as our heart out brought
The stained sighs in witness of our woe,
Such restless cares our fault did well beknow:
Wherewith of our deserved fall the fears
In every place rang death within our ears.
And as ill grain is never well ykept,
So fared it by us within a while:
That which so long with such unrest we reapt,
In dread and danger by all wit and wile,
Lo see the fine, when once it felt the whele
Of slipper Fortune, stay it might no stowne,
The wheel whurles up, but straight it whurleth down.
For having rule and riches in our hand,
Who durst gain say the thing that we auer'd?
Will was wisdom, our lust for law did stand,
In sort so strange, that who was not afeard,
When he the sound but of King Richard heard?
So hateful waxt the hearing of his name,
That you may deem the residue of the same.
But what auail'd the terror and the fear,
Wherewith he kept his lieges under awe?
It rather wan him hatred every where,
And fained faces forced by fear of law:
That but while Fortune does with favor blaw,
Flatter through fear: for in their heart lurkes aye
A secret hate that hops for a day.
Records Dionysius the King,
That with his rigor so his Realm oppressed,
As that he thought by cruel fear to bring
His subjects under, as him liked best:
But lo the dread wherewith himself was strest,
And you shall see the fine of forced fear,
Most Mirror like in this proud Prince appear.
All were his head with crown of gold yspread,
And in his hand the royal scepter set,
And he with princely purple richly clad;
Yet was his heart with wretched cares orefret,
And inwardly with deadly fear beset,
Of those whom he by rigor kept in awe,
And fore oppressed with might of tyrants law.
Against whose fear, no heaps of gold and glie,
No strength of guard, nor all his hired power,
Ne proud high towers that preased to the sky,
His cruel heart of safety could assure:
But dreading them whom he should deem most sure,
Himself his beard with burning brand would sear,
Of death deserved so vexed him the fear.
This might suffice to represent the fine
Of tyrants force, their fears, and their unrest:
But hear this one, although my heart repine
To let the sound once sink within my breast:
Of fell Phereus that above the rest,
Such cruelty upon his people wrought,
As (oh alas) I tremble with the thought.
Some he encased in the coats of Bears,
Among wild beasts devoured so to be:
And some for prey unto the hunters spears,
Like savage beasts withouten ruth to die.
Sometime t'encrease his horrid cruelty,
The quick with face to face engraued he,
Each others death that each might living see.
Lo what more cruel horror might be found,
To purchase fear, if fear could stay his reign?
It booted not, it rather struck the wound
Of fear in him to fear the like again.
And so he did full often, and not in vain,
As in his life his cares could witness well,
But most of all his wretched end does tell.
His own dear wife whom as his life he loved,
He durst not trust, nor proch unto her bed,
But causing first his slave with naked sword
To go before, himself with trembling dread
Straight follows fast, and whurling in his head
His rolling eyne, he searched here and there
The danger deep that he so sore did fear.
For not in vain it ran still in his breast,
Some wretched hap should hale him to his end.
And therefore always by his pillow pressed
Had he a sword, and with that sword he wend,
In vain (God wot) all perils to defend.
For lo his wife foreirking of his reign,
Sleeping in bed this cruel wretch has slain.
What should I more now seek to say in this,
Or one jot further linger forth my tale?
With cruel Nero, or with Phalaris,
Caligula, Domitian, and all
The cruel rout? or of their wretched fall?
I can no more, but in my name aduert
All earthly powers beware of tyrants heart.
And as our state endured but a throw,
So, best in us the stay of such a state
May best appear to hang on over throw,
And better teach tyrants deserved hate,
Then any tyrants death tofore or late.
So cruel seemed this Richard third to me,
That lo my self now loathed his cruelty.
For when alas, I saw the tyrant King
Content not only from his nephews twain
To riue worlds bliss, but also all worlds being,
Sauns earthly guilt ycausing both be slain,
My heart agrieud that such a wretch should reign,
Whose bloody breast so sauag'd out of kind,
That Phalaris had nere so foul a mind.
Nay could I brook him once within my breast,
But with the thought my teeth would gnash withal:
For though I erst were his by sworn behest,
Yet when I saw mischief on mischief fall,
So deep in blood, to murder Prince and all,
Aye then thought I, alas, and welaway,
And to my self thus mourning would I say:
If neither love, kindred, nay knot of blood,
His own allegiance to his Prince of due,
Nor yet the state of trust wherein he stood,
The worlds defame, nor naught could form him true,
Those guiltless babes, could they not make him rue?
Nor could their youth, nor innocence withal
Move him from reauing them their life and all?
Alas it could not move him any jot,
Nay make him once to rue or wet his eye,
Stirred him no more then that that stirs not:
But as the rock or stone that will not plie,
So was his heart made hard with cruelty,
To murder them: alas I weep in thought,
To think on that which this fell wretch has wrought.
That now when he had done the thing he sought,
And as he would, complisht and compast all,
And saw and knew the treason he had wrought
To God and man, to slay his Prince and all,
Then seemed he first to doubt and dread us all,
And me in chief, whose death all means he might,
He sought to work by malice and by might.
Such heaps of harms vpharbar'd in his breast,
With envious heart my honor to deface,
And knowing he that I which wotted best
His wretched drifts, and all his wretched case,
If ever sprang within me spark of grace,
Must needs abhor him and his hateful race:
Now more and more began cast me out of grace.
Which sudden change when I by secret chance
Had well perceived, by proof of envious frown,
And saw the lot that did me to advance
Him to a King that sought to cast me down,
Too late it was to linger any stowne:
Since present choice lay cast before mine eye,
To work his death, or I my self to die.
And as the Knight in field among his foes,
Beset with swords, must slay or there be slain:
So I alas lapt in a thousand woes,
Beholding death on every side so plain,
I rather chose by some sly secret train
To work his death, and I to live thereby,
Then he to live, and I of force to dye.
Which heavy choice so hastened me to chose,
That I in part agrieu'd at his disdain,
In part to wreake the doleful death of those
Two tender babes, his silly nephews twain,
By him, alas, commanded to be slain,
With painted cheer humbly before his face,
Straight took my leave, and rode to Brecknocke place.
And there as close and covert as I might,
My purposde practice to his pass to bring,
In secret drifts I lingered day and night,
All how I might depose this cruel King,
That seemd to all so much desirde a thing,
As thereto trusting I emprisde the same:
But too much trusting brought me to my bane.
For while I now had Fortune at my beck,
Mistrusting I no earthly thing at all,
Unawares alas, least looking for a check,
She mated me in turning of a ball:
When least I feared, then nearest was my fall,
And when whole Hosts were pressed to stroy my fone,
She changed her cheer, and left me post alone.
I had vprais'd a mighty band of men,
And marched forth in order of array,
Leading my power amid the forest Dene,
Against the tyrant banner to display:
But lo my soldiers basely shranke away.
For such is Fortune when she list to frown,
Who seems most sure, him soonest whurles she down.
O let no Prince put trust in Commontie,
Nor hope in faith of giddie peoples mind,
But let all noble men take heed by me,
That by the proof too well the pain do find:
Lo, where is truth or trust? or what could bind
The vain people, but they will swerue and sway,
As chance brings change, to drive and draw that way.
Rome, thou that once advanced up so hie,
Thy stay, Patron, and flower of excellence,
Have now thrown him to depth of misery,
Exiled him that was thy whole defense,
Nay count'st it not an horrible offense,
To reuen him of honor and of fame,
That wan it thee when thou had lost the same.
Behold Camillus, he that erst revived
The state of Rome, that dying he did find,
Of his own state is now alas deprived,
Banished by them whom he did thus debt-bind:
That cruel folk, unthankful and unkind,
Declared well their false inconstancy,
And Fortune eke her mutabilitie.
And thou Scipio, a Mirror may thou be
To all nobles, that they learn not too late,
How they once trust the unstable Commontie.
Thou that recur'd the torn dismembered state,
Even when the Conqueror was at the gate,
Art now exiled, as though thou not deserved
To rest in her, whom thou had so preserved.
Ungrateful Rome have showed thy cruelty
On him, by whom thou live yet in fame,
But not thy deed, nor his desert shall die,
But his own words shall witness aye the same:
For lo his grave does thee most justly blame.
And with disdain in marble says to thee:
Unkind country, my bones shall thou not see.
What more unworthy then this his exile?
More just then this the woeful plaint he wrote?
Or who could show a plainer proof the while,
Of most false faith, then they that thus forgot
His great deserts? that so deserved not.
His cinders yet lo, does he them deny,
That him denied amongst them for to die.
Milciades, o happy had thou ben,
And well rewarded of thy country men,
If in the field when thou had forced to fly,
By thy prowess, three hundred thousand men,
Content they had been to exile thee then:
And not cast thee in depth of prison so,
Laden with gyues, to end thy life in woe.
Alas how hard and steely hearts had they,
That not contented there to have thee die,
With fettred gyues in prison where thou lay,
Increast so far in hateful cruelty,
That burial to thy corpse, they eke deny:
Ne will they grant the same till thy son have
Put on thy gyues, to purchase thee a grave.
Lo Hannibal as long as fixed fate,
And brittle Fortune had ordained so:
Who evermore aduanst his country state
Then thou that liu'dst for her and for no mo?
But when the stormy waves began to grow,
Without respect of thy deserts ere while,
Art by thy country thrown into exile,
Unfriendly Fortune shall I thee now blame?
Or shall I fault the fates that so ordain?
Or art thou Jove the causer of the same?
Or cruelty her self does she constrain?
Or on whom else alas shall I complain?
O trustlesse world I can accusen none,
But fickle faith of Commontie alone.
The Polypus nor the Cameleon strange,
That turn themselves to every hue they see,
Are not so full of vain and fickle change,
As is this false unsteadfast Commontie,
Lo I alas with mine adversity
Have tried it true, for they are fled and gone,
And of an host there is not left me one.
That I alas in this calamity
Alone was left, and to my self might plain
This treason, and this wretched cowardie,
And eke with tears beweepen and complain
My hateful hap, still looking to be slain:
Wandering in woe, and to the heavens on hie
Cleaping for vengeance of this treachery.
And as the Turtle that has lost her mate,
Whom griping sorrow does so sore attaint,
With doleful voice and sound that she does make,
Mourning her loss, filles all the grove with plaint:
So I alas forsaken, and forfaint,
With restless foot the wood roame up and down,
Which of my dole all shiuering does resowne.
And being thus alone, and all forsake,
Amid the thick, forwandred in despair,
As one dismayed, nay wist what way to take,
Until at last began to my mind repair,
A man of mine called Humfrey Banastaire:
Wherewith me feeling much recomforted,
In hope of succor to his house I fled.
Who being one whom erst I had up brought
Even from his youth, and loved and liked best,
To gentry state advancing him from naught,
And had in secret trust above the rest,
Of special trust now being thus distressed,
Full secretly to him I me conuei'd,
Not doubting there but I should find some aid.
But out alas on cruel treachery,
When that this caytife once an inkling heard,
How that King Richard had proclaimed, that he
Which me descri'd should have for his reward
A thousand pounds, and farther be preferred,
His truth so turned to treason, all distained,
That faith quite fled, and I by trust was trained.
For by this wretch I being straight betrayed,
To one John Mitton, Sheriff of Shropshire then,
All suddenly was taken, and conuayed
To Salisbury, with rout of harnest men,
Unto King Richard there emcamped then,
Fast by the City with a mighty host:
Withouten doom where head and life I lost.
And with these words, as if the axe even there
Dismembered had his head and corpse apart,
Dead fell he down: and we in woeful fear
Stood mazed when he would to life reuert:
But deadly griefs still grew about his heart,
That still he lay, sometime revived with pain,
And with a sigh becoming dead again.
Midnight was come, when every vital thing
With sweet sound sleep their weary limbs did rest,
The beasts were still, the little birds that sing,
Now sweetly slept, besides their mothers breast:
The old and all were shrouded in their nest,
The waters calm, the cruel seas did cease,
The woods, the fields, and all things held their peace.
The golden stars were whirld amid their race,
And on the earth did laugh with twinkling light,
When each thing nestled in his resting place,
Forgot days pain with pleasure of the night:
The Hare had not the greedy Hounds in sight,
The fearful Dear, of death stood not in doubt,
The Partridge drept not of the Falcons foot.
The ugly Bear now minded not the stake,
Nor how the cruel mastiues do him tear,
The Stag lay still vnroused from the brake,
The fomy Boar feared not the hunters spear:
All things were still in desert, bush and breare.
With quiet heart now from their travails ceast,
Soundly they slept in midst of all their rest.
When Buckingham amid his plaint oppressed,
With surging sorrows and with pinching pains
In sort thus sown'd, and with a sigh he ceast,
To tellen forth the treachery and the trains
Of Banastaire, which him so sore distraines,
That from a sigh he falls into a sound,
And from a sound li'th raging on the ground.
So twiching were the pangs that he assaid,
And he so sore with ruthful rage distraught,
To think upon the wretch that him betrayed,
Whom erst he made a gentleman of naught,
That more and more agrieued with this thought,
He storms out sighs, and with redoubled sore,
Struck with the furies, rages more and more.
Whosoever has seen the Bull chased with darts,
And with deep wounds foregald and gored so,
Till he oppressed with the deadly smarts,
Fall in a rage, and run upon his foe:
Let him I say behold the raging woe
Of Buckingham, that in these gripes of grief,
Rages against him that has betrayed his life.
With blood red eine he stareth here and there,
Frothing at mouth, with face as pale as clout:
When lo my lims were trembling all for fear,
And I amazde stood still in dread and doubt,
While I might see him throw his arms about:
And against the ground himself plunge with such force,
As if the life forthwith should leave the corpse.
With smoke of sighs sometime I might behold
The place all dimd, like to the morning mist:
And straight again the tears how they down rold
Along his cheeks, as if the rivers hist:
Whose flowing streams ne were no sooner whist,
But to the stars such dreadful shouts he sent,
As if the throne of mighty Jove should rent.
And I the while with sprits welny bereft,
Beheld the plight and pangs that did him strain,
And how the blood his deadly color left,
And straight returned with flaming red again:
When suddenly amid his raging pain
He gave a sigh, and with that sigh he said,
Oh Banastaire, and straight again he staid.
Dead lay his corpse, as dead as any stone,
Till swelling sighs storming within his breast
Vpraisd his head, that downward fell anon,
With looks vpcast, and sighs that never ceast:
Forth streamd the tears records of his unrest,
When he with shrikes thus groueling on the ground,
Ybraied these words with shrill and doleful sound:
Heaven and earth, and ye eternal lamps,
That in the heavens wrapped, will us to rest,
Thou bright Phoebe, that clearest the nights damps,
Witness the plaints that in these pangs oppressed,
I woeful wretch unlade out of my breast.
And let me yield my last words ere I part,
You, you, I call to record of my smart.
And thou Alecto feed me with thy food,
Let fall thy serpents from thy snaky hear,
For such relief well fits me in this mood,
To feed my plaint with horror and with fear,
While rage afresh thy venomd worm areare.
And thou Sibylla when thou see me faint,
Address thy self the guide of my complaint.
And thou O Jove, that with the deep fordoome
Do rule the earth, and reign above the skies,
That wreakest wrongs, and give the dreadful doom
Against the wretch that does thy name despise,
Receive these words, and wreake them in such wise,
As heaven and earth may witness and behold,
Thy heaps of wrath upon this wretch unfold.
Thou Banastaire, against thee I clepe and call
Unto the Gods, that they just vengeance take
On thee, thy blood, thy stained stock and all.
O Jove to thee above the rest I make
My humble plaint, guide me, that what I speak,
May be thy will upon this wretch to fall,
On thee Banastaire, wretch of wretches all.
O would to God the cruel dismal day,
That gave me light first to behold thy face,
With foul eclipse had reft my sight away:
The unhappy hour, the time, and eke the day,
The Sun and Moon, the Stars, and all that was
In their aspects helping in ought to thee,
The earth and air, and all accursed be.
And thou caitiffe, that like a monster swarued
From kind and kindness, have thy master lorne,
Whom neither truth, nor trust wherein thou served,
Ne his deserts could move, nor thy faith sworn,
How shall I curse, but wish that thou unborn
Had been, or that the earth had rent in tway,
And swallowed thee in cradle as thou lay.
To this did I even from thy tender youth
Vouchsafe to bring thee up? did I herefore
Believe the oath of thy undoubted truth?
Advance thee up, and trust thee evermore?
By trusting thee that I should die therefore?
O wretch, and worse then wretch, what shall I say?
But clepe and curse against thee and thine for aye.
Hated be thou, disdaind of every wight,
And pointed at where ever that thou go:
A traitorous wretch, unworthy of the light
Be thou esteemd: and to increase thy woe,
The sound be hateful of thy name also:
And in this sort with shame and sharp reproach,
Lead thou thy life, till greater grief approach.
Dole and despair, let those be thy delight,
Wrapped in woes that cannot be unfold,
To wail the day, and weep the weary night,
With rainy eine and sighs cannot be told,
And let no wight thy woe seek to withhold:
But count thee worthy (wretch) of sorrows store,
That suffering much; oughtst still to suffer more.
Deserve thou death, yea be thou deemed to die
A shameful death, to end thy shameful life,
A sight longed for, ioifull to every eye,
When thou shall be arraigned as a thief,
Standing at bar, and pleading for thy life,
With trembling tongue in dread and dolours rage,
Lade with white locks, and fourscore years of age.
Yet shall not death deliver thee so soon
Out of thy woes, so happy shall not be:
But to the eternal Jove this is my boon,
That thou may live thine eldest son to see
Reft of his wits, and in a soul Bores stye
To end his days, in rage and death distressed,
A worthy tomb where one of thine should rest.
Yet after this yet pray I more, thou may
Thy second son see drowned in a dike,
And in such sort to close his latter day,
As heard or seen erst has not been the like:
Ystrangled in a puddle not so deep
As half a foot, that such hard loss of life,
So cruelly chanst, may be the greater grief.
And not yet shall thy doleful sorrows cease,
Jove shall not so withhold his wrath from thee,
But that thy plagues may more and more increase,
Thou shall still live, that thou thy self may see
Thy daughter stricken with the leprosy:
That she that erst was all thy whole delight,
Thou now may loath to have her come in sight.
And after that, let shame and sorrows grief
Feed forth thy years continually in woe,
That thou may live in death, and die in life,
And in this sort forwaild and wearied so,
At last thy ghost to part thy body fro:
This pray I Jove, and with this latter breath,
Vengeance I ask upon my cruel death.
This said, he flung his retchlesse arms abroad,
And groueling flat upon the ground he lay,
Which with his teeth he all to gnasht and gnawed:
Deep groans he fet, as he that would away.
But lo in vain he did the death assay,
Although I think was never man that knew
Such deadly pains, where death did not ensue.
So strove he thus a while as with the death,
Now pale as lead, and cold as any stone,
Now still as calm, now storming forth a breath
Of smokie sighs, as breath and all were gone.
But every thing has end: so he anon
Came to himself, when with a sigh outbrayed,
With woeful cheer, these woeful words he said.
Ah where am I, what thing, or whence is this?
Who rest my wits? or how do I thus lie?
My limbs do quake, my thought agasted is.
Why sigh I so? or whereunto do I
Thus groule on the ground? and by and by
Vprais'd he stood, and with a sigh has stayed,
When to himself returned, thus he said:
Suffices now this plaint and this regrete,
Whereof my heart his bottom has vnfraught:
And of my death let Peers and Princes were
The worlds untrust, that they thereby be taught.
And in her wealth, since that such change is wrought,
Hope not too much, but in the mids of all
Think on my death, and what may them befall.
So long as Fortune would permit the same,
I lived in rule and riches with the best:
And past my time in honor and in fame,
That of mishap no fear was in my breast:
But false Fortune whom I suspected least,
Did turn the wheel, and with a doleful fall
Has me bereft of honor, life, and all.
Lo what auailes in riches floods that flows?
Though she so smiled, as all the world were his.
Even Kings and Kesars bidden Fortunes throws,
And simple sort must bear it as it is.
Take heed by me that blith'd in balefull bliss:
My rule, my riches, royal blood and all,
When Fortune frowned the feller made my fall.
For hard mishaps that happens unto such,
Whose wretched state erst never fell no change,
Agreeue them not in any part so much,
As their distress to whom it is so strange,
That all their lives nay passed pleasures range:
Their sudden woe that aye weild wealth at will,
Algates their he arts more piercingly must thrill.
For of my birth, my blood was of the best,
First borne an Earl, then Duke by due descent:
To swing the sway in Court among the rest,
Dame fortune me her rule most largely lent:
And kind with courage so my corpse had blent,
That lo on whom but me did she most smile?
And whom but me lo, did she most beguile?
Now have thou heard the whole of my unhap,
My chance, my change, the cause of all my care:
In wealth and woe, how Fortune did me wrap,
With world at will, to win me to her snare.
Bid Kings, bid Kesars, bid all states beware,
And tell them this from me that tried it true:
Who recklesse rules, right soon may hap to rue.
FINIS.
T. Saxuist.
HOW COLLINGBOVRNE WAS CRVELLY EXECVTED FOR making a Rhyme.
BEware, take heed, take heed, I say, beware,
You Poets you, that purpose to rehearce
By any art what tyrants doings are.
Erynnis rage is grown so fell and fearce,
That vicious acts may not be touched in verse:
The Muses freedom, granted them of eld,
Is barred, sly reasons treasons hie are held.
Be rough in rhyme, and then they say you rail,
As Iuuenal was, but that does make no matter:
With Jeremy you shall be had to iaile,
Or forced with Martial, Caesar's faults to flatter.
Clerks must be taught to claw, and not to clatter:
Free Helicon and frank Parnassus hills,
Are hellie haunts, and rank pernicious illes.
Touch covertly in terms, and then you taunt,
Though praised Poets always did the like,
Control us not, else traitor vile auaunt,
What pass we what the learned do mislike?
Our sins we see, wherein to swarm we seek.
We pass not what the people say or think:
Their shittle hate makes none but cowards shrink.
We know (say they) the course of Fortunes wheel,
How constantly it whitleth still about,
Arrearing now, while elder headlong reele,
How all the riders always hang in doubt.
But what for that? we count him but a lout
That sticks to mount, and basely like a beast
Lives temperatly, for fear of blockam feast.
Indeed we would of all be deemed gods
What ere we do: and therefore partly hate
Rude Preachers, that dare threaten plagues and rods,
And blase the blots whereby we stain our state:
But naught we pass what any such do prate;
Of course and office they must say their pleasure,
And we of course must hear, and mend at leisure.
But when these pelting Poets in their rimes
Shall taunt, or jest, or paint our wicked works,
And cause the people know and curse our crimes,
This ugly fault, no tyrant lives but irkes.
Wherefore we loath such taunters worse then Turks,
Whose meaning is to make us know our miss,
And so to mend: but they but dote in this.
We know our faults as well as any other,
We also doubt the dangers from them due:
Yet still we trust so right to rule the rother,
That escape we shall the scourges that ensue.
We think we know more shifts then other knew.
In vain therefore for us are counsels writ:
We know our faults, and will not mend a whit.
These are the feats of the unhappy sort,
That prease for honors, wealth, and pleasures vain.
Cease therefore Baldwine, cease I thee exhort,
Withdraw thy pen, for nothing shall thou gain
Save hate, with loss of paper, ink, and pain.
Few hate their faults, all hate of them to hear,
And faultiest, from fault would seem most clear.
The intent I know is honest, plain, and good,
To warn the wise, to fray the fond from ill:
But wicked worldlings are so witless wood,
That to the worst they all things construe still.
With rigor often they recompense good will:
They rack the words till time their sinews burst,
In doleful senses strayning still the worst.
A painful proof taught me the truth of this,
Through tyrants rage, and Fortunes cruel turn:
They murdered me, for meetring things amiss.
For wot'st thou what? I am that Collingbourne
Which made the rhyme, whereof I may well mourn.
The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
Do rule all England under a Hog.
Whereof the meaning was so plain and true,
That every fool peceiued it at furst:
Most liked it, for most that most things knew,
In hugger mugger muttred what they durst.
The tyrant Prince of most was held accursed,
Both for his own, and for his counsels faults,
Of whom were three the naughtiest of all naughts.
Catesby was one, whom I did call a Cat,
A crafty Lawyer, catching all he could.
The second Ratcliffe, whom I named a Rat,
A cruel beast to gnaw on whom he should.
Lord Louell barkt and bit whom Richard would,
Whom I therefore did rightly term our Dog,
Wherewith to rhyme I called the King a Hog.
Till he the Crown had caught, he gave the Bore,
In which estate would God he had deceased,
Then had the Realm not ruined so sore,
His nephews reign should not so soon have ceased,
The noble blood had not been so decreased.
His Rat, his Cat, and Blood hound had not noied
Such liegemen true, as after they destroyed.
Their lawless acts good subjects did lament,
And so did I, and therefore made the rimes,
To show my wit how well I could invent,
To warn withal the careless of their crimes.
I thought the freedom of the ancient times
Stood still in force: Ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat? Nay, nay. Veritas est pessuma rerum.
Belike no tyrants were in Horace days,
And therefore Poets freely blamed vice,
Witness their Satyrs sharp, and tragic plays,
With chiefest Princes chiefly had in price.
They name no man, they mix their gall with spice,
No more do I, I name no man outright,
But riddle wise, I mean them as I might.
When brute had brought this to their guilty ears,
Whose right surnames were noted in the rhyme,
They all conspired like most greedy Bears,
To charge me straight with this most grievous crime:
And damned me the gallow tree to clime,
And strangled then, in quarters to be cut,
Which should on high ore London gates be put.
This judgment given so vehement and sore,
Made me exclame against their tyranny:
Wherewith incenst, to make my pain the more,
They practiced a shameful villainy:
They cut me down alive, and cruelly
Ripped up my panch and bulk, to make me smart,
And lingered long ere they took out my heart.
Here tyrant Richard played the eager Hog,
His grashing tuskes my tender gristles shore:
His blood hound Louell played the hungry Dog,
His woluish teeth my guiltless carcass tore:
His Rat and Cat did what they might, and more,
Cat Catesby clawed my guts to make me smart,
The Rat Ratcliffe gnawed me to the heart.
If Jews had killed the iustest King alive,
If Turks had burnt up Churches, gods and all,
What greater pain could cruel hearts contriue,
Then that I suffered for this trespass small?
I was no Prince nor Peer, but yet my fall
Is worthy to be thought upon for this,
To see how cankard tyrants malice is.
To teach also all subjects to take heed
They meddle not with Magistrates affairs,
But pray to God to mend them if it need:
To warn also all Poets that be strayers,
To keep them close in compass of their chayers,
And when they touch that they would wish amended,
To sauce them so, that few need be offended.
And so to mix their sharp rebukes with mirth,
That they may pierce, not causing any pain,
Save such as follows every kindly birth,
Requited straight with gladness of the gain.
A Poet must be pleasant, not too plain,
Faults to control, ne yet to flatter vice,
But sound and sweet, in all things ware and wise.
The Greeks do paint a Poets office whole
In Pegasus, their fained horse with wings,
Whom shaped so Medusaes blood did foale,
Who with his feet struck out the Muses springs,
From flintie rocks to Helicon that clings.
And then flue up into the starrie sky,
And there abides among the gods on hie.
For he that shall a perfect Poet be,
Must first be bred out of Medusaes blood:
He must be chaste and virtuous as was she.
Who to her power the Ocean God withstood.
To the end also his doom be just and good,
He must (as she) look rightly with one eye
Truth to regard, and write nothing awrie.
In courage eke he must be like a horse,
He may not fear to register the right.
What though some frown? there of he may not force,
No bit nor reine his tender jaws may twight,
He must be armde with strength of wit and sprite,
To dash the rocks, dark causes and obscure,
Till he attain the springs of truth most pure.
His hooues also must pliant be and strong,
To rieue the rocks of lust and errors blind,
In brainlesse heads, that always wander wrong:
These must he bruise with reasons plain and kind,
Till springs of grace do gush out of the mind:
For till affections from the fond be driven,
In vain is truth told, or good counsel given.
Like Pegasus a Poet must have wings,
To fly to heaven, or where him likes best:
He must have knowledge of eternal things,
Almighty Jove must harbor in his breast:
With worldly cares he may not be oppressed,
The wings of wit and skill must heave him hier,
With great delight to satisfy desire.
He must also be lusty, free, and swift,
To travail far, to view the trades of men,
Great knowledge often is gotten by this shift:
Things that import he must be quick to pen,
Reproving vices sharply now and then.
He must be swift when touched tyrants chafe,
To gallop thence, to keep his carkas safe.
If I had well these qualities considered,
Especially that which I touched last,
With speedy flight my feet should have delivered
My feeble body from most boistrous blast,
They should have caught me, ere I had bin cast.
But too much trusting to a tyrants grace,
I never shrunk, nor changed port or place.
I thought the Poets ancient liberties
For pleas had been allowed at the bar:
I had forgot how new found tyrannies
With truth and freedom were at open war,
That lust was law, that might did make and mar,
That among tyrants it is and ever was,
Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas.
Where lust is law it booteth not to plead,
No privilege nor liberties avail.
But with the learned, whom law and wisdom lead,
Although through rashness Poets hap to rail,
A plea of dotage may all quarrels quail:
Their old license their writings to expound,
Does quit them clear from faults by Momus sound.
This freedom old ought not to be debard
From any wight that speaks ought, or writes:
The Authors meaning should of right be heard,
He knows best to what end he enditeth:
Words sometime bear more then the heart behiteth.
Admit therefore the Authors exposition,
If plain, for truth: if forced, for his submission.
In case of slander, laws require no more,
Save to amend that seemed not well said:
Or to unsay the slanders said before,
And ask forgiveness for the hasty braid:
To Heretics no greater pain is laid,
Then to recant their errors or retract:
And worse then these can be no writers act.
Yes (quoth the Cat) thy railing words be treason,
And treason is far worse then heresy.
Then must it follow by this awkeward reason,
That Kings be more then God in majesty,
And souls be less then bodies in degree.
For heretics both souls and God offend,
Traitors but seek to bring man's life to end.
I speak not this t'abase the heinous fault,
Of traiterous acts abhorred by God and man,
But to make plain their judgment to be naught,
That heresy for lesser sin do ban.
I curse them both as deep as any can,
And always did: yet through my foolish rhyme,
They stained me with that most hateful crime.
I never meant the King or Counsel harm,
Unless to wish them safety were offense.
Against their power I never lifted arm,
Nor pen, nor tongue, for any ill pretense.
The rhyme I made, though rude, was sound in sense,
For they therein whom I so fondly named,
So ruled all, that they were foul defamed.
This was no treason, but the very troth,
They ruled all, none could deny the same:
What was the cause then why they were so wroth?
What, is it treason in a riming frame
To clip, to stretch, to add, or change a name?
And this reserved, there is no rhyme nor reason,
That any craft can clout to seem a treason.
For where I meant the King by name of Hog,
I only alluded to his badge the Bore:
To Louels name I added more our Dog,
Because most dogs have borne that name of year.
These metaphors I used with other more,
As Cat, and Rat, the half names of the rest,
To hide the sense that they so wrongly wrest.
I pray you now what treason find you here?
Enough: you rubbed the guilty on the gaul,
Both sense and names do note them very near.
I grant that was the chief cause of my faule,
Yet can you find therein no treason at all:
There is no word against the Prince or State,
No harm to them whom all the Realm did hate.
But since the guilty always are suspicions
And dread the ruin that must sue by reason,
They cannot choose but count their counsel vicious
That note their faults, and therefore call it treason.
All grace and goodness with the leaud is geason.
This is the cause why they good things do wrest,
Whereas the good take ill things to the best.
And therefore Baldwine boldly to the good
Rebuke their fault, so shall thou purchase thanks:
As for the bad, thou shall but move their mood,
Though pleasantly thou touch their naughty prankes.
Warn Poets all, no wise to pass the banks
Of Helicon, but keep within the bound:
So shall their freedom to no harm redound.
THE WILFVLL FALL OF THE BLACKSMITH, AND THE foolish end of the Lord Awdeley,
in June, Anno Dom. 1496.
WHo is more bold then is the Bayard blind?
Where is more craft then in the clouted shone?
Who catch more harm then do the bold in mind?
Where is more guile then where mistrust is none?
No plasters help before the grief be known,
So seems by me who could no wisdom leare,
Until such time I bought my wit too dear.
Who being boystrous, stout, and brainlesse bold,
Puffed up with pride, with fire and furies fret,
Incenst with tales so rude and plainly told,
Wherein deceit with double knot was knit,
I trapped was as silly fish in net,
Who swift in swimming, careless of deceit,
Is caught in gin wherein is laid no bait.
Such force and virtue has this doleful plaint,
Set forth with sighs and tears of Crocodile,
Who seems in sight as simple as a Saint,
Has laid a bait the warelesse to beguile,
And as they weep they work deceit the while,
Whose rufull cheer the rulers so relent,
To work in haste that they at last repent.
Take heed therefore ye Rulers of the Land,
Be blind in sight, and stop your other care:
In sentence slow, till skill the truth has scand,
In all your doomes both love and hate forbear,
So shall your judgment just and right appear.
It was a southfast sentence long ago,
That hasty men shall never lack much woe.
Is it not truth? Baldwine what say thou?
Say on thy mind: I pray thee muse no more:
Me think thou star'st and look I wot not how,
As though thou never saw a man before:
Belike thou musest why I teach this lore,
Else what I am, that here so boldie dare,
Among the prease of Princes to compare.
Though I be bold I pray thee blame not me,
Like as men sow, such corn needs must they reap,
And nature planted so in each degree,
That Crabs like Crabs will kindly crawle and creep:
The subtle Fox unlike the silly sheep.
It is according to my education,
Forward to prease in rout and congregation.
Behold my coat burnt with the sparks of fire,
My leather apron filled with horse shoe nails,
Behold my hammer and my pinsers here,
Behold my looks, a mark that seldom fails:
My cheeks declare I was not fed with quails,
My face, my clothes, my tools with all my fashion,
Declare full well a Prince of rude creation.
A Prince I said, a Prince I say again,
Though not by birth, by crafty usurpation.
Who doubts but some men princehood do obtain,
By open force, and wrongful domination?
Yet while they rule are had in reputation.
Even so by me, the while I wrought my feate,
I was a Prince, at least in my conceit.
I dare the bolder take on me the name,
Because of him whom here I lead in hand,
Tychet Lord Awdley one of birth and fame,
Which with his strength and power served in my band,
I was a Prince while that I was so mand:
His Butterfly still underneath my shield
Displaied was, from Wells to Blackeheath field.
But now behold he does bewail the same:
Thus after wits their rashness do deprave.
Behold dismayed he dare not speak for shame,
He looks like one that late came from the grave,
Or one that came forth of Trophonius cave,
For that in wit he had so little pith,
As he a Lord to serve a traitor Smith.
Such is the courage of the noble heart,
Which does despise the vile and baser sort,
He may not touch that savors of the cart,
Himlisteth not with each Jack lout to sport,
He lets him pass for pairing of his port:
The jolly Eagles catch not little flees,
The courtly silks match seeld with homely frees.
But surely Baldwine if I were allowed
To say the troth, I could somewhat declare:
But clerks will say, this Smith does wax too proud,
Thus in precepts of wisdom to compare.
But Smiths must speak that Clerks for fear ne dare.
It is a thing that all men may lament,
When Clerks keep close the truth lest they be shent.
The Hostler, Barbar, Miller and the Smith,
Hear of the sawes of such as wisdom ken,
And learn some wit, although they want the pith,
That Clerks pretend: and yet both now and then,
The greatest Clerks prove not the wisest men:
It is not right that men forbid should be
To speak the truth, all were he bond or free.
And for because I used to fret and some,
Not passing greatly whom I should displease,
I dare be bold a while to play the mome,
Out of my sack some others faults to lease,
And let mine own behind my back to pease.
For he that has his own before his eye,
Shall not so quick another fault epsy.
I say was never no such woeful case,
As is when honor does it self abuse:
The noble man that virtue does embrace,
Represseth pride, and humblenes does use,
By wisdom works, and rashness does refuse.
His wanton will and lust that bridle can,
Indeed is gentle both to God and man.
But where the Nobles want both wit and grace,
Regard no read, care not but for their lust,
Oppress the poor, set will in reasons place,
And in their words and doomes be found unjust,
Wealth goes to wrack till all lie in the dust:
There Fortune frowns, and spite begins to grow,
Till high, and low, and all be over throw.
Then fith that virtue has so good reward,
And after vice so duly waits shame,
How hap'th that Princes have no more regard,
Their tender youth with virtue to inflame?
For lack whereof their wit and will is lame,
Infect with folly, prove to lust and pride,
Not knowing how themselves or theirs to guide.
Whereby it happens to the wanton wight,
As to a ship upon the stormy seas,
Which lacking stern to guide it self aright,
From shore to shore the wind and tide to tease,
Finding no place to rest or take his ease,
Till at the last it sink upon the sand:
So fare they all that have no virtues scand.
The plowman first his land does dress and turn,
And makes it apt or ere the seed he sow,
Whereby he is full like to reap good corn,
Where otherwise no seed but weed would grow:
By which ensample men may easily know,
When youth have wealth before they can well use it,
It is no wonder though they do abuse it.
How can he rule well in a commonwealth,
Which knows not himself in rule to frame?
How should he rule himself in ghostly health,
Which never learned one lesson for the same?
If such catch harm their parents are too blame:
For needs must they be blind, and blindly led,
Where no good lesson can be taught or read.
Some think their youth discreet and wisely taught,
That brag, and boast, and wear their feather brave,
Can roist and rout, both loure and look aloft,
Can swear and stare, and call their fellows knave,
Can pill and poll, and catch before they crave,
Can card and dice, both cog and foist at fare,
Play on unthrifty, till their purse be bare.
Some teach their youth to pipe, to sing and dance,
To hawk, to hunt, to choose and kill their game,
To wind their horn, and with their horse to praunce,
To play at tenis, set the lute in frame,
Run at the ring, and use such other game:
Which feats although they be not all unfit,
Yet cannot they the mark of virtue hit.
For noble youth, there is nothing so meet
As learning is, to know the good from ill:
To know the tongues and perfectly endite,
And of the laws to have a perfect skill,
Things to reform as right and justice will:
For honor is ordained for no cause,
But to see right maintained by the laws.
It spites my heart to hear when noble men
Cannot disclose their secrets to their friend,
In sauegard sure, with paper, ink, and pen,
But first they must a secretary find,
To whom they show the bottom of their mind:
And be he false or true, a blab or close,
To him they must their counsel needs disclose.
And where they rule that have of law no skill,
There is no boot, they needs must seek for aid:
Then ruled are they, and rule as others will,
As he that on a stage his part has played:
But he was taught, naught has he done or said.
Such youth therefore seek science of the sage,
As think to rule when that ye come to age.
Where youth is brought up in fear and obedience,
Kept from ill company, bridled of their lust,
Do serve God duly and know their allegiance,
Learn godly weal which time nor age can rust:
There Prince, people, and Peers needs prosper must.
For happy are the folk, and blessed is that land,
Where truth and virtue both have got the over hand.
I speak this Baldwine of this rufull Lord,
Whom I perforce do here present to thee,
He faints so sore he may not speak a word:
I plead his cause without reward or fee,
And am enforced to speak for him and me:
If in his youth he had been wisely tought,
He should not now his wit so dear have bought.
For what is he that has but half a wit,
But may well know that rebels cannot speed?
Mark well my tale, and take good heed to it,
Recount it well, and take it for good reed,
Prove it untrue I will not trust my creed:
Was never rebel heretofore or since,
That could or shall prevail against his Prince.
For ere the subject purpose to rebel,
Within himself let him consider well,
Foresee the danger, and bear in his brain,
How hard it is his purpose to obtain:
For if he once be entered to the breares,
He has a raging wolf fast by the ears.
And when he entered is to rule the rout,
Although he would, he can no way get out:
He may be sure none will to him resort,
But such as are the vile and rascal sort:
All honest men, as well the most as lest,
To taste of treason utterly detest.
Then let him weigh how long he can be sure,
Where faith nor friendship may no while endure:
He whom he trusts most, to gain a groate
Will fall him from, and seek to cut his throat:
Among the knaves and slaves where vice is rooted,
There is no other friendship to be looked.
With foolish men so falsehood is in price,
That faith is sin, and virtue counted vice.
And where the quarrel is so vile and bad,
What hope of aid then is there to be had?
Thinks he that men will run at this or that,
To do a thing they know not how or what?
Nor yet what danger may thereof betide,
Where wisdom would they should at home abide,
Rather then seek, and know not what to find.
Wise men will first debate this in their mind:
Full sure they are if that they go to wrecke,
Without all grace they lose both head and neck.
They lose their lands and goods, their child and wife
With grief and shame shall lead a woeful life:
If he be slain in field he dies accursed,
Which of all wreckes we should account the worst:
And he that dies defending his liege Lord,
Is blessed and blessed again by Gods own word.
And where the soldiers wages is vnpai'd,
There is the Captain slenderly obeyed:
And where the soldier's out of fear and dreed,
He will be lack when that there is most need,
And privately he seeks his ease and leisure,
And will be ruled but at his will and pleasure.
And where some draw forth, other do draw back,
There in the end must needs be woe and wrack:
To hope for aid of Lords it is but vain,
Whose foretaught wit of treason knows the pain:
They know what power a Prince has in his hand,
And what it is with rebels for to stand.
They know by treason honor is defaced,
Their offspring and their progeny disgraced.
They know to praise is not so worthy a thing,
As to be true and faithful to their King.
Above cognizance or arms, or pedigree a far,
An vnsported coat is like a blasing star:
Therefore the rebel is accurstand mad,
That hopes for that which rebel never had:
Who trusting still to tales does hang in hope,
Till at the last he hang fast by the rope.
For though that tales be told that hope might feed,
Such foolish hope has still unhappy speed.
Is is a custom never will be broken,
In broiles the bag of lies is ever open:
Such lying news men daily will invent,
As can the hearers fancy best content:
And as the news do run and never cease,
So more and more they daily do increase.
And as they 'ncrease, they multiply as fast,
That ten is ten hundred, ten thousand at the last.
And though the rebel had once got the field,
Thinks he thereby to make his Prince to yield?
A Princes power within his own region,
Is not so soon brought to confusion.
For Kings through God are strong and stoutly hearted,
That they of subjects will not be subverted:
If Kings would yield, yet God would them restrain,
Of whom the Prince has grace and power to reign:
Who straightly charge us above all thing,
That no man should resist against his King.
Who that resists his dread sovereign Lord;
Does damn his soul, by Gods own very word,
A Christian subject should with honor due,
Obey his Sovereign though he were a Jew:
Whereby assured when subjects do rebel,
Gods wrath is kindled, and threatens fire and hell.
It is soon known when Gods fierce wrath is kindled,
How they shall speed with whom he is offended:
If God give victory to whom he likes best,
Why look they for it whom God does most detest?
For treason is hateful, and abhorred in Gods sight,
Example of Judas that most wicked wight:
Which is the chief cause no treason preuailes,
For ill must he speed whom Gods wrath assailes.
Let traitors and rebels look to speed then,
When Gods mighty power is subject to men.
Much might be said that goes more near the pith,
But this suffices for a rural Smith.
Baldwine when thou hear'st reason in this case,
Belike thou think I was not very wise,
And that I was accursed, or else wanted grace,
Which knowing the end of my fond enterprise,
Would thus presume against my Prince to rise:
But as there is a cause that moves every woe,
Somewhat there was whereof this sore did grow:
And to be plain and simple in this case,
The cause why I such matter took in hand,
Was nothing else but pride and lack of grace,
Vain hope of help, and tales both false and fond:
By mean whereof I did my Prince withstand,
Denied the tax assest by convocation,
To maintain war against the Scottish nation.
VVhereat the Cornish men did much repine,
For they of gold and silver were full bare,
And lived hardly, digging in the mine,
They said they had no money for to spare:
Began first to grudge, and then to swear and stare,
Forgot their due obeisance, and rashly fell to rauing,
And said they would not bear such polling and such shauing.
They first accused the King as author of their grief,
And then the Bishop Morton, and Sir Reinold Bray:
For they then were about the King most chief,
Because they thought the whole fault in them lay:
They did protest to rid them of the way.
Such thank have they that rule above a Prince,
They bear the blame of other men's offense.
When I perceived the Commons in a rore,
Then I and Flamoke both agreed together,
To whom the people resorted more and more,
Lamenting and crying, help us now or never,
Break bondage now, then are we free for ever:
VVhereat inflamed in hope to purchase fame,
To be their captains took on us the name.
Then might you hear the people make a shout,
God save the captains, and send us all good speed:
Then he that fainted counted was a lout,
The ruffians ran to sow seditious seed:
To call for company there was no need,
For every man his brother did entice,
To be partaker of his wicked vice.
Then all such news as made for our avail,
Was brought to me, but such as sounded ill,
Was none so bold to speak or yet bewail:
Each one so wedded was unto his will,
That forth they cried with bows, with sword, and bill.
And what the rufler spoke the lout took for a verdite,
For there the best was worst, worst best regarded.
For when men rebel, there still the viler sort
Conspire together, and will have all the sway:
And be it well or ill, they bear the port,
As they will do, the rest must needs obey.
They prattle and prate as does the Popingay:
They cry unto the rest to keep the array,
Whiles they may range and rob for spoil and pray.
And when we had prepared every thing,
We went to Tawnton with all our provision,
And there we slew the Provost of Peniyn,
For that he there did sit in high Commission:
He was not wise, nor yet of great discretion,
That durst approach his enmies in their rage,
When wit nor reason could their ire assuage.
From thence we went to Wels, and were received
Of this Lord Awdely as our chief captain,
He had the name, but yet he was deceived,
For I indeed did rule the clubbish train,
My cartly Knights true honor did disdain:
For like does love his like, it will be none other,
A chorle will love a chorle, before he will his brother.
From Wels and Winchester, to Blackheath field,
And there encamped looking for more aid,
But when none came, we thought our selves beguild.
Such Cornishmen as knew they were betrayed,
From us by night away together straid:
There might we learn how vain it is to trust
Our fained friends, in quarrels so unjust.
But we that thought our power was strong;
Were bent to try what ever should betide.
We were the bolder, for the King so long
Deferred fight: which so increast our pride,
That sure we thought the King himself did hide
Within the City, and with courage hault,
We did intend the City to assault.
But he contrary to our expectation,
Was fully bent to let us run our race,
Till we were farthest from our habitation,
Where that of aid or succor was no place,
And then be plagued as it should please his grace:
All doubtful plaints, how ever they did sound,
To our best veil we always did expound.
When that the King saw time, with courage bold
He sent a power to circumuent us all:
Where we enclosd as simple sheep in fold,
Were slaughtered all as beasts in butchers stall:
The King himself, what ever might befall,
Was strongly armed within Saint Georges field,
And there abode till that he heard us yield.
Then down we kneeld, and cride to save our life,
It was too late our folly to bewail:
There were we spoild of armor, coat, and knife:
And we which thought the City to assail,
Were led as prisners naked as my nail.
Of us two thousand they had slain before,
And we of them three hundred and no more.
My Lord and we the Captains of the West,
Took Inn at Newgate, fast in fetters tide,
Where after doom we had but little rest.
My Lord through London was drawn on a slide,
To Tower hill, where with an axe he did,
Clad in his armor painted all in paper,
Torn and reuers'd in spite of his behauer.
With Flamoke I and other of our bent,
As traitors at Tiburne our judgment did obey:
The people looked I should my fault lament,
To whom I spoke, that for my fond assaie,
I should have fame that never should decay:
Whereby ye may perceive vain glory does inflame
As well the meaner sort, as men of greater name.
But as the fickle patient, sometime has desire,
To taste the things that Physic has denide,
And has both pain and sorrow for his hire:
The same to me right well may be applide,
Which while I raught for fame on shame did slide,
And seeking fame, brought forth my bitter bane,
As he that fierd the temple of Diane.
I tell thee Baldwine, I muse often, to see
How every man for wealth and honor gapeth,
How every man would climb above the sky,
How every man the assured mean so hates,
How froward Fortune often their purpose mateth:
And if they hap their purpose to obtain,
Their wealth is woe, their honor care and pain.
We see the servant happier then his Lord,
We see him live when that his Lord is dead,
He sleeps sound, is merry at his board,
No sorrow in his heart does vex his head:
Happy is he that poverty can wed.
What gain the mighty men when they be dead,
By all the spoil, and blood that they have shed?
The lofty tower where honor has his seat,
Is high on rocks more slipper then the ice,
Where still the whirling wind does roar and beat,
Where sudden qualmes and perils still arise,
And is beset with many sundry vice,
So strange to men when first they come thereat,
They be amas'd, and do they wot not what.
He that preuailes, and to the tower can clime,
With toil and care must needs abridge his days:
And he that slides may curse the hour and time
He did attempt to give so fond assaies,
And all his life to grief and shame obaies.
Thus slide he down, or to the top ascend,
Assure himself repentance is the end.
Baldwine therefore do thou record my name,
For president to such as credit lies,
Or thirst to suck the sugared cup of fame,
Or do attempt against their Prince to rise:
And charge them all to keep within their sise.
Who does assay to wrest beyond his strength,
Let him be sure he shall repent at length.
At my request admonish thou all men,
To spend the talent well which God has lent,
He that has one, let him not toil for ten,
For one's too much, unless it be well spent:
I have had proof, therefore I now repent,
Thrice happy are those men, yea blessed is he,
Who can contented serve in his degree.
M. Cauil.
HOW THE VALIANT KNIGHT SIR NICHOLAS Burdet, Chief Butler of Normandy, was
slain at Pontoise, Anno Dom. 1441.
IF erst in Kings affairs we counted were of trust,
To fight in waged wars, as Captains against the foes,
And might therefore alive receive the guerdon just,
Which aye his Majesty employed on those:
Why should we so keep silence now, and not disclose
Our noble acts to those remain alive,
TO encourage them the like exploits t'atchiue?
For if when as we warred, for Prince and public weal,
We might to each for both have time and place to speak,
Then why not now, if we to both appeal?
Since both well know our dealings were not weak.
We claim as right, in truth our minds to break,
The rather eke we think to speak we franchiz'd are,
Because we served for peace and di'd in Princes war.
Which granted so, and held deserved due,
I may full well on stage supply the place a while,
Till I have plainly laid before your view
That I have cause, as these, to plain of Fortunes guile,
Which smirking though at first, she seem to smooth and smile,
(If Fortune be) who deemed themselves in skies to dwell,
She thirleth down to dread the gulfes of ghastly hell.
But here I let a while the Lady Fortune stay,
To tell what time I lived, and what our wars were then,
The great exploits we did, and where our armies lay,
Eke of the praise of some right honorable men,
Which things with eyes I saw, called now to mind again.
What I performed present in the fight,
I will in order and my fall recite.
In youth I served that royal Henry fifth the King,
Whose praise for martial feats eternal fame reteines,
When he the Normanes stout did in subjection bring,
My self was under then his ensigns taking pains.
With loial heart I fought, pursued my Prince his gains,
There dealt I so that time my fame to raise,
French writers yet my name and manhood praise.
And erst as Burdets diverse warlike wights
(In Warwick shire their lands in Arrow ar)
Were for good service done made worthy Knights,
Whose noble acts be yet recounted far:
Even so my self well framed to peace or war,
Of these the heir by due descent I came,
Sir Nicholas Burdet Knight, which had to name.
That time the noble John of Bedford Duke bare sway,
And feared was in France for courage stout and fell,
He loved me for my fight and person, (though I say)
And with revenues me rewarded yearly well.
I played the faithful subjects part, the truth to tell,
And was accounted loiall, constant still,
Of stomach, worship great, and warlike skill.
But then (O grief to tell) ere long this peerless King,
When he restored had his right unto the Crown
The Duchy all of Normandy, eke subject bring
The Frenchemen all, and set Lieutenants in each town
High Regent made of France, then Fortune began to frown,
He then departed life, too soon alas:
Some men suppose his grace empoisond was.
Thou Fortune sly, what meanst thou thus, these prancks to play?
False Fortune blere eyed blind, unsteady startling still,
What meanst thou turning thus thy flattering face away,
Inconstant where thou bear most good will?
Is it thy nature then? or is it thy wonted skill?
It cost thee naught, they say it comes by kind,
As thou art bisme, so are thine actions blind.
I nothing doubt then thou thy self shall fall.
I trust to see the time when thou shall be forgot.
For why thy pride, and pomp and power must vanish all,
Thy name shall die for aye, and perish quite I wot.
And when thou shall be counted but a sot,
The noble wights which lived and did in worthy fame,
In heaven and earth shall find an everlasting name.
But words of course are these of Fortune had,
When unto Princes haps chance good or ill:
God sends to every sort these tempests sad,
When from his word they swerve and heavenly will.
Men must endeavor then to please his goodness still,
And then come life or death, come joy, come smart,
No Fortunes frown can daunt the doughty heart.
The famous King so dead, his son but nine months old
Henry the sixth, of England was proclaimed King:
And then the Frenchmen waxt more stout and bold,
His youth occasion gave them to conspire the thing,
Which might them all from due subjection bring.
On which the Counsel called a Parliament:
Of French that might the treasons high prevent.
VTherein the Duke of Bedford my good Lord and friend
Was Regent made the Prince his deputy in France:
The Duke of Gloucester Protector was, to the end
To rule in cases such at home might hap to chance:
They chose to guard the Prince in honor to advance
Henry Benford Bishop of Winchester,
And Thomas the noble Duke of Excester.
But here before those things could well be settled sure,
(As great affairs of Kingdoms longer time do take)
The Frenchmen did by treason, force, and coin procure
Some towns which English were in France their faith forsake.
A long discourse it were of all recital make:
But of my chance that time, recite will I,
Which served in wars my Prince in Normandy.
Before the Mount S. Michael as in siege I lay,
In confines of the Normans and the Britons land,
From townsmen famisht nigh we vitailes kept away,
And made them often in danger of dis-Mounting stand:
But it being strong and also stoutly manned,
Even by our losses they gate heart of grass,
And we declining saw what Fortune was.
Yet nerethelesse we thought by famine make them yield,
Eke they by fight or succors hopte the siege to raise,
T'accomplish which they rusht on sudden out to feeld,
As bent to die or win the wanted food with praise:
And we as ready were for them at all assaies.
These eager impes whom food want feaz'd to fight amain,
We forced them die, fall, fly, to take their fort again.
Where I in chase pursued them even to the town,
Taken prisoner was, a while for ransom lay:
But then the worthy Duke the Regent of renown,
Did for me quite disburse the price required to pay.
The siege we raised, from thence we went our way,
And I redeemed bare this blanke in mind,
Till of requite I might occasion find.
Which thus ere long befell, to this a while give ear:
When Arthur Earl of Richmond to S. Jacques came
De Beuuron where my self and other Captains were,
Which had repared well and fortified the same,
We made him fly, to his immortal shame:
Even thus to him and forty thousand more,
Five hundred English gave the ouerthroe.
Long while he battery laid against the wall,
Thereby to make a breach for them to enter in:
But well perceiving still his shot to profit small,
And that we weighed not of his power a pin,
On every side afresh he did the assault begin:
Yet we so bare them off, and beat them down,
They durst not seize or enter on the town.
But wearied with the siege and fault they pausd a while,
Consulting what were best, and so did we likewise:
They found the feate, they thought should surely us beguile,
And in an evening came t'accomplish the enterprise.
A sharp assault they gave. Alarm my mates we rise:
On both the sides they scald, the fort to gain:
But from the scales and walks we flang them down amain.
It was my charge that time to keep a bulwark bace,
Where Britons came along to enter by a strait:
It Was in a bottom low, a pond was by the place,
By which they needs must pass up to a posterne gate.
I meant to make them fish the poole without a bait,
Protesting ere they there should get the wall
We would as English die, or give our foes the fall.
The trumpets sound tan tara, tan tan tara right,
The guns were shot founce-founce-founce, fomp-fum, fow-powthow,
The drums went downe-dun down, the fluits fit-fite-fit-fite,
The weapons clish-clash and the captains now-now now.
With bills we beat the^ down, with shafts we shot them throw.
The gory ground did groan, the smoky shot and cries
Dimd all the air, and thundered through the skies.
S. Denise cride the French, and Britons glahe-lahee,
S. George the English cride, fight-fight-fight, kill-kill-kill:
Fight-fight (quoth I) come on, they flee, they flee, they flee.
And therewithal we use a point of warlike skill,
We causd the men within to cry unto us still,
Fight Suffolk now, fight-fight and Salsbury:
Fight fight you noble Earls, the Britons flee they flee.
With that amazed all the Britons began recoile,
Some drowned in the pond, wherein they ran for fear,
And I pursued the flight, to wrecke my captive foil,
We paid them in the chase disordred as they were,
Seven hundred slew, took fifty prisners there,
Gaind eighteen standerds, and one banner more:
Yet I and mine not fully were fourscore.
Of this exploit when the Earl of Richmond heard,
Which gave an hot assault on the otherside the town,
No less was he displeasde, amazed, then affeard,
To hear the names of those two Earls of high renown,
His guilty courage quaild, his heart was danted down,
He causde the trumpets sound retrait away:
To scale our walls he durst no longer stay.
At midnight he dislodgd, from siege he made depart
The Constable of France (late Earl of Richmond) fled,
And toward Fougiers sped, with such as took his part,
For haste perhaps with fear lest he should lose his head.
They left two hundred pipes of flower and biscuit bread,
Great gunnes fourteen, three hundred pipes of wine,
Two hundred frailes of figs and raisons fine.
Five hundred barrels they of herring left beside,
Of powder for our gunnes full forty barrels more,
They fled without their tents, the dasterds durst not bide,
For fear they could not stay, to take away their store.
Have you often heard the like, of cowards such before?
Those forty thousand, Britons, French, and Scots,
Four score them foiled, made them flee like sots.
When this, that noble man, the Duke of Bedford heard,
How I did quit my self, and served my Prince so well,
He me procured of the King as great reward
As my deserts could wish, and more the truth to tell,
Chief Butlership of Normandy unto me fell,
Revenues eke in Normandy of lands,
A thousand crowns came yearly to my hands.
I after this was sent to make inrode
Upon the coast of Britain, for to bate their pride,
A band of horsemen took without abode,
The Duke of Sommerset made me their guide,
To many towns about their bounds we ride:
Set them on fire, or made them ransom pay,
Took store of prisners, wrought them much decay.
Returned victours safe to Normandy,
With good success, for why the cause was good:
And of our Prince were guerdond gratefully
With laud and gifts, as for our service stood.
This makes the Captains venture life and blood,
And soldiers serve with heart in what they may,
Which are assured of honor, praise, and pay.
Ye worthy wights alive, which love your Countries weal,
And for your Princes port such wars do undertake,
Learn so for Country yours with foreign foes to deal,
See that of manhood good, so great accounts ye make.
It nothing vailes in peace, to swear, stur, face or crake:
In wars he winnes the fame of noble wight
Who warlike deals, for Prince and public right.
If you so pointed be, to serve your Prince in war,
As erst was I, and must before the muster take,
Retain such soldiers as well made, strong, seemly ar,
Brought up to labor hard, of such account do make:
These able are at need to stand and keep the stake,
When facing foisters fit for Tiburne fraies
Are food-sick faint, or hart-sicke run their ways.
At whom a man may find a number every day,
Which wear their weapons still, as all the world were war,
And keep a coile to bear the best of blades away,
With bucklers brave at backs, to show what men they are.
In peace at home they swear, stare, foist, roist, fight, and iar:
But when abroad they fear of wars the smart,
Some better soldiers prove from driving cart.
In wars to serve (as we) and weapons have
When warlike storms do rage beseemes a warlike man:
In pleasant peace who sets himself to banding brave,
And facing fares at home, abroad do nothing can,
(Though nere so much he boast) fie on him coward than:
For not in gauntlet, sword, targ, oaths, hair, staring eyes:
But in the breast, good courage, virtue lies.
But here perhas (you say) I fall a note too low,
Beneath the persons of these worthy Peers and me.
It Is true indeed, and yet such fruit hereof may grow:
As eke the mean hereby, his iarring out may see.
Without good mean, the song can never sweetly gree.
Leave out the mean, or let him keep no tune:
And you shall sing when Easter falls in June.
Even so, if meaner sorts do iangle here and iar
To languish under Mars, but fill good peace with fight,
As discord foul in music, fit they for the war:
They never can atchieue the victory aright.
Lead such as square or fear, then farewell all, good night.
A sheep is even as good to starting stand and bea:
As he that iangles, wrangles, rangles, runs awea.
Then whosoever deals for war, must wisely make his mart,
And choose such soldiers stout will stiff in warfare stand.
If he not recke what ruffian roisters take his part,
He weeldes unwisely then the mace of Mars in hand.
He must be able eke, to deem for sea and land
What men may serve, to best advantage make,
And them instruct fine warlike points to take.
With skillful knowledge freight he must be void of fear,
Of wisdom so discreet, so sober, grave and sage,
To deem, perceive, abide, adventures both to bear
As may in all exploits of fight with Fortune wage:
He must have art in ure, and use not rule by rage:
Wise dealing sets the soldiers sure in ray,
Wild over rashness casts all away:
The cause, ground, place and time, the order of their fights,
The valor of his foes, and what is their intent,
The weather fair or foul, occasion of the nights,
What witty wiles and policies may them prevent,
And how the time or store of the enmies has been spent:
All these (I say) must well be waide before,
By him that sets in wars of credit store.
In all which points that noble Duke his grace did pass,
I mean the Regent good, for choosing, using men,
By nature framed thereto, he wondrous skillful was,
And friendly used all, instructing now and then
Not only Captains stout, that were his country men,
But also sundry soldiers as occasion came,
And taught them how to wars themselves to frame.
His princely grace and gesture yet me thinks I see,
And how he bare himself, to deal for war or peace:
In war full Mars-like, hardy, stern, and bold was he:
And meek and prudent, merciful, when storms of wars did cease:
Whom pity moved as much inflicted pains to release,
As ever wight in whom the broiles of war
Or force of fights, had entered in so far.
Which if again to rue the loss of such a friend,
In sight with plaints, of tears the fountains out might flow
So all lamenting Muses would me wailings lend,
The dolours of my heart in sight again to show:
I would deplore his death, and Englands cause of woe,
With such sad mourning tunes, and such sobs, sighs, and tears
As were not seen for one, this ten times twenty years.
For why this noble Prince, when we had needed most,
To set the states of France and England in a stay,
That feared was of foes in every foreign coast,
Too soon (alas) this Duke was taken hence away.
In France he di'd, he less lament his loss we may,
That Regent regal, rule of public right.
Lo how my hurts afresh beweepe this wanted wight.
"With that his wounds (me thought) began freshly bleed,
"And he waxt faint and fell, and my salt tears
"Ran down my rufull cheeks, with trickling speed,
"(For who could choose that such cause sees and hears?)
"O worthy Knight (quoth I) whose loyal faith appears:
"Cease wailes, rise up, instruct my quiuering pen,
"To tell the rest of Fortunes doublings then.
I have (quoth he) not Fortunes flattery to accuse,
Nor Fate nor Destiny, nor any fancy faind:
I have no cause t'affirme that these could ought misuse
This noble Prince, whose life and acts such fame and honor gaind,
But our deserts, our sins, and our offenses staind
This noble I Will and us, our sins (I say)
Offending God, he took this Prince away.
He less how loath can I return, and leave this pearl in Roane
My Lord John Duke of Bedford, there his corpse yet lies
Enclosd with costly tomb, wrought curiously of stone,
By North the altar high (delighting many Martial eyes)
Within our Lady Church, where fame him lifts to skies,
By daily view his name renoum'd exalted is,
And soul, I trust, full sweetly sweames in bliss.
Needs must I enterline my talk a while with this:
And then I will return to tell you how I sped.
When once the French men saw this noble Duke to miss,
Which English armies all against foes with fortunes led
They lived at large, rebeld against their sovereign head,
Forsook their oaths, allegiance all denide,
And English men with all their force defide.
While he did live, they durst not so to deal,
They durst not dare with the English often to fraie,
They found it was not for their own of public weal,
To rise against their Lord the Regent in arraie.
Soon after he was dead, departed hence away
Both French and Normanes close to win did close,
And we divided were, our rights abroad to lose.
The feend (I think) deuisde a way to make the breach,
By envy bred in breasts of two right noble Peers,
Which mischief hatched in England, then may teach
All noble men that live, hence many hundred years,
Beware of Envy black, how far she deares.
Even their examples tell, how true our Christ does say:
Each realm, town, house, in civil strife, shall desolate decay:
Perdie the Duke of York was Regent made of France,
At which the Duke of Sommerset did much repine,
He thought they rather ought him so t'aduance
King Henry's kin, for honor of his Princely line:
But mark the grape which grew on this ungracious vine,
I will not say it after stroid their lines and houses nie,
But this I say, we daily saw dishonor came thereby.
For though the hauty Duke were worthy it to have,
As well for courage good as virtues honor due:
Yet since to the Duke of York the election first it gave,
And he the saddle mist, what needed he to rue?
When tumults great and sturres in France yet daily grew,
He nild the Regent hence dispatched in many days:
That loss might win him hurt, or long dispraise.
Wild wengand on such ire, whereby the realm does lose,
What gain have they, which heave at honor so?
At home disdain and grief, abroad they friend their foes.
I must be plain in that which wrought my webs of woe,
My webs (quoth I?) would God they had wrought no more.
It was the cause of many a bleeding English breast,
And to the French, their end of woeful wars addressed.
I dare avouch if they had firm in friendship bode,
And soothly as beseemd ioin'd friendly hand with hands,
They had not felt defame in any foreign rode,
Nor had not so been sent, with loss from Gallia strands:
They might possession kept, still of their conquered lands,
And able been to tried themselves so true,
As might have made their enmies still to rue.
For while the Duke of Sommerset made here so great delays,
That into France the succors small and slackly came,
Not only Paris then was lost, within few days,
That famous flower of France, of far renowned fame,
The French (I say) not only gat and kept the same,
But by this means, in France we daily felt such smart,
As might with pity pierce an adamantine heart.
O great mishap, the noble Duke of Bedford once being dead,
Our wealth went back, by discords foul despite we lost
Not only towns in France, and Captains armies led,
But many soldiers eke with labor, spence and cost:
And though full often we made the French men smell of the roast,
Yet in the end we gain of fight the fame,
And they by craft and treason gate the game.
What rests more, it were, perdie, too long to tell,
Of battles great and broiles which happened daily still,
The stories eke declare adventures which befell:
Although (God wot) the writers wanted points of skill,
Of whom to speak a while, digress again I will,
And partly show what one he ought to be,
Which takes on him to write an History.
A Chronicler should well in diverse tongues be seen,
And eke in all the arts he ought to have a sight,
Whereby he might the truth of diverse actions deem,
And both supply the wants, correct that is not right:
He should have eloquence, and full and fitly write,
Not mangle stories, snatching here and there:
Nor gloss to make a volume great appear.
He should be of such countenance and wit,
As should give witness to the Histories he writes,
He should be able well his reasons so to knit,
As should continue well the matter he recites:
He should not praise, dispraise, for favor or despites,
But should so place each thing in order due,
As might approve the stories to be true.
But this may haps the time may seek at length redress,
And then such stories now and noble acts as die,
May come again to light (at least defaced less)
If from the Britains first antiquities they try.
In great defects if they the truth supply,
Then shall the readers fuller stories find,
And have whereby to recreate the mind.
But now return I must, and briefly here declare
Before my death, what sundry haps we had.
In wars right variously the states of Captains fare,
Now well, now woe, now joyful, now right sad.
But who well ends, though all his haps were bad,
Let him erst sink or swim, lose, win, be slain, die, fall,
If he die well, h'is thrice and four times blessed of all.
In France eight leagues from Paris, Pontoise stands,
(Tweene that and Roane) which we had won before:
And so we held it English safely in our hands.
For to our Prince the men allegiance swore,
And they remained obedient evermore,
Till from their necks to reaue the English yoke,
They might find means by whom to strike the stroke.
When these saw Paris lost, and cities more beside,
And what in France and Normandy reuolts had done,
They thought no longer subject to abide,
But sought occasion how they might by French be won.
As of our loss reports did daily to them run,
So with King Charles the agreed when to betray the town,
And force the English flee, or yield, or beat them down.
For why, the power of France could not with mighty host
Perform to win by force from us the assaulted town,
Them scaling often from the walls we tossed.
On every side full fast we flang the French men down.
Our noble acts before had gotten such renown,
And Fortune erst had past with us so far,
They had small hope to win our forts by war.
Wherefore King Charles assai'd the secret saut,
Not by his force of French, but by his golden fee,
Corrupting diverse Burgeses to make the faut,
Whereby an entry should to his oppugning be:
And they (as erst is said) were willing to agree,
Like perjured thieves conspired by secret fine device,
Gave Pontoise up, and took the promised price.
But in November next when it was sharp and cold,
And daily frost had dried and parched hard the ground,
We were in hope again to get of Pontoise hold,
Which erst the townsmen sold, for gain of many a pound
The snow fell fast, lay thick, and covered well the ground,
And ditches were so hard about the town befrore,
That on the ice by every side we safely might get ore.
The Lord John Clifford was chief Captain then,
Which with us Captains did this policy devise,
That we in clothing white and soldiers every man,
Should in our armor finely us disguise:
The next night so we should to the assault arise,
And pass the frozen ditch unto the wall,
With ladders scale, and kill the watchmen all.
We so prepared our selves as time occasion gave,
And dressed in white coats trim, it joyed our hearts to see
How fine we past the ditch, what good success we have:
How on the walls we find the watch nigh frozen be:
As noble Greeks on Troy, on Pontoise seasoned we,
We slew the watch, we beat the soldiers down,
Some prisners took, and took withal the town.
Of stately Captains French, was John de Villers one
Within the taken town, and Narrabon a Knight
Burgunion: yet they fled, away they gate them gone:
They durst not bide against the blanched boys to fight.
We paid the perjured knaves the Burgesses that night,
And gat as much of honor and renown
As they gat shame and loss, which bought and sold the town.
Mark well the French men's foiles in all our worthy war
In these two regal Henry's times, and you shall see
How we surpast the French in valor far:
And bend for Prince and Realm so valiant for to be:
Which if ye shall, and deal in service as did we,
I nothing doubt renown and fame shall say,
That noble England bears for wars the palm away.
But When King Charles had heard how Pontoise men had sped,
His army straight assembled he therefore again,
Wherewith to win this town afresh the assault he led,
He piners set to trench and undermine amain,
Made bastiles for defense, yet all this toil was vain.
For battery of our walls he spent his powder still,
Made freshly French assaults, but did no ill.
The noble Duke of York discharged late before,
When now the Earl of Warwick chanst at Roane to die,
Being Regent chosen once again of France, as yore,
(The Earl of Warwick Regent was two years perdie)
Arrived in France, to rouse the French King he did hie,
(Which lay besieging Pontoise, as I said)
With him to fight, and eke to bring us aid.
The French King fled, for haste he left his store behind:
When he was once assured the Duke of York drue near,
He durst not stay to bide the time or place assigned
To fight our Regent with, but fled away for fear.
By these assaies you see what men in France they were,
Discouraged often, slain, put to flight and fall:
By sight, force, fight, and names of numbers small.
There when the Duke had fortified our Pontoise town,
Then he pursued the French King erst that fled,
To Poyssy, where he lay with Lords of French renown.
Before which town, the Duke his noble army led:
The French King durst not out of Poyssy put his head:
And yet there came to skirmish out French gentlemen,
Of which some slain, four taken, the rest retired again.
The Duke to bid him battle did pretend,
If he could there encounter with him tho:
But forth again he durst not come nor send,
For fear he should receive the foil and ouerthro.
On which the Duke dislodged, departing Poyssy fro,
To Maunt, and Roane, from thence his grace did hie,
To Appease the broiles of strife in Normandy.
But then the French King calling unto mind his loss,
His charges in the siege, his bastiles trenches made,
How erst we did them thence, sans bag and bagage toss,
Eke how from siege he durst not stay the store to lade,
And how their Fortunes often, in fight went retrograde,
How neighbors ill to Paris, we of Pontoise were:
He cast aside his French and fainting fear.
The rather yet, for why, Parisiens aye did rail,
They said he wanted courage good, he durst not fight,
He lackt no soldiers good, his feeble heart did fail:
Le Roy (quoth they) du France, les Anglois point nennit:
Le Roy ne ose pas pour Pontoise fair pour suit:
Le Roy est Lourd, sans cueur: car peu de gens,
Fait nostre Roy and pais fair grande dispens.
On this King Charles returned with mighty host,
To vindicate this great reproach and shame:
And unto Pontoise gave assault in post
Full hotly, when we feared least the same.
Whereon, to fight against him all our force we frame,
But number great at the entry got such hand,
We could not forth again their force aband.
With trumpets sounding, tan tan-tar'aloud
The larum bell we rung, our selves to try dispose,
To make them pay the price of our distress we vowed,
Before we would possession got, of Pontoise lose:
In every street we met the strength of all our foes,
And made them pass by deadly dint away,
Which ventured first our English mates to slay.
Why now my friends, for England fight, I cried:
If ever English hearts your noble breasts possessed,
I promise you to make them flinch, if I may bide:
Mates follow me. Amongst my foes I rusht before the rest:
O here come on (quoth I) now fight we for the best.
And therewithal I used such courage, force and might:
As made my foes to fall, and soldiers fitly fight.
If we do leese (quoth I) the French men shall not gain:
So if we win, it is worth the while to keep array.
If ye stand stiffly to it, we will make them peaze the pain,
And lead with loss of lively limbs the laud away.
Although they fiercely fight, in hope us all to slay:
Lo six to one they fall, and dead they lie:
We English men, in triumph fight, and honor die.
With bloody broiles of war, the hapless town did smoke,
The children saw their fathers dear, to bleed their last:
The wives be wailed much the fatal stroke,
Which forced their husbands bleed, fall, die so fast:
Helas the women cried, the woeful streets that past:
(When so they saw the channels bloody stream)
What plague is this, that pesters so our Reame?
Is no remorce of life, but kill, kill, kill? (he less)
Kill, kill the English ctie, and valiantly they fight:
What hap had we to see these mischiefs come to pass?
Helas le sang de nous amiss, la mort helas:
The maidens cry, the widows wail, and aged mourn,
With wringing hands vplift, and wish themselves unborn.
Of us one thousand English men within the town,
Sustained the force, the power and puissance of their King:
And of the French that fought, we beat three thousand down,
We slew no less, for all the number he did bring.
If this untrue shall seem, disere dit mine to ring,
A French Historian writing for themselves shall say:
Three thousand French men there, were slain that day.
Four hundred English men that time were slain in fight,
My self was one, with loss they wan the town perdie:
But if I might have lived to have tried our right,
With one for every seven, by ods as we did die:
I doubt not (so the rest, would done their parts as I.)
But that King Charles, his Lords, nor all his men,
Should scarce have taken the town of Pontoise then.
What need I more debate of these things here,
In England was the fault, though we did feel the smart.
While they at home, at bate and strife for honors were,
They lost abroad of Normandy the greater part.
To think on this torments again my wounded heart,
That Lords at home, should strive about the name,
And lose abroad their countries weal and fame.
Let English Peers abandon such contentious strife,
It hurts the public weal, decays the State:
It reaues the years too soon of longer life:
It frets the breast with rust of baend debate:
It gives the check to him that gives the mate:
Then thus I end, that wight of all is blessed
Which lives in love with God, his Prince and country best.
So Higins if thou write, how this my fall befell;
Place it in Baldwines Mirror with the rest.
From crazed scull since here my mind I tell:
Since bleeding heart these rufull rimes expressed:
This mangled tale beseemes my person best.
Do so (quoth he) and let it pass even thus:
Viuit (quoth I) post funer a virtus.
John Higins.
HOW SHORES WIFE, KING EDWARD THE FOVRTHS CONCVBINE, WAS by King Richard
despoiled of all her goods, and forced to do open penance.
AMong the rest, by Fortune overthrown,
I am not least, that most may wail her fate:
My fame and brute, abroad the world is blown,
Who can forget, a thing thus done so late?
My great mischance, my fall, and heavy state,
Is such a mark, whereat each tongue does shoot,
That my good name, is plucked up by the root.
This wandering world, bewitched me with wiles,
And won my wits, with wanton sugared joys:
In Fortunes frekes, who trusts her when she smiles,
Shall find her false, and full of fickle toys,
Her triumphs all, but fill our ears with noise,
Her flattring gifts, are pleasures mixed with pain,
Yea, all her words, are thunders threatening rain.
The fond desire, that we in glory set,
Does thirle our hearts, to hope in slipper hap:
A blast of pomp, is all the fruit we get,
And under that, lies hid a sudden clap.
In seeking rest, unawares we fall in trap,
In groping flowers, with nettles stung we are,
In labring long, we reap the crop of care.
Oh dark deceit, with painted face for sho,
Oh poisned bait, that makes us eager still,
Oh fained friend, deceiving people so,
Oh world, of thee, we cannot speak too ill:
Yet fools we are, that bend so to thy skill.
The plague and scourge, that thousands daily feel,
Should warn the wise, to shun thy whirling wheel.
But who can stop, the stream that runs full swift?
Or quench the fire, that is crept in the straw?
The thirsty drinks, there is no other shift,
Perforce is such, that need obeyes no law.
Thus bound we are, in worldly yokes to draw,
And cannot stay, nor turn again in time,
Nor learn of those, that sought too high to clime.
My self for proof, lo here I now appear,
In woman's weed, with weeping watered eyes,
That bought her youth, and her delights full dear,
Whose loud reproach, does sound unto the skies,
And bids my corse, out of the grave to rise,
As one that may, no longer hide her face,
But needs must come, and show her pitious case.
The sheet of shame, wherein I shrouded was,
Did move me often, to plain before this day,
And in mine cares did ring the trumpe of brass,
Which is defame, that does each thing bewray.
Yea though full dead, and low in earth I lay,
I heard the voice, of me what people said,
But then to speak, alas I was afraid.
And now a time, for me I see prepared,
I hear the lives, and falls of many wights:
My tale therefore, the better may be har'd,
For at the torch, the little candle lights.
Where pageants be, small things fill out the sights.
Wherefore give ear, good Churchyard do thy best,
My tragedy, to place among the rest.
Because the truth, shall witness well with thee,
I will rehearse, in order as it fell,
My life, my death, my doleful destiny,
My wealth, my woe, my doing every deal,
My bitter bliss, wherein I long did dwell:
A whole discourse, by me Shores wife by name,
Now shall thou hear, as thou had seen the same.
Of noble blood, I cannot boast my birth,
For I was made out of the meanest mold,
Mine heritage, but seven foot of the earth,
Fortune ne gave, to me the gifts of gold:
But I could brag, of nature if I would,
Who filled my face, with favor fresh and fair,
Whose beauty shone, like Phoebus in the air.
My shape some said, was seemly to each sight,
My countenance, did show a sober grace,
Mines eyes in looks, were never proved light,
My tongue in words was chaste in every case.
Mine ears were deaf, and would no lovers place,
Save that, alas, a Prince did blot my brow,
Lo, there the strong, did make the weak to bow.
The majesty, that Kings to people bear,
The stately port, the awful cheer they show,
Does make the mean, to shrink and couch for fear,
Like as the hound, that does, his master know:
What then? since I, was made unto the bow,
There is no cloak, can serve to hide my fault:
For I agreed, the fort he should assault.
The Eagles force, subdues each bird that flies,
What metal may, resist the flaming fire?
Does not the Sun, dazell the clearest eyes,
And melt the ice, and make the frost retire?
Who can withstand, a puissant Kings desire?
The stiffest stones, are pierced through with tools,
The wisest are, with Princes made but fools.
If kind had wrought, my form in common frames,
And set me forth, in colors black and brown,
Or beauty had, been percht in Phoebus flames,
Or shamefast ways, had plucked my feathers down,
Then had I kept, my fame and good renown:
For natures gifts, were cause of all my grief.
A pleasant prey, entiseth many a thief.
Thus woe to thee, that wrought my peacocks pride,
By clothing me with natures tapestry:
Woe worth the hew, wherein my face was did,
Which made me think, I pleased every eye.
Like as the stars, make men behold the sky,
So beauties show, does make the wise full fond,
And brings free hearts, full often to endless bond.
But clear from blame, my friends can not be found,
Before my time, my youth they did abuse:
In marriage, a prentise was I bound.
Then that mere love, I knew not how to use.
But well away, that cannot me excuse,
The harm is mine, though they deuisde my care,
And I must smart, and sit in slandrous snare.
Yet give me leave, to plead my cause at large:
If that the horse, do run beyond his race,
Or any thing that keepers have in charge,
Do break their course, where Rulers may take place:
Or meat be set, before the hungries face,
Who is in fault? the offender yea or no,
Or they that are, the cause of all this woe.
Note well what strife, this forced marriage makes,
What lothed lives, do come where love does lack,
What scratching breers, do grow upon such brakes,
What commonweals, by it are brought to wrack,
What heavy load, is put on patients back,
What strange delights, this branch of vice does breed,
And mark what grain, springs out of such a seed.
Compel the hawk, to sit that is vnman'd,
Or make the hound, untaught to draw the Dear,
Or bring the free, against his will in band,
Or move the sad, a pleasant tale to here,
Your time is lost, and you no whit the near:
So love ne learnes, of force the knot to knit,
She serves but those, that feel sweet fancies fit.
The less defame, redounds to my dispraise,
I was entist, by trains, and trapt by trust:
Though in my power, remained yeas and nayes,
Unto my friends, yet needs consent I must,
In every thing, yea lawful or unjust.
They brake the boughs, and shakte the tree by sleight,
And bent the wand, that might have grown full straight.
What help in this, the pale thus broken down,
The Dear must needs, in danger run astray:
At me therefore, why should the world so frown?
My weakness made, my youth a Princes pray.
Though wisdom should, the course of nature stay,
Yet try my case, who list, and they shall prove,
The ripest wits, are soonest thralles to love.
What need I more, to clear my self so much?
A King me wan, and had me at his call,
His royal state, his princely grace was such,
The hope of will, that women seek for all,
The ease and wealth, the gifts which were not small,
Besieged me, so strongly round about,
My power was weak, I could not hold him out.
Duke Hannibal, in all his conquest great,
Or Caesar yet, whose triumphs did exceed,
Of all their spoils, which made them toil and sweat,
Were not so glad, to have so rich a meed,
As was this Prince, when I to him agreed,
And yielded me, a prisner willingly,
As one that knew, no way away to fly.
The Nightingale, for all his merry voice,
Nor yet the Lark, that still delights to sing,
Did never make, the hearers so rejoice,
As I with words, have made this worthy King:
I never iar'd, in tune was every string,
I tempred so, my tongue to please his ear,
That what I said, was current every where.
I joined my talk, my gestures and my grace,
In witty frames, that long might last and stand,
So that I brought, the King in such a case,
That to his death, I was his chiefest hand.
I governed him, that ruled all this Land:
I bare the sword, though he did wear the Crown,
I struck the stroke, that threw the mighty down.
If justice said, that judgment was but death,
With my sweet words, I could the King persuade,
And make him pause, and take therein a breath,
Till I with suite, the faultors peace had made:
I knew what way, to use him in his trade,
I had the art, to make the Lion meek,
There was no point, wherein I was to seek.
If I did frown, who then did look a wrie?
If I did smile, who would not laugh outright?
If I but speak, who durst my words deny?
If I pursude, who would forsake the flight?
I mean, my power, was known to every wight.
On such a height, good hap had built my bower,
As though my sweet, should nere have turned to sour.
My husband then, as one that knew his good,
Refusde to keep, a Princes Concubine,
Forseeing the end, and mischief as it stood,
Against the King did never much repine:
He saw the grape, whereof he drank the wine.
Though inward thought, his heart did still torment,
Yet outwardly, he seemd he was content.
To purchase praise, and win the peoples zeal,
Yea rather bent, of kind to do some good,
I ever did, uphold the common weal,
I had delight, to save the guiltless blood:
Each suitors cause, when that I understood,
I did prefer, as it had been mine own,
And help them up, that might have been orethrowne.
My power was pressed, to right the poor man's wrong,
My hands were free, to give where need required:
To watch for grace, I never thought it long,
To do men good, I need not be desired.
Nor yet with gifts, my heart was never hired.
But when the ball, was at my foot to guide,
I played to those, that Fortune did abide.
My want was wealth, my woe was ease at will,
Ny robes were rich, and brauer then the sun:
My Fortune then, was far above my skill,
My state was great, my glass did ever run.
My fatal thread, so happily was spunne,
That then I sat, in earthly pleasures clad,
And for the time, a Goddess place I had.
But I had not, so soon this life possessed,
But my good hap, began to slip aside:
And Fortune then, did me so sore molest,
That unto plaints, was turned all my pride.
It booted not, to row against the tide:
Mine oars were weak, my heart and strength did sail,
The wind was rough, I durst not bear a sail.
What steps of strife, belong to high estate?
The climing up, is doubtful to endure,
The seat it self, does purchase privy hate,
And honors fame, is fickle and unsure,
And all she brings, is flowers that be vnpure:
Which fall as fast, as they do sprout and spring,
And cannot last, they are so vain a thing.
We count no care, to catch that we do wish,
But what we win is long to us unknown:
Till present pain, be served in our dish,
We scarce perceive, whereon our grief has grown:
What grain proves well, that is so rashly sown?
If that a mean, did measure all our deeds,
In steed of corn, we should not gather weeds.
The settled mind, is free from Fortunes power,
They need not fear, who look not up aloft:
But they that climb, are careful every hour,
For when they fall, they light not very soft.
Examples have, the wisest warned often,
That where the trees, the smallest branches bear,
The storms do blow, and have most rigor there.
Where is it strong, but near the ground and root?
Where is it weak, but on the highest sprayes?
Where may a man, so surely set his foot,
But on those bows, that grows low always?
The little twigs, are but unsteadfast stays,
If they break not, they bend with every blast,
Who trusts to them, shall never stand full fast.
The wind is great, upon the highest hills,
The quiet life, is in the dale below:
Who treads on ice, shall slide against their wills,
They want not cares, that curious arts would know.
Who lives at ease, and can content him so,
Is perfect wise, and sets us all to school,
Who hates this lore, may well be called a fool.
What greater grief, may come to any life,
Then after sweet, to taste the bitter sour?
Or after peace, to fall at war and strife,
Or after mirth, to have a cause to lowre?
Under such props, false Fortune builds her bower,
On sudden change, her flittering frames be set,
Where is no way, for to escape the net.
The hasty smart, that Fortune sends in spite,
Is hard to brook, where gladness we embrace:
She threatens not, but suddenly does smite,
Where joy is most, there does she sorrow place.
But sure I think, this is too strange a case,
For us to feel, such grief amid our game,
And know not why, until we taste the same.
As erst I said, my bliss was turned to bale,
I had good cause, to weep and wring my hands,
And show sad cheer, with countenance full pale:
For I was brought, in sorrows woeful bands.
A pirrie came, and set my ship on sands.
What should I hide, or color care and noy?
King Edward di'd, in whom was all my joy.
And when the earth, received had his corse,
And that in tomb, this worthy Prince was laid,
The world on me, began to show his force,
Of troubles then, my part I long assai'd:
For they of whom, I never was afrai'd,
Undid me most, and wrought me such despite,
That they berest, me from my pleasure quite.
As long as life, remained in Edwards breast,
Who was but I? who had such friends at call?
His body was, no sooner put in chest,
But well was he, that could procure my fall:
His brother was, mine enmie most of all,
Protector then, whose vice did still abound,
From ill to worse, till death did him confound.
He falsely feigned, that I of counsel was,
To poison him, which thing I never meant:
But he could set, thereon a face of brass,
To bring to pass, his leaud and false intent.
To such mischief, this tyrants heart was bent,
To God, ne man, he never stood in awe,
For in his wrath, he made his will a law.
Lord Hastings blood, for vengeance on him cries,
And many more, that were too long to name:
But most of all; and in most woeful wise,
I had good cause, this wretched man to blame,
Before the world, I suffered open shame,
Where people were, as thick as is the sand,
I penance took, with taper in my hand.
Each eye did stare, and look me in the face,
As I past by, the rumors on me ran,
But patience then, had lent me such a grace,
My quiet looks, were praised of every man:
The shamefast blood, brought me such color than,
That thousands said, which saw my sober cheer,
It is great ruth, to see this woman here.
But what prevailed, the peoples pity there?
This raging wolf, would spare no guiltless blood.
Oh wicked womb, that such ill fruit did bear,
Oh cursed earth, that yields forth such mud:
The hell consume, all things that did thee good,
The heavens shut, their gates against thy spreete,
The world tread down, thy glory under feet.
I ask of God, a vengeance on thy bones,
Thy stinking corpse, corrupts the air I know:
Thy shameful death, no earthly wight bemones,
For in thy life, thy works were hated so,
That every man, did wish thy ouerthro:
Wherefore I may, though partial now I am,
Curse every cause, whereof thy body came.
Woe worth the man, that fathered such a child,
Woe worth the hour, wherein thou wast begat:
Woe worth the breasts, that have the world beguiled,
To nourish thee, that all the world did hate.
Woe worth the gods, that gave thee such a fate,
To live so long, that death deserved so often.
Woe worth the chance, that set thee up aloft.
Ye Princes all, and Rulers every chone,
In punishment, beware of hatreds ire.
Before ye scourge, take heed, look well thereon:
In wroths ill will, if malice kindle fire,
Your hearts will burn, in such a hot desire,
That in those flames, the smoke shall dim your sight,
Ye shall forget, to join your justice right.
You should not judge, till things be well discerned,
Your charge is still, to maintain upright laws:
In conscience rules, ye should be thoroughly learned,
Where clemency, bids wrath and rashness pause,
And further says, strike not without a cause:
And when ye smite, do it for justice sake,
Then in good part, each man your scourge will take.
If that such zeal, had moved this tyrants mind,
To make my plague, a warrant for the rest,
I had small cause, such fault in him to find,
Such punishment, is used for the best:
But by ill will, and power I was oppressed,
He spoiled my goods, and left me bare and poor,
And caused me, to beg from door to door.
What fall was this, to come from Princes fare,
To watch for crumbs, among the blind and lame?
When alms were dealt, I had an hungry share,
Because I knew not, how to ask for shame,
Till force and need, had brought me in such frame,
That starve I must, or learn to beg an alms,
With book in hand, to say S. David's Psalms.
Where I was wont, the golden chains to wear,
A pair of beads, about my neck was wound,
A linen cloth, was lapt about my hear,
A ragged gown, that trayled on the ground,
A dish that clapped, and gave a heavy sound,
A staying staff, and wallet therewithal,
I bare about, as witness of my fall.
I had no house, wherein to hide my head,
The open street, my lodging was perforce:
Full often I went, all hungry to my bed,
My flesh consumed, I looked like a corse.
Yet in that plight, who had on me remorse?
O God thou know, my friends forsook me then,
Not one help me, that succred many a man.
They froun'd on me, that faun'd on me before,
And fled from me, that followed me full fast:
They hated me, by whom I set much store,
They knew full well, my fortune did not last.
In every place, I was condemned and cast,
To plead my cause, at bar it was no boot,
For every man, did tread me under foot.
Thus long I lived, all weary of my life,
Till death approcht, and rid me from that woe:
Example take, by me, both maid and wife,
Beware, take heed, fall not to folly so.
A mirour make, by my great ouerthro,
Defy the world, and all his wanton ways,
Beware by me, that spent so ill her days.
Tho. Churchyard.
HOW THOMAS WOLSEY DID ARISE UNTO GREAT authority and government, his manner
of life, pomp and dignity, and how he fell down into great disgrace, and was
arrested of high treason. Anno, 1530.
SHall I look on, when States step on the stage,
And play their parts before the peoples face?
Some men live now, scarce fourscore years of age,
Who in time past, did know the Cardnals Grace.
A gamesome world, when Bishops run at bace,
Yea, get a fall, in striving for the gole,
And body lose, and hazard silly sole.
Ambitious mind, a world of wealth would have,
So scrats and scrapes, for scorfe and scornie dross:
And till the flesh and bones be hid in grave,
Wit never rests, to grope for mucke and moss.
Fie on proud pomp, and gilded bridles bosse:
O glorious gold, the gaping after thee,
So blinds mine eyes, they can no danger see.
Now note my birth, and mark how I began,
Behold from whence, rose all this pride of mine,
My father but, a plain poor honest man,
And I his son, of wit and judgment fine,
Brought up at school, and proved a good Divine:
For which great gifts, degree of school I had,
And Batchler was, and I a little lad.
So, tasting some, of Fortunes sweet concaits,
I clapped the hood, on shoulder, brave as Son,
And hopte at length, to bite at better baits,
And fill my mouth, ere banquet half were don.
Thus holding on, the course I thought to ron:
By many a feast, my belly grew so big,
That Wolsey straight, became a wanton twig.
Lo what it is, to feed on dainty meat,
And pamper up, the gorge, with sugar plate:
Nay, see how lads, in hope of higher seat
Rise early up, and study learning late.
But he thriues best, that has a blessed fate,
And he speeds worst, that world will nere advance,
Nor never knows, what means good luck nor chance.
My chance was great, for from a poor man's son,
I rose aloft, and chopped and changed degree:
In Oxford first, my famous name begone,
Where many a day the scholars honored me.
Then thought I how, I might a courtier be:
So came to Court, and feathred there my wing,
With Henry the eight, who was a worthy King.
He did with words, assay me once or twice,
To see what wit, and ready sprite I had:
And when he saw, I was both grave and wise,
For some good cause, the King was wondrous glad.
Then down I looked, with sober countnance sad,
But heart was up, as high as hope could go,
That subtle fox, might win some favor so.
We work with wiles, the minds of men like wax,
The fawning whelp, gets many a piece of bred:
We follow Kings, with many cunning knacks,
By searching out, how are their humors fed.
He haunts no Court, that has a doltish head:
For as in gold, the precious stone is set,
So finest wits, in Court the credit get.
I quickly learned to kneel and kiss the hand,
To wait at heel, and turn like top about,
To stretch out neck, and like an Image stand,
To taunt, to scoff, and face the matter out,
To prease in place, among the greatest rout:
Yet like a Priest, my self did well behave,
In fair long gown, and goodly garments grave.
Where Wolsey went, the world like Beeswould swarm,
To hear my speech, and note my nature well.
I could with tongue, use such a kind of charm,
That voice full clear, should sound like silver bell.
When head devised, a long discourse to tell,
With stories strange, my speech should spised be,
To make the world, to muse the more on me.
Each tale was sweet, each word a sentence waid,
Each ear I pleased, each eye gave me the view,
Each Judgment marked, and paused what I said,
Each mind I fed, with matter rare and new,
Each day and hour, my grace and credit grew:
So that the King, in hearing of this news,
Devised how, he might my service use.
He made me then, his Chaplain, to say Mass
Before his grace, yea twice or thrice a week:
Now had I time, to trim my self by glass,
Now found I mean, some living for to seek,
Now I became, both humble, mild, and meek,
Now I applied, my wits and senses throw,
To reap some corn, if God would speed the plow.
Whom most I saw, in favor with the King,
I followed fast, to get some hap thereby:
But I observed, another finer thing,
That was, to keep, me still in Princes eye.
As under wing, the hawke in wind does lie,
So for a prey, I prowled here and there,
And tried friends, and fortune every where.
The King at length, sent me beyond the seas,
Embastour then, with message good and great:
And in that time, I did the King so pleas,
By short dispatch, and wrought so fine a feat,
That did advance my self to higher seat,
The Deanrie then, of Lincoln he me gave:
And bounty showed, before I began to crave.
His Amner too, he made me all in haste,
And threefold gifts, he threw upon me still:
His counsler straight, likewaies was Wolsey plaste.
Thus in short time, I had the world at will:
Which passed far, man's reason, wit, and skill.
O hap, thou have, great secrets in thy might,
Which long lie hid, from wily worldlings sight.
As shewres of rain, fall quickly on the grass,
That fading flowers, are soon refresht thereby:
Or as with Sun, the morning dew does pass,
And quiet calm, makes clear a troubled sky:
So Princes power, at twinkling of an eye
Sets up aloft, a fau'ret on the wheel,
When giddy brains, about the streets do reele.
They are but blind, that wake where Fortune sleeps,
They work in vain, that strive with stream and tide:
In double guard, they dwell, that destny keeps,
In simple sort, they live that lack a guide:
They miss the mark, that shoot their arrows wide,
They hit the prick, that make their flight to glance
So near the white, that shaft may light on chance.
Such was my luck, I shot no shaft in vain,
My bow stood bent, and brased all the year:
I waited hard, but never lost my pain:
Such wealth came in, to bear the charges clear.
And in the end, I was the greatest peer
Among them all, for I so ruled the land,
By Kings consent, that all was in my hand.
Within on year, three Bishoprics I had,
And in small space, a Cardnall I was made:
With long red robes, rich Wolsey then was clad,
I walked in Sun, when others sat in shade:
I went abroad, with such a train and trade,
With crosses borne, before me where I past,
That man was thought, to be some God at last.
With sons of Earls, and Lords I served was,
An hundred chains, at least were in my train:
I daile drank in gold, but not in glass,
My bread mas made, of finest flower and grain:
My dainty mouth, did common meats disdain,
I fed like Prince, on fowls most dear and strange,
And bankets made, of fine conceits for change.
My hall was full, of Knights, and Squires of name,
And gentlemen, two hundred told by pole:
Tale yeomen too, did hourly serve the same,
Whose names each week, I saw within check role,
All went to church, when service bell did knole,
All dinde and supt and slept, at Cardnals charge,
And all would wait, when Wolsey took his barge.
My household stuff, my wealth and silver plate,
Might well suffice, a Monarke at this day:
I never fed, but under cloth of state,
Nor walked abroad, till Vshars cleard the way.
In house I had, musitions for to play,
In open street, my trumpets loud did sound,
Which pearst the skies, and seemed to shake the ground.
My men most brave, marched two and two in rank,
Who held in length, much more then half a mile:
Not one of these, but gave his master thank,
For some good turn, or pleasure got some while.
I did not feed, my servants with a smile,
Or glosing words, that never bring forth fruit,
But gave them gold, or else preferred their suite.
In surety so whiles God was pleased, I stood,
I knew I must, leave all my wealth behind:
I saw they loved, me not for birth or blood,
But served a space, to try my noble mind.
The more men give, the more indeed they find
Of love, and troth, and service, every way:
The more they spare, the more does love decay.
Iioide to see, my servants thrive so well,
And go so gay, with little that they got:
For as I did in honor still excel,
So would I often, the want of servants note:
Which made my men, on master so to dote,
That when I said, let such a thing be done,
They would indeed, through fire and water run.
I had in house, so many off'cers still,
Which were obaid, and honored for their place,
That careless I, might sleep or walk at will,
Save that sometime, I weighed a poor man's case,
And salu'd such sores, whose grief might breed disgrace.
Thus men did wait, and wicked world did gaze,
On me and them, that brought us all in maze.
For world was whist, and durst not speak a word
Of that they saw, my credit curbd them so:
I waded far, and passed ore the foord,
And minded not, for to return I troe.
The world was wise, yet scarce it self did knoe,
When wonder made, of men that rose by hap:
For Fortune rare, falls not in each man's lap.
I clim'd the clouds, by knowledge and good wit,
My men sought chance, by service or good luck,
The world walked low, when I above did sit,
Or down did come, to trample on this mucke:
And I did swim, as dainty as a ducke,
When water serves, to keep the body brave,
And to enjoy, the gifts that Fortune gave.
And though my pomp, surpast all Prelates now,
And like a Prince I lived and pleasure took:
That was not fure, so great a blur in brow,
If on my works, indiffrent eyes do look.
I thought great scorn, such ^^uings here to brook,
Except I built, some houses for the poor,
And order took, to give great alms at door.
A College fair, in Oxford I did make,
A sumptuous house, a stately work indeed.
I gave great lands, to that, for learning sake,
To bring up youth, and succor scholars need.
That charge of mine, full many a mouth did feed,
When I in Court, was seeking some good turn,
To mend my torch, or make my candell burn.
More houses gay, I built, then thousands do
That have enough, yet will no goodness shoe:
And where I built, I did maintain it to,
With such great cost, as few bestows I troe.
Of buildings large, I could rehearse a roe,
That by mischance, this day have lost my name,
Whereof I do, deserve the only fame.
And as for suits, about the King was none
So apt as I, to speak and purchase grace.
Though long before, some say Shores wife was one,
That often kneeld down, before the Princes face
For poor men's suits, and help their woeful case,
Yet she had not, such credit as I gate,
Although a King, would hear the parret prate.
My words were grave, and bore an equal poies,
In balance just, for many a weighty cause:
She pleased a Prince, with pretty merry toies,
And had no sight, in state, nor course of laws:
I could persuade, and make a Prince to paws,
And take a breath, before he drew the sword,
And spy the time, to rule him with a word.
I will not say, but fancy may do much,
Yet world will grant, that wisdom may do more:
To wanton girls, affection is not such,
That Princes wise, will be abusde therefore:
One suit of mine, was surely worth a score
Of hers indeed, for she her time must watch,
And at all hours, I durst go draw the latch.
My voice but heard, the door was open straight,
She might not come, till she were called or brought:
I ruled the King, by custom, art and slight,
And knew full well, the secrets of his thought.
Without my mind, all that was done was naught,
In wars or peace, my counsel swaied all,
For still the King, would for the Cardnall call.
I kept a court, my self, as great as his,
(I not compare, unto my master here)
But look my Lords, what lively world was this,
That one poor man, became so great a peer?
Yet though this tale, be very strange to here,
Wit wins a world: and who has hap and wit,
With triumph long, in princely throne may sit.
What man like me, bare rule in any age,
I shone like Sun, more clear then morning star:
Was never part, so played, in open stage
As mine, nor fame, of man flew half so far.
I sat on bench, when thowsands at the bar
Did plead for right: for I in public weal
Lord Chancellor was, and had the great broad seal.
Now have I told, how I did rise aloft,
And sat with pride, and pomp, in golden hall,
And set my feet, on costly carpets soft,
And played at goal, with goodly golden ball:
But after, Lord, I must rehearse my fall.
O trembling heart, thou can not now for tears
Present that tale, unto the hearers ears.
Best weep it out, and sudden silence keep,
Till privy pangs, make pinched heart complain:
Or cast thy self, into some slumbring sleep,
Till wakened wits, remembrance bring again.
When heavy tears, do hollow cheeks distaine,
The world will think, thy sprits are grown so weak,
The feeble tongue, has sure no power to speak.
A tale by signs, with sighs and sobs set out,
Moves peoples minds, to pity plagued men:
With howling voice, do rather cry and shout,
And so by art, show forth thy sorrow then.
For if thou speak, some man will note with pen
What Wolsey said, and what threw Wolsey down,
And under foot, flings Wolseis great renown.
What force of that, my fall must needs be herd,
Before I fell, I had a time to rise:
As fatal chance, and Fortune me preferred.
So mischief came, and did my state despise.
If I might plead, my case among the wise,
I could excuse, right much of mine offense:
But leave a while, such matter in suspense.
The Pope, or pride, or peevish parts of mine,
Made King to frown, and take the seal from me:
Now served no words, nor pleasant speeches fine,
Now Wolsey, lo, must needs disgraced be.
Yet had I leave (as doleful prisner free)
To keep a house (God wot) with heavy cheer,
Where that I found, no wine, ne bread, nor beer.
My time was come, I could no longer live,
What should I make, my sorrow further known:
Upon some cause, that King that all did give
Took all again, and so possessed his own.
My goods, my plate, and all was overthrown,
And look what I, had gathred many a day,
Within one hour, was cleanly swept away.
But harken now, how that my Fortune fell,
To York I must, where I the Bishop was:
Where I by right, in grace a while did dwell,
And was in stawle, with honor great to pass.
The Priors then, and Abbots began to smell,
How Cardnall must, be honored as he ought,
And for that day, was great provision brought.
At Cawood then, where I great buildings made,
And did through cause, expect my stawling day,
The King deuisde, a secret under shade,
How Cardnall should, be rest and brought away.
One Wealsh a Knight, came down in good array,
And seasned sure, because from Court he came,
On Wolsey wolf, that spoiled many a lamb.
Then was I led, toward Court, like dog in string,
And brought as biefe, that Butcher-row must see.
But still I hopte, to come before the King,
And that repair, was not denide to me.
But he that kept, the Tower, my guide must be.
Ah there I saw, what King thereby did mean,
And so I searched if conscience now were clean.
Some spots I found, of pride and popish parts,
That might accuse, a better man then I:
Now Oxford came, to mind, with all their arts,
And Cambridge too, but all not worth a fly:
For schoolmen can, no foul defects supply.
My sauce was sour, though meat before was sweet,
Now Wolsey lackt, both cunning, wit, and spreete.
A deep conceit, of that, possessed my head,
So fell I sick, consumed as some did think.
So took in haste, my chamber and my bed,
On which device, perhaps the world might wink.
But in the heart, sharp sorrow so did sink,
That gladness sweet, (forsook my senses all)
In those extremes, did yield unto my fall.
O let me curse, the popish Cardnall hat,
Those miters big, beset with pearl and stones,
And all the rest, of trash I know not what,
The saints in shrine, their flesh and rotten bones,
The mask of Monks, devised for the nones,
And all the flock, of Freers, what ere they are,
That brought me up, and left me there so bare.
O cursed priests, that prate for profits sake,
And follow flood, and tide, where ere it floes:
O merchants fine, that do advantage take
Of every grain, how ever market goes.
O fie on wolves, that march in masking cloes,
For to devour, the lambs, when shepherd sleeps,
And woe to you, that promise never keeps.
You said I should, be reskude if I need,
And you would curse, with candell, book and bell:
But when ye should, now serve my turn indeed,
Ye have no house, I know not where ye dwell.
O Freers and Monks, your harbor is in hell,
For in this world, ye have no rightful place,
Nor dare not once, in heaven show your face.
Your fault not half, so great as was my pride,
For which offense, fell Lucifer from skies:
Although I would, that wilful folly hide,
The thing lies plain, before the peoples eyes,
On which hie heart, a hateful name does ries.
It has been said, of old, and daily will,
Pride goes before, and shame comes after still.
Pride is a thing, that God and man abores,
A swelling tode, that poisons every place,
A stinking wound, that breeds many sores,
A privy plague, found out in stately face,
A painted bird, that keeps a peacoks pace,
A loathsome lout, that looks like tinkers dog,
A hellish hownd, a swinish hateful hog.
That grunts and groans, at every thing it sees,
And holds up snowt, like pig that coms from draffe.
Why should I make, of pride all these degrees,
That first took root, from filthy dross and chafe,
And makes men stay, upon a broken staff?
No weakness more, then think to stand upright,
When stumbling block, makes men to fall down right.
He needs must fall, that looks not where he goes,
And on the stars, walks staring gozling like:
On sudden often, a blustering tempest bloes,
Then down great trees are tumbled in the dike.
Who knows the time, and hour when God will strike?
Then look about, and mark what steps ye take,
Before you pace, the pirgrimage ye make.
Run not on head, as all the world were yours,
Nor thrust them back, that cannot bide a shocke:
Who strives for place, his own decay procures:
Who always braules, is sure to catch a knock:
Who beards a King, his head is near the block:
But who does stand, in fear, and worldly dreed,
Ere mischief comes, had need to take good heed.
I having hap, did make account of none,
But such as fed, my humor good or bad.
To fawning dogs, sometimes I gave a bone,
And flung some scraps, to such as nothing had:
But in my hands, still kept the golden gad,
That served my turn, and laughed the rest to scorn,
As for himself was Cardnall Wolsey borne.
No, no, good men, we live not for our selves,
Though each one catch, as much as he may get:
We ought to look, to those that digs and delues,
That always dwell, and live in endless det.
If in such sort, we would our compass set,
We should have love, where now but hate we find,
And headstrong will, with cruel hollow mind.
I thought nothing, of duty, love, or fear,
I snatched up all, and always sought to clime:
I punished all, and would with no man bear,
I sought for all, and so could take the time.
I pli'd the Prince, whiles Fortune was in prime,
I filled the bags, and gold in hoord I heapt,
Thought not on those, that thresht the corn I reapt.
So all I lost, and all I gate was naught,
And all my pride, and pomp lay in the dust:
I ask you all, what man alive had thought,
That in this world, had been so little trust?
Why, all things here, with time decline they must.
Then all is vain, so all not worth a fly,
If all shall think, that all are borne to die.
If all be base, and of so small account,
Why do we all, in folly so abound?
Why do the mean, and mighty seek to mount,
Beyond all hope, where is no surety found,
And where the wheel, is always turning round?
The case is plain, if all be understood,
Wear so vain, we know not what is good.
Yet some will say, when they have heaps of gold,
With flocks of friends, and servants at their call,
They live like Gods, in pleasure treble fold,
And have no cause, to find no fault at all.
O blind conceit, these glories are but small,
And as for friends, they change their minds so mich,
They stay not long, with neither poor nor rich.
With hope of friends, our selves we do deceive,
With fear of foes, we threatened are in sleep:
But friends speak fair, yet men alone they leave
To sink or swim, to mourn, to laugh, or weep.
Yet when foe smiles, the snake begins to creep,
As world falls out, these days in compass just,
We know not how, the friend or foe to trust.
Both can betray, the truest man alive,
Both are to doubt, in matters of great weight,
Both will sometime, for goods and honor strive,
Both seems plain, yet both can show great slight,
Both stoopes full low, yet both can look on height,
And best of both, not worth a cracked crown:
Yet least of both, may lose a walled town.
Talk not of friends, the name thereof is naught,
Then trust no foes, if friends their credit lose;
If foes and friends, of one bare earth were wrought,
Blame nere of both, though both one nature shows.
Grace passes kind, where grace and virtue flows,
But where grace wants, make foes and friends alike,
The one draws sword, the other sure will strike.
I proved that true, by trial twenty times,
When Wolsey stood, on top of Fortunes wheel,
But such as to the height of ladder climes,
Know not what lead, lies hanging on their heel.
Tell me my mates, that heavy Fortune feel,
If rising up, breed not a giddie brain,
And falling down, be not a grievous pain.
I told you how, from Cawood I was led,
And so fell sick, when I arrested was;
What needs now more words herein be sed,
I knew full well, I must to prison pass,
And saw my state, as brittle as a glass:
So gave up ghost, and bad the world farewell,
Wherein, God wot, I could no longer dwell.
Thus unto dust, and ashes I returned,
When blaze of life, and vital breath went out,
Like glowing coal, that is to cinders burned;
All flesh and blood, so end, you need not doubt.
But when the brute of this was blown about,
The world was glad, the Cardnall was in grave,
This is of world, lo all the hope we have.
Full many a year, the world looked for my fall,
And when I fell, I made as great a crack,
As does an oak, or mighty tottering wall,
That whirling wind, does bring to ruin and wrack,
Now babbling world, will talk behind my back,
A thousand things, to my reproach and shame,
So will it too, of others do the same.
But what of that? the best is we are gone,
And worst of all, when we our tales have told,
Our open plagues will warning be to none,
Men are by hap, and courage made so bold:
They think all is, their own they have in hold.
Well, let them say, and think what thing they pleas,
This weltring world, both flows, and ebs like seas.
Tho. Churchyard.
HOW THE LORD CROMWELL EXALTED FROM MEAN ESTATE, was after by the envy of the
Bishop of Winchester and other his accomplices brought to untimely end, Anno Dom.
1540.
Awaked, and trembling betwixt rage and dread
With the loud slander (by the impious time)
That of my actions every where is spread,
Through which to honor falsely I should clime,
From the sad dwelling of the untimely dead,
To quit me of that execrable crime,
Cromwell appears his wretched plight to show,
Much that can tell, one much that once did know.
Roughly not made up in the common mould,
That with the vulgar vilely I should die,
What thing so strange of Cromwell is not told?
What man more praised? who more condemned then I?
That with the world when I am waxed old,
Most it were unfit that same of me should lie
With fables vain my history to fill,
Forcing my good, excusing of my ill.
You that but hearing of my hated name,
Your ancient malice instantly bewray,
And for my sake your ill deserved blame
Upon my legend publicly shall lay;
Would you forbear to blast me with defame,
Might I so mean a privilege but pray,
He that three, ages has endured your wrong,
Hear him a little that has heard you long.
Since Romes sad ruin here by me began,
Who her Religion plucked up by the root,
Of the false world such hate for which I wan,
Which still at me her poisned'st darts does shoot;
That to excuse it, do the best I can,
Little I fear my labor me will boot:
Yet will I speak my troubled heart to ease,
Much to the mind, her self it is to please.
O powerful number, from whose stricter law
Heart-mouing music did receive the ground
Which men to fair civility did draw
With the brute beast when lawless he was found:
O if according to the wiser saw
There be a high divinity in sound,
Be now abundant prosp'rously to aid
The pen prepared my doubtful case to plead.
Putney the place made blessed in my brith,
Whose meanest cottage simply me did shroud,
To me as dearest of the English earth;
So of my bringing that poor village proved,
Though in a time when never less the dearth
Of happy wits, yet mine so well allowed
That with the best she boldly durst confer
Him that his breath acknowledged from her.
Twice flowed proud Thames as at my coming wood,
Striking the wondering borderers with fear,
And the pale Genius of that aged flood
Unto my mother laboring did appear,
And with a countenance much distracted stood,
Threatening the fruit her pained womb should bear:
My speedy birth being added thereunto,
Seemed to foretell that much I came to do.
That was reserved for those worser days,
As the great ebb unto so long a flow,
When what those ages formerly did raise,
This when I lived did lastly overthrow,
And that great'st labor of the world did seize,
Only for which immedicable blow
Due to that time me dooming heaven ordained,
Wherein confusion absolutely reigned.
Vainly yet noted this prodigious sign,
Often predictions of most fearful things,
As plagues, or war, or great men to decline,
Rising of Commons, or the death of Kings;
But some strange news though ever it divine,
Yet forth them not immediately it brings,
Until the effects men afterward did learn,
To know that me it chiefly did concern.
Whilst yet my father by his painful trade,
Whose labored Anuile only was his fee,
Whom my great towardness strongly did persuade
In knowledge to have educated me:
But death did him unluckily invade,
Ere he the fruits of his desire could see,
Leaving me young, then little that did know
How me the heavens had purposed to bestow.
Hopeless as helpelesse most might me suppose,
Whose meannesse seemed their abject breath to draw:
Yet did my breast that glorious fire enclose,
Which their dull purblind ignorance not saw,
Which still is settled upon outward shows,
The vulgars judgment ever is so raw,
Which the unworthiest sottishly do love
In their own region properly that move.
Yet me my fortune so could not disguise,
But through this cloud were some that did me know,
Which then the rest more happy or more wise,
Me did relieve when I was driven low,
Which as the staier by which I first did rise,
When to my height I afterward did grow,
Them to requite my bounties were so hie,
As made my fame through every ear to fly.
That height and Godlike purity of mind
Rests not still, where titles most adorn
With any, nor peculiarly confinde
To names, and to be limited does scorn:
Man does the most degenerate from kind,
Richest and poorest both alike are borne;
And to be always pertinently good,
Follows not still the greatness of our blood.
Pity it is that to one virtuous man
That mark him lent to gentry to advance,
Which first by noble industry he wan,
His baser issue after should inhance,
And the rude slave not any good that can,
Such should thrust down by what is his by chance:
As had not he been first that him did raise,
Nere had his great heir wrought his grandsires praise.
How weak art thou that make it thy end
To heap such worldly dignities on thee,
When upon Fortune only they depend,
And by her changes governed must be?
Besides the dangers still that such attend,
Liuel'est of all men purtraied out in me,
When that for which I hated was of all,
Soon'st from me fled, scarce tarrying for my fall.
You that but boast your ancestors proud style,
And the large stem whence your vain greatness grew,
When you your selves are ignorant and vile,
Nor glorious thing dare actually pursue,
That all good spirits would utterly exile,
Doubting their worth should else discover you,
Giving your selves unto ignoble things;
Base I proclaim you though derived from Kings.
Virtue but poor, God in this earth does place
Against the rude world to stand up in his right,
To suffer sad affliction and disgrace,
Not ceasing to pursue her with despite:
Yet when of all she is accounted base,
And seeming in most miserable plight,
Out of her power new life to her does take,
Least then dismayed when all do her forsake.
That is the man of an undaunted spirit,
For her dear sake that offers him to dye,
For whom, when him the world does disinherit,
Looks upon it with a pleased eye,
What Is done for virtue thinking it does merit,
Daring the proudest menaces defy,
More worth then life, how ere the base world rate him,
Beloved of heaven, although the earth does hate him.
Injurious time, unto the good unjust,
O how may weak posterity suppose
Ever to have their merit from the dust,
Against them thy partiality that knows!
To thy report o who shall ever trust,
Triumphant arches building unto those
Allowed the longest memory to have,
That were the most unworthy of a grave?
But my clear mettle had that powerful heat,
As it not turned with all that Fortune could:
Nor when the world me terriblest did threat,
Could that place win which my hie thoughts did hold,
That waxed still more prosperously great,
The more the world me strove to have controlled,
On my own Columns constantly to stand,
Without the false help of another hand.
My youthful course thus wisely did I steer,
T'auoid those rocks my wrack that else did thret:
Yet some fair hopes from far did still appear,
If that too much my wants me did not let:
Wherefore my self above my self to bear,
Still as I grew I knowledge strove to get,
To perfect that which in the Embryon was,
Whose birth I found time well might bring to pass.
But when my means to fail me I did find,
My self to travel presently betook,
As much distasteful to my noble mind,
That the vile world into my wants should look,
And of my self industriously inclinde,
To measure others actions with my book,
I might my judgment rectify thereby,
In matters that were difficult and hie.
When lo it hapt that fortune as my guide,
Of me did with such providence dispose,
That the English Merchants then who did reside
At Antwerpe, me their Secretary chose,
(As though in me to manifest her pride)
Whence to those principalities I rose,
To pluck me down, whence afterward she feared
Beyond her power that almost she had reared.
When first the wealthy Netherlands me traind
In wise commerce most proper to the place,
And from my country carefully me wain'd,
That with the world did chiefly win me grace,
Where great experience happily I gaind;
Yet here I seemed but tutored for a space,
For hie imploiment otherwise ordaind,
Till which the time I idely entertaind.
For having Boston business in hand,
The charge thereof on Chambers being laid,
Coming to Flanders hapt to understand
Of me whom he requested him to aid;
Of which when I the benefit had scand,
Weighing what time at Antwerpe I had staid,
Quickly me won fair Italy to try,
Under a cheerful and more luckie sky:
For what the meanest clearly makes to shine,
Youth, wit, and courage, all in me concur
In every project, that so powerful trine
By whose kind working bravely I did stir,
Which to each hie and glorious design
(The time could offer) freely did me spur,
As forcing fate some new thing to prepare
(Showing success) t'attempt that could me dare:
Where now my spirit got roomth it self to show,
To the fairest pitch does make a gallant flight,
From things that too much earthly were and low,
Strongly attracted by a genuine light,
Where higher still it every day did grow;
And being in so excellent a plight,
Craved but occasion happily to prove
How much it sat each vulgar spirit above.
The good success the affairs of England found,
Much praised the choice of me that had been made:
For where most men the depth durst hardly sound,
I held it nothing boldly through to wade
My self, and through the strait'st ways I woond.
So could I act, so well I could persuade
As merely Iouiall, me to mirth apply,
Composed of freedom and alacrity.
Not long it was ere Rome of me did ring
(Hardly shall Rome so full days see again)
Of freemens catches to the Pope I sing,
Which wan much license to my countrymen,
Thither the which I was the first did bring,
That were unknown to Italy till then:
Light humors them when judgment does direct,
Even of the wise win plausible respect.
And those from whom that pensions were allowed,
And here did for intelligence remain,
Under my power themselves were glad to shroud,
Russell and Pace yea oftentimes were feign,
When as their names they durst not have auow'd,
Me into their society t'retaine,
Rising before me mighty as they were,
Great though at home, yet did they need me there.
In foreign parts nere friends I yet forsake
That had before been deeply bound to me,
And would again I use of them should make,
But still my stars command I should be free,
And all those offers lightly from me shake,
Which to requite I fettred else might be,
And though that often great perils me oppungne,
And means were weak, my mind was ever strong.
And those great wants fate to my youth did tie
Me from delights of those rich countries drive,
Thereby enforced with painful industry
Against affliction manfully to strive
Under her burden faintly not to lie,
But since my good I hardly must derive,
Unto the same to make my self a way
Through all the power against me she could lay.
As a Comedian where my life I led,
For so a while my need did me constrain,
With other my poor countrymen (that played)
Thither that came in hope of better gain,
Whereas when Fortune seemed me low to tread
Under her feet, she set me up again,
Until the use me bad her not to fear
Her good and ill that patiently could bear.
Till Charles the fifth the imperial power did bend
Against Rome, which Burbon skilfully did guide,
Which sore declining Italy did rend;
For the right that him her holiness denide,
Wholly her self enforced to defend
Against him that justly punished her pride,
To which my self I lastly did betake,
Seeing thereof what Fortune meant to make.
And at the siege with that great General served,
When he did girt her stubborn waste with steel,
Within her walls who well near being starved,
And that with faintnes she began to reele,
Showing her self a little as she swaru'd:
First her then noting I began to feel,
She whose great power so far abroad did rome,
What in her self she truly was at home.
That the great school of the false world was then,
Where here is their subtle practices did vie,
Amongst that mighty confluence of men,
French plots propt up by English policy,
The German powers, false shuffling, and again
All countermin'd by skillful Italy,
Each one in possibility to win,
Great rests were up and mighty hands were in.
Here first to work my busy brain was set,
(My inclination finding it to please
This stirring world which strongly still did whet)
To temper in so dangerous assaies,
Which did strange forms of policies beget;
Besides in times so turbulent as these,
Wherein my studies hopefully did bend
Unto that point the wisest made their end:
And my experience happily me taught
Into the secrets of those times to see,
From whence to England afterward I brought
Those slights of state deliu'red unto me,
In t'which were then but very few that sought,
Nor did with the umour of that age agree,
After did great and fearful things effect,
Whose secret working few did then suspect:
When though it were long it happened yet at last
Some hopes me homeward secretly allured,
When many perils strangely I had past,
As many sad calamities endured
Beyond the Moon, when I began to cast
By my rare parts what place might be procured,
If they at home were to the mighty known,
How they would seem compared with their own.
Or if that there the great should me neglect,
As I the worst that vainly did not fear,
To my experience how to gain respect
In other countries that do hold it dear,
And now occasion seemed to reject,
Whilst still before me other rising were,
And some themselves had mounted to the sky,
Little before unlike to thrive as I.
When now in England Bigamie with blood
Lately begot by luxury and pride,
In their great'st fulness peremptory stood;
Some thereunto that diligently pri'd,
Stilly were fishing in that troubled flood
For future changes wisely to provide,
Finding the world so rankly then to swell,
That till it brake it never could be well.
But floting long upon my first arrive,
Whilst many doubts me seemed to appall,
Like to a bark that with the tide does drive,
Having not left to fasten it withal,
Thus with the time by suffering I do strive
Unto that harbor doubtful yet to fall;
Until enforced to put it to the chance,
Casting the fairest my fortune to advance.
Making my self to mighty Wolsey known,
That Atlas which the government vpstai'd,
Which from mean place in little time was grown
Up unto him, that weight upon him laid,
And being got the nearest to his throne,
He the more easly the great kingdom swai'd,
Leaning thereon his wearied self to breath,
Whilst even the greatest far sat him beneath.
Where learned More and Gardener I met,
Men in those times immatchable for wit,
Able that were the dullest spirit to whet,
And did my humor excellently fit,
Into their rank that worthily did get
There as their proud competitor to sit,
One excellence to many is the mother,
Wit does as creatures one beget another.
This Founder of the palaces of Kings,
Whose veins with more then usual spirit were filled,
A man ordained to the mighti'st things,
In Oxford then determining to build
To Christ a College, and together brings
All that thereof the great foundation wills,
There me imploies, whose industry he found
Worthy to work upon the noblest ground.
Yet in the entrance wisely that did fear
Coin might fall short, yet with this work on fire,
Wherefore such houses as Religious were
Whose being no necessity require,
But that the greater very well might bear,
From Rome the Card'nall cunningly did hire,
Winning withal his Sovereign to consent,
Both coloring with so holy an intent.
This like a symptom to a long disease
Was the forerunner to this mighty fall,
And but too unadvisedly did sease
Upon the part that ruinated all,
Which had the work been of so many days
And more again, recover hardly shall:
But lo it sunk which time did long uphold,
Where now it lies even leueld with the mould.
Thus thou great Rome here first wast overthrown,
Thy future harms that blindly could not se,
And in this work they only were thine own,
Whose knowledge lent that deadly wound to thee,
Which to the world before had they not shown,
Nere had those secrets been descri'd by me,
Nor by thy wealth so many from the plow
Worn those hie types wherein they flourish now.
After when as the Cardinal again
Into hie favor with the King me brought,
With whom my self so well I did demean,
As that I seemed to exercise his thought,
And his great liking strongly did retain
With what before my Master me had taught,
From whose example by those Cells were small
Sprang the subversion lastly of them all.
Yet many a let was cast into the way,
Wherein I ran so steddily and right,
And many a snare my adversaries lay,
Much wrought they with their power much with their slight,
Wisely perceiving that my smallest stay
Fully required the utmost of their might,
To my ascendant hasting me to clime,
There as the first predomining the time,
Knowing what wealth me earnestly did woo,
Which I through Wolsey happened had to find,
And could the path most perfectly unto,
The King thereafter earnestly inclined,
Seeing besides what after I might do
If so great power me fully were assigned,
By all their means against me strongly wrought,
Laboring as fast to bring their Church to naught.
Whilst to the King continually I sue,
And in this business faithfully did stir
Strongly t'approue my judgment to be true
Against those who most supposed me to err,
Nor the least means which any way I knew
Might grace me, or my purposes prefer
Did I omit, till won I had his ear,
Most that me marked when least he seemed to hear.
This wound to them thus violently given,
Envy at me her sharpest darts does roue,
Affecting the supremacy of heaven,
As the first Giants warring against Jove,
Heaped hills on hills, the Gods till they had driven
The meanest shapes of earthly things to prove:
So must I shift from them against me rose,
Mortal their hate, as mighty were my foes.
But their great force against me wholly bent
Prevailed upon my purposes so far,
That I my ruin scarsely could prevent,
So momentarie worldly favors are,
That till the utmost of their spite was spent,
Had not my spirit maintained a manly war,
Risen they had when laid I had been low,
Upon whose ruin after I did grow.
When the great King their strange reports that took
That as pernicious as they potent were,
Which at the fair growth of my fortune struck,
Whose deadly malice blame me not to fear,
Me at the first so violently shook,
That they this frame were likely down to bear,
If resolution with a settled brow
Had not vpheld my peremptory vow.
Yet these encounters thrust me not awry,
Nor could my courses force me to forsake,
After this shipwreck I again must try
Some happier voyage hopeful still to make,
The plots that barren long we see did lie,
Some fitting season plentifully take,
One fruitful harvest frankly does restore
What many winters hindered had before.
That to account I strictly call my wit
How it this while had managed my state,
My soul in counsel summoning to sit,
If possible to turn the course of fate,
For ways there be the greatest things to hit,
If men could find the peremptory gate,
And since I once was got so near the brinke
More then before, it would grieve me now to sink.
Bedford whose life (some said) that I had saved
In Italy, one me that favored most,
And reverend Hayles who but occasion craved
To show his love, no less that I had cost,
Who to the King perceiving me disgraced,
Whose favor I unluckily had lost,
Both with him great, a foot set in withal
If not to stay, to qualify my fall.
High their regard, yet higher was their hap,
Well near quite sunk recover me that could,
And once more get me into Fortunes lap,
Which well my self might teach me there to hold,
Escaped out of so dangerous a trap,
Whose praise by me to ages shall be told,
As the two props by which I only rose,
When most suppressed, most trod on by my foes.
This me to urge the praemunire won,
Ordained in matters dangerous and hie,
In t'which the heedlesse Prelacie were run,
That back unto the Papacy did fly,
Sworn to that sea, and what before was done
Due to the King, dispensed were thereby,
In t'which first entering offered me the mean
That to throw down already that did lean.
This was to me that ouerflowing fourse,
From whence his bounties plentifully spring,
Whose speedy current with unusual force
Bare me into the bosom of the King,
By putting him into that ready course
Which soon to pass his purposes might bring,
Where those which late emperiously controlled me
Pale struck with fear stood trembling to behold me.
When state to me those ceremonies showed
That to so great a favorite were due,
And Fortune still with honors did me load,
As though no mean she in my rising knew,
Or heaven to me more then to man had owed,
(What to the world unheard of was and new)
And was to other sparing of her store
Till she could give, or ask I could no more.
Those high preferments he upon me laid,
Might make the world me publicly to know
Such as in judgment rightly being wai'd,
Seemed too great for me to undergo,
Nor could his hand from pouring on be stayed
Until I so abundantly did flow,
That looking down whence lately I was cloame,
Danger bid fear if further I should roame.
For first from Knighthood rising in degree,
The office of the Jewel house my lot,
After the Roles he frankely gave to me,
From whence a privy Counselor I got,
Chose of the Garter: and the Earl to be
Of Essex: yet sufficient these not
But to the great Vicegerencie I grew,
Being a title as supreme as new.
So well did me these dignities befit,
And honor so me every way became,
As more then man I had been made for it,
Or as from me it had derived the name:
Where was that man whose love I not requit
Beyond his own imaginary aim,
Which had me succored nearly being driven
As things to me that idly were not given?
What tongue so slow the tale shall not report
Of hospitable Friscobald and me,
And show in how reciprocal a sort
My thanks did with his courtesy agree,
When as my means in Italy were short
That me relieved, less great that would not be,
When I of England Chancellor was made,
His former bounties librally repai'd?
The manner briefly gentler Muse relate,
Since often before it wisely has been told,
The sudden change of vnauoided fate,
That famous Merchant reverend Friscobald
Grew poor, and the small remnant of his state
Was certain goods to England he had sold,
Which in the hands of Creditors but bad,
Small hope to get, yet lesser means he had.
Hither his wants him forciblie constrained,
Though with long travel both by land and seas,
Led by this hope that only now remained,
Whereon his fortune finally he lays,
And if he found that friendship here were feigned,
Yet at the worst it better should him please,
Far out of sight to perish here unknown,
Then vnrelieu'd be pitied of his own.
It chanced as I toward Westmister did ride,
Among the great concourse passing to and fro,
An aged man I happily espide,
Whose outward looks much inward grief did show,
Which made me note him, and the more I eyed
Him, me thought more precisely I should know,
Reuoluing long it came into my mind,
This was the man to me had been so kind:
Was there withal so ioyed with his sight,
(With the dear sight of his so reverend face)
That I could scarcely keep me from t'alight,
And in mine arms him openly embrace;
Weighing yet (well) what some imagine might,
He being a stranger and the public place
Checked my affection, till some fitter hour
On him my love effectually might shower.
Never, quoth I, was Fortune so unjust
As to do wrong unto thy noble heart,
What man so wicked could betray the trust
Of one so upright of so good desert?
And though obey necessity thou must,
As when the great'st the same to me thou art,
Let me alone the last be left of all,
That from the rest declined not with thy fall.
And calling to a Gentleman of mine,
Wise and discreet that well I knew to be,
Showed him that stranger, whose dejected eyne
Fixed on the earth nere once looked up at me,
Bid yonder man come home to me and dine
(Quoth I) bespeake him reverently (you see)
Scorn not his habit, little can thou tell
How rich a mind in those mean rags does dwell.
He with my name that kindly did him greet,
Slowly cast up his deadly-mouing eye,
That long time had been fixed on his feet,
To look no higher then his misery,
Thinking him more calamity did greet,
Or that I had supposed him some spy,
With a deep sigh that from his heart he drew,
Quoth he, his will accomplished be by you.
My man departed and the message done,
He whose sad heart with strange impressions struck,
To think upon this accident begun,
And on himself suspitiously to look,
Into all doubts he fearfully does run,
Often himself cheering, often himself forsook:
Strangely perplexed unto my house does come,
Not knowing why judged nor dreading yet his doom.
My servants set his coming to attend,
That were therein not common for their skill,
Whose usage yet the former did amend:
He hoped not good, nor guilty was of ill,
But as a man whose thoughts were at an end,
Fortune (quoth he) then work on me thy will,
Wiser then man I think he were that knew
Whence this may come, or what thereof ensue.
His honored presence so did me inflame,
That though being then in presence of my Peers,
Daine not the less to meet him as he came,
(That very hardly could contain my tears)
Kindly salute him, call him by his name,
And often together ask him how he cheares,
With still along maintaining the extreme;
Yet thought the man he had been in a dream.
At length t'awake him gently I began
With this demand, if once he did not know
One Thomas Cromwell a poor English man,
By him relieved when he was driven low:
When I perceived he my remembrance wan,
Yet with his tears it silently did show:
I wept for woe to see mine host distressed,
But he for joy to see his happy guest.
Him to the Lords I published by my praise,
And at my table, carefully him set,
Recounting them the many sundry ways
I was unto this gentleman in debt,
How great he was in Florence in those days,
With all that grace or reverence him might get:
Which all the while yet silently he hears,
Moisting (among) his viands with his tears.
And to lend fullness lastly to his fate
Great sums I gave him, and what was his due
Made known, my self became his advocate,
And at my charge his creditors I sue,
Recovering him unto his former state:
Thus he the world began by me anew,
That shall to all posterity express
His honored bounty, and my thankfulness.
But Muse recount, before thou further pass,
How this great change so quickly came about,
And what the cause of this sad downfall was,
In every part the spacious Realm throughout,
Being effected in so little space,
Leave not thereof posterity to doubt,
That with the world obscured else may be,
If in this place revealed not by thee.
If the whole land did on the Church rely,
Having full power Kings to account to call,
That to the world read only policy,
Besides heavens keys to stop or let in all,
Let me but know from her supremacy
How she should come so suddenly to fall:
It Was more then chance sure put a hand thereto,
That had the power so great a thing to do.
Or ought there were had biding under Sun,
Who would have thought those edifices great,
Which first religion holily begun,
The Church approved, and wisdom richly seat,
Devotion nourished, faith allowance won,
And all that them might any way complete,
Should in their ruins lastly buried lie,
But that begun and ended from the sky?
And the King late obedient to her laws,
Against the Clerk of Germany had writ,
As he that first stirred in the Churches cause,
Against him greatliest that oppugned it,
And wan from her so grateful an applause,
Then in her favor chiefly that did sit,
That as the prop, whereon she only stai'th,
Him she instil'd Defender of the faith.
But not their power, whose wisdoms them did place
In the first rank, the oracles of state,
Who that opinion strongly did embrace,
Which through the land received was of late,
Then ought at all prevailed in this case,
O powerful doom of vnauoided fate,
Whose depth not weak mortality can know,
Who can uphold what heaven will overthrow?
When time now universally did show
The power to her peculiarly annexed,
With most abundance then when she did flow,
Yet every hour still prosp'rously she wex'd,
But the world poor did by loose riots grow,
Which served as an excellent pretext,
And color gave to pluck her from her pride,
Whose only greatness suffered none beside.
Likewise to that posterity did doubt
Those at the first not rightly did adore,
Their fathers that too credulous devout
Unto the Church contributed their store,
And to recover only went about
What their great zeal had lauished before,
On her a strong hand violently laid,
Preying on that, they gave for to be prayed.
And now the King set in a course so right,
Which I for him laboriously had tract,
(Who till I learned him, did not know his might)
I still to prompt his power with me to act,
Into those secrets got so deep a sight,
That nothing lastly to his furtherance lackt,
And by example plainly to him shown,
How all might now be easly overthrown.
In taking down yet of this goodly frame
He suddenly not brake off every band,
But took the power first from the Papal name,
After a while let the Religion stand,
When limb by limb he daily did it lame,
First took a leg, and after took a hand,
Till the poor semblance of a body left,
But all should stay it, utterly bereft.
For if some Abbey happened void to fall
By death of him that the superior was,
Gain that did first Church liberty enthrall,
Only supreme, promoted to the place,
Among many bad the worst most times of all,
Under the color of some others grace,
That by the slander from his life should spring,
Into contempt it more and more might bring.
This time from heaven when by the secret course,
Dissension universally began,
(Prevailing as a planetarie sourse)
In The Church believing, as Mahumitan,
When Luther first did those opinions nurse,
Much from great Rome in little space that wan,
It to this change so aptly did dispose,
From whose sad ruin ours so great arose.
That here that fabrique utterly did fail,
Which powerful fate had limited to time,
By whose strong law it naturally must quail,
From that proud height to which it long did clime,
Letting against it the contrary prevail,
Therein to punish some notorious crime,
For which at length just dooming heaven decreed,
That on her buildings ruin here should feed.
The authority upon her she did take,
And use thereof in every little thing,
Finding her self how often she did forsake,
In her own bounds her never limiting,
That awful fear and due obedience brake
Which her reputed holiness did bring,
From slight regard soon brought her into hate
With those that much disliked her estate.
And that those parts she cunningly had played,
Belief unto her miracles to win,
Unto the world were every day be wrai'd,
From which the doubt did of her power begin,
Damnation yet to question what she said
Made most suspect the faith they had been in,
When their salvation easly might be bought,
Found not this yet the way that they had sought.
When those ill humors ripened to a head,
Bred by the rankness of the plentious land,
And they not only strangely from her fled,
Bound for her ancient liberty to stand,
But what their fathers gave her being dead,
The sons raped from her with a violent hand,
And those her buildings most of all abused,
That with the weight their fathers coffins bruised.
The wisest and most provident but build,
For time again too wastfully destroy,
The costly piles and monuments we guild,
Succeeding time shall reckon but a toy,
Vicissitude impartially wild,
The goodliest things be subject to annoy,
And what one age did studiously maintain,
The next again accounts vile and vain.
Yet time does tell, in some things they did err,
That put their help her bravery to deface,
When as the wealth, that taken was from her,
Others soon raised, that did them displace,
Their titles and their offices confer
On such before, as were obscure and base,
Who would with her they likewise down should go,
And o'rthrew them that her did overthrow.
And the Romish rites that with a cleerer sight
The wisest thought they justly did reject,
They after saw that the received light
Not altogether free was from defect,
Mysterious things being not conceived right,
Thereof bred in the ignorant neglect,
For in opinion something short does fall,
Wants there have been and shall be still in all.
But negligent security and ease
Unbridled sensuality begat,
That only sought his appetite to please,
As in the midst it of abundance sat,
The Church not willing others should her praise
That she was lean, when as her lands were fat,
Her self to too much liberty did give,
Which some perceived that in those times did live.
Pierce the wise Plowman in his vision saw
Conscience sore hurt, yet sorer was afraid
The seven great sins to hell him like to draw,
And to wise Clergy mainly cried for aid;
Fallen ere he wist (whom peril much did awe)
On unclean Priests whilst faintly he him staid,
Willing good Clergy t'ease his wretched case,
Whom these strong Giants hotly had in chase.
Clergy called Friars which near at hand did dwell,
And them requests to take in hand the cure,
But for their Leechcraft that they could not well,
He listed not their dressing to endure,
When in his ear Need softly him did tell
(And of his knowledge more did him assure)
They came for gain their end which they did make,
For which on them the charge of souls they take.
And voluntary poverty professed,
By food of Angels seeming as to live;
But yet with them the accounted were the best
That most to their fraternity do give,
And beyond number that they were increased:
If so (quoth Conscience) thee may I believe,
Then it is in vain more on them to bestow,
If beyond number like they be to grow.
The Friar soon feeling Conscience had him found,
And hearing how Hypocrisy did thrive,
That many Teachers every where did wound,
For which Contrition miserably did grieve:
Now in deceit to show himself profound,
His former hopes yet lastly to revive
Gets the Popes letters, whereof he does shape
Him a disguise from Conscience to escape.
And so toward goodly Unity he goes,
A strong-built Castle standing very hie,
Where Conscience lived to keep him from his foes,
Whom lest some watchful Centinell should spy,
And him unto the garrison disclose,
His cowle about him carefully does tie,
Creepes to the gate and closely thereat beat,
As one that entrance gladly would entreat.
Peace the good porter ready still at hand
It does vnpin, and prays him God to save,
And after saluing kindly does demand
What was his will, or who he there would have?
The Friar low lowting crossing with his hand,
Speak with Contrition (quoth he) I would crave.
Father (quoth Peace) your coming is in vain,
For him of late Hypocrisy has slain.
God shield (quoth he) and turning up the eyes,
To former health I hope him to restore,
For in my skill his sound recovery lies,
Doubt not thereof if setting God before.
Are you a surgeon, Peace again replies;
Yea (quoth the Friar) and sent to heal his sore:
Come near (quoth Peace) and God your coming speed,
Never of help Contrition had more need.
And for more haste he haleth in the Friar,
And his Lord Conscience quickly of him told,
Who entertained him with right friendly cheer:
O Sir (quoth he) entreat you that I could
To lend your hand unto my Cousin dear
Contrition, whom a sore disease does hold,
That wounded by Hypocrisy of late,
Now lies in most desperate estate.
Sir (quoth the Friar) I hope him soon to cure,
Which to your comfort quickly you shall see,
Will he a while my dressing but endure;
And to contrition therewith comes he,
And by fair speech himself of him assure,
But first of all going thorough for his fee:
Which done (quoth he) if outwardly you show
Sound, t'not auailes if inwardly or no.
But secretly assoiling of his sin,
No other medicine will unto him lay,
Saying that heaven his silver him should win,
And to give Friars was better then to pray,
So he were shrieu'd what need he care a pin.
Thus with his patient he so long did play,
Until contrition had forgot to weep,
This the wise plowman showed me from his sleep.
He saw their faults, that loosly lived then,
Others again our weaknesses shall see:
For this is sure he bideth not with men
That shall know all to be what they should be:
Yet let the faithful and industrious pen
Have the due merit; but return to me,
Whose fall this while blind Fortune did devise,
To be as strange as strangely I did rise.
Those secret foes yet subt'ly to deceive,
That me maligning lifted at my state,
The King to marry forward still I heave,
(His former wife being repudiate)
To Anne the sister of the Duke of Cleave,
The German Princes to confederate,
To back me still against those against me lay,
Which as their own retained me here in pay.
Which my destruction principally wrought,
When afterward abandoning her bed,
Which to his will to pass could not be brought,
So long as yet I bear about my head
The only man her safety that had sought,
Of her again and only favored,
Which was the cause he hasted to my end,
Upon whose fall hers likewise did depend.
For in his high distemprature of blood
Who was so great whose life he did regard?
Or what was it that his desires withstood
He not invested were it nere so hard?
Nor held he me so absolutely good,
That though I crossed him yet I should be spared,
But with those things I lastly was to go,
Which he to ground did violently throw.
When Winchester with all those enemies
Whom my much power from audience had debarred,
The longer time their mischiefs to devise,
Feeling with me how lastly now it fared,
When I had done the King that did suffice,
Lastly thrust in against me to be heard,
When all was ill contrarily turned good,
Making amain to the shedding of my blood.
And that the King his action does deny,
And on my guilt does altogether lay,
Having his riot satisfied thereby,
Seems not to know how I therein did sway,
What late was truth converted heresy:
When he in me had purchased his pray,
Himself to clear and satisfy the sin,
Leaves me but late his instrument therein.
Those laws I made, my self alone to please,
To give me power more freely to my will,
Even to my equals hurtful sundry ways,
(Forced to things that most do say were ill)
Upon me now as violently ceaze,
By which I lastly perished by my skill,
On mine own neck returning (as my due)
That heavy yoke wherein by me they drew
My greatness threatened by ill-boding eyes,
My actions strangely censured of all,
Yet in my way my giddines not sees
The pit wherein I likely was to fall:
O were the sweets of man's felicities
Often amongst not temp'red with some gall,
He would forget by his ore weening skill,
Just heaven above does censure good and ill.
Things over rank do never kindly bear,
As in the corn the fluxure, when we see
Fill but the straw when it should feed the ear,
Rotting that time in ripening it should be,
And being once down it self can never rear:
With us well does this similie agree,
(By the wise man) due to the great in all,
By their own weight b'ing broken in their fall.
Self loving man what sooner does abuse,
And more then his prosperity does wound?
Into the deep but fall how can he choose
That ouer-strides whereon his foot to ground?
Who sparingly prosperity does use,
And to himself does after-ill propound,
Unto his height who happily does clime,
Sits above Fortune, and controlleth time.
Not choosing that us most delight does bring,
And most that by the general breath is freed,
Wooing that suffrage; but the virtuous thing
Which in it self is excellent indeed,
Of which the depth and perfect managing
Amongst the most, but few there be that heed,
Affecting that agreeing with their blood,
Seldom enduring never yet was good.
But whilst we strive too suddenly to rise
By flattring Princes with a seruill tongue,
And being soothers to their tyrannies,
Work our more woes by what does many wrong,
And unto others tending injuries,
Unto our selves it happens often among
In our own snares unluckily are caught,
Whilst our attempts fall instantly to naught.
The Counsel Chamber place of my arrest,
Where chief I was, when greatest was the store,
And had my speeches noted of the best,
That did them as hie Oracles adore:
A Parliament was lastly my enquest,
That was my self a Parliament before,
The Tower hill scaftold last I did ascend:
Thus the great'st man of England made his end.
Michael Drayton.
FINIS.

