Truths Purchase: OR A Commodity, which no man may either neglect to buie, or
dare to sell: laid forth in two Sermons upon Prove. 23.23. by Samuel Hieron
Minister of the word, at Modburie in Deuon.

Very necessary for the times, in which so few seek after the Truth, and so
many fall away from the profession and practice of the Truth.

Revel. 2.25. That which ye have already, hold fast till I come.

Cambridge University coat of arms. HINC ^ LVCEM ^ ET ^ POCVLA ^ SACRA ALMA
MATTER CANTABRIGIA

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge. 1606.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul^ Churchyard by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, my very good Lady, the Lady Elizabeth
Champernowne, of Modburie.
MAdam, being well persuaded both of your good knowledge in Gods holy Truth
and of your unfeigned affection thereunto, I have emboldned ^y self, to present
you with these two Sermons touching Truth: yet not for your self alone, but
that from you, they may pass to the common use of all the Lovers of the Truth.
I doubt not but that your La: does both see, and bewail the misery of these
wretched times, in which Atheism, and Policy (falsely so called, being
indeed little better then plain villenie,) and Temporizing, have like a
canker, fretted out the very heart of Piety. They are but a few, which seek
to search out the Certainty in matters of Religion, or which care to have
stablished hearts, Luke 1.4. Heb 13.9.
and to know precisely, which is the True God, Baal or the Lord. Men had rather
halt between two opinions, that so they may be for all Times, 1. king. 18.^
then undergo the labor of gaining advised Resolution. On the other side, if
we come to these, (which yet will needs be religious,) what a woeful falling
away do we behold? In some to Popery, being lead captive (God in justice
sending them strong delusions) by those False brethren, 2. Tim. 3.6. 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. Gal. 2 4.
which are privily crept into every corner, through the remissenes of these
Evil Times. In other some to Prophane-nesse, and to that which is of all other
the worst, luke-warmenes. So that we may well say, Reu. 3.16. Isa. 1.9. Ier
3.14.
Except the Lord of Hosts had reserved unto us even a small remnant, culling
out (as it were) one of a city, Amos 3.11.
and two of a Tribe, as the shepherd takes out of the mouth of a lion, two
legs, or a piece of an ear, according to the Election of grace, we should
long ere this have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha: we had been (as it
is said of a cursed Tongue) a very world of wickedness. Iam. 3.6.
Now, things being so, there are three duties required of all that fear God.
The first is, to long for the Appearing of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8.
and to cry daily, with the Souls under the Altar, How long Lord, holy and
true! Reu. 6.10. Reu. 22.20.
Even so come Lord Jesus. The other is, to beware least they be plucked away
with the Error of the Times, 2. Pet. 3.17.
and fall from their own stedfastnes. The third is, every man in his place,
earnestly to contend for the maintenance of the Faith, and the advancement of
the Gospel: Iud: 3.
and to be as industrious, to convert the goers astray, Iam. 5.20. Act. 14.22.
and to exhort the Believers to continue in the Faith, as the Pharisaicall,
Math. 23.15.
both Jesuits and Seculars are, to compass sea and land, to make men of their
profession, 2. Tim. 4.4.
and to turn them from the Truth unto Fables. In desire to perform some part
of this latter duty, as I first preached these Sermons so, with the same
intent I do now publish them. The Text I am sure, is excellent for the
purpose, but for my manner of handling it, I leave it to the censure of Gods
Church. In Preaching I have ever accounted plain-nes, the best eloquence, and
the carriage of matters so, that those of the lowest form may learn somewhat,
the soundest and surest learning. If any censorious disposition shall say, that
these things are too mean for this ripe and exquisite age, let them consider,
that at the building of Salomons Temple, 1. king. 5.15.
there was room as well for Burden-bearers, as for other more curious
Artificers: and at the first making of the Tabernacle, not only the Bringers
of blue silk, and purple, and scarlet, but even the poorer sort which brought
Goats hair, Exodus 25.4.5.
and Rams skins were accepted. How ever it be, I do more then hope, that
your La. will kindly accept it from me, and entertain it as a Testimony of my
love, and not so only, but use it also for your comfort. And so praying the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians 3.13.
to make your heart stable and unblameable in holiness, I commit your La. to his
grace in Christ Jesus. Modburie. November. 14. 1606.

Your La. in all good affection, Samuel Hieron.

Prou. 23.23. Baie the Truth, but sell it not.


The first Sermon.
THis short speech of Salomons, contains in it two things: 1. an Iniunction,
Buy the truth: 2. an Inhibition, Sell not the truth. First of the Iniunction.
To make way unto the profitable handling whereof, we are to examine two things:
1. what is the Truth: 2. what it is to Buy the same.

Truth is but one, and it is in God, What is meant by Truth. Quicquid est in
deo, Deus est.
and of God; nay it is God himself. For the nature of God is not subject to
any attending properties; whatsoever is in God, is God. As he is Mercy it
self, Justice it self, Goodness it self, so he is also, Truth it self. God
is Truth, Deuteronomy 32 4. Ioh. 14.6.
says Moses, and I am the Truth, says Christ of himself. Yet nevertheless,
this Truth which is but one, and is primarily in God, is from him conveyed into
diverse other things, which in that respect are also rightly termed True. For,
as the Sun is the Fountain and natural seat of Light, yet that Light is
thence derived into many other Bodies naturally fitted to receive it, which are
therefore truly termed Lightsome; so, though God, is in that sort the Head and
spring of all Truth, that he is called even Truth it self, yet his Truth is
communicated unto other Things also: and every thing is so far forth called
True, as it is squared and made answerable unto that eternal Truth. And as
diverse resemblances in many glasses, being set together, do come all from one
and the same Face, which is set against them, so all that Truth, which is in
other things, fetches it first Beginning from the Lord

Now howsoever, the end of all our Endeauours, is the union of this Truth to
our understanding, and the knitting of our souls unto God, (wherein the the
very heathen by the Light of nature placed man's Happiness,) yet this is not so
properly that Truth, which is here commended to us, but rather some inferior
Truth, which is substituted by God, as a means to bring us unto himself. And
yet, neither is it that Truth, which God has seated in Nature, and natural
things; because, so it is that the Creature partaking of Man's corruption, Romans
8.^0.
is subject to Vanity: and by that means the native Truth thereof, is so
tempered with lying deceitfulnes, that the Heart of Man (being in it self a
mere lie) is not able to sever each from other, but is rather thereby made more
vain, and to turn the Truth of God, shining therein into a Lie. Romans 1.25.
So weak an instrument is the Book of nature to beget Truth in our hearts.

There is then another Truth, which has been framed by God himself, which
neither can deceive, nor be deceived, and that is, The Holy and precious word
of the Almighty, which by the spirit of God is called Truth. Ioh. 17.17. Col.
1.5. (...). 1. Pet. 2.2. Psalm 31.5. 2. Pet. 1.20. Ioh. 14 6. Ioh. 14.17.
Sanctify them with thy Truth, thy word is Truth. The word of Truth which is
the Gospel. And, the Milk of the word without deceit. And this indeed cannot
but be the Truth. First, because of the Author of it, which is the God of
Truth. Secondly, because of the Penmen of it, Holy men, which wrote of no
private motion. Thirdly, because of the confirmer of it, Christ the Truth.
Fourthly, because of the Interpreter of it, The Spirit of Truth. And if it were
fitting to the Text, it were easy to show, the Truth of the Scriptures above
all other Truths, that it is both the most ancient Truth, and the most true
Antiquity. Now, there is yet another derived Truth, which is drawn out of the
Word, and is, as it were the Brief and Summary thereof. Romans 6.17. Romans 12.3.
Tit. 14. Deu. 34.4.
It is that which Paul in one place calls the Form of Doctrine: in another
place, the proportion of Faith: in another, the Truth which is according to
godliness. And this may fitly be compared unto the mount Nebo, upon which the
Lord placed Moses that from thence he might see all the borders and limits of
the promised Canaan: so from this, and by the help hereof, a man be able to
comprehend with all the Saints, what is the breadth, and depth, and length, and
height of Religion. So then, here is the Issue of my speech, that by Truth in
this place, is meant the Truth of Religion, grounded upon the Rule of Truth
which is the scripture.

What it is to Buy the Truth.
Now for Buying, we must understand, that it is not any making merchandise of
the Truth, like to that beggarly sale of the Romish Trumperie; as though a man
could by money, purchase the graces of Gods Spirit: which if it were so, Christ
should be proved a Liar, Luc. 18.24.
who says, that with difficulty they that have Riches shall enter into the
kingdom of God: whereas, if salvation were a money matter, the Rich were like
to speed best. But because Buying is usually of things of greatest cost, and
greatest necessity, therefore to signify the pains to be taken in this case,
the spirit of God uses this word of Buying. Again, because the end of Buying
is possession, and the end of Possession, is use; (as Riches is possessed to
make rich, Apparel to make gay, and so in other things;) therefore also, the
spirit of God, to show the care we ought to have, both to have the Truth in
possession, and to divert it to our use, has mentioned Buying. So then, this
Buying of the Truth, which is commended here unto us, urges two duties. 1. To
labor to have the Truth of Religion settled in ou^ Judgments, that so we may
be fulfilled with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. 2. To convey it thence into our affections, that so there may be
begotten there, that which David calls Truth in the inward parts. This then
is the meaning: Psalm. 51.6.
Buy the Truth, says Solomon: that is, use all diligence, The sense of the
first part.
spare no cost, refuse no labor, spend your best endeavors, to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, and thereby your selves to be transformed into the
Truth; that you may so become true Israelites, truly religious. The division of
it.
So that now this first member of my Text has brought forth two Instructions:
the one is, that we must endeavor for the settled knowledge of the Truth; the
other that we must make conscience of a holy Practice, and of obedience to the
Truth: of these two in order. And first of Buying the knowedge of the Truth.

Seeing it has pleased the wisdom of God, in this place, to borrow a word from
the ordinary courses among men, and to call the seeking after the Truth, a
Buying, of the Truth; therefore it shall not be amiss to follow the Metaphore,
and by examining the usual circumstances of Buying, to give light to the duty
recommended here unto us. The particular Branches of this whole Sermon.
As therefore in all other Bargains, so in this Purchase of the Truth, these
things necessarily must concur. 1. A desire of the Commodity. 2. A repairing
to the Place, where it is set to sale. 3. A skill to discern, and know the
goodness of it. 4. A giving a price proportionable to the worth and value
thereof. 5. A storing it up for necessary uses, of all these briefly.

The first Branch.
First, there must be a desire of the Commodity: that is plain in Reason. For
whenever a man lays out his money upon any thing it proceeds from a
desire to be the owner of it, and to have it in possession: and so the first
thing in this Buying, must be that, which the Apostle Peter calls Desiring
the sincere milk, 1. Pet. 2.2. Isay. 55.1.
etc. which Isaiah terms Thirsting; Psa. 119.111. and 174.
which David in one place calls, the clayming of the Lord his testimonies as
an Heritage: in another, the longing after Gods salvation. Now the desire of a
commodity, springs ordinarily from these two things. 1. a man's own
necessity. 2. the excellency of the thing it self. His own necessity
makes him willing to buy: the excellency of the thing, makes him willing to
buy, This, rather then any other. So that to the end, we may come to this first
degree, of desire to Buy the Truth, we must labor to feel these two things.
1. what need we have of it. 2. what an excellent thing it is to enjoy it. To
show our need many things might be alleged: I will be as brief in it as I can,
because, me thinks, I do feel my matter, like to a spring, the further it
goes, into the more streams to divide it self. Man by nature in respect of
spiritual graces, is the poorest Creature under heaven, he comes not into
the world with a body so naked, but he comes also with a soul as utterly
stripped of all goodness. To touch only his penury in regard of Knowledge. He
has in his understanding no true knowledge of God, but only so much left, as
may make him inexcusable before God. And therefore the Scripture does well, so
often to befoole him, as Solomon does by name in the book of the Proverbs.
When man has to do with these earthly things, he seems to have some
sharpnes and dexterity: but when he comes to spiritual things, he is clean
blunted, They are foolishnes unto him, 1. Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them. It is with the Eyes of his soul, as it is with the
Eyes of his body. Our eyes looking upon the earth, and those baser substances,
seem quick and piercing, but let them be turned up to behold the glorious
Body of the Sun, they are clean dazeled, and seem to see an hundred
several colors, where there is no color: such a maze is the wit of man by
nature brought into, when he comes to behold and consider of spiritual
matters, he will run you into millions of absurdities. Take you Nicodemus, a
great wise Pharisie, and tell him of the New birth, you shall strike him into
such an amazement, that he will cry, Job. 3.9.
How can this be? Go among the learned Philosophers, and discourse in their
hearing of one Jesus, who was dead, and now lives, and of the Resurrection;
what will they say? Some will mock, and call thee Babbler, Acts. 17.
that teach such stuff: and they which are the most stayed among them, will
put it to a demurre, they will hear thee again of this thing. This is man's
natural poverty in this case. Yea, but will some man (perhaps) say unto me:
Put case, this be true, that I am thus without knowledge of the Truth of my
self, is it any danger to continue so? There be some things, which a man has
not, yet can not he be said to want them, Aliud est catero, aliud indigere.
because he has no use of them: It is one thing to be without a commodity,
another thing to stand in need of it. To clear this point therefore in one
word: There is as much need of knowledge, as of salvation. If thou have need
to be saved, thou have need to have knowledge also. This is life everlasting,
Ioh. 1^.3.
to know etc. And Paul describing the estate of a natural man, puts these
two together; Ephesians. 4.18.
his Cogitations are darkened: and, he is a stranger from the Life of God.
Ignorance and and Destruction; Knowledge and Salvation, go together. If this
be not sufficient, to show the necessity of Knowledge, I know not what may
persuade us. Now for the excellency of Knowledge, if a man had the Tongue of
men and Angels, he could not speak sufficient in commendation of it. The
Heathen knew, that Reason, is that which makes man better then a beast: and
the enlightening of Reason, by Knowledge, is that, which prefers one man to
another. Now, if knowledge be in it self a thing so excellent, much more the
saving knowledge, I mean, the knowledge of Gods Truth. This makes the people
of God the wisest people, This is your wisdom, says God, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
and your Understanding. It brings a man to have a kind of familiarity and
acquaintance with God himself: yea, it enableth a man to conceive the things
which pass knowledge, namely, the peace of God, and the love of Christ. Phil.
4.7. Ephesians. 3.19.
No marvel then, though David rejoiced at it, Psalm. 119.162.
as one that finds great spoils: and that Paul, did account all things but
dogs-meat, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus. (...). Phil. 3.8.
For both David was thereby made wiser then his teachers, and Paul by
comprehending it, Psa. 119.99. Phil. 3.12.
was comprehended also of his Savior. Thus in part, may we see our need of
Knowledge, and the worth of Knowledge, to prepare us to the purchase of
Knowledge.

Pro. 17.16.
which have a price in their Hand, but they have no heart to get Wisdom. They
have the means to bring them to the knowledge of the Truth, familiar, common
and easy, but have no affection thereunto. Tell them of Knowledge, it is as
the singing of songs to an heavy heart, a matter which fitteth not, it has no
relish nor savor in the world. Tell the covetous man, the extorting
Gentleman, the engrossing Merchant, the enhaunsing husbandman, of a commodity,
of a secret bargain, of a means of gaining, it is like enough, he will soon
give thee the hearing, and take thine Information as a fruit of great kindness:
but, talk of the Knowledge of Religion, and of the means for attainment to
it, thou have (as the saying is) told a tale to a deaf man, Surdo cani^.
he would as leife thou had kept thy counsel to thy self. And hence (oh
woeful case) it is come to pass, that gross and intolerable ignorance, like a
disease, has ouerspread the greatest part. The multitude know not (as we say)
the right hand from the left: the best of us be but smatterers, and our
knowledge little better then vain iangling. 1. Tim. 1.6.
There is, I know, store of that knowledge which Micah speaks of, The
statutes of O^^^^ are sought for: Mic. 6^6.
men are cunning in penal. precepts, and in the knowledge of Law-points. There
is also plenty of the knowledge which Christ mentions, men can discern the
face of the sky, Mat^. 16.3.
and the signs of the Times: Neither is there any want of that skill which
Amos touches, of making a small Ephah, and a large shekel. Am. ^.5.
These times abound in these knowledges: but as for the only necessary
knowledge, the Knowledge of Religion, almost no man esteems it; it seems to
us, as a withered branch, which has neither form nor beauty, we see nothing
in it, why we should desire it. Now because this deadnes and dulnes arises
especially, from the want of the feeling of our own necessity, (for, the
person that is full, Pro. 27.7.
despises an honey comb) and from our not knowing the worth of Knowledge (for
the cock upon the dunghill, would rather have a barley corn, then a diamond)
therefore I beseech you let us remember, the before-deliuered matter, touching
our own necessity, that we have not naturally so much as a dram of true
knowledge within us; and the excellency of Knowledge, that without it we are
but as dead men, strangers from the life of God, without hope, without God in
this world. And so leaving it to your best consideration, I thus end this
point.

The next point, The second Branch.
is the Coming to the place of sale. For, as in our ordinary buying, it
suffiseth not a man, to feel his want of a commodity, to know the worth of
it, and to wish the having of it, unless he also resort to the place where it
may be had: so in this case, it is not enough, that we find our selves
ignorant, acknowledge our need of Knowledge, unless we vouchsafe to repair
thither where it is ordinarily set to sale, and as it were by Proclamation
offered to our uses. Now the usual place of sale, for this commodity of saving
Knowledge, is the Church, the Assembly of Gods Saints, where the ministry of
Gods word (the ordinary means of Knowledge) is dispensed. In the Church, by
the Ministry of Gods word, we hear Christ making a solemn Oyez, and saying,
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Come buy without silver and
without money: Ioh. 7.37. Isay. 55.1.2.
wherefore do you lay out silver and not for bread? I counsel you to buy of
me gold tried by the Fire, Rev. 3.18.
that you may be made rich, and raiment, that you may be clothed, and ^iesalue,
that you may see. This is the voice of Christ proclayming in the open Market of
his Church, and uttering his voice by the Top of the high places, Pro. 9.4.
who so is simple let him come hither. Col. 2.3.
In me are hid the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Of my fulness you may
receive grace for grace. Ioh. 1.16.
So that in the congregation, where the word is truly and sincerely preached, as
in a Public Mart, there is that which is fitting to every man in every
respect. There are the Principles of Truth, for Christians of a lower form:
there are deeper points for exercised Wits; Heb. 5.14.
there is for Magistrates, for Ministers, for private men, for every calling:
for the you^gma^ that he may redres his way, for the old man, to increase in
wisdom, there is truth for the understanding, truth for the conscience, truth
for the will, truth for the Affections, that so a Christian may be perfect to
every good work: 2. Tim. 3.17.
whatsoever thou do lack, there thou shall be sure to have it abundantly
supplied: there thou shall see discovered the great Mystery of godliness, which
is, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, 1. Tim. 3.16.
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory. Thus the church is the place, and the preaching of the
word is the Treasure subjected to the view, and offered to the use of all,
which desire to receive it. And indeed, herein especially stands the
difference betwixt the word Read, and the word Preached. The word read, is as a
rich wardrope of a Prince, where many garments of cost are folded up together
in a narrow room, which cannot so satisfy the beholder, as if the same might
be severally laid forth before him, time being also granted him, to take
notice of every particular: because, being lapt up, he cannot see the whole
beauty, and being together, he is not able to observe every specialtie. Even
so it fares with the scripture. If a man hear the word read, it cannot but
draw him to admire the majesty and riches of the Text, and it will cast some
glimmering light upon the understanding, but when he hears the riches of it
laid open by Preaching, it will much more astonish him; yea it even ravish him
(as it were,) striking a greater terror into his conscience, casting a clearer
light upon his judgment, working more mightily upon his affections. This is
not spoken to discountenance the Reading of the word, or to banish the use of
it out of Gods Church, or to deprive it of that respective estimation which it
does deserve: nay, it is rather spoken to the winning of reverence thereunto.
For indeed, there is no man hears the word read, more humbly, observes it
more heedefully, or listeneth unto it more affectionately, then he, who by
preaching has been brought to know the excellency of the word. So then, here
I shut up this doctrine. He that desires to make this purchase of the Truth,
must repair to the place where it is set to sale, even to the House of God,
where the word is truly preached, and soundly delivered.

Laborers into his harvest, yet it is far more generally bestowed, Math. 9.38.
then obediently and dutifully entertained. For truly, if a man should ask of
me, what that thing in my opinion is, which is at this day almost in every
place most hateful, most abhorred, most ^^ksome, most contemptible, least
welcome and least regarded, I know not (I speak unfeignedly) how to answer
more truly, then to say it is the Ministry and preaching of Gods word. And to
the end that I may not speak at Randon but may lay this fault upon those in
whom at is, I will distinguish those of our Times (to let professed Enemies of
our Religion, Papists, alone) which either come not to the Place of sale of
Truth; or else come as gazers, to look on, and to fill up number, into three
sorts. 1. The common protestant. 2. The Politician. 3. The proud and self
conceipted man. By the Common Protestant. I understand such an one, as the
Papist calls (in scorn so speaking of us all) a Parliament protestant, that
is, a Time-seruer, who looks no further, then to the Law of the Prince, who
is ready for any religion, and is therefore indeed of no Religion. Of which
humor, there are (the Lord knows) infinite multitudes at this day, all whose
Bible is the statute Book, and the Articles of whose faith, are grounded upon
positive Iniunctio^s. Now the common Religion of this common Protestant, I find
to be this. He has a certain notice of loving God above all, and his
neighbor as himself, and that he thinks is as much as he needs to care
for, and after this manner he thinks with himself: I keep my Church, as
well as the most: I receive the communion at Easter, as becomes a good
subject: I live quietly among my neighbors, and wherein am I now to be found
fault withal? Indeed I am not over precize: for I hold that to be more then
needs: I am no medler with the Scriptures, that I account to be beyond my
reach: once, I am no Papist, I content my self to do as other do, and have
no desire to be singular. Here have we the right humor of our common men, at
this day, this is their Catechism, these be the very principles of their
Religion. Now, has this man (think you) any need of preaching? cares he to
depend upon the Ministry of the word? Surely no. For he thinks himself of so
good a Religion, to have so good a faith to Godward, and to be so well minded
that he has no mind of Instruction. And therefore, he is clear in it, that
it were a great deal better, if there were less preaching: it fills men's
heads full of matters, breeds division among neighbors, brocheth novelties,
and troubles the whole country. Add hereto (says he) that they themselves,
which preach, cannot agree; and that distracteth the people; so that their
preaching might better be spared, or at the least, be the less used; and what
should men do which have families to provide for; and many businesses to
dispose of, and much to look unto? they cannot intend it, to follow these
matters so hard and hotly as it is required. This is the first sort, that is
guilty of this sin, of not caring to frequent Gods cheap-house which is his
Church, where knowledge of the Truth, is by preaching offered unto us; and the
men belonging to it, are so humored as I have described. The second in this
number is the Pollitician, who thinks all Religion to be but a fable, a
matter invented by wiser men to hold the vulgar in subjection, and to busy
them withal, least they should fall into worse matters, and run into further
inconveniences. And therefore tell him of preaching, he laugheth in his sleeue,
accounting them a sort of silly fools who esteem it, and making himself
believe, he is a great wise man, because he sees that which the common sort
has not espied. Thus, as the former in a drowsines and hardened security,
contemns the word, so this in a very Atheistical and godless profa-nesse,
scorneth it, and makes a very Jest of it. The third in this rank is the
proud conceipted man; who walking in the sun is tanned though he meant it
not, so this, by reading now and then, does a little smell of some rudiments of
Knowledge, but yet, that little in his opinion, seems so great that he
imagines that by his private Reading at home, he can do as much and more then
by any hearing: and therefore he has no better opinion of a preacher then the
Athenians had of Paul, Act. 17.18.
(what will this Trifler say?) So that whereas the Lord tendering our weakness,
and knowing in his wisdom, what is fittest for us, has left in his Church
the ministry of the word for every man's Instruction, he cares not for his
part, if God had never appointed any such means, he thinks he can altogether
do as well without it. This is the proud man's opinion. And thus, by that time
you have referred to every one of these sort^, those that do by right
appertain to each, and have shuffled in among them, all Familists and
scorners, and a rabble of other irreligious persons, you shall find the number
of careful comers, to the house of God, to buie the Truth at the hands of his
Ministers, to be (as Micah speaks) like the summer gatherings, Mic. ^.1
and as the grapes of the vintage, to be but a small number, scarce an handful
in regard of the multitude. I beseech you therefore, let us learn this lesson
from this place, to love the gates of the Lords house, to let our feet wear
out the Treshold of it, to give attendance at the Posts of his doors: and to
say also one to another, Isay. 2.2.
Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc. And let these carnal
reasonings go, as to say, (looking but to the face and gifts of the Preacher)
what is he, that he should teach me, and why may I not profit as well by some
other course? but remember, that the Power of God is made perfect through
weakness: ^. Cor. 12.9.
and that as it was a greater honor to God, to overthrow the walls of
Jericho, by the noise of rams-hornes, then if it he had done it by Canon-shot;
1. Cor. 1.21.
so it is more for Gods glory, by the Foolishnes of Preaching to save those
that believe, then if an Angel should descend from heaven to instruct, nay,
then if the Lord himself should speak with some audible voice to convert us.
And surely, as in Buying and selling, that Bargain is by law most warrantable,
which is made in open market; so I account that knowledge most acceptable unto
God, and most like to receive a blessing from him, which is gotten publicly,
by the ordinary course appointed for that purpose. Howsoever, I doubt not, but
as a man having publicly bought a commodity, may privately husband it, to his
own best behoof, so that which is delivered openly may, (nay ought) by
private reading, prayer, meditation, and conference, be increased. And thus
much for this second Branch.

The third thing in this Purchase of Truth, The third Branch.
is, Skill to discern. For as in Buying, in regard of so many counterfeit
Wares, of the mingling good with bad, and the great deceit of the world, it is
good for a man to have skill to preserve himself from cosenage, and from
cause-les expense upon unprofitable goods: so in laboring after Knowledge, in
respect of so much blending man's inventions with wholesome doctrine, it is
requisite, that we be able to put a difference betwixt holy, and corrupt, true
and false, profitable and unprofitable Teaching. And this is a thing, which the
Scripture also in many places requires of us. T^^ the spirits, says John, 1
Ioh. 4.1. 1. These. 5.21. Pro. 14.15.
whether they be of God or no. Try all things, says Paul: and he is a fool,
says Solomon, that will believe every thing: and for this cause the noble men
of Beraea are commended, because hearing the Apostles preach, they searched the
scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Act. 17.11.
And our Savior has pronounced it generally of all his sheep, that they know
his voice, Ioh. 10.5.
and will not follow a stranger, but flee from him etc. For howsoever we do
urge all reverent respect unto the preaching of the word, as to the Ordinance
of God, for the gathering together of his Saints, and for the edification of
the body of Christ; Ephesians 4.12.
yet we abhor that Popish tyrannizing over the faith of our Hearers, as
though we would bind them to give credit to every thing we speak, because we
speak it: Authoritate nomi^^s. Amb. in 1. The. cap. 5.
We know, that if he were an Angel from heaven, that should come amongst us,
yet his doctrine must be brought to the Law and to the Testimony, Isay. 8.20.
as the Prophet speaks, and if he be found to swerue from that holy doctrine
which we have received, Gal. 1.8. 2. Ioh. 10.
he must go for accursed, and, bid him not so much as God speed, says S.
John. And this skilfulnes and Ability to discern, as it is ever necessary,
so now especially. First of all, because there are (that I may still follow the
language of my Text) so many pety-chapmen, I mean, so many privy workmen, who
are all guided with the spirit of the Beast, sent out and set on work, by that
Antichrist, that man of Rome, who are crept almost into every corner, and under
pretense of their devotions and Voluntary Religion, Col. 2.2^.
and Humblenes of mind, insinuate and wind themselves into many men's
Affections, drawing some to traitorous disloyalty, some to settled Popery,
others to indifferent and depending uncertainty, that so they may fit and
prepare them for that day, which they have long exspected, and I pray God they
may still with wearied eyes, and languishing spirits awaite for. Now to the
end, that these false Brethren, Gal. 2.4.
which are come in privily to bring us into bondage, may not carry us away with
dross for silver, glittering shows for a golden substance, counterfeit
profession, for sound Religion, we had need to labor and pray for discerning
spirits. Secondly, this ability to discern is necessary, in regard of so
many dangerous and infectious Books, which (I know not by whose default) are
sparsed abroad into all parts, tending to the defaming of the present state,
and of our holy Religion, and to the working of men's affections to a more
tolerable opinion (if not a total embracing) of Popery. Thirdly, this skill
is no less necessary, in respect of so much corrupt Preaching, both in manner
and matter. First, for the manner of Teaching, it is an ordinary thing with
many men of gifts, to scorn to seem to Know nothing but Christ, and him
crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2.
and to think basely of the plain evidence of the spirit: And therefore, they
have more care to abound with excellent words, and with the entising speeches
of man's wisdom, then to speak to the conscience of their Hearers; so that in
this respect, we had need to be wise to discern, least our faith should be in
the wisdom of man rather then in the power of God. 1. Cor. 2.5.
Again, for the matter of preaching, it is now almost in religion and
divinity, as in the matter of Apparel; every year brings a new fashion,
and then (because of the love which men have to noveltie) that, is thought to
be the most hansome, most thriftie, and most profitable fashion, only indeed
because it is the newest, and so, every year almost, we hear of some new
opinion or other, raked out of the dunghill of Popery, and a new gloss set
upon it, 2. Tim 4.3.
and by and by it is entertained, men that have itching Ears are ready to
listen to it, and are soon wrought to embrace it. This is the great policy
of the Devil, neither is there any thing, by which he does more harm, by
which he kills more souls then by this means. When the Lord was purposed to
bring a plague upon Ahab, the Scripture describes him as it were sitting in
counsel, what might be the next way to overthrow him. At last, when one had
said on this manner, and another on that, there came forth a Spirit and stood
before the Lord, and said, I will entise him; ^. king. 2^.20.
and the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go (...) and be a
false spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets: Then he said, Thou shall entise
him, and thou shall prevail. Thus it appears, that the most speedy way which
Satan, being put to his choice, has, to do mischief, is to send spirits of
Error, privily to bring in damnable and dangerous opinions. And surely it is
just with God, to give us over to be seduced, because we have not received the
love of his Truth, 2 Thessalonians 2.1^.
that we might be saved. So then, that neither insinuating Jesuits may deceive
us, not dangerous books empoison us, nor fantastical Teachers beguile us, nor
corrupt Doctors carry us away with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians 4 14.
it stands us upon to labor to abound with spiritual wisdom, and
understanding, that we may discern betwixt Light and darkness, Truth and
falsehood, least, leaving to follow Christ, as a shepherd to the fold, we go
after Antichrist, as a Butcher to the shambles.

are, who are grown to that peeuishnes, that they resolve with themselves,
that it is the best course to hear none. We cannot tell, say they, whom to
believe, they are at uariance among themselves, and therefore till they do
better accord, it will be the safest, and wisest way, either not to hear, or
not to credit any. This is the wayward humor of many in this Age. Their folly
(as to me seems) may well be manifested, by urging the present similitude of
Buying. If a man wanting meat, drink and raiment, and other necessaries, and
being persuaded to supply himself out of the market, from those which sell,
should make this Answer. The world is so full of deceit, that a man knows
not whom to trust; they which sell, many of them will beguile their own
fathers, if they should chaffer with them; and the tricks and devises which
tradsemen have are so many, that it is twenty to one but a man shall be
coosened, I had rather therefore go near the wind, and want necessary
provision, then put it to the hazard of Buying: If I say, a man amongst us,
should plead thus, what would we think of him, but that either he were very
foolish or very froward? And so we well might; because, we know, the fraud of
others must be prevented, rather by care and circumspection, and not used as an
occasion for a man to abridge himself of his necessaries. Is not he then as
much a fool, who wanting the saving knowledge of the Truth, and being called
upon to repair to the house of God, where the Means is offered freely unto
him, shall p^ead strait the deceiuablenes of false doctrine, the corruption of
many Teachers, the show and appearance of contrarieties, as though he were
therefore to deprive himself of the necessary food of his soul, because it
may be, that through want of care, instead of being fed, he may be poisoned.
We know rather, that he ought to be, the more diligent in prayer, the more
studious in the scripture, that so when he comes to buy the Truth he may not
be deceived. Thus this point meets with this humor of wilfulnes. Now for the
unskillfulness of men, this point does also make against it exceedingly. It is
too true of the greatest part of our Hearers at this day, 1. Cor. 14.20. Phil.
1.10.
that they are Children in Understanding: they want that Judgment which Paul
speaks of to, discern things that differ one from an other: Iam. 1.6.
they are like a wave of the sea, Heb. 13.9.
every Wind of Doctrine is ready to over blow them; their Hearts are not
stablished, Heb. 5 14.
they have no exercised Wits. They will be ready to cry Hosanna to Christ to
day, and to bid Crucify him to morrow; they are like those of Lystra, who at
the first admired Paul, and made a God of him, but with the turning of an hand,
by the counsel of certain Jews, they drew him out of the City and stoned
him; Act. 14.
so unstable and unsettled are the most of us at this day, that a man may
persuade any thing saving that which ought to be believed. Who almost is so
skillful and experie^ced, as to know even in the principal matters, and most
necessary points of Religion, what is to be held as Truth, and to be detested
as an Error? to be able to say peremptorily; this I am sure is true in
Religion, and I will (by the grace of God) live and die in it; this is an
Error, and I hope never to yield unto it? You will say (perhaps) this is enough
for Preachers. Oh, belooued, I say as Moses did, I would all the Lords people
were Prophets, I would we were al thus cunning; nay I would men were, Number.
11.29.
or could be persuaded, that this is a duty, to strive to come to a settled
certentie herein. Then there were much hope of the perpetuating of Religion,
then we need never fear the restablishment of Popery, and Atheism, I am sure
would give up the Ghost. Well, you see, the Truth must be bought, for shame we
cannot deny it. In Buying, we may be ouereached; in reason we cannot say
against it; therefore we should also be ashamed, to be so without Reason, as
not to think it reason, to labor with the Lord by Prayer, to lead us into all
Truth, that so we may grow in the Truth, and continue firm in the Truth unto
the end. And this is an End of the third Branch.

The fourth Branch.
The fourth Circu^sta^ce in making this Purchase of the Truth, is, to give the
price proportionable to the value of the Commodity, which is indeed the very
Act of Buying; the other three, which I have named hitherto, are but
preparatiues to Buying. For though a man feels his own want, comes to the
place of sale, tries and examineth the commodity which is for his necessity,
yet he is not said to have bought, till he have paid the price at which the
thing is rated. All the while before, he is said to be but a chapman, and many
do all the former oftentimes, who have no great disposition to buie. So fares
it in our customarie Buying, and so it is in this case. It is necessary for a
man to feel the want of Knowledge, to come to the place of Knowledge, to
examine that which is proffered to him, but yet he has not followed Salomons
counsel as he ought, until he have paid the price also. Now the price (as I
told you) is not money (for, Act. 8.20.
Thy money perish with thee, which art of that opinion:) but the price is this,
to prefer it in account and estimation before all Things, and so to make it
our chiefest labor to attain it. You shall see this proved. If thou seek
knowledge as silver, and searchest for her as for Treasure, Pro. 2.4.5.
then thou shall understand the Fear of the Lord. The kingdom of Heaven is
like to a Merchant-man, Math. 13.45.
that seeks good pearls, who having found a pearl of great price, went and
sold all that he had, and bought it. The kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force. Math. 11.12.
Will you have examples? Phil. ^.^.
I count all things loss (says Paul) for the excellent Knowledge sake of
Christ Jesus: and a little after in the same chapter he compares himself to a
man in a race, who, partly to signify his desire of the prize, partly to help
himself in running, leans forward in his running: ver. 13. (...).
so (says he) I forget that which is behind, bending forward to that which is
before, I follow etc. And if a man might go further, David may seem herein a
little to have gone beyond him. I opened my mouth, and panted, Psalm. 119.131.
because I loved thy Commandments. David was so hot, and egre in this
pursuit, that he was even breathless, he was feign to gape for a new supply
of wind. Thus these places, and these examples, I hope, do sufficiently
prove this point, namely, that the price to be given for the Knowledge of the
Truth, is to set no price upon it, but to esteem it above all price, and to
account that nothing is too dear, no travail too much, no pain too great for
the attainment thereunto.

are ever learning, 2. Tim 3.^.
and yet never come to the knowledge of the Truth. They come to church, and
hear, and go home, and come again, and hear again, and so go round, like
a Horse in a mill, and are yet never the nearer. They are like the fish in the
sea, which live in the salt water, and are yet never the salter: so they hear
the word, which is the salt of the Earth, and yet are still unseasoned. Mat.
5.13.
Now the special reason of it is, because they be no frank chapmen; they
would have too good a peniworth, they will buie the Truth under foot, or they
will none of it. If to hear now and then, and in hearing, now and then to
hearken, and so an end, and some such superficial performances will do it,
they will be content to be at the cost, otherwise they wish you a better
chapman, the ware is too dear. If you tell them of often Hearing, and of
keeping their hearts and ears together from the beginning of a Sermon to the
end, of private Meditation, of conference, of prayer before to prepare them, of
prayer after to strengthen them, of redeeming the Time, and setting some part
apart for such holy purposes, they make you answer, that you set your Knowledge
at too high a rate, and unless they shall find you more reasonable, and that
they may have it with less pains, less hindrance, less disgrace, they are
content to let it go, or else, as men do when things are too dear, they will
take the less, and a smaller portion shall suffice them. To shake off this
dulnes, and backwardnes, and that men may learn to be ashamed of this
niggardize, to stand offering and offering, and like to near fellows, to be
loath (as it were) to come off with the other penie, I pray you let us remember
the price which the Lord has set, and whereof there is not one hair to be
abated. It must suffer violence, it must be most of all esteemed, and sought
for first of all, it must be striuen for, and studied about, and cared for
exceedingly. If we be not willing to give this price, we do but pester Gods
house, it is in vain for us to make a show, and to come hither, as Gods people
uses to come: God can not endure to be dallied withal, either go through
with him, or never begin with him. And to comfort thee, take this with thee:
the commodity is better then it makes show for: and when thou have once
gotten it, and viewed it better, thou will say as David, The lines are fallen
unto me in a pleasant place, Psalm. 16.6.
yea I have a fair heritage: and thou shall have more joy of hear, Psalm. 4.7.
then the Rich worldings have when their wine and oil abounds. Thus much of
this point, which is the very act of Buying.

The fifth Branch.
The last circumstance, in this Bargain of Truth, is to store it up. For as,
bought commodities are safely disposed, and said up, till Time and occasion
shall offer use: so gotten Knowledge, must be reserved in the Storehouse of
the Memory, that when any occasion of use shall be offered, it may be at hand,
either for the Trial of a Truth, or for a Direction in life. Pro. 4.21.
Let not the words of my mouth, says the wisdom of God, depart from thee,
but keep them in the midst of thy heart. Psalm.^19.11.
I have hid thy promises in my heart, says David: and Marie is commended,
Luc. 2.19.31.
because she kept Christ's sayings, and pondered them in her heart. And indeed
there is great reason, why this of Storing up, should be added to all the
former. For though a man should desire the Truth earnestly, care to hear it
diligently, discern it wisely, obtain it painefully, yet it will little
avail, if it do strait run from him, if it be as soon forgotten, as
gotten, if it be not entertained, and settled, Col. 3.16.
that so it may dwell plenteously in the heart.

Buying. A man, who has been at the market, or at the Merchants shop, and
has there laid out his money, when he returns home, he will begin to call
himself to an account, to see what he has laid out, where the things are,
which he has bought, and whether he has not lost any thing thereof: and if he
have, he will return again, to the place where he bought it, to try, if he
left it not there, and in the way he will enquire of every one he meets, if
they have not found such or such a thing, and will never be satisfied, until
he have found the same. It should be so, with us, in this case. When we come
from Gods house, whether we went to Bu^ the Truth, after our return, we should
find a time to keep (as it were) an Audit, with our selves, to see what we
have gained, by that days hearing, and should endeavor to try our selves
from point to point: If we find some things forgotten, return we must again,
to the Ministry of the word, to see if it (...) please God, that the same
things may be again delivered, and inquire of our friends and familiars which
were there, whether they can help us in recounting those things, which through
infirmity have escaped us. Thus Knowledge would grow up, Religion would thrive
amongst us, and we should abound in spiritual understanding, and so both those
which teach us, should be encouraged, and we our selves should exceedingly be
comforted. One special reason which may move us to this care of storing up
knowledge in Religion, is the possibility of a famine of the word of God
amongst us. We read, Genesis 41.
that when there was a famine approaching in Egypt, Joseph advised Pharaoh to
make provision before hand in the seven plentiful years, and to lay up corn
against the time of Penury. This was good Policy in humane reason. It shall
be no less good Policy in Religion, now in these times, in which the word of
God is plentiful, and we have it common amongst us, to treasure up knowledge
against the days of want, we having given the Lord, so great cause to take
away his word from us, and to give it to a nation that shall bring forth better
fruits then we have done. So that indeed (considering our intolerable contempt
of Gods Truth, and our general lothing this heavenly Manna) it is rather to be
wondered, that the Lord has hitherto forborne us, then to be presumed, that we
shall still escape away unpunished. I beseech you therefore, let us now play the
the good husbands, and bestirre us, and even engrosse, as much knowledge in
Religion as is possible, that so if ever such a heavy time should come (as
Lord, if it be thy will, ever keep it from us) we may be able to speak a word
in season to our own souls, and to be a comfort also, and an instruction unto
others: least then, many of us, which now will scarce step out of our doors
to hear, shall be glad to run from North to East, but shall not find it.
This may be, and I hope will be, a motive to us, to Buie the Truth, while the
Market lasts, and to lay it up in store against the Times of woeful
necessity. Thus (as I could) I have endeavored to discover unto you, the
whole Mystery of this Bargain of Truth, so far forth as it concerns our
care, in laboring to be grounded in the Knowledge of Religion.

Now before I do dismiss this point, it might not be amiss (perhaps) to
say something, to those which are the Lords Officers, (as it were) in the
selling of his Truth unto the people, I mean the Ministers of the Gospel. For
sure, by just proportion, every one of these circumstances, seems to urge a
duty upon them. First of all, if the people, must have a desire to get
Knowledge, it is meet, that they should have a desire to impart Knowledge. And
it is a notable thing, it a Minister, Job. 32.19.
when he is like unto the vessel to which Elihu compared himself which having
no vent, Ier. 20.9.
is ready to burst; so that the spirit within him, compels him, and the
Word in his Heart, is as a Burning Fire shut up in his Bones, so that he cannot
stay: And so contrariwise, it is a miserable thing when his bowels are shut
up, and he has no compassion in regard of the necessities, of gods people. So
then, let this, that the people must have a desire to learn, teach us to be of
Paul's mind, Romans 1.11.
even to long to bestow some spiritual gift among them. Secondly, they must
come to the Church, the Place of sale: there must be some body there to
discover the treasures of Gods house, to open the mysteries of Godliness unto
the^ and therefore it would make man wish his head were full of water, and his
eyes a Fountain of Tears, to see the state of many Churches. Because my Text
speaks of Buying, I know not whereto better to compare them, then to some old
Towns, which have had yearly faires in them, and are now decayed, and grown
out of use: you shall see upon the day in which their faires were wont to be
kept, they will hang out a glooue or some such testimony of such a meeting,
but not one whit of ware is there to be sold: so in many Churches, you shall
see a Pulpit, a place for a speaker, and another for hearers, bur it is bu for
a sign, he which comes thither to buy the Truth, is like to have but a
reasonable Bargain. Thirdly, as the People must labor for discerning spirits,
so the Preachers, must study to speak iudicially, that they may say as Christ
said to Nicodemus, we speak that we know; Ioh. 3.11.
least they be an occasion of falling unto any. Fourthly, as the people must
equal the price to the worth of the thing, that is, must inestimably value
that which is taught, so the Preachers ought to beware of doing Gods Business
negligently, I^r. 4^.^0.
of slight and superficial performance of so weighty a matter. It is
generally a fault with us, that the world has so beguiled and entangled us,
that it makes us so slenderly to prepare our selves to the duties of our
public Ministry; as though to preach, were a business but by the way: and that
causes our Preaching to carry the less Majesty and Authority with it,
because the wiser sort of our hearers, do perceive, that we are often put to
our shifts, and do make Preaching to be but an exercise by the glass, which
time if we can by any means fill up, Ad c. epfidram
we hold it to be sufficient; well, if our hearers must buy our Sermons at so
dear a rate, let us endeavor that they may be worth the Buying. Lastly, as
the people must store up knowledge, and that now especially, because we know
not how near the dearth is; so we must also now chiefly, bring out of our
Treasures both new and old, Mat. 1^.52.
and not be wanting by our forwardness to provoke them to diligence in this
case, remembering what Christ speaking touching himself has laid upon us all,
Ioh. 9.4.
namely to work the works of him that sent us while it is Day; the night
comes when no man can work. Thus much I thought good by the way to add,
touching those, whom the Lord has deputed to the service of his Church, that
we may all take heed to our Ministry, Col. 4.17.
which we have received, to fulfill it.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
Prou. 23.23. Buie the Truth, but sell it not.


THough I purpose not to enter into any precise repetition, of the points
taught out of this place of Scripture, at the Time of my last being here; yet
for order and methodes sake, that it may appear, how I make my two Sermons to
agree, and to follow, the one directly upon the other, I must necessarily
entreat you to remember with me thus much; that, as this Text was divided into
two parts, 1. an Iniunction: 2. an Inhibition; so the former part was cut into
two members: the one, concerning the settled knowledge of the Truth: the other,
touching a holy practice, and obedience to the Truth. The first of these two,
was the matter and subject of the last Sermon, the latter must hau^ the first
room in this exercise.

The perfection and good of every Action is the End of it: because, whatsoever
we do attempt and undertake, something there is which we do aim at therein,
which is by many degrees to be preferred before the means leading thereunto.
As it is in all other things, so is it in the Buying of the Knowledge of the
doctrine which is according to godliness. For it is not therefore only to be
purchased, that by it the Mist of ignorance in the understanding part might be
dispelled, but also that thereby, the Will might be strengthened, the
Affections streightened, the Conscience purged, the Outward man reformed, and
so the very Body of Falsehood which the Father of lies, Ioh. 8.45.
has begotten in us might be utterly destroyed. Well then, that we may profit
by the handling of this point. I will take this Course: I will show you first,
what this second and inferior Truth is, which must be had also to the making up
of this full Purchase. Secondly, I will declare the necessity of it. Thirdly,
I will apply the same to our use.

And first of all, that we may understand, what this kind of Truth is, which
from the understanding, is derived into the whole man, and diuerted to the
ordering and government thereof, I take it the best way will be, a little to
take view of that which is contrary thereto, which being aright conceived of,
will give a better light unto this. David in one of his Psalms, makes mention
of a certain Guile, which he calls a spiritual Guile; Blessed (says he) is
the man its whose spirit there is no guile. And, Psalm. 32.2.
our Savior commended Nathaneel in these terms, Ioh. 1.47.
Behold an Israelite in whom there is no Guile. When we shall understand what
this Spiritual Guile is, we shall the better judge what this other Truth is,
which my intent is to urge in this place.

Spiritual Guile may be in general thus described: It is a kind of double
dealing betwixt God and a man's own self, in the things which do concern his
soul. It has many Branches, which being opened will give a fuller and
cleerer light unto the whole; you may (if you please) suppose this spiritual
guile generally named, to be (as it were) the Coat of fig-leaues, which Adam
made for himself when he had first sinned, wherewith to hide himself from
God; and the opening of the particulars, (into which I am now to enter,) to be
(as it were) the ripping of that coat, and the sundring of each leaf,
wherewith the same is patched together. The first branch then of this Guile, is
a conceit of a man's own good Estate for spiritual things: an opinion that
all in him is well, and nothing to be found fault withal. Such a conceit it
seems to me, that Paul had of himself before his conversion: I once was
alive (says he) without the law: that is; Rom 7.9.
before I took a fuller view of my self, in the glass of Gods Law, I deemed
my self perfect, I was so zealous of the Traditions of my fathers, Gal. ^.1^.
that I supposed, that I was a man out of the reach of all exception. Such an
one also, was the proud Pharisie, who stood prating, and telling God a Tale of
his own good deeds. Luc. 18.11.
Such an one also, Math 9.13.
are they whom Christ calls Righteous in that saying, I came not to call the
Righteous; that is, men that are so in their own seeming. And even such, the
greatest part of us are at this day, Psa. 10.3.
lying to our own hearts, blessing our selves, as David speaks. So that it is
even the hardest matter in the world, to persuade us, or to beat it into us,
that our natural estate, in regard of the abundance of in-borne corruption, is
so lamentable, so woeful, and so deeply to be pitied, as indeed it is. And
that makes many carnal men, even to wonder what Preachers mean, when they
speak so vehemently touching the misery of man's nature, and the extreme
danger in which he stands thereby. Hence also it is, that the offers of Gods
mercy in Christ are so disdainfully entertained, and so commonly rejected: men
not knowing their own necessity do despise the Riches of Gods bounty, Heb.
10.29.
and even tread under foot the Son of God. The second branch of this
Spiritual Guile, is to extenuate and lessen those sins which we cannot but
acknowledge. As namely, when the word working upon the conscience, has made a
man even in despite of his own heart, to confess himself in some things
guilty, the^ to find this shift, that yet they are small and petty offenses,
they are no heinous, nor bloody sins, and therefore there is no such danger
in them, as that they should ask so speedy, and so deep repentance. This
false Trick we read Saul played. 1. Sam. 13.
When he had prevented the appointment of Samuel for solemn sacrificing at
Gilgal, (which how great a sin it was, the reproof and punishment of it do
declare) yet Saul being challenged for it, and not able to deny the fact,
extenuated the matter in these terms, I was bold, etc. he was content to
acknowledge it a little slip, but loath to yield it, to be a matter of that
hainousnes, that Samuel would make it to be. And this is the very conceit,
which men have of many sins at this day, as of Jesting, foolish Talking,
unclean speaking, swearing, dalliance, wantonness, Gaming, Reuelling,
Sabaoth-breaking, which though they be in their own nature very great sins,
yet the outrage of these worst times, has made them so common, that the
commonnes, has much abated the vglines of them in men's Opinion. And therefore,
when men are dealt with, for any of these or the like, and cannot but confess
their own guiltiness, yet they will say, I hope this is no such great offense,
I pray God I never do worse, you need not make so great a matter of so small
a trespass, and I trust God will not be so extreme for every Trifle. This is
a second branch of this Guile. The third branch is, a Lying shirt, which Satan
has furnished many withal, which is this; to thrust themselves in among the
multitude, and to think by that means to escape away unespied, or at the
least, the less blamed. So at this day, the superstitious and ceremonious
people, which place all religion, in outward observances, do shroud themselves
under their forefathers, cover the matter with the name of Custom, and with
the practice and example of the Multitude; they are content to do as others
do, and therewith they hope to be excused. In like sort many taken in the
common sin of this Age, I mean, Adultery, when they cannot but confess it,
then this is their Plea, that they be not the first; as though it were wisdom
for them to go to hell, because the way thither is a much travailed way, in
which a man shall never miss much company. Under this kind of Guile, may be
comprehended all such courses, the lawfulness whereof, men do ground only
upon Examples, being of the same mind for matters of godliness and religion,
that Chusai would seem to be in state matters unto Absalom, Whom this people,
2. Sam. 26.18.
and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be, and with him will I dwell. So
say they, Look which way the most go, that way will we go. The fourth branch
of Guile, is, the setting of a tolerable name upon a gross sin, that so
either it may not be seen, or may not appear in it own likeness. Thus in the
world drunkenness is called, Goodfellowship; Riotousnesse, Merie-meeting;
Gaming, a passing of the Time; Covetousness, is termed warines; Coosenage, the
living by a man's wit, dissembling, Policy. The usurer will have his practice
called Interest, or usage, or Putting out, any thing save plain usury.
Implacablenesse is called Stoutnesse; Fornication a stepping a little awry;
swearing, a foolish custom; Pride by a milder name is called vanity; Ignorance
is colored with a pretense of simplicity, and vnlearnednesse; Oppression is
said to be the making the most of a man's own. And thus in many other things,
as in these, the Devil beguileth us, and teaches us to lie to our own
souls. The fifth Branch, is, to derive and translate a sin committed by us to
another, thereby to ease our selves wholly, or at the least by having a
partner, that it may be the more light upon our own shoulder. So Adam being
challenged by God for eating the forbidden fruit, sought to derive the fault,
partly to God himself, partly to his wife, The woman that thou gave to be
with me, Genesis 3.12.
she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. So Heuah likewise, it was her excuse,
The Serpent also beguiled me and I did eat, thus you shall have aswerer say
sometime for himself, that he could not otherwise be believed: the riotous
says, Company drew him in: the usurer says, he was importuned to lend, and
offered largely for the loan. So the Simoniacall both Patron and Prelate, are
at this day at variance, upon which of the two, the sin of corruption should
lie. The one pleads the greedines of the Ministry that will offer so deeply:
The other alleges the hardness and straitnes of the Patrones, whom nothing
but a gift in the Bosom can persuade. This is also a spice of this Spiritual
Guile. The sixth Branch thereof, is a wrong Reasoning from the examples of the
falls of Gods children, related in the Scripture. There is many a man who thus
thinks with himself, was not David an adulter? Did not Solomon keep many
concubines? Had not many of the Patriarchs (who notwithstanding were well
reported of) multiplicitie of Wives? Was not Noah drunken? Did not Lot commit
incest with his own daughters? Did not Peter curse and swear, and deny his
Master? And therefore why should I be afraid to satisfy my own Lusts, and to
fulfill my own desires, and to follow my own best pleasing courses? No doubt,
it may be as well with me, as it was with the^: By Repentance, they at last
recovered, and so may I. Thus many a one secretly harteneth and encourages
himself to continuance in Evil, by a false and unjust applying of the falls
and blemishes of Gods children. The only use whereof is, before we fall, to make
us watchful, beholding in them Man's Infirmity; and after we have fallen, and
are touched in conscience, to put us in hope of Gods mercy: and not to be (as
it were) a stale, under the shadow whereof, we may the more boldly give our
selves over to ungodliness. The seventh Branch of this Guile is, a
misinterpreting of those gracious testimonies, which the Scripture has, of
Gods forbearance, and mild dealing with his children, which belong to his
Election. It is said in holy Scripture, that God will spare his Elect, as a man
spares his own son that serves him: Mal. 3.17.
that in them he will accept the Will for the deed, the Endeavor for the full
performance; that he will pass by their Infirmities; that their sins shall
not separate them from his love; that he looks rather to the truth of their
Affection, then to the quantity of their Obedience. These and the like
assurances, the Scripture gives of the Lords conniuence (as I may so speak)
and of his remitting the straightnes of his Justice toward those that are
his; which things are indeed exceeding full of comfort to all those which know
rightly to apply them. But now, many wretched ones hearing this, do even
cosen themselves with a conceit, that their Heart is good, their Meaning for
the best, and their desire to be as holy as the Purest: and so, because God
will (in his kindness) accept good beginnings in his Elect, though the same be
but weak, and like smoking Flax; therefore they imagine that, albeit their
courses of life are abominable, and such as in no respect, in regard of gross
sins can be justified, yet with a pretense and protestation of a good Will
and desire, and endeavor, to bleare the Eyes of God, and to escape unpunished
at the day of Reckoning. This is a Dangerous subtilty, because it is an Abuse
of the riches of Gods mercy, and a turning of the sweetest propriety of his
Nature, into wantonness. The eight branch of this Guile is, a Mistaking the
nature of sin: as for example: Some man having some one gross sin,
reigning in him, which (perhaps) is also in the world taken notice of, as,
whoredom, oppression, swearing, etc. thinks with himself, that though this
be indeed a foul fault, yet it is his only fault, and many times, he thus
communeth with his own Heart: True it is (I confess it) there is such a
gross sin which I am guilty of, and it may be the world sees it, and it is
some blemish and disgrace unto me: but what then? I hope when they have named
that, they have named all: they can (I am sure) lay no other matter to my
charge, only this excepted: and I know no man lives without a fault,
therefore I trust I may be the better borne withal. This conceit arises (as
I have said) upon a mistaking of the Nature of sin, men thinking, that sin
may go alone by it self without company: as though a man could be given to
Adultery only, and to no other iniquity: to oppression only, and to no
other vice: to drunkenness only, and to no other enormitie. It is impossible.
These gross sins have many attendants, and it cannot be, that they should
go single. Sin is the sickness of the soul. As therefore in the diseases of
the Body, we see, that every maine grief, as the stone, gout, pestilence,
etc. has certain inferior griefs annexed to it; so every grand-sinne, has
other petit evils to attend it, and to feed it (as it were) without which, it
can never come to any great perfection. So that it is a plain Error, when a
man persuades himself, This or this is my only sin, not considering what a
troop and train follows every soul and open Evil. The ninth branch is,
the drawing of a false conclusion out of the Lords long-suffering. It is that
which David mentions, when he brings in God thus speaking to the Wicked
man: These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, Psalm. 50.21.
therefore thou thoughtest, I was like thee. Ecc. 8.11.
And Solomon, Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the Heart of the children of men, is fully set in them to do evil.
It is an ordinary reasoning among many, thus, Surely if God were so severe, or
so deeply displeased with my evil courses, as it may seem by some Texts of
Scripture, and as some Preachers would persuade, I do not think he would so
long have forborne me, and (which is more maruailous) that he would have thus
heaped outward Things upon me; therefore I see not to the contrary, (unless I
will be afraid of shadows, and terrified with words) but that I may continue
in my own course, and seek mine own satisfaction, as heretofore I have been
accustomed. The tenth branch of this Guile is, a Hoping to satisfy, and make
amends for many Evil courses by some special services and devotions, or by
some shows of charity. This is first, the guilefull conceit of all Papists:
Annot. Rhem. Luc. 11. sec. 5.
for so are our Rhemists own words, in their notes, that Alms extinguish
sin, redeem sin, make clean and satisfy for former offenses, and are to
be done as a propitiation to God for former evils. The same is their Opinion
of fastings, of penance, of pilgrimage, and the like. Secondly, this is the
blind Imagination of our sottish ignorant people at this day, who (for want of
better instruction) are frozen in the dregs of Popery, and suppose the due
observation of some solemn festiualls in the year, as they come in their
course, to be a kind of recompense for a multitude of other defaults; and that
if they be precize in the keeping of these, and the like rituous traditions,
then they are very religious. Thirdly, this is also a devise by which many
worldly men deceive themselves, who having by rapine and extortion, by gaping
over the heads of the poor, by treading upon them and grinding their faces,
and by other the like violent and indirect courses, raked much together,
imagine to remedy all this both with God and the world, by some largess, and
beneuole^ce to the poor, or to the Church at their decease; and being
possessed herewith, they run on, presuming by this means to make a thorough
satisfaction, both to recover their credit with men, and to gain favor also
with the Lord. The eleventh and last branch of this Guile: is to look no
further then to a show of Godliness, 2. Tim. 3.5.
and to think ones self religious enough, if he have learned the Art of
seeming, and can make an outward semblance of that, which indeed is far,
from their Hearts. These which are thus minded, if the world hold a good
opinion of them, they think themselves to be very holy, if men can not
challenge them, they account themselves unblameable. This is right hypocrisy.
Hypocrite, is a greek word, and signifies a stage player, who many times, for
the time wears the habit, and carries the style and title of a king,
himself being but a rascal, or bears the part of some valourous knight,
being a man of no resolution, or represents a chaste and modest lover, when
his own life is a practice of uncleanness: This is properly an Hypocrite, and
being applied to matters of religion, it signifies such an one, whose
profession, and mouth, and face, and habit, make by fittes and upon occasions,
great shows of Pletie, when in his heart, he is nothing less then he makes
show of. Yet, this is the common Religion of the world, and from hence come so
many courses for getting of a man, a name, and opinion of religion. One man
shows himself a sharp reprouer and correcter of the errors of others, that
so he may be thought to be such an one, who cannot brook or suffer evil, and
yet the same notwithstanding is slack enough in reforming his own
corruptions; like to him of whom our Savior speaks in the Gospel, Math.
7.3.4.
who forgetting the Beam in his own Eye, was very desirous, as might seem,
to cast out the Mote, which was in his brothers Eye. Another, in some outward
observations will seem very precize, which are but as it were the
Circumstances of religion, in the mean time neglecting the maine duties; after
the fashion of the Scribes and Pharisees, to whom Christ denounced a woe
because they did tithe minte, and anyse and cummin, and did leave the waightier
matter of the Law: Math. 23.23.
A third sort to be thought religious, will not stick to give some testimony
of reformation, and like Saul in his expedition against Amaleck, who killed the
worser stuff, and saved the best of the spoil alive, so they will kill (as
might seem) some petite sins of less profit advantage, or delight, and yet
let the great sins, the crucifying whereof should chieflly testify there
obedience, Mat. ^.20.
) bleate and cry still in the ears of the most high. Thus Herod, reformed some
things at John's preaching, but the gra^dsin he would by no means be persuaded
to reform, but thought the preacher might better spare his head, the^ he could
live without that sin; many such Herod's there are now adays, who, when a
godly reformation is urged, cry with the same words, though I fear me not
with the same mind, 2. King. 5.18.
that that good Syrian used Only herein the Lord be merciful unto us, let us
be born with in this, and besides it we will me^d any thing. As men's courses
are many, for the attaining of an Opinion of religion, so their ends are
diuerstone man does it for his profit; as the Shechemites yielded to be
circumcised upon this hope, Shall not their flocks, and cattle, Genesis 34.23.
and all their substance he ours? Another does it for his credit and
estimation. So, Saul though he did not much love or esteem Samuel, as a
Prophet, yet when Samuel in some coffeehouse was departing from him, he
importuned him to stay with him, and this was his reason, Honor me, (...)
15.30.
I pray thee before the Elders of my people. He though^ Samuels presence would
grace him, otherwise it is likely he did not much regard him. And I do verily
think, this to have been one cause, which moved Herod at the first, to
countenance John Baptist: because, the people accounting John as a Prophet, it
could not but make much for Herod's credit to be a protection unto him. Another
yet makes Religion, but as a cloak to greater vilanies: so Iezabel purposing
by false witnesses to take away Naboths life, 1. King. 21.9.
yet would grace the matter with proclaiming a Fast. And Absalom made the
performance of a Vow in Hebron, 2. Sam. 15.7.
to be the shadow of his unnatural conspiracy against his father. This is the
last Branch of this Spiritual Guile; the sum of It, is this, when for
matters of Religion men content themselves with the Judgment of the world,
thinking themselves very holy, if the world so account them. Thus have I ripped
up Adams fig-leaues, and showed you, as I think, all the particulars of this
Spiritual Guile; whereby men thinking to deceive God, do at the last utterly
beguile their own souls. I have been longer in it then I thought; but the
excellency and necessity of the point, has ouercaried me. Now, Truth is in
every respect contrary hereunto, as full of plain-nes, as this is full of
subtlety, making a man as like to the God of Truth, as the other makes him to
resemble the father of lies. It is briefly this; An humble and feeling
acknowledgement of a man's natural sinnefulnesse; an aggravating to the
conscience of every evil, when a man has to do directly with the Lord; a
shunning and avoiding of all shifts, either of pretensed examples, or of
Multitude, or of shrouding great sins under tolerable names, or of
translating faults unto others, or of presuming upon Gods goodness, or of hoping
by petit means to redeem offenses, or by covering a false heart with a face
and vizard of Religion. This is Truth in the inward parts, as David terms
it. This was in Hezekiah, O Lord, Psalm. 51.16. Isay. 38.3.
I have walked before thee in Truth. And from hence springs Truth in the
conscience, giving a true information of peace wrought with God by Jesus
Christ, and assuring a man by the Truth of his Obedience, of the Truth of his
Faith: Truth in the mouth, to put away Lying, Ephesians 4.25.
and all manner speeches, which may give the Lie to a good profession. Truth in
the Eyes, not to behold Vanity: Psalm. 119.37.
Truth in the ear not to hear the Instruction that causes to err, Pro.
19.27.
from the words of knowledge: Truth in the Hand, in respect of the
uprightness, and fidelity, and plaine-nes, and open-nes of a man's dealing
among men. Thus I have showed you, the nature of this Truth, which is
comprehended in one clause thus, True Obedience to that which a man knows to
be the Truth.

The next point, is to show the necessity of this kind of Truth, or namely
Truth of Obedience, or Obedience to the Truth. The necessity, may be gathered
by that which scripture has delivered of it, all whose Precepts impose a
necessity. Pro. 2.10.
When wisdom enters into thy Heart and knowledge delights thy soul, Then
shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding keep thee. So that there is no
benefit by knowledge, till it come into the heart, and has wrought upon the
Affections. Saint James speaking of a general apprehension of the Truth of
Religion, Iam. 2.19.
without use, says, The Devils have it and do tremble. Many shall come in
that day, and shall say unto me Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name (let
us which are preachers consider it,) yet Christ shall say unto them, Matthew.
7.22.
Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Here is knowledge, Ioh. 13.17.
and yet no salvation. If you know these things, (says Christ else where)
blessed are you, if you do them: It is the Obedience, which makes up the
Happiness. To every one that is thirsty, Come buy: and what then? Eat to:
the Having is nothing, without the using. Places of Scripture of this nature
are infinite, all which do confirm thus much; that the Purchasers of the
Truth, ought not to be like, the Rich, (but yet miserable) purchasers of the
world, who, when they have gotten much into their hands, yet go as near the
wind, fare as hardly, toil as painfully, look as rufully, as they did when
they had nothing, and so (as Solomon says,) make themselves poor having
wealth: Such must not the Buyers of the Truth be, Pro. 13.7.
knowing much, doing little, having (as it were) golden understanding, and
leaden Affections; And indeed to have recourse unto the true definition of a
Lie, there is no more proper Lie, then when a man knows one thing, and does
the clean contrary: Montiri est contra mentemire.
To lie, is, to go against a man's mind. So that when a man's carriage gives
his knowledge the Lie, that man is, though he know the Truth, a notorious Liar
before God. So much briefly for the necessity of this Truth.

Truth, so now) to hearty and unfeigned Obedience thereunto: that as by
following the former Exhortation we shall be able to say; Thus we have
labored, thus we abound in knowledge, thus are we grounded in Religion; so by
this, Romans 6.17.
I mean by this Obeying from the Heart the Form of Doctrine which we have
learned, we may with seeking use the words of Jeremy, Iam. 3.24.
The Lord is my portion says my soul: and of David, I have sworn and will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. So that when we shall
hear the Lord say in his word, Psalm. 119 106.
Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
and to keep all my commandments always; Psa. 119 5.
our hearts within us, may make Answer, Oh that our ways were directed to
keep thy statutes. This is the life of all Religion, 2. Tim. 3.5.
this is the Power of Godliness, namely, Psalm. 233.
when as the Truth seated in the understanding like the oyntme^t which being
powered on Aarons head ran down to his Beard, and went even to the skirtes of
his garments, so this, deriueth it self into the whole man, and sweeteneth all
his Actions, making him to give up his Body, a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God. And surely, Romans 12.1.
if I had the best gift in persuading which God has given to any man, and
could make my words like nails, Eccl 12 11.
fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, I could not bestow my skill better,
then in urging, and pressing this duty: and that in these three respects.
First, because of the difficulty of the duty. It is by many degrees easier,
to become a man of deep judgment, then of a religious Obedience: a harder
matter to rectify the Affections, then to inform the understanding. And there
is good reason for it, even in nature: In a matter of Knowledge, to be
apprehended by the understanding part of Man, there may such forcible reasons
and necessary consequences be drawn, whereunto it cannot possibly but give
consent: In the affections it is not so. For, that which moves them, is some
sensible, either profitte or delight, which because it is not so easily felt,
and so soon perceived in the case of Obedience, and reformation, therefore it
is an easy matter, for the understanding to be well enlightened in the
knowledge of religion, and yet the affections to remain cold and lumpish
without any love to religion. So that a man may sooner run through the whole
Circle of Knowledge, then set one step forward to Obedience. Now in reason,
that which is so hard in performing, requires vehemency of persuading. The
second respect, why I hold it so worthy the pains of me, or of any other to
urge this duty, is the excellency of it; and that apppeareth hereby, because
the left grain of Obedience, does as it were season the whole lump of
knowledge: the smalest quantity of hearty affections, is the measure of
Religion: God, respects not how much, but how heartily: yea, if a man be cut
short of the fullness of obedience, yet, if he have an unfeigned desire, he is
accepted according to that he has: 2. Cor. 8.12.
so precious a thing is the hearty Embracing of this Truth. The third respect,
is the general want hereof among the men of this generation. For, as we have
caused the enemies of God to blasphemy, I mean Papists, and to speak evil
of our holy profession, because of our fruit-lesnes; so it would make the Eyes
of David to gush out with rivers of waters, Psa. 119.136. 2. Pet. 2.8.
and vex the righteous soul of Lot, if they lived among us; to see first, how
the more learned and wiser sort, (who yet would be thought Religious) make
religion only a matter of contemplation, and think it enough to be able to
discourse in matters of Divinity, as in other things upon occasion; and then
next, how the common sort, (that are yet called Christians,) be as far from the
power and truth of Religion, as they which never heard of Religion. So then,
this being a duty of that difficulty, of that excellency, of that
necessity, (that I may at last end this first part) suffer me to renew the
former exhortation in one word: As you must spare no cost to possess the
Truth, so you must even give all, even for one little Modicum of hearty
obedience to the Truth. For the purchasing whereof, I know no other place to
remit thee unto, then that which I named for the purchasing of knowledge, eue^
the Market of the Lord, the House of God, where his word is most faithfully
dispensed: where the faithful Steward of Gods house, who knows how to
distribute to every man his portion in due season, will, as he does prove the
Doctrine, to stablish thy Judgment, so apply it also, and make use of it to
direct thy Obedience. And thus much for the first part of the Text, The second
part of the Text.
the Iniunction, Buy the Truth. Now follows the Inhibition, sell not the
Truth.

I shall not need to spend much time, in searching out the meaning of this
clause. For first, the word Truth is so to be understood here as in the former
part. And then, what it is to sell the Truth, will easily be gathered from the
consideration of Buying, which has hitherto been expounded. As then Solomon
when he enjoined the Buying of the Truth, meant thereby a careful and an
Industrious endeavoring to obtain the Truth; so here inhibiting the sale of
Truth, he inte^deth a careless and negligent disposition to forgo the Truth.

The only division which I will use, shall be to apply this selling, to the
double Interpretation of the word Truth: So that I have here two points to
handle: 1. Sell not the knowledge of the Truth: 2, Forgo not, part not with
thy Obedience to the Truth. Of these two in order. And first of this, sell not
the knowledge of the Truth; that is, Be not wrought by any means, to alter thy
Judgment when thou art once grounded, and settled in the Truth. Now as in
handling of the former part, I did apply the Similitude of Buying, so in this
also, I must have leave, to follow the phrase of selling, so far forth, as
(agreeably to the Rule and Proportion of Faith,) it may give light unto this
place.

Of a good and thriftie Husband, which is resolved not to part with that, which
by his great Industry and charge he has gotten, two things are required. 1. To
continue and preserve his estate. 2. By all honest means to increase it. He
which has a resolution not to sell that, which he has, you know he will have
naught to do, with common Brokers, such as are lifting (as it were) at every
Thing, and lie in the wind to catch whatsoever, any unthrift shall be willing
to depart with; or else, if he happen to have to do with such, he will bewise to
know how torid his hands of the^, and to keep that which he has from their
fingering. This is wordly Policy; not much unlike to this, ought to be the
wisdom of every good Christian in this behalf. As our Times are, Satan,
(who is the captain Broker and cannot abide this Christian frugality) has two
principal agents, who follow his causes, and are dealers for him in this kind.
1. The Atheist. 2. The Papist. Against both these, he which is a right
religious Naboth, and cries, God forbid that I should part with the possession
of Gods Truth, must arm himself. First, for the Atheist, (who is in the
Devils hand, as the sword was in the hand of Ioab toward Amasa, to strike
Religion to the Heart, that he may not need to double his stroke; the best
course in regard of him, is altogether to disclaim him, and not so much as to
use any speeches of chafering with him; but as Saint James speaks touching
the Devil, at the very first Encounter to resist him. For, Iam. 4.7.
it is a dangerous thing, in religion, especially in the principal points, as
of the Godhead, the Immortality of the soul, the Resurrection, and the like,
to admit of any discourse, although it may be pretended to be but for
conference sake, whereby the Truth of these Things might be called into
Question. Reason teaches us, that every Art must have his principles, which
must not be gainsaid. I remember what the Philosopher could say; If any should
dispute and argue touching this Principle, whether there be Motion in nature,
let him be beaten, till he confess, that he who strikes him, may desist from
beating him; or, whether the fire be hot, let him be made to feel it; and
so, he that should call the Immortality of the soul into question; it were
pity but he should be served, as he did voluntarily do to himself, who threw
himself headlong from a Rock that he might experimentally know it. The
Heathenish Ephesians were wiser: for, when they heard Paul begin to call the
Godhead of Diana into doubt, Act. 19.34.
they carried it away with a shoute, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, they
thought it a thing not to be endured. And through this Flood-gate, came this
Sea of misery into the world in which we are all overwhelmed, even, that our
gra^dmother Heuah, did entertain a discourse, and Parley with Satan, Genesis 3.
touching the Truth of Gods word: As indeed, to what end are conferences and
reasonings of this nature? For, Luc. 16.32.
If men will not believe Moses and the Prophets, nothing can persuade them.
Furthermore: because every Man shall now and then feel a little piece of an
Atheist in his own bosom (for each man by nature is that Fool which says in
his Heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14.1.
) therefore (because also the Principles of Atheism are grounded upon Man's
Reason,) it is good to be settled in this Rule; that the Mysteries of Christian
Religion are not to be examined by Humane Reason. For which cause the Scripture
says. 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the Things of the spirit of God for they are
Foolishnes unto him, etc. And The Wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.^4.
is Enmity against God and, If any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, 1. Cor. 3.18
let him be a Fool that he may be wise. It is not in Religion, as in natural
Things: In them, a Judgment is grounded upon Experience and observatio^, and
the Induction of many particulars, from which is drawn a general conclusion:
In divinity, the very Thing delivered by Scripture is to be acknowledged,
though it be not as yet strengthened by Experience, Blessed are they that have
not seen, Ioh. 20.19. Heb 11.1. Ioh. 6.6^.
and have believed, says our Savior, and Faith is the Evidence of things
which are not seen, and, we have believed, and known, etc. said the
Disciples. As Abraham hoped against Hope, so a Religious man must believe
against all carnal Reason to believe. And indeed, if we will tie our selves
to Reason, there can be no soundnes in religion: For bring your maine points
of Religion to Reasons Bar, there to receive their Trial, and what shall be
the verdict but this; that the doctrine of the Trinity is senseless, of the
Incarnation of Christ, absurd; of the resurrection, incredible; of the union of
Christ's two natures, unlikely; of Regeneration, impossible; of Predestination,
Unjust; of Preaching, Foolishnes, and so of others: howbeit I hold this also,
that where Scripture approoueth Reason, there Reason may be brought in as a
witness, although never as judge; as in the case of the Real presence, the
Scripture ascribing to Christ a natural Body, makes natural Reason an
argument strong enough, against such an unreasonable Opinion. Thus if a man
shall bring his own thoughts into captivity, which exalt themselves against
the knowledge of God, he shall be reasonably well guarded against the Atheist,
and mainetaine this spiritual possession of Gods Truth.

The second Manager of Satan's Business, in seeking to draw us to an unthrifty
selling of the Truth, is the Papist, who was never busier, nor fuller of
devises then he is at this day, laboring by Books, by privy Perswaders, by
Bribes, and by all means which hellish wit can devise, to draw men from the
acknowledgement and profession of Gods Truth. Their common motives, are well
known to those, which know any thing, and how they seek to blind and dazell
the Eyes of many with the glorious (but yet pretensed) shows of Antiquity,
universality, unity, Lineall succession, Catholic Church, Church planted by
the Apostles, Fathers, Counsels, Miracles, and the like. Now to show the
weakness of every of these Motives, the falsehood of some, the pretensing of
other some, the Inuailidity of them all, were a long piece of work, and not
possibly to be (though it were but slightly,) handled, in this shortness of
Time: yet lest I should seem to name an enemy, and to give no direction to
resist him, therefore, that eue^ the meanest christian, who has gotten some
comfortable knowledge of the truth, may know how to keep his Right against
every inueigling and catching Papist, I will deliver these two instructions.
The first is, the speech of the Apostle to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.14.
Continue thou in the Things, which thou have learned, and art persuaded
thereof, knowing of whom thou have learned them. I pray you to consider the
Place and you shall find it a notable Preservative, and as good as a grimme
Porter to keep out those Popish factors that would defeat us of our
inheritance. The Apostle presses a stiff, and firm continuance in Truth
received, when as these two Things concur with it: 1. A man's own persuasion:
2. The consideration of the Quality of those which first taught us. First, for
a man's own Persuasion; mark I pray you, least I should seem, in steed of
grounded setlednes, to commend selfe-willed Peeuishnes: By being persuaded,
Paul means thus much, as if he had said to Timothy: If it be an opinion,
which thou have not suddenly entertained, but upon good Advise; if it has
seated it self in thy judgment, then when as thou with Care and Conscience,
with Humility, with using the Ordinary means, with Prayer unto God, with
hearty desire to be guided into Truth, enquiredst after knowledge, surely thou
ought not (being by these degrees brought to it and in this manner
persuaded in it) rashly and suddenly to forgo it. This is meant by Persuasion
in this place; A setlednes of Judgment, following upon an orderly course to
bring a man thereunto. The second thing which must concur, is Consider and
mark of whom thou have learned them: that is, Observe, and note well, what
kind of men they are, by whose Ministry thou have been instructed, If they be
men, who by their Fidelity in Teaching, and by the blessing of God upon their
Labors, in using their Ministry to convert men's souls, do carry with them
the seal of their Ministry, nay, if thine own soul can witness for them
either of these, out of thine own feeling, then beware of a Doctrine contrary
to that thou have been Taught; though I would not have thee tie thy self to
any man's Authority, yet be not rash, be well advised, before thou alter thy
judgment confirmed by such a Ministry. This is the first thing which I will in
the Lord commend as a direction, for the meaner sort, (who cannot enter into
the examination of every several) to preserve them from the allurements of
Popery, and from selling the Truth to every cheating companion.

The second thing which I will commend unto the simpler sort, as a means to
keep them, from being entangled, with the large offers of subtle Papists,
which seek to draw men from the Truth, is this; when they shall be persuaded
to any point, of Popery, differing from the doctrine taught amongst us at this
day, either by writing, or privy suggesting, or corrupt and unsound Teaching,
let them compare it with the contrary which we hold, and well ponder with
themselves, (desiring also the assistance of Gods spirit) which of the two
Opinions, makes most for the Glory of God, for the comfort of a distressed
and distracted conscience, and for the restraint of the Liberty of the flesh:
and which soever of the two, they shall find, by the witness of their own
conscience, (concurring with the voice of the Scripture) to make most for all,
or for any of these three, let them take that, to be the soundest, and for
their life not dare to renounce it. Mark the Reason. First the End why God
made all things, was the Glory of his own name: the end why he redeemed mankind
was, That no flesh should rejoice in his presence, Pro. 16.4. 1. Cor. 1.30.31.
but that he which rejoices should rejoice in the Lord; that no man should
have cause to thank himself, but should be compelled to ascribe all unto the
Lord. By this Rule Paul decideth the Controversy touching Justification by
Faith and works; where is then the rejoicing? says he) It is excluded: Romans
3.27.
By what law; (that is, By what means of salvation) of works? Nay, but by the
Law of Faith. Faith takes all from man, and ascribes all to the Lord: verse.
28.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the law. So that hence I confirm This Rule, that look which point of Doctrine
does most debase man, and give the whole glory of all good unto the Lord, that
is the Truth, and that is alone to be embraced. For the second Rule, which is
touching comfort: Paul says, Rom 15.4.
that the End why the Scripture was written was for our Learning and comfort:
The End of all, both writing and Teaching is, that man feeling the extremity
of his own misery, might notwithstanding be settled in the comfortable
assurance of the love of God in Christ Jesus. So then, that doctrine which
affords the soundest comfort, then, when a wounded conscience most desires
comfort, that is the Truth, and that is not at any hand to be forsaken.
Thirdly, touching the Restraint of the flesh, I remember the saying of the
Apostle, Ye have been called into liberty, Gal. 5.^3.
only use not year liberty as an occasion to the flesh: as who would say, The
doctrine of Christian Religion, though it be a doctrine of Liberty to the
Spirit, freeing it from the bondage of sin and Satan, yet it is a doctrine
of Restraint to the Flesh; so that when you feel the Flesh begin to break
out, and take liberty, then know it to be an Abuse of the Doctrine of
Liberty. This was Paul's meaning. So that it is an infallible Canon, that that
Doctrine which presses upon men, the most precise and strict Obedience to Gods
will, not giving any the least toleration to any the smallest sin, but is
still curbing man's natural inclination unto Evil, that same is the Truth of
God, that ought every servant of God to maintain. I pray you remember this
Direction. I do not for mine own part (and I speak it having often and
advisedly thought upon it) know any maine point of Popetie, but it may well be
tried by these Rules. So that you shall find all the Grounds of that Religion,
either to obscure Gods glory, or to weaken man's comfort, or (what pretense
soever it may make, Col 2.23.
by not seeming to spare the Body) to give liberty to the flesh. I pray you
try the Truth hereof upon occasion, and then credit the Direction accordingly.

Thus much briefly how a Christian good husband, who having at a dear hand
purchased the Truth, and is willing still to enjoy it, may keep the same from
all Hucksters, whether they be such as would draw him to No Religion, or such
as would win him to a false religion. A needful point in these decaying
times, in which Satan knowing that he has but a short time, Rev. 12.12.
has great wrath, and bestirreth himself exceedingly; and in which also,
many, as it were weary of Manna, of the sincere doctrine of the Gospel, do
long for the fleshpots of Egypt, for the grossenes of Popery; others go
about to make a Medley of Popery and true Christianity, to put the Arc and
Dagon into one Temple, which cannot be, others considering the course of Times,
carry themselves in a kind of Indifferency, casting (like the wise Steward)
what they shall do hereafter. So that if ever the Papists, leaving all other
perswasio^s, should have opportunity (which God forbid) to resume their old
Argument, From the clubbes, A F^st. bu^.
threatening us, that, If we will not sell our Inheritance, they will fire us
out, it is much to be feared, that a great many of us would resign our
interest, choosing rather to go seek a new, then to hold our old possession
upon so hard conditions. I beseech you therefore, let us as well remember to
take heed of a Thriftlessenes in forsaking the Truth, as of Miserablenes and
Niggardice in purchasing the Truth, and let me conclude this place, and
exhortation, with the words of the Apostle; you that are, or hereafter by the
blessing of God upon the use of the good means, shall be grounded in Gods holy
Truth stand fast, and keep the Instructions, 2. These. 2.15.
that ye have been taught; and I pray Jesus Christ our Lord, who has given us
Everlasting Consolation and good hope through grace, comfort our Hearts, and
stablish us, in every word and good work.

The next point, is to urge this Inhibitio^ in regard of the Truth of
Obedience; of which also this place is to be understood, which says, sell not
the Truth, that is, After thou art once entered into a holy course of true
Obedience, see thou never forsake the same. For the well handling of this
point, the most full and profitable course were this. In so much as Satan, the
Arch-enemie of our souls, knowing, that the further we go on in true
Obedience, the further we are from his jurisdiction, does therefore, not fail
to solicit us, and by many several means to be ever tempering with us, to
slake our forwardnes, and to kill and cool all zeal within us; for this cause
it were good to discover his plots, to design his instruments, and to note the
several suggestions by which he attempteth to make us cast off all holy
Obedience to Gods Truth. Sometimes Profit hinders, sometime Pleasure
misleadeth, sometimes a fear to impair our credit in the world is a stop,
sometimes a conceit of too much straitnes and difficulty in Religion
discourageth, sometimes an opinion that to much zeal is superfluous, crosses
us; so that it is a hard matter, to play the good Husband in holding fast a
good profession to the End. But, because to enter into every of these
particulars, would require a more large discourse, therefore as a general
preservative, against all occasions that may withdraw, I will only commend,
and confirm unto you this Doctrine, namely; That he which has entered into a
good course of true obedience, ought not at any hand to desist and fall away
from the same. The course of Christianity, is often in Scripture compared to a
Race, in which it suffices not a man, either to have run long, or to have
run painefully, unless he hold out unto the mark; nay, he which breaks
off, in the mid way, is as far from a reward as he which never set one step
forward thereunto; So in this Case, it booteth not a man, to have been
sometimes very forward, and to have made some show of love and obedience unto
Gods Truth, unless he do persist, and continue therein unto the end.
Therefore, So run (says the Apostle) that you may obtain. so run; that
is, moderately in the beginning, ^. Cor 9.24.
constantly in the midst, and cheerfully in the end, making the end rather
better, then worse then the Beginning. An unstayed, inconstant and fickle
disposition, to be carried with a humor, and to embrace a thing but for a
fit, is a thing so disgraceful even in common reason, that many men
oftentimes do persist in that which is naught, rather to incur the suspicion
of vnsetlednes; much more, is it shameful in matters of religion. And
therefore, as it is the Brand of the wicked to be like a whirlewind, Pro 10.25.
so it is the note of the Righteous to be as an Everlasting Foundation. All the
promises of Happiness in holy Scripture, are made with Condition of Continuance.
He that endures to the end shall be saved; To him that over comes will I
give, etc. Math. 24.13. Reu. 2.7.
Be faithful to the Death, and thou shall receive the crown of life. So that
if you take away continuance, all hope of happiness is utterly overthrown. In a
word, not to say so much as might be spoken in this case; they which have been
zealous, and careful, and forward, and do after grow cold, their case is
worse, and their punishment more heavy. First their case is worse, because
hereby they are brought into the way, to that unpardonable sin against the
holy Ghost, so that if ever they recover, it will cost them the setting on.
Again their punishment is more heavy: For they who have escaped from the
filthiness of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord etc. If they be
tangled again therein, the latter end is worse then the beginning. 2. Pet.
2.21.


2. Tim. 4.10
The Church is full of Demasses who have left their old zeal and have embraced
the present world. The blessed continuance of our happy Peace, has been to
many an occasion of Falling: It is time that the Lord should quicken us by some
sharper courses. There be many, of whom it may be said, He was a zealous
Gentleman, careful in the ways of godliness: I knew such an one, an earnest
and painful preacher, studious, industrious, of excellent gifts: There is an
other, was pretily come on, and gave good testimony of Gods graces to be in
him, was a diligent hearer, a man who loved to confer of good Things; But now
there is a great alteration, the world has choked them, the Vanity of outward
things has beguiled them and they are not the men they have been. Alas that
any man should give occasion to have it so said of him. I remember the saying,
It is the most woeful thing to have been happy: Miserrimum est fu^sse bea^um.
and so, it is a miserable thing to have been zealous, and now not to be
zealous, to have had Lands, and Livings, and large possessions, and now to be a
beggar, to have had the Truth of Obedience in possession, but now to have
clean parted therewithal. I beseech you, if any here be guilty herein (as
every man, has good cause to be ielous over himself with a godly jealousy)
let him be admonished to look to it quickly, to repent and do his first
works, (...)
least he incur a double condemnation. Who will pity him, that had land and
living, and could not keep it? and how shall the Lord be merciful unto him,
who having known the Way of Truth shall turn from the holy Commandment given
unto him? And for others, which are (perhaps) but yet comers on and beginners
in good things, as you shall learn, other Things, so learn this withal, that
we have need to keep a narrow watch over our hearts, 2 Thessalonians 3.13
least we wax weary of well Doing, least at unawares a kind of sacietie and
fulness creep upon us. To, begin a thing is pleasant, therefore for varieties
sake, many will begin, but upon some occasions soon leave off; so that all
the proof is in the End.

There is one point more behind, no less necessary then the former, a Branch
of my division, and incident also to my Text; and that is, a Godly care to
enlarge, and increase the Truth which we have purchased. In this frugall and
Thriuing Age, he is, among worldly wise men, half accounted an unthrift, not
only, that makes away his estate, either in whole, or in part, but also which
does not by his industry, and providence something better the same. And I pray
you, mark, if my Text, do not require so much: It is in the nature of every
Inhibition, or forbidding Commandment, to imply the contrary: As, Thou shall
not kill; comprehends this under it, Thou shall by all honest means preserve
the life of thy neighbor: so, thou shall not sell the Truth: what must I then
do, (will thou say:) Thou must husband it well, and labor to increase it. So
that my Text very naturally, without setting it upon the rack, occasioneth the
urging of that duty which the Scripture often does persuade, namely, A caring
and endeavoring to thrive in Religion, to increase both in knowledge and in
obedience. 2. Pet. 3.18.
S. Peter gives a charge, Grow in grace. 1 Thessalonians. ^1.
Paul beseeches his hearers to increase more and more. Pro. 4.18.
Solomon compares the state of a Christian to the light, which shines more
and more unto the persit day. In Ezekiel, the graces of Gods spirit, are
figured by the waters, E^ek. ^.
issuing out of the Sanctuary, which were first to the ankles, then to the
knees, then to the Ioynes, then to a river that could not be passed over. Psalm.
92 ^.
David calls Gods servants Trees, which bring forth fruit in their age, and
even then are fat, Math. 25.2^.
and flourishing. Christ in the Parable reports that the Evil servant,
though he kept the Talent in a napkin safe, yet was condemned for not
increasing it. Thus you see the Truth of this Doctrine. forget that which is
behind, Phil. 3.13.
accounting that whereto we are come, to be scarce worth the naming, and
striving to go from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, Psalm. 84.7. Romans
12.3.
from strength to strength, according as God has dealt to every one the
measure of faith. Flesh and blood is ready soon to satisfy it self, with a
little in these things, though in other things it be insatiable; and worldly
men (that would be thought religious for all that) they plead, All is well, and
how Religious would you have us to be? Do we not thus and thus, and what would
you have of us more? To help this, I pray you remember this; He is the best
Christian, who is ever complaining to himself of his own slacknes, and
carries a kind of holy Indignation against himself, that he knows no more,
and is no more obedient, Phil 3.13.
more grieuing at that which is Behind, then pleasing himself in that whereto
he is attained. And on the other side, he that is in his own conceit come to
a full point, thinking that a little Religion, a little zeal, a little
holiness, a little knowledge will suffice, the same man has no zeal, no
holiness, no knowledge, no religion at all. My reason is, the evil servant I
spoke of before, though in one place it is said of him, Math. 25.29.
that that was taken from him which he had, yet elsewhere it is said of him,
that that was taken from him which it seemed he had. So that it is but a
seeming of Religion, Luc. 8.18.
where there is no care of increasing. And thus at last I have ended this Text,
and though I have not handled every point so largely, as the worth of it did
deserve, yet I have, in some measure, touched every particular incident to this
place.

The end of the second Sermon.
Let God alone have the glory.

