THE PENITENT SINNERS ENTERTAINMENT.

Set forth by Mr. JOHN HILL, Student in Divinity, and now Preacher of Gods
Word at Dublin in IRELAND.



AT LONDON Printed by JOHN BEALE, for JONAS MAN. 1614.

TO THE Worshipful and virtuous Gentlewomen Mis. TEMPERANCE CREW, wife to Mr.
Thomas Crew, and Mis. Mary Blinco, wife to Mr. John Blinco, I. H. desires all
grace and peace unfeignedly to be multiplied: etc.
GOdly, and christian gentlewomen, whom I love in the truth, 2. Ioh. 1.
I hope I may speak of you as did that worthy Apostle of the elect lady, who
by the fruits of her piety and godliness, manifested her election: so you by the
love you bear toward God, his ordinances, and servants, do declare
evidently, 1. Ioh. 3.14
your translation from death to life, and by your virtuous and holy lives, you
demonstrate freedom from sin, which are of everlasting life. I have made bold
(Christian Gentlewomen) to patronize this small work under your favors, in
token of thankefulnes, for your many favors I have received from you; not
doubting but small things of this nature, will be much respected, and
willingly received; both in respect of your own private gain, as also the
profit and benefit, which the whole Church of God may reap and gather from it.
Now if you, or the rest of the body of Christ shall receive any benefit by it,
for the furthering of that work of repentanee, and sanctification of life,
give God the glory and praise.

And so J humbly take my leave, commending you to the providence of God, and
the word of his grace, Act. 20.32.
which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

Steane this 20. of April 1612. Yours in all christian duties to command JOHN
HILL.

THE PENITENT SINNERS ENTERTAINMENT.
LVKE 15.20, 21, 22, etc. So he arose and came to his Father, and when he was
yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell
on his neck, etc.


IN all this parable of a godly and religious father, and a stubborn and
impious son, is prefigured and set down, the unspeakable love and
compassion of God our heavenly father to all his children in Jesus Christ,
which have been rebellious and disobedient before their calling.

In these words are set down two things, viz. First the duties of a penitent
sinner, Secondly the promotion that the penitent person comes unto.


In the duties of the penitent person, there are two things to be considered.

First, a persuasion of mercy, and sure confidence of obteining compassion, if
he did return, implied in the word (Father) as if he should have said; truth
it is O Father, as my life and works have been toward thee, I do not deserve
to be thy son (as in the words following may appear) but yet never the less,
I am persuaded, that though I have failed of my duty toward thee, yet thou will not fail of thy love to me: and although there be no desert of mercy in
me, yet I know there is compassion for seeking for with thee: and this is the
first ground the penitent person lays, to obtain mercy.

Secondly, the penitent person confesses his sin, whereby he had offended
his father, for there must be a confession, that as the child is to be well
persuaded of the love of his father, so he must be ill persuaded of himself,
in respect of his sin, and therefore he says, I have sinned against heaven
and before thee: that is, against the God of heaven, and against thee my
natural father, and so I have broken both the tables of the commandments.

And he confesses also, he was not worthy to be called a son to so godly a
father, or to receive mercy that was so full of impiety, making himself vile
and base in his own eyes, that he might be highly esteemed in his Fathers
eyes: which is the first part.

Now for the second part of this text, which is the promotion the penitent
sinner shall be exalted unto; set down in the 22. and 23. verses, rendering a
reason wherefore the father did thus promote him.

The promotion set down is this; the father seeing his riotous and unthrifty
son return home, with a broken and humble heart, and with a resolution to
become a new man, and rather desiring his fathers love then his goods, he
presently offers himself to his child, and before he could ask for his
needs, he commands his servants to bring forth such things as his penitent
son wanted, and to give it before he did crave it, for the father seeing his
son so well clothed with humility and with godly remorse for his former life
within, he will not reject him, though he came poor and ragged outward, but
calls for the best robe to cover him.

The comparison is taken from a King and a princelike child, whose manner was
to wear robes, and before the son could ask for apparel which he stood
in need of, the father gives him a robe to put on: for seeing he had made
himself base in his own eyes, he would cloth him royally that he might
seem precious in his fathers eyes.

And put a ring on his hand: that is, he would not only give him things for
necessity, but also to adorn and beautify him, and as the Apostle says, upon
our uncomely parts he will put more comeliness on.

And shoes on his feete] And whereas he came barefooted to his father, he
commands shoes to be put on his feet, to keep and preserve them from
thorns and stones that might annoy and hurt the^.

And bring the fat calfe etc] And whereas he came with a languishing stomach
for want of meat (for before he had been feeding amongst swine) now he will
refresh him with a tender calfe; with pleasant and comfortable meat.

And let us eat and be merry.] Here is cause of mirth and rejoicing on both
sides; First on the fathers side, that had lost an untowardly son, and now
had found an obedient son, that went from him dead in his sins, and
returned quickened unto the life of grace, that departed impenitent, and
returned humbled; in all which there was cause of mirth, and this cause the
father renders himself to his eldest son; for my son was dead and is now
alive, he was lost, but is now found, etc. Secondly there was cause of
rejoicing in the son, because he went from his father a dead man, and now he
comes to his father a living man: he went from him stubborn, proud,
disobedient, he returns meek, penitent, and obedient; in truth he departed
from him a child of Belia^ and returns to him the child of God; in all
which, there was great cause of joy on both sides. And so much for the sum
and order of these words.

The drift of the parable is, that if a godly father had a stubborn and
ungodly son that had departed from him; and spent his portion amongst ryotous
and lewd companions, yet if the father should see his son come home in that
manner as is before alleged, he would receive him again, nay he ought (in
truth) to entertain him into his favor again with joy, passing by all his
stubborn and disobedient behauiours, remitting all his faults, and receive him
as his child again, notwithstanding all his offenses.

Application.
Then the application of this Parable is, that if the people of God have been
Apostates, reuolters, rebels, and disobedient unto God, yet if they would from
a plain and an honest heart, return to God by true and sound repentance,
confessing their sins with godly sorrow, and judging themselves not worthy of
mercy; then will the Lord, command his ministers (...) put on the rich robe of
Christ his righteousness; and they shall be adorned with the graces and gifts
of his spirit, and shod with the gospel of peace, and give them the flesh and
blood of his son, and the comfort and joy of the spirit, and shall have
communion with God in Christ Jesus, and this will God bestow upon every
penitent sinner. For if a natural parent can show so much mercy to so
ungracious and impious a child when he humbles himself unto him, that has
but a drop of mercy, in comparison of the Ocean and Sea of mercy which is in
God, how much more will God show mercy unto such penitent and humble sinners,
that with sense and feeling of their sins and wants can come to God for
mercy? And so much for the explication and application of the words.

And the son said unto him father, etc.] that is, the penitent child said
unto his natural father. But before we come to gather any doctrine from the
very words of the text; there arises a doctrine from the dependence of the
words, in the 17 and 18 verses; for when he came to himself and was his own
man, and was awakened out of his spiritual frenzy, then he considered what he
might do; and begins with this resolution; I will go to my father and say,
etc.] he begins to loath that course of life, and now does put that in
practice, which before he did but purpose; and put that in deed, which before
he had but thought in mind. From hence arises naturally this doctrine.

That resolution in heart and action in life must go together.
but also good endeavors and actions in the life, not only think and say
well, but also practice and do well. This we may see very fitly proved unto
us, in the examples of Ruth and Orpah, both of them purposed a like, for both
protested to company with Naomie to her own country, to serve the God of
heaven; but Orpah hearing the reasons against that her purpose, returned back
to serve their idols: Ruth. 1.
but Ruth having been grounded by true repentance, to the love of true
religion held on her resolution, although her Mother in law did bring her
sisters example as an argument to persuade her to return also, but she replies
against her Mothers speeches, saying, entreat me not to return, for whether
thou go I will go, and where thou dwell I will dwell, thy people shall
be my people, and thy God my God. And what made Ruth so good of her word in
this respect, because she was come to her self, and true repentance, which
made her thus purpose and perform.

The like we see in Paul when he came to repentance, he resolved to leave his
blasphemy and persecuting of the Saints of God, and so did: he was as good in
action, as he was in purpose and affection. This doctrine being so; may also be
farther confirmed by reasons drawn from the holy scriptures of God.

First, because whosoever comes to true repentance, will have stronger reasons
Hosea, Hos. 2.7.
when the Lord met with them by his judgments and stopped the way, of inioying
their outward blessings in that abundance which they had before time enjoyed,
and all because they did attribute their plenty to their idols, but in their
penury and want they have better reasons; and say, I will go and return to
my first husband (that is to Christ) for at that time I was better then now: as
also in the fourteenth chapter, when they come to repentance for their
idolatry, Hos. 14.4.
they say; neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
gods, for in thee the fatherless find mercy; as if they should have said, we
will not be so ignorant and sottish any longer, to think that an Idol or
carved piece of wood can pity us or show us any compassion, for they are but
our creatures, and therefore it argues that they should rather kneel and bow
to us, then we to them; thus we see their judgments are better informed when
they came to repentance, then they were before, for repentance is a change of
the mind, as it signifies.

Secondly, look what reasons men have to purpose well, the same reasons they
have to hold out well; the same arguments which work good affections in ones
heart, will also hold out to bring forth good actions in the life, as here
the prodigal child.

Thirdly, where true repentance is, there will be also godly sorrow (for it
causes repentance, 2. Cor. 7.10.
as the Apostle says) and where godly sorrow begins, these effects will
follow. First, a holy care to leave evil, and to practice that which is good.
Secondly, a clearing of ones self from ones sin. Thirdly, it will work an
indignation and a holy anger against ones sin. Fourthly, a godly fear to
commit sin the time ever after. Fifthly, a desire to serve God more, and to
have a greater measure of grace to please him better. Sixthly, a godly zeal of
gods glory, and after the spiritual means of ones salvation. And Lastly, a
holy revenge upon ones own self, for the sins whereby we have dishonored
God: and these are the effects of true repentance. And to this effect does the
Apostle James speak, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, Iam. 9.8.
and purge your hearts ye double minded But they might object; How shall we
come to this purging and clensing of both inside and outside? He answers them
in these words following; suffer afflictions, and sorrow ye and weep, let
your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness; as if he
should have said, if you will purge your heart from sin, and part the sin from
the soul, you must come to godly sorrow for your sins: for the nature of sin
is such, that it is like a little child, it will tarry longest there where it
is most made of, so if we will love and make much of sin we shall have his
company, but if we will labor to afflict our souls for our sins and sorrow
for it, we shall quickly be rid of it.

that you have repented? because we purpose well; It is true, good motions are
to be respected, but if they do not bring forth good actions, they are no
better then quaulmes and passions that may be in very wicked men and
hypocrites: for if there be good desires in the heart, there will follow
certainly good endeauours and actions in the whole man. Saul in a passion
would confess to David, O my son David, thou art more righteous then I; and
why did he presently fall to persecute David again? was it not because the
spirit of God never convinced his conscience of the sin, and he never came to
godly sorrow for the same, and therefore these were but passions, which died
before they brought forth good actions? Judas also could come to this, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood: so far he went well: but he could not
come to repentance to crave pardon, for had he repented he might have been
pardoned, and if he could have believed he should have been saved, but doing
neither, he was damned. Such passions and quaulmes had they, which in all the
have, would go and build upon Christ: they did not consider beforehand what
charges it would amount unto, and whether they were able to undertake so great
a building, Luke 14.28.29.
and therefore having begun, they could not proceed, but left off and were
not able to finish it; So many have sudden flashings and passions come into
their minds, to do good things, but not considering the danger nor charges
that one must be at, if they purpose to build upon Christ, they let their suit
fall, and their purposes are quickly extinct and quenched before they come
forth to action. But these passions the Prophet Hosea compares to the morning
dew. Hos. 6.9.
O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee, O Judah how shall I entreat thee? for
your goodness is like the morning cloud, and as the Morning dew it goes
away: that is, as soon as the sun arises and shows forth his beams of
light, it lickes up the dew upon the grass; so soon passes your goodness,
and it is of no continuance. Of such a nature are all these passions and sudden
quaulmes that many may have, and yet be very sinful and wicked: many have
these flashings when they come to the Sacrament, and will have these purposes
to leave their covetousness, their swearing, Sabbath breaking, and all their
known and notorious sins; and they will also purpose to pray more, frequent
the exercises of religion more, and they will amend many disorders which are
amiss (if it might be all remedied with thoughts and purposes) but after the
Sacrament they are as profane and sinful as ever they were before, and are
never a whit the better in practice and conversation. Oh before they go to the
Sacrament they will purpose to make satisfaction to such whom they have
wronged, and to live as friends with them which in times past they have much
grieved; but let the Sacrament be past, there is no more hearing of
satisfaction, nor acknowledgement of injuries and wrongs offered; yet we shall
have these unconstant men persuade themselves they have repented, and would
have others so to think and reckon of them: but such must know that they have
not yet repented, till these motions and purposes conceived, bring forth good
actions in life to be practiced.

Secondly, it serves for instruction, that seeing true repentance stands in
resolving James speaks:) let us labor to do that which Barnabas exhorts the
faithful brethren at Antiochia; That with purpose of heart, they should
continue in the Lord. So let us with all purpose of heart resolve to leave our
sins, and to practice holy and good duties: let us be like unto this
prodigal child, which did purpose and practice, and so we shall have a good
testimony to our hearts that we have repented.

Oh but, I can no sooner have a good motion come into my heart, but Satan is
ready to steal it out, and mine own corruption to extinguish it, before I
can bring it forth to action? but labor to put in practice these rules which
by Gods grace may help thee, to cherish good motions and further them, that
they come out to practice in thy life and conversation.

First, if we would have our good desires James in the place before alleged,
exhorts his hearers to purge their hearts by godly sorrow, for it will break
the cords of sin, and kill it by degrees. And to the intent that we may
sorrow for sin, let us be frequent in meditating of what sin would have
done to us, namely have killed us, (for the wages of sin is death) and
exposed us to the everlasting wrath of God. Also consider, that our sins killed
Jesus Christ the Lord of life, they were the murderers and betrayers of this
just one. And whatsoever woe or misery has or can befall us in this present
life, is the effect of these our sins. Thus seriously pondering of these
things, it will procure godly sorrow for sin, which godly sorrow will produce
good actions from good motions.

Saul could have had good arguments and reasons when he pursued and fought
against David, if he could have considered, suerly in fighting against David,
I fight against my best friend, and my faithfullest subject, yea in so doing I
shall fight against God, and mine own salvation etc. then he would never have
followed him with such a deadly malice. Job that faithful servant of God, he
had good reasons to keep him from sin, as appears, I have made a covenant
with mine eyes, Job 31.1, 2, 3.
why should I think on a maid, and what portion should I have of God from
above, and what inheritance from the almighty from on high? is there not
destruction to the wicked, and strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?
Why does Job be so diligent in watching over his senses lest he should
offend? His reason is, if he should not have regard to them, he knew that the
Lord would not regard him: and if he should have let loose his eyes to behold
wantonness, he knew he should quickly loose the favor of God, and letting his
eyes take their liberty, he should suddenly have tasted some misery: for he
knew there were strange punishments for the workers of iniquity. Oh but who
takes notice of ones thoughts and looks? I may let my eyes to take their
liberty, and no man can perceive it; nay, but Job makes answer, Does not God
behold my ways and tell all my steps? And although man cannot take notice of
my lustful heart and eyes, yet the allseeing God does behold it, and considers
my steps. Which made him not so much as wrong his poorest servant he kept:
for says he, If I did contemn the judgment of my servant, and of my maid,
when they did contend with me, 13.19 ver.
what then shall I do when God stands up? and when he shall visit me what
shall I answer? And the reason why Job durst not be froward with his servants;
because says he, He that made me in the womb, has he not made him? As if
he should have said, it may be my servant may be as dearly beloved of God
as I my self, and he may be an heir of Heaven as well as I; at least wise,
I know we are both his workmanship; and therefore I dare not vex and iniure
him. The whole chapter does run upon such arguments and reasons.

I will rise and go to my Father, he delaied not, but rose and came to his
father. So the prophet David did, finding himself out of the way, Psalm. 119.60.
he says, I made have and delaied not to keep thy commandments. Whiles the
wound is green, it is best to go to the Surgeon: and we have an old
proverb, It is good striking, whiles the iron is hot; so when God puts into
our hearts good affections, let us quickly put them in practice; whiles he
warmes us with the word and Sacraments, let us not delay but speedily put it in
action, and whiles he speaks by afflictions, let us resolve upon a holy
conversation. Now many when they come to the word, and hearing of such duties
which they ought to practice, as for prayer to be performed of every one, at
the lest both morning and evening, the heart is presently affected with it, and
resolve to practice it, but so soon as they are gone out of the Church, they
defer the putting the duty in practice by and by, and so those motions die
before they come forth into action: and all because they do not speedily go
about the work; for as fire without supply of fuel will quickly be
extinguished, even so the delaying of putting these good resolutions and
desires in practice, do quickly go out, and it leaves such a deadnes and
hardness of heart, and makes one more duller to every good duty: wherefore
whiles the heart is warm with any good motion, let us spedily put it in
practice.

Peter exhorts the new conuerts unto, saying, Act. 2.40.
Save your selves from this froward generation, then they should be sure to
hold out, and not be perverted, nor our minds altered and changed. And so
much for the first doctrine.

So he arose, and came to his father, and said to him, Father etc. In this
confession which the prodigal child does make, he begins with that which
brought him home, even the true consideration that he had a Father, and the
persuasion of mercy, if he did return, was it as brought him home, and so to
repentance. From hence arises plainly this doctrine.

That the persuasion of mercy is a special For he that comes to God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him: he
that will come to God and seek him indeed, must be persuaded to find him in
mercy, and that he will bestow his love and favor upon him; for it is the
persuasion of good success that makes one go to God: and therefore the
Prophet says, Psalm. 130.4
That mercy is with thee that thou might be feared. as if he should have
said, I should never have reverenced thy name, but that there is hope of mercy
and grace from thee. Therefore the devils having no hope of mercy, they do
not, nor cannot fear the Lord. Wherefore let us set down this as a maine
conclusion, that if we cannot have mercy from heaven, we shall have mercy
from no place.

The Apostle Paul does urge the mercy of God, Romans 12.1.
to the Romans, as a forcible argument to serve God. I beseech you brethren,
by the mercies of God, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to God which is your reasonable service of God; where the
mercies of God are a special motive to stir them up to serve God.

Also the prophet Zachary says, I will power upon the house of David and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and prayers, and they shall look
upon me, Zach. 12.12.
whom they have pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one mourns for his
only son, whom etc. This will make one turn to Christ, when they see their
sins so odious, as to be the special instruments to wound and kill the Lord
of life, and also when they do consider that Christ gave himself for them,
this infinite love and mercy, will move them to true repentance and godly
sorrow.

It is not misery as can convert one to God, and turn one from ones sin; for
then the devils might have bin converted before this time, for they are in
anguish and perpetual misery: and Judas might have repented, for he was
sensible of horror enough in his conscience, but that rather did drive him
from God, because he could not apprehend the mercy and kindness of God.

The reasons to prove this doctrine are.

First, because till such time one have this persuasion one shall never come to
sound repentance, and one will never confess ones sins without hope of
mercy.

Our father which art in Heaven. For we can never have any comfort that our
sins are pardoned till we can boldly go to him in assurance of mercy. And
though we have failed of our duties toward him, yet he will not fail of
mercy to us, because he is our Father.

Since this is so, that the persuasion of mercy is a special means to stir
us up to true and sound repentance, it serves for a double reproof of two
sorts of people.

whom? to such as continue in this impiety? no: but do thou abuse the mercy
and long suffering of God, that should lead thee to repentance, and so thereby
do harden thy heart in impenitency, and do heap up as a treasure unto
thy self, wrath against the day of wrath, that thus on earth add drunke^nes
to theft: these abuse the name of God, and it is more fearful to abuse the
Gospel, then the law. It were a sin to break the positive law of a
Prince, but more if he stamp under his feet the privy seal of the Prince,
wherein his pardon is written, thus disgracing and mocking it, and yet hope for
mercy of him. We would count it the part of a madman. Such are the dealings
of all such presumptuous wretches, they break the positive laws of the King
of Heaven and earth, and continue in the breach of the first and second table
of the commandments; and not only so, but abuse the privy signet of God, and
hope for mercy notwithstanding their ungodliness: but such must know, that the
Lord will not be merciful to such, but contrariwise, the wrath and severity
of God. For if a Father should use all the duties of kindness to his child, and
yet he would be very rebellious to his Father still, and all because his
Father is loving and kind unto him; such a child would be quickly censured to
be a very ungracious and wicked child: how much more are such impious and in a
high degree ungodly, which daily displease God, blaspheme his name, profane
his Sabbaths, etc. and all because God is merciful, and gracious? But these
make a contrary use of the love of God, then the Prophet Zachary exhorts the
faithful unto, in the place before alleged, that they should look upon him
whom they had pierced, and lament, but the wicked wretches look upon him, and
gnash their teeth at him, and blaspheme his name, and so are made impenitent.

one foot to go to God for mercy, and pardon of their sins, and a removing
of the Cross. Thus they think there is less mercy in God, then is in man:
for if a godly parent, though his child have played the unthrift, and
rebellious child, yet if he would come home with sorrow and humility, and
acknowledge his faults, he will presently receive him and show him mercy, and
yet we cannot persuade our selves of the like success with God. Thus we make
Gods of our selves, and make the merciful God more cruel then man, which is
most fearful once to think. Can we forgive the faults and wrongs committed
one to an other, that have but a drop of mercy, in comparison of that Ocean
and Sea of mercy and pity in God, and shall we not be fully assured we
shall have pardon and forgiveness of sins, if we come to him by repentance?
Let us not dishonor God so highly, to make God less merciful then mortal
man: for man has made no promise to remit the wrongs and injuries offered to
him; but God has bound himself by covenant, yea by oath to pardon the sins
and offenses committed against him. Again, man cannot forgive all wrongs
perfectly, but he would have some stirrings and motions in his mind against
the party: but if we had all the sins of Cain, Saul, and Judas, yet if we
could come to God with faith in his mercy, and godly sorrow, and repentance
for our sins, he would receive us to mercy, and give us a general pardon
of all our sins, and seal it with the blood of the everlasting covenant.
Wherefore let us no longer look upon the greatness of our sins, but upon the
mercy of God, which exceeds our sins, nor on the greatness of our crosses,
but upon the infiniteness of gods compassion, and kindness, and let us resort
to him in hope of mercy,

and he is greatly pleased to show mercy to such. Let us conclude before hand,
that if we resolve to be true upright christians, the^ we may boldly call God
Father; and if we can persuade our selves we are his children, we may
believe we shall find mercy at his hands. Wherefore let us confess our
sins, and leave our sins, and we shall find mercy. For if a Judge of an
Assize should say to a felon or some malefactor in the Jail, If you will
confess your theft or trespass, and resolve to become an honest man, I will
pardon your fault, and not only so, but you shall be made a Justice of peace,
or some great man; he would upon this promise be moved quickly to confess
his felony, and forgo his theft; now the Judge of all the world offers us this
large promise of mercy, that if a sinner will truly, and from his heart
confess his sins and resolve to leave them, he shall have pardon, and not
only so, but he shall be made a King, and priest unto God the Father, and
this preferment we shall come unto, if we come unto God in a right manner.

Oh but how might I do to come to be persuaded of mercy, if I come to God?

Gal. 4.6.
Because we are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into our
hearts, which cries, Abba Father. The spirit of Christ does work this
assurance, that God is our Father, and upon this assurance, we shall be
forced to cry Abba Father, and going to our best Father, we may be sure to
find mercy.

Nehemiah says, O Lord I beseech thee, let thine ear hearken to the prayers
of thy servant, and to the prayers of thy servants, that desire to fear thy
name. So that if we can but truly desire to repent, and desire to keep all
Gods commandments, and desire to bewail all our sins, and to strive
against all corruptions, and it is certain we shall obtain mercy at the hand
of God. For if a christian parent command his child to do a thing, and if
he do it willingly and cherefully, and though he do it not so perfectly as
the parent himself, yet he will take it in good part, because his child
endeavored to perform it, as well as he could: how much more will God our
heavenly Father accept of the poor desires and endeauours of his children,
when he sees in them a willing desire to do well? But if our desires be good
and true, then there is a using of all good means, and ordinances to
accomplish the thing desired, or else it is but a slothful desire, and it may
not be called truly a desire; else, but a lust: but if we desire to repent,
and to believe, and also use all good means to repent and believe, and be
humbled because we cannot repent and believe, as we should, the Lord will have
mercy upon such holy desires, and accept the will for the deed. And so much
for the second doctrine.

And when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran etc. In all these words is set down the affection and love of the
father, upon the resolution of his son; the son was but coming, but the
father is running: he comes slowly for mercy, but the father is ready and
forward to show mercy: which shows the wonderful readiness of God to show
mercy to a penitent sinner, that comes to God for mercy. From hence we learn
this doctrine.



That a penitent sinner can noe sooner look for mercy from God, but he is
ready to show mercy to them.

That God is more ready to show mercy, then penitent sinners can be to seek
for mercy. This we see in a natural father, to his penitent child here; now
a natural parent, has made no such promise to show mercy to his child, but
our heavenly Father has made a promise to every penitent sinner to show him
mercy; again, a natural parent cannot show mercy, and kindness to his
child, without great costs and labor, but our heavenly Father, he can show
mercy without any trouble or charges, for it is his name to be merciful.

Now if this be in a natural parent, that he will show mercy, though he have
not promised, yea though it be to his great cost, and pains; how much more
will our heavenly Father show mercy to his children, since he has promised,
and is both able and willing, with ease to do it. If this be in man, which
has but a drop of mercy, in comparison of God, what may a penitent soul
expect at the hands of God, who is infinite in mercy, and pity, to his? This
doctrine may very fitly be proved, by the example of Gods dealing with David:
that when he had committed two grievous sins of adultery, and murder, and had
almost slept a twelve month in them, in so much that the Lord is feign to send
a Herald of arms to him, to awaken him out of his spiritual sleep, and to
help him out of his sins, and to bring him to repentance, but the Prophet
could no sooner remember his sins to him, but he does imediatly confess his
sin, and he no sooner acknowledge and confess his sins, 2. Sa. 12.13.
but the Prophet Nathan by the mouth of the Lord does pronounce his pardon: yea
before he did ask it, the Prophet tells him, the Lord has put away thy sin,
and thou shall not die. This also we may see proved, in that Psalm which is
entitled David's learning, wherein the Prophet confesses, when I held my
tongue, my bones consumed, and when I roared all the day. That is, as long as I
did dissemble, and seemed to cloak, and hide my faults, I was plagued and
tormented, so that roared like an unreasonable beast through pain: then I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquities, for I thought,
I will confess against my self, Psalm. 32.45
my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgave the punishment of my sin.
Thus we see, he could no sooner confess, but he had pardon, both from the
guilt, and punishment of his sin, and he could no sooner seek for mercy,
but he obtained mercy at Gods hands.

Also the Prophet Isay shows the mcreie of God unto true repentant sinners
where he says, Isay 64.5.
Thou did meet him that rejoiced in thee, and did justly, they remembered
thee in thy ways: behold thou art angry, for we have sinned, yet in them is
continuance, and we shall be saved: where the Prophet speaks of the Lord,
after the manner of men, that he is ready to meet them half way (as it were)
that set themselves in truth, and uprightness, to confess their sins, and
meet him by repentance, he will meet them swiftly, though they come but
softly, and though they come heavily, yet they shall depart joyfully. And the
same Prophet says in the next chapter of the Lord, before they call, I will
answer, Isay. 65.24
and whiles they speak, I will hear. This we may see in the prodigal
child, that before he asked for food, clothes, and other things, which he
stood in need of, his father bestows it upon him, and before he could make
an end of confession of his sins, he falls upon his neck, and embraces,
and receives him to favor. Now there are reasons to prove that this doctrine
is so.

Micah affirms, he retayneth not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases
him. When a man is come truly to confess his sins with sorrow, then God
must needs show mercy to him, for mercy pleases him; A small entreaty will
persuade a man to do that which he delights in, and takes pleasure in the
doing of it: even so God is easily drawn to show mercy to the penitent sinner,
because he delights in it, and is well pleased to show mercy. Oh but how shall
I know that I shall receive mercy from him? why should we call it in question,
if we be penitent, for it stands upon his truth and covenant, to pardon the
sins of the elect, and for the certainety thereof he has bound himself by
an oath to fulfill it.

the elder brother of this prodigal child, did grudge and think much that
his father should show subh kindness to his younger brother, which had bin such
an unthrift; yet we have our elder brother Jesus Christ, to make continual
intercession unto his Father for us, and in our behalf. Now if a natural
father can show such mercy to his child, when the elder brother speaks
against him; how much more shall our heavenly Father show mercy to us, when as
our elder brother is willing and speaks for us, and he is as ready to pray
for mercy for us, as our Father can be to give mercy to us.

Since it is so, that God is more ready to offer mercy to penitent sinners, then
they can be to ask for mercy; The uses serve;

First for confutation of the Papists, and run to a Saint; this is palpable
blindness, to forsake the creator, and receive the creature: it is as if one
should forsake to fetch water from the Sea, where is enough, and run to a
channel that is dry; but if God will not show mercy, who will? and if he
cannot, who can? shall we find more mercy from a Saint or Angel, then from
the merciful God, of whom the fatherless finds mercy? This argues they know
not Gods name, for then as the Prophet says; They that know thy name, will
trust in thee, for thou never failest them that seek thee They are not
persuaded of this name of God, for then they would not seek to Saints or
Angels, but unto God, who never fails any that seek to him in truth.

with an honest heart, and indeed; for he would meet us halfeway, if he did
but perceive in us but a true purpose to come to him. One godly tear of true
repentance, with a faithtfull prayer unto God, is able to do us more good, and
to help us out of our distresses, then all outward means of friends, money,
goods, and such like things, in all this world can do. But here is our
distrust in God, that we have more hope that we shall speed better of our
neighbors, and friends in time of trouble, then of God: but this comes to
pass, because we do not assure our hearts that he loves us in Christ Jesus,
Ioh. 17.26.
according unto Christ's prayer, that he made for all the elect: for if we
did, we would more depend upon God, and less rely upon men, more seek to
him for help, and less trust upon outward things.

Thirdly it serves for instruction, that let us seek unto God, for there is
neither will, nor power wanting in him, if we come to him in truth. And if we
would have mercy from God, let us draw near to him with penitent and broken
hearts, washing our souls with godly sorrow for sins, and then the blood of
Christ shall be as water to purge us from all our sins and iniquities
whatsoever.

Oh but my sins are so many, I dare not go to him! but let not that hinder
thee from goeing to him, for the more we see our sins, and the greater
burden we feel them, the more bold we may be encouraged to go to him for
mercy: for only such are the guests which Christ inuites, and calls, and unto
whom in truth he was sent: and therefore he says; Come unto me all that are
heauy-laden, and I will ease you. Matthew 11.28.

be easily entreated to be reconciled, when matters of differences fall out,
and let us so pardon, and forget the wrongs and injuries offered us, that we
never vpbraide the parties in the teeth for the same. Oh let us never burst out
with these speeches, I will forgive him, but I will never forget him, or I will
never love him again, and such like speeches, but this is to be far unlike
God: oh but the offense that is offered me, is such a great wrong, as no man
could put it up; but be it that it is so grear, have not you offered God
greater wrongs? and yet he has pardoned you, and will not you forgive him
this one wrong that is done to you? in truth this argues that you have not
tasted of the love of God in Christ, that cannot forgive your brother so small
a fault. But if you will be like God, (which all his children must resemble in
truth, if they mean to come to heaven,) you must labor to remit great wrongs,
and small wrongs, and all and every one, and never vpbraide them in their teeth
of it, but bury it in oblivion, and never remember it: and so we shall be
like to our heavenly Father. And let us be so far from revenging wrongs
offered us, that we pray for them that hate us, and bless them that curse us,
ouercoming evil with goodness, as we are commanded. And so much for this
first doctrine.

And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven. Here is the
confession of this prodigal child, to his worthy father: as if he should
have said, truth it is, I have sinned against the God of Heaven, in sinning
against you my natural parent, and whereas before I thought my self to good
to be your child, or to remain within your house, yet now I change my
opinion, and think not my self worthy to be son to so good a father, and
that the worst place in your family is to good for me, so untoward a son.
And so much is to be understood in the 21 verse. But in that he confessed he
sinned against God, by disobeying of his father, we learn this doctrine.

sin against God: In iniuring men on earth, we sin against the Lord in
heaven. This is proved by the wise man, where he says; He that mocketh the
poor reprocheth him that made him: Pro. 17.15.
he that derides the creature, does mock the creator: and he that contemnes
the work, does by consequence speak against the workman.

Also the Apostle proves the same when he says; Cor. 1.8.12
Now when ye sin against the brethren, and wound their week consciences? ye
sin against Christ, Where the holy Apostle shows, that those offenses that
are committed against the weak brethren, do redound to be committed against
Christ: when they offend the members, they sin against the head.

And therefore Christ says; Math. 18.6
Whosoever shall offend one of those littleones that believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea. Thus we see that if any offend the least
christian, he does offend Christ, and shall be severely punished: and this
Christ will do, when he will pass sentence of condemnation against the
reprobates, I was a hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in to you, and so
forth. Where for the omitting of good duties, to be performed to the members
of Christ, Christ takes the omission of duty, as done to himself, and so a
sin done against God.

The reasons to prove this doctrine are.

David to cry out; Psalm. 51.
I have sinned against thee, against thee only. But one might have said,
David, you have wronged Vriah, in taking his wife away? It is true, but I have
broken Gods law, and so sinned against God, by killing Vriah.

Secondly in wronging men, we sin Job did consider well of, which did
terrify him from wronging his servants, as appears by his words, what then
shall I do when God stands up, and when he shall visit me, what shall I
answer? he that has made me in the womb, has he not made him? has not
he alone fashioned us in the womb?

Since that God is offended, when man besides you are forbidden to wrong any,
be they never so base and vile. But such persons as wrong these base ones, (as
they term them) dare not wrong a greater person: because, if they should, they
might have the law inflicted upon them, and so thereby be brought into
danger, as to be cast into prison, etc. But to hurt and trouble a poor
christian, that they fear not to do; but such must know, there is as great
danger, to wrong the poorest christian, as in iniuring the greatest personage
in the world: for the wrong done to the member, redounds to the head, and the
hurt offered to the porest christian, is a sin against Christ him self: and
as the Prophet Zachary says; Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye.

There is none would endure one to stir or row a thorn, or any such like
thing, in ones eye but one should feel it; for there is no place so tender
about one as the apple of the eye; how much more sensible is God of the
injuries, and wrongs offered unto his children, and cannot endure them, that
thus touch him, in so tender a place, as to wrong his beloved ones, such shall
be sure to smart for it. And if the Lord would not have Balaam to wrong his
Ass, much less will he suffer wicked men to wrong his children: but many
care not what injury they do to others, so they can act it cunningly, and
work it subtilely, that they may not be seen, or so that the laws of the
Realm will not take hold of them. As the wife many times, toward the husband,
she cares not what hard speeches she gives him, because there is no humane
laws against her for it: but such wives must know, that seeing God is offended
when their husbands are thus wronged by them, they shall not go unpunished,
unless they repent; for Gods law and precept is violated, that commands wines
to be obedient to their husbands in the Lord. So many times the husband, he
wrongs his wife in word, countenance, and sometime in their disordered passions
in blows, when in truth there is no cause offered him; but this argues there
is but a little fear of God in him, that thus will wrong his own flesh: such
men little consider when they revile their wives, they revile God himself, and
when they thus wrong them they sin against him, for they break his
commandment, that charge every husband to love their wives, as Christ loved
his church, and to to dwell with them as men of knowledge, etc. But unless such
husbands come to true repentance for the injury thus offered to their wives,
God will surely plague and punish them, as a sin done against his majesty.

So many masters which deal cruelly toward their servants, because they be
poor and mean, both in parentage and outward friends, they care not what
wrong they do unto them, and how bad they use them; but such masters must know
that in wronging their poor servants, they sin against God, and howsoever
their servants be base in their eyes, yet they may be members of Christ, and
heirs of heaven, or at least, he that made you in the womb, made him in the
womb also, and in wronging them, you wrong the image of God in them; but if
they be Gods servants, as well as thine, and if they be the children of the
Almighty, then they touch the Apple of his eye: and better it were a millstone
were hanged about your neck, and that you were cast into the depth of the Sea,
then that you should offend one of these little ones. And if Christ will
pronounce sentence of condemnation against such (at his second coming) which
omit works of mercy to his members, how much sorer punishment shall such
have, which wrong and hurt the members of Christ.

Secondly, since God is offended, when David did, when he had committed
adultery with Bathsheba, and killed Vriah, against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and this David would have done, put case that Vriah should have lived,
he would have first gone to God, and have confessed his fault, before he
would have gone to Vriah, (though both are required.) Herein many are very
faulty, for they think, if they have fallen out with their neighbors, and be
made friends again, they have done enough, and they suppose then they may
lawfully come to the Sacrament, because they be at peace with men, and have
gotten reconciliation with those which they have offended: it is true, if you
had only offended man, then it were sufficient if you had done no more, but
since there is two persons offended, the person of God, and the person of man;
therefore there must be reconciliation got of both, and the fault must be
acknowledged to God, as well as to man, before we can come preparedly to the
Sacrament. At for example, If a man rob another by the way side, and from him
take his purse, and by this fact, he breaks not only the laws of the King,
but also the laws of God; it were not sufficient for the offender to
acknowledge the fault to the party robbed, and pray him forgive him, but he
must also get his pardon from the King, whose law he has broken, or else it
may be he may die for his trespass, notwithstanding the party robbed has
forgiven him.

In like manner, when we have wronged man, we must not only seek to him for
to have the wrong remitted, but also to God, whose law we have broken, that
he would forgive it, and so we must seek for a pardon from God, as well as
from men, or else we are liable to have his judgments executed upon us.

The want of this duty, is the cause why those agreements that are so made up,
betwixt man and man, are so soon broken, that within two or three days (if
occasion be offered) their hatred is as great again as ever it was, and that
is because they be at so little pains, and so small charges, to sue out these
pardons, whereas if they bought them at a higher rate, and went to Heaven for
them, by sound repentance, confession, and godly sorrow, they would not be so
hasty to fall out with their neighbors again.

And the neglect of this duty is the cause, that many times we have such
checkes, and galls in our consciences, because we make up these wrongs
offered, so slightly, we go to men whom we have wronged, but never to God,
whom we have offended. Wherefore to avoid all inconveniences, which may
follow upon this wrong doing, let us be exhorted for the time to come, not
only to go to men, but a so to seek to God, for an acquittance: for having a
pardon from the King, we need not fear the arrest of a petty constable, or
any inferior officer belonging to him. And so much for the handling of this
point.

And against thee:] that is, against thee my natural parent, I confess I have
sinned. From hence we learn.

them. That known wrongs done against men, must be acknowledged and confessed
to men.

This duty Christ does exhort unto, Math. 5.23 24.
If thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, leave there thy offering, before the Altar,
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer
thy gift.

Thus we see, if any has ought against us, that we have done them any manner
of wrong we must first, and principally, go and seek reconciliation, for it
is fit, if we have set a house on fire, we should seek to quench it, and put
case we have neglected it until we come to the Sacrament, yet we should
then leave our offering, and defer it, and return to the party offended, and
acknowledge the wrong, craving pardon for it, for God is willing, and content
that his own service should wait and stay, till that duty be performed, and
then come, and offer thy gift.

Also in an other place, Luk 17.3.4
our savior exhorts them to this duty, saying; If thy brother trespass against
thee, rebuke him and if he repent, forgive him, and though he sin seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day return again unto thee, saying, it
repents me; thou shall forgive him.

There Christ would have us to be content to forgive wrongs, if the parties
offending will return, and confess their faults, for if they perform their
duty, to seek reconciliation, we must not fail of our mercy to give them
remission so far as lies in our power.

Reasons to prove this doctrine to be true, are these. First, it is drawn
from equity, froward speeches, and unjust actions, against one another.

Secondly, if when we have wronged

Thirdly, if we did use to confess the not only confess the injury to God,
but also to my husband. This would make the wife ashamed, and so by that means
break the neck of sin, and it work humility in ones soul, so that one
should have little lust to fall out, and to wrong one again.

Now fith it is not enough to confess and acknowledge the wrongs done to men,
unto God, but we must confess it to the parties offended.

It serves first for reproof of such persons, that come to this point, that if
they have wronged any one, they will confess it to God, and so think they
have done enough, but they must as well perform it to man, as well as to God;
for the plaster ought to go as far as the sore. Oh but what need there be
any confession to men, when we have confessed it to God, for none can forgive
sins but God, but you must not only repent to God in Heaven, but also ask
forgiveness of men on earth, or else the Lord will not forgive it: for
hipocrites may do the one, as Judas, Saul, etc. But those which are truly
upright, will perform them both; but such as neglect this duty to man, as well
as perform it to God, argues they are in love with their sin, and loath to
have their nature healed, and their sins pardoned.

Secondly, it serves for instruction, that therefore we should take heed,
that we do not wrong any one, for this will follow confession and
acknowledgment of the fault, not only to God, but the party offended, for
until we confess the wrong to the party, and get reconciliation with him,
we must not look God in the face, nor cannot have entertainment to any of
Gods ordinances, as the word, Sacrament, prayer; for the Sacrament is a love
feast for the sheep of Christ, and not for wrauling dogs.

Now if the husband have given any angry and churlish speeches to his wife,
whereby she has taken them to heart, and troubled her mind, let him confess
the fault to her before he approach nere unto God in any of his services.

So if the wife have wronged the husband, the child the parent, the servant
the master, or any one, one another, let them humble themselves who soever is
guilty, and acknowledge the fault to the party offended, and so get
reconciliation, or else we cannot lift up pure hands, without wrath, as the
Apostle speaks.

Ob.
Oh but, he whom I have wronged is not in the country, how should I get
reconciliation with him? shall I not come to the Sacrament, and other services,
till I have confessed my fault to him, that I know not where he is?

Sol.
Yes thou may come to the word, Sacrament, prayer, and the rest, if thou can
find in thy self a willing heart to ask forgiveness, if he were in the
Country, as also if thou do resolve within thine own soul, that if ever
the party offended returns again into the Country, thou will perform this
duty. If this be in thee, thou may frequent Gods ordinances.

Ob.
But what if the party offended will be so stubborn, that he refuse to be
reconciled, and will not pardon me, though I acknowledge the fault, and offer
satisfaction for the hurt and wrong committed?

But do thou the work of the Lord, Sol.
and let it not be thy default, and then thou shall find mercy of God, for
he will not deal with us according to the success with the party, but
according to the vprightnes of our heart, and in performing our duties, let us
do the work, and then the Lord will reward us. And so much for this point.

I am not worthy to be called thy son, etc. Here is the last duty of this
repentant sinner: his humility, he is well persuaded of his father, but ill
persuaded of himself. This doctrine we learn from hence.

That true repentance makes one see his own unworthiness: the better repentance,
all holy men, when they came to repentance, as Jacob; I am less then the lest
of thy mercies.

Nehemiah, Ezra, Daniel, they were ashamed, and confounded in their faces, and
that shame and confusion of face belongs to them.

Job 39.37.
And this we may see in holy Job, when the Lord had showed him his power and
wisdom, he answers the Lord, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee, I
will lay my hand upon my mouth, etc.

And in an other place, Job speaks when he came to repentance for all his
passionate and distempered words in his afflictions; Job 42.6.
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. And beholding Gods purity, he
saw more evidently his own impurity, and cause enough to humble and abhor
himself for his filthiness, and no longer to stand out with God in his own
innocence.

And Paul that worthy Apostle, and servant of God, when he came to repentance,
he confessed, that he was not worthy to be called an Apostle, because he
persecuted the Church of God.

In all which examples, we see these holy men when they came to repentance,
they were base and vile in their own eyes, and saw their own unworthiness.

The reason to prove this doctrine is.

Because repentance opens our eyes to see more perfectly Gods glorious purity,
Isai 6.5.
when he cried out, Woe is me I am undone because I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell in the midst of people of polluted lips. Where God
appears unto the Prophet, and his majesty being so perfect, that it reflects
upon him, whereby he perceiues the more his own vileness and pollution, yea
even in his best part, as his lips, which had delivered the message of God
very faithfully. So in truth when we come to see the multitude of our sins,
and the hainousenes thereof, we shall be made quickly low enough, and be
forced to cry out with the prodigal child, I am not worthy to be called thy
son.

Since it is so, that true repentance makes us see our own unworthiness;

Heaven, but smote his breast, saying; O Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
I tell you this man departed to his house justified rather then the other. Thus
we see the estate of these boasters that stand upon their own goodness and
worthiness, whereas a poor sinner that feels his sin, does wonder at the
goodness of God, that should save such a vile wretch as himself, so far is
he from boasting in himself, that he glories in God alone.

Secondly, it serves for consolation it is a good argument that they have
repented, and that they have put on a great part of their wedding garment: for
this is a great part of a christians worthiness, to see his own unworthiness,
and it is certain, if we can be base in our own eyes, we shall be
precious in Gods eyes, and those which see how vile sin has made them, shall
be made excellent in the righteousness of Christ. These guests are the welcome
guests unto the Sacrament of the Lords supper, for these are invited; Come unto
me, all that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. And so much in breife for
the handling of this doctrine.

Then the father said unto his servants, bring forth the best etc. Now the
father is so glad of the return of his wandering child, that he presently
receives him to favor, and having his favors, he has all his wants
supplied. From hence we learn this doctrine.

when we have Gods favor.

Love is bountiful, and liberal, chiefly in God. This David knew to be the
fountain of all good, when he heard them cry out, Who will show us any good?
but he cries, Psalm. 4, 6.7.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy
of heart, then they have had, when their wheat and wine did abound. He had
more good by Gods favor and countenance, then the worldlings could have in
their greatest plenty of outward things.

This made the Church in captivity be so earnest in this petition, that she
repeats it thrice, noting thereby the excellency of it; Restore us again O God
of hoasts, Psalm. 80
and cause thy face to shine upon us and we shall be saved. So that if God
would look upon them with a gracious countenance, they should quickly have a
riddance of their miseries.

And this the Lord himself prescribes as a notable means to bring prosperity
to soul, body, state, etc. 2. Chron 7.14.
If my people upon whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves, pray,
and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear in
Heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and will heal their land. When they
perform these duties, (as among the rest) to get and obtain my favor, then
will I show these mercies, I will hear as a merciful and heavenly Father to
deliver them from their troubles, and bring them such comforts as they stand in
need of.

King of Kings? In his favor there must needs be life, and prosperity. If the
favor but of an heathenish King could promote Mordecai to such an outward
honor and dignity, from so base and dejected estate, that he must have a
royal robe and apparel to be clothed withal, a gallant steed and horse
to be mounted upon, and a crown of gold upon his head, and no base personage
to bring all these presents to Mordecai, but by the hand of one of the Kings
most noble Princes; what shall we have, we may conclude, that God does
favor, when Mordecai shall have so much, when an earthly King does mean to
honor. It is certain the King of Heaven will be far more liberal and
bountiful to his favorites, then an earthly Prince can possible be, for he
will put upon them the royal robe of Christ's righteousness, which is the best
roabe, and they shall all be Conquerours over all their spiritual enemies, and
be made Kings and priests.

And they shall have all these spiritual graces and gifts, delivered to them
by the King of Heavens Ambassadors, the faithful ministers of Christ, by the
word, and Sacraments. And this shall he have, whom the King of Heaven will
favor indeed. And so much for this doctrine.

Then the father said unto his servants. In that the father when he would give
any gift to his son, does it by the hand of his servants, we learn this
doctrine.



I cannot have time to prosecute this point, because the time is past already,
and therefore I will leave it, and only touch a little of an other doctrine,
and so we will make an end for this time.

And the father said, bring forth the best robe, and put it upon him, and put a
ring on his finger, and shoes etc. In that, coming to his father, with
repentance and humility, the father gives him all things he stood in need of,
coming ragged, he has the best robe put upon him, and a ring upon his hand
for ornament, and shoes etc. From hence we learn this doctrine.

That whosoever comes to God with an humble heart, and true repentance,

This may be proved by the words which Christ speaks to the Church of
Laodicea, she boasted of her plenty, when as she was full of penury: sheee
thought she had all things: when she wanted all good things, yet Christ
promises her if she would come to him, he would furnish her with all good
things, and if she would receive his council, he would deck her with the
richest jewels, and therefore he says, Reu. 3.17.18.
I council thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou may be made
rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy
nakedness may not apeare, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may
see, etc.

Now in buying and selling, there must be somewhat given and received. Now
therefore she must sell her sins, by repentance, and godly sorrow, and she
must esteem of the favor of God, and graces of Christ in lieu thereof: and
this being done she shall receive in steed of her poverty, the riches, and
graces of Christ, and his spirit; and in stead of her filthiness, she shall
have the white raiment, and righteousness of Christ, to cover her, and all her
wickedness, and infirmities shall be taken from her: and whereas she was
blind, that shall be removed, and her eyes shall be opened, and her
understanding enlightened, by the spirit of wisdom and knowledge.

But what need I go from my text to prove this, that when we come to true
repentance, we shall have all good things bestowed upon us? For here the
father commands the servants to fetch out the best robe: now all the robes
that are in Gods wardrobe, are all best robes. For the thief upon the cross
that died with Christ, and repented and believed in him, had one of the best
robes, as well as Abraham, Jacob, or any of the Patriarchs; and they are all
long robes, not scanting, but covering and hiding all our filthiness with the
Kingly robes, and shining garment of Christ. And he will not content himself
to give him a robe, but he will also put a ring upon his hand, for ornament;
so the Lord will deck and adorn every true repentant sinner, with the comely
graces and virtues of his spirit.

And whereas he comes barefooted, and surbated with travel, he puts shoes
upon his feet. So the Lord, when one comes to him by true repentance, he will
bestow upon him the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that he
may be able to walk through all rough and hard ways, yea the shadow of
death, and shall not be hurt.

And whereas he came home with a languishing soul, for want of food, the
father calls for the fat calfe, and the best cheer he had, he bestows upon
him.

So the Lord bestows upon the penitent sinner, the best diet, and banquet.
Many times, earthly fathers have it not ready, wherewith they may entertain
their children, but God has it always in a readiness, a feast of fat things,
even a feast of fined wines, and fat things full of marrow, of wines fined, and
purified, even the body and blood of Christ, for God the Father makes the
feast, Jesus Christ is the matter of the feast, and the Holy ghost the applier
of it. Now in the Sacrament the worthy receivers, receive all these things, and
all needful things shall be supplied unto them thereby: for if the eating of
one fruit which was forbidden us, brought such an universal misery upon all
the posterity of Adam, how much more may we be persuaded that the eating of
the bread, and the drinking of the wine in the Sacrament, which is commanded,
will bring a more happy estate to the worthy receivers, the^ the other lost,
for this meat will not only nourish us, but cure us also. The elder brother
(which is to be understood of the Jews) he was angry, and repined at the kind
dealing of his father toward his younger brother: but now our elder brother
Christ Jesus, is well pleased with every penitent sinner, which comes to his
Father, and makes intercession for them. And if an earthly parent will thus
love a younger son, which has bin a lewd and riotous companion; how much more
will our heavenly Father entertain every penitent person, that comes to the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, with resolution to cleave unto God,
they shall be sure to have supply of whatsoever grace they stand in need of.

So also the father rejoices, and they are merry that his wandering son is
returned home again; and therefore the father makes a feast.

First God the Father makes a feast for every penitent sinner, and he
rejoices to see a sinner to return to him, Ier. 32 41.
for he delights to do such good.

Also Christ himself rejoices to see such as convert unto him, for it is
meat and drink for him to do his Fathers will.

And the Angels in Heaven do both desire and rejoice at the conversion of a
sinner, Luke 15.7.

And not only so, but all the Saints and Church of God, that hear of the
conversion of a sinner, and addition to the Church, will magnify God, and
rejoice upon it.

Secondly, there will be a feast of joy to the party converted, when he sees
a wretched creature to come to the feast of God, that before was eating with
swine, he now comes to feast with God, the whole Trinity: before to feed upon
swinish meat, and now to eat no worse then the body and blood of Christ, by
faith in the Sacrament, and to afford us these benefits. First thereby to be
purged from our sins, through the blood of Jesus Christ. And secondly, to
receive strength and increase of graces, as faith, repentance, love, and other
saving graces more. And not only spiritual gifts, but also temporal for body,
state, name, and every thing that is needful for us, in every point according
to the covenant which the Lord has made in Ezechiel 36.25. etc. And if we can
come to the Sacrament with true feeling and seeing the want of grace, and also
being pained with carrying such a load of sin, we may be assured to be
disburdened of the one, and our want supplied in the other, and so we shall
be made fit guests for the Lords supper.

Since it is so, that whosoever ever does come to God with true repentance, and
resolution to cleave fast unto him, shall have as much as he stands in need
of, it serves for encouragement to poor penitent sinners, that have committed
many and great sins, that they should come to God, and make their moan unto
him, that he would vouchsafe to pardone all their sins, and give them such
graces, whereby they may be assured of his favor; for certainly if we come
with repentance, and resolve to become new men, and to stick close unto him,
we may expect to receive at his hands every thing which we stand in need of.

Others must be entreated before they will do any thing, but God will give
before we ask, yea he will meet a penitent sinner half way, if they will
but look toward him, he will run toward them with mercy. Oh but I never
look to live in credit again, and to have a merry day, my miseries are so
many? indeed if you purpose to keep your sins, you must be sure to keep
your sorrows; but if you will come to true repentance, and seek unto God, he
can and will supply all your wants, and whatsoever crosses and losses you have
sustained, he is able to make up your broken estate, heal your name, and set
you in as great prosperity again as ever you inioied; for he makes poor, and
makes rich, and prosperity comes from him, and he gives to all, and hits none
in the teeth. God has in his wardrobe all kinds of apparel ready made, if
we seek unto him.

And there is no soul so thirsty after the graces of God, but if we come in
humility to him, he will give the^ the sweet graces of his spirit to quench
them: wherefore let us put out all carnal doubts, and worldly cares, and set
our selves to perform our duties, and we undoubtedly be persuaded to find
his mercies. For he that bids us forgive our brethren seauenty times seven
times if they seek unto us; much more will God forgive us all our sins
whatsoever, be they never so many, nor never so great, if we seek unto him,
by true repentance, and acknowledgment of them with grief and sorrow.

If he would seek Paul when he was going to Damascus, to persecute the
members of Christ, and show him mercy; how much more will he show compassion
to such, which now have desisted from persecuting of the Sains, and committing
of other sins, and labor to seek God by true repentance, and a full
resolution to serve him in truth.

And to conclude, if God would call for Adam, when he ran from from him to
hide himself, and all to give him the pardon of his sin which he unhappily
had committed; how much more will he give all things unto them both temporal,
and spiritual, which with an honest heart seek unto him, by true repentance,
and godly sorrow for their sins, for if he be so ready to show mercy to
such which never seeeke for it, he will be more ready to give mercy to such,
as in truth perform this doctrine. The time being past, let us here make an
end for this time.

FINIS.

