A PLEASANT History: Declaring the whole Art of Phisiognomy, Orderly uttering
all the special parts of Man, from the Head to the Foot.

Written by Thomas Hill.



Printed by W. Iaggard. 1613.

An Admonition unto the Gentle Reader.
THE same consider and note for a general Rule, that the Significations and
Judgments after uttered, in many places of this Book, do chiefly extend,
and are meant rather to happen and come to pass on the brutish sort: which for
the lack of grace, and being not regenerated by Gods holy Spirit, these in
such manner, are moved to follow their sensual will and appetites. For by a
natural frailty, proceeded from our fore-Father Adam, every Creature (after
Nature) is drawn and allured unto the like dispositions and passions of the
mind. But to be brief, the Creatures which are regenerated through the holy
Ghost, do not only endeavor to mortify their fleshly appetites, but seek to
put away and correct, all other inormities and vices resting in them: although
there still continues a frailty to sin, and offenses daily committed, even
of the wise: which for that we be so intised of the flesh, no marvel is it
(says the Phisiognomer) that so many ensue, and follow the like steps of
sundry sentences pronounced in this Art, the more is to be lamented: that these
so bestiall, should be thus common amongst us, as we daily see and know.

Thomas Hill,

A large and pleasant discourse of the whole Art of Phisiognomy, orderly
uttering all the special parts of man, from the head to the foot.
Of Phisiognomie in general. CAP. 1.
THE PHILOSOpher Aristotle and Concylatour, agree, that to all living
creatures, it is a matter common, as to suffer and do of a natural inclination:
which as the same in beasts is named a violence, even so in men this is, by a
contrary manner, named an inclination. For as much (as by way of example) in
the Chollericke, is known an inclination to ire: in the Melancholicke, to
ware: in the Sanguine, to mirth: and in the Flegmaticke, to sluggishnesse. All
which inclinations, are reported to be the vtterers has of the natural
Motions and conditions in men, which by reason and wisdom be well governed.
Which well appeared by Hypochrates, who by his face was judged wicked; yet
through Philosophy known to be well conditioned. But in beasts for the lack
of reason, are these affections and conditions, as Aristotle utters in his
book de secretis se^retorum, may not be governed: in that they live and
persevere after their sense and appetite. By which evidently appears, that
Phisiognomie to be a necessary and lawdable Science, seeing by the same a man
may so readily pronounce and foretell the natural aptness unto the
affections, and conditions in Men, by the outward notes of the body: which
although a man may thus foretell the natural motions, and actual conditions:
yet of this, it is not accounted so perfect and ^^me a Science: seeing by the
same a man may err, in sundry subjects having Grace and wisdom.

But in that men (for the more part) do live after a sensual will in
themselves, and that none but the wise and godly (which is by an inward working
of the spirit) do live after reason: for that cause is this Phisiognomy
accounted and named a Science: which instructs a man by the outward notes to
foretell the natural motions, and actual conditions, that consist and dwell in
many persons especially in those, which live after their affection and
appetites, rather then governing themselves by reason. And of this did the
learned ( Bias Priaenias) report, that there lived and were more of the wicked,
than of good persons: in that so many are led and moved after a sensual
will, than procured by reason: which causes that man (as Aristotle affirms)
to swerve and fall from a mean in many manners: but the same is approached
unto and purchased, by one manner of way. And two kinds there are of these
Notes: as certain, which of the Elementary quality conceived, that utter and
signify the affections of the mind: as does the hayrinesse of the Breast,
which is a note of ire, thorough the hot heart. And certain are of property,
as the declining of the head to the right side in the Walking, which is the
note of a Cynede as Aristotle reports: and this like is neither gathered of a
hot, nor cold cause, but of the property.

Yet do the Perypateticks (as writes Aristotle secundo priorum) utter, that
not any one affection to consist and be in man, or any condition of nature, but
that a like note is outwardly to be seen on the body: by which not only that
passion or condition may be vttred, but the fortune unto good or evil by the
accidental notes may be judged: And although the spirit (as unto understanding)
is from the body elevated, yet (as unto the other parts and powers) is the
spirit comprehended of the body. Although the inner affectes of the spirit
cannot be judged by the outward notes of the body: yet may the accidents of
the spirit and mind, according to those which together alter both Spirit and
body be judged, as Aristotle reports in secundo priorum. Auerrois utters,
that the accidents not natural, cause no note but in the Spirit: as if any
knows the Art of Music: he has the note in the spirit, and not in body
formed of the same.

The looks also of men, although they do not differ in the essential kind:
yet do these differ in the kind accidental. So that the accidental
difference of looks in man, does only suffice, for the difference of
conditions. But if any shall here object that sentence written in the seventh
chapter of Saint John's Gospel: where our Savior wills none to judge rashly,
after the utter appearance of the face or look, but to pronounce and judge
arighteous judgment. To this may thus be answered, that the same saying of the
Lord was spoken unto them, which in very deed were wicked persons, of malicious
conditions: yet not of the matter and cause do they procure a judgment, but
thorough the accepting of persons, and in the hate or contempt of men, are
they so alienated from the truth of the matter in judging, which otherwise must
be eschewed, and that especially where the person is occupied in the celestial
Doctrine. This is also to be learned and noted, that any person (as before
uttered) to judge alone by the face, mightily to err and be deceived, so
that necessary it is, to gather and mark sundry other Notes of the body,
and after to pronounce Judgment, and the same not firmly, but coniecturally:
As by this example may well appear, that if the Phisiognomer earnestly
beholding and viewing any merry person by nature, does see him at that instant
time (through some hap) very sad of countinance, and does of the same judge
him to be sad by Nature, where he contrariwise is of Nature merry: or
otherwise appearing then merry, shall judge him of the same to be of Nature
merry, where perhaps, by Nature he is given to be sad: must needs (through
these like) greatly err, and be deceived in judgment. Here also note, that
there are two manner of passions, as the one natural, and the other
accidental.

The accidental are those, which consist of the spirit, and for the same, that
they consist of the spirit, no alteration in body is caused: as of the Art and
Science: and these by notes in the body are not indicated. But the natural,
which for that they consist in us, as before taught: for that cause does some
^^l^^^acion appear in the body: as ire, fear, and such like, of which
hereafter (in this work) shall be entreated. To be brief, this Phisiognomy
is a knowledge which leads a man to the understanding and knowing both of the
natural motions, and conditions of the spirit: and the good or evil fortune,
by the outward notes and lines of the face and body. Yea, by the pases many
times is the heart bewrayed, and the voice, as Aristotle reports, are notes
and vtterers of the inner thoughts: all which, under the Phisiognomicall
Science are contained. Lucius Scylla, and Cesare Dictatoure by the help of
this Science found out and judged the wilye crafts and deceites of their
adversaries many times, that secretly couerd their malicious minds, by their
fair shows. The most singular and prudent Plato, in his Phisiognomie,
utters these words: That the man which has members like to any beast insueth
his nature: as he which has an Aquiline or hauked nose, uses and exercises
Aquiline conditions, as magnanimity, cruelnesse and greedy catching. The common
sort of this day, without any reason and learning, do pronounce and judge
certain matters very strange of men: as when he says of any fowl look, this
person pleases me nothing. They also say, God defend and keep me from the
fellowship of that person marked; as are the bunch backed, and goggle eyed
persons. By which evidently appears, that the bodily notes of Phisiognomating
by the natural conditions of men, do procure and cause a great probablenesse,
although no necessity. To conclude, all the workings and passions of the
spirit, appear to be matched and joined with the body, which especially
appears in the passions of the concupiscible or desirefull spirit: as are
ire, meekness, fear, pittifulnesse, mercy, and such like: which are not
caused, without the local motion of the heart dilating, and drawing together.
Of this the bodies of diverse men, are diversely disposed, according to the
diverse dispositions of spirits, in that men's spirits through diverse members, are
diversely disposed in their passions. To end, the conditions and natural
affections, that consist in the sensitive part: is reported of the Philosopher
Aristotle, to be the sense giver, being common both to men and beasts.

The known signs and notes, both of the healthful and sick bodies, after
the condition of the four qualities.

First the signs and notes of a hot quality. The ii. Chapter.


THose bodies naturally hot, do most speedily increase and wax ^at: as the
like in young children, does well appear. But after years, such wax dry, their
veins apparent in the places, and beating fast. Also their breath strong,
their voice loud, mighty and great of strength, lusty and strong to coeate, and
much or very often desiring thereto. Such also do feed well, brook and digest
their meats. Further, they have much hair on their head, and in other places
the like, where as naturally the same should grow: and that thick bristled,
specially on the breast. The cause of which proceeds thorough the much heat
of the heart: as the like may appear (after the mind of ancient men) both in
the Lion and Cock.

The signs of those bodies of a cold complexion or quality. The iii. Chapter.


THose bodies naturally cold, do increase slow and come to a fatness, their
Ueynes appear big and apparent, but their Pulses beat slow. Also their
Beeath low in the hearing, having a small voice, and weak to co^eate: so that
seldom desiring thereto, of the which such beget few children. They also be
great sleepers, and sleeping often: yet eating very little, weakly digesting
and bearing their meat evil. Further, such be white of skin, with some
redness mixed: and in the feeling appear cold, with the hairs thin, and slow
in the growing, whether the same be black or white. Also dull of wit, fearing
or trembling of a light cause, and weak to labor.

The signs of those bodies of a moist quality. The iiii. Chapter.


THose bodies naturally moist, be tender and soft of Flesh, Corpulent, with
their Joyntes and bones hid, and weak of strength, that they cannot long, or
but a while endure to labor, so that the weariness of labor is soon espied
and seen in them. Also, such fear and tremble in a manner for every cause,
coveting to sleep much, and delighting to coeate often: having besides thin
hairs on the head, and but a little quantity. The eyes often watery and
running, yet in wit forward and apt to learn.

The signs of those bodies of a dry quality. The v. Chapter.
THose bodies Naturally dry, be well discerned, rough in the feeling, and
lean in flesh, yet strong and may well endure to labor, feeding well, and
their joints also in the places very apparent. Besides, such have much hair on
the head, and in the other places: and that rough and curled.

The signs of temperate and healthful bodies. The vi. Chapter.


THose bodies temperate and healthful, do feed^ and drink sufficiently,
according to the congruency of nature, and digest the like, To ye things
needful be sauoury to them, and do hunger also in due hours, ioying besides
with such as be merry, and sleeping their full sleeps. Further, thinking
themselves both light of body, to go light on the ground, and sweating
lightly: yet seldom sneezing, and wax meanly Fat, but colored and read
in the face, and in the feeling hot. Besides, in them the five senses have
congruent force, according to the agreement of the Age, Body, and Hour.

The signs of distemperate and vnhealthful bodies. The vii. Chapter.


THose bodies distemperate and unhealthful, be in all points unlike to the
bodies temperat and healthful: so that such do euilly eat, and that very
little, and force not to drink. Also they do euilly digest and brook their
meat, and to them things be unsavory, whereof they hunger (...) in due
hours, and give not themselves to be thoroughly cheerful and merry, neither
rejoicing in them which laugh and be merry, but rather always sad, and the
like continuing. Further, such make their sleeps unquietly, and suppose
themselves heavy, and to go heavily on the ground, and seldom (or in a
manner) sweat any thing at al: also gape, or sneese often, and stretch their
arms out and abroad. So that such be either pale, or over high colored in the
face, and in them also are the five senses weak, and such as cannot long
endure to labor: yea, they soon forget matters, spitting much and often, and
much filth seen commonly in their noses. Also they be (in a manner) throughout
fa^* and their flesh blown or puffed up like the Nos^, and their hands and
feet do sometimes sweat, and their eyes do often run.

The signs of a good nature and memory. The viii. Chapter.


THat person is of a singular memory and understanding, and well fashioned in
nature, which has moist and soft flesh, being a mean between roughness and
lenity, and mean of stature, and has a ruddie continuance suffused with
Whiteness, and a gentle or friendly look: whose hair on the head is plain
lying, and has the eyes meanly big, which decline to a roundnesse, and the
head meanly big with an equality: the neck well proportioned, and the
shoulders declining downwards, or the like rather ready to fall. Being not
fleshy about the shankes and knees, and has a clear and mean voice, between
small and great, of a mean laughter, and not in deriding: and has also the
palms of the hands long, with long fingers, and his countenance framed after a
cheerful and merry sort.

The signs of a good understanding and nature, after Conciliat^ur. The ix.
Chapter.


THat man is of a singular Nature and understanding, whose Flesh is tender and
soft, with a meannesse between grosenesse and leanenesse, tending. And that
the Face be not much fleshy, the Shoulder-pointes somewhat bearing up: the
Belly and back not fleshie, the sides decently extensed: mean of stature, and
gentle of countenance. That his color also be a mean between white and red:
being somewhat bright and clear, and the Skin, thin. Further, that the
hair of the head, be of a mean thickenesse, abourne in color, and between
plain and curled, the eyes between variable and black, and the beard in a
mean manner, sufficiently thin and fair.

The signs of hot and dry bodies. The x. Chapter.


THose bodies after full growth be thick, bushy of hair, and the hair on the
head, thick and black. Also their bodies in the end be found lean, and in
feeling appear hot: having besides a thickness of skin, and rough, and
strong sinnewes: and have also both the veins, bones, and joints, much
apparent: a low voice, their pulses beating very fast, and their moving the
like: yea, they be hold, shout, and obstinate withal. These hitherto Rasis.

The men of a temperate nature, and this borrowed out of Conciliatour.


THe stature of such persons, obtain an equality between the three
Diamiters: And between a fatness and leanness, possess the like a mean
habit: the color of these is White mixed with red, their skin appears
thin and clear, their hands and feet in all dispositions, possess a mean,
their heads are proportionably formed to the body, yet great unto the respect
of the whole body; and flatted like to a ball of war, lightly compressed with
both the hands on each side.

Their Nosthrils figured erect, lineally and very fair, the eyes in color
like to the Lions, or between the black and variable a mean. In which, (after
the mind of the Author) a clear moisture consists. The hayres on the head
in the form appearing a mean: for that in every body there consists a
mean: the like in these which are by the part of the spirit, as in the
conditions and others a temperate condition is found. And to this disposition,
the contrary show forth, and utter their unlike.

Of the equality of the same Nature, and this Written of Aristotle, unto king
Alexander.


THe Philosopher Aristotle, learnedly utters, that the equaller and more
temperate creature to which a meannesse of Stature agrees, has the eyes
black, and the hairs of the head of like color, with a roundnesse of the
countenance: but the whiteness of skin in that creature, commixed with a
redness: and a swartish color temperat consisting in that subject, with an
integrity of the Body, having also an uprightness of Stature: yea, a
meannesse of the head, formed in the smallness and bigness, a person also
using the rarity of Words, but when need shall require: and a meannesse
discerned in the sounding of the voice. When that Nature declineth to a
blackness and yellowness, then is the best temperancy consisting in the same
Creature: for this Creation and Habit (Oh Alexander) shall well please and like
thee: and such a person retain continually about thee. Here (Mighty
Alexander) do I enterpret, by manner of the condition of form: but thou shall
try and prove the same, in the certainty and uprightness of understanding.

The Phisiognomie of the notes of a sapient Philosopher, and this borrowed of
the Learned Conciliatour.
THis singular man, affirms his stature to be upright, with an equality of
the Flesh, the color of the skin white pertaking, with a mean redness: the
form of his Head compounded sufficient big and large: the Eyes conditioned
between a black and variable color, whose look is discerned like to one
merry: the hands formed plain with a seemly division of the Fingers, and
modest articulation: the hayres on the head seen between many and few, and a
mean condition consisting between the plain and crisped, blackish and
yellowe in color, having a mean beard and fair, and sufficiently thin:
these hitherto Conciliatour.

The signification and judgment of the abouesaide, uttered by the ancient
Rasis.
This worthy Physician, opens the Notes of the abouesaide person: that he
ought to be of an upright Stature, having the flesh of the Body throughout
equal: the skin white, mixed with a small redness. The hairs on the head
discerned a mean, between the plenty and few, and between the plain and
crisped, and abourn in color. The hands formed seemly and plain, and the
fingers comely distant asunder. The forehead (in respect of the head) formed
big, the eyes comely conditioned, and a mean between black and variable:
the flesh soft in the feeling, gentle of countenance, and the look discerned as
one smiling. These hitherto Rasis.

The signs of cold and moist bodies, after Rasis. The xi. Chapter.


THose bodies be judged soft in the feeling, and naked of hair, which have
gentle and soft hayres on the head, the veins appearing narrow, and the joints
hid, having besides corpulent bodies, and very fat: and that make their sleeps
weakly and unquietly, and slow of moving, but slower in their pase going.
Further, such bodies be either cold and dry, or hot and moist, and have mixed
dispositions, according to the disposition of the simples, of which they be
compouned: and as the like to any of them they do approach, or that there be
between them a mean. These hitherto Rasis.

The dividing of mankind into two forms or Natures: and a perfect description
or distinction of the man from the woman, after Physiognomy, uttered by the
singular Conciliatour. The xii. Chapter.


THe wise and skillful Physiognomers, in their examinations, do divide Mankind
into two forms, as into the Masculinity and Feminity, according to the
property of the spirit: for man naturally, except his procreation be hindered,
is perfecter than the woman, both in condition and action. First, he is of a
lively mind and courage, and unto a brunt or attempt, very vehement: yet slowly
moved to ire, slowly pleased, advised in businesses, in due and fit times
studious, abroad liberal, stowt, just, trusty, unconstant or wandering from
place to place, and true of his word. Of which, Auicen (writing of the
conditions of persons) reports, that man is the subtiller, and that Weomen
are more pitiful and gentle than men, more conuertible, lighter, persuaded,
sooner seduced, enuiouser, fearefuller, vnshame^aster, more Foolish, Liars,
more fraudulent, more given to fraud, more esteeming tri^^es slower, tenderer,
weaker, and more pro^e or sooner drawn into familiarity, and into company
with another.

The like utters the Philosopher, in lib. 9. de hystoria Animalium, cap.
primo: that man in nature is perfectest, and for the same cause, the
proportions of all the members and parts are seeml^er and stronger compact,
insomuch that the woman is more pitiful and mercifuller, year adier to shed
tears and weep, than the man: yet enu^ous, full of compla^nts, euiller
speaking, backebyting and slaundering. Besides, more sorrowful, careful, and
dispayring, than the man: yea, more impudent. A greate^ liar, lighter deceived,
apter to call to memory: or remember matters unto these, watchfuller,
sluggisher, lesser sturring abroad, and lesser desiring meat. But the man, as
above uttered, liuelier, more stirring, and stronger. Auerro is primo phisico.
commen. 81. utters, that the woman is vnperfecter than the man: and the
femininitie happens to man by accident (another Text opens) of the
depriving. And the Learned Ioannitius in pisagogis reports, that the man
differs from the Woman, in the same, that he is hotter and drier than the
Woman, and she contrary wise colder and moyster than he. And the singular
Aristotle utters, in primo de Animali. that the Worthiest, Noblest, and with
us more common and known, yea and the more stable and sat creature, is man.
And in the xi. de animalib. Aristotle reports, that man among all other
Creatures, is accounted the worthier: and of the virill kind, the Males are
stronger and stowter than the females, except in the Bear and Libard, as 8. de
Animalibus.

In all the kinds of Beasts, the Females have a more dead mind, and are less
patient, and may sooner be converted, and are sooner angered and sooner
appeased, and are of a lesser heat: they are besides rash and hasty, and
inuericundious, and have a small head, the face and neck slender, the breast
and shoulder points narrower, the ribs lesser, but the haunches big, and
Buttockes the like: the legs also are slender, the hands and Feet slender
and thin. The Females in all the kinds of Beasts (as before reported) are
found far more fearfuller, and Peeuisher or frowarder conditioned than the
Males. These hitherto, Alman for secundus.

The Woman for the most part is light of belief, and ungracious or froward in
conditions. The light belief, signifies the malice or understanding: but the
temperate is more congruent, as reports Hypocrates, in lib. secretorum. But
if the man possesses the Woman's properties* whose note appears, that he is
unfaithful, an ill reporter, and a liar: and so much the rather, when he
draws near to the Woman, by the counterfayting, the often shifting, and
decking of parts. The like may be said of the Woman's qualities, when she often
exercises and follows near man, in the apparrelling and decking of her body
like to him: as did that manly woman Farcassa, of whom shall fully be uttered
in the proper place. The Philosopher Aristotle reports, that the person which
leans with the body to the right side in the going, to be effeminate, in that
he is of a moist quality, and soft of skin. The like of these Cocles noted,
to have a soft skin, a clear and fair throat, effeminate legs, and for
the most part were slender, but the haunches were big and soft, the face
white and pimpled, the voice small, low, and hoarse, like to the common Harlot,
haunting very often man's company: and these have many other notes, which for
that they are more at large uttered, in other places of his Book, he does
here wittingly omit them. There was in his time, a certain Noble person
imprisoned, being one of these. And another effeminate person, he saw in the
City of Luca, being of forty years, which hanged or leaned to the left side as
he went, and had a red color in the face, so fair a throat as the clear
Woman, the face pimpled, the hayres of the head trussed and finely trimmed, the
voice small and soft: to be brief, he was a very effeminat person, and Cyned.
The man (to come unto the matter) by the part of the composition of habitude,
ought to be as Conciliatour utters: that is, the perfect man (if the
lascinious nature disturbeth not the order) has a big head, the face in breadth
and length, equally stretched out, according to proportion: the neck big,
lively* and sinnewed, the Breast strong and large, the Shoulder points and Ribs
big to the back, and before strongly coupled and joined together: the back
throughout sinnewed, and strong ioynted, the belly but meanly fleshy, the Hips
and buttockes, lesser and smaller than the Woman's: to conclude, in all parts
much bigger and stronger than the Woman, unless any accident may contrary the
abouesaid, as is in the kind of Rapine o^ greedy catching Birds, a temperate
nature found. The Woman ought to have a contrary composition, as a small head,
a long face, a small neck, a large throat, and somewhat eminent, the breast
narrow, the shoulder points flat lying, the flanks and ribs slender, the back
like: but the Hippes and Buttockes bigger than the man's: the legs in a manner
of one bigness throughout, the feet small, the heels flat, short arms, the
hands and fingers small, the lips thin, and the chin round, with a certain
pit or denting in, whether the same be of length or breadth, the Flesh soft in
feeling, and long comely hairs on the head, yet little and small hairs on the
Breast, Belly, Hands, and Feet, through her cold complexion: and she also is
weaker of strength and courage, and less bold through her narrow Breast which
she has, yet coupled she is to man, to yield (by their consentes) a natural
tribute to the world. The gelded persons become not only weak of body, but in
mind and courage little differ from the Woman, as the Philosopher Aristotle
reports. This worthy lesson also the Philosopher utters, that he wishes to
fly and eschew that Woman's company when she is of composition manly: for
there is a sure token in her, both of Luxury and Wickedness: but contrary,
judge the courage of such men, which in composition be effeminate.

The judgment of the colors of the whole body. The xii. Chapter.


THe color is many ways changed, according to the commixion of the Humors:
and according to the Dominion of them Intensiuely, and remissiuely, by which
also a man must Physiognomate.

For the judging of colors, except the propper effect be adjoined to his
cause: error to the iudger, must in many happen. So that their Natures and
qualities cannot easily be judged, except a man diligently consider the proper
Country in which each be borne: for that we see in many places, and cheefely in
Italy, many Nations dwelling together, like as the Jew, Turk, Schauone,
Greek, and high Almayne, and many others. Whose mixte Natures must be
considered, if a man will rightly phisiognomate, and judge upon any of these
abouenamed, or of any other Nation besides. Seeing those people dwelling far
North, be strong of body, comely of color, soft of flesh, big bellied, yet
simple, yrefull, of small Learning, mean of counsel, unstable, liars,
deceivers, and boasters. And on such wise, temper your judgment, according to
the nature of the place and Country, where such are borne: which in another
Chapter happily I will further write of.

But to return unto the matter, understand, that the white, wanne, and
yellowish color, is a note of the deminished decoction: if this diminution
therefore happens, the goodness of nature shall like be diminished. For which
cause, fly and eschew the company of a wanne and yellow colored man, for that
he is given to vices, and luxury: but this Luxury does the Philosopher here
mean to be the immoderate appetite of the thankful matter, in causing evil
Works, unto others hurt and loss, and not of the co-eating alone, in that
coldness is a contrary unto the lust, seeing the lust is caused of hotnesse
and moistness. For, the wan and yellow color, does here rather argue
coldness. Further, the wan color, is the way and beginning of the mortifying of
natural heat, and extinction of the same: by which reason appears, that the
wan color does no otherwise differ from the black, but as to the remission of
the mortifying. And by this wan color, is to be understood the Leadie color.
The Learned Auicen Writes, that the whiteness of color, is a note of the
depriving of blood, or the scarsity of it with a coldness, for if this color
should proceed of a hotnesse, and that with the Chollericke humor, then should
it tend unto a cytrinesse. Further, Auicen Writes, that the ruddie color,
does signify the plenty of blood: the red, and somewhat read color, does
declare the hotnesse of quality: yet more does the somewhat red color, declare
the red Choler: and the red color, the Sanguine Choler. Here further is
to be noted, that the color somewhat red, does signify the depriving of
blood: although there appears not the red Choler, as the like happens in the
helthfull bodies. But a very swar^ color, as between the black and yellow
appearing, does rather signify coldness, through which, the blood then is
diminished and congealed, and that little so congealed, is through the same
turned into a blackness, which changes the color of the skin. And this we
name a wan or yellowe color, according to the intensiue and remissiue dominion.

The honey color, signifies a coldness and dryness, forasmuch as the color is
the same which ensues a pure black choler. So that the whiteness of color,
follows the condition of Phlegm, and quality of the moisture, but the
greannesse of color, does rather argu the blood congealed, which then tends
to a blackness, so that the same commixed to the Phlegm, is made green: yet
does the whitish gray color, rather signify a Phlegmatic coldness, mixed
with a little red choler. And after the opinion of many Physicians, the color
is for the more part changed, through the Liver, unto a reddishnesse and
whiteness: and thorough the Milt, into a swartnesse. Further Auicen writes,
that the swart yellowe color, does argue the red Choler: but the Dark
Brown color, does signify the black choler. And the like in (a man^^ to
this) affirms Auerrois, which writes that in an equal Climate, the swart
yellowe color, does declare that the red Choler, to govern the
chollericke: but the dark brown color, does testify in the same climat, the
dominion of the black cholier. Auicen also writes, that the body becomes
red, through the dominion of blood, and white in color (as the Juorie) of the
phlegmatic humor. Besides these, the complexion having a mixte color, both of
the white and red, is after the estimation, a mean temperated.

Rasis also reports, that the quality of the body thorough the color and
habitude of the same: of the feeling and Operations, and of the matters yssuing
from the Body, is so known. For the White and Swartish color, and of a
Whiteness and Graynesse mixed: and the wanne and Leadie color, do intimate a
cold Complexion. But the red, reddish, the high red, and bleake red, all these
Demonstrate a hotnesse of Complexion; and if a clearenesse and thinness be
conjoined to the color, the clearenesse and thinness of Humors, are then
declared. But if a troublednesse and grosenesse be mixed to it, the grosenesse
of Humors is then signified. The White color besides, to which a redness,
with the thinness and clearenesse is admixed, does demonstrate an equallity
of the Complexion. That if a redness shall abound, and the clearenesse shall
be lesser, the dominion of blood is there signified. But if the redness shall
so much be diminished, that it approaches to the color of Juorie, it does
innuate the paucitie of blood, Which if the same shall yet be more diminished,
in such manner, that of the same appears in a manner nothing at all, the
dark wanne color proceeds: which portendeth the paucitie both of choler
and blood, and the Dominion of Phlegm in the body. But if this color
approaches to a Whiteness, to which a Greenenesse is admixed, then ensues
the same, which of the Physicians is named a Leadie color: which declares a
diminution of the blood and red choler, and indicateth the dominion of the
black choler and Phlegm. The swartish color, if the same shall approach to a
redness, or that to it this admixed, does demonstrate a gross blood to bear
sway, according to the quantity, which ^o it is approached, or if a redness
to it be admixed. And the color perfectly Swartish, which is approached to a
Greenness, does declare the dominion of the black Choler. But bodies colored
with a red Color, which is found to draw nearer to a Whiteness, are of a
cold Complexion. If the color, shall appear nearer to a Greenenesse or
Graynesse, shall be of a hot complexion. But the other, are Cytrine bodies,
which to a whiteness partake a near subtilnesse: which color in the
healthful, or in whom the multitude of blood consists, and not for the
dominion of choler. So that these bodies are not Cytrins, but accidentally, or
by accident. Yet the other bodies perfectly Cytrine, are somewhat clear, which
like persevere at any time. And these are chollericke bodies. There are besides
of these certain, which with a cytrinesse, approach to a greenness and
swartish color, pertaking a small fayrenesse, in which either choler bears
sway, whose complexion is proved and known to be worser than all others. The
Liver and milt, having the like quality and condition, are for the most part
diseased: and the health of these bodies, is not firm, nor permanent or
continuing. But the bodies having a dark color, which are nearer to a
Cytrinesse, are of a hot Complexion, and near to the red choler. And those
which have a greenness admixed, are less hot, and pertayne to the black
choler.

Conciliatour reports, that the black color, very soft, does declare a
weak, fearful, and crafty man, applied unto them which dwell far south,
like as the Indian: and that because such are Melancholic, whose property is
to be fearful. Again, the Moors and the Egyptians, and thorough the
inordinate heat, under which they be borne, are thereby but weak.

If the Red Color, shall be sparsed with a white, does then declare stout
and strong persons. The color which is a mean between these two, does denote
a temperament of quality, proportioned to them which dwell under such a climate.



The color between a yellowness not tincted, and a blackenesse, which
changes into a clear brown, does declare a good wit, and honest manners.
Such persons the Philosopher Aristotle willed King Alexander to retain to his
Person, and about him.

The color covered with a palenesse, does testify a weak and fearful
person, and that such a one to be berest and taken in the love of a woman, and
applied after the kind unto heresies, except this happens in passions.

When the color shall be a swart Camelline, mixed unto a palenesse: does
then Demonstrate such a person to be a babbler, indiscreet and full of ire.

The blackness of color like to the clear horn, in any man, is a note of
adustion: and this is general, as well in the members, as in the color of the
hairs of the head.

Whose color is a dark green, or black, and not soft in the feeling, does
argue such persons to be prone unto ire.

A Ruddy color of the Body, is an Argument of a mischeeuous man, and endued
with variable manners.

The color very red, does declare such a person (of experience known) to be
crafty, and applied to the Fox: also the Proverb says, that we sildome see
a little man meek, and a ruddy man faithful, but the godly I here except.

The face read spotted, so that the greater redness appears in the
forehead, and free from the eyes, does declare a shamefast person, and applied
to passion, for that the shamefast face for the most part, is covered with a
redness.

The color white, with some red mixed, does argue strong and stout persons,
applied to the Septentrionals.

The color mightily and ouer-White, is contrary to virtue, for that the same
signifies the person to be a ssuggard, forasmuch as he is of a flegmaticke and
cold quality, and through the same fearful.

That Color, which is deformed with a palenesse, does testifye a weak and
fearful person, and a hafter or ouerthwarter: if that neither sickness, nor
earnest study, be the cause of that palenesse.

The color swarter, and mixed with a palenes, does declare that person to be a
glutton, a Babbler, and indiscreet both of ire and tongue.

That person which has a rednes simply, with a pleasant moving and playing of
the lips, and enlarging of the nostrils, does argue such a man's mind to be
occupied and troubled with a most great ire, and referred unto the accidents
of the passion.

The Cheeks and Eyes red above, with a certain moisture like to watery
Pimples; do Denote such to be Drunkards, and Lovers of Wine and strong Drinks:
applied to the men of the City of Pauie.

If the Eyes appear red and dry, then does it declare such a person to be
stout, and soon moved to ire, and referred unto the passion, which like so
happens in that action.

The eyes appearing very black, do declare such a Person to be fearful,
and covetous of Gain.

The eyes a white gray, and troubled, are notes of a fearful person^, and
compared to the Goat and Sheep.

The eyes not very black, to a yellownes tending, like unto the Lions, does
declare an honest and Friendly person, compared to the Lion and Eagle.

And a meannesse of color, with an abatement does signify shamefastnes and
honesty.

And whose inner parts of the lips, shall not be with a certain redness
colored, is then of the physicians judged sickly.

When the Aeynes both of the temples and behind the neck, do appear to wax
red, otherwise to swel out, and that the eyes seem prominent and bloody, do
argue an yrefulnes so vehement, that they incur unto a madness, and referred
to the passion.

When the countenance appears all Read, does then either declare a
shamefastnes, or else to be a Wine bibbler: and this redness is readilye
known by tokens of the e^es, and by the custom of it.

That person which has a fiery rednes on the Breast and Face, is inflamed with
ire, and easily comes frantic and mad: as the like of these, the
Phisiognomer has known by experience, in sundry persons, and referred to the
passion.

The red color of the hairs of the head intensed, is a note of crafty wiles
and deceits, of much ire, and of fransinesse, when as the same declares the
abundance of choler.

The brown Chestnut color, does declare uprightness, and the love of
Justice. And all report, especially Nunciu* natu^ae, in the seventh book of
the nature of beasts, and in the first Chapter of the condition of a Nurse,
where he says, That of those, the better and healthfuller sort are they,
which be brown in color, than the white woman and have a health^uller Milk.
The selfsame affirms Auicen 4. de Animalibus.

Those persons having a fiery red color or near to it* do retain anger long:
also they are hard to be quallified and appeased when as they are angerie; and
such, are referred to the passion that is: unto the manner appearing, in any
such grievously angered.

Those Persons, which have the Ueyns of the neck entensed, and appearing big
and eminent out, with a red color tincted, do retain anger long: and such
an ungracious anger, that hard it is to be appeased.

Those also (as the Philosopher writes) be referred to the manner appearing,
for that in such an ire this happens, as that the veins to be extended and
magnified, through the boiling and swelling up of the blood and spirits from
the heart, which so retch out those veins, as is aforesaid: and the like judge
in the forehead, where we utter judgment of the lines there seen.

The judgment of the Color, and substance of the hairs of the head, and in
all other p^aces of the body. The xiii. Chapter.


NVncius naturae says, in lib. 2. de partibus. cap. 14. animalium, that of
all living Creatures, man in especial, is thickest, and has most plenty of
hairs on the head. The cause of which matter is applied, as well unto a
necessity, as unto the reason of a help and succor. For necessary it was,
that the hayrs should be, both for the moisture of the Brain, and seames of
the Scull. For where the moist quantity of humors and heat is, there of
necessity must the great plenty of hairs grow, for the reason and cause of a
defense, that the daily increasing and growing of the Hayres covering the
head, may so defend and succor it from the extreme cold, and mighty heat.
Seeing man's Brain in proportion, is greatest and moystest, for that cause it
needs especially a defense, etc.

Isidore reports, that the hayres of the Head were ordained of nature, to
cover and beseem the head, and that these might so defend the Brain from the
cold and heat of the Sun.

Albertus in lib. de animalibus, cap. 3. reports, that the hairs proceed of
the grosser vapors, issuing by the poores of the Skin of the Head, sent
forth by heat, thorough the narrow holes of the Skin, which dried and
hardened in the coming forth, through the outward cold of the air. And the
hairs of the head, which slowly increase (thorough the lack of blood) is a
note, that the complexion to be very moist. That if these speedily increase, is
a note that the body declineth unto a drines.

But to come to the matter, the Hayres of the head do naturally declare, the
qualities and quantities of humors, and the conditions of the spirit or mind.

The Philosopher also (in 5. de generatione animalium. cap. 4.) says, that the
cause of the bigness and smalnes of the hairs of the head, is most chiefly
caused, and grow out of the skin, and not out of the flesh, when the humor in
them is euaporated, and breaths forth: seeing we see, that the gross hairs
do spring out of a thick and gross skin, and the small hairs out of a thin
and soft skin. These hitherto Aristotle.

So that when hotnes and drines be conjoined, the hairs of the head do much
sooner grow, and wax matny and thick. Forasmuch, as the much quantity
signifies a hotnes: and the bigness of them, a much fumositie. And for that
cause, in young men, there is much more quantity, than in children: for as much
as the matter of children, is vaporous, and not humorous. And the contraries of
these, do follow their contraries. Further, the signification by the part of
the Figure, is that the crispednes thereof, declares a hotnes and drines: for
the same is caused, when it finds a tortuousnes both of the holes and powers:
but this doubt, is not here resolved, when as the complexion is altered,
although the two first matters be changed. The plainness and flat lying of the
hayres of the head, does signify a contrary, that is, coldness and moistness,
as evidently appears.

As touching the part of the color, the blackenesse signifies a hotnesse:
which blackness, is here meant like to the clear horn: with a roughness,
and somewhat tortuous. The whitishnesse signifies a coldness: but the
citrinnesse and redness, signifies an equality: and the whitishnes does
either argue a vehement coldness, as the hoarines, or a strong and mighty
dryness, which happens in the Uegetalles, when they are dried: which from
their blacknes or greenness, pass into a whitenes and this like happens not
to men, but in the end of drying sicknesses.

Auerrois (quarto colligit capitulo) of the notes of the complexion of the
whole body reports, that the signification of the color of the hayres of the
head, is not verified (for the most part) but in temperate climates, although
in every climate may be somewhat comprehended, in comparing the men of that
climate, dwelling there under. As for example in the Germans and Moors, of
which, the Moors are black, and their hayres are crisped with an uttermost
tortuousnesse: yet not for this is their complexion hot, but rather these notes
ought to be attributed to the outward heat, seeing they a^e known rather to
be cold, through the heat vaporating. But the Germans, Wendenland people, and
those which dwell in the cold Countries, are white of body, their hairs
yellow and plain: yet not for this, is it generally to be said, that they be
cold, but rather that their complexion is very hot, in that the heat is
included in the inward parts of their bodies, as the like happens in the
winter time. Gallen utters, that the white hayres of the head, do declare a
cold comple^ion, and the quality of a diminished coldness, has the hairs of
the head yellow as Gold: and the complexion of a diminished hotnesse, has the
hairs of the head red in color.

Auerroys Writes, that in whom coldness is lesser than hotnesse, has golden
or yellow hayres on the head, in that the yellowness does signifye the
Complexion of a diminished coldness. And the redness of hayres on the head,
does declare a Complexion of lesser hotnesse, than is the Quality having
black Hairs: and this (for a truth) is true, in that the redness is near,
and a neighbor unto blackness: and like the yellownes and whiteness. The
Golden color of the hayres, has an equal and temperate quality, of the
yellowe and red mixed and compound together. These hitherto Auerroys.

The Airs and Countries, have an operation, in the cause of the hayres of the
head, which diligently is to be observed and noted, seeing it is not to be
made any question at all, that so well in the black hairs, as the yellow, is
the equality of a like complexion declared: here we apply Jupiter seeing it
has any yreall Nature. Nor in the hairs of the Illyrian, the blacknes, which
of his quality, signifies a hotnes, when as their kind has the same.

The ages also do work, in the matter of the hairs of the head, for that
young men be like to the Meridionals, children like to the Septentrionals, and
old age as a mean between both.

The hairs of the head much in a child, argues that his quality (as he
grows) turns into the Melancholy: and in an old man the like, signifies
that he is presently Melancholic.

By these we understand, that the hairs of the head lying plain, do denote a
coldness of the brain, especialy when they are soft in the feeling: for these do
then declare a fearefulnes, and pusilanimity, applied to the Indians and Sheep,
forasmuch as this is a moist complexion, as the Learned Albertus writes.

Those persons which have the hairs of the head so much crisped, that these be
in condition like unto dried Pepper, as the Indians are, which dwell under such
hot places, that do make black and Crisped the hairs so much, euenlike to the
dried Pepper: by which, most writers do digestiuely note a weakness. When in
them shall be a most great resolution wrought: and that moisture is diminished,
then does old age fast come on. For such which dwell in those countries, become
old at xxx. years, and their hearts are fearful and weak of courage, which
well declares, that the kinds of them, he much resolved.

The bodies dwelling in hot countries, are lighter than others: as the same
witnesses Aristotle in Methaphoricis, where he puttteth a difference of the
Countries, in Phisiognomating.

Conciliatore in 10. partic. proble. reports, that for the much hotnes,
causing the moisture to euaporate forth, by which accident their members are
like winded and writhed, and generally, the living things of those climates,
which evidently is declared by green wood dried, which deprived of the proper
moisture, appears winded and wrythine, when the moisture does not equally
break forth through out, except it has a viscous moisture very unctious. For
which cause (in Phisiognomating) it behooves to consider many matters and
notes.

The color of the hayres of the head yellowish, like to Honey, does declare
the Dominion of coldness, thorough the heat covered in the moisture as the
like are in Children: yet the Persons dwelling Northerly, have the like
condition thorough the Region, which much beguileth in Phisiognomating upon the
like subject. And such persons to Venus are attributed: so that the same be
either of Nature, or by Art. The hairs of the head, gross and black, are
applied to Saturn: yet is not the same to be like considered of them, as of
the Spaniards, for this declares them to be subject to the earthly and shadowy
moisture.

The hairs black and rough, and not plain lying, do signify a hotnesse in
that person, as the white hairs do indicate a cold complexion.

Ionnicius in hys^g^gis utters, that there are four manner of colors of the
hairs of the head: that is to say, the black, the red, the gray, or flaxine,
and the hoarie. The black color proceeds from the great and much quantity
of the kindled Choler, or by the much combustion of the blood: but the red
color, thorough the mightiness of heat, not adust, of which the hairs are
always caused red: the flaxine color, proceeds of the abundance of
Melancholy: but the hoary white, is caused of the overmuch lack of natural
heat, and through the effect of rotten Phlegm: and this for the most part is
caused in old persons. And these sometimes declare the venerial conditions.

The color of the hayres, like to the clear horn, are attributed to the
nature of Mars: So that the hairs be not gross, but somewhat small, and this
through the subtlenes of the humors. And that it is black through an intensed
heat, like bred baked on coals from which the moisture flies; so that by the
long lying thereon is made black. When in the other parts of the body, there
is overmuch hairinesse seen, there do the stars of Saturn and Mars work
their virtue, who are noted to be robbers on the highway, especially when the
Eyebrowes be very thick joining over the Nose, and that the eyelids be hairy,
but when the breast shall be only hairy, declares a hot and stout person.



The whole body covered with hair, both thick and rough: does denote such a
person to be of a more brutish will and nature, than manly. When the nape of
the neck shall be hairy, it denotes strength and courage, and applied unto
the Lion.

When the Physiognomer (by any occasion) came to Princes Courts, or Noblemens
houses: he would at the first thoroughly behold and consider on every side, the
Officers and servants about the Prince, or Lord: but most especially the faces.

It chanced on a time (at the request of some) to view and earnestly mark the
faces both of the Officers and servants attendant on the noble Prince Astorgius
Fauent^us: among the rest, he especially noted his Secretary, whose personage
and form he thus described. He was small of stature, in body slender, his face
and skin wan of color: a little neck, and somewhat short, Mercuries line in
the forhead, conditioned in a retrograde manner: the other positures of the
face and body answerable to the rest.

Touching the iesture of body, he went upright, making short paces, but trod
very fast withal. And the Phisiognomer considering the others about this
Nobleman, perceived sundry of them subtle and crafty deceivers by whom their
Lord was greatly abused and indammaged, especially thorough the means of his
Secretary that notable deceiuer. Al which the phisiognomer seeing, by a
similitude, uttered these words: That he as an Angelical rose, was in a manner
suffocated and choked by the wicked thorns daily conversant about him.

Thus may a man by outward signs, find out the qualities of people. As when a
woman attired in man's apparel, it does then declare and manifest her nature
to draw near to man's. As did that courageous woman, named Fracassa, who
commonly used to wear (by the report of the Phisiognomer) man's apparel: and
would on a bravery many times arm herself at all points to Just and run
sundry times so armed at the cing. The form of whom (by the earnest view of
the Phisiognomer) was thus described. She had a small head, Pineaple like, a
comely neck, large bre^^ed, seemly arms, answering to the body: but in ^^r
other parts, as in the hips, buttockes, thighs, and legs, near agreeing to
man's. She also walked upright in body, treading lightly, and bearing her head
playing like to the Heart. But the other notes of her body (for breuity sake)
was omitted. Concluding, that through sundry notes which he viewed, she was
subject to some violent death.

These Italian verses of Franciscus Asculanus may aptly be applied to this
place, touching the exceeding great deceit and subtilties of many strumpets in
their wanton deckings and alurements, to the utter undoing of many men, as has
bin heard of by that before described woman, who drew (by her singular beauty)
many a worthy Captain and Soldier to her company. Wherefore this man, for love
of his Countrymen, sought to persuade them in these verses, as follows.

De non credati a femina scioccha,
E non vacenda lor ficta belezza
Ma riguardati come de^tru fioccha
Miri la mente cum gli occhij cerueri
Che alhora perderaila sua vaghezza
De lei mirando li socii m^steri.
In which words, he wills his Countrymen to beware of the counterfeit beauty
of most weomen with them, for that it is not natural, but framed by Art, with
Waters. Tinctures, and such like things. The Phisiognomer also reports, that
many women, like delighted to garnish and deck up themselves, carrying the
head after the manner of the Heart, with the eyes rolling and turning here and
there: still turning the head one while on the right side, another on the left,
now upward, then downward: which argues an especial unstableness, and an
unsatiate luxury in that creature. In so much, that if they intensiuely
possess or have these, then such be for the most part cremeriti, and of
experience (says the Phisiognomer) do I report this.

Where sundry men are named to be effeminate, is understood and meant two
ways: the one, when as such be delighted to go in apparel, and decked with
ornaments like to women: the other to appear lasc^uious and weak, both of
will and courage.

The quality of which apparently declares, the mind (for the most part) does
like ensue and answer to the disposition of the body. For such be noted of
experience to be unfaithful and evil reporters and liars* for that through
their counterfaiting answer in parts, to be kind, fraudulent, and wily.

Further, the youthful delights in men, is seen unto xx. years, or near
upon: for that the natural heat, is all that tune covered and hid of the
moisture. The knowledge of which, is well discerned through their members then
being soft, that suffer in a manner as the women.

The wearing of heavy garments customablie, does argue a heavy brain: but the
garments light, witnesses alight brain: which rule, much furthereth the
person minding to Phisiognomate on any subject.

The hairs of the head Blackish in color, if they be meanly thin, as
writes Palemon, and the like Albertus, Aristotle, and Conciliatore, do then
denote very honest conditions, and both a good disposition* judgment, and
nature in that person.

The hairs of the head yellowish and meanly thin, denotes that the Sun and
Mercury to ^ear sway in the qualities and nature of that person, after the mind
of the Phisiognomer, which I thereto agree.

Conciliatore writes, that he which has the hairs of the head small, and in
all other parts of the body standing upright, is argued by judgment fearful:
for that such persons in great fear appear the like: which for that applied to
the condition of the passion.

Alike reason of the ^ame, utters Albertus, which affirms that the windy
moisture, is cause of such an uprightness and staring of the hairs. Yet be
the hayres sometimes crisped, curled, and hard, which proceed thorough the
dryness in the sharp heat, is causing and working the like. The worthy
Almansor writes, that the crispe^nesse of the hairs, and of these standing
upright, do demonstrate a hot quality and hasty nature in that person.

Here in the first persons, touching the color of the hairs, and the
effeminacy of parts, does the Phisiognomer aptly apply the Moon and Venus: but
in the second kind, does he near attribute the Sun, or rather Mars.

The hairs of the head lying flat, and reaching out on the forehead, denotes
a strong person, yet brutish (of likelihood) in conditions: for that the
polling of heads in our time, may greatly beguile the iudger, applied to the
Bear; and other Wild Beasts.

The like judgment (the Philosophers say) that the roughness of the hairs on
the head denotes in many (lacking educa^ien and grace) the rudeness of
manners, and wild behavior.

The hairs of the head after the mind of the Philosopher Aristotle, very
thin, indicates an effeminate mind, for the lack of blood, thorough which not
only a slownesse, but a womanly courage and dullness in conceiving is procured.



A much quantity of the hairs of the head lying (...), and a part on the
middle of the forehead folding and widing upward toward the brain, or crown
of the head: do argue (after the agreement of Authors) that such a person to
be both subtle and wily: yet in honest and just causes not found so advised
and witty: for which reason, attributed of the Phisiognomer to the barbarous
sort.

The hairs of the head, flat lying of either side, descending to the forehead:
do declare such a person condicioned, to the nature of the horse.

The hairs next the Temples small and thin: do denote a cold person and weak
of strength: the reason of which seems to be, for that the temples supply
that place, where the great Arter^ and vaiues do end. And in this, the place
should naturally be hot, through which causing the engendering of hairs, in
that the same is procured of heat. For which cause, when the hairs of the
temples be small and thin, do then denote the lack of natural heat: and
applied to women, being the^ ^are of hairs.

The hair of the temples thin, yet found stiff^, do then denote not only a
fearful person, but cold also by nature.

The hairs thick growing about the tem^^^^ and ears: does denote that person
(of experience known) to be of an hot nature, and prone to the veneriall act.

The hairs in that place, if they shall be big (...) whiter: do then denote
untaught manners, (...) rude conditions: applied to those brutish sort, named
the Frizeland men.

The hairs in the same place, if they shall be either perfect black, or
flaxen of color: do then argue a violent and furious mind, applied (of the
likelihood) to the Boar.

The hairs so it and thin, and exceeding small, do then declare an effeminate
mind and courage: and that this person not only lacking blood, but to be dull
of sense, and slow.

When the hairs shall be yet much thinner, (...) then innuate a crafty, hard,
or near, and covetous person: applied (after quality) to the fearfulness and
covetousness, both of the Barbarian and Assirian: for that the Assirians, are
by nature exceeding covetous.

The hairs much and gross, and flat lying, with a hairinesse of all the body
in a child: do witness the melancholy to ensue, that is to ^^y, to become
frantic and mad.

When the hairs in age are much increased, then do they represent the much
ad^stion above nature: which so causes the sickness of innocence and
foolishness.

The uttermost line or creast of the hairs of the head, if the same reaches
and goes from the forehead: do then argue a crafty person, having a perverse
and wicked understanding.

The uttermost line or creast of the hairs, if the same extends to the
forhead: does then note such a person to be stout, and somewhat wild. This
like is thus pronounced by reason of the hotnesse, and such are propperlie
applied to the Nature of Mars.

The uttermost Line or Creast, if behind the forepart of the Head (at which
ended the beginning of hairs) disrendeth toward the Nape of the Neck: does
then argue such a person in wicked matters, to be crafty, but in the good,
lacking discretion, and lecherous.

Such a line from the forepart, when the same is far higher from the nape of
the neck: does then demonstrate such a person to be slow, fearful, of an
effeminate mind, and many times irefull.

The hairs of the head, yellow as Gold, do declare such to be right
Sollistans: that is to say, of a proud and hawty mind, and vain glorious.

The hairs of the head soon hoary, do indicate the lack of natural heat,
or putred phlegm: and these sometimes witness veneriall conditions.

If a man by the Art and skill of Phisiognomy, may find to place in the
forehead, and face, both Mercury and Mars: then such (of skill known) be
found through the inclination, to addict their minds to Alchymie, and in the
same to invent the great deceit in Mettalles, and false coining of Money, and
imagine many euilles pernitions: of which condition (being at Uenice) I saw
two like beheadded, for such a wicked Fact, in the year 1565. Whose bodies and
heads (after the order of the Country) (...) immediately burned with the
Scaffold into Ashes: but of these the elder and principal, was much more
spiced with the notes of Saturns retrograde.

Women by nature wax not bald, in that the quality of them draws near, and
is like to the nature of Children.

The gelded persons wax not bald, in that they be changed into the feminine or
womanly nature: but few such (at this day) he here with us: except those by
hap, caused through the incession of a rupture.

To conclude the horinesse, and whitish flaxen color of the hair of the head,
is caused of a flamatick quality: and such of nature draw near to the quality
of women, as experience teaches.

The judgment of the head, by the bigness, figure, and disposition. The xiij.
Chapter.


SEeing the head of all other parts of man, is most open to be seen: it shall
therefore be good to v^ter largely of the constitution and form thereof. Which
the Philosopher seems to distinguish and divide into seven forms, of these
the first form he utters to have no imminency or bearing out before, but
behind: the second form, that an imminency contains in the forepart, and not
in the hinder: the third form, that the head again lacks an imminency
before, and not behind, and that the same be formally round: the fourth form,
that the temples, in respect, have a more bearing out, then either the forepart
or the hinder: the fifth form, that it be in form like to the Pine Apple: the
sixth form, that there be a great distance from the ears before, then behind:
the seventh form, that it be in a most comely manner proportioned: and in
these do Gallen, Auicen, Auerroys, and diverse other learned agree.

So that the head being either over big or over small porportioned, is nothing
at al liked of them: in that the same is corrupted and hindered of the proper
virtue. For such having the like form, when they approach unto an
understanding, appear evidently to be harmed and hindered. As a small head is
evermore corrupted: even so a big head appears sometimes good, and
sometimes viciated and evil.

But the best formed head, allowed of the learned, is that, which has an exact
roundnesse, and is on either side a little depressed, with an imminency before
and after: so that where the temples are, a certain plainness may appear: as
by example, that a certain ball of Wax made exactlie round, should be
somewhat depressed of either side: then should that round form (as the
Geometrians affirm) most apt to receive forms, aunswerable to proportion.

For which cause, the more lawdable head, is that, which has a mean form in
the proportion and bigness, and contains a decent roundnesse, which besides
enjoys an imminency, before and after tempered with a little compression or
flatnesse. Auicen writes, that the cause of smalnesse of the head in the
creature, is the paucity or small quantity of matter: but the cause of bigness
of the head, is the great quantity of matter, being spermaticall.

Rasis answering to the form of the scull: for if the scull shall be small,
then will the brain be like, Et econtra.

The figure also of the scull, if the same be corrupted, then is the form of
the brain like corrupted. Besides the head in smalnesse superfluous, must of
necessity be evil.

That head is commended, which in bigness is a mean, having comely
roundnesse, and decent eminency both behind and before: and has from both the
ears a little flatnesse: this Almansor.

So that man's head (among all other beasts) has proportionally much brains.
The males (of knowledge uttered) have more brains than the Females: although
the effect may sometimes show a contrary to this. But of these which are
sildome caused, or rather by accidence, is neither Art nor Science uttered.
Man's head (of the diligent search) is known to have more joints, then all
other beasts.

The man also is found to have more joints then the Woman. The head of a
comely and due form, is fashioned like a Hammer, in which the fore and hinder
part bear out: for otherwise ca^ this not make a due direction and government:
the reason of which is: for that the ventricles have a due form to receive the
quantities of spirits in every place: as that the forepart to imagine and
judge, the hinder especially to remember. But the middle ventricle, when the
form of it is lightly compressed and flatted, then is the bethinking part so
much the nobler, and worthyer: for that in the same small place, is the best
unity* to distinguish the congruent, from the incongruent, of the object
consisting in the forepart. When the form of the head before is depressed, and
(...) in, then fails the judgment (of the Creature: when the hinder part
lacks in the eminency, or is depressed, then like faylesh the rememb^an^^.
There consists also a weakness in moving of the sinnewes, and by the
consequent of the whole body: in that by the strength of the brain, as the
strength (...) of the (...) sinnewes. And as the largeness of the
(...)-points, (...) so of the (...), and bones. (...) writes that the head
(...) a (...) manner, does increase both sense and virtues and denotes in that
person both (...) and a gravity of (...). The (...), and not in (...)
proportion formed, does (...) the contrary to these before. So that when the
head shall be great, then will the brain be like bigger (...) that the (...)
the beginner and worker of all the senses. Again, if the head be great, then
are the senses many: and ^ contra.

To have a most big he^^ (as (...) wr^teth) and that in due form: (...)
denote (...) of manners, and goo^ conditions in that person.

The head great with a diverse form proportioned, and the sinnewes small with a
comely ^^rm of the neck: notwithstanding small and the bones small: is a root
of an evil composition and form of the brain.

Such having a big head without due form (are for the more part) Idiots and
Fools, and unapt to learn, or to be taught: which sign and note is
accidentally gathered of the Ass, having a big (...). This also is verified,
when as the head is not answerable to the neck and body, and proportioned
orderly after nature.

The head big and the Neck small, is an evil sign: for that the virtue
forming lacks in that creature, and matter is also inobedient: of which
ensues a simplicity of wit, and lack of discretion in that person.

The head great, proportioned agreeably to the body, or rather to the neck, so
that the neck be strong and meanly big, with strong and big sinnewes, not
without good reason and desert, is the same lawdable and commended.



The head Pineapple formed, after the condition of a sharp upright Pillar, in
such manner, that the nether part shall be big and round, but the upper part
sharp to a Pineapple fashioned: does argue in that person, an
unshamefastness, irefulnesse, greedy catching, and rash boldness, which
proceeds through the hotnesse and dryness of the brain. Such (for the more
part) are the forms and conditions of the Janewaies, and many of the
hypocritical religions.

The person which much stirs too and fro, and not long abiding in a place is
noted bold, and yrefull: and such a person seems to have a hot brain.

The head big, with the other signs denoting wit, is an apt receptacle and
place for good Arts: but other-wise is the same, when as the Head is great,
and not aunswering to the other Members.

If the form of the head (as before uttered) be comely, with the fore
ventricle of a good form and sufficient moist, is then lawdable: in that the
attayning and imprinting of kinds, is by the moisture caused, but the
intention caused through the dryth, which is conta^ned in the hinder part. When
the brain is great, then are caused big sinnewes, which of that reason argue
dryness in the places: for these of their proper nature be known cold and
dry. And of this the virtue memoratiue is made strong in retayning the kinds,
and by that help reserueth them long.

The head with the middle ventricle, somewhat compressed or flatted of either
side: does denote the virtue of bethinking, to be in compowning prompt and
ready; and like in dividing the same, which is attained through the unity of
spirits, in that place gathered.

The head spericall or thoroughly round, does denote a quick moving,
unstableness, forgetfulness, small discretion, and little wit in that person:
for this motion of the spirits, never cease nor rests: as in many Frenchmen
and Spaniardes, and the like in certain Germans, has been observed and
noted. For when the form of the head is through round, then is the middle
ventricle large, and the spirits working in the same so large, until these
find a large place, which in the mean time are not sufficiently united: and on
such wise is the virtue extimatiue weakened, by that the Spirits are carried
round about the bounds of the same.

Insomuch that such men having the like formed heads* do (of a proper quality
and condition) promise much, but perform little: these also are known to be
importunate, covetous, and envious, thinking only of the present time (and the
same slenderly) so that for the time past, and the same to come, these take no
care, nor think any whit thereof. For which cause (the Phisiognomer wills)
that no man assuredly trust, any such persons, which especially be found (after
skill) to have the body much chollericke, or melancholic: seeing such
conditions in sundry persons of like form, has been observed many times by
the Phisiognomer, which were most true. Further he reports, that if any of
these happen in authority and bear rule: they are not only seduced by light
credit, but prone to be ravening Wolves, and put forward themselves to utter
their cruelty, and (become in time) wicked Tyrants. The meaner sort of these,
are given to be Robbers by the highway, yea, and Murderers of Men, except
their virtuous education, and fearing of God, do otherwise contrary these
dispositions in them. He further instructs, that if the habitude and form of
the abouesaid body be sanguine, then is the aforesaid qualities much abated in
the same creature, so that such a subject is but a little inclined to like
manners and conditions, through the goodness of this complexion.

Here in this place, somewhat agreeing to the abouesaide, does the
Phisiognomer place an example, for instruction sake, which is on this wise.



A certain A^maine he noted on a time, being Secretary to a worthy Prince in
that Country, who in the time of wars being in camp with the Prince, espied
on a time by hap, a body-louse creeping on his hose: which seeing, was much
abashed thereat, and being in that amazement, required his man to take him
off, saying to him scrupulously, that he in no manner wittingly, would sley a
creature of God, etc. The form of this man, as the Phisiognomer did diligently
note him, was after this manner: he had a sphericall or round head, a narrow
forehead, slender neck, thin and narrow shoulder-pointes, loins, and hips,
with the other parts of the body, weak and ill formed, and to these the breast
narrow, and Marses Line in the forehead weak, and evil fashioned: sundry
other (...) perceived both in the hands and Face, which for breuity he
omitted: but to conclude, the Phisiognomer found by sundry notes, that this
faint hearted Secretary, was not only fearful, but very light of belief,
and brutish in conditions.

The head small, must of necessity be evil, in that such a person lightly
falls sick, and within is the brain little, with a straightness or
narrowness of the ventricles: in which, the spirits drawn narrow, are so
let, that they cannot orderly work a due use and effect; and these pressed
together are in such manner inflamed and choked, that they may neither duly
imagine, dispose, nor remember. So that such persons like formed, are known to
be fearful; yea, yrefull, and retayning ire long: through the intensed
dryness of the brain, and the distempered heat. These be also of a small
judgment and understanding, and neither can orderly discern: they both
compass and work false matters: yea, evil speakers, bablers, and double
tongued: from which the Phisiognomer counsels a man to fly and shun, as
he would avoid his wicked enemy, except grace and prayer, bridle and temper
the effects above uttered.

The head unseemly long, and twhart fashioned to an Organe Pipe, does not
only denote unshamefastness, but an impudency and p^^uish conditions.

The head short, yet the same per^^t round, does by the (opinion of the
Philosopher) denote such a person, not only to be empt^, and (...) of honest
gifts and virtue, but lacking wisdom. The head Pineapple like forms, does
indicate unshamefastness in that person: the rather, and of more like^^hood,
if the other notes answer: this Conciliatore.

The head flat and plain, does argue that vice of ambition and sensuality, in
the person mightily bearing sway. The head eminent or bearing out in the
forepart, does note a haughtiness and arrogance in the Creature* after the
opinion of the abouesaid Philosopher.

The head in the forepart vallied, depressed, and hollow: does denote an
irefull and deceitful person: but such which have the hollow of the hinder
part of the head flatted: are noted after Art, to be very fearful persons:
applied to the kind^ like.

The head big, with a largeness of the forehead, and countinaunce unto a
Giant: does argue such a person to be slow, yet strong in the composition of
Body, and gentle of behavior: but that person (of the Philosopher) is
reported unapt to be taught, and to learn: and applied for that cause unto the
Ore.

The head long, and somewhat protensed or streatched out to the form of a
hammer (even as the heads of the Switzers for the most part are) does indicate
such a person to be reasonably fearful, diligent, circumspect, and a foreseer
in weighty matters and affairs.

The head right out formed in the middle plain, and in a manner flat, being also
of a mean bigness, does indicate such a person not to be only witty, but
stout, and of great courage.

The head well formed, does denote such a person to possess a singular wit, to
be one of a good aduisement and consideration, yet liberal in gifts: but by
the report of Conciliatore, this Person sometimes will be very fearful and
faint-hearted.

The head either small or big, is understood and meant, according to the
measure and proportion of the whole body, as says Albertus.

The head short, declares such to lack reason, understanding and wit: as
report Palemon, Albertus, and Conciliatore.

The head in the hinder part hollow, does denote an irefull person, wily, and
deceitful: and these acording to the notes answering to the other parts of the
head and body.

And in whom you shall epsy the temples hollow of either side, such (by the
agreement of the Philosophers) shall you judge and pronounce to be cruel,
deceitful, and great dissemblers, with other conditions scarsely tolerable.

Hitherto, of the judgments of the head: next follows the judgments of the
forhead, after the rules and order of the Art: as a member and part greatly to
be regarded, both for the composition and lines (worthy memory) seen in the
same.

Of the form, nature, and judgment of the forhead. The xv. Chapter.


THe face says Aristotle, evermore goes bare, ^^pecially in man.

The forehead is that space lying between the highest brows upward, and the
eyes downward.

The breadth whereof, begins from the root of the nose, where the eyelids
end: and reaches unto the garland seame about the head.

The length often be forehead is understood after the breadth of the body, which
way the hairie sinnewes are seen to stretch and run. As the like the
Phisiognomer has observed in many of the best learned.

Also at Rauenna he beheld the Image of that learned Dante, having the like
form.

Here note, that a man must consider all other parts, with the conditioned
form of the head, and the agreement of the countenance, otherwise this cannot
be verified.

By the round forehead, shall you conceive and understand a certain
sphericall or very round eminency and bearing outward: such a form of
necessity must be granted to lack in the length of the Forehead. The cause of
this is, for that the ^pirices in the same empty place, are reuerberated and
inflamed, and that the inflammation long continues: Which reason and saying is
confirmed, when such have a short Neck and chollericke, in that the
inflammation of blood is light^^ caused and abiding.

The forhead is an vtterer of heaviness, ^irth clemency, and cruelty: of which
the proverb came, That the flattering person shows a smooth and smiling
forehead: the irefull man a knitting or wrinkling forehead.

Aristotle affirms the forehead to be the seat or place of modesty and honor:
and the same for the meerenesse of the imaginatiue virtue, which with the
common fence in the forepart of the brain, is placed as principal of the
head, by force of whose virtue, either heaviness or mirth, comeliness, or
uncomeliness, are suddenly carried unto the judgment of reason, and by the same
judged. Of this we name such to have a shameless and bra^en forehead, which
put away or set aside all bashfulnesse and shame.

The forhead thorough the discending of all the sinnewes from the brain, to
perform the sense, is as it were a certain tower and ^ortresse, to whose
hollownes do the five sensitive sinnews concur of the outward senses, through
whose help, from all the objects of the senses, at the seat of reason, is
judgment caused.

The S^inne of the Forehead, which with a certain musculous and thin
substance fastened to it, is united or joined together, that the inner parts of
the hands, and soals of the feet, with the tendons, do agree together.

The fore head distinguished of the bones, lying under the utter skin, does
only consist of two mouable skins: and briefly, the whole is lose in it self:
and of the same, is undoubtedly moved, by a voluntary.

The skin of the forehead, does move together with the eye-liddes, by
certain muscles and sinnewes: at the opening and shutting together of the eyes.

The Musculous thickenesse, lying under the skin of the forehead, by which
the eyebrows are drawn up, and the motion of the foreheade caused, has his
hairie fastnings tending downewarde: which cut overthwart, by an unskillful
Chirurgian, does after cause, that the whole skin of the forehead, does slide
or fail down to the eyes.

The plain and even forehead without any wrinckles, is the same which does
bear or bosse nothing outwardes: but contains or has a certain eeuennesse
thoroughout.

And such persons are noted (of the Phisiognomer to be contentious and full of
variances: the reason is, for that the same signifies a gross skin of the
forhead, and of the consequent, alike Wit: and the hardness of Flesh, which
cannot be placed, of which the rudeness of understanding ensues through the
Organ not due proportioned. And such also be hot and dry persons, which
causes ye tention of the forehead: so that through the paucity of
understanding, they be caused brawlers and contentious.

In all matters, there is a certain outward note, by which we find those that
are not answering to the eyes, that is, the inward notes not seen. Of this
appears, that the nature of the propper matter has his, and Philosophy
natural has his, which it skilfully notes.

The person having a big forhead, is slow and dull Witted, compared unto the
Ox, in that the Ox is a flow beast, which has a big forehead. But the
forehead small, does denote an vnsta^^^ person.

The forhead large, does indicate such a person to be inclined often to change
both mind and purpose: but if the forhead be large, then such (for the most
part) is noted to be a fool, of small Discretion, and dull witted: as both
Aristotle and Aui^^^ write.

The forehead very large, is meant to be formed with a due quantity, both in
the length (...) breadth.

The forehead round and fleshy, argues such to be yrefull: especially if the
same be bearing or (...) out, and with this lacking discretion dull and slow:
who of the Philosopher, aptly aplied to the Ass.

The forehead over much standing forth, that the same seems ^ossed out in
the middle, signifies excess of choler: and such (for the most part) are
disposed and inclined unto the chollericke and hasty passions, as unto the
frensinesse and furious hastiness.

Alike to this, that if the forehead has (as it (...)) a proper bearing forth,
or knob bossing out, and certain dentings in, or little furrows to be seen,
does (by practice of the Phisiognomer) signify such a person to be rash,
wily, and false of promise: yea, this like (by the report of Adamanti^s) does
denote sometimes foolishness and frensinesse or madness in that creature: so
that the other signs and notes of the parts, answer and agree.

The forehead little and narrow, does indicate such a person to be foolish,
and a small likelyhoode in him to be taught, or to conceive any learning to
purpose: yea nastie, sluggish, and a gl^ttonous Feeder* applied for these to
the grunting Sow. But the Forehead small, that is thin of skin, and very
narrow, in a Swarty person, does denote him to be Lascivious, soon moved to
ire, over liberal, seeking destrouslie acquaintance, and a manifest note of
small wit in him.

Here note, that the forehead small and having a thin skin, does ind^cate in
that creature subtle and moveable spirits, etc econira. For the spirits (...)
a subtle substance, air all, clear, and produced of ye lightest and most thin
part of blood, by which the virtue of life is carried unto (...) proper (...)
the same. So that where the overmuch (...) is of the forhead, there of
necessity must the gross spirits be engendered, which (...) not apt to in (...)
conceive ^^^ply, for the expulsive virtue which is weaker in that person. A^^
the virtue (...) is stronger or mightier than the same dispersed on that the
spirits united, cannot aptly discern the congruent actions, through the over
empty, large, and flegmaticke place.

The forehead over thin of skin, and wrinckles does argue the lack of brain,
and consumption (...) the substantial moisture, as the like appears in aged
person^: and in those which by daily and con^^nuall sicknesses are wasted, and
brought (...).

The forehead long, does witness such apti^^^ to be Witty, (...) to learn or
to be taught: (...) somewhat vehement in causes many times. For these are of
the Philosopher aptly applied to the fierce Dog. new acquaintance, and a note
of small Wit in him.

Here note, that the forehead small, and having a thin skin, does ind^cate
in that creature, subtle and moveable spirits, and econira. For the spirits
(...) substance, air all, clear, and produced of the lightest and mo^^ thin
part of blood, by which the virtue of life is carried unto the proper actions
of the same. So that where the overmuch thickness as of the forhead* there of
necessity must the gross spirits be engendered, which are not apt to meditate
or conceive deeply for the expulsive virtue, which is weaker in that Person:
and the virtue united is stronger or mightier then the same dispersed; so that
the spirits united, cannot aptly discern the congruent actions, thorough the
over empty, large, and phlegmatic place.

The forehead over thin of skin, and wrinkled, does argue the lack of brain,
and consumption of the substantial moisture: as the like appears in aged
persons: and in those, which by daily and continual sicknesses are wasted, and
brought very lean.

The forehead long, does witness such a person to be witty, apt to learn or
to be taught: yet somewhat vehement in causes, many times. For these are of the
Philosopher aptly applied to the fierce Dog.

The forhead square, having an equal and moderate largeness, agreeable to the
head and face, or according to the manner of the other parts does argue such a
person to be virtuous, witty, of honest conditions, and of likelihood to be
hardy and courageous: for which (of the Philosopher Aristotle) applied unto
the Lion.

The forhead plain, and wholly without wrinkles, does indicate such a person,
to seek and be desirous of great honor, and the same above his reach and
possibility to be compassed: being one also of small discretion, spiteful,
and very yrefull, or that continues long angry, obstinate, and full of strife.
A like to this, does Adamantius Write: that the forehead long, lean, and
hollow: to testify such a person, fearful, crafty, and desirous of honor.



The Forehead that bosseth out unto the edge, is of some allowed, especially if
the same well answers to the head. But if such a roundnesse occupies and
causes the smooth and plain streatching out at length of the temples, and
that the same is bare of hair, does indicate in that person the towardness
and worthiness of wit, the desire of honor and arrogance, such also valiantly
atempt bold and mighty enterprises: as the same is noted sundry times, of the
worthy Physiognomer Cocles.

The person that draws or knitteth together the skin, in the middle of the
forehead, with the ouerbrowes, is not only noted to be waiward and yrefull, but
greedily bent and fixed to the horrible excess, and greedy coveting of money;
much to be detested: as Palemon, Loxius, Morbeth, Co^ciliatour, write.

The forehead (as Thaddeus Hagecius reports) stretched out plain and even,
and the same as one smyling, does argue such a person to be a Flatterer, and
hardly to be trusted: as the same of experience noted: which manner of
appe^raunce the Philosopher Aristotle, does attribute and apply to the kind of
the passion: in that the Forehead thus stretched, throughout equal and smooth,
is labored (as it were) by a made or dissembling means. The same also is
named of the Phisiognomer (and Thaddeus agrees thereto) a counterfaited
forhead, when it thus appears wholly retched out plain and smooth. As by a
like may well appear in such persons, at what time they flatter: and in the
Dog fawning for an intent, which makes smooth the forhead.

The forehead clowdy through wrinkles, does signify such a person to be bold,
fierce, coragious, and terrible, compared of the Philosopher for the like, to
the furious Bull and Lion.

A mean condition of the fore-heade, between the former uttered, does by
judgment of all writers, decently agree: and such a person has been noted
(for the most part) to be gentle, civil, of honest Nature, and endued with good
conditions: as these of experience noted, by the well practiced Physiognomer
Co^les.

The forehead appearing in a sad manner, with a heavy countenance, does argue
such a person to be full of mourning and heaviness, and applied to the effect:
in that such which wail and mourn, have then a heavy countenance, and be full
of sorrow.

The forehead drawn together or wrinckled in the middle, does signify such a
person to be yrefull, and revenging.

The forehead long, lean, und hollow, does denote such a person to be
fearful, crafty, and desirous of honor.

The foreheade hanging down, and shadowed as it were, does indicate such a
person much inclined and prone to shed tears: for which reason, these of the
Philosopher, are aptly applied to the kind of the passion: and to this do the
later writers agree.

The Forehead big, is always caused thorough the bigness of the Bone,
grosenesse of the flesh, and the thickenesse of the skin: contrariwise the
Forehead small, is through the thinness of the Bone, Flesh, and Skin: as
both the philosopher Aristotle and Palemon, with others, do Write.

The forehead apearing deformed, through the many wrinkles deep, by which the
same is named foul, signifies a sorrowful person, and applied of Aristotle
to the kind of the passion: in that such, which sundry times vexing and grieved
in mind, do then utter and show a like wrinkled and deformed forhead.

The Forhead bare of hair (as Thaddaeus Hagecius writes) and having a plain
and even skin, except the same within the upper Face above, or over the nose,
does signify a malicious Person, deceitful, and full of ire, yea,
contentious many times.

The forehead cloudy or lowering, and wrincled, yet in the middle of the same
more wrinkled, does together indicate with the two best virtues (as does
stoutnesse of courage and wit the most hateful vice of cruelty, to consist in
that creature after the mind of the Philosopher.

The forehead very great round in form (by the bearing out) and bare of hair,
does not only argue (by the agreement of all writers such a person to be hardy
and stout, of will hardly to be brideled, but a dissembler and liar and the
rather if the other parts answer.

The forehead long, with the countenance or face long and slender, and chinne
like slender and thin, does not only (after the mind of the Physiognomer,
and Thaddeus) denotes such a person to be rigorous and cruel, but bearing
ru^e, to be a Tyrant.

The forehead confused by wrinckles, and the face appearing puffed up, thorough
and overmuch fatness, does indicate an ^nstable, flegmaticke, gross, and
dull witted person, by the agreement of Palemon, and others.

The forehead narrow, to be foolish: and the same long in form, unapt to
learn. This hie swol^e or bolned out, and round, to be a deceiuer, subt^^, and
wily. The forehead wrinkled, to have deep cogitations, and buethened with
cares. The same round in the bossing out, to be not only enuiou^, but crafty.
The forehead large (after breadth) does denote such a person, not only honest
conditioned, but free of expenses, and liberal in gnifts, as Loxius, Philemon,
Palemon, and sundry other writers report.

Certain report, and rightly in the same, that the forehead overmuch
wrinckled, does argue much unshamefastness in that person: the reason is,
when the Virtue apprehensiue and conceiving is weakened, the same then cannot
orderly discern the Congruent, from the incongruent: of which insueth those
that are wrought without shamefastness. The cause of this is, in that the
forepart of the brain is very moist, and of the over much moisture is this
great wrinckling caused of the Forehead.

Yet note, that the wrinkling of the forehead may like be (...) of two causes,
as of dryness and moisture: saving the difference is, that the same which
proceeds of drines, does not occupy ye whole forehead, so that this si^nifieth
irefulnesse in that creature, and anger in the other person of a moyster
quality. The reason is for that the person discerns nor the same, which
causes and retains both the ire and hatred, without due cause: and such also
are known (for the most part) to be full of envy and strife, (...) covetous
and il tongued. Oh how many vain Physicians be there (says the Phisiognomer)
which nothing at all regard, nor care for the science of Phisiognomy: yea, they
in a manner wholely decide the professors of the same, through their simple
travail, and study bestowed in the science. A^icen reports in secunda
quarti. Chap. 26. that necessary it is for a Physician by Phisiognomy,
^iligently to consider in the face, (...), and other members, the evil form
not (...): and that he especially regards at the first whether the same form
and note be natural, and according to the indiuiduate l^ke aunswering, so to
pronounce judgment. The like words in a manner, reports that worthy man
Galen, in his first book of complexions.

Henricus and Guydo, in a proper chapter of the Pockes write, that such having
a short forehead (as to length) and both the Temples flat, and che^ke bones
large, be prone and apt to come unto that impost^mation or swelling in the
throat, named (of many) the Kings evil: for that in such Creatures the matter
is readily derived and sent to the neck: but this especially happens to
Children, through gulositie and much feeding, and both thinness and moisture
of body: yea, the same is the more verified, when as the head (to the Iudger)
appears big, and not due proportioned.

Conciliat^^^^ thus writes, that the person^ which has an ^^uen stretched and
smooth forhead, with a certain shining in the same, is denoted to be not only
a flatterer, but dereitfull, and hardly to be trusted. And many like were the
Bononian^ which Conciliatore observed and noted in his time. The cause of this
tention and eeuennesse of the forehead, does the Phisiognomer suppose to
proceed, through the Chollericke quality, for that by his dryness the skin
stretches out plain: but the cleernesse of shining, does denote the subtilnes
of skin, and humors: and by the consequent of the Spirits: so that the like
forehead, does argue a ready wit: but such be fair spoken, using mirth and
delectable words, to the end of purchasing somewhat: for which cause aptly
named worldly flatterers, and deceitful through the moving of the spirits.

Such having wrinckles plaited or gathereh together in the forehead right up
retching, especially unto the angle of the nostrels: are denoted to be persons
full of care, and deep thoughts bethinking weighty and serious matters, through
the sad humor melancholy.

Such having the forehe^d, parted (as it were) here and there, or the same
rough in sight, or otherwise very hollow in the middle (as if the same to a
gutter dented in) with an evenness throughout, by a looseness of the skin,
appearing as one smiling: be not only noted subtle, and very crafty, but
covetous and very near or hard persons to deal withal: yea, this note
perhaps in some may indicate foolishness.

The forehead much awry formed, bearing out both high and round: does declare
such a person to be weak of courage, neither profitable to himself, nor to any
other, impudent, lacking both reason and wit^i as the Greek Author Adamantius
writes.



The forehead gathered and wrinckled to a Cloud along the forehead, or down
the middle of it toward the nose, as if the skin were plaited: does signify
such a person to be irefull* furious, and revenging* applied of the Philosopher
Aristotle, to the Bull and Lion.

Such a person having a shaddowed and low forehead, with a pensiuesse of look:
does not only argue a mourning and heavy mind, and given to much sadness, but
sundry times to be irefull: if we may credit the Commentatour Gulielmus Nurice.

That singular Philosopher Ptolomeus paru^s writes, that the person having a
long, high, and large forehead, to be honest condicioned, much bearing, and
suffering injuries, yet of great likelihood to increase in Riches: this does
the learned Conciliatour report.

The forehead appearing even and smooth, does denote such a person to be
effeminate, both in courage and will: according to the agreement of Philemon,
Palemon, Loxius, Aristotle, Conciliator, and the Greek Author Adamantius.

Michael Scotus utters, that whose forehead in the temples, shall appear as
puffed up, through the grossness of the flesh, in such manner, that the like
person has the cheeks filled with flesh: does signify him to be very
unconstant of mind, proud, irefull, and of a gross or dull wit: the reason of
which is, the grossness of the temples and flesh: and of the ^awes and
cheeks, does argue the grossness of humors, and dominion of heat, in that the
same is cause of the irefulnesse, and rudeness of wit. Such did the
Phisiognomer always see, to have a big head, with the form evil, and
vnordinately proportioned.

The forehead that seems crooked in form, and the same both high and round:
does signify, or rather is an apparent note of foolishness, and impudency in
that Creature.

These hitherto of the judgment of the forehead: to which added (as matter
agreeable) of the three principal lines, commonly seen in most Men's
foreheads, with the skillful judgment of those, and other notes there
appearing in sundry subjects: much further all such as mind rightly to
Phisiognomate by this Art.

The judgment of cer^^ine lines seen in the forehead. The xvj. chapter.
THe Phisiognomer rep^^teth, that there came unto his understanding and
knowledge, a certain skillful Jew, which could by Art Phisiognomate and
pronounce great matters by the only sight of the face, but especially the
forehead: in divining matters past and to come. He also could utter of riches,
honors, and calamities: yea, of the fortune and infortune, both of the Father
and mothers, and many other matters besides* The same skill when he desired of
the Jew (by earnest su^t to learn) he utterly cefused; and denied this request
of his: so that forced he was to use sundry questions and disputations with
him: by which at the length he perceived and found, that this person was
wholely ignorant of Phisiognomy, so well Metamoricall, as of the members and
Planets: saving only by certain lines, which at the last through his industry
and labor conceived. And in these (says the Phisiognomer) have I found and
learned a singular practice, and an infallible or most certain truth, which I
attained by a long time of practice. So that this worthy Jewel, and most rare
secret, he purchased after the manner above uttered, not minding to hide the
skill, but rather furthering the same to the uttermost of his power, which he
thought most agreeable, to publish next after this Chapter of the forehead, as
in a most apt place to ensue.

The instruction and knowledge of which is on this wise: first conceive that in
the flat and even forehead, you shall sometimes see there several lines,
reaching out the length of the forehead: which after the mind of the
Phisiognomer, do import and signify three ages: that is to say, childhood,
youth, and old age. This childhood does he here mean from birth, unto xxv.
years: and youth, from xxv. unto fifty years: and old age, from fifty, to the
term and end of natural life: as the same hereafter shall plainer appear,
in the condition of the lives. But for a readier intelligence of the former
words, conceive this example here under demonstrated, which evidently to the
eye utters these three lines, representing the three ages in most persons.

To come unto the matter, the two nether lines, being under the three
principal, which make sometimes the form of an angle above: are attributed,
the one unto Saturn, standing on the right side, and the other unto the Moon,
appearing on the left side. Of these, that line also on the right side,
ascribed unto the father: and the other on the le^t side, unto the Mother.



So that in the same place where these lines appear whole, there (of
knowledge) we affirm the good hap and fortune to be: specially, if these she^^
and be strait: in that such lines appearing crooked, do evermore argue the
contrary: and the same, either more or less, according to the strength and
weakness of them.

Further, the three ages in all persons, are attributed unto the two upper, and
sixth planet Mercury: as here under by this figure does plainer appear.



Of which the first, and nether most toward the nose, is named Mercuries
line, which represents the first age: for that in such an age and time, all
persons then be aptest to conceive and attain both learning, sciences, and
handy-crafts: yea, this is named of most men, the flourishing age, although the
same somewhat wanton, and unconstant.

The second line upward (named Jupiters) represents the second age, which the
Phisio^nomer names, the time of veneration, and Wisdom: for that in the same
Age are the large show of descent, conditions, and liberality uttered: yea,
both the stability in religion, and discretions in men, and their lawdable
actions. Further, where virtues are embraced, vices left and detested. Where
also is (in men) a fruitful and commendable wit uttered: where besides is the
mother of honesty indirated: all which by Jupiters line, are (after the
agreement of sundry Writers) represented and expressed.

The third line (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) represents a third age:
which of all men is known to be the time of sadness and covetousness: yea,
the wearing out of pleasures, and the end of natural life. If this line be
fortunate, the same then does indicate an increase by husbandry, land, houses,
and al such matters which appertain unto the office of old age: so that to
such a third line, are all these agreeable, which are attributed to Saturn.

Some perhaps will argue and say to the Phisiognomer, that this is the age of
devotion: to which I thus answer, that old men, in very deed be then more
inclined and bent to serve God seeing that age is then dissolved, and become
impotent unto the wanton pleasure and luxuries: through which these are the
more prone, and disposed unto prayer, and the faithful serving of God.

The time (to come to the matter) of youth, is known to be natural, and not
through endeavor, for which cause, a more affiance and trust, is to be had and
found in them for the more part.

So that in the same place, where this line is broken, there the infortune is:
as either sickness, impouerishment, or any other hindrance.

If the two nether lines (next the Nose) be whole, and that these, form as
it were an angle and cone about: do then denote (as the Phisiognomer has many
times experienced) that such persons to have a notable fortune unto the
attaining and purchasing both of riches, and promotions. Although few such
there be, which possess and enjoy the like note.

Further, the said two nether lines; under the three principal, are thus
applied: that is, the right line unto the Planet Saturn, and the left line
unto the Moon. The right line also is attributed to the Father, but the left
line to the Mother. By which understand, that according to the presence and
form of the lines: so judge of the fortune and infortune of that person.

But when the said two lines do reach and meet into the form of a triangle,
and that there appears an overthwart line stretched and crossing above the
nose: yet in such manner, that the same forms not with the others, a perfect
tryangle: does then denote a competent fortune unto such a person, and this
according to the strength of the lines there seen. For where these lines are
broken off* lacking, or crooked: there they witness and signify the infortune
to succeed.

If a line appears in the middle, under the lines, in the Dyameter of the
Nose: does then argue a singular fortune, and the great increase of riches.

The Philosopher Pt^^lomeus paruus writes, that if one line re^cheth along the
forehead, as from the right side unto the left, does then promise such a
person (after nature) to live threescore years.

If two lines shall the like stretch along the forehead: do then promise such a
person, to live unto the age of three^core and ten years.

If three lines the like, then unto fourscore years.

If four lines the like stretched along the forehead do then signify
fourscore and ten years. And if five lines the like stretched a long, do
then declare an hundred years: as the learned Ptholomeus writes.

If the ^hree lines above described, are crossed of other lines, do then
denote hatred, troubles, and persecutions for the more part.

If the said crossinges of the lines, shall make an angle: and that one line be
bigger then the other: in such manner that the same stretches over the angle
above the nose: does then signify, that such a person has Enemies, but they
shall not greatly harm him. But further of this form of the angle crossed,
may a man learn and understand, in any work of Paulmestry: that vtte^eth
matter of the quadrangle of the hand: as touching friends and Enemies: and
even the same is witnessed by the signs of the forehead.

If neither angle, cross, or ouertwart line shall appear on the forehead,
does then signify a lucky continuance and glory in works, and a most happy
estate unto the end of life.

The sharp crossing of lines, to the manner and form of a pinnacle: does
then demonstrate both household, and familiar enemies, or enemies of the own
Kindred: as Morbeth the Cardinal writes.

If any two lines of the forehead, are near joining together in any part: do
then demonstrate discord and contention with many persons.

The comeliness and good proportion of the three principal lines of the
forehead, does denote a worthy Fame, and finguler Wit* as sundry Authors
write, and the same affirms the Phisiognomer.

If many lines are discerned in the forehead, then (so appearing) those are
named the sisters of the three principal lines: as writes the former Morbeth.
If but one line only is seen or does appear in the forehead, then according
to the manner and form of the same, and place where that appears, with the
age of the person and dominion of the Planet, must a man like judge.

If no line at all shall appear in the forehead: then by reason, no judgment
at all can be pronounced.

When in the breaking, those lines appear crooked in this manner, as the
example here under of the one plainer expresses: does then signify the
greater infortune to that person. As the like by observation was noted, in a
certain Italian, and sundry others.



If any of the lines appears crooked or bended upward as a Bow: does then
indicate the greater infortune: But if any line downward stretched, then the
lesser infortune, is signified by the same: as Mant^anus and Cocles write.

When in the crooking any of the lines shall be crossed, especially Marses
line: does then signify violent death unto that person: and this (according to
the positure and place of the line) shall like be judged to happen, either in
the second or third Age.

The Ueines very big appearing in the Forehead: does denote the exceeding
quality of Choler, and that such a person to be exceeding yrefull.

These hitherto of the judgment of the three principal lines, appearing and
to be seen (in a manner) in the foreheads of most subjects: which diligently
observed, and noted by due circumspection, shall in the end find this rare and
Golden secret, hid a long time from many good wits: yea, and of these
sufficiently skillful in other lawdable Arts. And that this Jewel may not
appear mutilate, and imperfect, for the lack of more principles and
instructions to further the same: I intend to publish a singular treatise very
rare, and known but to few Students, entitled Metoposcopie, or by a more
known name, the view and beholding of all the lines appeering in the forehead,
beginning orderly from Saturns line unto the Moons, written by a most learned
Mathematican and Physician, named ^haddaeus Hagecius of Hag^k: the which aded
unto the number of threescore examples, lively counterfeited: that he by
diligent travail, noted and observed: which no doubt will much help and
further those, that mind to judge on subjects by the aid of those faithful
instructions, and linely examples: published in this perfect manner, by that
worthy man above named: for recompense of which travails, he in my (opinion)
well deserves immortal memory, among other of the learned Philosophers; which
commendation and opinion of mine, I refer to the wisdom of the Readers, at
the coming forth of the Treatise: in the mean time, I wish the Readers to use
these instructions above uttered. Next follows the judgment of the
ouer-browes, as a part belonging to the forehead by which singular matter may
be learned and known.

The form and judgment of the ouer-browes. The xvii. Chapter.


THe Learned Philosopher, named N^^cius Naturae, writes in the second Book (
de partibus Animalium) that the ouer-browes and eielids were ordained for
special helps to the face, as to ornate and beseem the same, with the
avoiding of other inconveniences.

The place of the ouerbrowes (as writes Cocles) is a part of the Forehead,
and formed of nature in that seat, where the bones knit and join together.
The ouerbrowes also were ordained to man (as reports Thaddaeus) both for
profit, and comeliness sake: these for profit, that the moisture and sweat
falling from the forehead, might (as penthouse to the eyes) so cast off the
moisture distilling, and like the humors and moisture falling from the head
(thorough the same eueising) shoot them off, without harm to the eyes. The
like words in a manner, utters the Phisiognomer Cocles.

The ouerbrowes (as reports Cocles) were appointed by God and Nature, in the
knitting and joining of the bones: for that in many Old^ persons they grow and
wax so long, that of necesitie, and for comeliness sake also, they must be
clipped.

The causes of the hairs (as writes the Physiognomer) are noted to be four:
as the Efficient, the Material, the Formal, and Final. The efficient cause
of the hairs, is procured two ways: the one is natural heat, which eleuateth
the humors from the moisture of the body, and sends or carries them forth
unto the skinny parts. The other is the cold air, which both thickneth and
coaguleth those humors, and reduces them into the form of hairs.

The material cause, is two ways, the first is far off, and is the corporal
moisture: the second cause is near, and is the earthly vapor or humor, which
is euaporated from the moisture. The formal cause, is the form of the hairs,
as the length and roundnesse of them. The final cause, is the diversity of
hairs, as to the decking and beseeming of the body, like as the hairs of the
ouerbrowes, of which our intentes is to write at large in this Chapter.

The ouerbrowes have a hid virtue, to express the affections of the mind: of
which this proverb that the person raises or lifts up the ouerbrow: meant
by the same, that such a one to be arrogant and proud. And such appearing like,
does the learned Thaddeus, rightly name hawty, and sour of countenance.

The right ouerbrow is more raised, and bended than the left: in that all the
parts thorough the cause of moving, do decline and lean unto the upper sight.
The right kidny in like manner is known to be higher placed, than is the left:
as the abouesaide Thaddeus writes.

Such having the ouer-browes very hayrie, be noted peevish, and overthwart in
words: the reason is, for that the much quantity of hayres, does argue the
great plenty of hot and addust matter, through the cause of heat and
adustion: of which insueth, or is procured, the uncomeliness of speech,
through the swiftness of words, and hasty talk. Their manners in like
condition be untoward, and eluish: seeing the understanding and worthy
behavior, is not caused, but thorough a temperament, and depriving of
adustion. For, of the great adustion, is the brain evermore heated, or a light
cause heateth, through the notable hearing: and by the consequent such be
clatterers and furious: and they neither think, nor can think and direct in
their words, a good or right discourse.

The ouerbrowes streatched upward, if of the hai^es descend unto the beginning
of the nose, and upward elevated unto the temples, do denote the deminion of
heat and drith, and such are known to be of crafty and wicked conditions.

Conciliatore writes, that whose ouerbrow^ appear whole, and not seueared of
hayres between each, are noted heavy and sad persons, applied unto the
similitude of the affection, and passion: as both Aristotle, Albertus, and
others report.

Morbeth the Cardinal writes, that whose ouerbrowes are stretched unto the
Nose, and reatch upward to the Temples, in such manner, that the hairs spread
to either side of the Brows, be not only noted simple, unshamefast, enuio^o,
foolish, without fraud or deceit, but insatiable and gluttonous, applied to the
S^w.

The ouerbrowes black, not much crooked and divided with a space, are most of
al to be commended: for such ouer-browes had our Savior Jesus Christ and the
chaste Virgin his Mother: as the singular N^^^phorus Preacher, and chi^^e Pastor
of Constantinople Church, and Writer also of the Ecclesiastical Histories
reports, in the end of his first Book.

The ouerbrownes thin and of mean bigness, argues a moderation in that
creature, and the goodness of humors: for such having the like ouerbrowes,
are noted to be ingenious and searchers of deep secrets, as both the
Phisiognomer Cocles; the learned Philemon, Conciliatore, Albertus, and others
agree in the same.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that when the ouer-browes appear thick of
hayres, and so plentiful or aboundaunt, that these (as the Philosopher
Writes) do descend to the beginning of the nose, and appear through the same
whole formed together: do then signify great adustion: and such having like
ouerbrowes, are melancholicke, and of an evil nature: yea, wicked persons* and
sometimes Thieves, rauishers of Maidens, Murderers, but deceivers always: and
to be brief, all vices and wickedness, are comprehended and known in those
persons. Of which, the motive Philosopher in his Mother tongue, wrote these
warning verses, which follow: NOn te fidare, de le giontae ciaeliae
Ne de le folte, se guercia e lo luce,
Che chi le porta, guarda non te piglie.
Impio danimo, ladro, falso, e fello,
Cum bell parlare, so tempo conduce,
rapace lupo, cum vista dagnello.
Non fu may guercio, cum lalma perfecta,
che non port ass, de malicia schermo,
Sempre seguendo, la superba secta.
These hitherto Franciscus Asculanus.


In these Verses above noted, does the Physiognomer declare and report, that
the Squint or goggle eyed persons, to be greedy Catchers, covetous,
dissemblers, and malfcious: and in a manner so euilly inclined, as such having
the ouerbrowes joined, through the hairs thick growing between: and the like
may be said of those having but one eye, so that the other parts are agreeing.
And generally these think all evils, if we may credit the Physiognomer.

This Goggling of the Eyes, is caused many ways, as Auicen writes ( tertia
tertii capitulo 28. de strabositate) where he vttreth, that sometimes the
goggling of the eyes, is caused through the mollifying and looseness of
certain Lacertes, etc. and after the same manner he reports, that this
gogling is sometimes caused thorough a dryness, as the like happens in sharp
agues, etc. and this (says the Phisiognomer) serves aptest unto our purpose:
in that the same corroborateth the dryness, which is cause of the hairs, and
two causes also are associated, unto the procuring of a wicked effect. And I
never saw (says the Physiogmer) the goggle eyed person* without a mighty
heap of vices, full of fraudulent iniquities and contumelious: the like do
affirm of the one eyed persons, having the other notes answearing, as above
taught.



The ancient Rasis affirms, that such having much hair on the ouer-browes,
are noted full of thoughts* and very pensive, or most commonly sad: and
their speech unseemly, and gross. So that this Text confirms choler
adust, and Melancholy humors: and is the cause also of many thoughts, and that
such mus^ and bethink great matters. A like note the Phisiognomer diligently
marked, in sundry Robbers by the high way (as above reported) by the said
Cocles. And such also are deflowrers of Maidens. Thieves, and Murderers for the
more part, if their faces be covered with a palenesse, or wholly pale: and on
sundry like formed, the Phisiognomer pronounced judgment by order of Law, and
death to ensue: which not long after happened, to the admiration of such which
knew of the same.



An example of a notable Thief, and ingenious in stealing and robbing, who in
the Physiognomers time, was hanged for his wicked factes: does he here place
by the way, for the better furthering of such, as mind to judge by the Art, on
subjects like proportioned. This person (to come to the matter) was figured on
this wise: he was of a mean stature, lean, and slender of Body, and
proportioned in the members and parts of the same. The hairs of his head
black, curled, ^hinne, and long: the forehead square, and in the middle eeuen,
the Hairs of the ouer-browes bended, and thick, and in the descending mined
in the Cone of the Nose. The eyes were mean of form, deep standing in the
head, having glistering and fiery spots: the Cheeks somewhat bearing out,
through the help and means of the Bones there pla^e^. The Face was long, the
Nose mean, as the same pro^e^sed unto the mouth, and Chollericke of form, the
part under the Nose foueated: the mouth small, the Lips thin, and the
nether (as the same were downward) foldes. The Chinne extending to a
sharpness* or in a manner sharp downward, and on the top foueated and round:
the beard small and thin. The color of the face was white, shed, or covered
with a certain^ palenesse* his pace in going like to the Peacockes, and that in
a soft manner. His stature after Nature, was rather upright, then stooping or
crooked: yet crookedly did this person wa^ke by himself, as one musing by the
way. His legs were slender, the feet small and fine, the heels little and
very flat: he went very seemly, and noate in apparel. The shoulder points
behind were somewhat big, and a little crooked.

The hands fair and comely, with the fingers long, and palms long. He was a
person (by report of the Physiognomer) of few words, yet quick of speech: and
his actions for the most part, were done with much expedition, through a
passing wit, great boldness and courage. In as much as unto the Physiognomy of
the Planets, the Phisiognomer affirms, that the blackness of the Hairs of
the head, and thinness of them, and cryspidnesse and quickness of sp^ech, and
motion of the body, and nose pretensed and chollerick or hooked, the^e
indicated that Marses virtue to bear sway in him: for as much as in the
respect of body, he had the breast large, and shoulder points big: which
together were a note of hotnesse in that person. The thinness of the hairs,
signified a dryness to be in him. His pace musingly, or as one full of
thought, with the eye-liddes drawn or gathered together, and ouer-browes
joining, through the thickness of hairs over the Cone of the Nose: the eyes
hollow or deep standing, and Peacockes pace. The eyes thus low situated, did
denote a Saturnine disposition in him: and this especially, the fewness of
words, and hardness in uttering them. The longnesse of face, with the cheeks
like figured, as above uttered: the lips thin, and color of the face wan,
indicated to Mercuriall disposition, the forehead especially square. The
ouerbrowes arcuated, the lips small, the sharpness of chin, and the Fossils of
them: the decking or eeuen dressing of the hairs, and fine apparrelling of the
whole body: fine feet with the heels small and flat, indicated a venerial
disposition. The glistering eyes and spotty, were by reason of the dryness of
the Animal Spirits consisting in the brain: For that the same firinesse and
adustion procures men (without the Grace of God) unto thefts and robberies
Saturn also increases dryness in that person: of the Sun, the Moon, and
Jupiter I write not, in that I remembered not the notes agreeable, at the
writing of this.

It suffices us (says the Phisiognomer) that we only write, how Saturn and
Mars beared sway, and procured this person unto Theftes, Venus unto gaming: and
Mercury was in place in his geniture, which caused him to be ingenious. And
hereof it succeeded, that this person had a small and thin beard. To conclude,
this conceive, that the members which possess a cold and moist matter, the
Phisiognomer attributes unto the Moon: the members which enjoy a hot and dry
quality, he applies to Mars: the members which contain a dry and cold Nature,
he applies to Saturn: the hot and moist to Jupiter: the hot and dry more
temperate to the Sun. The hot and moist members vncompact, and not much
solid and round, nor very loose, nor much erected and clear, does he
attribute to Venus. The members long, not protenced and slender, are of
Mercury. Of the Saturnine and Martial slenderness, does the Phisiognomer
here omit to write, willing the Judgers in this Art, diligently to consider
the Saturnine lines, both in the forehead and hand: and to learn the
Phisiognomy of the Planets, before they enterprise to judge on any subject. In
that the forms, colors, clenly decking of parts, and all other special
members of the body, are to be fully considered and beholden: before any minds
to Phisiognomate on the proper indiuiduate.

The Phisiognomer Cocles here utters another example, yet easier to be
conceived, and understood of all persons, than the other above taught, which is
on this wise. A certain Governor, named Valentius Caesar, the Son of a
mighty Man when he governed, which was a Murderer, a great Deceiuer, a
breaker of true faith, a spoyler of Women, and a most great Liar: had the eyes
glistering, which signified that person to be governed of Mars: in the night
time he exercised revels, banketing, and women: and this he followed in the time
of his most serious affairs: he sildome gave ear or heard any of his subjects
causes. He was a man given to be solitary, and full of thoughts and musing,
sometimes prodigal, and of no ^^able Religion: he also was covetous, and
fearful, ye^ bold in words, and endued with a singular eloquence: in diverse
public matters to be heard* or in places of Justice he thr^atned: and this
caused, thorough the disposio^ of Saturn and Mars, as above uttered. He was a
person having a most detestable wit, especially about wicked business, which
proceeded of Saturn and Mars. The color of the skin was wan, and had an
Aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition and nature of Mars. But at the
meeting of the three upper Planets in Cancer, dyed that mighty man above noted:
whom some report, was Pope Alexander the sixth, which seemed to be an enemy in
Ecclesiastical matters (but in what manner) I cannot justly report. To be
brief, about the time of the death of this Pope, happening at the great
conjunction of Cancer, lost this man his government, and sore vexed with a
grievous sickness.

And thus above his stock and kindred advanced, was at that time infortunated,
and thrown into Prison. This person was most vile in deeds, and bold in words,
in that the Saturnine disposition bare sway in him. And of this it came to
pass that he was so great a dissembler, and deceiuer of many: for when he was
come unto his uttermost tyment, he vanished as a smoke or vapor: in that
Mercury of the Alchymisters, was evil fixed and congealed. But the salt
Armoniacke, and the salt Alkali, were separated from the iuyces of the Herbs.

Such which be accustomed to wear gorgious apparel, many ornaments and
Jewels, like to Women: or that he much delighted to wear and use sweet
Powders, and pleasant Pomanders: are reported to be spiced with the
disposition and nature of Venus.



Whose hairs of the eyebrows are descended downward from part of the nose,
and retched upward from part of the Temples: is noted unshamefast, and dull of
wit. For the unshamefastness, proceeds through a ^urious hotnesse, and
overmuch moving: and the dullness through the same cause: as Rasis, Palemon,
Loxius* Adamantius, and sundry others aff^rme, and the Phisiognomer with them.

The ouerbrowes thin of Hairs* and of a mean bigness, do insinuate a
temperament, through the goodness of humors: and thorough the separating from
very much adustion. And such by report of the Physiognomer, are noted
ingenious, and searchers of ^eepe secrets.

That worthy man Rasis reports, that the ouerbrowes long, do signify
arrogance, and unshamefastness in that creature: the cause did the
Physiognomer above utter.

Conciliatore writes, that when the hayres of the ouerbrowes are streatched
unto the Temples: such a person is known to be nasty or uncleanly: and of some
noted to be a mocker and dissembler: which the Phisiognomer seems not to have
noted in his time.

Certain affirm, that the ouerbrowes long, do argue such a person to be
arrogant, leacherous, and very unshamefast: which matters truly are increased,
for the most part in old age. As the Physiognomer Cocles noted in sundry
indiuiduates.

The Learned Auicen Writes, ( primo de Animalibus) that when the hayres of the
Ouerbrowes descend by incuruation or crooking, from part of the Nose, does
signify a sharp, that is, a ready wit and ingenious, in wicked and
detestable matters or businesses. When the hayres be stretched, and crook to
the outside of the eye corners Lachrimall: such a person (by report of the
Physiognomer) is noted, to exercise jesting, and to play the ieaster, and to
take great feltcity therein, except his education otherwise contrary the same.

The hairs of the ouerbrowes, if they shall be stretched, and lie so strait as
a line in length, and these long, do demonstrate an evil, weak, and feminine
mind: applied by the like, to weomen. And these manner of eyebrows (says
the Physiognomer) do I attribute to Venus: and such he saw (for the more part)
to be Cynedes: or else very luxurious.

The ancient Palemon Writes, that if the hairs of the forehead or brows, be
stretched unto the middle of the Nose, and that thick appearing, but unto the
parts which consist on either side, little: is an argument of magnimity, and
of most singular Virtue of mind, in that creature. The hairs in the same
place streatched straight out also, de denote such a person to be very
fearful, yet endued with deceites, if we may credit Palemon.

Auicen (primo de animalibus) reports* that when the Ouerbrowes are
streatched according to a rightline, it does then signify a feminine mind: he
also writes, that the hayres of the Ouerbrowes hanging downwards, do signifye
an envious person: the Ouerbrowes crooking, do denote a Weak mind, and
feeble of Courage. The Ouerbrowes so much crooking, that they apeare almost
joined to the nose, do denote a very subtle, and an ingenuous person. Such
ouerbrowes (says the Physiognomer) declare a studious person: and applied for
that reason to the Planet Mercury.

When the ouerbrowes shall be thin, in the diameter commensurated, and that
these are large: this person (by report of the Phisiognomer) is noted to be of
a quick and ready understanding. Some write, that if the ouerbrowes bended, are
joined together at the cane of the Nose, argues a subtle and a studious
person. If these there knit (by the agreement of all writers) do witness a sad
person, yet not the wisest, as the Phisiognomer noted the same.

Here the Physiognomer propounds a solemn Problem, that may be demanded,
why the hayres of the ouerbrowes, are far more ensed in Old Age, than in
Youth: to the which question he makes th^s answer, that seeing the generatiue
vapors of the hairs of the ouerbrows which are carried or sent forth, by the
joints of the bones, and in youth are compe^t, and well joined thorough the
tenacitie of moisture: for that cause the vapors cannot have their free
passage forth, seeing the penetration in them at that age, is prohibited. But
the moisture of the self. (...) joined in old age, is consumed and dried:
whe^^ of the bones are caused more open, and the vap^^^ free do consequently
ascend, thorough which the hairs of the ouerbrows are then procured to grow
long.

The hairs of the ouer-browes thick, and so long streatched out, that they
seem in a manner to shadow the sight, denotes in that person the excess of
heat. The ouerbrowes thin of hairs, and the places much fleshy, denotes a
slow and dull capacity and coldness ruling in the principal members, as the
learned Thaddeus writes.



The hairs of the ouer-browes near touching, and in a manner joined together,
are noted to be the woorst condition of all others: in that the Brows like
formed, do argue a wicked person, full of mischief, ungracious works and
deeds, and given to wicked Arts. As the like, the learned Joan Indagines
affirms, that he observed in sundry old Witches, brought to be burned,
having the like ouerbrowes.

The learned Physician Thaddeus reports, that he observed a jolly Captain, a
great trauailer, a Pirate on the Sea, and a rauisher of Maidens in the Ci^ty of
Nymburge) three years before he was cruelly slain of the Tartarians, who had
the like ouerbrowes, with the eyes glistering, and fiery spots in them, having
also an yreful and fierce countenance, and manne of color in the face. That
the form of this person, may nearer be understood and Learned of the
professors of the Art, does conceive this figure here before demonstrated
lively to the eye.

The hairs of the ouerbrowes white (as reports Joan. Indagines) do argue an
effeminate person, lightly believing and foolish. If the crooking of the hairs
declineth unto the temples, and to the bossing out of the cheeks, denotes him
to be negligent and foolish. The ouerbrwes, if they reatch out long, and
appear thick of hairs, argues meditating, and bethinking mighty matters, as
the Physiognomer reports.



The Physiognomer Cocles here places an other example of a certain person
that he noted (in his time) which by reason of the overmuch hotnesse
consisting in him, was known to be a fool full of words, furious, yrefull,
evil tongued, and impatient whose positure and form of parts is thus
described. He had the head pinaple like, the voice loud, ^^^^ke of speech, and
in stature (...), muscu^ous, Sanguine, yet tending unto (...). The ears were
great, the forhead bearing out, ^^ter a round manner, the ouerbrows joined
together and much hairy, the eyes small, hollow standing, glistering, and
Fie^y: the Nose flat and hollow in the middle at the cheeks bony, and
somewhat flat ^the mouth great: the lips thick, and fo^lded or turned
outward, the Teeth big, the Chinne sharp and long, the face long, the Neck
Gross and short: small was the distaunce between the heart and brain: by
which appears, that the skill of the Anathomy, is very necessary in this
Art.

The shoulder-points were great and eleuate^, with a largeness of the breast:
the part before (named Methaphre^on) was eminent and fleshy, the Hipocondria
great, the legs short and musculous: the arms long, gross, or big, the
feet Big and articulated, the heels great, the soales of the feet hollow, a
swiftnes in pace, and treading short. He bare the head (by turning hither and
thither) after the manner of the Heart: over all the body he was most hairy,
having a red color in the Face: which notwithstanding was a dark fiery. In
the hands he had the Cardiacke, and middle natural line, very large separated,
and were most red, with the mensall line naked and alone: in the palm of the
hands were only three lines: with the rest of the tubercles and other lines
infortunated and depressed: that denoted a most beluin or brutish nature, to
consist in that person.

For as much a^ Michael Scotus has friuolously written of the ouer-browes, for
that cause does the Physiognomer Cocles, writingly ouer-passe his sayings in
his Chapter: considering they do so far disagree from the lively Art. And the
learned Ioannes Picus, greatly discommendeth this Scotus, affirming him to have
written no weighty matters of importance, but rather trifles, and of these
full of superstition. Hitherto of the Ouer-browes, with the lively examples
described of the Physiognomer much furthering all such as be delighted in the
Art: next to this does he speak both of the uses and judgment of the eie-lids.

The form and judgment of the Eye-liddes, and hairs of the liddes. The 18.
Chapter.


ISydore writes, that nature ordained the cover of the eyes, or eye liddes, to
defend the eyes from outward harms: as from flies, moths dust, strawes, and
such like, that might otherwise fall into them. The eye liddes also be the
couers, with which the eyes are covered: and (of Isydore named) the eye liddes,
in that these ^ouer and hide the eyes in saftie. For the same cause, the like
is to be learned and understood of the nature, and diversity of the hears:
as before in the other chapter, of the ouerbroowes. Here in this chapter, has
the Phisiognomer diligently gathered together, the sayings of the learned
Conciliatore, and others, although but a few notes of them were to be found.

The eye liddes, which on the eye aproched nigh the angle, in the lacrimall
part, if the same be exceeding small and thin: does denote the disposition of
the manner, and malice of the form. The cause of ye smalnesse of hears, does
little the matter indicate.

The thinness of the hears, does argue the subtilnesse of matter, that is, of
the humors, and the dominion of choler. Such are known to be malicious,
vicious and wicked: yet consider diligently, all the other passions of choler.
When that place shall be fleshier, like to the Kites eien, then does the same
denote craftiness, and an evil hotnesse, and is also a chollericke fool. For
which cause (says the Phisiognomer) beware of the chollericke, not regenerated
of the holy Ghost.

The lacrymall or inner corner of the eye, when the same is little and narrow:
does signify a crafty person, as Auicen reports, primo de Animalibus.

The upper eye lidde bearing out, rather blown up: then full appearing, and
somewhat declining over the eye: does argue that person to be hawtie and
disdainful.

If the eye lyddes do decline downwards, full and very thick, especially
when they be covered with a redness: does indicate such a person to be a
ruinous and wastefull drunkarde. The reason is, for that these signify a
weakness of the eyes: and by the consequent, of the brain. So that through
such a weakness, the like persons fear the drinking of wine. As the same,
Phisiognomer observed and noted in many, haunting tauernes, and such often
drinking Maulmeste: of which one, the like was a certain Countryman of his,
being an exceeding quaffer and drinker of Wines.

That if the nether eye lidde shall be small, and narrow drawn together, in
such manner, that it covers but the white of the eye: does denote the body to
be governed of a dryness of humors. If this like happens in any cause, of
very sharp passions: unless nature has so wrought the same (as Hypocrates
witnesses) does then pronounce death at hand.



The ancient Rasis reports, that when the h^ares of the eye liddes (so named
of the beating of them) do crook downwards, or be naturally wrythed unto one
part: do indicate such a person to be crafty, and a liar.

Why the liddes are placed on the eyes, does Gulielmus Nurice thus define: that
by them, the condition and quality of the eyes, might the readier and better
be defended and preserved from the outward matters: even as the sheath, on a
sword: for that cause, such a person which has a grosser or thicker eye
lidde, does further see from him: for as much as these preserve the light of
the eyes, from the outward heat, and cold. And of this, many beasts see
further off, than men: through the grossness or thickness of the Eyelids.

The corners of the eyes, when they be delated, do then argue a sickness or
disease of the eyes. And if these have any flesh bearing out, do denote
drunkenness: especially when the eyes are bearing out, and the eyelids be
dry: as in many the like, the Phisiognomer has observed and noted.

The upper eyelids covering the nether, do argue (by the report of
Conciliatore, Albertus, and others) long life.

The corners of the Eyes dylated and large, through the cause of a smiling eye:
does indicate a letcherous person: and this note, applied (of the Philosopher)
to Venus.

The often beating or panting of the eyelids, does argue such a person to be
fearful, and vexed often with a frenzinesse: as Palemon, Loxius, and sundry
others report.

The eyelids thin (and in health) are best commended: For these declare a
lawdable mind, nighest approaching to God, through an upright behavior.

The judgment of the spaces between the eyebrows, after the mind of Michael
Scotus. The xix. chapter.


THe spaces between the eyebrows, nere joining together: declare that person
to be a niggard, envious, very much desirous of beautiful things, having a
strange fortune, and more rigorous then gentle in behavior.

The spaces between the eyebrows, if they be large: does denote such a
person to be of a dull capacity, yet of a great boldness, very trusty in
need, of a perfect and upright friendship: these h^therto Michael Scotus, if we
may credit the agreement of these sayings.

The nature and judgment of the mouings of the eyes. The xx. Chpter.


THe Phisiognomers confirm their sayings, by the signs and notes of the
eyes: in that the notes which are discerned in the eyes, be figurs and vtterers
of the affections of the heart.

The eye is the isntrumental member of sight, whose quality is moist, in a
round form figured, with a certain plainness: and formed with seven co^tes,
and three humors, as writes the learned Sillanus (super nono Almansoris.)

The passions of the mind, as trouble, mirth, love, hatred, and such like: are
especially declared and uttered by the eyes: after the agreement of all Writers.

The especial colors of the eyes, are known to be four: as the black,
whitish, variable, and gray: as the worthy Canamusalis (in libro oculorum, cap.
tertio) reports, and the like Iehusalis.

The round form of the eyes, is better moving, perfiter, and incorruptible,
through the lacking of corners: as all the learned agree in the fame.

The cornered eyes, have very often superfluous moisture standing in them: as
writes the singular Constantine, in libro oculorum.

A perfect form and condition of the eyes, does denote an honest person: as
writes Gulielmus Nurice, Conciliatore, Albertus, and others.



The eyes big and eminent, do argue weakness, and a feeble courage: in that
these be so caused big, thorough the much abundance of moisture of the
brain: in which is coldness, that sheddeth along by the Members, and
extinguisheth the blood. So thrt such a Brain is more colder and moister than
it ought to be: and in such a body should be the lack both of natural
blood and courage. And as the spirit and store of blood, procures boldness
in men, even so does the cold and moist quallity, contrary work and cause
fearfulness.

Rasis reports, that the Eyes being very eminent and big: does argue such
a creature to be fearful, and applied to the Hare, Cunny, and Frogge.

The eyes outward extended, do denote (after the mind of Rasis) such a person
to be foolish: but the eyes deep standing, do denote such a person to be
subtle, and of evil conditions, through the part of the wicked quality: yet
such be of a good and sharp sight, and see further, than the eminent eyes do in
that the visible spirit is more gathered in the deep eyes, and the seeing
virtue stronger, yea, the light is received in greater quantity, as by
experience is known in the Gunner, which minding to shoot strait, winketh with
the one eye: and like the Carpenter, in the laying of his line right: Hitherto
Auerroys. But through the contrary cause, such having the eyes eminent be weak
of sight, and see nothing so far off. The large eyes tending into a breadth
of the body, like to the eyes of the Parthians, do indicate the moisture of
body in that creature.



Such having the eyes elevated, and standing hie out, do see from them (as
above uttered) but a little way: the cause is, that when the eye is eminenter,
it is then further distant from the brain: which is noted the Wellspring of
the Eyes. So that through the far distance from their Spring, that is the
brain* such eyes are hindered to see far: where otherwise the eyes standing
deep, do see s^^ner and further, yet such are noted to be of ill conditions.
Further, conceive that through the Eminency of the eyes, diverse matters visible
are represented: so that such in a short time, can judge of matters: They are
also bablers, through the moist forepart of the fore head. And thereby are
noted unshamefast and foolish: the selfsame (in a manner) does the learned
Asculanus write (in his mother tongue) in libro Cerbae, as follows.

Gli ochij eminenti, et in figura grossi
Gli ochij veloci cum lo batter sermo,
Matri e falsi, and de mercedae scossi.
By which he concludes, that such are without discretion, thorough the small
discourse of understanding. He also says of these, that the eyes moving fast
and quick, proceeding of hotnes, argues irefulnesse, luxury, and boldness,
aplied to the Hauk and Falcon.



The slow moving of the eyes, denotes coldness, declaring sadness and
fearfulnes in that creature. Such with the eyes move the eyelids together, are
of a weak and feeble mind, as Palemon writes. The eyes which shut and open
together, denotes a wicked and traitorous person. If water shall stand in
them, it argues a studious person, and an earnest searcher of Arts, as writes
Aristotle, Albertus, and Phylemo.

Conciliatore writes, when the eyes are disformally moved, that one while they
run, and another while cease running (although by these as yet) no wicked fact
or mischief be committed or done, in cogitation notwithstanding the mind is
known to be occupied with the like. And such generally the Phisiognomer noted
to be of wicked conditions: and prone to some violent, shameful, or evil
death. Yea, the Physiognomer has often times observed it, in many that Rob by
the highway.

Ptholomy the Philosopher Writes, that the eyes yellow (so that the same
proceeds of no sickness) does signify such a person to be a deceyuer, and
cruel, as the Phisiognomer Cocles observed in sundry Bawds and Murderers.
Further, such a color indicateth the dominion of choler, with great adustion:
of which occasion cannot otherwise be caused, but the dominion of malignity.



The eyes moving swiftly, with a sharpness of sight, are noted thieves
unfaithful, and deceyuers: yea such a note has the Phisiognomer seen many,
which were after hanged.

One of these, was the son of M. Iulianus de Pontremulo, brought up and
trained courageously from a child) under a valiant and politic Captain, named
Francesco Rouerso, on whom he pronounced judgment, in the year 1492. and
before the presence of M. Bartholomew (de S. Marino) a famous Chirurgian, and a
most special friend of the Physiognomers. And as this Cocles had before
pronounced and judged of the young man, even so came it to pass (through the
lack of grace) that he was hanged, in the year of our Lord, 1496.

And this Physiognomer on another, named Tadeus Guidottus, pronounced a like
judgment, which (as he reports) was also hanged for theft, by sentence of the
law. For these are well known to have a subtle wit, always ready and prone to
evil. The like confirms that worthy Conciliatore, saying, that the eyes
swiftly moving, and apearing sharp of look, are noted crafty, unfaithful,
and thieves: as of nature these are uttered. The cause is, in that through the
subtlenes of wit Theft proceeds, and the strange deceiving. For the subtle
wit proceeds through the subtlenes of humors, ensuing of the hotnesse of
complexion, as above uttered. And the moving proceeds through a hotnesse: so
that when the hotnesse is great, then is the sweetness intensed.

The look fixed, is not caused but of the overmuch and fixed thought, and of
the often desire to deceive. By which reason, for two causes are the like in
such a subject, that is, the moving, which the intensed hotnesse signifies:
the other is, the sharpnes of wit, to the deep cogitation and thought, to work
evil. The selfsame Rasis reports, that those whose eyes move fast, and be
sharp of look, is a deceiuer, crafty, and a thief. Yet some may say, that
Thieves are melancholy, in that Melancholy proceeds of a cold and dry humor:
for which cause, the contrary of this is, as before vttred. To the same, does
the Physiognomer thus answer, that this is not always certain or true, in
that there has been seen (says Cocles) that Martial persons were Thieves
and robbers by the highway: and that those were found chollericke and
Melancholicke, as shall after appear, in the Physiognomy of the Planets, and
Chyromaucy (to come forth) of the nature of Mars, yet may it be, through the
accidents of the mind, that these are caused Melancholy adust: the same
accident did the Phisiognomer observe, in sundry Bawdes, common Dicers, and
Robbers, which applied their minds and wits in these.



The Wanne and yellow Color, does sometimes indicate the complexion or quality
of Choler adust: yet the same tending unto Melancholy. If to a Whiteness, to
which a Greenenesse is admixed, heat insueth, which of the Physicians, is
properly named a leady color, as writes Almansore, lib. secundo capit. 1. So
that this is a Swartish color, if the same appears nigh unto a redness (or
a redness mixed to it) which demonstrateth that the gross blood to bear
sway, even as the quantity which approached to it, or as the redness which is
mixed to it. This color (by the agreement of the Physicians) is as the color
of the lungs, when the same is newly drawn forth of a beast, that is properly
named wan of color. The same of the lunges which after the drawing forth,
begins to putrifye, and swell up, and a wan or leady color appears in the
same. Here note, that the Phisiognomer wills a man to beware and take hee^
of the like ^^^ured persons, i^ that these are very evil and wicked: if so be
these in habitude (as Cocles reports) be not lawdable or comely. Such a
color the Phisiognomer noted in sundry Cardinals, that were wicked in their
deeds. Yea these of like color he noted to be drunkards, luxurious, and
practisers of false and wicked matters, without any shame: as the like of
experience the Phisiognomer reports to have known. He further writes, that
the Melancholic adust, are leacherous unlearned and exercise Swinish
conditions: when as their heads be special, or Pineaple like, and having fat
cheeks. Yea when the ad^^^ion is overmuch, then such incurie and fall into a
frensinesse.

The Phisiognomer noted, yea he judged (before the learned) sundry of a like
complexion, that became foolish: and of these two were Students at that time,
who after the increase of this Melancholy, became foolish, according to the
judgment of the Phisiognomer.



The eyes small, do argue such a person to be perverse, foolish, and
faint-hearted, applied of the philosopher to the Ape: the reason is, in that
when the creature is hot and dry, he is then malicious of the humors and
spirits: and is a betraier through the hotnesse and drines, proceeding of the
choleric adustion. For which cause, such are deceivers and partake of the
Melancholy humors: of which fearfulnes and foolishnes insueth through a
dryness. The deepenesse of the eyes proceeds thorough a dryness, which
dries up the moisture of the Muscles and lygaments. Or which insueth a drawing
together into the inner parts, and the brain to be exhausted. And the paucity
of the matter of the eyes, does signifye in the moisture proportioned the
dominion of dryness and melancholy adust, or a d^inesse adustiue: and for
this, are fearful, and deceivers, like to the Ape: as the same experience
demonstrateth.

When the eyes are situated after length of the body (for that these Natural
in Mankind, are situated according to the breadth of the same) this is then
named monstrous, that is, not agreeable to Nature: the cause of which, is the
great hotenesse, as before sufficiently uttered. Of which a deceiving and envy
ensues, thorough a daily or continual desire unto the exercising and
committing of evil facts, for the firinesse of the spirits, and dis^razed or
disturbed brain. Of the same, Rasys utters, that when the eyes shall be
placed or situated as into length of the body, it does then demonstrate the
like creature, to be subtle, and a deceiuer. And one like to these by the
report of the Physiognomer was the Brother of Hieronimus Sauonarola, who in
very deed, was known to be a great* Seducer, and beguiler of the people: yea,
a deceyuer of deceyuers, and the propper invention of deceit consisted in him,
so that not his like was known or to be found in his time: this great
deceiuer, as Cocles utters, for the more coloring and hiding of his frauds,
published new Statutes and laws for the people, in the rich City of Florence.
The Phisiognomy of whom was thus: he had a small head, his eyes were acording to
length of the body, his nose crooked like to the Eagles bill, the lips thick,
the color of his Face was wan adust, and the neck leaning or bending to one
side: and a note of the great hotnesse of his complexion was, that he could
not endure to wear on his head any other under his Cap, then a fine and thin
linen cloth, for that the hairs always shed of, how thin soever he went
covered on the head: and balde he was (through this continual shedding of
hairs) which argued the Dominion of dryness to consist in the forepart of the
head. And throughout the whole body, he was by report of the Phisiognomer most
hairy: a note also of great adustion in that person. For which cause says
Cocles, beware and take heed of such false Prophets, or that I may aptlier
name them, wicked deceivers, thus complexioned and formed: but have an eye
specially to such, whose whole complexion is most adust.

Rasis reports ( in secundo ad Almansorem) that many spots in the eyes
appearing, do indicate an evil person: the rather when the Eyes shall appear
variable of color, which signifies the wickeder person. For the varieties of
the eyes proceed not but of a great hotnesse which eleuateth the vapors unto
the eyes: of which, how much the more the variety of the eyes is, so much the
more does the same argue an intensed hotnesse. By that reason, how much the
more diverse the spots are, so much the more is the adustion: and by the
consequent declares the variety of humors, and greater adustion: and this
does manifest the adustion of the spirit: of which, the varieties of
conditions proceed, and the mighty heap of vices. So that o^ the great
variety, is the honest and lawdable judgment debased or caused the worser.



The look of the eyes like to a woman, causes the same disposition, as of
such a complexion: and is the same in conditions as the Woman, as luxurious and
inuericundious: for which cause such men of like nature be luxurious, and
inuericundious. Of which, Rasis reports, that when the look is like to a
child's, and that his whole face and eyes seem or appear as he smiled, this is
a sight-harted person, and given to mirth* without taking care of the affairs
of the world. The eyes appearing wholly smiling, with the rest of the Face in
like manner, be Flatterers, Luxurious, and il reporters or slanderers. Some of
this aledge a cause, and report that the mirth and length of life, to proceed
of a good complexion: whose cause are the laudable humors and pureness of
them, through his agreement. So that the cause of life is hotnes and
moistness: but of death, coldness and dryness. The complexion of young men,
is hot and moist, but o^ old men cold and dry: and the Note of the same is,
that such which coeate much, do live a short time: and the gelded after nature
longer then those not gelded: and the aged men which have much flesh, do live
longer, in that the causes of much flesh is a hotnesse and moistnes. By which
reason, Children that are hot and moist, be among other ages merry, and joy
through their complexion: and be without cares of the mind. So that such like
to children in countenance, are the like in complexion: not bethinking earnest
or weighty matters.

When the eyes appear in redness to the burning coal, such a person is
denoted to be wicked and very obstinate: the reason is, in that the fiery
color, does indicate a most intensed Choler, by reason of the hotnesse: and
he is vicious and obstinate, as appears in the Uerses in the first place.



Whose eyes be in color like to the Goats eyes, is argued foolish: the reason
is, that when a Creature resembles to any beast, such a person is of the like
nature, complexion, and conditions as in many places before like uttered. So
that such Goats eyes do indicate foolishness, and great simplicity. The
Phisiognomer many times looked on such a beast, and found the eyes somewhat
variable, with a certain troubled matter about the ring and sight of the eye,
which declared after his judgment, a complexion very phlegmatic and watery, of
which fearfulness and foolishness insueth.

The eyes, which are like to the Cowes eyes, does portend a madness to
succeed in that Creature: seeing the eyes like to Cowes eyes in Men, do argue
a like complexion* For the complexion of such a beast, is cold and moist, of
which the eyes are great: so that through a coldness and moystnesse, is the
slownesse and dullness of understanding caused, of which a madness and
simplicity ensues.

The eyes gray of color (to the sky) dry seeming, and dimmy: such a person
(wills the Philosopher) that a man to eschew so nigh as he may: for that this
gray color in dry eyes, is a note of wic^ed persons. The color of the eyes,
which represents the color of Oil, does witness a strong person. The
yellowish color of the eyes, does indicate a strong and stout person. The eyes
appearing much black of color, is denoted to be of a hard nature and
fraudulent. The deepnesse of the eyes is through a dryness, drying the muscles
and ligaments: of which ensues a gathering into the inner parts (as before
uttered) and the brain ex^austed. The eminency of the eyes represents many
objects, of which a peevish discourse ensues, through a confusion of the
objects.

If the eyes shall be small and prominent out, like to the Creauis eyne: do
denote the lewdness of conditions and foolishness. The reason is, in that the
smalnesse of the eyes, does witness the paucity or littleness of matter: but
the eminency of them, does indicate the overmuch moisture in the fo^e
ventricle, where the Spirits are let, and of this lacks judgment. The
eminency also of the eyes, is the cause of the representing of many objects, in
so much that such a one cannot discern the congruent, from the incongruent: of
which does the pieuish and beastly discourse ensue, through the confusion of
the objects.



The eyes tending upward, as the Ox eyne, which (and with this) appear red,
and are most great: do indicate a most wicked person, lend of conditions, a
Fool, a Bibber, and a Drunkard. The reason of this effect is, in that the same
signifies the weakness of brain: for as much as such a form, proceeds of
a moist brain. And of the weakness of brain, is the drunkenness caused,
through the vapors ascending, which together disturb the brain. The same
elevation of the eyes, proceeds by accidence: in that this is caused through
the overmuch hotnes, whose note is the red color, or the red color
indicateth. For of an overmuch hotnesse, is the disturbance (of the rational
spirit) caused: as the like we daily see in the fiery irefulnesse of men. Such
eyes the Phisiognomer noted in the City of V^teberge, by one Nicholas a
Barbier: which in a manner, was customably or daily drunk.

The eyes directed with the look upward, quiuering, and with a palenesse of
countenance infected, do denote such a person to be of a fierce and an
inhumaine wit, of an envious nature, and sometimes a murderer.



If any by nature, has the eyes appearing turned upward: such a one of nature,
is libidinous: applied to the manner appearing in the dead Bodies. And in
persons at the instant coating, as writes Aristotle, in his Problemes. For the
eleuating of the eyes, is by accidence, in that the same is caused, through the
overmuch hotnesse, whose note is, the redness of color: of which is a
troubling of the rational spirit caused: as we daily see in the intensed
irefulnesse of men.

The eyes appearing retort, if they tend to the right side, do denote
foolishness: but if these tend to the left side, then they pronounce
incontinency, as the learned Palemone in his phisiognomy utters.

The extensed eyes, with the extension of the countenance, does denote such
persons to be malicious and wicked: the reason is, for that the same extension
is procured of dryness, and hotnesse, through which the hot Spirit is caused
evil.

He which has the eyes like to the Ass, is noted foolish, and dull of Nature:
the reason is, in that they be of a cold and dry quality, of which the
impression of kinds is hard to enter: so that by the same reason, such are
foolish: referred after the manner, to the slow Ass.

The worser eyes are they, which have either white, black, red, or any other
colored spots in them: in that such a person is less constant, then any
others: yea, so hardly to be trusted, that rather to be shunned: except grace
and godly education help herein. And such a note, the Phisiognomer many times
observed and considered, in diverse Princes, Noblemen, and jolly Lawyers in
authority. Here might a man question and demand, how it happens, that such a
variety of colors, appears in the eyes: to which the Phisiognomer thus
answers, that seeing the eyes are very clear, and of a thin substance,
which is caused of the watery humors consisting in the^, of which the eyes are
formed: For that cause, do the visiue spirits, declare their qualities in
their eyes. That these also are of a thin substance, does well and manifestly
appear in the m1m4w when seh has reh (...): in that such a one does then
t4spe a erayf and real 4lking essagl, at the beholding of the same, with
iedwbol t4spse: yea, and at that time, do such cetinef drenlchi ylineg in the
readle: if a man may credit the saying of the ancient Writers in this.

The eyes appearing as they were hid in the head, that is, standing hollow
inward, do further see: and such a person these argue to be suspicious,
malicious, of a wicked ire, and perverse condition: yet very mindful,
especially of injuries, bold, cruel, deceitful, a liar, envious, leacherous,
etc. as that Michael Scotus reports.

The ancient Rasis utters, that many spots appearing about the sight of the
eyes* do witness an evil person: and the worser are those spotted eyne
known, if they be variable of color. The varieties of the eyes, do no
otherwise proceed, then of the heat eleuating the vapors unto the eyes: and
how much the more variety there appears of the eyes, so much the more does
this argue the inward hotnesse to be. How much the more variable, or diverse in
form, the spots are so much the more and greater, is the adustion of the
spirits elevated: of which, both the varieties of conditions, and the great
heap of vices proceeds. So that of the great variety, is the honest and
lawdable judgment, procured the worser of all likelihood.

Such persons which have the eyes shining, are noted to be libidinous: and for
the form, applied of the Philosopher Aristotle, unto the Cock and Raven.

The eyes in redness, appearing unto the burning coal: do indicate a most
wicked and obstinate person: and the cause is, for that the fiery color, does
witness a most intensed choler, by reason of the hotnesse: as before uttered
of the Phisiognomer Cocles.





He which has mean eyes, decltning unto the Celestial color (or to the
color of the sky) or unto a blackishnesse: such a person is noted, to be of
fit understanding, faithful, and serviceable. The conditioned eyes, the
philosopher Aristotle commended highly unto King Alexander. And the same
seems the learned Auicen to utter ( primo canticorum, de varietate oculorum)
which argue a temperament: if so be the eyes appear to the color of Antimony:
for these denote a sharpness and readiness of wit.

The worthy Almanser reports, that those the learned name the better eyes,
which appear as (between the black and variable) a mean: if with this,
these are not much shining, nor that a redness, nor Cytrinesse appears in
them: for such eyes, do demonstrate a good nature, discretion and wit. The
reason is, for that these are private and free, from the adustion of choler,
and the adust Melancholy.

The color of the eyes celestial, or unto the sky, black, or a dark yellow,
whereas no spots in any manner appear, and are caused of moist humors
temperate, without any adustion: of which a spirit like to nature, is
represented, yea, a readiness of wit, and speculation in that creature, after
the mind of Nuncius Naturae, and Conciliatore.



The variable color of the eyes, signifies that the Spirit of sight (in that
creature) to be the more and clearer: and such the Phisiognomer always knew,
and saw to be well borne, that is, well complexioned, and that those to be
Philosophers and searchers of Sciences, and deep matters: of which one the
like, was that learned Philosopher, and singular searcher of natural and hid
secrets, named Alexander Achillinus a Bononian. And many others Cocles noted,
among who^ was that Dominicus Fuscus Ariminensis, a man singulerly learned, and
a witnes-bearer of the Phisiognomers lucubrations. And Cocles says, he never
saw any learned Lawier, but that he had the eyes without any spot in them.

The worser eyes are they, which have either the white, black, or red spots,
or of any other color in them, for that such a person as is aforesaid is to be
misliked: yet except herein those which be pained with the web in the eye, of
which the like has been known, both honest and godly in conversation.

Conciliatore utters, that the eyes variable, big, and gray in color: if
these shall be with read spots, especially adusty, and that the same be like
to a corrupt black: and orderly move with the look to one side, denotes a
troubled mind, and vicious of fact: yet by Nature bold and ingenious.

By the eyes (not always the whole eyes) but the black of them conceive, in
that it is the black only, which shows the matters that we see.

Whose black of the eyes be red over are so irefull at times, that they quite
forget what they do, when they are so possessed.

It has bin observed, that in the white of the eyes, where veins appear, are
sild with blood, and wax red, declares that person to be yreful and hasty, as
Phylemon and Rasis reports.

When the one sight of the eye, seems or appears far greater then the
other, it does then signify by the agreement of Writers, not only an evil
nature, but wicked conditions in that creature.

The reddish spots in the eyes, but not very red rather more declining to a
blacknes: so that to the beholders, these appear and seem blackish, denotes
such a person to be of a courteous mind, just, honest, and ingenious, by the
agreement of the most Phisiognomers.

The eyes which shine (as with little spots of brightness) within: do denote
such to be cleanly, gracious, and well conditioned: as the Physiognomer of
experience affirms.



The eyes with Spots (appearing altogether read) yet those not round* but
rather four square: and like to the Fire shining, both within and beneath: and
that the others behind them are pale and others also grayish: and that the
circles without the sight, compassing and melosing, are bloody: and that there
is a bigness of the eye, and that both the eye lids and apples of the ^^es do
move, do argue such a creature to be of a cruel mind above all measure, a
shedder of his own households, friends or kindreds blood: yea, devising and
atempting all kinds of mischiefs, and subuerting al manner of matters, with
great deceit and craft. For such were the eyes by report of the phisiognomer)
of that most wicked tyrant, named Ezelinus de Romano.

Such small spots appearing in the eyes, how much the redder and lesser these
shall be, so much the greater ire, injuries, and detestable euilles, they
Witness in that creature: but the greater and Darker spots, does diminish
those wicked evils, yet smally take them away, or abate these in effect: as the
most Metoposcopers agrees in this.

The black or bloody spots, in the black or swartest sights of the eyes,
witnesses a wicked person and a poisoner, unless grace contrary this. But the
pale spots, do indicate such a creature to be wily, deceitful, and somewhat
inclined unto Wicednesse. Here note, that how much the colors of the spots be
mightier, so much the greater are their effects. For that by their darkness,
how much the same be (as is aforesaid) so much the lesser are the evils and
mischiefs, as reports Rasis, Conciliatore, P^ylemon, and others.

There be eyes colored like a Rainbow, which if these are dry, argues
madness: if most, it does then signify magnificency and wisdom, yet with
yrefulnesse and pronnesse to the venerial act. The moist eyes, shining like
Water, denotes honest conditions, gentle, and friendly, as Ptholomeus Parvus
reports.

If the sight of the eyes shall be black and closed with the aforesaid
citrinesse: or if it appear golden in color (as the Phisiognomers write)
indicateth a f^ux of blood, by the nether parts.

Ptolomeus Paruus says, that the eyes big, and the ouerbrowes long,
signifies short life, if other notes agree with this. For such a note had
that Lodouicus de Blanchi, a Bononian of Noble birth, which the learned Cocles
pronounced to be short lived, by this and other like notes that he considered:
who according to the conjecture, lived but a short time after: the like he
judged of diverse others, having the like notes, that ended their life in a
short space after.



The person which has the eyes long cituated, with the ouerbrowes long, such a
person shall be learned of a deep understanding and subtle: yet by the
agreement of the most Physiognomers, but short lived.

He which has the whiteness in the eyes tending unto a blacknes, does
signify a mighty men, and living by the report of the Phisiognomer) in honor:
The upper eyelids, covering over the nether, as before uttered, demonstrateth
of experience known long life.

The eyes small and round, do argue (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) such
a creature to turn willingly unto the evil: so that the face withal, be
covered with a palenesse. Hitherto Polomeus Paruus.

Whose eyes shall be vehemently moving, and a little quiuering or heating)
indicateth a wicked person, in that a most inward hotnesse is declared, by
reason of the spirits abounding and flowing, unto the compass about of the
eyes. Of which the ancient Rasis reports, that the swiftness of the opening
and shutting of the eyes, does signifye a hotnesse in that creature.

The Eyes quick and ready moving, and sharp of look, do indicate such a
person, to be a greedy catcher, applied for the manner unto the catching
Hawke. That if the beating of the eye-liddes shall be often, does then indicate
a timorous and frantic Creature.



Whose balls of the eyes are drawn or curled unto one side properly, whether
does are uniformly, or disformally moved, do indicate evil conditions, and
a wicked person from whom just cause is to shun and fly. For if these are
moved uniformly, conceive that his mind is prone unto mischiefs and
wickedness: and that the Creature to be polluted, with murders domestical,
wicked meats and marriages: as were the Gestes and marriages (by report of the
ancient) of Thiestis, and Attrei, of Medeae and Iasonis, whose children were
spoiled and rent into pieces, with the hands of the proper persons.

But when the eyes are one whiles turned to one side, another whiles moved
back, and these another whiles stand still, such manner of wicked facts by
them, are as yet not attempted, although in mind and cogitation occupied with
the like, is the learned Conciliatour, and Ptolomeus paruus report.

The eyes big veined, and dry appearing: do argue frenzinesse present, or to
come, by report of the most Phisiognomers.

The hollow eyes smiling, like such determined or purposed to work deceits, if
so be the Cheeks, the ouerbrowes and lips, are moved withal, do then
pronounce the cogitations of wicked purposes and deceits: If the eyelids
especially do sometimes meet, and sometimes touch together, for then do they
denote a most wicked cogitation to consist in that creature.

The ancient Auicen (primo de Animalibus) utters, that the eyes trembling,
do signify a lightness, that is, an unstableness of mind in that Creature.

The eyes covered with a dimnesse, do argue such a person to be endued with
evil Arts, unfaithful, and immodest in his doings.



The eyes contrary to the abouesaide, are best: that is to say, clear through,
and that no other sign of evil besides shall contrary the same: and such
manner of eyes, does Palemon report, that the mighty Adrian the Emperor had.

The eyes clear, of a big light, and that shine with a graynesse and
bloudinesse, do argue rashness and madness, but if they have a mean state,
then do these signify a good disposition of mind.

The meannesse of the eyes, between the black, and variable, is commended:
yea, among the other manners aforesaid: unless they be much shining, either
very cytrine in color, or red. But spotted with blood, do argue such to be
rash, and doing their businesses, which they (purchased before) speedily.

The eyes big and clear, with a brightness shining: do indicate such a
person to be just, apt to learn, a fore-seer, and a witty admonisher or
warner, and such like eyes, was the learned Socrates supposed to have.

The eyes overmuch standing out, read, and small: do argue an unruly mind and
tongue, and an unstable person in purpose.

The abouesaid Palemon reports, that the eyes prominent or standing out,
shining, trembling, and beating, and that these are small: do witness such to
be mutable, disceitfull, and crafty.

The eyes trembling and gray, do denote such to be without shame, faith, or
justice.

The eyes of a measurable bigness (as Auicen writes) moist and bright: do
signify such a person to be of a stout courage, bethinking and atchieuing
great matters. These sometimes do indicate an irefull person, given to drinking
or Wine, a Wrangler, a Glutton, and exceeding covetous. Of such a mean form
were the eyrs of King Alexander known and reported to be. And so much is only
said of these, which as unto the form and standing of the eyes are reduced.

The eyes smiling and most great, do denote such a person to be a Dullard,
leacherous, and not careful or providing for the time coming.

The sad eyes are not altogether to be feared, for that (of the moisture) these
are occupied in cogitation: and do denote the studies of honest Arts. That if
with these, the ouer-browes and forehead be large, with a plainness congruent,
and the eie-lids lawdable: do witness an honest and lawdable wit, gentle, and
grave.

The eyes sad and dry, and with this a roughness or wrinckling of the
forehead, and an earnest beholding of the look* and casting down of the
eyelids: do denote such a person to be hurtful, cruel, and leaving nothing
unattempted.

The eyes somewhat moist, and looking dreadful: does denote such a person to
be prone to ire, sharp, furious in talk, and in actions hasty* yea, rash and
hastily speaking, and most wicked. But the dry eyes, do denote ungracious and
wicked conditions: when with this, these shall be descerned small and hollow;
or denote worser then the abouesaid.

The eyes dry, and of a sadder look: do witne^ such a person to be very
gentle, and friendly: a^ Palemon reports.

The Philosopher in Methaphorieis, utters, that from whose eyes do hang like
to water drops, are known to be lovers of Wine, yea, they wax balde, and
referred unto the passion: for that in such a disposition is the moisture, and
feebleness of the brain declared: and most of the ancient, agree in the same.

In whom before the eyes like to drops appear and show out: are noted to be
lovers of sleep, and referred unto the passion, in that such do like hang
(arysing from sleep) which appear in the eyes: as the Phisiognomer has often
observed in many subjects.

Here conceive, that the blearednesse of the eyes is caused, through the
gathering together of gross blood: and of the melancholy humor in the
eie-lids, and the thin skins compassing the eyes, engrossing or thickning them
on such wise. The like (as before reported) are naturally sleepers, and referred
in like manner unto the passion or congruency. Seeing such a manner of swelling
of the eyes is caused, through a long sleep after the noone meal is eaten.

For when in sleep the meat is digested, and by the consequent some fumes are
elevated unto the brain: those fumes or vapors then, through the coldness of
brain engrossed, do descend unto the eyes, as above uttered: insomuch, that
by such a means, a swelling of the eyes round about appears: after the
agreement of the Phisiognomer and others.

The blearednesse of the eyes, in regarding the disposition: do denote such a
person to be a Bibber, and a drunkard: if this like proceeds of no others
cause. When these shall be, with a falling of the eyes, do then indicate such a
person to be a lover of sleep. Which also is referred unto the passion, as
both Albertus and Conciliatore learnedly report.

The eyes big, do witness such a Creature to be dull in conceiving, and
slow in the proper actions: applied for the form unto the Ox. The eyes small
are faint har^ed, and feeble of courage: referred unto the apparancy and the
Ape: after the mind of the Philosophers, Aristotle and Auicen.



The eyes being a mean, as between the sma^l and big appearing: do signify
that person to be well complexioned, and of honest conditions.

The meandness of the eyes in form, does innuare both a goodness and
pureness of nature in that creature: after the agreement of sundry Writers.

Such which have the eyes standing hollow, are supposed to be malicious:
applied for the form unto the Ape: But such which have the eyes eminent, are
noted foolish, and applied unto the apparancy.

The eyes standing very hollow, is worthy no commendation at all* but such
eyes which stand hollow, and big withal, are not to be reprehended.

The eyes hollow and small, argues such to be mutable, deceitful, a betrayer,
and corrupted both with envy and disdain.

The eyes hollow, looking smilingly, denotes such a person to be a bethinker
of evils.

The eyes standing a little hollow, are bold and stout, applied to the Lion.
But the eyes somewhat more standing out, are gentle, applied unto the Ox.

The sight of the eyes black does portend a slow person, and a dullard, by the
report and agreement of all writers.



The sights of the eyes (in whose compass about) like to little Pearls shall
appear, denotes an envious person, full of words, fearful and most wicked, as
Rasis reports.

The bals and sights of the eyes broad, argues evil conditions in that
creature, as writes Palemon.

The bals of the eyes small, indicateth evil and perverse conditions. And in
whom you shall espy the circles which ars about the sights to be unequal,
such are known and noted of experience to be fools.

Haly Abbas (primo the oricae, capit. 24.) wills a man to beware that he be
not deceived in the knowledge of the black color: for, says he, you shall see
his eyes appearing with a sharp look, and unto the same which he shall behold,
the eyes shining: as these in a manner were beholden of some bright body right
against: and his Words are known to be uttered in a fumbling manner, and out
of course or order.

When the eyes shall be thwart appearing, and have a sharp Ague, it deuoteth
short life, as the worthy Hypocrates utters in his learned book of secrets.

If the eyes shall appear (long open together) does indicate foolishness and
unshamefastness, as the learned Albertus reports.

The eyes very black, do argue such to be fearful, and this never fails the
like: yea these note such, to be greedy of gain: for the black color very
deep, is known to signify fearfulness: as both the Philosopher Aristotle
in M^thaphoricis, and the ancient Auicen (primo de Animalibus) write.

The eyes appearing palish, does denote such a person to be prone to deceit.

The eyes not very black, but to a yellowness declining, do denote a good
nature, and to be strong.



The eyes either white or gray, do denote such a person to be fearful: and of
the white color, it seldom or never fails the like.

The eyes black, not able in brightness, do argue such to be evil
conditioned, deceitful, and wicked. The person which has black eyes, and a
little smiling withal, is denoted such a one that is greatly inclined and
prone to all filthiness.

The eyes not very gray in color, but to a seemly manner, like to the color
of the Lions eyes, do denote such a person to be of an honest nature and good
mind, and for the form applied to the Lion and Eagle.

The gray color of the eyes, is here meant to be like unto the color of the
Owl, or rather of the color of the Jayes wings, which are changeable of
color.

The eyes appearing veiny, do denote such a person to be frantic, and
applied to the Goat. And veiney be those eyes named, which be full of small
and little lines alength, much like to small veins: through which, the color
of the eyes is changed. And such as be of this, are of a diminishing
imagination, which serves to the understanding, and applied to the sheep.

The eyes fiery appearing, are unshamefast: and applied for the form to the
dog: and such also are greedy catchers, and contentious. The eyes are then
named fiery, when like to fire these shine, burn, and twickle: So that the
like persons kindled with ire, see not, or if they see, one thing seems two
in their sight.



Auerrois (in de sensu and se^sato) instructs at large the causes. The
especial token of yrefulnesse, is the natural redness in the veins of the
eyes.

The diverse colored eyes, do argue such to be fearful and applied unto the
passion: for that the like which are afraid* become suddenly pale, and
possess through that fear an unequal color.

Such having the eyes appearing or looking merrily, are noted to be luxurious,
and applied for the form, unto the Cock and Goat, or Raven: that is, having
the eyes like to them, which cheerfully and lovingly look on any matter: for
these then show a gladsome and merry look.

The eyes and cheeks red, do signify such to be lovers of Wine, and Drunkards.

The eyes reddish, and dry, are stout, courageous, and hasty unto ire.

The eyes gray or troubled, do argue such to be fearful, and applied to the
Sheep and Goat.



The eyes mean, and low standing, do demonstrate such to be shamefast, and
honest of conditions. The mean color of the eyes, with the other notes
orderly agreeing, does not only witness a goodness of sight^, but a good
understanding and knowledge to consist in that creature.

The eyes standing out, and reddish, do argue such to be libidinous, and
gluttons.

The eyes standing in a manner, short or small, and bearing a little out: do
indicate such a person to be covetous, very greedy of gain, and earnestly
laboring after the same. If he also draws or knitteth together the forehead,
with the ouerbrowes to the middle of the same: such a person is then so much
the couetouser, and more desirous of gain.

The Wolf is a beast greedy, irefull, wily setting upon, bold, and violent.
And those persons which to the kind of this beast, are applied to be on this
wise: that is to say, having very crooked noses, stretching downwards, the
ouer-browes joining together, rough haired, small eyes, and shutting often,
somewhat hollow standing, the head small and round, rough haired in body, long
hair on the head, and fast compowned in legs: So that such proportioned
after this manner (above uttered) are crafty persons, wicked, ioying in the
shedding of blood, and prone to ire, or soon angry. And thus the Phisiognomer
ends with the matter of the eyes.

What notes to be learned in judging of the face and countenance. The xxi.
chapter.


THe faces of such well borne and complexioned, are on such wise: that is, mean
of composition in the Cheeks and Temples, declining unto a fatness. Such a
Creature (after Phisiognomy) is judged just, loving, faithful, and of a good
vnderstandin^. Of which Ecclesiasticus xiij. reports, that man's heart
alters the face, either to the good or evil.

When Jacob by the face of Laban, found out the hatred toward him, he turned
then unto his Wives, and said: I knew by the face of your Father, that he is no
more like in friendship toward me that he was yesterday. For even his
countinance, is a silent vtterer to me of his mind, the contrary.

The gladsomnesse or mirth of the face, proceeds of a merry heart: but the
heaviness or sadness of look, is caused of a heavy heart.

The face is often taken, and that simply, for the natural look of any: but
the countinance signifies the qualities of the mind: so that, a deformed look
is of a rare felicity: as the learned Isidorus (Ethimologiarum xi.) utters.

Whose face appears fleshy, is lightly covering: and applied unto the Ox, as
the Philosopher Aristotle utters in Methaphoricis.

Whose face by Nature appears red, is shamefast and merry: but whose face
appears pale of color, the same by nature is known to be fearful: as
Aristotle reports.

The face appearing lean, does argue a careful person, and sometimes a
betrayer: as the learned Albertus and Conciliatore utter.

The face seen fleshy, does indicate such a person to be fearful, applied for
the quality to the Heart and Ass: as Aristotle and the learned Palemon write.

The face that appears small, does witness such a creature to be saint
hear^ed, and fearful: applied for the quality, unto the Ape and Cock: as the
learned Conciliatore reports.

Conciliatore writes, that whose face appears big, is noted (by the
agreement of other writers) to be slow and sluggish in the proper actions: for
the same denotes much matter, and flegmaticke, not regulated: applied for the
quality unto the Ox, and sluggish Ass.

The face appearing very bony, does witness such a Creature to be laborious,
fearful, and of a cold Nature, after the mind of the Phisiognomer.

The learned Palemon writes, that a mean form of the face, as neither to
big, nor to small, is perfect good, and signifies an honest person: by the
agreement of Auicen, Albertus, Conciliatore, and others.

Whose face is judged small in form, is reported to be a person ungentle in
conditions, and a niggard: applied after the manner, unto the apparancy known.

The face seen very fleshy, does indicate a sluggishnes of actions*
foolishnes, and the great desire of coeating to consist in that creature:
through the matter abounding of the flesh, and gross humors, not so
flegmaticke, as before has been uttered: in the hotnesse there bears sway,
after the mind of the Phisiognomer. For which cause, such desire vain and
impossible things, yea, the like persons by the report of Phylemon, are light
of belief, studying or exercising them in eating, drinking, and in the wanton
desire of coeating. If the others correspondent, shall be connexed, that is, the
greatness of the two ventricles.

The Philosopher Aristotle, in his Treatise of Phisiognomy (of the members)
says, that he which has a fleshy face, is indicated to be less sapient,
importunate, a liar, and a glutton.

The person which has a slender or lean face, is noted to be circumspect in
his doings, and argues a subtle understanding, as the Mercurians possess and
have. That creature which has a long face, is known of experience, to be
froward and injurious.

The worthy Philosopher Aristotle says, that both of horses and men the same
is known: that those whose face is wrinkled of nature, and not by accident, is
begotten of feeble parents, for that the strength of the heart, whereas the same
is feebled, draws the skin together. And are denoted but weak of the
principal members.

The learned Palemon, and Ptolomeus paruus write, that a lean or thin face,
witnesses such a one to be full of cares.

Rasis says, that the face looking like unto one drunken is lightly overtaken
with strong drink, and p^ocured drunk, as the Phisiognomer reports of
^x^erience.

Rasis says, that one having a modest and shamefast face, is denoted to have
the like conditions, and to be gentle.

An irefull face (says Rasis) indicateth yrefulnesse, which like happens to be
found both in other vices and Uertues: for that the face of like Nature, to the
like passion, is even subject actually to the same.

The face very round, argues such an one to be foolish, but the same
appearing very big, is indicated sluggish in the proper actions, and of a dull
^^pacity.



A very small seen, does argue such a one to be evil, crafty, a flatterer, a
nigg^rd* and (for the most part) fearful. The reason seems to be) in that the
exceeding smalnesse of the head, proceeds of the matter of the humor, and
subtle spirit, with a dryness: and thorough the evil composition, of which
flattery and fearfulness is caused, which is a Sister of tenacity, as is
aforesaid.

Conciliatore instructs* that a deformed face sildome argues good and honest
conditions. Nor a wry countenance of nature, can utter (after the opinion of
Aristotle) laudable actions and conditions: nor such a creature) of experience
known) is greatly fortunate. And this note sufficiently appears of the
congruent apparancy.

Whose face appears long, is noted unshamefast and injurious: proceeding of a
mighty hotnesse, which is the cause of the lengthning out the same, that such
through this, are so inuericundians. He which has bloowne temples, and the
veins appearing great, is denoted (after Rasis) to be very yrefull and furious.

The face fleshy, if with a deformed il fauourednesse, indicateth such a one to
be fearful and frantic at times, after the opinion of Palemon, and others.

The face gross, with big jaws, and rusticall looks, argues dull capacity,
and rude nature, as the Philosopher reports.

The face reddish of it self, does witness such to be rough, sturdy, and
cruel. If the cheeks be only red, it signified a Drunkard.

Conciliatore Writes, that the face small, and covered with a yellow color,
it indicateth such a creature to be vicious, a deceiuer, a drunkarde, as
Aristotle reports, that the same seems to declare. This very often has bin
experienced in the Phisiognomers time, especially in sundry Princes, head
Captains of Armies, Secretaries, and Ambassadors, which (at that day) were
supposed to be amongst them, both Sapient and Skillfull: that knew wittily to
deceive, and find out a deceit.

Whiles Cocles remained at Rome, he there noted a most Wicked person, and
lecherous with^ll, whose habitude in this place (by the way of an example) he
minds to utter and describe, after this manner.



He was very small or short of stature, in manner like unto a Dwarf, whose
hairs on the Head were much in quantity, and great: especially about the
temples, were these seen black: his face and countenance appeared round and
fleshy in form, the forehead big, and fleshy in like manner: the ouerbrowes
great, through the much quantity of hairs. The eyes big tending outward: in
the corners of which, were seen many fiery spots, his look was sturdy and
wildely: the Pellicles about the eyes puffed up: the Cheeks were fleshy, the
ears found great, the nose big and short, in whose middle appeared a
hollownes, like unto the little Dogs of Spain. The Nostrils were seen to be
large open, the mouth (in respect of the habitude) great: the lips in form
found very thick, and turned outward, after the manner of the Murryans: the
chin discerned big and round, the color of the whole face appeared wanne
adust: the Beard found thick and black, the neck known to be gross and
lively stirring: the teeth placed thick, or thick standing together, and
appearing big: the under chin seen very fleshy: the breast formed large,
with great pappes, the arms short and fleshy, the hands short and in like manner
fleshy: the fingers small compounded, and muscled or brawned, the nails seen
short in form, pale, black, and rough, the shoulder points found very fleshy:
the back (in respect of the constitution of body) very large and fleshy: the
Belly found big to a Tonne: the Pecten seen very hairy and thick, or much
in quantity: the 2d1ry discerned full of apparent veins, the Flanks and
Buttockes were fleshy: the Peritoneon or space between the Legs, bear^ng
outward: the Hippes big and seen fleshy: the Legs (in respect of the
personage) were slender: the feet small, and but a little brawned: the souls
of the feet, were formed with an equal upper face, or evenness throughout,
and fleshy: the whole personage was found hot and moist: with a swiftness of
pace in his going: the steps treading short, and the eyes appeared protensed*
and large open in the going: the speech uttered very quick: breathing strong,
and thick together: the whole body seen most hairy.

As touching the form of this man's hand: A the Paulme (through the slatnesse
of the montes) was not hollow. B The life line was stretched out long, and red
in color. C The upper angle was separated. D The middle natural line, was
seen red and thwart in form, and evil situated. E The mensale line was sound
great, and with inordinate creasts. F The monte of Venus bearing up full. G
with the Sister of the life line, situated on the monte. H There was a
triangle, no where formed in the hand. Jupiters monte not lined, and evil
colored, with the Character C. placed on the same Tubercle.



And on the back of that finger were lines seen, formed to a star. I The
Zone or girdle of Venus in the proper place, appeared read. Ki The Suns
mount evil conditioned. L. Mercuries Tubercle, appeared obscure or dark
shaddowed. The Moons place ^. figured with such a Charracter. M. The life line
was gross, between the thombe and forefinger. Thus was this most wicked man*
formed in personage, and lined in the hand. So that through such a habitude, he
used both kinds of coe 12ngtbus, as well with the 2l1sm as 2le1smf: and other
detestable matters he exercised, not here meet to be uttered. To conclude, he
was the most vicious person of al others, that ever the Phisiognomer
understood, or knew in his time.

In a man the face remains, but the countenance does alter: so that the
continuance is named of the Latin word Volando, which properly in English
signifies a flying or vanishing away.

The countinance appearing sour, through the form and condition of the lips,
cheeks, forehead, and grinning: does indicate such a person to be a fool,
and frantic at times: by the report of the Phisiognomer.

A cheerful and smiling countenance seen, does innuate such a Creature to
be given unto mirth and to be libidinous after nature.



The face often sweating, and that of a light or small stirring: does argue
hotnesse, or a hot condition to consist in that person. And such a Creature is
known of experience, to be leacherous, gluttonous, and a great feeder. Of
which insueth indigestion, and a sickness to come: as the Phisiognomer has
sundry times noted.

The face appearing valled or dented in, and rather more lean than fat, does
innuate such a Creature to be injurious, envious, a liar, contentious, cruel:
yea, a Murderer: if the same especially be annexed unto adustion, and that the
color be either ^anne, or yellowe appearing: as the same (the Physiognomer
sundry times) has observed and known.

And every countenance, when the same apeareth full of flesh and fat, does
denote (by the agreement of most Writers) such a creature to be sluggish, and
given unto pleasure and wanton actions.

The face appearing very much awrie, lean, and long, procures after the
mind o^ the Phisiognomer) a very rude creature in conditions, malicious, and
^nuious: and the same affirms learned Rasis.

A sad countenance indicateth sadness and heaviness of mind in that creature:
but the frowning look, does denote such a person to be a bethinker, and an
immaginer of deep matters: yea, wily, fearful in actions, and indeuoreth
himself to be crafty.

The face well proportioned, both in the form of the flesh, color, and in the
parts connexed, does argue a laudable life or disposition, and flowing in
Uertues.

Yet many men has the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted, which were near
unto an infortune* whose look or countenance before, (although it seemed hid
unto the same time) yet their countenance after becam deformable, so that their
faces were more deformable, then these to fore appeared: and their eyes were
drawn awry, that they seemed leering, with their eie-lids gathered, and
eyebrows shed downward. And the Phisiognomer this noted many times: and
judged the like of one named Petrus Capreolus, who fell unto the like estate,
as Cocles prognusticated of him

The face seen hollow, from the beginning of the forhead, unto the end of the
chin, that the nose and mouth seem placed as they were in a valley, does
inuate evil conditions, especially if the same be with a wan or adust color.
For such has the phisiognomer known to have bin murderers* full of words,
contentious, yea Pirates and Thieves.

Take heed (says Cocles) that you be not deceived in the judgment of the
leprous, forasmuch as their eyes are round, and the veins eminent or bearing
outward, and a cytrinesse of color mixed unto the redness: and such are
caused to be quick of stirring, and possesses a straitnes of the Nosestrils,
with a most vehement hoarsenesse, that it causes that person, as it were, to
speak thorough the nose. The Gums also of such creatures, and the ends of
their noses are known to be beaten away: their skin besides is caused rough,
and the hairs of the ouerbrowes shed away: al which by the face may partfull
be known, as the Learned Arnoldus de villa noua, reports.

A small face and countenance, does witness a small and base wit. The
countenance formed exceeding big, denotes sluggishnes in actions, a dull
capacity, and foolishness.

What to be noted and judged of the condition and form of the Nose and
Nosthrils. The 22. chapter.


Man's face (after the mind of the Methaposcope^) is thin and very passible,
and no part there is of man's body, which like expresses the passion of the
mind, as the face properly does. Of which the mind altered by any cause, the
Methaposcopers can readily espy and judge. The passible place also of the face,
and the eyes which the Phi^osophers name to be the Windows and Mess^ngers of
the mind, and next to these is the forehead. For we daily see in the place,
that the vains exte^sed in many subjects, when such are angry, do swell in a
marvelous bigness. The next passible part, is the nose, in that the same is
Cartilaginous (as without flesh) except the virtue of ingendring be mighty from
the beginning of generation. So that this before the other parts, causes man's
face especially, to be either comely or deformable.

The nose stretched and retching unto the mouth, with a decent bigness, argues
the bigness of the Cartylage, and the multitude or much quantity of flesh,
which compasses the same Cartilage, in that the same cannot be caused, but
thorough a great hotnesse. For the property of heat is to dilate and lengthen
out: so that the nose, when the same is protensed or stretched unto the mouth,
does indicate the complexion of the whole indiuiduate to be hot: of which both
honesty and boldness proceeds, and is caused in that creature.

The Nosthrils big and large, do witness the Testicles great: and that such
a person to be leacherous, a betrayer, deceitful, a liar, envious, covetous,
a niggard, of a gross wit, and somewhat fearful, as certain report: yet the
cause of this matter, they allege not, as the Phisiognomer witnesses.

Here the Phisiognomer teporteth, that the nature of heat is to dilate, but
of cold to shrink, and gather together: so that thorough the largeness of
the Nosthrilles, is the cause of the hot complexion known, of which the great
testicles proceed, and luxury in that creature: for through the multitude of
Sperme, must the receptacle of necessity be great and large, that the same may
receive and contain the Sperme, or matter of the Sperme, unto the digesting of
it. Of the gross humors, is the grosenesse and bigness of members procured,
and by the consequent are the Spirits gross: so that of this grosenesse, is
the rudeness of wit caused, as the Philosopher Aristotle says, ( in lib. 2.
de part. Animalibus cap 4.) of which a tenacity and covetousness insueth: in
so much, as such cannot (thorough the same) rightly Discern.

The Nose does argue the quality of the heart, in that a big nose, does
indicate the hotnes of the heart, and yrefulnes in that creature. And through
this hotnesse (after the mind of Conciliatore) is the priuity of man enlarged
and caused great, as aforesaid. Of which certain report these Words in Latin.

Ad formam nasi, dignoscitur hasta Baiardi. By alike reason (says the
Phisiognomer) may a man argue of the woman's privy place, in these Latin words.

Nam mulieris pes est* signum oris verendae.

The nose either big, or small: does argue by the like, the man's and woman's
(...) to be, in that the same being great, does proceed of the gross matter,
and h^at intensed.

The (...) of the woman, is a note of (...)

For the (...) long, straight and slender: does like argue (...) to be: and
econtra.

The measure of (...) is the proportion and measure of the (...) of (...) in
every one. Of which a learned says, in these words: Ad formam pedis, tu
nosces portam mulieris.

The smalnesse and thinness of the skin of r2h (...) of a (...): is only
known by the condition of the (...) of the (...) in every one: for if the
(...) of the (...) are (...) then do they declare the like (...) or (...) of
the (...) to be, if but (...), then likewise (...) etc.

The Nostrils are the larger parts of the nose, where the holes of breathing
and smelling be seen, and by which, the humor of the Brain is purged.

The Nostrilles of the Nose, do like declare the genitours to be (if we may
credit the Physiognomer) for if these be big and large, then like are the
genitours of Man, judged to be big and large: but if the Nosthrilles appear
small and narrow, then like are the genitours judged small, etc. Of which, this
rule seldom fails, except by accident: as either thorough a sickness, or by
the often fractions with the hand: which practice (as the Phisiognomer
reports) is more commonly exercised of the Cynedes or effeminate persons:
which by that manner of dealing, have greatly increased this Member: as he of
experience, has known in many. And he also vttreth by his skill, that in many
persons, is the right hand bigger than the left: in that the same (by his
reason) is more oftener used.

The Nose big and hawked to the Eagles bill, does argue such a Creature to be
stowt, cruel, and greedy catching: for that this proceeds of a great heat.
And such of this are known to be irefull, revenging, and doing unlawful
things. For this drawing together of the nose, is caused by reason of the
hotnes: as evidently appears in a leather skin, thrown into the fire:
which through heat of the fire, gathers together: so that of the same such
are known to be hot, and by the consequent chollericke and stout, by reason of
the hotnesse bearing sway. Also these for the other part and cause, are yrefull
and revenging (as before vttred) in that such workings proceed, of an excessive
hotnesse. Of the Aquiline nose, does the skillful Asculanus write (in the
mother tongue) after this manner, in his book de Cerbae.

LImpia forma cum laquilino naso,
viuer desia de lo ben daltrui:
Finche la morte vien cum limpio caso.
Gentil magnifico fora de pietade,
Sempre diserue non guardando a cui:
si come fera senza humanitate.
This Philosopher Asculanus concludes, that such are cruel, and handling or
working false matters, and procure or do all things without any regard of the
right or wrong, even unto the death, and these without humanity at al: for as
much as such a Chollericke body, does indicate a ravening mind and will.

The experience of which, the Phisiognomer had many times, especially in sundry
Princes: and of these, one was an Italian King, whose fame was sufficiently
divulgated, and known to all Italy. But here rises a doubtful question,
worthy to be known: and the same is, which the Phisiognomer Cocles grants
unto, that there be two chollericke Subjects found, having both Aquiline or
hawked noses: and of these, the one known and found to be of a Chollerick
complexion, and the habitude Chollericke: the color also of that Creature,
seen to be Cytrine or wan adust. But the habitude of the other person, known
to be perfect, and of a good complexion, that is sanguine: yet the same tending
unto choler.

Of the first (in aunswering unto this doubt) I say (says the Phisiognomer)
that he is of an intensad malignity, by reason of the corroboration ^^rough the
same Spirit, which is conjoined wholly in the Chollericke subject, both of
nature, and by accidence. By accidence (says Cocles) I speak through the
wanne color, which signifies a cold complexion, and Melancholic adust: which
that color properly causes. As the like, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and
noted, in a certain Italian Prince, which altogether was a wicked person, and
causer of the destruction of much people, and a sower of discord and debate
among many. But the end of this Creature was detestable, unto the utter infamy
both of him and his lineage. But of the second and other person I say, that when
the habitude is Sanguine, it is possible, that of the Chollericke, to be made
or caused Sanguine, and of the Sanguine Chollericke by accidence, when the ages
alter these. So that a man may conclude, that when this in a Sanguine body, the
same is then of a remissiue or qualified malignity. The reason is, for that the
blood is a Snaffle or Bridle unto the choler, by which the malice of it is
depressed. And one of like condition (says the Phisiognomer) was that famous
Chyromancer Galasius nigrisolus Carpensis: For as much as his complexion was
known to be Sanguine, and a little flegmaticke: and very effeminate he was*
yet from the shoulders upward, tending unto the Chollericke quality: so that
not free he was, from the vices above noted. And sometimes is the same
depressed, through the part of the complexion and composition, as before uttered.

The Aquiline or hawked nose (after the mind of Conciliatore) seen in a body
very Chollericke, that is, Cytrine or wan adust, is noted the wickedder
conditioned: by the words above uttered of the Phisiognomer.

The Aquyline or Hawked Nose, decerned in a Sanguine Body, or of such a like
quality, tending unto Choler: is of Auicen judged not so evil.

The Aquiline nose in joint manner joined to the forehead, does indicate such
a person to be stowt, and hardy: applied after form unto the Eagle. This
manner of ioynting or to be ioynted unto the forehead, is understood and
meant of him which has the eminency or bearing out toward the forehead, and
such are named to be greedy Catchers, of the head and drith cau^ed, and
signifies also such to be yrefull, violent in Wrath, and chollericke.

Here the Phisiognomer takes in hand, to describe Charles the French King,
whose picture was most lively counterfaited with colors, by a singular painter
in a Table, was brought and showed unto the Phisiognomer, for him dilligently
to behold: which at their requests he did. Also he further learned of a
religious Hermit, the whole composition of this Kings body, which was thus: He
had a big head, the nose exceeding hawked and great, the lips somewhat thin the
chin round, and pitted or dented in, the eyes big, and somewhat bearing out,
the neck short, yet not sufficiently strong, the breast and back large, the
loins and flanks sufficient great, the belly fleshy, the buttockes reasonable
large: the haunches and legs slender: yet sufficient big unto the length: of
the feet does the Physiognomer here nothing utter. Thus in proportioning all the members together, the Physiognomer pronounced, that this mighty King was
short lived: and that his death proceeded by a Catheral and feeble matter,
fuming from the stomach, and like discending again from the head to the
stomach, and of such causes answerable, etc. Although some there be which
report, that he died of poisoning.

The Physiognomers reason of this Judgment was, in that his head, nose, and
breast, etc. were big, and indicated the multitude of matter, and the same
inobedient consisting in him: thorough which the virtue ruling, could not
direct the whole Body, for his evil composition. Of which is to be learned,
that every sign is a representer of his proper note, forasmuch as the same
slenderness in the hippes, signified the virtue and strength of the brain, to
be feeble and weak, and caused an evil quality or condition of the sins:
and disorder of the royal members: without whose good agreement it is
impossible that life could be long in that creature.

He was also known to be Luxurious, and the reason agreeable (is about
uttered of the Physiognomer) which confirms that the norishment which ought
by due nature to be converted, and run unto the hanches and legs, was by
that manner of life, otherwise converted into Sperme. So that this King was of
like Nature and Disposition, as above described of the Phisiognomer: yet the
quality (as it should seem) of lesser Malice in the members, contrary Working
unto a hotenesse of the heart: and he was wanne of Color, which by accident*
signified the Dominion of Coldness and Melancholic to consist in him. And the
selfsame (he reports) that the Aquiline or hawked nose, did somewhat
depresse. But the eminency or bearing out of the eyes, signified, that the
fore ventricle of the brain, was Flegmaticke: which to conclude, fortified (as
he says) the shortness of life: and according as the Phisiognomer had judged
on this King, even it fell out, who reigned but a short time after.

The French King, that reigned in the Phisiognomers time, for his evil
habitude and composition of body, lived and reigned bur a while, according as
the Phisiognomer had before pronounced at the sight of his picture brought unto
him, earnestly to view and behold it: the personage or counterfaite of whom,
was thus described: he had the head somewhat sharp in composition, the forhead
narrow, the eyes appearing big and eminent: the face showed lean, the hairs
of the head seemed of nature short: the Nosthrils appearing large and bearing
up, the lips showed thick, but the chin appeared sharp, the neck short and
slender formed: the shoulders showed lean and narrow: the arms and hands were
discerned slender and long in form: the epiglotis eminent, the ^urcle of the
breast appeared narrow, and the breast like narrow in form: the stature of
this King, appeared rather crooked or stooping, then upright: the body of this
Creature, was found Chollericke: the moving of the eyes descerned, and known
to be swift and rolled or turned vpwardes in the motion: the legs (to be
brief) were seen slender in composition. As touching the lawdable praises of
this King, the Physiognomer found not any justly to report: in that his vices
were so known unto many, and divulgated (in a manner) every where.

But in returning unto the purpose, there was another Aquiline nose, which
could not so well put in practice, or exercise his government, as the other above
uttered, whose name was Codrus (a man known) to be a singular learned Poet in
the Latin tongue, and had the fame and seigniority for the Greek tongue,
whose corporature and personage was thus: he had the head congruent formed,
the forhead plain, and mean of bigness: the eyes s^ood sufficient hollow,
being gray of color, not shining or glistering: the nose formed like unto the
Eagles bil the face found long, the lips of r^asonable big^^s, ^ut somewhat
thin, the chin dent^d in, the neck found long, the Epyglottis eminent, the
shoulders large, and bearing out: the breast and hanches slender and narrow:
the thighs and shanks small, yet agreeable unto the other parts, of the body,
the heels found flat, the feet were long and slender.

Of which notes, Almansor secundus vttreth, that the sharpness of the nose,
the long neck, the voice sharp or small, and the comeliness of complexion,
demonstrated together a dryness in that creature, thorough the part of the
chollericke quality. But his composition of body, was found small: and the
place of the Stomach, descerned narrow: his digestion also of meat, was known
to be both weak and small, through the little and narrow stomach: his heart was
found to be cold through the length of his neck: he was besides covetous and
fearful, which is contrary unto magnanimity or boldness: in that the same
proceeds of a hot quality. Yet had this person a ready wit, through the
comely form of the head, forasmuch as the knitting and conioyning of the
spirits was lawdable, by which, the descent Organe aptly served unto reason:
especially, for the eminency of the fore-heade in breadth: But the breast, the
Ribs, the Heels, and the neck, were found all effeminate, which (as above
uttered) be contrary unto magnanimity: the Aquiline or hawked Nose indicated
(as the Phisiognomer reports) his Covetousness: that so mightily (by his
report) bare sway in him. Thus says he, a man must proportionate all the
Members together: for otherwise it shall be in vain, to judge or pronounce any
matter at all (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) on any subject.



The nose seen flat* does signify such a person to be luxurious, hasty in
wrath, and faint-harted: for the dominion of the moisture, and Phlegm in that
creature, as the learned Conciliatore reports.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer Cocles) that when the nose appears
flat, then is a hotnesse and moisture indicated in that person: for as much as
the hotnes of the Aqualine or hauked nose, is caused with a dryness. So that
the flat noses are procured through a hotnesse and moisture, in that the
moisture causes the enlarging of the nose: of which, such are known hot and
moist, that properly cause the luxury in them.

When any report such persons, that they are hasty in wrath, the same
proceeds (as the Phisiognomer reports) of an overmuch hotnesse: and the
inflammation of spirits moved and procured, through the abundance of matter:
and of that inflammation (by the report of Cocles) is the yrefulnesse caused in
such. Another cause, shall here be uttered, in that the inflammation of the
spirit, cannot soon or speedily be cooled, through the narrow passage: as shall
appear in the matter following.

Of which, the singular Philosopher Asculanus, in the mother tongue, wrote
these worthy verses following.

EL concauato e anchora il naso simo,
ciascun di lora a la luxuria acosta:
Piu del secundo dico che del primo,
chi la subtle e ne lextremo agozo.
Ouero rotundo cum obtusa posta:
mouesi ad ira el primo come cuzo,
Laltro e magnanimo, e dae grave style.
The person which has a short Nose, and the same flat: is judged (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) to be lascivious: and as some write, to be a Thief.

The nose seen short, the mouth formed small, and the teeth found short and
big: do denote (after the mind of the worthy Conciliatore) a moist and cold
complexion.

The sharpness of the Nose seen, the Neck found long, the voice heard small
and comely: are apparent notes of a temperate chollericke quality: as the
learned Rasis, the worthy Albertus, Ptholomeus paruus, and other report, and
Cocles with them.

Here conceive, that the nose formed broad in the middle, and appearing bended
unto the top, does indicate such a Creature to be full of words, a liar, and
irefull. The reason is, in that the same ^leuation or rising of the nose, and
hollownesse unto the middle: is procured of the Chollericke quality, and
paueity of the Cartylage: For as much as choler has consumed that persons
heat, and caused a drawing together of the skin in that part, as above uttered
(of the Aqualine Nose) so that the parts, which shall not be impouerished or
lessened (by the same) of flesh: is because the fleshy part has a viscous and
clammy moisture, through which the same is not so soon and lightly resolved.
The cause of the irefulnesse in that Creature, proceeds of choler, and
through the passages hinddred, as shall appear in the proper place.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that he has many times noted of
experience in infinite subjects: and in all his life time, he never saw any
which were not possessed with a heap of vices, especially for lying, or for
their imagining lies: and this caused by the Chollericknesse consisting in
them: for which cause, this Cocles wills a man to take heed of the fellowship
of such, as of all which (says he) experience in short time, will instruct
thee perfect.

The nose formed sharp of the end, does indicate such a person to be a liar,
contentions, and yrefull: the reason is (as the Phisiognomer reports) in that
such are of a chollerick quality, for as much as the leanness and sharpness
of the nose, does for the most part happen through the abundance of choler.
The same end also, has narrow passages, in which the air cannot pass to
cool the heart: so that of this, it long remains inflamed, which is the
cause of contending and quarrelling in that person.



The like Creature (by report of the Phisiognomer) was that Antonius, a learned
scribe and notary: yea* he noted many other Contrymen of his to be like:
among the number of which, Cocles observed and knew a jolly Fellow of the like
Nature, named Vandinus de Fauentia, which was a betrayer of his courteous
Lord, and a principal aider, Son unto the Noble Astorgius Fauentia: by whose
means, and other mighty deceivers about him, was this gentle Lord by
commandment, conveyed unto the prison in Rome, and shut up as close
prisoner in that strong Castle, named Sa^cti Angeli: where not many months
abiding, was lamentably murdered of a most cruel Bastard, by a headlong fall,
as the Phisiognomer learned and understood: which wicked Creature after the
fact committed, miserably pined away, even like an Image of Wax, standing in
the hottest Sun.

When the Nose shall be meanly small, a little dry upward, and at the end
raised up, and the nether part or end turned again upward: or that his cleft
be proceeded from beneath, unto the part turned upward, toward the Cone of the
Nose: does then indicate luxury, or such an abuse of the body, not here
decent to be uttered: as the learned Conciliatore in his Rubric of Phisiognomy
reports.



The like of this the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted sundry times,
especially in one of the Senate House of the Noble City of Bononie: which for
reverence unto the noble-house and honesty sake, he refuses to name. The cause
is, for as much as such are of a moist and sanguine quality, tending unto
choler: and these universally (by report of the Phisiognomer) are luxurious,
in both the kinds, even as the same through the pricking forward of choler,
which daily inflameth the blood.

And the regitiue Nature of the whole body, moves or stirs forward the
expulsive virtue, unto the sending forth of the noious matter superfluous, and
expels the same unto the congruenter places, by the apt passages: and
sends the same forth unto the 2rd1y, in that it is the cause of the erection
of it. So that such help forward themselves, by a proper industry, not decent
(for honesty sake) to be he uttered, when as the desired subject is not at
hand. And the apparent notes of these persons are, that such have the nose
big and blunt, especially at the end: and the Nostrils wide and large,
through the grossness of bigness of the nose.



The singular Aristotle (in Methraphoricis) utters, that such having the nose
big at the end, are of an earnest and ready mind, unto the concupiscence of
the desired act: such also are known to be base, and of no reputation, applied
for the form unto the Ox: in that such especially in the venereall act, are
so prone and easily moved, that they covet in mind what person soever they
see, which especially in known to be true: for the active coeating as with
Women: for such after the sight of women, seem in a manner to mourn unto
themselves, as the Bull does after the Cow: and such ( Asculanus reports) are
irefull.

Rasis utters these words, that whose Nostrils are found to be large, is
argued to be a person luxurious.

Such which have the nose formed big and broad, are insensible, unshamefast,
unapt to learn, and sluggish, applied after the form unto the Sow, having
the like nose. The reason of this is, for as much as such having the nose
grosser or bigger at the end then in any other part, and that large, are
inuericundious, unapt to learn, and insensible: that is, rude: for which
cause, such are applied to the Sow, having the like nose, and the like
conditions in a manner.

The nose sharp at the end, does denote such a person to be irefull, applied
unto the dog: as Conciliatore reports.

He which has a marvelous short Nose, does argue such a person to be an
accuser, and a pickethanke, as the skillful Philemon and Palemon report.



The nose formed sharp at the end, and the same thin, yet upward foward the
forehead more gross: does denote (of experience known) that such a person
hardly to remit his ire: applied for the kind (after the mind of Conciliatore)
unto the irefull Dog.

The Nose formed blunt at the end, and round withal, does indicate such a
Creature to be stout of courage: applied of the Philosopher Aristotle for the
kind, unto the hardy Lion. The same note by relation, sufficiently appears to
most men at this day.

The end of the Nose seen small and sharp, like to the form of the Birds
deck or bill, and generally long: does declare such a person to be hasty,
foolish, and like stirring to and fro: as the learned Rasis reports, and of
him compared unto the bird. And the same like, does the long and thin nose
signify.



The nose very retort, or the same turning back or upward, does (for the most
part) denote, the like perverse mind and conditions, to consist in that
creature.

The Nose formed from the forehead unto the mouth along crooking, and hard or
very stiff: does denote such a person to be unshamefast, applied for the
form (of Aristotle) unto the Raven. And such were known naturally to be
Thieves, as Gulielmus Nurice reports.

The like utters the Phisiognomer, that such a person is known many times to
be a thief, and by the consequent unshamefast: forasmuch as this exposition is
aptly agreeing: and it appears like by the relation which he here utters,
in that such (after the form) are applied unto the Raven. For the Raven is
well known to be a wily and deceitful Bird, purchasing many things by
stealth; and hiding those in privy places.

The nose found rising, and copping up toward the forehead, like to the Eagles
bea^^e: are noted to be stout, bold, and greedy of catchers: applied of
Aristotle (after the kind) unto the Eagle: and as the same in many, has of the
Phisiognomer been diligently noted.

The nose appearing hollow, with the forehead formed round and eminent upward,
does indicate such a person to be luxurious: applied after the kind, unto the
Cock: and this nose sufficiently appears by the relation.

The Nose formed great, yet in a com^ly manner throughout: does argue such a
person to be honest and gentle conditioned, after the mind of Concilia ore.

The nose great, and at the end appearing with an unseemly bigness: d^oth the
like declare (as above uttered) that such a person to be insensible, unapt to
learn, etc. applied for the form unto the Sow.



The Nose seen in the upper part depressed, or flat formed: does argue the
feebleness of courage, and foolishness in that Creature: and this besides is
a note of womanly lightness to consist in him, after Rasis.

The Nose on such wise formed, that the same from the forehead immediately
crooketh: such a person (after the mind of learned Plato, Albertus, and
Conciliatore) is judged impudent, and a privy filcher: applied for the form,
unto the subtle Raven.

The nose in comely form crooking, does indicate an honest mind and singular
wit: as the worthy Conciliatore reports in his Rubricke of Phisiognomy, and
Cocles the like.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the declining of the Nose on the
laterall parts of man: as if unto one side only of the position, it shall
decline: does denote a hurt to happen from the Girdle-steed, unto the lowest
part. But if the Nose downward shall be divided on either side of the
position: does then indicate a sickness, or a stripe to happen: and this
either of the Primitive or Antecedent cause.

The Nose at the end formed somewhat flat: does declare such a person to be
bold and liberal: applied for the form unto the Lion.

The Nose appearing read, with the root and hole within, and breeds drawing
unto a swelling, like to the Strawberry: does argue such a person to be a
great Drinker of Wine, and often drunk: and such for the most part are moist
of quality, and luxurious: especially if such a note be found in Bodies of a
small stature: and this was a practice first found by the Phisiognomer Cocles.

The Nosethrilles formed wide, do denote such a Creature to be irefull: and
this note proceeds of the overmuch hotnesse of the Heart: for how much the
more open and wide these are, so much the greater ire these signify. The
singular Conciliatore (in his Rubricke of Phisiognomy) reports, that such
having the nosethrils stopped, are noted foolish, and of a small understanding.

The nostrils (after nature) thin, and very large open* do denote after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) such a person to be irefull cruel, and of a
disoainfull mind.

The nostrils formed thin, and long retching, are by nature near unto Birds:
but the same proportionally agreeing unto men, is a note of lightness, and an
unstableness of mind, as Conciliatore learnedly utters.

The nostrils appearing thin and sharp, do witness such a person (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) to be full of complaints.

The part of the nostrils joining unto the forehead, if from the forehead
extending, the same be with a comely composition, and that well joining
together: in such manner, as this be neither too high nor to low fixed of
nature: but even direct (as a line or creast (discendeth: does then indicate
(by the report of the Phisiognomer) a manly note and courage in that creature,
yea constancy and wisdom, applied of Aristotle for the form, unto the hardy
Lion. But if the part of the nostrils be lower or flatter, and that deeper then
the abouesaid, does argue the vndiscreetenesse of mind, and weakness of
strength and courage: seeing the same is known to be the note of a femine
lightness.



If the nosethrilles in the top directly cleuated, extene whole: do indicate
an evil government and distemperaunce (...) that Creature. And such are those,
which in the inward end of the gristle be raised up unto the creast, and do to
descend to the Nose: which when these be dire^^, do (after the opinion of the
Phisiognomer) procure the disorder of the tongue, in the vttring of speech, and
sounding word.

The greater and wider Nostrils simply, are (of all the Metopo^copers) better
allowed and commended, then the lesser form of them.

The lesser Nostrils, by the agreement of Pla^o, Philemon* and Ptolomeus
paruus, are naturally ascribed unto servile wits, ouerthwarters, wranglers, and
to thieves.

The Nostri^s formed large open, do witness such a creature to be given to
mirth, and strong in the composition of body.

The Nostrils seen very narrow, round formed, and as they were confusedly shut
together: do witness (after the opinion of the learned Conciliatore in his
Rubricke of Phisiognomy) foolishness, and unaptness to learn, and the
feebleness of courage in that creature.

The ancient Rasis and Al^^rtus report, that the largeness of the nostrils,
and the much quantity of flesh on the Jaws, and the little quantity of baires
on the cheeks, do signify a moist complexion.

The Nostthrilles appearing very blunt, do argue such a person to be foolish:
but the Nostrils joined small, indicateth a perverse mind, and peevish
conditions.

The hairs growing within the Nosthrils, if these be many, thick growing, and
big apearing, argues unstableness of mind, and a gross wit, as Conciliatore
reports, and the Phisiognomer Cocles affirms the same by experience.

If the hairs within the Nosthrils, are fonnde few and soft, do witness after
the mind of the phisiognomer, a ready wit, apt to learn, and honest
conditioned.

The judgment of the form and condition of the ears. The xxiii. Chapter.


THe ears declare the temperament and proportion of the principal members,
and especially the brain, which experience certifieth us. For that the brain
does sometimes send forth a noisome matter behind the ears, of which there is
engendered and caused many times an impostu^^ and the same according to the
diversity of the humors. Of which* the Physicians name these, the clensing
places of the members, and super^t^^ties.

The ears great, are engendered and caused (...) rough the multitude of matter,
in the beginning of generation, of the strong virtue. And all such in a manner
which have great ears (as the Physiognomer has noted) are known to have a
short neck, and head sufficient comely, and are Sanguine: and such for the
more part tending unto choler, or unto gross blood somewhat adust. Such also
are impatient, and lightly angry. For which cause, the Philosopher reports,
that such are foolish (this being excepted) that they are of a good mind and
intention, that is* ^^ter the departure of the inflammation and kindl^^^ about
the heart, forasmuch as this declares ^ hotnes of the heart, through the vains
and arteries as in the Anathomy may well be discerned. And such are of a good
memory, in that they have a ^^emely neck, being an expresser of the brain,
and demonstrating a good disposition: and perhaps through the chollericke
quality, is the retention of kinds, and thorough the quality of the sinnewes,
which are of a dry nature. After the quailing and abating of injuries, such are
of a good intention, in that these cause a good discourse, and noted to be long
lived, forasmuch as in them is a good proportion between the heat and moisture.
And such a person which possesses a mean, is moderate in his actions. The
selfsame is confirmed of the Philosopher, in lib. 1. Animalium, cap. 11. where
he reports, that those which are most apt and ready in hearing, be well
nurtered and conditioned. Such (says he) have a note of the best manners,
which possess mean ears.



The ears great, and directed above measure, are notes of foolishness, or
that such to be Bablers: as Aristotle the Philosopher says. The selfsame
reports Auicen pri. de Anamalibus: that when the first pulpe, that is, of the
ears, is joined with the flesh of the iaw, signifies a foolish vain person.

The Philosopher says, in Methaphoricis, that such as have small ears, like
to an Ape: have (of that reason) Apish conditions. Such as have big ears, are
noted to be dullards, applied to the Ass. If any person shall have ears
formed like a dogs, they are noted to have the best, and to be in a mean
manner. Hitherto Auicen. So that such having the ears over small, are noted
Apish, that is, Apish conditions, where one may see, that malignity and deceit
to have dominion in them.

Such as have the ears ouer-great in respect of the body, argues
foolishness, and dull of understanding, as Aristotle reports, primo de
Animalibus.

Such having the ears mean in quantity, is a good note, for that the same
proves by the similitude, of the disposition in good Dogs.

Rasis reports, that whose ears are big, is a fool, yet long lived after
nature: the ears erected up, and very great: indicateth the multitude of
matter, and the same inobedient as to the due form: and the Dominion of
dryness indicated, which is the only cause of the erection or standing
upright.

The ears flexible or bending, demonstrateth the proportirn of heat and
moisture: and the moisture is cause of the bending, as appears in a skin and
wood, which when they are crooked or winded inward, are moist, otherwise if
they be dry, their parts are broken. Even so, Ptholomy the Philosopher
reports, that the ears great and bended downward, do denote riches.



When the ears are very small, the paucitie of matter, and weak virtue of the
brain is signified: and the Chollericke matter argued: of which the subtle
spirits caused: so that such have a wit or be ingenious in evil Works, and
are Thieves, Foolish, and so covetous, that they desire all things. And
thorough that coveting, such are luxurious, and understood perhaps of the
immoderate appetites, and not of the power or force of the matter.

The learned Palemon utters, that when the ears shall be prominient and
very great, foolishness and garrulitie is signified in that creature: and
such are known to be covetous. But the ears which are as they were cut, and
very short and parted, does Loxius report, to attempt and commit a deceit.

The ears formed semicircularly, and creastes connexed, in the middle somewhat
flat toward the Center, and of a mean bigness, which decently stand to the
head, do witness a goodness of nature. But the ears that are ouer-round,
signifye such a person to be vnap^ to learn. The ears long and narrow, are
reported to be the notes of envy.

The ears lying or standing close with the head, are reported to signify
dullness and sluggishnes* as Albertus says: the reason and cause of the
signification, is for that the Virtue formatiue, when the Organes are directly
formed: or that the Instrument of heat, and the kind quaileth or wants,
causes that the malice of the matter does so enlarge the ears out of
measure, or through the dryness or scarsity of the same, causes them to draw
together, and be narrow, in respect of the due proportion: and of this cannot
govern the works of the spirit: but that the ears like in^ue, according to
the plenty and scarsity of matter, forasmuch as they thus proceed of the
indiu^^ions of nature. These hitherto Albertus. I (says the Physiognomer) have
noted many old men, and found them to have great ears, and not small in that
age.

So that the small ears (after the agreement of most Writers) do denote short
life: in this agr^^th Ptholomy the Philosopher, where he reports, that the
ears small, be a note of shor^e (...): and if the ears be hayry, do
indicate long life. The reason is, that the smalnesse utters the paucity of
matter: and when these be hairy, do denote the matter to be sufficient strong
in virtue to heat the brain with a lawdable heating, in that the hairs are
caused through the vapors elevated of the hotnesse of the heart, and all the
other members.

The ears hairie, do pronounce a good and ready hearing, which is a note of
the kind and heat: and for that cause, I report the same. But the ears
perhaps of some man are ouer-great, and of some small, of some mean, of some
standing far off from the head, of some contrariwise less flat to the head,
some being of a mean disposition: so that among these two, a mean of all the
kinds which hitherto has been uttered, do signify a goodness of nature.

Some report that the ears grisly* does indicate such a person to be of a
Melancholic quality. But the ears great, denotes the dominion of the
Melancholy humor: as the like appears in the Hare and Ass, which have great
ears, and are foolish. So that such having the like ears, are of a like
nature: and the Melancholy humors do not repugne unto the length of life.

Conciliatore says, that the form of the ears, denoting the temperament and
goodness of Nature, consists always of a semicirculare form, and in figure
of a mean greatness: and the creasts or lines connexed, in the middle
somewhat flat toward the Center, and standing seemly to the head. For the
contrary positure of the ears, denotes a contrary to the abouesaide.

The ears marvelous great, and standing out, witnesses foolishnes, garrulity,
and imprudencie. Ptholomy the Philosopher says, that those which have thin and
dry ears, shall never possess the wealth of the world, and it signifies a
very chollericke complexion: of which, the exhaust intention proceeds in the
congruent workings, and argues a most great vnstability in that person. The
selfsame Ptolomy vttreth, that the person which has equinas aures, morietur
dominus vel princeps.

Conciliatore says, that the ears small, denotes malignity in that creature.
The ears over round, to be unapt to learn. The cares long, argues that
person to be envious. The broad ears fixed in a right manner with the head,
indicateth slownesse.

The hairs which are within the ears, if they be many, thick, and long,
argues an ernest mind in the desire of the actual lust of the body.

The signification and judgment of the form of the Cheek bones, and Cheeks.
The 24. Chapter.


THe bals of the cheeks are the parts bering out under the eyes: and these are
also named the cheek bones, as writes Gulielmus Nurice.

The jaws are the parts of the cheeks, out of which the hairs of the beard
do grow, as writes Isidore, in lib. 11* cap. primo.

The cheek bones are often taken and named of the Phisiognomers, for the
Jawbones: and like the worthy Constantine and Conciliatore defines them,

The Cheek bones after Constantine and Gulielmus Nurice, especially declares
the complexion or quality of mankind.

The cheeks appearing read, yet mixed with a tempted whitenes, and in
substance not formed over gr^sse or fat, do indicate a hot and moist quality
and temperament of the same, as Gulielmus Nurice, Phylemon, and others report.

If the cheeks shall be white in color, without any redness mixed, do
signifye an excess of the quality, especially of fleagme, in that creature, as
Gulielmus Nurice, Conciliatore, and Cocles report

If the Cheeks in substance seem lean and thin, and either Swartish or
Cytrine in color: does demonstrate a hot and dry complexion in that person, or
the dominion of an overmuch dryness and heat, as appears in the chollericke.

If the cheeks shall appear as if they were wan in color, and formed thin in
substance, or seem lean of flesh, it indicateth the excess of dryness and
coldness to consist in such an one, as the like apeareth in the Melancholic. So
that the cheeks (after the agreement of Authors) are evident vtterers of the
affections of the mind, and notify his quality: for according to the affections
of the mind proceeding or caused either of a sudden fear, or sudden joy,
does the cheeks suddenly become pale: or otherwise appear red. These hitherto
Constantine.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that when age comes hastily on age, that
such a person seems old before the natural time, then is the same a most
special note of the shortness of Life, which in the face is apparently
discerned. But this rule has his most effectuous judgment both in children and
sicknesses, especially in that which the Physicians name the Ethicke or
consumption of age, a sickness that speedily hastneth death.

Rasis reports, that whose flesh of the cheeks appears gross, and thick
compact, is noted to be of a gross nature. Conciliatore says, that the
cheeks formed gross and thick of flesh, does denote sluggishnes in that
creature, and to be an excessive drinker of strong Wines: but some report
violence, or a wicked will in that person. Which argument of others, is
rather to be allowed then judged, by the agreement of the most Phisiognomers.

The cheeks formed over thin of flesh, argues malignity and wicked conditions,
as both Palemon and Ptolomeus Paruus write.

The bals of the cheeks soft and long in form, denotes such a person to be a
most importunate talker.

The bals of the cheeks formed somewhat long, declares such a one to be a
trifler, and a teller of vain matters and news.

The cheeks are so named of the Physiognomer, for that the teeth and hairs are
naturally ingendered.

Cocles affirms, that the cheeks or Jawebones, are eminent from the upper
parts of the mouth, with a length of the cheek bones through the part of
composition: and such (of observation) are known to be malicious, especially
in unlawful and incongruent matters: and these are applied for the part of the
Jaws, unto the Ox and dull Ass.

But if the Jaws shall be formed short, with such an eminency or bearing out
from the upper part of the mouth, it indicateth maliciousness an evil
reporter, violent in actions, and envious, this especially is verified, when
there shall lack the substance of flesh, or the same appear but thin. Thus far
the skilful Cocles.

The Philosopher Aristotle, said unto K. Alexander, that the cheeks formed
full, with the temples appearing blown, denotes such a person to be
contentious, hasty in words, and very yrefull: the selfsame reports
Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Physiognomy.

The cheeks so small situated, that from the eyes these seem parted off, do
argue the fulness of humors: and that the same creature (after the mind of the
Physiognomers) to be grieved with the burden of them.

The roundnesse of the cheeks formed after nature, indicateth envy, and of
deceitful conditions.

The full or rather fat cheeks, are significations for the most part, of a
sluggarde and Drunkard, if we may credit the ancient Physiognomers.

The cheeks discerned soft, and ill fashioned, do argue such a person (after
the common proverb) to be long tongued, importunate, and talkatiue: and this
the Phisiognomer Cocles has known by experience.

The worthy Philosopher Aristotle, in Methaphoricis utters, that the cheeks
appearing red above, do witness such a creature to be a Drunkard, or a great
drinker of wine: referred unto the similitude of the passion: in that such
which lately have bin vexed, appear of a blushing rednes, especially about the
eyes, kindled and caused in the beginning of the ire. The cause is sufficiently
uttered before of the Physiognomer, in the Chapter of the nature of the face.

Of the Condition, Nature, and Judgment of the mouth. The 24. Chapter.


THe singular Isidore (in xi. Ethimologiarum capit. primo) writes, that the
mouth is so named in Latin Os: for that by it, as by a door, all men
naturally and usually put in meat, and cast forth the spittle prepared: or for
that al meats and sustenance pass by the same into the stomach, and al words
issue forth of the same, to the understanding of minds.

To come unto the matter, in the former Chapter it has been sufficiently
uttered, that the bigness of members proceeds through heat, especially the
mouth, which represents the natural and spiritual members: as of these,
especially the stomach. For how much the proportion of the stomach is unto
the mouth, so much is the proportion of the mouth, answering unto the stomach:
for that the inner members, are known of the Phisiognomers to be hot. Of which
reason, how much intentiuer the heat is, so much the greter will the resolution
of parts be. For where a great resolution consists, there of necessity must
ensue, that a restoration aptly be procured: which otherwise cannot be caused,
but through the benefit and help of meats, that ought to be a sufficient
quantity: of which the spirits are actiuely engendered, and these in great
quantity, which properly cause in that Creature ire, boldness, yea,
quarrelling and fighting. Of which it succeeds, that the worthy Philemon,
Palemon, Albertus, and Conciliatore, report: that the Creature which has a
great and wide mouth, is a gluttonous feeder, yet hardy, and prone to fight.

Rasis utters the like, that the person which has a great mouth, is known to
be a gluttonous feeder, and bold.

The mouth formed small, is noted to be of a Feminine nature. But the mouth
discerned great and wide does witness ire, boldness, quarrelling and
fighting: such also are known by experience, to be gluttonons feeders.

The mouth formed ouer-wide, that the same appears, as it were wyder cut of
purpose: does indicate such a creature to be a gluttonous feeder, wicked,
fierce, lightly moved to fight, and cruel: who for the proper conditions,
applied unto the brute beasts. Certain report, and Ptholomeus paruus with
them, that these are full of words, bosters, tellers of vain tales, envious
liars: and after a manner, appear stark fooli^^.

The mouth having a small closing and opening: does denote such a creature to
be peaceable, yet many times found unfaithful, and faint hearted: the reason of
this contrary, is the same which was above uttered of the Phisiognomer.

The mouth in the proper sight or being, having a seemly quantity in the
greatness, with the lips thin, and appearing small in the closing: and to
these the eyes showing smilingly, with the rest of the face agreeable
answering: does indicate a libidinous person, a Cynede or an effeminate
Creature, and a liar: as the worthy Conciliatore in his Rubrike of Phisiognomy
utters.

A small mouth in form, appearing prominent outward, does denote wicked
conditions in that person, to be false in promise, and a betrayer.

The mouth discerned small, having thin lips, does witness a feeble mind and
courage: but this person is deceitful and malicious.



Where, or in whom the mouth shall appear very far bearing out, and round,
with a thicknes of ^he lips, and that the upper lip foldeth outward: is or the
form (applied of the Philosopher) unto the Hog: and signifies by the
agreement of Authors, that such a creature is nasty, peevish, cruel, and a
fool: as the Phisiognomer has often times noted.

The best conditioned mouth, after the agreement of the Phisiognomers, is when
the same appears not over moist, in that the moisture of the mouth and lips,
does argue fearfulness, and malignity in that Creature, as the worthy
Albertus reports, and the same the Phisiognomer Cocles affirms.

The mouth that sauoureth swe^^e, especially in the breathing: does indicate
an honest person, witty, both in the giving and retaining: wary, se^ret,
coveting fai^e things, and faithful: yet easily led, either unto the good or
evil, through his light ^eleeuing: if we may credit Michaell Scotus.

The mouth that sauoureth ill in the breathing, does denote such a Creature to
be diseased in the Liver, besides of a gross understanding, lightly
crediting, of a base wit, a coueter of other men's goods, lascivious,
deceitful, a liar, a teller of vain matters and news: if Michaell Scotus may
be believed.

Whose mouth in the speaking, is drawn awry, is noted of experience, to be
diseased with a rewine distending from the head: yet is the same either
stronger or weaker procured, even as in the doubling unto the other
proportions: and this of observation, does the Phisiognomer Cocles witness.

The judgment of the form and condition of the lips. The xxvii. chapter.


AT the end of the Jaws, are the Lips formed, which are compouned of a soft
flesh, in that these by a double motion, are aptly moved: as in the one, by a
proper manner upward, and in the other, by the motion downward: and these
caused, by motion of the jaws, from one to the other, both in the closing and
opening: which is the cause, why the lips are named to have a good and perfect
motion. The vtility of them (by the agreement of all the Phisiognomers) is, and
seruech for the furthering and helping of speech, and that these may (through
the help of the Jaws) aptly and well close together, for the better beseeming
of the countenance.

The color of the lips, toward the opening of the mouth is red, thorough many
veins of blood derived unto that place: the note of which is, in that these
often and much in quantity bleed: and are of a light cause broken and quickly
cut off. The common hurts there happening, are especially cured (after the mind
of the Phisiognomer) with the same, named the Practitioners Mel Rosatum: for he
reports, that he has often experienced the same in many subjects.

There may Notes also be gathered in conceived, by the color of the Lips;
for that the natural color in the edges of the Lips (after the mind of
Constantine) ought to be read: through the thinness of skin, which lightly
of the heat or color of the blood, receives a Ros^e quality. Of which the
worthy Constantine reports: that the redness of the lips, indicateth the
pureness of complexion, and the vnmixing together of troubled blood: and the
note both of good and strong virtue in that Creature.

The wanness of the lips, argues the contrary to the same above: in that the
virtue of blood, and natural heat is lacking in that creature: so that such
having the like lips, are noted to be sick, as the worthy Rasis reports.

When the lips are formed big, these do represent the multitude of matter,
drawn unto them through heat: and the grossness or bigness of them, is
caused through the gross humors and spirits, of which the dullness of wit and
foolishnes ensues, procured by reason of the hotnesse, except the nether lip
be discerned loose hanging, and watery running.

But if the lip be discerned upright, and thick in form, that is, compact or
stiff: in such a person, does the Phisiognomer (of experience) apply there the
Planet Mars.

A like reason the Phisiognomer uttered, that when the mouth is formed great,
if that the lips appear loose and hanging: in that part of the Creature is
the Moon of him, and others aptly applied.



The nether lip decerned loose hanging, and that the same appears very red
in color: does argue (happening in the woman) to be a most sure note, of the
great desire unto the veneriall act, and shamefastness in that Creature: as
the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles noted in a famous Curtizane of Rome, named
Isabella di Luna. The like note seen in Children, signifies the Creature in
time, to grow and become a Cynede or effeminate person: especially, if the
countenance and eyes appear smiling, and the creature grown unto a ripe age:
as Cocles reports, that he noted in a certain Nobleman of the like
condition.

In brief, all the other members according to the nature and property of them,
are each attributed unto his proper Planet: as shall after appear in the third
Book of the Physiognomers to come forth, entitled the Phisiognomy of the
Planets.

The worthy Loxius, Philemon, Plato, Aristotle, Albertus, and Conciliatore
report: that the lips decerned cheerful, and somewhat smiling, happening with a
mercy countenance: do argue such a Creature to be wantonly disposed, and
libidinous: yea, such sometimes are known to be crafty, deceivers, and
thieves: of which, was that wicked Chirurgian (a Countryman of the
Phisiognomers) named Seraph nus de pisis, that he diligently noted.

The lips of the mouth formed very gross, loose hanging, or overmuch folding
out: do indicate such a creature to be simple, lightly or soon crediting, and
of a dull capacity: these also denote a flegmaticke humor moystning, to
consist in that person: compared of Arist^tle for the form, unto the aged
Ass, having the like lips.

If the lip within be seen not lively, or not a fair read in color: does
argue a matter not regulated, and gross humors to consist in that Creature:
of which a dull capacity, and belluine understanding ensues: yea, the same
sometimes denotes a sickness present, or that shall shortly follow*

The Philosopher Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) utters, that such which have
the lips formed thin, and in the edges appearing to hang loose out: in such
manner, that the upper lip is seen stretched over the nether, at the
closing and joining of the lips, are denoted to be bold, stout, and of great
courage: applied for the form, unto the courageous Lion. The like condition of
these, may a man see in the Massiue (...) of our Realm, which have such hanging
Lips, as to all Men known.

Such which have the Lips hard, and thin formed, and a bearing out decerned
about the Canine or sharp teeth: do indicate a rude understanding in that
Creature, unapt to learn, and furious in actions: applied for the form, unto
the grunting Hog.

The cause of these (as the Phisiognomer Cocles supposes) is the paucity of
matter, and the dominion of drith: in that it consumes the moisture of the
lips but this about the canine teeth, it cannot so wast or consume: for as much
as the moisture consisting in such a place, is known to be viscous and ciammy.
Such also by reason of the dries, (says the Phisiognomer) multiplied in the
brain, are noted to be foolish: applied after the manner, unto the Swine. So
that whose lips are discerned thin and hard, and about the Canin teeth bearing
up, such persons are referred to the swine.



The nether lip decerned greater then the upper denotes unaptness to learn,
simple, of a small understanding, and foolish.

The nether lip seen swelled unto the sharp or canine teeth, does indicate
such a person to be full of rancor, malicious, and contentious.

Such which have the Lips formed gross, and the upper hanging over the nether
Lip, are denoted (by report of the Philosopher Aristotle) to be of a simple
understanding, of a dull capacity, and foolish: applied for the form, unto the
slow and dull Ass.

Whose upper lip shall appear prominent or bearing out with the Gummes,
does witness such a Creature to be a lover of discord, and occupying or
busying himself in strifes and Controversies, applied for the form unto the
dog: these hitherto, borrowed out of the Phisiognomy of Aristotle.

Such having the upper lip so elevated, that the Gums that is, the flesh on the
teeth, and the teeth themselves are decerned, are known (as the Phisiognomer
reports of experience) to be full of variance, and contumelious: yea, often
rebuking: applied for the form unto the Dog, especially, and the same,
according to the apparent congruency seen. For the dog when he purposes to
bite, shows then the teeth by the gathering up of the lips.

The Lips formed small and thin, and the mouth discerned little: does
indicate the imbecility of mind, and craftiness to dwell or consist in that
person.

The ancient Rasis reports, that whose lips are discerned great, is denoted
foolish, of a dull capacity, and unapt to learn. The selfsame does the
worthy Phylosoher Aristotle utter, in his Phisiognomy of the members, that
such a person which has thick lips, is known to be foolish, and of a simple
capacity.

The much bearing out of the lips, does witness such a person (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) to be foolish, full of words, contentious, and hardy.

Certain report, that whose lips shall be formed congruently thin and not much
folded or turned outward: does denote such a person to be secret in all
matters, wary, of a good perseverance, yet yrefull at times, and of a singular
or ready wit. The cause is, for that the same declares a congruent matter,
unto the subtilnesse of the humors and spirits, which is the reason and cause
of the wit. But the irefulnesse consisting in that creature, proceeds through
the subtilnesse of the spirits, prone and apt unto the kindling of it.

Such having the lips with the gummes formed on the teeth prominent or bearing
out, do indicate an evil tongued person, a wrangler, yreful, and inclined to
work injuries: for these properly referred unto the Dog: as the singular
Palemon utters.

Whose lips shall be seen well colored, and these rather thin, then gross
or thick: does signify such a person to be well conditioned in all matters,
and lightly changed, either to the good or evil, but rather prone unto
virtues, then unto vices, as Michael Scotus utters: and there (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) is the Planet Jupiter represented.

Whose lips are decerned not sufficient equal, or a like throughout, in such
manner, that the one be grosser or thicker then the other: does witness such a
person to be more simple then wise: and of a variable fortune, as certain
report.

The philosopher Ptholomeus paruus, utters, that the outward lips formed
small, and somewhat folded or turned outward, do denote such a person to be
full of words, very envious, and an accuser. The reason is, for that the
paucity or smalnesse of the lips, does witness the small quantity of matter,
and the dominion of coldness, but the folding or turning outward of them, does
declare a dryness drawing together the hairy sinnewes: of which ensues that
the animal spirits are incongruent, unto the decerning of whatsoever is
spoken: and the envy through the same, proceeds, and is like caused.

The worthy Ptolomeus Paruus utters that the upper lip folding or turning
upward, and the nether downward: do signify a misery or wretchedness of
life, and uncomely conditions. Of this the Phisiognomer saw, and found a
singular experience, especially in the poor and needy people. For the
weakness of the animal Spirits, (says he) is signified to consist in them:
of which the wit properly has not place or seat in that creature.

The lips formed thin, if the upper be turned and folding outward, and the same
loose hanging: do denote such a creature to be a deceiuer, subtle, and a
Thief for the most part.

The lips decerned gross or thick, like to the Dogs: do indicate such a
person to be a deceiuer, an accuser, and wicked in conditions: these hitherto
borrowed out of the phisiognomy of Ptolomeus Paruus.

The lips of the Moors are not to be judged upon, but of those which dwell
and are conversant amongst them and their qualities there shall note: for which
cause sufficient it is, to judge in general of those Realms and Countries,
more known to us.

The judgment of the form and condition of the teeth. The xxvii. Chapter.


THe Canine or sharp teeth of men, if these be long, fast standing, and
bearing outward, do argue such a person to be a glutton, irefull, fierce, and
lascivious, applied for the form unto the dog and Boar.

The cause I suppose (says the Phisiognomer) through the abundance of the
radical moisture, or Spermaticall matter, which declares a most great
dominion of heat and strength in the principal members, of which a hasty
dissoluing of the substantial moisture insueth, that cannot be restored, but
through the much ating of meat, whose plentiful substance this greatly
needs: for which cause, such are inordinate, as is aforesaid: as appears
by relation in the Dog and Boar.

And such the Phisiognomer has known of experience, to be wasters of their
own substance, great drinkers, deceivers, Whore-hunters maintainers of
Harlots and murderers, especially if any other proportion aydeth and
confirms the same.

Rasis reports* that whose teeth are discerned weak, thin set, and small,
argues the whole bodies weakness, both with feebleness, and shortness of
life. The selfsame utters the said Rasis, in the buying of servants. Also
Aristotle uses the same words in his Problemes.

Aristotle likewise reports ( in secundo de Animalibus) that such having the
teeth thin set, are noted to be short lived. Rasis also affirms the same in
these words: That whose canine or sharp teeth are discerned long, and strong
set, is argued to be a Glutton, an evil person, and vicious of body.

Conciliatore in his Rubricke or Phisiognomy, reports: That a noise causes
through the teeth, does denote a frensines in that person, which sometimes
happens to sleeping children, when they are troubled with Worms, as the
skillful Physicians report.



The teeth formed big and broad, whether the^e stand inward, or are seen
outward, do argue a vain person, lascivious, simple, of a slender capacity,
and having a ^ouine wit, for that the same witnesses gross spirits to
consist in that person, proceeding of grosse-humors.

The teeth most dry, without any moisture discerned to stand in them, yea and
wholly dry in a sick person, do denote death at hand: forasmuch as the
radical moisture is then consumed, and their bodies remain and are, as a lamp
without Oil. In a healthful body, the like seen, do signify a sickness to
come, and the same shortly.

The teeth seen full of reume, or a distilled water from the head appearing
in them, argues a disease of the head or stomach, through the participation
and occasion of the head and lungs, causing this distillation from the head
into the Nose and Eyes, the Cathar, the cough, the Squincy in the throat, and
the impostume of the jaws. But any of these, this procures either more or
less, according to the contrary working of the members, as unto the beholder
may evidently appear. Such Beasts having the teeth indented like to a Saw,
only drink by licking with the Tongue: But such having the teeth formed
whole, do drink by supping, as the famous Philosopher Aristotle reports.

The Teeth formed small, and weak to chew, both thin set, and short appearing,
do indicate (after Michael Scotus) a feeble courage, a tender capacity,
fearful, lightly persuaded, either unto good or evil, of a reasonable wit,
and faithful: but such a one is short ^iued.

The Teeth (after Michael Scotus) not-euen formed, neither in the bigness, nor
in the standing of the Gums: so that there appear of them narrow, broad, thin,
and thick teeth, denotes a disdainful person, envious, bold, wary, and of a
ready wit, if one may credit this Scotus.



The teeth formed very long, and as they were sharp, somewhat thin set, yet
strong in the chewing, do witness (after the mind of Scotus) such a person to
be a Glutton, envious, bold, deceitful, suspicious, a liar, and
inuericundious.

The teeth (as M. Scotus reports) appearing cytrine, or brown, whether these
be short or long formed, argues such a person to be more foolish then wise, a
gross feeder, lightly crediting, of a diverse understanding, suspicious,
envious, a coueter of other men's goods, and a liar.

The teeth big and broad, whether these decline, or stand in and out, or that
they appear thick or thin set, witnesses such a person to be vain, lightly
crediting, simple, of a tender capacity, a gross feeder, lascivious, and a
liar.

The teeth discerned strong and thick set, indicateth long life in that
creature, to be a Teller of news, self willed, a stout person, lightly
crediting* desirous of beautiful things, and of a dull capacity.

The teeth weak, few in number, thin set, and small, do indicate such a person
to be weak of body, short lived, gentle, shamefast, tractable, trusty lightly
crediting, of a ready capacity, and wary. Hitherto borrowed out of the
Phisiognomy of Scotus.

Of the condition and judgment of the tongue. The xxvii. Chapter.


THe tongue is a member which is extended out of white flesh, both hard and well
moving, and this the color and use of it declares: the rednes consisting in
it, is caused of many small vains and little arteries which proceed and come
unto it, especially unto the nether part of the same, thorough which this
appears in the nether part Redder, than in the upper: and this is known to
be a spungy matter full of powers: For experience instructs us, that the same
is bloody, for that the solution of the continuity of the same, is only cured
in short time, with the simple Rosed Honey.

The tongue not only serves for the clean and perfect uttering of words in
smiting the teeth to cause the sound of them, in the issuing forth: but the
same also helps to distinguish all manner of tastes, yea the letters perfectly
express, as the learned Aristotle says.

The tongue folded or turned downward, and stutting or stammering, does argue
an humorall laske of the belly, as the worthy Hipocrates reports, in 32.
Aphoris. sexrae secto.

Such as are encombred with this Humorall laske, become Stutterers or
Stammerers, thorough the matter descending from the head which enters, and is
drunk into the Spunginesse and Lacertes of the tongue: and of this engrossed
or caused thick, through which enlarging, the same of necessity must be
shortened. So that of the same cause, such stut or stammer: yea, Rasis
reports, that the stammering does innuate the moystnesse of quality. Some
there be, which are caused to stut of nature: of which, that Noble Phisitien
Etius writes.

Such having the tongue tied before, cannot perfectly pronounce the letter S.
but sound the same like C. and such are named of Etius, proper stammerers.

The tongue tied behind, cannot pronounce the Letters, R. and T. as Galen
reports: but breaking the Letter R. sound the same like to the letter L. and
such of him, are aptly named Lispers.

The Flix named Diarrhaea, is a Flix or laske of the belly, with the only
shedding of humor, without an inflammation or exulceration: when the humors
especially descend from the head. So that when any utters the words with
difficulty, it is then a note of Diarrhaea to mollest that creature. With which
disease, the Phisiognomer reports himself to have been encombred in his
Childhood: forasmuch as in many subjects this sickness much mollesteth and
abounds in this age, but grown unto riper years, the same then seaceth.

The Stammerers (says the Phisiognomer) do many times fear to drink any
heddy Wine, in that these are soon drunk, through the brains weakness. Hence
it is that the drunkard so stammereth, that he readily cannot pronounce
(thirty three. Forasmuch as the vapors of the Wine, are drunk into the
spunginesse of the tongue, so that it is hindered of the natural site.

Hypocrates in suis secretis says, that the heaviness of the tongue happening
in a young man, pronounces after the lightness of the same sudden death: the
like affirms Galen.

When the tongue is discerned gross, big and large, argues a rude wit, as
the Phisiognomer many times noted: this also does represent Flegmaticke
humors, to consist in the brain of that creature, or in the other parts of his
body.

Conciliatore says, that the stammering and often repeating of the fore
syllable and word, before the full uttering and speaking of the Word, does
denote such an one to be prone unto the Melancholy quality.

The tongue by a swift motion drawn together, and through the corrupting and
breaking of the words, causing a repetition: does Witness such a person to be
foolish, hasty in wrath, and yrefull. And this is caused through the
moueablenes and hotnesse of the spirits, hastening forwards the pronouncing of
words, without consideration.

When the tongue shall be discerned so heavy as a stone, and in a manner
appearing immooueable: does denote (after the mind of the Philosopher) a
sluggish person, slow in actions, and of a dull capacity.

The tongue thin, does represent a subtle wit, through the decent matter, both
of the humor and spirit: although the same may declare a hot, and peradventure
a Chollerick quality, after the mind of the Phisiognomer.



Ptolomy says, that the tongue long and read, signifies wisdom, proceeding of
laudable humors.

In Kisses (by report of the Physiognomer) may much be known and found. For a
certain creature I saw (says he) which thrust forth the tongue, nigh a
Palm breadth: and the same sundry times experienced in my sight, as a matter of
admiration, and worthy to be noted. And of this is known to the wise, that the
virtue of the muscles to be voluntary, etc.

The tongue seen white in color, does indicate poverty and misery to ensue,
except mightier notes prevail, as the Philosopher Ptolomeus Paruus reports.

Conciliatore writes, that the tongue discerned of the natural color, does
denote a weak estate and evil condition in that person, especially of the
breast and belly.

The person which has such a long, gross, and round tongue, that with the
same thrust forth, he may easily lick the Nose, does witness such a person
(after nature) to imitate the Ox in conditions: as the same (the Phisiognomer
dilligently noted) in a neighbor of his.

The learned Auerrois (in de se^su and sensato) says, that when the tongue
has drunk in, and received certain humors, the fast of the same is then
corrupted, and is to be conceived of the Instruments of the other senses.

The tongue ouer-fast speaking (as reports Michael Scotus) denotes such a
person to be more simple than wise, of a dull wit and understanding, lightly
crediting, and conuertible either unto the good or evil.

The Tongue that stutteth in the vttreing of words (says Michael Scotus) does
indicate such a person to be very simple* vain, unconstant, yrefull: yet from
his ire easily brought and appeased, and willing to serve.

The tongue discerned big and rough, witnesses a circumspect person,
reasonably willing to serve, secret to himself, disdainefull, a betrayer,
vain, a teller of news, fearful, and yet having a reasonable sufficiency of
many things.

The tongue descerned thin, signifies a Circumspect person, ingenious, yet
lightly fearful, soon crediting, and conuertible unto good or evil.
Hitherto Scotus.

The nature, forms, and judgment of voices. The xxix. Chapter.


THe cause why in some persons, the voice is heard big, in some small in some
big and small together: and in some after a hoarse manner: is for that (as the
Philosopher says) there are three principal conditions that concur unto the
voice. The one, is the virtue of the lunges in forcing or procuring forward the
breath, in reuerberating to the root of the tongue, or to the pipe of the
lunges. The other and second is, through the air expelled again, to
reuerberate the same. The third is, the pipe of the Lungs, unto the root of
the tongue where the air and breath is reuerberated. Of which, how much the
sounding virtue consists strong, to expel much breath, and the pipe of the
lungs formed large, that the same receives great plenty of air, so much the
greater and lesser appears the voice: but how much the virtue appears weak,
and the weason or pipe of the lungs consists weak, so much the smalnesse and
shrilnesse of voice appears, according to the moving or swiftness of the
breath.

The grosnesse of the voice, proceeds thorough the slownesse of moving in
that creature: of which how much the virtue does lesser move the air or
breath, so much the more subtilnesse or smalnesse, and shrilnesse has the
voice: through which, this proceeds and is caused (after the mind of the
phisiognomer) the swifter.

How much the more air or breath (says he) shall be gathered and received
into the subject, so much the grosser or bigger will the voice succeed and be,
and the same procured thorough the slownesse of moving.

The asper or rough voice, proceeds through ^ dryness, of the pipe of the
lungs. But the hoarse voice is caused thorough a superfluous moisture, which
descends from the head, unto the pipe of the lungs, which (as it should
seem) so hinders and lets the breath to pass in that creature.

The equality and sweetness of the voice, proceeds and is cau^ed through a
temperament of the pipe of the lunges: when the same consists and is neither
to dry nor moist. For this is a note that the quality of the heart not to be
resisting or letting, but that a proportion of all living things, may be found
and known: and in these, the Female^ are decerned to be of a weaker and
shriller voice then the Males: except the cow as the Philosopher ( in quinto de
Animali^us) utters.

The person which has a big voice, is noted to be very injurious: applied for
the form unto the Ass, as Aristotle reports, in Methaphoricis.



Such which, seem to forecall, beginning in a base manner, and ending small:
are noted to be irefull, yet soon appeased and pleased: app^ied (...) the
form unto the Ox, and unto the comeliness of the voice.

Such which utter the words now big, now low, and vnperfitly: are indicated
to be fearful, applied for the same condition unto Women, and unto the
comeliness of the voice.

The persons which seem to call and speak big, and the voice not changed into
a diverse manner: are applied of the Philosopher for the form, unto our great
Masty, and unto the seemelinesse of the voice.

The creature which is heard to speak softly, without a retching of the
voice, are noted to be gentle, and simple: applied for the form unto the
sheep.

Such which call or utter the words shrilly, are noted to be irefull: applied
for the kind and form unto the Goat: these hitherto out of Aristotle, the like
Albertus, and Conciliatore report, and Hieronimus de Manfredis, a Countryman
of the Phisiognomers.

The voice uttered big, and distensed in the kind, does indicate a strong
person: forasmuch as the same proceeds through the plenty of heat. This
gross or big voice, does the Phisiognomer here mean, to be like to the
base Organ^ pipe.

The person which utters a slow and big sound of the voice, is judged to be
quiet, tractable, gentle, and merry: of these, certain are known to be very
just, and upright creatures in their dealings, after the mind of the
Phisiognomer.

The voice decerned big, yet the sound of words perceived very corrupt: is
an apparent note of a frantic Creature, injurious, and a glutton.

The strength of the voice, ensues the largeness of veins, and multitude of
the spirits, which altogether are caused of heat: as the Philosopher Aristotle
reports.

The persons possessing a big voice, and that heavily or basely calling: are
indicated to be apt persons, to bear injuries and wrongs, applied for the
form, unto the Ass.

Such creatures which call or begin big, and end in their words with a small
voice, are denoted to be both yrefull, and pitiful at times: yea soon
pleased and tractable: applied unto the Ox, for the form of the cry: the
reason of this, is often taught before.

Such a person which has a gross, high, and sounding voice: is reported to be
eloquent, bol^, fierce, and valiant in Arms, or a Warrior.



The voice decerned small and low, does indicate such a Creature to be
fearful, and envious. By this low voice, is here meant (says the
Phisiognomer) the small and faint voice, and not the big in any manner.

Here conceive, that the voice is diverse of sound, forasmuch as the voice is a
sound with an imagination, by the mouth of the creature, uttered to demonstrate
any effect. But sound is any kind, proceeding of the sounding, which unto the
hearing procures a passion. And the speech is a third kind, having a diversity
unto either of these.

The voice decerned small, soft in the hearing, and in a broken manner, does
witness a womanly fearfulness to consist in that Creature, and to be
effeminate.

The voice heard slow, does indicate (after the mind of the Philosopher) such a
person to be sluggish in actions, rash at times, and impudent.

The voice decerned weak, does argue a straightness of the Arteries, and
paucity of the spirits, which are especially caused by the means of cold.

The voice decerned soft, without retching, does indicate such a person to be
gentle, and tractable: applied unto the sheep, for the similitude of the
voice: even as the others, applied unto Beasts of like condition.

The voice heard gross and high, does indicate a hotnesse of the heart and
Lunges, and a largeness of the Wezand, that both freely draws and expels
the air or breath, without impediment: for which cause, the voice heard loud,
does denote such a creature to be talkatiue, bold, and contentious.

The Philosopher Aristotle (in de secretis secretoris) utters, that whose
voice appears a mean, between a smalnesse and bigness: is noted to be a
person sapient, a fore-seer, true, and just, and these through the contrary
cause.

Such a person which is decerned quick of speech, especially if he has a
shrill voice, is denoted to be a Creature yrefull, obstinate, foolish,
importunate, a liar, and evermore evil conditioned.

But if the voice shall be perceived or decerned gross, or rather big: does
signify such a Creature to be irefull, hasty, of an evil nature and condition.

The creature which has a sweet and pleasant voice, is judged (of the
Philosopher Aristotle) to be envious, irefull at times, and maruailous
suspecting.

The delectablenesse of voice, decerned in a proper subject (as the worthy
Palemon) utters, does indicate a dull capacity, yet a stowtnesse of courage
to consist in him.

The quickness and hastiness of words or speech decerned, as the (learned
Albertus) reports, does argue a hot complexion to consist in that Creature.
The like do Phylemon, Loxius, Palemon, and Conciliatore utter, under these
words: that whose voice is heard, gross, and big uttered, is reported to be
ireful, rash, and hasty in his actions, and suspected to be of an evil nature:
the reason of these (is reported of them to be) through the intemperate
hotnesse.

The person hasty in speech, especially when he has a small voice, is reported
to be wicked, a Fool, importunate, a liar, yrefull, and evermore of evil
conditions.

Whose voice shall be decerned pleasant (as before uttered) is judged envious
and suspicious: the reason has bin opened in another place, for as much as the
same is effeminate. Further the delectablenesse of voice, does denote small
wisdom or simpleness, and veneriall conditions.

Rasis reports, that the voice decerned big, does indicate the hotnesse of
complexion, but the small voice, does witness the coldness of complexon in that
creature.

The voice perceived rough and hoarse, like unto the Cranes, does testify an
envious person, and one that retains a mischief secretly in the heart, the
same person also is by report of the Philosopher, melanchollike in quality.

Whose voice shall be decerned, not fully uttered or spoken with a long breath:
is noted to be a vile person, through the coldness of the heart, and
peradventure with moystnesse applied.

The Creature which has a very big voice, is noted to be a Servant, unto his
own belley. The reason of this is, for as much as the Grave or big voice,
proceeds through the debillitie of virtue, which cannot breath out the
sufficient plenty air, to move the Muscles of the breast: of which insueth
sluggishnesse, that such a person of the same, can neither apply his wit to any
study, nor frame or exercise his body with any corporal or painful labor.

They which utter the voice in cutting of the breath: do promise liberally,
but perform little, and such are known to be deceivers.

They which are decerned to utter the voice (as it were) by a moouement of the
breast, sturdily big, are denoted to be manly, yet unapt to learn, and stout
of courage: applied for the form unto the Lion.

They which have a slow and big voice, are denoted to be quiet and merry: such
also for the most part, are known to be just persons, and gentle conditioned.

They which are heard to sound the voice shrill like unto birds, are noted to
be prone unto the veneriall act, unstable, and vain.

A breathing discerned small and faint in voice, does innuate such a creature
to be sad for the more part, froward and suspicious.

The creature which moves often himself, and speaks with the moving of
hands, is thought uncleanly, yet of a very ready wit, and quick utterance,
and sometimes known to be a deceyuer. But he which refraineth from the moving
of hands when he speaks, is of a perfect understanding, of a good
disposition, and of a sound counsel.

The person which speaks and sounds the voice through the Nosthrils, is
affirmed to be full of words, a liar, malicious, envious, and ioyeth in the
harms of another: and such a creature does imitate the nature of the Ducke.
This the Phisiognomer observed and noted in a certain Countryman of his.

Further, the voice heard vehement, and making a noise, as a sound indecently
mixed, does denote an unjust person, violent, and bearing hatred in heart. But
the voice descerned slow, does indicate a sluggish person in actions, and
sometimes hasty. And whose voice in the middle, appears a mean, as between
the smalnesse and grosenesse, is accounted sapient, a fore-seer, true and just.

The condition and judgment of laughter. The xxx. chapter.
THe mind, after the opinion of the Philosopher is much delighted with
laughter: yet the overmuch laughter, is named of most men, a laughter out of
course, and argues besides a small understanding and simple wit.



Of which, the common Proverb rise, and often divulgated of the wise is, that
in the mouth of a fool, much laughter consists: the like reports Catullus,
that singular Po^t in this Sentence: The laughter light moved,
not framed in place:
Be wrayeth a fools folly,
in iesture and grace.
Here conceive; that through the Milt formed big, such a creature is procured
to laugh much, and otherwise is it, when in the contrary manner, as some
report. And the learned Isidore (in xi. ethymolagi^^um) utters, that the Milt
to be so named of the supplying of the same: which properly lies on the
contrary part of the liver, to the end the same should not consist or remain
empty. The Gaul is know^e to be an apt receptacle and bladder in the creat^re,
which by due work of nature sends or recei^eth into it the choler. The Mylt
are supposed of some to be a procurer of laughter, seeing by it we (...)
especially caused to laugh. By the Gaul (if we may credit (...)) are all
Creatures moved unto the: by the heart, to conceive deep matters: by the
(...) the quality moved unto love: through which (...) elements, every living
creature (says he) is sustained.

So that the persons which sufficiently laughe, are denoted (after the
agreement of Writers) to be benign and gentle, quiet, beloved (for their
courteous behavior) of all persons, yet l^^htly endamaged or harmed, although
such are smoisy ^^refull for any: and these beside a (...) of an apparent
comeliness (says the Phisiognomer) applied unto the Sanguine and Jo^^all
persons.



The creature which reasonably laugheth, is argued to be given to mirth, of a
good quality, but ioyeth much in the veneriall (...), especially, if the eyes
appear smiling.

The overmuch laughter exercised (as Aristotle utters unto king Alexander)
remo^e^^ ^^reuerence* and hastes old age in that creature: for troth, with
such willingly (says the Phisiognomer) is no society or fellowship to be
used: in that these lack Wit, and are nothing at all secret: yet these (after
some Writers) are reported to be serviceable and painful in their doings.

Such persons which are seen seldom to laugh are indicated to be of a deep
understanding, and known faithful as certain report: and this the
Phisiognomer observed and noted in sundry honest and virtuous persons, which
he knew to be searchers of deep and hid secrets. The cause evidently
appears, and is known to be a deep thinking and reatch, which consists in
that creature which remoueth laughter. Of whom, such a person that laugheth
often (as is aforesaid) bethinketh or museth on no serious and deep matter,
nor makes any solemn or witty discourse with himself.

Certain of the ancient report, tht the creature which is hardly procured to
laugh, is affirm^ to be witty, a foreseer of matters unto himself, niggardly:
and very studious in the Art which he daily exercises: yet such a creature
(says the Phisiognomer) is prone to be a surmiser, and irefull.

The person which is heard to laugh alowde, with a certain noise discerned in
the laughter, is indicated (by some writers) to be inuericundious, and rash in
actions.

Such a creature, that (without cause procured) laugheth, and in his laughing,
seems often to cough, or gape, or to draw the head awrie, is indicated to be
variable of purpose and mind, envious, lightly or soon crediting, and
conuertible either unto the good or evil, as Loxius, and Phylemon report.

The learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of Phisiognomy says, thta the
creature Coughing when he laugheth, or is at the instant encombred with the
hardness and shortness of breath, is judged to be inuericundious, fierce, and a
Tyrant, as the like was observed and noted by Cocles in a certain Prince of
Lumbardy.



Certain of the worthy Physiognomers report, that whose Cheeks are discerned
often to smile, is denoted to be of evil mind, of a perverse cogitation, and
a liar: and such persons generally are malicious and dissemblers, not to be
trusted, but rather to be doubted if we may credit the phisiognomer: when the
like especially is joined with other accidents of the mind: and that their
eielids appear wrinkled together, with the eyebrows gathered as it were in a
cloudy form: such are then shedders of blood, murderers, robbers by Sea and
land, as has often bin observed in many, which were the like.

He that smileth unto himself when he talks, is indicated to be foolish, and
of simple understanding as the phisiognomer observed in an Italian: and such
are reported to abound in the Melancholic quality.

The cheeks writhing in laughter, as if it were in the derision of another,
witnesses such a person to be arrogant, deceitful, covetous, a liar, yrefull,
and a blabber of secrets.

Such as lightly laugheth (says M. Scotus) is denoted to be of simple
understanding, unstable, vain, lightly crediting, of d^l wit, gross in feeding
and serviceable, yet in facts or actions not secret*

Such as sildome laugh, and soon make an end, is argued according to M. Scotus,
to be stable, wary, niggardly: yet of good understanding* secret, faithful and
glorious in his actions.

The condition and judgment of the b^^^^h. The 31. chap.


THe much breath, argues abundance of the spirits, and econuerso, which
proceeds two ways, the one through the lungs smalnesse, and the other
through the straitness of the breast* Of which the creature much breathing, is
of great strength and courage, by reason of the heat resolving the moisture,
especially that dewy moisture, after the mind of the Phisiognomer.

The breath sent forth in due course and order, that is, between (the great
and small, apearing) a mean, does indicate the quietness of heart, and a man
in mind well pleased, as the Philosopher reports.

That person which sigheth without cause, and fetched the sighs deep and
long, does witness the Melancholy to come, and that mighty to persevere in
that creature.

The breath appears cut between being after an order, which in the end
through straitness of the breast, comes forth with a heat and sighing,
argues such a creature to be encombred with thought, and the disquietnesse of
mind. And the same to be mixed to some evil, if the head especially shake
withal.

That person which with the sighing, draws the eyes awry, is judged after the
mind of most writers) that he then bewaileth the matter come unto mind,
devising with himself in what manner he may aptliest bring about, and compass
or atchieue the same.

The creature which breaths with a certain noise* through the larger opening
of the nostrille^, does then indicate cruelty, brutish furiousnes and violence
to consist in him: which of Aristotle is applied to the passion.

The breath passing forth troubled and think, as if the same were after a
course of running, or through some strong accidents: does then denote such a
person to be violent, unadvised, hasty, and yrefull.



When the breath shall be decerned short and thick, and through a much
cutting off stopped between: such a creature (of the Philosopher Aristotle) is
judged fearful, weak of courage and strength.

That person which (with the sight and counte^^nce) seems as he were bereft,
with a certain ^odlinesse and pittifulnesse: such a one (says the
Phisiognomer) is judged to be then taken and wrapped with the furious passion
of love.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle utters, unto the mighty King Alexander,
that when he says, you shall see a person much and long together beholding:
yea, and earnestly looking on your face, and that when you again behold him so
looking, is of the same abashed, and therewith blusheth, and gives specially
(at that instant) a sigh against the will, and that tears appear standing in
his eyes: such a person undoubtedly loves and fears you. But if you see the
contrary unto this, then judge that creature to regard you little: and to be
one, that is both envious and disdainefull.

The breath decerned loud, cut between, and the sigh appearing the like, does
witness sorrow, and heaviness, for some losses happened to that Creature.

Hipocrates, Galen, and certain other Physicians report, that the breath
perceived passing forth cold by the mouth and Nostrils, in a sharp sickness:
does innuate death, shortly after to ensue.

Ptolomeus paruus utters, that he which often weepeth for no cause
reasonable, shall always be poor, and needy.

The breath (by report of Michael Scotus) coming out so soft, that the same
can scant be heard, does denote such a person to be greatly encombred with
thought: which condition of thought, the eyes in a manner will declare.



The breath which is decerned sometimes still, and within a good while after,
is drawn (and fetched in) ouerfast: does argue such a creature (as that
Scotus writes) to be then occupied with a present great heaviness of the
mind.

The head if it shakes as he sigheth (according to the mind of Scotus) then
for the weight of the matter evil handled, and evil spoken off, it argues
him to be sorry.

If he does the like, with the eyes intentive or steady looking, such a person
bethinketh him rather of the evils then repenterh him, as Michael Scotus
writes.

The breath heard light, breathing out by little and little without noise,
does denote (after the mind of Scotus) such a person to be of an upright mind.

The person which is heard to breath loud, and smileth withal: is judged (of
Michael Scotus) to be furious and a drunkard.

Such a person decerned breathing, troubled, and thick, as though he had
lately run, is denoted to be wilful, fool hardy, irefull, and of a wicked
mind, desiring all things what he sees, and talking of all things that he
hears.

He which breaths on high, and that the breath seems to pass through the
nostrils thick and quick, does argue such a creature (after the mind of Scotus)
to be fearful and sorrowful. Such also are noted to be effeminate, when as
the other notes fortify the same.

The breath so coming forth, as if the subject were encombred with the
hardness of fetching breath, such a Creature is reported (of Michaell Scotus)
to be simple, of a perverse mind, full of words, and desirous of all things
that he sees.

The form and judgment of the chin. The xxxij. Chapt.


THe chin decerned very long, does argue the abundance of matter, in that by
reason of the overmuch hotnesse, the same is lengthned out: of which such are
known to be irefull, cruel, and hasty: yet these sometimes are found to be
full of words, and sometimes boasters of themselves, as ^oth Palemon and
Constantine write.

Such which have the chinne formed small and short, are persons especially to
be eschewed: for besides the other conditions consisting in them, such are
discourteous, yea, rather rigorous, full of w^^es and envious: for these (of
Palemon) aptly ap^lied unto the Serpent.

(...) conceive, that Phisiognomy and Paulm^^^y, are more manifested of
experience, than by ^eason: yet somewhat may be uttered, of the pr^^cipaller
members: which express the g^eatne^^e and smalnesse of matter, from the
begin^ing of ^eneration.

If the chinne be sharp or formed into a round manner, does indicate effeminate
conditions and a f^^ble courage: In that this is, a feminate n^te, as
Pythagoras utters. For the man's chin after nature* ought to be formed in a
square manner, and not found.

If the under chin be seen so fat, that the ^^me re^^heth down to the
throat, does indicate mos^ great luxury to consist in that creature: if a pit
o^ hole be especially decerned in either cheek.

The chin formed of a decent or comely bigness does denote such a person to be
prone unto the vene^all act: yet judge him to be much bound (...) God, for the
gifts lent him. Here conceive (sai^^ the Phisiognomer) that the chin ought to
be formed neither too round nor over sharp: but in ^ mean manner unto a
squarenesse.

The chin decerned over long, does innuate most wicked creature, very
talkatiue, and a whisperer, yea his mind altogether occupied with deceites: as
the like, the skillful Phisiognomer observed and noted in a certain French man,
which was very malicious, a great deceiuer, and exceeding covetous (as al of
that nation) bewra^ themselves to be: especially prone unto frauds, and great
deceites.

The Chinne at the lower end, seen so do^uded, that the same expresses a
double form, in such manner, as this be not too much or too deep dented in
the middle: does then argue (as certain report) deceitful conditions to
consist in that Creature. But this known to be a note of Venus in that place
(after the mind of the Phisiognomer Cocles) and such a person like formed,
shall purchase with men, great favor and grace. As the like Cocles experienced
in many subjects, which were known to be lascivious, and that haunted the
company of Harlots: yea, these with the Cyneds, had sundry times doing, and
suffering. There be some which have a pit formed on breadth, and by an equal
line stretching, as on length, that more coroborateth the phisiognomers
sentence.

The chin formed so crooked up, that the Lips seem as they were standing in a
valley: does denote the rudeness of wit, unfaithfulness, wicked conditons,
and sometimes such are known to be thieves, unless old age cause the same,
through the loss of many teeth.

The singular Aristotle in tertio de Animalibus, utters: that such which have
the chin divided, do less wax bald, and shed fewer hairs then other Creatures.

The chin formed sharp, and thin or slender, through an emptiness or lacking
of flesh: does indicate a bold and stout, or courageous person, and
disdainefull.

The chin formed large and big, through the much quantity of flesh: does
witness (after the mind of M. Scotus) such a creature to be quiet, of a mean
capacity, dull of wit: yet faithful, secret, and conuertible, either unto the
good or evil.



The chin formed sharp, and sufficiently full of flesh: does denote (as Michael
Scotus reports) such a person to be of a good understanding, lofty minded,
and one that feeds sufficiently, and bold in actions.

The chin formed, as the same were parted in two, by a certain valley or
d^^^^ng in: does argue (as Michael Scotus utters) that person, to be of a
gross wit, vain, lightly c^editing, a great surmiser: yet congruently
serviceable to another, quiet, and secret (for the more part) in his doings*

The chinne decerned sharp, and thin in the quantity of flesh: does (after
Michael Scotus) denote such a Creature to be bold and courageous, a Quarreller
sometimes, and fighter, irefull, disdainful, weak in strength, and contented
(after a manner to serve, for the relief of living.

The chin seen crooking up, with a hollownesse in the knitting of the Jaws,
and lean of Flesh, that the same appears, as it were formed sharp: does
witness (after the mind of Scotus) such a person to be wicked, envious, of a
simple wit, a niggard, deceitful, soon angry, ireful, a surmiser, bold,
proud, a threatner, a betrayer, and a thief: these hitherto Michael Scotus.

The condition and judgment of the Beard, The xxxiij. Chapter.


THe Beard in man (after the agreement of the ancient writers) begins to
appear in the nether Jawe, which so ascends toward the Temples, through the
heat and moisture carried unto the same, from the report of the head, drawn
from the ^enitours, which (...) to (...) especially, the Sperme from those
^laces: which n^^e is, by reason the spermaticall^ ^eines do d^^^e^^d unto the
same place, as the like appears in the^^, which overmuch exercise (...),
whose fa^^s by the means are after (...) ^razed and al^ered.

As touching the womans testicles, in that the^e are but weak, for the same
(...) are they known not to be bearded. And such Women which are found to have
these hotter then the (...), have also somewhat of the reflexed matter, (...)
the same place, whence the Sperme mo^^ cheef^^ie comes. This reflexed heat
(says the Con^^^atore) draws with it the moisture* of whi^^ in them (...)
engendered the thin and small h^^res of the Beard: and this especially verified
in them, which use often and very much ^oea^^ig. For which cause the sanguine
bodies that have a thin beard, and mean of length: are indicated to be
creatures, which often and greatly desire to coeate, through the common of the
hea^ and moisture consisting in th^^ them.

The Beard in man, after the mind of the Philosopher, begins to spring out
and appear after (...) years of age^ these by little and little, appearing
from day to day, and then begins the hairs to appear and grow on the 23
(...) ^2c1lp of both kinds.

Here conceive says the Phisiognomer, that such hairs do proceed and
appear through the superfluousnesse of meats, and the fumosities of them,
which daily ascend on high unto the parts of the Laws: much like to the smoke
of an Oue^heated, that passes so long through the Chinkes of the same, until
those passages, through the heat are wholly stopped, that no more smoke can
after pass through them. Even the li^e do the fumosities of man issue forth,
into the manner of hairs: which are properly named the hairs of the Beard.

The color of the Beard, does sometimes express the qualities and quantities
of the humors, yet hitherto has not the same been heard of, that any man saw
a flaxen white Beard: for as much as the flegmaticke humor is not found so
mighty, as to engender hairs of the like color, through the depriving and
lack of natural heat, to eleuate the sufficient matter unto the engendring of
the like colored hairs.

Here perhaps some will argue and affirm, (says the Phisiognomer) that there
is sundry times seen Women bearded, yet these are not ^ound of a Flegmaticke
quality, but rather the same does happen in that the humors are so subtle,
that of Nature such are procured to be hot. For out of these Creatures do
hairs spring, yea they sometimes appear on their Jaws, but properly these
appear about the mouth, where the more heat does abound: and such Women
(seen the like) is named of all men bearded: here conceive (says Cocles)
that the like Woman found, is judged to be very luxurious through her heat, and
moist quality: of which the like Creature seen, is not only strong of nature,
but to be of a stout courage, and manly in her facts.



The perfect woman is known to be sufficiently naked of hairs, especially about
the mouth: such a creature after Phisiognomy, is reported to be of a good
quality: that is to say, bashful, fearful, honest, weak of courage, gentle
of behavior, and obedient.

Here (says the Phisiognomer) does a solemn doubt arise, and the same is,
why men are seen bearded and not women for the more part, which doubt seems
to be put forth by the learned Gulielmus Nurice: to which Cocles answers in
this manner, that the same may be gathered to proceed, of the efficient, the
material, and small cause: for as much as these properly serve unto an
ornament, and comely beautifying of the Woman: and in every kind, the Males
are seen comelier beautified with the same, than the Females. Which condition
of the hairs, properly serves unto a defense of the jaws in man, that the
Woman (for the like defense and necessity) nothing needs, at the least so
much as the Man: through which, the sense of feeling is known to be of greater
force in Man. So that the Man by this reason, may better endure to go
bareheaded, and naked in other parts, in the bitter cold weather, than the
Woman: and suffer greater storms on the Body, than she may, without harm to
ensue. A stronger reason may be rendered and given of the efficient, and
material cause, seeing the Males in general, are known to be hotter than the
Females. For which cause, the Fume in men, that is the matter procuring the
Hairs, is found both more and mightyer, than in women: which seeing the same
is known not able to be consumed: for that cause (God and nature together)
ordained two apt places in man, for the passages of them: as the one by the
head, and other fitly by the chin and jaws, which form the beard of man.
Which manner of fumes consisting in the woman, for as much as they appear^ not
to be so many and mighty, as well known they are to rest in the man: for this
cause are these properly and naturally sent forth by the head. And a note of
the like effect, we sundry times know and see by Women found of a hot and
moist complexion, that appear bearded: we see contrariwise, that in the cold
and dry men these (for the more part) have very little or no Beards. By which
reason we gather (says the Phisiognomer) that the seemly Beard waxes not in
the gelded person: for as much as those parts have then lost the benefit of
their hotter quality through which, these should engender the hot humors and
fumes, that properly are the matter of the hairs in them. And by a like reason
of the former words it appears: that the thickness of the Beard, and great
hairinesse in general* is an evident note and judgment of the substantial
heat and moisture, and of natural strength consisting in that Creature.

Here may this argument also be propowned, that seeing Children are known to
be hot and moist, why they wax not bearded as men: to which the Phisiognomer
thus answers, that the smoky superfluousnesse, which is the especial matter
of the hairs that issues from the head, and other parts of the body, does
pass and serve for their increase and norishment. The l^ke affirms that
singular Constantine.

Conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that how much the force and plenty of heat
consists by so much more the quantity of hairs succeeds in that person. For
which cause, a man must carefully beware of those which overmuch abound in the
store and plenty of hair ^on the body, when the complexion of such is
especially found adust.

Cocles wills a man to beware of such which have red beards, for that the
said color indicateth an abundance of adustion, and a mighty hotnesse to
consist in these creatures: thorough which, such are known to be ^^iurious,
deceivers, and liars: and in them (by report of the Phisiognomer) do the
principal heap of vices rest, unless that grace and godly education, seem
otherwise to contrary the same.

The beard decerned comely, and well fashioned, does innuate such a creature to
be of a good nature, of reasonable conditions* congruent to all things, and
manured after his bringing up. Contrariwise judge of those which have the
bearde not seemly formed, or evil fashioned in the length, as appear thin the
gelded persons, which after these are deprived of their genitors, be then
greatly changed from the nature of men, into the condition of women, as
reports Aristotle, in libro de Animalibus.

Cocles observed in sundry subjects, which having long and seemly beards, after
certain^ years, fell into a frensinesse, and some of them to be (...) foolish.

He further says, that he knew sundry persons, which having very long beards,
fell from good estate, unto oppressed miseries: yea, he also knew certain
noble persons, which (...) expel^ (...) ^^^tiue country of Italy. The like
judgment (says the Phisiognomer) may in a manner be uttered of hoary beards,
as aforesaid in the Chapter of the hairs in general, forasmuch as their
nature is then known, to draw near the Woman's.

Of which, the Phisiognomer Cocles wills the Princes, and noble person (...)
him, to beware of such persons as were a think and long beards, in that their
faces then cannot bewray or open the passions of the mind, nor (...) changing
or al^^ing of colors, can perfectly be discerned in these: so that their
deceits, and colored pretenses may be covered and lie hid by that means. Yet
do I not disallow the wearing of long and thick beards altogether, but that the
same may lawdably and very well be (...), without any such crime to be found,
and lying hid there under. For well known it is, that sundry Realms allow, and
customably wear long beards, as the Medians, the Grecians, the Germans, and
sundry other Countries, through the general influences of the Heavens, which
procure or cause new conditions and alterations of apparel, as the
Phisiognomer observed and noted of the force and effect of the great
conjunction that happened of the upper Planets Saturn and Jupiter in his time:
which thus met together in the year of our Lord, 1484. and in the last
degree of Scorpio, whose mighty effect in general, continued unto the year
1504. being the tenty day of June. To these, that fear ul Planet Mars, which
bare sway with them for xx. years together, denoted (as he reports)
lamentable commotions, bloody Battles, the euersion of kingdoms hasty tumults
of the people, new Kings elected, conspiracies attempted, dissemblinges
intended, wicked treasons procured, pitiful Burnings exercised, grievous
spoils forced, the waking of Countries attempted, with other grievous and
lamentable matters long to report, etc.

The form and judgment of the throat. The 34. Chapter.


THe throat clear and white, whether it be lean or fat, argues such to be
vainglor^ous, fearful, envious, lascivious, prone to lying, congruently wary
and circumspect, yet very yrefull and long hating, if we may credit Michael
Scotus.

The throat lean and thin, so that the veins appear, argues (after the mind
of M. Scotus) hard fortune, to be fearful, sluggish, a gross feeder, lightly
crediting, weak of courage, and conuertible either to good or evil.

The throat rough, denotes an unconstant person, a trifler, full of words,
and presumpt^^^^^y talking, applied for the form to the birds.

If the canell bone of the throat, with the sinnewes eminent, and lightly
moving withal, indicateth such a creature not only rash of his tongue, but
occupied in haughty cogitations. And when this person has well filled himself
with Wine, does then mourn, and is also suspicious* prone to ire, and of
himself by property a sad drunkard.

The canell bone of the thr^at seen eminent or bearing out, does indicate a
sluggish person* injurious, and slow in his actions, after the mind of the
Phisiognomer.

The canell bone of the (...) well fashioned, and comely in fight, argues
strength, stoutnes of courage, nimblenes in actions, and endued (by report of
the Phisiognomer) with wisdom.

The condition and judgment of the neck. The xxxv. Chapter.
Conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the neck is sometimes ^ake^ and used
for the whole, conjoined to the head, in the forepart, and like in the hinder
part. But this sometimes used and taken for the hinder part, in the Diameter or
space, where the ^ares are situated: and this part of him is divided into two
parts. So that the part nearer to the head, is named the nape or hinder part
of the neck* that is, the top of the Neck behind, where the beginning of the
sinnewes is placed. Yea, the nape or hinder part of the Neck, is used or taken
with some practitioners, for the whole neck, as hereafter shall be alleged and
used of the Phisiognomers.

But the Phisiognomers in their judgments, do distinguish the Neck, and Nape
in the hinder part. For in the forepart, they take (...) weasand, the
throat-^^le, and whole (...) the root of the conjoined, according to the mind
of the philosopher. The like words vttreth Isidore in libro 11. cap. 1. This
named the neck in that the same is formed stiff, and round as a pillar to
b^are up the head: whose forepart of him, r^^ned aptly the throat: and the
hinder part not without good reason, the neck.

This singular Isidore reports, that such a person having the neck formed
big, not by reason of the fleshinesse, but thorough the bigness of the b^nes
and sinnewes, is denoted strong of Body, applied for the same unto the male
kind, and acording to the conditions of the spirit, in that the male after the
kind, is known to have a big and lively neck: the lame neither short nor
formed too long, which by agreement of the most Phisiognomers indicateth a hot
quality and boldness in that creature.

The second note seems to be, that such having the neck formed long and
slender, are judged to be feminine in conditions and weake^ courage. The neck
discerned big and lively, as aforesaid, does denote the strength of the Brain:
and by the conse^uent, a hotnes of the heart: as all men are like known in
their kind.

The neck long and slender, signifies the contrary unto the abouesaid, that
is, the weakness of body, and to be fai^^ hearted.



Such having the neck formed big through a fleshinesse, and not by reason of
the bigness of the sinnewes and bones (as Rasis adds) found hard and strong,
and known to be irefull, applied for the same unto the apparent congruency of
the irefull Bulls, provoked or stirred to ire, which then have such a form
and condition of the neck: and as Rasis adds, such also are known to be
rash and hasty in their deeds.

The neck dererned sufficient big, not by reason of the fleshinesse, but
through cause of the sinnewes and Bones, and sufficient long seen, are
reported to be bold, and stowte of courage: applied for the form, unto the
stowte Lion. This especially is verified, when the Head and Neck is orderly
proportioned, in such manner, that the same be of a mean bigness, as the
learned Conciliatore and Constantine write.

The form of the head, if the same shall be of a mean bigness, and the neck
formed somewhat big, does indicate a goodness of the quality and disposition.

If the head shall be decerned small, and the neck seen big, does denote the
abundance of matter, and the superfluousnesse of the same: the lack also of
the Virtue performing, in the due propor^^on. Such a head (as certain report)
is many times grieved with much pain, and the Cephalic passion.

The neck discerned very long and slender (as above uttered) is judged
fearful, applied for the form unto the Heart, in that the Heart is known to
be a beast very fearful, and has a very long neck, and small formed, in
the respect of his body and greatness.

Yet the neck formed slender and long and that he bears it upright in his
going, does indicate not so much fearfulness to consist in that person, as
above reported of the Heart.

The neck seen very short, does innuate such a person to be a deceiuer and
very crafty, applied for the form unto the Wolf. And this note here taken of
the apparent manner seen, both in men and beasts: in that a person minding
subtlety to set upon another, whether the same be his enemy, or otherwise
attempting upon pleasure, does then wilily draw, and shrincke in the neck,
for the more shortning of the same, that he may not so soon be espied in the
stealing upon: as by alike we daily see in the Cat, when she (with the neck
shrunk in) steals by little and little on the Mouse.

Certain report, that the neck formed long, signifies the feet to be long, and
the neck seen slender, does indicate the feet to be slender.

The neck hollow behind, and deep withal, does denote a weakness of the
sinnewes and sicknesses to ensue, according to the knitting of it in that
creature.

The neck formed very fleshy, does witness such a creature to be a liar,
using filthy excess: and a mean neck seen, does indicate the goodness of
nature to consist in that creature.

The nape of the neck, next unto the head behind, if the same be found
hairy, does inuate such a person to be strong and stout of courage, in that
this note appears to be a hotnesse, consisting in that person.

The neck formed long, and having a meanness in the proportion, does indicate
malice, and indignation to consist in that person. And certain report, that
such a creature to be a fool, weak of strength, fearful, and full of words.

The neck big, with a certain length, yet not very fleshy, denotes a strong
person, stout of courage, a boaster, and proud, as Conciliatore reports in
his Rubricke of Phisiognomy.



The neck formed stiff and strong, argues yrefulnes, hastines, and unapt to
learn. The good disposition also of the mind and humanity, they say negatiuely
to concur unto such an operation.

The neck with apparent sinews, and il shaped does witness by the report of
the Phisiognomer) a foolish person and unapt to learn.

The neck decerned so loose, that the same seems to lean unto the one side,
does inuate such a creature to harm those, that are not able to resist,
wilful, and deceitful, as the learned Conciliatore reports.

Such that about the joint of the neck above, are seen over fleshy, be those
which have the knot bearing out, and the neck hardly moving: and be also
without feeling, to exercise the same orderly: yea, such are known to be dull,
and unapt to exercise good works: yet these in the evil or wicked actions,
and to do injuries very prone and forward: as before in another place the
Phisiognomer observed.

And certain Apostates and Princes this Cocles noted, that moved their necks
never unto the right nor left side, without the moving of the whole body
together: and such were known to be double tongued, dissemblers, and very
wicked. But such having the contrary to this, is of another disposition, that
is, honest conditioned, and of gentle behavior.

The neck formed long, with a largenes in the positure, denotes such a person
to be yrefull, and unapt to learn, applied for the form unto the grunting Sow.

The neck big and fleshy, and short withal, does argue such a person to be a
fool, and a very great feeder.

When a certain bearing out shall be between the knitting of the shoulder
points, and beginning of the neck, that the growing out of the knottes be
sharp: does indicate such a Creature (for the most part) to be proud and
arrogant: as the Phisiognomer Cocles noted many the like.

The neck declining or leaning unto one side, does innuate such a creature to
be of a dull capacity, and unapt to learn.

The neck bearing too much upright, does argue that creature, not only to be
unapt to learn, but high minded, and selfe-willed: and one that will not be
admonished of nothing he does.

The neck decerned stiff, and as the same were immovable: does like declare
such a person, to be unapt to learn, and indiscreet in his doings, by which
note (for the most part) such are known to be fools.

The difference between the moving and not moving of the neck, is easily
discerned: so that the neck appearing fast or stiff, or quick moving, does
witness the more foolishnes to consist in that creature: but if the same
appear stiff, and in a manner fixed does demonstrate dull capacity, and the
unaptness to learn.

That you may not much err, the Phisiognomer does here discover and open, that
there be some (which minding to hide this note) in them the rather to beguile
the Judger: do use customably and oftentimes in the day, to rub and chase
well their necks with a warm linen cloth: whereby these may move and turn the
head hither and thither, somewhat the easier in covering by such means their
foolishness. As the like note the Phisiognomer observed in a certain Citizen
of Bononia, in Lumbardy, which Creature besides as he talked, many times smiled
to himself. So that by this appears, that the stiff turning of the neck,
is a note of the proper foolishness to consist in that creature: by the report
of the Phisiognomer.



The nape of the neck from the joint unto the head decerned rough: does
denote such a person to be very rude conditioned, and luxurious. But the white
neck seen rough, does signify a dell^^ne understanding and rude wit: as
Conciliatore reports in his Rubricke of Phisiognomy.

The neck bending upward toward the head, does demonstrate such a Creature to
be arrogant, stubborn in actions, and void of honesty: as the learned
Conciliatore in his Phisiognomy utters.

When you shall decerne a looseness of the neck, with a certain gathering of
the Lips unto a laughter, and that the eyes appear out of order in the
rolling, with a certain lightness of countenance showed, in the sitting or
standing of the creature, and a trembling voice to (...) in him, does not only
indicate an effeminate mind: but eui^^ conditions to consist in him, after the
mind of the Phisiognomer.

The neck decerned bending toward the breas^: does innuate such a person to be
much encombr^^ with cares: yea, this creature (...) oc^upie^ with niggardship,
and sometimes moved (with that evil vice) of malignity.

The neck al^^^ varied (says the Phisiognomer) according to the knitting of
the other members in man.

The neck seen bowing downward, as the learned Conciliatore (in his
Phisiognomy) writes, does indicate a foolish person, a niggard, froward at
times, and known he is to be neither simple, nor of an upright mind.

The neck decerned leaning unto the right side, does denote such a person to
be witty, or seemly manners and conditions, and circumspect in the (...) that
he attempteth or goes about. But the Neck seen leaning unto the left side,
does argue such a Creature to be currish or churlish, rash in his actions, and
foolish: as the learned Conciliatore reports, in his Rubricke of Physiognomy.

The neck formed strong and very big, whether the same be of length, and that
this hardly turns: does innuate such a person to be a greedy proller, and
gatherer of goods together, howsoever the same be.

The neck decerned crooking (after the breadth of the Body) as either from the
right or the left side: does denote such a Creature to be full of words,
deceitful, wily, and unfaithful: as the sa^e, the Phisiognomer Cocles
observed in many subjects. For which cause, this Cocles warns a man,
especially to eschew the fellowship and company of such, which of nature are
wry necked, and have a drawing in, or narrowness to be decerned between the
shoulder points: in that these are known to be wicked persons, envious,
fraudulent and hypocrites: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed in
sundry of the obseruant brothers in his time, and in many Melancholicke persons.

The neck formed in a mean manner, both in the bigness and length: does
demonstrate such a person to be strong of nature, apt to learn, and of a
singular wit: but these oftentimes are known to have a subtle or crafty wit,
and to be deceitful.

The condition and judgment of the shoulder points. The xxxvi. Chapter.


HEre conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that such persons having the shoulder
paints sufficiently distant from the knottinesse or spondile of the neck, which
first appears above the sholders, where the sholder points or neck are
continuated, and not to near joined to it, are of a good nature, and having
ripe or good senses, and by the consequent of a good understanding. The
Philosopher in Methaphoricis, utters a reason of this, saying: that the
shoulder points being sufficiently soluble, that is, sufficiently distant from
the spondile or knottinesse: in such manner, that the space between them be
equal: do denote that such indiuiduates readily receive, that is, easily the
sensitive motion. For these have the note or sensitive power easily moveable,
that is, lightly reducible from the power, unto the act of perceiving. But such
which about the spondiles of the neck appear hidden: are noted to be persons
lacking wit, forasmuch as these hardly (being soluble) which about the
knottinesse are decerned weak, to receive the motion of the senses.

The Shoulder points decerned sufficiently distaunt-asunder, do denote such a
Creature to be liberal after Nature, applied for the same, unto the decent
apparancy and form: for that liberality, answers and agrees to such a
forms: and the like formed, are the Shoulder-points of the Lion, by the report
of the Phisiognomer.

The shoulder points near adjoining together, do contrariwise signify
niggardship, and vncourtesie to rest in that person.

The shoulder points appearing sufficiently distant asunder, and decently
spaced from the knot or joint of the neck, argues such a person to be of a
simple perseverance and understanding, and by the consequent known to be a
dullard, as the learned Aristotle writes.



The Shoulder-points (after the mind of the Philosopher) well brawned with an
eminency or bearing out of the flesh, and these strong formed, are applied
after Nature, unto the Malekind. Forasmuch as the nature of the muscle, is to
possess the engendered hotnes strong, and of the reason of the heat is thus
procured, to increase the form of the members, according to every Diameter.

The shoulder-points discerned big and large in form: do indicate a
hotnesse to consist in that creature. The strength of every person consists
in the sinnewes and bones* for which cause, when the muscles are sufficiently
formed Fleshy, then must needs ins^^ a mighty strength, to consist both in the
sinnewes and bones: of which, the spirit combyned in (...) an habitude^^ body,
may well exercise, and att^mpt or do strange actions, if need re^uireth.

Of which, Rasis reports, that the Shoulder-points discerned large, do
indicate a strong person, of an honest mind, o^ good conditions, and perfect
understanding.

The reason of this is, in that through ye breadth of the shoulder points, the
muscles are indicated to be large and strong: proceeding from a strong
beginning, that is in the brain, where the beginning consists of the sinews,
and the seat of the spirits. So that of necessity, the form of the (...) must
be ^apeable to the retaining of the goodness of the senses, as the Phisiognomer
says.

The muscles weak of strength, so as the shoulder-points appear flat, and (as
it were) cou^^ed with a softnes of flesh, argues a phlegmatic quality of the
contrary nature to rest in that creatu^^: and if these appear without a
softnes, they import the like quality, as says the Phisiognomer.



Rasis reports, that the shoulder-points formed thin, indicateth the
smalnesse of wit and understanding.

Cocles reports* that he knew and saw sundry women in his time, which drew by
Art, and through their bestiall in^^^ents, the shoulder-pointes so near
together, that they formed in a manner the like, unto Os vontris, in the part
behind: and they garnished or beautified these with Cosmeticall waters. This
Cocles also noted sundry Italians, and fond French men, which he aptly names
(by that byword) Hermaphroditi, that exercised the like practice with their
shoulder-points. A matter which seems in my opinion, incredible to be
exercised of any faithful Christian, but the Phisiognomer seems truly to
utter, what he saw and knew in sundry places.



The bearing of the heads ^f the shoulder points very fair out, do denote
^oolishnesse to consist in that creature: which manner, Aristotle reports
unto King Alexander, to be a note of rigorousnes and unfaithfulness to dwell
in that person.



The Phisiognomer Cocles utters of experience known, that he sildome saw
any person being crook backed, which were of a good nature: but that these
having the like bearing out, or bunche on the shoulders, were rather
Traiterous, and very wicked in their actions. And such (says the
Phisiognomer) were known in his time, to be the founders of all wicked
deceits, yea wily un deminers and gropers of the people, and had a deep
retching wit, and wily fetches, in wicked actions. So that it seems
impossible after Nature, that such deformed persons should possess in them
lawdable actions, forasmuch as the spirit connexed in such an habitude, does
yield a retrograde form and property: which (says the Phisiognomer) is
known for the most part to be Melancholicke. For which cause, a man ought
carefully to beware and take heed, of fellowshipping or keeping Company with
such unfortunate persons, for the abouesaide reason and Work of Nature. For
these (says the Physiognomer) are the like to be eschewed, as a man of skill
would refuse and shun the company of a person lacking any cheef or principal
Member of the Body. And the like Aristotle (in secretis secretorum) says,
that a man ought very diligently and carefully to beware of such an
unfortunate person, lacking any special member, as much as he would of his
most dangerous Enemies.

The Proverb also warns us to beware of the creatures marked: and in another
place, of the persons marked in any member, that a man trust not them. The
reason is, for that the Spirits like ensue unto the form of the body, so that
out of an evil shaped body, can no lawdable actions proceed or be caused, as
before uttered: and this of him uttered Phisiognomically.

The Philosopher also utters, that the great number of Children living, is
cause many times of the ill hap of Parents. For these lacking provision, for
their natural sustenance, are caused to work mischiefs not tolerable by
law. For the Phisiognomer learned, and saw sundry times that diverse fathers of
many Children, not able to provide sustenance for them, were constrained through
great need to steal, through which practice exercised, their Children like
endeavored, for the help of their parents need, and confessed a like matter
at the place of execution. So that the Philosopher gives or shows this, not
as an in^orced precept, but rather pe^swadeth, that in the cause of a
necessity, the same to be procured as a rule in misery: which to the beholder
may like appear. And the Mother Philosopher Asculanus utters, a sum of the
matter before taught.

Ben se voria plicar li cinqui rami,
Metendo el primo fra le do piu apresso,
Dicendo hor toi poi che tanto mami,
Poi laltre cinque del sinistro tronco,
Volatere in verso gliochij de si stesso,
Chi may si fida in rosso guercio e cionco.
By which he concludes, that no trust is to be had, in those women and men,
heing red of color, and gogle eyed, or one eyed, and bunch backe^ also: the
reason is all^adged in the same book, where he reports these words.

Quando tu vidi quisti zoppi e glombi
Impio fo el segno de la part,
Et anche quisti cum li flexi lombi.
Defecto corporal fa lalma ladra,
In pegiorando dicon le lor carte
Sonno superbi, e de la mala quadra.
The Philosopher Aristotle, in Methaphoricis utters, that the shoulder
points not in due measure formed, are noted to be crafty and deceytfull:
applied unto the passion, and f^minine kind^. But the shoulder points well
proportioned in due measure, do indicate a faithful, just, and strong person:
yet the relation of the commensuration, must be reduced unto the good motion,
and good necessity, that is, unto the good complexion, which is caused of the
good bi^th, and good forming of the nutritive or formatiue virtue in that
creature. So that this is to be reduced, neither unto the Masculine, nor
feminine kind: but rather to be applied unto the good or evil quality of the
body.

The shoulder-pointes well formed, both in the length and breadth, do denote a
good disposition and nature, to consist in that Creature: after the mind of
the Learned Conciliatour.

The shoulder-points discerned thin, in the composition of nature, do signify
such an one to be a niggard, covetous and fearful in attempts or Enterprises.

The shoulder points being formed unequal, signisieth the unequal actions of
such a Creature: and dull of capacity.

The shoulder points being thin and lean, do witness (as Michael Scotus
reports) a weak person, feeble of courage, fearful, not well bearing or
enduring earnest labor, lightly crediting, quiet of behavior, and conuertible
either unto good or evil.

The shoulder points formed large and big, through the flesh, signifies (as
writes Michaell Scotus) a strong person, faithful, yet a niggarde, gross of
wit, feeding, simple, well enduring painful labor, feeding sufficiently, and
willingly desiring quietness.

The Shoulder points appearing bended inward, does intimate (after the mind
and opinion of Scotus) such a person to be wary, sluggish, and after a manner
ingenuous, secret, and an vndergroper of men.

The Shoulder-pointes discerned flat lying, in a manner to the body, do
signify (as affirms Michael Scotus) a simple person, a niggard, Laborious,
modest both in his talk and feeding, and quiet of behavior: yet cre^yting
lightly, and conuertible either unto the good or evil.

The shoulder points decerned unequal, that the one be bigger or larger than
the other: do denote a sluggishe person, of a gross wit, of a dull
capacity and understanding, simple, gross in feeding yea a nyggard,
deceytfull, a betrayer* bold, and hardly credyting: if we may credit Scotus
in these.

The shoulder points seen far bearing out, do witness ^uch a person (as
affirms Michael Scotus) to be of an open life in his conditions: that is to
say* vain, simple, unstable, a liar, envious, bold, unshamefast, and a
brawler.

The judgment of the Arms. The xxxvii. Chapter.


THe Arms so long, that the hands reach unto the knees, do denote the
subtilnesse of wit, arrogancy, and the desire to rule. Aristotle reports,
that these notes seem to signify boldness, honesty, with a liberality.

The like long arms some suppose, that the mighty king Alexander had. Nor it
is unlike to that, which the son of Zachari^ affirms, that in some to argue
arrogancy, and in othersome a desire to rule and govern, and in both a
boldness and stowt courage.

The selfsame reports Albertus in de Animalibus, and in compendio suae
Theologiae: and like Hieronimus de Manfredis, and the Learned Rasis. For that
lengthening out, and longnesse of the arms, proceeds of the great heat of
the heart, with a moisture proportioned, which is the cheifest cause of the
lengthning out: as may well be comprehended by the former Words of the
Phisiognomer.

When such a length or longnesse is extended unto the thighs or hammes, it
does intimate wicked conditions, and such as rejoice at other men's harms, in
that those persons are exceeding malicious and envious. And some affirms
(that this note) does argue fearfulnes, also to be ignorant and a lover of
discord.

Such which with a greedy desire to meat, do bring the mouth to the hands,
being especially caused through the shortness of the arms, and evil form of
the hands, not orderly wrought, are judged to be wicked and envious, for that
envy is the daughter of coldness and dryness, the plannet Saturn engendring
her.

The Arms thin or slender, if they shall be weak, do witness a rude
person, and unapt to learn.

The arms big, through the bones, sinnues, and flesh, do indicate a strong
nature: and if the veins appear, it does then declare a hot quality.

When the arms are big, with soft flesh, do then demonstrate a womanly
Nature.



The Physiognomers report, that the Arms very hayrie, do denote such a
person to be Luxurious.

Aristotle unto King Alexander writes, that when such a Person (whiles he
talks) moves the hands too and fro, is judged envious, a deceyuer, and one
pleasant in words.

Such a person which refraineth moving of the hands, whiles he talks, is
argued to be of a perfect understanding, well disposed of a singular wit and
ready counsel, very commendable: the reason does the Physiognomer utter in
the Chapter of the Paces.

The perfect length of every person (after the mind of Albertus, in compendio
suae Theologiae) in accounting from the top of the forhead, and beginning of
the Crefi of the bead, unto the sole of the foot: is noted to be so much
(these being of sound limbs and composition) as is the space discerned
between the two ends of the middle Fingers, the arms right retched out.

The arms so long that being stretched out, reach to the knees, which seldom
so happens, does then denote such a person to be liberal, bold, high-minded,
of a greedy desire, weak of body, simple of wit, foolish, and vainglorious,
as Writes Michael Scotus.

The arms over short, in respect of the stature of the body, do signify a
contentious person, unthankful, bold, envious, proud, foolish, and a niggard,
as affirms Scotus.

The arms big, through the bones, sinews, and much flesh: do signify a
person sufficient strong, proud, of a light cause presumptuous, envious,
desirous of bewtifull things, and lightly crediting: as writes Michaell Scotus.

The arms fat and brawned, do signify a person vain glorious, coveting
pleasant things, and more foolish than witty, in the doing of things: as
witnesses Michael Scotus.

The arms very hearie, whether they be lean or fat, and soft of flesh: do
argue a leacherous person, of a weak capacity, weak of body, very
suspicious, and craftilye malicious, as writes Michael Scotus.

The arms very naked of hear, do denote that person to be of a weak
capacity, long angry, lightly crediting, vain, lascivious, a liar, lightly
deceyuing, wary in the evil, and but weak of body: as affirms Scotus.

The form and judgment of the hands. The xxxviii. Chapter.
THe Regityue nature of the whole body formed the hand, with the paulme long,
and the fingers in seemly length, through the goodness of the matter
regulated, as the like in many creatures appears: in such manner, that the
same is sufficiently prepared and formed unto the doing of all works, that
is, to be wrought: and in expressing the mighty force of the members, and
singularity of the Wit, the Jests, and other skils in every creature. This also
formed of Nature, as a most strong helper, to reatch and take unto it all such
things which are needful: so that this necessarily and aptlye serves, both
to take and do.

Isidore learnedly writes, that this part is named the hand, for that the same
is the officer and presenter unto the whole Body: and is the same which
presents and Ministereth Meat unto the Mouth: which thus ministered, is after
carried into all the parts of the body.

This Author, names the Paulme to be the hand, with the fingers stretched
out, and the hand seemly drawn together, to be the fist of the creature.

Those branches of both the hands, are properly named the Fingers, which in
number are known to be ten, and decently matched or joined together. For these
we see (says the Phisiognomer) that they both have a perfect number, and a
most decent order in their standing.

The proper names of these, and their Offices, shall here briefly be touched:
as first the same (so named the thumb) in that this among the others, re^dreth
or gives a virtue and power: the second (...) named the showing or pointing
finger, and the saluting: for that with the same, we in a manner salute all
persons, and express with it most matters. The third, properly named the
infame or middle Finger, being the longest, which is much occupied about the
low and clensing place. The fourth, aptly named the ring Finger, for that on
the same, the wedding Ring is (most commonly) worn. The fi^t, rightly named
the Eare-finger, for that with the same we daily empty and cleanse the ears, as
is to most men known and exercised at this day.

The learned Formica writes, and by diverse of skill well known, that it first
behooves a man, to learn and know the quantity of the hand: and afterward,
the quality, substance, and condition of the same: inasmuch as the accident
does note and give to every skillful person, a great perseueraunce and
understanding, both to know and pronounce what these tend unto: as reports
Aristotle, in primo de A^ima.

The bigness and shortness of the Fingers, argues the paucity or smalnesse
of matter, and a flegmaticke quality, and that nature could not dispose and
guide: of which the spirits then be like to that nature. And of this such are
noted foolish: and of the same mind, is Rasis, Conciliatour, and Ptolomie the
Philosopher.

Formica writes, that very necessary it is, to know, that the bigness of
the Hand does sometimes proceed of great labor: and for that cause* such
which labor much, have big hands. Yet these sometimes, are big of nature:
and then caused through the bigness of the bones, and sinews. Such a person
whether the same be man or woman, is naturally strong. The same sometimes
proceeds, through the grossness of flesh* and then such are drunkards,
leacherous, (...) (naturally) proud vile persons.

If any has the hands big, and fingers (about the ends of the nails)
sharp ^ do denote such a person to be deceytfull, and covetous.

Forasmuch as the Phisiognomer has ex^^^sed, in this hand here under placed,
the most (...) known: and given names to them in the Lat^^ tongue, with
letters added to each, for a be^^^ conceyuing, and knowing of them at any (...)
I, of this occasion thought good, whereby (this ^^ligent travail of the
Author, might not appe^^ frustrate unto our native Country men) (...) english
all the lives, there seen: and placed (...) in the form of a brief Table,
with the letters (...) the Alphabet annexed to each line, that they (...)
readier be found and known in the said (...) lively figured to the eye.

A vitae linea, signifies the life line. B Soror vitalis seu Martia, is the
sister of (...) life line on the mont of the Thombe. C. Cerebri linea,
represents the head line. D. Soror Cerebralis, is that which stretches near
in the Palm of the hand. E. Veneris and genitalium linea, is that, which is
named of some, the table line, or the line of generation, and strength of the
body. F. Saturnia, appears to be a Sister line coming from the wrist, and
retching in many hands, unto the Mont of the middle finger. This also is of
some named the line of felicity. G. Iecoraria, is the Liver line, that comes
from the life line, which retching up in the hollow of the Hand, performs
the Triangle in most hands. H. Via lactea, is a line many times found on the
Mont of the hand, reatching unto the Mont of the ear finger, named of some,
the tail of the Dragon. I. Cingulum Veneris: is a line, which beginning
between the ring and ear finger, is extended between the middle and
forefinger, after the form of a half circle. K. Carpus vel restricta,
represents the Wrist of the hand, which separateth it self from the arm.
L. Hypothenar, represents the Breast of the hand: applied (for the near
effects) unto the Moon. M. Solaris linea, Via ^olis: is that line, which
coming from the Mensall or Table line, reaches unto the Root of the Ring
finger, straight, deep, and whole*




The accidental lines, which either increase, or diminishe the significations
of the principal lines: with all other lines, and notes, that happen in the
hand, shall shortly be uttered in the great work of Pa^lmestrie to come forth.

Of which is to be noted (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) that the fore
finger, middle fin^er, ring finger, and ear finger, have three joints a
piece, which (if in every joint) happen but one line, such a person shall
sodensy die: as Actours write. But if there shall be two lines equally distant,
then is it a good note: for that these signify an honest and faithful person.

If in the middle joint of each finger, shall be only one line, and in the
other two joints, two lines: do denote, that such a person shall leese one of
his eyes: These hitherto Formica.

Ptholomie the Philosoph^r writes, that the hands big, and thick skinned:
do denote a person, not contented in mind.

The learned Rasis utters, that the hands nymble, and slender: do
demonstrate a singular wit, a good understanding, and the subtilnesse of
humors.

The hands flender and very long: do argue tyrany and foolishness in that
person.

The Philosopher Ptholomy affirms, that the hands of diverse colors, do
demonstrate such a person to be leacherous and cruel: and the like do the
slender fingers (more then is decent) denote foolishness.

The skillful Formica reports, and the same a truth, that such a person*
which has the fingers ends broad, is judged faithful, and a good companion.

Such a person, which has the Table in the hand large, and the fingers slender
and long, is judged to be subtle in a natural faculty, and apt or given to
play on Instruments.

Such a creature which has the Table in the hand narrow, and the fingers
big: is aptly disposed and given to write well: and shall die of an impostume.

Such a person which has the hands not ouer-bigge, nor over small, but well
proportioned to the body, do denote such a person to be well contented and
quieted in all his accidents.

If any has the hands small, the same creature is reported to be of a womanly
nature in his deeds insatiable and hateful after the kind, as now loving, and
now hating, so that seldom there is any assured trust to be had in him.

If any woman has manly hands, such a creature has a big midriffe, and big
belly port intumescent: and such a one may lightly conceive, yet bring forth no
perfect child.

If any have big hands and fat, do argue such a person to be of a dull capacity
and wit.

Such a woman having the like hands, does ernestly desire the l^^rened a^t.

If any has the hands slender, is denoted to be a person nimble, and ready in
his ^^ings, and that he much delights in women's comp^^y.

If any has hollow Fingers, and those evil fashioned, and no, well joining
together, is judged to be a person prone to poverty, and unconstant in his
words, so that he performs little in deeds: as the same Physiognomer often
times noted in one (named S^raph^^us de P^^is) a Physician.

Such a one, who has not his fingers standing close together, or not straight
ou^ lying* does signify a miserable life, and poverty to succeed. The reason
of this is, thorough the evil proportion, which forms not there a good
understanding, but an evil and inoromate.

The fingers formed little, denotes such a one to be dull, envious, and a
fool, after the agreement of Authors.

The learned Morbe^h (the Cardinal) in his paulmestry writes: that the
fingers long and slender, and well proportioned together: do argue an apt and
ready wit, especially in handie crafts: yet do these demonstrate, an evil
government, through which ensues, that such are miserable and poor. Vt in
politicis patet.

If the Fingers shall be much or wide standing assunder, do denote poverty and
misery to ensue to that person: as the same Physiognomer often noted, in such
persons which begged from door to door.

Certain report, that the fingers very short and little, do denote such a
person to be strong and witty: which reason, seems not to the Phisiognomer,
simply to be allowed.

The hands big, if the fingers b^e over short, do argue such a person to be
an ouerthwarter, deceitful* and a thief, after the agreement of writers.

The hands crooked and slender, do denote such a person to be a gluttonous
feeder, and full of words.

Certain report, that the fingers evil proport^oned, as big and small, with
the Paulme of the hands crooked, do indicate an envious person, a wretch,
covetous, and a fool. The reason o^ this is, forasmuch as the grossness does
indicate much quantity of the matter, and a little of the Natural heat, not
mighty to stretche out: through which the creature is denoted, to be an
earthly dry person, and rude, by reason of the overmuch dryness: and he is
judged to be a fool, through the luck of natural heat and moisture
proportionable: and by the consequent, the same argues him to be covetous,
through the crooking of the hands.

Morbeth in his Paulmestry utters, that the woman having small hands, and
big fingers at the ends, is judged prone to luxury, and of a dull capacity.

A certain Author of a small Palmestrie reports, that the Woman which have
a short paulme of the hand, in respect of the Body, shall be grieved with the
hard delivery of child: and this only caused, thorough the straitness of
her 23u3rp2c1lp: which length is answerable to that length, which is on the
back of the middle finger nigh the first joint, coming by the Paulme, even
unto Ra^cetta, or the wrist.

Or thus plamer, the length of this 2c1lp, is aunswerable to the just space,
which is from the root behind the middle finger: unto the wreast of the
hand: and this do4bl2d, is the just measure of r3h2toof, vt dicunt and recte.

A certain writer (whose name the Physiognomer knew not) reports, that the
hands short, bunching out, and slender, do denote such a person (...), and a
gluttonous feeder. The cause o^ which matter is, the end of the sinews which
(^^rough a dryness) is drawn together, and bow^^ inward, and thereof crooked
or bunched out. Of which men crooked at the end^ of parts* through the daily
excess about fire, or by a sickness, these well and true reported: yea, these
well drink and e^te.

When the end of the little finger shall not reach unto the upper joint of the
ring finger) unless the same be otherwise shortened of some accident) is then
thought a perfect note of a Bastard: as the same Physiognomer has noted in
many, but this warily to be judged.

If the Fingers bend at the Tops, do denote such a person to be envious and
covetous, and such are crafty and false of promise, applied to the Ape. But
when these bend inward, then the contrary judge.

If the Thombe bends toward the Fingers, and likewise the Fingers inclined
toward the Thum, do argue such a person to be covetous and malicious. And
this disposition of the members proceeds from the spring, unto which it
ensues as is aforesaid.

The Creature, which of a Custom, uses to hold the hand strait out, and the
fingers (at length) stretched: is judged to be a person fearful, full of
words and vain.

If any uses to hold the hand most commonly shut together, betokens such a
person to be yrefull and hasty.

The fingers small and slender in a man, do denote him to be a fool: as
certain of knowledge report.

If the Fingers be short and big, do argue such a person to be bold and
envious: as Formica writes.

When the fingers are well proportioned, of a comely form and length, do
indicate honest conditions in that person.

He which in talking moves much, clappeth the hands, and has many iestuees
besides, is noted to be a fair speaker, envious, and a deceiuer.

Certain report, as that ancient Hermes, that the shaking or quiuering of the
hands, in a healthful young man, does demonstrate such a person to be soon
angry. For this proceeds of abundance of heat, and moving forward of the
spirits.

If this shaking or quiuering of the hands, shall be very strong, the same is a
note of a corrupt quality: and such a person is lightly angry, Melancholicke,
desirous of many and diverse things, and malicious.

The hands hollow in the Paulmes, with a goodness and eminency of the Montes,
and proportion of the lines: is an assured note of long li^e. But if contrary
to this, you find the hand: then judge the contrary.

The Fingers of what form so ever they be, with the joints gross or big,
do indicate misery and misfortune, as the Physiognomer has many times noted.

Here conceive that by the form of the Fingers, a man may l^ke distinguish
three Ages in every creature, as the Physiognomer taugh^ us before, in the
Physiognomy of the lines seen in the forhead.

In holding the hands upright and close together against the light, mark
where any open place appears, and at that age the misfortune of the creature
shall happen. This manner of accounting, must begin from the first joint of the
fore and middle finger: in proceeding like, unto the ends of the fingers: and
on such wise, consider along from Finger to Finger where any open place is: for
at that age, where the space signifies, shall the misfortune come: and on such
wise, may the fortune and mis^ortune of the three ages, be known and found. If
the closing or shutting together of the Fingers be whole, with a most comely
form of the joints, does denote a singular fortune to that person, especially
if the annexed do answer the like.

The learned Albertus and Conciliatore write that when the Fingers be so full
and round, that lifted up before the eye, a man cannot see between them*
do indicate a covetous person, and malicious.

If the Fingers stretched out, these bend toward the back of the hand, do
argue such a person to be unjust, subtle, and witty, especially if the
Fingers be slender.

If any, whiles he walks, does of a custom, shut the thumb within the
fingers, is noted to be a covetous person, as the like the Physiognomer
observed in a certain Lumbard.

The Fingers long, do like argue the length of the ears of the Liver, and the
bigness of the Fingers, do like denote the largeness of the ears of the
liver. But the smalnesse of them, as Albe^tus reports, does like signify the
ears of the Liver to be little: the selfsame utters Auicen and Galen, in
lib^o reg^^.

If any shall have red hands, whither the same be man or woman, is of nature
noted Sanguine and Luxurious, as writes the learned Formica, and the same a
truth known.

Ptholomie the Philosopher utters, that the creature which has the upper
joints of the Fingers gross or big, and turning backewarde: does denote,
that if he shall then be rich, within a period, and a certain time after to
become poor: or else by some misfortune, shall be short lived.

The hands crooked in the length, is a note (as some Authors write) of sudden
death: and this in sundry has bin noted. Forasmuch as some are found to have
six fingers on one hand, as the two last toward the ear Finger: in like manner
lined, yet in the greatness diverse, the joints and Nails seemly formed and
proportioned through the goodness of the matter. And the first person which I
saw and considered, before the presence of M. Julius Vitalis, was a Jew, named
Helias. After him many others, whose names for brevity, the Physiognomer
omitteth: and this person he beheld in the City of Bononie. Thus briefly, the
Physiognomer Cocles ends this Chapter of the hand and Fingers: craving
pardon of the Reader, if the same be imperfectly or superfluously handled.

The form and judgment of the nails of the Fingers. The xxxix. Chapter.


THe Prince of the laters Writers, both of Phisiognomy and Paulmestry
affirms, that the Nails (and the same a truth) are produced, or do proceed
of the superfluities of the heart, in that the heart is found the nobler member
of action: so that by them, is somewhat to be uttered.

He also reports, in differentia, 54. that the nail is a body extensed
thin, produced and caused of the superfluities, and hardened on the fingers
ends, for a special help to them being there situated, and grows on the
Fingers ends and Toes ^ as the hears, uttermost of the skin, do occupy on the
body.

Also Auicen utters, that the nails both on the Fingers and toes, were
ordained in the ends of the^e members, the better to strengthen: for to take
and hold things firmly, and to cover the flesh at the ends: which jointly
being well matched, give a more strength. This well appears, in that if any
of the small bones be lacking at the ends of any of the toes or fingers: then
like do the nails, lack at the ends of those members: as the same may
evidently appear, in any large scarre in the flesh, where after grows no
hairs to be seen.

The manner also of the Original and cause of those nails, is proportional
to the production of the hairs, through the grosser superfluities not so much
adust.

The nails plain, white, soft, and thin, reddish and sufficient clear, do
indicate a singular wit in that person: and this is one of the Notes, which
very seldom fails, forasmuch as such nails, do proceed of the best quality,
as Albertus reports: so that the spirits which produce the Nails, declared
(from the heart) are clear and thin: thorough whose superfluity, are the
Nails engendered.

The nails rough and hard, do denote such a person to be prone to the
veneriall act: as the learned Morbeth reports.

The nails over short, do argue wickedness in that creature. And the black,
small, and bending nails, do argue impudency, compared to the greedy catching
fowls. These also after the mind of the Physicians, with a leanness of the
Fingers, do witness a consumption of the body.

When the nails fall off without cause, do threaten the Leapry to come, or
near at hand, as the learned Conciliatore utters.

The Child borne without Nails, or having them but weak, does witness the
mother to have used the overmuch eating of Salt, as witnesses the Philosopher
Aristotle, in septimo de natuta animalium. cap. 4.

The nails in the middle, deep, gross, or big and thick, do denote a rude
person, and knowing little, especially if the flesh about the Fingers ende^ be
high and gross.

Ptholomy the Philosopher reports, that the Nails long, do signifye poverty
to that Person and to live in bare estate or Begge^ie, all his lif^ time. The
same is confirmed of Pontius Gallicus.

Certain Authors affirm, that whose nail of the fingers of the left hand,
grow faster then the right, witnesses poverty: the like if the nails (...)
without color.

I much marvel (says the Physiognome^ that all the legitimate authors do
affirm: th^^ the white pricks in the Nails, to signify happ^^nesse and
friends, which (as it should seem) hat^ many times bin observed and noted, and
iudg^ of the Physiognomer by the order of the Finge^ as thus, the white pricks
seen in the Sunn^ Finger, do signify ^he increase of honor, worsh^^ offices,
and friendship with Noble persons, etc. (...) reason of this is, forasmuch as
these denote a (...) humor, and benign, presupposing there a (...) quality
and understanding: of which, a good ^^^cretion and courtesy ensues: so that
such person through the same, do attain friends, and co^^mended of many. The
like pricks found in (...) little finger, do denote friendship with the
Mercurians: and that Mercury to be well proportioned, and very strong, in
that place about, and similia.

But the black pricks seen in the nails, and chiefly in the middle Finger,
do argue harms, persecutions, imprisonment, and all kinds of detriments that
may happen unto any: as the same the Phisiognomer understood of a certain
friend, which noted the like in many persons. And these he reported to like
succeed, according to the diversity of the Fingers: forasmuch as the
misfortune and loss of riches, happened after the positure of them on the
Fingers.

But some Authors report, that these do indicate hatred. The reason of this
is, thorough the excess of the dry Melancholy, which then abounds: and lack
of the Natural heat, which fails. So that the black pricks of the nails,
do always demonstrate, that the cold Melancholye, and an earthly dryness to
ensue. Yet it seems to me (says the Physiognomer) that experience may
contradict the same, seeing I have always seen (says he) that the black and
white pricks on the Nails do come and go away within a few days: and that
these to be caused, of determinate effects: which otherwise, cannot proceed
or be caused, but through the Periode and course of the Planets, in certain
years and months, as shall appear in many places of the Phisiognomy of the
Planets, to come forth.

The sign^fication and judgment of feeling, after Physiognomie. The xl.
Chapter.
THe Philosopher ( in libro de regimine principum) reports, that the sense*
which consists in the hand, is the tactiue or palpatiue virtue, and the
course of them rests in the heat and cold, rough and soft, moisture and
drith. And it is a Virtue contained between ^wo skins, of which, the one is
in the upper ^ace of the body, and the other, in the same which belongs and
cleaves unto the flesh: so that when each of these senses is attained, which
God by h^s mighty Virtue, has Ministered to this kind. Thin Skins so light
as the Spiders Web arise, and come from the root of the Brain: and are a fine
scarffe and thin Curtain to this kind: insomuch, that when the same is
presented, which each sense has: and the same comes unto those skins, which
are in that substance of the brain: the passages then of all the senses are
gathered with the immaginatiue Virtue, which represents these to the
cogitatiue Virtue, which consists in the middle of the brain: tha^ it may
behold these, and both gather and study in the figures and examples of them,
that it may^ know in them the nociue and inna^ue, and that the same may ve
wronght according to measure, which proceeds or comes to it of them. And as
Auerro is (in de sensu and sen^ato) utters that the feeling is flesh: and is
proper to al instruments of the senses: this considered, that these nothing
possess of all the senses in the act of them, which they properly comprehend,
but the instrument of feeling: which is compowned of the qualities, which it
comprehends: and for that cause does this not comprehend, but the intensed
matters, through his temperament: and for the same reason, how much, he
temperater the flesh shall be found, so much the more does it comprehend the
simple qualities, as heat, cold, dryth, and moisture. For these does man
enjoy far above other living creatures, and is of feeling better and
sensibler, which especially is decerned by the hand (as the flesh of the
paulme) and the flesh especially of the fore finger. But the tongue (at the end
of it) has not taste in the act: and for that cause, when the same is imbybed
and filled of certain humors, the taste then is corrupted: and like is to be
conceived of the instruments, of the other senses. The self same utters
Albertus (in libro de anima) where he wills to conceive that the skin is
wouen with sinews very small, and with heary veins contained within the same
wouen, with which the Liver, and bowels are wrapped: that these may defend them
from outward harms: and for this, the skin in beasts, is very thick, and
hearie. For that the same has not any protection or outward defense: but the
skin in men is thin. For which cause it is protected and succored by
garments, from wind, cold, and rain. Seeing the skin compowned of the
sinews, is naturally white: for that cause is the property of the sinews
procured, that the same retcheth out and draws in, and is white in color:
but the redness of blood, passing by them, appears to the eye. So that whose
color of the hand or face is white or read (as Phylemon utters) and of a
good feeling: do denote the faithfulness of mind, constancy, and truth: and
this confirmed, if a commensuration or comeliness of form consist in the
other members. These hitherto uttered of feeling, shall here suffice.

The condition and judgment of the back bone. The xli. chapter.
THe back bone great, that is, in the length and breadth, does argue strength
of the creature: and the royal members to be strong, and natural heat
mighty, as before uttered: especially when the ridge or back bone is musculous,
and without a softness of flesh decerned, is for the same applied, unto the
Masculinity. But if the back bone be found narrow, and compassed with soft
flesh, that person is judged of a feminine action: forasmuch as the rest is
narrow, and the royal members feeble in heat: and their actions are known
weak, and feeble in conditions, yea these have a dead mind or faint courage,
applied unto the feminine kind. Of which Rasis reports, that the largeness
of the back bone, does argue such a person to be strong, arrogant, and furious
in ire.

The back bone narrow, and covered with soft flesh, does denote such a person
to be effeminate.

The crookedness of the back, does intimate the wickedness of conditions:
but an equallity of the back, is then a good note. These hitherto Rasis.

The learned Conciliatore utters, that the back bone large, and well brawned,
and strong of bones, is applied to the man kind: and in the contrary manner to
the woman kind.

The back bone crooked, if the same be covered with soft flesh, and slender in
the gyrting place: does denote such a person, to excel in natural guiftes,
and to have very great pleasure in hunting. Yet some affirm, that the
crookedness of the back, to declare the wickedness of conditions.

The thinness of the back, does denote that person to be of a contentious
nature, and spiteful.

The back large and vnextensed, does denote strength, arrogance, and the
vehemency of a strong ire.

The nether part of the back bone, if the same lies broad to the buttocks,
and be compassed with a soft flesh, does indicate an effeminate person,
compared to the woman. But if the same appears long, and shall end sharp at
the end, does argue wantonness unto the veneriall act, yet with a temperancy
and fea^efulnesse. Such also having a great, large, and strong ioynted back,
are reported strong: and econtra. But broad, thin, narrow and flati^, do
indicate weakness. These hitherto Conciliatore.

Certain report that the back bone hearie, lean, and very much elevated or
bearing out, from the equallitie of parts: to denote such a person to be
unshamefast, malicious, rude, of a dull capacity, weak of small labor and
sluggish.

Whose back bone is decerned big, and fat, does argue such a person to be
variable, sluggishe, and very crafty, or full of deceit.

The back bone thin, long, and lean, does signify such a person to be
weak, of a light cause fearful, vain, contentious, and very light of
belief.

The back bone from the shoulder points, unto the girdlesteede, when it is
short, and suf^icient broad: does denote such a person to be hasty in the
venerall action, as the Phisiognomer oftentimes noted in sundry persons. Here
conceive that the back bone, is mente and reckoned from the shoulder points,
unto the gyrdlesteede.

Of which, is to be noted, that the back bone be large, does then argue the
breast, the ribs, and flanckes to be large, and of necessity it ensues that
the composition of Nucha, and the neck to be strong with a decent form of the
head. And the inner members have their receptacles great, and the knittings of
the motive sinews, are of a due proportion. Et econtra contrarium denotatur.
By the loins (the ingenious Philosopher Aristotle means) from the
gyrdlesteede, unto the beginning of the buttockes. So that when the same place
has a largeness, does argue strength in that creature: through the plenty of
muscles: and such are delighted in the hunting of beasts: and applied to the
Lion, and Greyhound in the form.

The condition and judgment of the breast, throat, and pappes. The xliii.
chapter.
THe breast is that part, which contains the spiritual members: for that in
it are certain parts containing, and certain contained. The parts
containing are f^wer, that is, the flesh* the brawny part, the pappes, and the
bones. The parts contained are eight, that is, the heart, the lungs, the
pannycles, the ligaments, the sinews, the veins, the arteries, and Hysophagus.

The Philosopher Aristotle unto King Alexander utters, that the largeness of
the breast, and bigness of the shoulders, and back: do argue such a person to
be honest, bold, of a ready understanding and witty.

The worthy Conciliatore reports, yt when the ^eather part about the
veysande, the shoulders, and breast, shall be evil distinguished and flat:
do signify the rudeness of wit, and foolishness: and that such a person
not to be apt, to attain any special handy craft,

When the weysande beneath, shall be far dystant from the shoulders, and
large: does denote such a person* to be of a feeble courage.

The weysand being a mean, does then argue such a person, to be honest
conditioned* and strong. These hitherto Conciliatore.

Here conceive that the weysande appearing emynent, and large, does denote an
effeminate person, especially if he be double chinned.

The breast large, and well proportioned, with the other parts large, is a most
perfect and true note to be conceived in every creature, forasmuch as this
largeness of the breast, is proper to man.

The breast thin, and weak compowned, does argue a weak courage and will,
after the mind of certain Authors.

The breast thick covered with flesh, does denote such a person to be
ungrateful, as the Physiognomer reports.

Whose breast is mightily bending in, and that the Muscles so proceeding, that
through these are caused (like to an hollownesse) does denote a perverse person
and wicked. When this is bery emynent, the heart of such a person is hot, of a
small understanding, and daily weepeth, or sings.

Rasis affirms, that the quality of the heart, if it shall be hot: does
argue the pulse to be quick moving and often, and the breath fast.

Much hear seen on the breast, and thick, and that in the feeling the same
perceived hot: such a quality of the heart, does demonstrate that person to
be bold, sturdie, and very yrefull.

The composition of the body, both in the bigness and smalnesse, is to be
considered: for that the same demonstrateth the quality of the heart.

So that the breast formed big, does argue properly the hotenesse and bigness
of the heart: and this the more confirmed, if (with the same) the head
appears small, or that it be not big: which i^ i^ shall so be, a man needs
not to have regard unto any other signs.

In like manner, the breast formed small, and the head appearing seemly, or
but meanly big: does demonstrate by that reason, the smalnesse of the heart,
and coldness of the quality in the creature.

If the bigness of the breast, appears to answer unto the bigness of the
head: or yt the smalnesse of the breast shall be proportionally ^ormed to the
smalnesse of the head, then ought a man to have regard unto the other notes.

The cold quality of the heart, does procure a weak pulse, and ^eeble
breath: through which the breast is caused to possess few hears on it, and
those but small: so that the breast by the means, is ^ound cold in the
feeling. The person being of such a quality is noted fearful, and sluggish.

The quality dry, has a hard pulse, and is thorow^ut the body brawned* and
swartish of color.

The breast also thin of flesh, but the veins appa^aunt, and heart of
body, and the skin both thick and hard

But the moist complexion, does cause a soft pulse, the breast naked of hears:
the flesh also soft and gentle: and such a person is noted effeminate.

The complexion or quality hot and dry, causes a hard and quick pulse, and
the same often: and engenders much hear both thick and stiff, on the breast,
and on the thighs. The breath also out of the same quality, proceeds both
great and often: and the whole body besides is in the feeling decerned hot and
brawned, and the veins apparent. The person being of this quality, is noted
yrefull and obstinate.

But the quality decerned cold and moist, works the contrary to these
above uttered: these hitherto the words of the ancient Rasis.

To come unto the matter and purpose (says Cocles) that is, when the breaste
is sound well compowned, and orderly formed, does indicate strength,
manliness, boldness, the others like, and aunswering, which properly belong
unto the man, as the Philosopher Aristole means: and such a habitude ought
not to appear much fleshly nor so soft in the feeling, as the softness of the
woman.

The like words utters, the singular Physician Galen: that the body
appearing not over fat, nor over lean, and continuing the like: does argue
such a person to live long: yet the body decerned rather lean then fat, is
the more commended, and does live longer: after the agreement of the learned
Physicians.

The veins of fat bodies, are evermore decerned narrow: whereof such
appear to have but a weak and small breath, and little blood consisting in
the special parts of the body. Of which, such growing elder in years, are
reported to be short lived: and to be abreuiated life, through a few, and these
small accydences to ensue.



When any considere^h a subject, let him first (says the Phisiognomer) mark
the condition of the breast, after the form of the head, and other members of
the body. For if the breast be formed large, and bearing out, and the head
seemly big, with a shrrtnesse of the neck does then indicate the hotnesse of
the heart, so that there appears a nakedness of hears: which after nature
does proceed, through a largeness of the powers consisting in that creature,
that properly cannot retain the matter of the hears: or else of the occasion,
that the straightness of the passages be so narrow and close, that these let
the issuing forth of the hears, after the due property and course of nature.

As touching the lean bodies after nature, these are in a contrary manner
formed to the fat: for as much as their principal members are known to be
open, and able (by the report of the Phisiognomer) to endure but small matters,
and traueyles. But the persons known of a temperate quality, and dieting
themselves daintilye, or rather after discretion, that these may so ware fat:
are by that means procured, that their veins and arteries are caused strong,
and endure large. Of which, their heat (by that reason) is not so soon
extinguished: as the singular Physician Galen utters. So that such an
habitude with the Phisiognomer, is accounted lawdable, and this generally meant
in all the body.

Here conceive (says Cocles) that the heart in man, is cause of all the
workings, if the principal members are duly formed: of which, the goodness
and m^lice of mind insueth, according to the positure of ^iuers parts in the
creature.

The contrary of this is to be judged: when as the neck is long, the breast
large, with a much quantity of hears* as in sundry places before uttered.

The thinness of flesh on the breast, with a due proportion of the other
members: does argue hotnesse of the heart, and by the consequent, a warlike
boldness: as appears in the chollericke. And as the like, by the former
words before may be gathered.

Of which, the authority of Flauius Vegetius witnesses, that the young man
fit to be trained up in the wars, must have a quick, and ready eye, an
upright neck, large breasted, the shoulders, brawned, or fast of flesh* the
hands and fingers strong, with longer arms, after the form of the body, a
mean belly, the legs sufficient fleshie, and strong sinewed, and rather
mean, than tall of stature: for that a strong and hardy Soldier, is more to
be preferred, than a tall and big person. And of this diligent heed must be
given, to the proportion of the members.

The form of the pappes is to be considered: which (as it is written) are
compowned of white flesh, having many kernels, and little holes like to a
sponge, through the veins, arteries, and sinews: and of this, they be joined
with the heart, the liver, and the brain, with the generatiue members.

If the pappes of any woman seem to hang down, (in a manner) like to the
woman's, and compassed with soft flesh, do denote effeminacy, and intemperancy.

The Philosopher Ptholomie reports, that he (which on the left side, of the
breast) has a big fleshie Mole, high out, and round, with one, or many
hears on it, does then promise the increase of riches and honor. This
experienced of Pontius Gallicus, and of the Phisiognomer Cocles.

Such women which have big pappes, and short: are denoted sluggish, and
rammish of smell, as some affirm.

Such women which have no veins, appearing on the breasts, are unfit to give
suck unto Children: For that such a positure does argue a flewmatick, and an
inordinate matter. Such women also are of a rude nature, and beastly: and give
suck with pain, through some grievous accidence.

The pappes of (a mean bigness) not soft, and the veins apparent, and
straight o^t: do argue a good milche Nurse: especially if her skin be swartish
in color.

The pappes small and lean, or slender through dryness? do denote such a
woman, to be weak of body.

When the pappes begin to arise, then do they denote, that (such shortly
after) to be provoked unto the veneriall act.

The pappes sufficient big, and full (after Galen) do argue a perfect
digestion.

The form and judgment of the hollownesse on the breast. The xliiij. chapter.
THe ingenious Philosopher Aristotle does Phisiognomate of the nobleness of
the part of the breast, which commonly is decerned between the breasts. The
same properly named Methafreton, where frenes and the Midriffe consists: and
this is a pellicle, dividing the region of the natural members, from the
region of the nutritive: which through a like division, is the same named the
Midriffe (as it were parting or dividing in two) and knitte or fastened, to the
back bone and breast, in the compass of the breast, having a circuler form.

This hollow place of the breast, is here meant of the Phisiognomer, where the
hears commonly grow on men, and right against the Midriffe.

The person which has this part of the breast, appearing big, sufficient
fleshy, and brawned: is (of the Philosopher) noted strong according to nature,
and applied of him to the male kind.

The creature which has this part appearing weak, not fleshie, nor brawned:
are denoted feeble* and weak after natuere, and applied for the form, unto
the female kind.

Such a person which ha^h this part so bending in, through the meeting there of
the muscles, right against the furcle of the two semi^^rcles, meeting at it
that they cause there a deep holownesse or pit in the middle of the same: does
denote such a person to be evil conditioned, and not to fellowship withal,
rude, and of a disdainefull nature. But the manner of his disdaining, he
covers and hides, for that he is close minded, as touching his malicious
stomach: which he subtly cloaketh, by his dissembling words.

The Phisiognomer Cocles, noted a certain husbandman in his time, which had
the Methaphrenon so hollow standing in, that a man might well have hid, the
whole fist in the same: who he diligently noted and knew to be evil
conditioned, especially a wrangler, contentious, and double tongued.

He which has this part appearing eminent, is noted to be very yrefull: in
that the bearing out of this part, proceeds through the overmuch heat of the
heart, and of the same cause is moved, to be very yrefull, as reports Galen
in Libro Tegm, and through this yrefulnesse caused to be forgetful of himself,
indiscreet, and unadvised of that he does: and applied for the nature and
property unto the Horse, for that the horse has such a form of the breast,
and is of a vehement fury, as Aristotle utters.

This part consisting a mean, in the hollownesse, that is, the Methaphrenon,
neither to high bearing out, nor to deep formed inward (as the breast plate of
a harness) is a laudable note, after the mind of the Physiognomer Cocles: and
such a person, says he, is known to be of a temperate quality, and well
conditioned.

The self same utters Conciliatore, and the like taught in the Chapter of
the signification of the breast.

The condition and judgment of the ribs. The xliiij. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher does skilfully instruct a man to Phisiognomate by the
disposition and form of the ribs, and learnedly utters certain notes of
these.

The first note is, that such creatures which are decerned to be well ribbed,
be accounted (after skill known) to be strong: and applied for the form, unto
the male kind.

But such seen and found weak ribbed, are denoted feeble of strength (after
nature) applied for the form, unto the female kind: which are known (says
the Philosopher) to have but small and feeble ribs, and weak muscles.

The Lion (of all beasts) is the strongest, and perfitest compowned in his
parts: yea he for the proper composition, nearest agreeing unto man's form.
The description of whose form, the learned Aristotle Artly utters, in this
manner.

That he has a mouth sufficient great, the face formed square, and not very
bony: the upper Jaw equally hanging downward, the nose more gross then small,
the eyes hollow standing, and very round, nor to much protensed: but the
meanness moderate, the ouerbrowes sufficient great and broad, the forehead
formed square, and in the middle of it, somewhat hollow denting in, unto the
ouerbrowes, and nose: under the forehead, the same as a cloud consisting: but
above on the forehead near to the nose, having the hears appearing inclined:
the head in a mean manner formed: the neck of a good and seemly length, and
the same gross and innodated: the hears in color yealow, not plain, nor
much crisped: the parts which are cituated next the joints of the shoulder
points, well proportioned and spaced, rather than near conjoined: the shoulder
points appearing strong, and the breast iuuenile: the Methaphrenon also
appearing large, and the back sufficiently compowned: the hips or haunches
appearing not fleshie: the thighs and shanckes strong formed, and well
sinewed: the whole chyne of the back throughout compowned strong: the whole
body (of knowledge) decerned to be well brawned, and sinewed, and not sound
very moist: the pace that the Lion treads, is known to be neither swift, nor
very slow: In pace also he walks stately, and moves the shoulder points, as
the treads. Such a condition of the man's body, formed according to these, is
denoted laudable, and to be strong, and such persons like formed after nature,
are known to give freely, and to be liberal, yea stout of courage, loving
and coveting victory, gentle of behavior, and just in dealing, loving besides
these, with which they associate: these hitherto Aristotle.

Such persons (says the learned Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomy)
which are strong and well ribbed, be denoted liberal, and free of gifts,
bold, desirous of victory, gentle in behavior, just in actions, and loving
well those, with which they fellowship. And applied for the form, unto the
Male kind: in that the same has great ribs, through the largeness of the
breast, and breadth of the back: which properly proceeds, of the nature of
heat. Forasmuch as the nature of heat (as before uttered) is to increase and
dilate the form of the members.

Such persons which are found weak and small ribbed, are known of experience
to be feeble of strength, and after nature, applied unto the female kind.

Such persons which appear to have the ribs much covered and compassed with
the great quantity of flesh, that these seem swolen or puffed up withal: are
argued to be full of idle words, and foolish in actions: as both Almansore,
and Conciliatore report. And for the like form, aptly applied unto the Ox,
and Frogge, having such conditioned ribs.

The ribs of the woman formed narrow, and the flancks like: are especially
caused, through the lack of natural heat in that creature.

The ancient Rasis utters, that the smalnesse, and thinness of the ribs:
does innuate in that creature, the debility and feebleness of coeating.

The condition and judgment by the notes decerned, in the quantity of the
space between the neck upward and the Nauill downward, unto the mouth of the
stomach. The xlv. chapter.
THe Philosopher Aristotle does Phisiognomate, by the quantity of the parts,
which are between the nauill and neck, and the mouth of the stomach: saying
on this wise, that such persons which have the same space larger, which is from
the nauill, unto the bottom and end of the breast: than that consisting from
the end of the breast, unto the neck: are judged gluttenous, and of a dull
perseverance. The reason (why such are reported to be gluttons) is, for that
such have a big belly, and great stomach: and a great stomach (says the
Philosopher) requires much meat or food, by reason of the great quantity,
and not of the quality: of which, these (by an earnest desire) covet, to eat
much meat. And such are known to be of a dull understanding, and
perseueraunce, through their mighty filling of meat, more then needs: which,
of the same, procures weak senses in them.

But such a creature which has the space consisting from the nauill unto the
breast lesser in distance, then the same which is from the breast, unto the
neck, has (by the report of the Phisiognomer) a great or large stomach: the
stomach here meant, for the proper belly: of which this person is known (of
observation) to be weak of body, and short lived. The reason of this is, in
that the belly, or rather the stomach consists cold, through the smalnesse
of the same of which, this ventricle or stomach (says the Phisiognomer) does
not orderly and well digest, but rather ingendreth superfluities in it: and of
the same, such are prone unto diseases or sicknesses; and to be short lived.
And the multitude of sicknesses procured in that creature, are occasioned and
caused through the intensed hotnesse, which the same purchases* and by the
means of the bowels, and other members near placed: that hastily draw from
the stomach, the meat by a force undigested.

The learned Aristotle also utters, that when this space above described,
shall be decerned equal, such a positure and condition of the like, is
commended highly of him: for that this argues, a due proportion of the
members, containing in them an apt, and good digestion in that creature.

But a contrary to these (above uttered) does Aristotle report, that such
persons which have the parts from the Nauill downewarde (as unto the belly)
larger appearing, then the parts which are consisting unto the breast, as unto
that named ( Pomum granatum) are denoted feeble, and weak persons of body: and
of likelyhoode to be short lived, for the reason and cause above reports.

Such persons which have that space larger, consisting from the end of the
breast, unto the neck: then that extended from the Nauill, unto the point or
end of the breast: such (after the mind of the Philosopher Aristotle) are
denoted strong, witty, and of a ready understanding.

Guilielmus Nurice in his Phisiognomy reports, that the like words (in a
manner) to be uttered of the singular Aristotle, where he writes, that when
the parts consisting from the Nauill downewarde, shall be decerned larger then
these, which are appearing from thence unto the breast: are judged to be weak
of body and short lived.

The condition and judgment of the inner parts, which are consisting from the
nauill upward, unto the beginning of the stomach. The xlvi. chapter.
IF the ( Hypocondria) or inward parts so named, shall be decerned hard in
the feeling, and sufficiently or well compowned with bones: do witness the
Masculynity: and that such persons to be fierce, cruel, and quarrellers, or
fighters: as the ancient Palemon, Albertus, and the learned Conciliatore
utter. Such Hypocondria (do certain report) that the worthy Plato possessed:
yea the like creatures (as Albertus and Conciliatore report) are applied unto
the fierce Lion.

But if these parts (named Hypocondria) shall be decerned to be covered with a
soft flesh: these then (says the Phisiognomer Cocles) do denote an
effeminate mind, and womanly courage to dwell or consist in that creature: and
the like affirms Conciliatore, in his Rubric of Phisiognomy.

Such which shall have these parts weak boned, and wrinckled, and compassed
with a thinness of flesh, like unto the Hypocondria of the Ape: are of the
Philosopher judged wicked of behavior, and full of shrewde or evil turns:
applied for the like condition and form unto the Ape.

The signification and judgment by the notes of the belly. The xlvii. chapter.
THe Philosopher Aristotle does here instruct, how a man may Phisiognomate by
the habitude of the belly: in that the belly is known to be the same, which
receiving the meat (as Isidore reports) does thoroughly digest it, and
conueieth the excrements forth, that be superfluous, for which cause, this of
nature formed, bearing and appearing outward.

Such which are sufficient fat about the belly, that is, well brawned, and
that the belly bear not to much outward: are denoted strong after nature,
applied for the form, unto the male kind. And such a condition of it, is
reported to be natural: so that the composition of the belly (after the mind
of Constantine) is formed fleshly after nature, yea hot, and moiste: and
this, through the occasion of digestion properly. Of which Rasis utters, that
such creatures which possess big bellies after nature, are noted to be
libidinous, great feeders, and that speedily digest meats.

Such creatures which are decerned in a contrary condition to this, as having
flat bellies, not sufficient brawned, and these found soft, are denoted and
judged to be weak of body, and for the form, applied unto the apparent
congruency. In that we commonly see (says the Phisiognomer) that such
possessing lean bellies, proceeding of any accident, as either of too much
fasting, or of a sickness caused, o^ procured otherwise of any accidental
cause: are argued to be unapt to learn, and to conceive deep matters, yea,
weak of body and courage. And how long soever such continue in the like
passion, and so long they tend or lean unto the womanly conditions and
courage: after the agreement of Aristotle, Albertus, Concilia^ore, and others.

The learned Aristotle does utter also, in secretis secretorum, that he which
possesses a big belly, is denoted and judged to be an indiscreet person,
proud, foolish, and often desiring to coeate, for the hotnesse resting in him.

A mean proportion and form of the Belley discerned, with a narrowness of
the breast, does indicate such a Creature to be of a deep understanding, of
a good discretion and wit, of an honest conversation and trusty. For a
meannesse of the belly (says the Phisiognomer) is procured of a hotnes,
proportioned in that Creature, of which lawdable spirits ensue. Where the
Philosopher utters, with a straightnest of the breast: this is here meant to
be formed with a proportion of the same breast: for if this should be compounded
with an overmuch largeness, it would indicate a hotnesse of the heart in that
Creature, to hinder understanding. Of the same mind and judgment, (by the
report of the Phisiognomer) is the learned Loxius, where he witnesses, that
such a form of the belly is known to be soft. Conciliatore reports, that
the bigness of the belly, does denote an overmuch desire unto the veneriall
act. Whose stomach and belley are discerned fleshier, are reported to be
strong.

He also affirms, that the belly soft in youth, does witness, that the same
in many to become flat and drawn together in old age, and econtra: of which
this like, does indicate a heaviness in old age. The learned Aristotle uttered
unto the mighty K. Alexander, that the person having a great belly, to be
indiscreet, foolish, proud, and desiring to coeate. A meanness of the belly
descerned, (as above taught) with a decent narrowness of the breast:
witnesses a deepenesse of understanding, and ready counsel in that Creature.
These hitherto of Conciliatore.

The bigness of the Belley, proceeds of the great heat, reuerberating in
the empetnesse of the same: especially, unto the Region of the Genitors. In
that (as it is said) the virtue Morrall or intellectiue, is not situated in a
body over hot: and of this, such are procured to be indiscreet, and foolish.
Such also are noted to be great drinkers, gluttonous feeders, and delighted in
sluggishnesse: and giving their minds much to luxury. As has been noted in
sundry persons, which led an easy life.

A hearinesse decereed on the belly, does argue such a person to be full of
words: applied for the form, unto the kind of birds: in that it is known,
that the property of such, which are thus heary on the bellye, to be talkatiue,
and full of words: and this note only conceived and taken, of the chattering
of birds: which through their light spirits, are thus moved to chatter: and
the lesser birds are known much louder to sing: and to have many more notes,
as the Nightingale, and such like, which are so procured and caused through the
subtilnenesse of their blood, and lightness of the spiri^s: in that these are
of an ayrefull nature, through which, they are so lightly moved unto mirth,
and diverse desires, which in their many songs, and changing of notes, endeavor
to express. And the Cocks of those kind, more exercise long, then the Hens
do, forasmuch as they are formed hotter, and by the consequent have subtiller
blood, and lighter spirits, than the Hens. And that hearinesse, or many more
feathers appearing on their bellies, proceeds through the abundance of the
heat vaporatiue, in that the same more abounds in this place, through the
digestion there bearing greater sway: whose note is, that the flesh of their
bellies is found far sweeter, and more sauerie in taste, than any part of
their bodies besides: so that of the like causes, sundry men are known to be
very heary on the belly. Of which, to conclude, in that these possess a
subtle blood, and light spirits, through the light motion of blood, and the
spirits. For that cause, are diverse fantasies in those subjects, lightly
procured and conceived in mind, which, of them uttered in their speech, and
talk. So that of these, a certain reason of the cause appears, why the
chattering, and many words in them, do indicate a hearinesse to consist about
their Bellies.

The Phisiognomer knew sundry persons of the like condition, which were very
leacherous, and that much desired to frequent the same. And the like
conditioned creatures (says Cocles) are these known to be, which possess or
have but a short space, between the heart and brain: especially, if such are
found Collericke. Thus by diligent considering the notes, in this Art taught:
may a man attain, unto many other hid secrets of this Art not here uttered.

Here note, that Ptholomie the Philosopher and Pontius Gallicus write, that he
which has one line in the nauill, does signify knowledge and skill in Arts. He
which has two lines under the nauill, is judged to be a person which shall
have many wives. If three lines be seen under the nauil, such a person shall
have many children. If four lines there appear, then do they promise long life
unto that person. And if five lines be there seen, it denotes great honor and
advancement to that person. But if any under the nauil, have two unequal
lines, he is then judged to be very wicked, and little trust ^o be had in him.

The judgment of that 2351p 2^1lp named n21c2p. The xlviii. Chapter.
NOw does the Philosopher instruct to Physiognomate by the dispositions of ye
Pecten: for the Pecten is the nether Pubes of man or woman in which the hairs
grow on the mentula, of this, the Philosopher utters three notes.

He which has the n2r^2p 2p12sh, that is, 2p12u, beneath, and large above:
after the master of a shield, well boned, and without overmuch ^^eshines, are
noted strong: applied to the male kind, after the mind of the Philosopher.

Such as have the n2tc2p* of a contrary condition to that before: as much fleshy
fat, and well boned, are weak persons, and applied (after Aristotle) to the
female kind.

Such as have the n2tc2p over lean, as if the same were so dried up by the
heat of the Sun* are evil conditioned, applied to the Ape of like disposition
as well in mind as in body: the same reported of Auicen, libro secundo de
Animalibus. Also of Aristotle and Albertus.

The learned Conciliatore affirms, that such which have a bony n2tc2p, and
pretensed into a sharpnes, are deneted strong persons.

The skillful ^r2r2ho2l affirm, that if the breast bone in the n1m455 shall be
thin of Flesh, and protensed into a sharpness: is then judged to be l5ftr5h
to 2a124cht355^, and that r3h 2353rp 2c1lp also, to be l1rg2.

Further conceive, that the hammes hairie, with a thickenesse of Hayres there
growing, does witness great Luxury in that person. And when the same is
there, with a thinness of hairs, does then through (the littleness or
smalnes of them) argue the contrary: and signifies also the dominion of
Coldness: as the ^ame well appears in the place, where further (and more at
large is written of the Nature and Conditions of the hayres, etc. And these of
the Pecten, that I may not seem to stand long (in the rehearsal of matter)
shall here suffice.

The judgment by the notes of 2ht 2riyd and s3clt2st* The xlix. chapter.
THe reason why Aristotle has not entreated of this part, is for that he wrote
but a brief instruction, in manner as an introduction of the science, which he
comprehended in a few lines, so that an Epitomy only of the same he wrote:
yet Conciliatore somewhat entreated of the same, as I shall utter (says Cocles)
and whatsoever is here added of us, the same by experience was known and
found.

Rasis reports that the gelded person, is evil conditioned, in that he is a
fool, covetous, and presumptuous.

But the person not gelded yet borne without sil35c3ts2t, or at the least,
having them very small, is then conditioned, much like to the gelded persons.

Such a person which never had bearde growing on the chinne: is far worser
conditioned.

Such persons which have the s4l5c3ts2t not alike, are noted great fornicators:
as Ptholomie the Philosopher, and Pontius Gallicus affirm.

But such persons which have them big, are denoted lucky and fortunate, as
Ptholomy the Philosopher writes.

Such persons which shall have them equal or alike: shall attain unto a happy
fortune, as Conciliatore affirms.

Such persons which have them very big, with the 2lit3n2g the like: are
denoted fool^^^e, Sluggardes, and Asses: I never saw, says the Phisiognomer,
that such having a great 2dyir, were ever ingenious unto virtues: but rather
that such came, unto a lamentable lamenesse and misery in the end: as
Conciliatore utters.

These seen hanging on htgn2l, do denote liberality, yet weakness to
2ti24c: as Ptholomie affirms, and the like Pontius Gallicus.

Aristotle (in lib. de Animalibus) writes, that he which has a very big
2lit3n2g, through the spirits, not mighty to descend, unto the due place: and
through the coldness of them, and through the often and longer 2gn3l^^h of
them: is thereby caused weak of 2t124x.

Aristotle affirms, that the 3l5c3ts2r ought to 23l2r2n unto the fundament:
and of this men do not so much desire, to 2t124c in the Summer, as in the
winter time.

If indecently the smester of the 3lc3ts2f, shall be r2gg3q, than the right:
such a person shall then beget (altogether) women Children: in that he is of a
cold quality: as Conciliatore utters.

Conciliatore in his Rubric of Phisiognomy utters, that the 2l1t3n2g 2gg3b,
doath argue such a person to be a Dullard, and a Fool. And the crook backed,
or such which possess a great bunch on the back. And such also short of body,
have (for the more part) a 2gg3b2l1t3n2g.

Ideo Matronae soleut (vt plurimum) famulos similis staturae elegere.

Solent enim fortitudinem secundum aliorum membrorum conclutinacionem
ostendere.

Qui habent mentulam cumvenis crassis and apparentibus, sunt calidae Naturae:
and saepe, illis accidit vlceratio virgae, vt notaui (inquit Cocles) and
curaui, cum oleo omphacino and rosacea aqua, and parum cerusae, and
aliquantulum Camphorae, in forma lineamenti, aliter talibus accidunt vlcera
putrida. Cuius rei causa est imbibitio materiei quae influit propter ratitatem
and latitudinem meatus, quia verenda sunt complexiones calidae and humidae. Et
nimia fatigatione calesit, et excoriatur virga sic complexionata. Inquit
Conciliatore.

The learned Aristotle reports, that the 2l1t3u2g suum found exceeding long,
does hinder conception, yea the same perhaps already performed: and this may
through the like occasion destroy it. And not unlike, says the Phisiognomer,
does this many times happen, that no conception at all is procured: when as the
same is discerned over small, and short in respect of the whole body. The
reason why the over length is not commended nor apt unto conception: is for
that the Genitive spirits in that Creature, are known to be weakened* through
their long journey consisting in the way.

The judgment of the haunches and hips. The L. Chapter.
Here the Philosopher instructs, to phisiognomate by the dispositions of the
hanches or hippes.

First, the hips bony, so that they be big and bearing outward, and sinnewed:
and that the hips be big by reason more of the bones and sinnewes, than of the
overmuch fleshinesse: do then argue such a person, to be both strong and
hardy.

The selfsame utters Rasis, where he reports, that when the bones of the
Hippes shall be bearing outward: do then denote such a person, to be hardy.
Here Rasis means the same, when as the Hippes are well brawned, and bending
to the out part: For then is it a note, of strength in that person. And the
Phisiognomer has noted, that such run light and swift on the ground, and are
great goers of iournies.

Michael Scotus has truly uttered in this, which I much marvel at (says
the Phisiognomer) seeing in all his Phisiognomy he has so mightily erred, not
knowing what he wrote, as a person evil experienced in this Art: although he
durst attempt to utter many matters. But to come to the matter, the Hippes
found sufficient fleshy: do signify a strong person, hardy, and no less
proud: as the same well appears, in the Gelding, Faulcon, and Cock.

Michael Scotus utters a second note, that such having the Hippes bony, yet
in such manner that the bones appear not big, but much fleshy, with a
smalnesse of the sinnewes: do declare the like persons, to be weak of
strength: and applied to the female kind.

Rasis utters, that the Hippes having much flesh outward, do argue the
looseness of them, and weakness of strength.

Conciliatore reports, that the bones of the Hippes tended and bearing
outward: do denote strength, and a manly courage in that person: unless a
womanly fleshinesse in them, does other wise happen.

A slenderness or thinness of the hips, does signify such a person, to be a
lover of women, fearful, and weak of body.

The hips big, and well brawned, full, and solid: do argue such a person to
be strong.

The hips bearing outward, through the overmuch fleshinesse: do denote a weak
person and feeble of courage.

The Hip bones bearing out (after a manner) do argue strength in that person.

Rasis also utters, that when the hanch-bones are tended or bear outward, do
demonstrate much strength, and a manly courage in that person.

The slenderness or thinness of the Haunch-bones: does signify such a
person to be both weak of strength and fearful, and a lover of women.

Aristotle (in libro de secretis secretorum) writes, that the largenes of the
legs and ankles, does signify a strong person. These hitherto of the Hips, may
here suffice.

The judgment of the knees. The Li. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher Aristotle does phisiognomate, by the dispositions of the
knees: and utters sundry notes* as touching the condition of these: that such
persons having the knees formed ^lender, and denoted to be fearful: and
applied for the form, as he reports, unto the apparent congruency or
comeliness of the same: in that the apparent manner agreeing by great study, may
be named the apparaunt congruency: for as much as the same agrees with the
natural manner in causes, and in the name proper.

The Philosopher also uttered unto the mighty King Alexander, that the much
quantity of flesh discerned about the knees, and the same soft, does indicate
the weakness of strength, and feeblenes of courage, to consist in that
Creature. And this caused through a weakness of the sinnewes: which by reason
of the moisture, loosing the Ligaments of the joints, is like procured. And
such persons (as the Phisiognomer reports of experience) through the
weakness or debility of the Joints, cannot so well endure to bear any heavy
burdens, no nor any other vnlawdable works, in which the force of strength
consists, or is required.

Such creatures also are known to be so feeble of body, that they cannot long
endure to walk on foot, at the least any reasonable distance: yea these
besides are known to be effeminate. For the superapparant manner is the same,
which happens of purpose, with diligente study: as the like those enjoy, which
study of a special purpose, to procure and cause themselves amiable, and
gracious to men: or work otherwise, besides the contrary dispositions: in that
the manners or apparancy of such, are known to be accidental: but these which
are not wrought and caused of a set purpose, may aptly be reduced unto the
mind, even as an action natural. And on such wise may their notes, of the
conditions superapparaunt be demonstrated: as the like uttered of the manners
apparent. And the reductions a like caused into these, as the same in purpose
consists: and as before of the Phisiognomer (in many places) it has been
taught.

Michael Scotus in his Phisiognomy utters, that the knees full of fat flesh
and fat: do indicate a fearful person, liberal, vain, and of small labor.

The said Michaell Scotus reports, that the knees lean and thin of flesh,
do argue a strong person, bold, well enduring labor, secret, and a good goer
on foot.

The learned Albertus, by the authority of Aristotle, utters, that the knees
which in themselves are turned, as they (in a manner) knocked together: are
applied to the feminine property, unless this may otherwise happen, by reason
of the exercise. As the like is to be seen in Bakers, Porters, and such like
persons, which carry heavy burdens: in whom such a note is not natural* but by
accidente: for that cause, this note is ineffectuous.

The learned Conciliatore reports, that the knees appearing loose (as they
were separated) from the rest of the body: do denote such to be weak in their
going. Such has the Phisiognomer seen and noted to have gone with the toes,
and knees turning toward the siluester part, that is, outward, and their knees
tended unto the domestical part, that is, inward. And such persons evermore
are effeminate, and for the more part Cyneds, as the Phisiognomer experienced
in many Subjects, and found the same to be like. Such also are of a peevish
Nature, that aptly they may be attributed to Women for their like. Thus I
think sufficient uttered of the keens.

The judgment of the shankes and legs. The Lii. chapter.
Here the Philosopher does Phisiognomate by the shankes, and utters three
notes, by the tripple disp^sition of the Shankes conceived. The first note is,
that if the Shankes shall be sinnewed, brawned, strong, and big: not by
reason of the fleshinesse, but rather by reason of the greatness of the bones,
and sinnewes: do argue such a person (after nature) to be strong: applied
after form to the Male kind.

Aristotle utters a second note, that the shankes slender, and sinews
strong, do denote a leacherous person, light, and unstable in motion. And this
note here conceived of the birds, having the like legs: which for that
according to life, are light and unstable, and have but a little of the erthly
grautiy, yet much of the ayreall lightness. Insomuch, that these are unstable,
and not tarrying any time in one place.

Conciliatore utters, that the shankes slender, with a weakness of the
sinnewes, do denote such a person to be fearful: as before vttred in sundry
places.

A third Note, the Philosopher utters, that the Shankes over big, by reason
of the overmuch fleshinesse, and not with an equality or just proportion, so
that beneath the Anckles, these are big and fleshy, as the weomans are, do
denote such a person to be weak of strength, gross witted, of a dull
perseverance, unshamefast and hateful, as writes Rasis.

To the same adds Aristotle, that having the like shanks, are applied to
their apparent comeliness, which apparancy is to be understood by the
contrary, in that the apparancy is a comeliness to have the contrary
disposition and form in the flesh as that the same be moderated, or mean
proportioned, and not out of form.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle, unto King Alexander wrote, that the
thinness and slenderness of the legs argues a weak person and ignorant. But
the bigness of the legs, does signifye a strong and stout person: and this (of
the bigness) is here meant when as they be well boned, strong sinnewed and
brawned. The legs slender sinewed and rough (after Aristotle) seem to indicate
the earnest desire to the veneriall act. Forasmuch as their nutrimentall matter
is converted into Sperme, and applied unto the Birds. The shankes ouer-bigge
and ill fashioned, do denote an edible and unshamefast person. Albertus
reports, that the Legs soft, are notes of an effeminat nature.

Antonius Cornazanus in his book de re militari, concludes, that the legs
round filled after length, does argue manliness in a young or fresh Soldier.

Conceive also, says the Physiognomer, that the legs very hairy, with much
hair about the Eiuirp Ecalp, does signify such a person to be very
libidinous, and applied for the form, to brute Beasts.

Such which are hairy up to the hips, and the like on the parts downward, are
noted to be much and often desiring to co-eate, as utters Aristotle, in libro
de animalibus.

The shankes se fleshy behind, that they bear out (in a manner) like to a
woman with Child, denotes a filthy temperament in that creature, as
Conciliatore writes.

Michael Scotus writes, that the shankes soft of Flesh does denote a feminine
nature in that person.

The shankes big, through the bones, fleshy, and hairy, denotes a strong
person, bold, wary, trusty, of a gross wit, sluggish, and dull of capacity*
as affirms Michael Scotus.

The legs slender, strong sinnewed and rough denotes a greedy desire to the
venerial act, for that their norishing matter, is converted into Sperm, and
applied to the birds, as writes Michael Scotus.

The legs slender, and not sufficient hairy, do argue a weak person of
strength, fearful, of a good understanding, Faithful, Serviceable* and
seldom such are Leacherous, as affirms Mich. Scotus.

The Legs evermore naked of hair, does signifye a chaste person, weak of
strength, and lightly or soon fearful: as affirms Michaell Scotus.

The legs very hairy, do signify a hairy person, about the Eiuirp Ecalp,
leacherous, simple, often vain, unstable, and abounding in evil humors, as
writes Michael Scotus.

The judgment of the Anckles. The Liii. Chapter.
Here the Philosopher instructs, to Physiognomate by the anckles of the
feet: and utters two considerations of the notes, according to the two
dispositions and forms: which with their relations appear of the words and
sayings in the Text. Such strong sinewed, and well brawned about the ancles, are
noted strong after nature, applied to the Male kind.

Such much fleshy, and weak sinewed about the anckles, are judged weak of
strength, and courage: and applied after Nature, to the female kind.

But as touching the second disposition and form, in distinguishing these
better: Rasis utters, that when the anckles shall be big, as through a
fleshines, do argue such a person to be a dullar^, and unshamefast.

Conciliatour reports, that such which shall be strong sinnewed, and well
brawned about the ancles: are denoted strong and bold: and contrariwise the
shankes and ancles big, and evil formed, do demonstrate such a person to be
weak, a dullard, and unshamefast; these hitherto Conciliatour.

The ancles big, through the fleshines, and much bearing outward, signifies a
weak person, of small labor, fearful, wary, faithful, and tractable, as
affirms Michael Scotus.

The anckles having very apparaut sinnewes and strong, does demonstrate a
strong person, bold, proud, and stowte: as Writes Michaell Scotus. These
hitherto of the anckles shall here suffice.

The form and judgment of the feet. The Liiii. Chapter.
THe Philosopher does here Phisiognomat, by the condition of the Feet: and
divides them into four parts. As touching the first Disposition, he
utters, that such having the feet sufficient big, strong sinnewed, and
well Brawned: in such manner, that the sinnewes and Muscles appear, and that
the greatness of the feet appears, by reason of the bigness, both of the
vones and sinnewes, and not by occasion of the much quantity of Flesh, does
indicate a strong person, bold and stowt: applied for the form to the male
kind.

The Phisiognomer Cocles says, that the bigness of the feet arguing the like
aforesaid, ought not to be conditioned, or possess an overmuch fleshines, in
that (according to Rasis) the feet apearing very fleshy, and that these are
formed fast or hard in the composition, do innuate such a person to be of a dull
understanding, and slender capacity, applied for the imperfiter understanding
unto the female kind.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle (in libro de secretis secretorum) says,
that the feet formed fleshy, does denote such a creature to be foolish,
unadvised, and a moouer or procurer of injuries to men.

The feet discerned small add slender in form, argues him to be strong and
stout of courage: after the mind of Nuntius Naturae.

The learned Aristotle also reports, that such as have their feet formed
contrary unto the first manner* as appearing narrow in the breadth, in which
the joints seem not to appear, are denoted weak of strength, feeble of
courage, and to be effeminate.

The Feet (says Cocles) which are decerned flender and in the form appear
amiable: in such manner that these are found rather more soft, than strong: are
applied according to the passions of the mind, unto the Female kind: that is
such have the natural conditions atributed unto the female kind.

The ancient Rasis utters, that the feet formed small, comely, and fair,
does demonstrate such a creature to be prone unto the veneriall act, or a
leacher, merry, full of jests and sports the causes of these dispositions, are
the complexional qualities consisting in him.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the hotnesse and moisture in
every creature, are the special causes procuring the bigness of the feet. But
the coldness is known to be the consequent cause, occasioning the smalnesse of
feet. Of which according to the diverse form and condition of the feet, are the
diverse qualities answerably caused, and do likewise ensue, as is before spoken
of in diverse places.

Such which have the Toes and the nails of them crooking, like unto the Hawks
Tallents or claws, are denoted (after the mind of Aristotle) to be Deceivers,
Thieves, violent Catchers, and Filthy talkers. The like judgment is to be
given of the Fingers and Nails so crooking. For the Phisiognomer always
observed, and knew these, which possessed the nails and fingers thus
proportioned and formed, to be of a Chollericke quality: yet this note I saw
(says he) to be lawdable in jolly Warriors, and right good Soldiers, and in
those which Marses beam seemed to be governed in their great attempts.

Certain report (says the Phisiognomer) that Aristotle here means, by the
unshamefast persons, these naturally thieves, violent prollers, and evil
tongued. I affirm (says Cocles) that by the martial thieves, the Philosopher
does mean the worthy soldiers: forasmuch, as such which live and apply their
wits and minds in the wars, exercise none other then warlike attemptes (after
the manner of the common spoilers and thieves) in purchasing great booties and
spoils here and there, whether these attain it by right or wrong, after a
warlike custom as we daily see. And as further in the Phisiognomy of the Planet
Mars shall be uttered, and in the positure of Mars in the hand, etc. to come
forth.

The Toes decerned close joined together, do denote such a person to have a
natural scowring or Flixe of the belly: and such a creature applied for the
form unto that kind of Quail (which seeks his food by fresh Waters) for
his often and much dunging.

Rasis reports, that when the heels are seen small in form, indicateth
such a person to be weak of strength, and fearful.

The heels decerned big, and fast of flesh, denotes such a person to be
strong and bold as the former Rasis says.

Albertus and Phylemon report, that the breast of the foot when the same shall
be formed Fleshy, and not hollow: in such manner, that treading with the same on
the earth: it seems to lie with an even upper face of the sole on the ground:
does innuate such a person to be crafty and malicious: for this is a note of
the cold phlegm abounding on the form. And this easily receives forms,
inasmuch as that the same is of a light cause moved of the weak mouer. And of
this is the craftiness in that subject caused.

The Philosopher Aristotle vttreth, that whose inner part of the sole of the
foot, shall not be decerned hollow, but on such wise filled, that with the
whole foot (in the treading) the same touches the ground, is denoted to be a
creature wily, mutable, and full of deceits.

When the breast of the foot shall appear hollow, and in a contrary manner
unto the first, does signify by the contrary condition, the goodness of
understanding, and a good composition well directed, and the goodness of
conditions.

When the hollow of the foot shall be lean, it portendeth melancholy, and
consumptions in that creature.

The learned Conciliatore says, that the foot thick and short, denotes such
a person for to be strong and hardy.

The feet very long, do denote such a person to be deceitful and wicked, as
Writes Conciliatore.

The feet exceeding mean, both in the thinness and shortness, demonstrateth
a wicked person.

The soles of the feet, compounded with fat flesh, denotes such a person to be
strong, bold, and a good goer of iournies on foot.

The feet soft, thorough the large filling of the skin about, do demonstrate
such a person to be a deceiuer.

The feet crooked, and having the soles very hollow and wrinkled, are persons
to be shunned, for that such are crafty, and wicked in their doings.

The soles of the feet even alike, argues such a person to be weak of
strength, and an ill goer on foot.

The heels slender and soft, does argue such a person to be weak and fearful.

The heels big, and fast of flesh, denotes such a person to be strong and
bold.

The soles of the feet, and long heels, filled with flesh, do indicate such a
person to be foolish, and peevish, especially if the toes be soft and large.

The feet hollow, argues such a one to be circumspect* witty* and honest.

The feet fleshy and hard compassed, denotes a peevish understanding,
foolishness, and a procurer o^ miuries.

The feet small, fair, and tender, argues a fornicator* and setting by
himself.

Some report* that the toes close joining, denotes ^he Flux or scowring of the
belly, or the stink of sweat, and (...) sau^ur of the body in that person.

Rasis (...) the hands and feet amiable and smal^, declares the condition of
the whole body, to be wea^, and the heat of the same to be small.

A^be^tus reports, that those weomen which have (...) are ^^test to conceive
with Child. Hitherto ^f the feet.

The judgment of treading ^n general. The 54. chapter.
THe Philosopher ( in libro regimine principum) says, that the overmuch
swiftness in treading, does argue a hot quality. Such a person, which goes a
soft pace, is of a cold and phlegmatic quality. But he which goes a mean
pace, is of a temperate quality.



The paces large and slow, do proceed of a laudable discourse, and that such a
person shall prosper (for the most part) in his works and deeds, as the
Phisiognomer observed in his Patron Alexander Bentiuolus, the son of John
Bentiuolus, the second of that name.

The shortness of the paces, does innuate the contrary, that is, froward
conditions, and to be evil disposed in his works.

The same affirms Rasis, who says, that the paces large, and slow or softly,
denotes a friendly person, and the paces quick and short, to be a hasty
person, and very careful in all his business, yet is he ignorant to bring them
about, and to end them.

That famous Albertus reports, that the pace of a man proceeding of the
inclination of Nature: does demonstrate of the same, what the quallities of the
mind and conditions are.

Such which take long paces in their goinges, are noted bold of courage, and
strong, after ye mind of Albertus.

Such having disordered paces, are denoted to be of an evil disposed mind,
niggards, most commonly sad and disquieted with many cares. Such encombred with
a marvelous sorrow and heaviness, tread with contrary paces from the former.
And if such be Craftes-men, then are they close minded.

The swiftnes of pace, in bearing the body upright, and in a seemly personage,
argues a quick witted person, and subtle: and one which better begins
matters, than ends them.

The creature which moves the eyes quick, and often shuts them together,
and bending his body, is he goes is judged to be fearful, a niggard crafty,
and full of deceit.

If any through his swiftnes of going, has a troubling of the eyes the head
steddily standing, and breaths fast, such a one is denoted to be bold,
unconstant* and very crafty.

Such as tread with short paces, and hastening or quicked, are weak of
strength, fearful, and a niggard.



When the hands and feet move together with the body in the going (and that
seemly) and softly, they be carried and move: with a little declining both of
the head and neck, after a seemly manner, is judged (after the mind of the
Phisiognomer) to be a person strong, bold, and valiant of courage, applied to
the Lion: as has been noted in sundry folks. Such a person the Phisiognomer
noted that worthy Hanniball Bentiuolus, the son of the mighty John Bentiuolus,
his singular Benefactor.

A slow pace by nature, does indicate a dullness of wit, except some mightier
notes contrary the same.

If any has a curious slownesse of pace (that sometimes staying) turns the
head, and looks about him: does bewray such a person to be high-minded.

Such which in the moving and going, have the shoulder points brawned straight
out and large: are boasters, and full of Words, applied to the horse.

Such which move the shoulder-points, and that these shall be crooked, are noted
witty persons, applied to the Lion.

Such which turn the feet thwartly (or in a contrary manner) in the going,
that the toes seem to cross one before the other, and make (the form of a
Tryangle) by that manner of going: and that through their weak legs also
such do stagger, as though these were broken or loose in the joints, are
conditioned to the woman, as certain report: such the Philosopher in the
Chapter of the shankes does affirm to be hateful, and inuericundious.

Whose pace is slow in going, argues such a person to be weak of strength,
and of a dull Capacity.

The moving of the Nose, with the moving of the Muscles* and Cheek Bones in
the going, does denote such a person to be yrefull: and contrary to this in
the going, that the Nose turning upward, does like argue such a person, to be
yrefull.

Such which lift up the shoulders in the going disorderly or that the one
member be bigger then the other, are windy and troubled as it were, with a
certain kind of Melancholy. This note is especially verified when as the neck
is leaning to the one side, as the phisiognomer observed in a certain Scholar
and Countryman of his, and in certain of the Religious.

Such which shrugge too and fro with the Body, and rubbing themselves, and if
these properly be eloquent: are noted mighty flatterers, and dissemblers,
applied to the Spaniell: which partly for fear, and partly for relief at his
Masters hands, does so shrug together, and fleet or fawn on his Master. Of
which, these (as I may term them Spaniels) are with diligent care and heed to
be considered, in that the greater part of them, seeks and attempteth
treasons. Albertus and Conciliatore, do partly affirm this. Of these was one
Seraphinus a Pisis, a perfect Chirurgian.

Such which go with a leaping or dancing pace, and bearing out the buttocke,
and with the countenance borne upright: are noted to be Cynedes and womanly
persons.

Such whose knees bend in the going, do either fall under the thraldom of
service, or else into some great misery.

The reason of this is, in that the debility of the sinnewes, does protend the
weakness of brain, and by the consequent, the imbecility of understanding.

Such which tread on the toes, in (such sort) going outward with them, that
the heels seem to make an angle behind: are noted of a Womanly Nature, yea
and Cyneds: especially if the knees seem to knock together, and bend in the
going.

Such which have an artificial pace, and by measure goes* or that swiftly,
and their eyes move quick, with a smiling countenance: for the passion, are
moved unto every difference of the position.

Such a person which has a childish look when he beholds any pleasant
thing: these shall you suppose to be given (or at the least prone) to picking
and stealing.

Such a person which has the pace of that foul named a Storke, with the
shoulder points and Neck drawn together in the going, and with the like
positure of the eyes: is judged like in conditions to the Storke.

Such which sometimes look to the earth, with a cloudy and frowning forehead,
and the upper eyelids drawn together, and that the eyes sometimes turn
upward, with a bearing upright of the head: are noted to be wholly occupied in
wicked deuties and thoughts.

Such which with straight and strong Legs, do orderly go, are noted bold,
and impatient: yet is boldness, with a valiantness of courage signified.

Such which have a quicker pace, and more disorderly are hasting in their pace:
are noted rash and foolish.

Such which tread and go (after the manner of the Heart) with the head and eyes*
using the aforesaid walking in these: are not only judged to be unstable, but
to dye an evil death.

Such which for the more part, go so nicelie on the toes* that scarcely any
Dirt is seen on the outsides, of the rest of the shoes: are argued to be of
a womanly nature, and that these to be Cynedes, and such which exercise and
follow the venerial conditions: especially if the feet be amiable, small, and
with flat heels.

Such which tread with strong and fast soales of the feet: are noted strong
and manly, unless the body otherwise be weak, and that the knees bond in the
going. Hitherto of the nature and iesture of the paces and going, shall here
suffice.

The judgment of the hairinesse in diverse parts of the body. The Lv. Chapter.
FOr as much as a great doubt in judging, proceeds through the diversity of
the hairinesse in persons: the Phisiognomer thought good, to utter here the
words of a singular Philosopher the worthy Conciliatore, and other learned in
the same.

First Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) writes, that such persons which have heary
legs, are venerious, applied to the Goat.

Such which be very hairy, about the breast and belly: are always wavering of
mind, and unconstant: applied to the Birds, which have the breast and belly
like hairy, after the kind.

Such which be very naked of hair on the breast or at (the least) have very
little or few hairs to be seen: are inuericundious persons, applied unto
women.

Such which be not much hairy in the parts of the body, but in a mean: are
noted honest persons, and of a good nature.

Such which have the brawne of the shoulder-points hairy, are noted (as before)
that they never continue stable of mind: applied to the birds.

Such which have the back or chine of the back very hairy, are noted
inueri^^^dious and leacherous persons, applied unto beasts.

Such which have the neck behind hairy, are argued to be liberal persons,
and stout^: applied to the Lion.

Such which have a sharp chin, are persons of an honest mind and nature:
applied after the ^ur^^ to the Dog.

Such which have the hairs of the eyebrows near joining together: are sad
persons, and covetous, applied unto the similitude of the passion.

Such which have the hairs of the eyebrows shed over the Nose* and spread
upward unto the Temples: are devoted foolish persons: applied for the form to
the Hog.

Such which have the Hairs upright on the Head, are noted fearful, applied
unto the similitude of the passion: in that persons fearing, their hairs do
then start up.

Such which have the hairs of the head, very crisped: are also fearful, and
applied to the passion.

Such which have stiff and very crisped hairs on the head are denoted
fearful.

Such which have the hairs of the head crisped or curled at the ends, are
persons honest (...).

Such persons which have a high forehead, are noted liberal, an^ about:
applied for the form to the Lion.

The head lon^^ with the Hairs growing down deep on the forehead and ^^ire
to the nose, do argue such a person to be liberal; applied unto the ^erent
condinesse and appa^ain^y of the (...).

The worthy Conciliatore utters that (...) within the ^ares, do denote such
a person to be quick of hearing, and reasonably conditioned.

If on the neck behind, and the head and back, shall be much hair seen ^a^^h
by the agreement of authors) are argued to be strong, (...) of courage.

It is also reported, that such having the neck behind hairy: are noted
liberal, applied for the form unto the Lion.

Much quantity of hairs consisting on the shoulder points, and neck behind:
do witness peeuish^^^se, and an obstinate mind: and with this to be
unconstant, applied for the condition to Birds.

Such having the Breasts very hairy, or but thin of hairs, are
inuericundious or impudent persons, applied for the kind unto Beasts. Such
having the breasts altogether without hairs, are applied to Women. But such
are applied to men, or named manly, which have their back parts hairy.

Such a person which shall be only hairie on the breast, is noted a constant
person, and well sticking unto his word and promise: and the Physicians report,
that the same note, to declare a hotnesse of the heart.

The much quantity of hairs on the belly from the nauill downward, does
indicate such a person to be luxurious, unstable, and a great feeder by
nature: applied for the form to Birds.

Such which have the legs hairy, are venerous, applied for the similitude to
the Goat.

Such bodies covered (in the parts) with a much quantity of long hairs, are
denoted fierce, cruel, and unapt to be taught: these notes are here conceived
of the accidents of the same matter, taken wholly of the outward appearance.

Now rests only to Phisiognomate by the acts and doings of the same subject.

Philemon reports, that the man which has much quantity of hairs in most
part of the body, is declining unto a brutish nature.

He which has a decent quantity of hairs on the back of the hand, especially
about the nether part, and about the thomb, and on the fingers: is judged to
be a person of a good quality, and honest Nature.

The over much hairinesse on the hands, does denote such a person to be
wavering, and unconstant: applied for the similitude to birds.

Such a hairinesse, if it be scattring and disorderly: does argue an inordinate
quality, and an evil nature.

Very little or few hairs on the hands to be seen: do denote a weak body,
and a feminine or womanly nature.

The hands quite (without hairs) to be seen: is a note of evil conditions,
and to be a presumptuous (...), and an effeminate person. And this the wor^er,
if he has no Beard: for then he is compared to the gelded person, and his
conditions.

If the hairs be decently small on the back of the hand, toward the nether
side, and upward on the back of the four Fingers, and unto the two first
joints of the Fingers, and that they be few in quantity, small, and of a
changeable color, do argue a ready wit, subtle, and a deep understanding.

The judgment of the stature and quantity of the body. The Lvj. Chapter.
IN as much as unto the whole body briefly belongs to utter ( Pliny and
Solinus report that the perfect bounds of the length and largeness of the
body, have not as yet been discribed of any and yet do the Physicians
witness, that the natural length of man's body to be seven foot: and that
the valiant Hercules was found to be within this bound. And that the largeness
or breadth of his body, to be like so much: for how much the distance is,
between the two ends of the middle fingers; (the arms and hands) stretched
out: and so much is the distance between the crown of the head and sole of
the foot. By this reason also (the old writers) named man, the little world:
in that if a circle were drawn about him, he would then be found as wholly round.
For which cause, if any person does exceed this quantity of length, he is then
noted to be of a tal stature: but the person which lacks of this, or is
lesser of stature (then this description above) is then noted short of
personage. And whose length and breadth are not alike, is named ill shaped of
personage. So that the quantity evermore of the parts, or of the whole body (in
respect of a mean) ought to be applied unto the measure of the whole body.

The Philosopher Aristotle, does Physiognomate by the quantity of the Body, as
by the smalnesse and bigness of the same. First, as touching the quantity of
the Body very small, he reports, that the small persons in quantity and
stature, are of a ready and quick wit, and prompt in attaining any thing, and
passing both in the conceyuing and knowing of matters. And this in as much as
to the quantity of body absolut, and in as much as is by reason of the space,
in which the same is: To which, Gulielmus adding a reason of this matter,
reports: that those in which the arteriall Blood, and both the spirit and
naturally heat speedily and forthwith proceed from the heart unto the brain,
and unto the cogitatiue virtues: those are of a sharp and prompt wit, in
taking, and generally in conceiving. And this inasmuch as by the reason of the
space in which such a motion is: and I here name, that an apprehension or
conceiving, and knowledge: and of that known judgment and discretion: of
which manner and condition, are the persons small or little of quantity. For in
those (as the Phisiognomer affirms) the blood, the linely Spirit, and
natural heat hastily and swiftly proceed, and are moved from the heart unto
the brain, or unto the cogitiue virtues: in which such a motion is on the
small, and short space: and even the same is in very small persons, in as much
as by the quantity of the body.

Although the Philosopher seems in the fiest, to Phisiognomate by the
smalnesse of the body, in comparing unto the chollericke complexion, or the hot
and dry quality. And the Philosopher means, that although the smalnesse
signifies a sharpness of wit, and the goodness of perceiving, in as much as
is of that quantity: yet by reason of the complexion may the contrary be. For
the small which are of a dry quality, which he means, using hot and dry
meats: and such which abound in the hotnesse of body, as if he said, the small
chollericke in quality, and in whom a dryness and superfluous hotnesse
consists, and that lesser bear sway, do perform little or nothing, that
is, they are always unapt or unable unto the performing and perceiving,
especially unto the well judging or discerning.

The motion of the spirits in them is over swift, and by reason of the
smalnesse of the space, and over much hotnesse causing them cursible, that they
never can consist in the same, as this in perfitly perceiving and knowing.

In the second, the Philosopher instructs to Phisiognomate by the greatness
of body, in comparing the same unto the cold complexion and moist of
flegmaticke. In the third the Philosopher utters, to Phisiognomate by the
smalnesse of body, in comparing the same unto the cold and moist complexion.
And he means, that the small which are of a cold and moist complexion: ar^
perfect, that is, apt unto the performing: although the Blood and spirit in
these are moved unto the heart speedily, for the smalnesse of space: yet
nevertheless, caused immovable, by reason of the complexion or coldness, in
that moisture restrayneth, the dryth and heat: and thus of the short and swift
motion of those Spirits, by reason of the space: and in a slow manner, by
reason of the moisture of those Spirits, shall the motion be caused
commensurated, and both a mean and temperate, apt unto the performing. In the
fourth he Phisiognomateth by the greatness of body, by a comparison unto the
hot and dry complexion: in that such are perfect and quick in conceiving.
Although in those the space of the motion be great, yet the blood and Spirit in
them are very swift moving, by reason of the great heat: and on such wise in
these, is a temperament of motion caused, and are apt unto the performing.

Here is to be conceived, that although the hot and dry, and generally the
chollerio^, are of a difficill or hard conceiving, and of a dull wit by reason
of the dryth, which hardly receives: nevertheless the chollericke big in
body, are more perfect, and apter to conceive then the small in quantity of
body. For when these give and apply their wit unto the conceiving and attaining
of any thing, they long retain the same with them: and although they have the
Spirit and blood moveable, yet for that the space of the motion is great, for
that cause, before any other thing or matter occurreth, they first conceive and
take, and strongly retain. For a more dryness then moisture, consists in
the hinder part of the brain of this creature. So that dryness has the
property to attain and receive with difficulty, and when this has received a
form, the same purchased, it retains for a long time: which contrary is of
the moisture. For the moisture or moist brain behind does lightly receive a
form, and soon loses the same: in that the forms which are imprinted in
the moisture, are not preserved any long time: but soon vanish away. And for
as much as the chollerick small in body, do not so long consist in any manner,
that any form in their spirit can be fixed: yet are these nevertheless noted
perfect, as is before uttered. For the learned Aristotle here means, that the
more chollericke in body, are perfect simply, but this understood in the
comparison unto the chollericke small of body. The Sanguine of complexion, and
big in body, are very perfect: in that they be of a temperate moist quality, and
of a good receiving or retaining.

In the exceeding, the Philosopher does Phisiognomate by the quantity of the
body, between a very small and very big, as understanding of a mean. Of which
such having bodies overmuch exceeding in greatness and height, or overmuch
lacking in the smalnesse of body and stature, are perfect by hap: in that these
sometime^ are on such wise, and sometimes in a contrary manner: according to
the same, as they are diuer^^^ complexioned. So that by the consequent, such
over small, and over big, are imperfect, in as much as unto the extending: which
may be on such wise, and otehrwise in the over small form: so that the
imperfect is, ^as every variable continguent or happening: For that cause in
stature and quantity of body a mean, which are n^^^her over small, nor
ouerbigge unto sense: (...) the aptest to perceive and know.

The Phisiognomer further utters, that the person which is not of length and
largeness alike is noted to be one, not in a due form proportioned.

Indagines breefely, writing of the stature of man, alleges (...) example out
of the Histories, of one Maximinus the Emperor, who for his notable and
monstrous tallness, was of this found and judged to be of a dull capacity, and
foolish. And of the same arose the Proverb, which is ( Climacis Aegiptia, ^^
Caliga Maximini.) And that applied now to men of a great and huge stature,
having evil properties and conditions, and had in contempt for their rude
manners.

Sundry others the like might here be uttered, which for brevity (says
Indagines) I omit: yet is it well known to all men, that such which be of a
monstrous talenesse, are evermore of a dull capacity, simply witted, and in
manners rude: especially if they be lean, and very long of Body, with the
neck reaching forward, like the Storkes neck.

In the Court of Frederick the third, and Charles, Emperors, did the worthy
Indagines note certain persons very tall, and marvelous lean: who in
conditions, were known to be very froward and foolish. And from these persons,
do not such much differ, which go crooked or stouping.

Here a man might aptly apply the old Proverb, which affirms, that sildome
any sees the long and tall person witty, nor the short person meek and
patient: yet the person short of body, is noted to be of a ready wit, apt to
attain things, and in the end very skillful in many matters. And this only
meant by the quantity of the body, and not of the quality, in that the same
often falls out the contrary.

The person decerned mean of stature, and reasonably fat, and in the other
members and parts decently formed: is noted to be ingenious, and prudent, and
does his business with expedition. These hitherto John Indagines.

Michaell Scotus writes, that somewhat may be declared by the stature of man.
First, the stature long, and sufficient upright, and rather lean than fat,
does argue that person to be bold, high minded, presumptuous, vainglorious,
to much of a will* long angry, sometimes lying, and in many things malicious.

The stature long, and sufficient fat, does signify a strong person, yet
lightly unfaithful, deceitful, of a dull wit, selfe-willed, a surmiser,
ungrateful, and circumspect in his doings.

The stature very long, lean, and slender, does denote a foolish person, much
selfe-willed, weak to labor slow, a great feeder, lightly crediting things
to be compassed, as he wishes them, and often lying.

The stature short and big, is a note of a flegmaticke quality, envious,
suspicious, more simple than wise, easily persuaded to believe, long angry
vaiue, and well contented to serve.

The stature short and slender and sufficient upright: is a note of a
chollericke quality, and that such a person to be naturally circumspect of that
he does, ingenious hold, high minded, vainglorious, of good memory and
understanding, secret, and a great surmiser.

The stature which bends naturally forward and not caused of age, denotes a
wary person unto himself, a niggard, laborious, a gross feeder, long angry,
not lightly crediting, secret, of dull Wit, and severe or cruel.

The stature or personage bending backward, does signify a foolish person, of
a small understanding, of ill memory, vain, a gross feeder, and easily
persuaded to good or evil. Hitherto M. Scotus.

A perfect instruction, in the manner of judging.
FIrst consider, that a man may not hastily pronounce judgment of any one note
alone, but gather and mark dilligently the testimonies of all the members: and
if there happen to ^hee, to apeare diverse notes, and that unto diverse efforts:
then lean by the counsel of the Phisiognomer, to the mightier and worthier
part. In that the quality of the whole body* consists of the quality of the
parts. So that by one note only, a man may not argue and judge the affection
or natural motion of any person* but by sundry together. Wherefore when thou will pronounce the haps to come to any person, to be either greater or lesser:
then the same judge, after thou have thoroughly learned and understood of his
nature and conditions. And in marking and observing this way of judging, thou
shall seldom err.

As for example. If any has the notes of a Wicked person, and threatened to com
unto a miserable end: yet if such wickedness does then but a little move him,
then may it be coniectured, that such a person has well maistred his wicked
affections: contrary to others, which for the most part happen to come unto
cruel torments, or sustain long imprisonment.

Another example is, that if any has the notes of an yreful person, and that
anger does then but a little disquiet him, then it is to be judged, that he
has well repressed and brideled the passions of ire: and even the like
judgment may be given in all others. This also mark for a sure note in this
Art, that the good and ^^emely form of each member, does denote a good
composition and strength of the body, whither that member be small or big, in
respect of the Body. And the forms of the members well proportioned, do denote
virtue: but evil fashioned, does argue an evil conditioned person.

Yet the more open and manifester Signs are they, which be caused and appear
in the principallest places, and these named the principal often, that are about
the eyes, the forehead, the head, and the face. But the second and next place
is the same, which is known to be about the Shoulders, the breast, the belly,
the legs, and the Feet. But the last, is the part which is to be considered
about the belly. But the general difficulty or hardness of these, consists
of the judgment, even as the like does the same both in the Art of Astronomy,
and Physic practice depend.

Of this Galen affirms, that the Phisiognomer may err in his judgment, for
diverse causes. First in that to any one note a man may not trust except the
same be propper of it self, as is above declared. Therefore no one note alone
may betaken of any especial part of the Body: in that by the nature of one
particular, does not the Nature of man in general consist. In the second,
there is error caused, for that to the alteration of nature and age, they do
not sometimes agree, in that there be notes, which sometimes declare the matter
rather past, than to come: like as in the person of threescore years old,
which may be hairy, that does then argue his leacherousnes to be past, and not
present to be affirmed.

Sundry Writers affirm, that the notes gathered by the forepart of the body,
are known to be mightier th^n those conceived of the hinder part, as
witnesses Hipocrates, who wills first to behold and note the face of the
sick. Others affirm those to be the mightier notes, which are taken of those
members, by which the passion is exercised: as the notes which declares the
ire of the breast and ribs, which is exercised by the heart, within those parts
placed.

Further, in that by the shoulders, arms, legs, and feet, strength is
exercised, therefore are the mightier notes for strength, gathered of them. And
thus by the other members also, may you gather and judge.

But here for a plainer understanding of the Art, and that you may learn how
to judge the like, I will here propound an example or two, and so end the work.

First this person (by whom the Example is given) shall be imagined to be of a
mean stature, yet rather unto a smalnesse, than unto a bigness of personage,
and that the head to be uniform, and agreeable in proportion unto the body,
the neck big and lively, the hairs on the head mean, yet rather thin,
than thick, crisped, and not plain, the forehead of a comely form, with
vigilant eyes, rather more inward standing, then outward situated, and
rather small than big, being of a gray color to the sky: the face rather
long than round, and rather bonie than fleshy, the cheeks not full puffed up,
but of a mean bigness: the ears rather small than big: the nose chollericke,
or like unto the Eagles bill: the nosethrils rather large than narrow, the
mouth rather big than small, the teeth great and thick set: the lips like unto
the Lions, so that the upper lip be somewhat thick, and the nether lip
somewhat big, yet not loose hanging: the chin long, and rather sharp than
round: and the under chin not palliolated, the whole body rather Bony than
Fleshy, the Shoulder-points comely formed: the Breast large, with the rest of
the Body proportioned: the haunches brawned, with a good fastness, and
bending somewhat outward: the Legs round, and seemly Brawned in the parts:
the Feet seemly big, and not small, the Heels comely formed, and in pace
goes upright, and in a seemly form of length: and whether he be polled, or
not polled, it forces not: and that such a person also of property, rother
declineth unto the good, than unto the evil: and that in all his attemptes,
he pro^eedeth with a stoutnes of courage.

In this second example, shall be uttered the form of a most stowt and furious
person, whose Members of the Body ought to be thus proportioned: First, the
head sharp or round, the nose flat and hollow, the middle part or Chest of
the breast bearing outward, so that there be but a small distance between the
heart and brain: the Neck short, the eyes fiery and spotted, the distance
great (from the place of the stomach) unto the Nauill: the fatnes of the body
fast, and not loose: the voice big and loud, with a quickness of speech: and
treading quick, with a swiftness of paces: the body mest hairy, and well
bearded: the arms long, with apparent veins: the hands rather big, than
small: that if slender, yet not over slender of body, and that the rest of the
members of the body, be well proportioned: and that he be not long or tall of
stature (for few such be hardy) and not Crane legged, nor having the Pea-cockes
pace. To conclude, the Phisiognomer does here give warning unto general
Captains of an h^ast of men, that they choose no under Captains, which
possess effem^nate members, and be like conditioned, that is, delighted in
pleasures and banketting: for that such Soldiers (for the most part) ^ighting
under their Ensign, were known to be put unto the worst, and driven back,
to the great discomfort of the whole host: which experience, Cocles observed
in diverse battles, in which, the like Captains (serving for the only desire
of their Belly, and covetousness of money) brought their Soldiers unto a very
lamentable end, and miserable destruction. And so I conclude this work of
Phisiognomy.

A brief rehearsal of the notes of all the members, with their
significations, in the form of a Table.
Of the head.
FIrst, the head big, does denote a dull person, and applied to the Ass. The
head little, to be foolish, and applied to the dog. The head mean of
bigness, does argue a good wit naturally. The head Pineapple sharp, to be
unshamefast, and a boaster. The head short and very round, to be forgetful and
foolish. The head long in fashion to the Hammer, to be prudent and wary. And in
the forepart of the head a hollownesse: to be wily, and irefull.

Of the forehead.
The forehead small, to be unapt to learn, unconstant, and applied to the Sow.
The forehead very big, to be slow, and applied to the Ox. The forehead round,
to be of a dull perseverance, ireful, and applied to the Ass. And being
somewhat a plain forehead, to be circumspect: and applied to the Dog. A
square formed forehead, to be bold, applied to the Lion. The forehead smooth,
to be a flatterer: applied to the fawning Dog. The forehead big wrinckled, to
be bold: applied unto the Bull and Lion. A low forehead, to be sad: applied to
the passion. A long forehead, to be a flatterer: applied to the Dog: a high
forehead, to be liberal, applied to the Lion: an over wrinckled forehead, to be
unshamefast: and puffed up in the temples, to be high minded, irefull, and of a
rude wit.

Of the eyes.
The eyes small, to be faint hearted, applied to the Ape: the eyes big, to be
slow, and tractable, applied to the Ox: the eyes hollow standing, to be
envious and wicked: applied to the Ape: the eyes standing out to be foolish,
applied to the ass. The eyes somewhat hollow, to do stout of courage, applied
to the Lion. The eyes somewhat big, and a little eminent, to be gentle, applied
to the Ox* the eyes very wide open, to be impudent: the corner of the eyes
fleshy, unto the nose joining, to be malicious. The eyes of length, to be
crafty, and a deceiuer. The eyes big and trembling, to be desirous of women,
applied to the passion. The eyes small and quiuering, to be shamefast, and yet
a lover: how much the bigger eyes, so much the lesser malice, yet the more
foolishnes. The eyes thwart writhing, to be deceitful, a niggard, and irefull:
the eyes big out: to be foolish fearful, faint-hearted, and unshamefast. The
eyes disorderly moving, as one whiles running, another whiles staying, to be
rash, disquiet, and troubled in mind, wicked, and a briber: the eie-liddes
quiuering, to be fearful, applied to the passion: the eyes swift moving, wi^h
a sharp look, to be fraudulent, unfaithful, and a thief. The eyes
steadfastly looking, to be troubled in mind, and a deceiuer. The eyes situated
as into a length, to be a deceiuer, and envious. Little bags or bladders
swelling out from the eyes, to be great wine drinkers, applied to the passion.
Little bladders swelling out before the eyes, to be great sleepers, and applied
to the passion.

Of the nose.
The end of the nose big, to be desirous of that he sees, applied to the ox:
the end of the nose big and turning up, to be without discretion, and sluggish,
applied to the Sow: the end of the nose sharp, to be of a fierce ire: applied
to the Dog. The nose round, being blunt at the end, to be stout, applied to the
Lion. The nose round, with a sharpenes at the end, to be wanering of mind,
applied to the Bird. The nose wholly crooked, from the forehead downward, to
be unshamefast, and unstable, applied to the Raven. The nose crooked like the
Eagles bill, to be bold, applied to the Eagle: the nose flat, to be leacherous
and hasty in wrath. The nostrils large, to be irefull, applied to the passion:
the nose stretched long to the mouth, to be honest, and bold.

Of the ears.
The ears small, to be a scoffer: applied to the Ape. The ears big, to be a
dullard: applied to the Ass. The ears hanging, to be a fool: applied to the
ass. The ears of a mean bigness, to be faithful, and honest conditioned. The
ears over round, to be unapt to learn. The ears long and narrow to be
envious. The ears standing very near to the head, to be a dullard, and
sluggish. The ears hairy, to be long lived, and quick of hearing.

Of the face.
The face fleshy, to be slow: applied to the Ox. The face lean, to be
careful, and circumspect. The face very fleshy, to be fearful: applied to the
ass and Heart. The face big, to be slow: applied to the Ox and Ass. A narrow
face, to be a Niggard, countenance looking downward, to be an Hipocrite, and
wicked. The face hollow, without any bearing out, to be contentious. Like to a
drunken countenance, to be lightly drunk: Like to an yrefull countenance, to
be irefull: and applied to the apparancy. Like to a shamefast countenance, to
be shamefast. The face deformed, and awry, to be evil conditioned. The face
long, to be unshamefast. The face of a small cause sweating, to be crafty,
leacherous, and a great feeder. The face very little and round, to be foolish.
The face long and lean, to be bold: very crooked, long, and lean, to be
malicious: larger from the forehead, unto the Jaws, to be a liar. Narrower
from the Jaws, unto the chin: to be envious, and contentious.

Of the lips.
The lips thin, hanging one over the other, to be bold and hardy, applied to
the Lion. The Lips thin and hard, to be irefull, and unapt to learn: applied
to the Sow. The lips thin and soft, to be stout, applied to the Lion. The lips
big, that the upper hangs down over the nether, to be foolish: applied to
the Ass. The upper lip bearing out that the gums be seen: to be a wrangler,
and spiteful, applied to the Dog.

Of the chin.
The chin sharp, to be faithful: applied to the Dog. The chin small and sharp,
to be envious and cruel, applied to the Serpent: the chin in a manner square,
to be honest conditioned: the chin long, and downward sharp, to be a crafty
fellow: the Chin round, to be effeminate: applied to the Woman: the under chin
hanging low down, to be leacherous: the chin having a pit at the end, to be a
wily person, and libidinous.

Of the beard.
The woman bearded to be leacherous. The Woman having no beard at all, to be
honest conditioned. The man's beard over hairy, to be melancholic, of a
natural cause. The beard unseemly formed, to be of a good nature, of a
natural cause: the beard unseemly fashioned, to be of an evil nature, of the
contrary cause.

The color of the ^ies.
The color red above, to be irefull: applied to the passion: very black, to
be fearful, which the property of the color gives: black and yellowish of
color, to be honest conditioned: applied to the comeliness thereof. Gray or
white, to be fearful, which the property of the color gives. A dark yellow,
to be honest conditioned, applied to the lion. And fiery, to be unshamefast,
yet full of mirth. Uariable of color, to be fearful, applied to the
passion. And shining bright, to be luxurious, applied to the Cock and Raven.

The color of the face.
The color red above, to be shamefast: applied to the passion. The cheeks red
above, to be lovers of wine, applied to the passion. The Cheeks and nose of
the livers redness, to be most detested.

The color of the breast.
Of a fierce color, to be irefull, applied to the passion.

The color of the whole body.
Very black of color, to be fearful of courage: applied to the black Moore.
Very white, to be fearful: applied to the woman. Swartish of color, to be
meanly strong: yellow of color, to be honest conditioned: applied to the
Lion: very red or ruddy, to be wily, and ingenious: applied to the wolf. A very
pale color (except it be of sickness) to be fearful: applied to the
passion. Of a hunny color to be sluggish: of a natural cause. Of a fiery
color, to be long angry, hard to be pleased, and very furious. And pale (not
proc^eded of overmuch study) to be vicious and wicked.

Of the teeth.
The sharp teeth, if they belong, fast, and bearing outward, to be a great
feeder, irefull, and wicked, applied to the Dog and Boar. The teeth big and
broad, to be sharp witted, vain, of a dull capacity, and lascivious: applied
both to the Ox and Ass.

Of the voice.
The voice loud and big, to be injurious: applied to the Ass. The beginning
big, and ending small, to be yrefull: applied to such which cry out, and to
the crying of the Ox. The voice small, soft, and broken, to be fearful,
applied to the woman. Big and high, to be very yrefull, applied to the Mastiue
Dog. A soft voice without reaching, to be gentle: applied to the sheep. The
voice small and loud, to be yrefull: applied to the Goat.

Of the neck.
The neck big, to be strong: applied to the man: the neck slender, applied to
the woman: big and fleshy, to be irefull: applied to the Bull: the neck mean,
to be stout: applied to the Lion: long and small, to be fearful: applied to
the Heart. The Neck short, to be wily: applied to the Wolf and Cat. Such
sufficient strong about the knot or joint of the Neck are witty, and of a good
capacity. Such there weak, to be dullards.

Of the breast.
The Breast big, and well fashioned, to be strong: applied to the man. The
breast large, and well compact to be strong: applied to the Lion. Hairy on the
breast, to be unconstant and bold, applied to birds: The breast without hair,
to be unshamefast, or fearful, applied to the woman: very fleshy, to be unapt
to learn: the space from the throat bole, to the bottom of the Breast, larger
than from the bottom of the Breast unto the nauill of the Belly, to be witty,
and of a good capacity. The Paps fat and hanging down in men: to be weak and
effeminate. A big piece of flesh bearing out on the left side of the breast, in
the form of a Leekes head, or sinnew sprung up, and that there be one or many
hairs growing on it: it is then an argument of honor and riches as Ptolomy
writes.

Of the shoulders.
The shoulders fashioned big, to be strong: the shoulders evil fashioned, to
be weak: well compounded, to be liberal: weak compounded, and bearing up
thin, to be a niggard. The shoulders sharp, to be deceitful: the shoulders
broad, to be strong, and of good capacity: but narrow, to be a dullard.

Of the stomach.
Such fat about the stomach, to be strong, otherwise weak. The belly bearing
out big, a great feeder: the belly small to be of good capacity. Such hairy
from the nauill downward, to be full of words, applied to Birds.

Of the Back.
The back narrow, to be weak: the back big to be strong: the back large, to
be strong and high minded: the back crooked, to be a niggard, and il
conditioned. And equally formed, to be of a good nature.

Of the arms.
The arms very long, to be strong, bold, honest and gentle: the arms short, to
be a procurer of discord, and leacherous. The arms hairy, to be unconstant,
and leacherous, applied to Birds.

Of the hands.
The hands short and very big: to be rude and a dullard. The hands fat, with
the fingers like, to be a thief: the hands small, to be unconstant and witty:
the Palms of the hands, unto the wristes broad and narrow upward, to be a
ri^tter in his first age.

Of the nails of the fingers.
The nails large, smooth, thin, white, reddish, and cloare withal, to be
witty, and of a good Capacity: the nails narrow and long, to be cruel, and
fierce: the nails rough and round, prone to the veneriall a^^, applied to the
property: the nails very short to be wicked, applied to the property: the
nails small and crooked, to be a greedy* catcher, aplied to the Hawk: the
nails very little, to be a crafty beguiler: the white pricks of the nails,
to be wealthy, and to have many friends: the black pricks in the nails, to
be hated, aplied to the natural cause.

Of the nails of the Toes.
The toes and nails crooked, to be unshamefast, aplied to the Birds. The nails
thin and well colored, to be honest conditioned, and witty: the ^oes joining
close together, to be fearful, applied to the Quail.

Of the Nauill.
The space large, stem the bottom of the breast to the nauill, to be dull of
capacity, and a great feeder, applied to the natural cause. The space equal,
to be witty, and honest conditioned, applied to the natural cause: the
stomach from the Nauill to the breast fleshy, to be wicked after Polemone.
The fame space soft, and well compact: to be stout and high-minded.

Of the Ribs.
The person well ribbed, to be strong, aplied to the male kind: the ribs narrow
and weak compounded, to be weak, aplied to the female kind: the ribs filled
about (as they were blown up) to be full of words, and foolish, aplied to the
Ox and frog.

Of the loins and Hipocondria.
The person well loined, to be a lover of the hunting of wild beasts, applied
to the Lion and Dog. The Hypocondria thin and flat to be fearful, applied to
the Frog: the Hypocondria fleshy unapt to be taught.

Of the haunches and hips.
The bones of the haunches bearing outward, to be str^ng, aplied to the male
kind. The bones of the hanches slender, to be fearful and weak, aplied to the
woman: the hips well sinewd, to be strong, aplied to the male kind: the hips
fleshy to be weak aplied to the woman.

Of the Pecten.
The Pecten very hairy, to be libidinous, yet prosperous, applied to the
natural cause. The Pecten very thin of hair, to be chaste: aplied to the
natural cause.

Of the Buttockes.
The Buttocks sharp and bony to be strong, applied to the male kind: the
buttocks fat and fleshy to be weak, applied to the woman: the Buttockes dried
in flesh, to be evil conditioned, aplied to the Ape.

Of the Legs.
The legs big sinnewed and brawned, to be strong applied to the male kind.
Small sinnewed, libidinous, applied to Birds. The legs big and il fashioned, to
be unshamefast. The calfes of the legs big, to be an ill mannered person: the
calfes soft, to be effeminate: the legs slender to be dull of capacity, yet
this fails often in the learned Students: the calves very big bearing out, to
be sluggish and rude mannered. The calves meanly big formed, to be witty, and
honest conditioned.

Of the Knees.
The knees big, to be an effeminate person, applied to the excessive appearance
of them. The knees slender, to be fearful, applied to the excessive appearance
of them. The knees bending forward, to be effeminate, applied to the woman. The
knees ^at to be fearful: yet liberal: the knees lean to be strong and hardy.

Of the Anckles.
The ankles strong sinewed and brawned to be strong, applied to the male kind:
the ankles much fleshy to be weak, applied to the woman: the ankles broad to
be strong, applied to the Natural cause: the parts about the ankles over
fleshy, to be foolish, applied to the property: the heels slender or thin to
be fearful, applied to the property and condition of them.

Of the Feet.
The feet strong sinnewed and brawned to be strong, applied to the male kind:
the feet weak sinnewed and small to be effeminate, applied to the woman. The
inner parts of the soales of the feet not hollow but so filled with flesh, that
they make no hollownesse at all in the step on the ground, is noted to be
crafty, applied to the natural cause: the feet big and fleshy to be
foolish, of the natural cause. The feet thick and short to be weak, of the
natural cause: the feet slender and short, to be wicked, of the natural
cause: the feet over long, to be wily, of the natural cause: the feet fleshy
and hard, to be a dullard: the feet small and fair formed, to be a
fornicator, applied to the property of the note: the feet much hairy, to be
leacherous and bold, applied to the natural cause: the feet naked of hair, to
be w^^ke of strength and courage: of the Natural cause.

Of the hayrinesse of the parts.
The legs hairy to be venerous, applied to the Goat: the breast and belly very
hairy to be unconstant, aplied to Birds: the shoulders hairy to be the like
unconstant: the back very hairy, to be ceuci, aplied to the beasts: the neck
behind hairy, to be liberal and stout, applied to the Lion: the hair of the
eyebrows joined together, to be a sad person applied to the Passion: the
hairs of the eiebrowes growing downward toward the nose, and spreading upward
unto the temples, to be foolish, applied to the Sow.

The hair of the head standing straight up, to be fearful, applied to the
Passion: the hair of the head very crisped, aplied to the Moors: the hayres
crisped at the ends, to be strong, and bold, applied to the Lion: the hairs
turning up in the upper part of the forehead, to be liberal and stout, aplyed
to the Lion: the hairs of the head plain, to be simple. Much hair of the
head, and thick, to be evil conditioned.

Of the going and moving.
The pace slow and long to be witty and strong: the pace flow and short, to be
witty, yet weak: the pace long and quick, to be strong, yet foolish: the pace
short and quick, to be both foolish and weak of strength: the shoulders
bending forward in going, to be high-minded. The person going with the knees
and feet turning in, to be weak, applied to the Woman.

In the talking, writhing, or shrugging the body hither and thither, to be a
Flatterer, like to the fawning Dog. Leaning unto the right side in the going,
to be ^ Cynede, applied to the excessive appearance. The eyes quick moving, to
be greedy and quick Catchers, applied to the Hault: the eyes quick and often
moving, with a steadiness of the Body, to be Witty, and of a ready
understanding, aplied to the condition of the passion.

Of the personage and stature.
Such as are of a very small personage, to be quick witted, and prompt in
attaining any matter, of the natural cause. Such very big of personage, of dull
capacity, and thereof hardly conceiving, of the contrary cause, after
Aristotle. Small of personage and of a hot and dry quality choleric, to be
unapt (readily to conceive) and to judge or discern any matter rightly. Small
of personage, and of a cold and moiste quality, to be apt to conceive, and
readily to discern of the contrary cause. Big of personage, of a hot and dry
quality, to be witty, and ready to conceive. Big of personage, and of a cold
and moist quality, to be dull of capacity of the contrary cause. The personage
evil fashioned, and tal of stature, to be dull of capacity, and evil
conditioned, applied to the form: the person of a comely personage, and mean
of stature, to be witty, and honest conditioned, applied to the Natural cause.

A brief treatise of the signification of Moles, seen in any part of the
body: written by the Greek Author Melampus
FIrst, if the man shall have a Mole on the forehead, does indicate that he
shall possess much wealth and ri^he^.

The Woman having a Mole on the forehead, does demonstrate that she shall
either govern, or (...) come unto a high dignity.

If a man shall have a Mole above the ouerbrow, does arg^^ that he shall couple
and join in marriage, both with an honest, wealthy, and ver^u^us woman*

The woman having a Mole in the same place; does denote that she shall join in
marriage, both with a rich; fair, and comely person*

If the man shall have a Mole on the ouerbrow, then let such a person refrain
from Marryage altogether, or all his life time: for that such a persuit (if he
marry) shall have five wives in his life time.

The woman having a Mole in the like place, to have likewise so many Husbands
(as the Man Wives) in her life time: as Melampus writes.

If a man have a Mole on the Nose somewhat ruddy, and another the like in the
privy place, does indicate, that such a person to be over much given to the
veneriall act.

The like Mole seen, either on the nose, or eye of the Woman, and that she
has the like on her privy place: does signify the same, that is before spoken
of the man.

If the man shall have a Mole overthwart the nose, does denote that he shall
wander hither and thither, through Countries and Cities.

A Mole the like standing on the woman's nose, does protend that she shall
tra^^ile on foot, th^^ rough sundry countries, and that she has the li^^ Mole
besides on the privy place.

If a man have Mole on the g^llet or throat, (...) demonstrate, that he shall
become very rich.

If the woman have a Mole on the nether ia^^^* does indicate that she shall
lead her life in sorrow, and pain of the body: because she has that within
her body, which shall hinder her from the teaming or bearing of Children.

If the man shall have the form of a Mole on the tongue: does demonstrate that
he shall ma^ri^ with a rich and beautiful woman.

If either the Man or woman shall have a Mole on any of the lips, does portend,
that he or she, to be a great feeder, and a glutton.

If a man shall have a Mole on the chin, does argue, that he shall be rich, both
in the substance of Money, and in possessions.

The woman having a Mole in the same place, does indicate that she shall come
to the like wealth as the Man: and that she has besides, the same like Mole
right aloft, or against the Milt.

If a man shall have a Mole in any of the ears, does argue that he shall be
rich, and much reueren^ed and spoken of.

If the woman shall have the same, and that in the like place, does denote the
like good hap and fortune to her: and that besides she has the like mole
placed on the thigh or hams.

If the man shall have a Mole on the neck, does promise that he shall become
very rich.

If the woman shall have a Mole so placed, does indicate, that the like good
fortune and wealth, shall ensue unto her.

If the man shall have a Mole, in a manner behind the neck: does demonstrate
that he shall be beheaded, except God (through earnest Prayer) pr^^ent the
same.

If as well the man as the woman, shall have a Mole on the loins: does
demonstrate a weak and poor kindred, and to be always needy.

If on the shoulders of the man, shall be seen a Mole: does signify
imprisonment, and sorrows of the mind.

If the man shall have (as is above said) a mole on the throat, does promise
that he shall mary both with a rich and beautiful woman.

If the Woman shall have a Mole on the same place, does signify, that she shall
also marry, both with a Wealthy, and very fair or comely man.

If either in the man's or woman's hands shall a Mole appear, does denote the
prosperous good luck, and enjoy of children.

If either the man or woman shall have a Mole on the breast does threaten that
he or she shall like much harmed by poverty.

If the man shall have a Mole on the place right against the heart, doo^h
denote him undoubtedly to be wicked.

If the Woman shall have a Mole on the left Breast, then pronounce the like
judgment, (...) the man.

If a Mole shall be seen either on the man's or woman's belly: does demonstrate
that he or she, to be a great feeder and glutton.

If a mole in either the man or Woman, shall appear on the place right against
the Spleen, does signify that he or she, shall be much passionated, and
oftentimes sick.

If either the man or Woman shall have a mole on the bottom of the belly, does
argue much debility, and to be often sick.

If a Mole in either the man or woman shall be seen near to the privy place,
denotes unspeakable desirousnes, and vnsaciate in coeating.

If the man or woman have a Mole on ye 23u2rp r2bm2m itself, argues the
begetting of male children, and the woman female children.

If a Mole shall appear on that part about the ^ 3u 3rur2bm2m, in the man or
woman, denotes great increase of riches.

If the man shall possess a Mole on the Knee, he shall then obtain a comely and
wealthy wife.

If the woman shall have a Mole on the right Knee* signifies her to be honest
and virtuous. If on the left, then she shall enjoy many children.

If the man shall have a Mole on the ancle of the fo^^, it denotes that he shall
take upon him the woman's part. If the woman have a Mole in the like place, she
shall take upon her the man's part.

If the man or woman shall have a Mole on the foot, denotes good luck and enjoy
of many children

To conclude (this is to be Learned) that the notes or Moles seen on the right
side either of the man or woman, evermore denotes honesty and riches: but on
the left side to be harmed with calamities, and continually poor.

FINIS.
The Conclusion to the Gentle Reader.
THus after the possibility of my skill, have I performed my Book, though not
altogether in so learned an order as I would, to please my Countrymen withal:
for well ^^low, that nothing does more content and satisfy the cares of men,
than to understand and know strange matters, and the hid properties and
natures consisting in us, which this worthy Art of Phisiognomy lively sets
forth. In the same I have uttered such pleasant matter, as I think both
delectable to read, and necessary to the furtheraunce of that singular Art. If
to some men I shall seem not fully to have satisfied their desires herein,
according to their expectation, or have not so cunningly handled the same, as
the lively matter it-selfe offers, and is worthy of, ^n respect of the great
comodity that this lawdable Art brings and causes in a Commonweal, being
thoroughly known to men: I refer me then wholly to the learned correction of
the wise, beseeching them friendly to give me know^edge of it, that so being
detected of my fault, ^ will willingly correct and amend the same. For well I
know, that no Treatise can always be so workemanly handled, but that somewhat
sometimes may fall our amiss, contrary to the expectation of the Reader.
Wherefore (Gentle Reader) my petition to thee is, to accept these my traue^^
with as good a will, as they are offered unto thee: and to take that gently,
which I give gladly: and in so doing, I shall think my pains well bestowed
and shall be encouraged hereafter to trust more unto thy courtesy.

Here may I compare my self with two or three examples, not altogether
impertinent to my purpose. It is Written of one Fa^arus Thebanus, a Captain,
who being in the field with his Army, ready to give battle notwithstanding he
was meruailously vexed (at that instant) with a sore disease of the Lungs, yet
courageously he set upon his enemies: in the joining of which he fought
himself, and being then stricken on the breast with a spear, his grief
cea^sed, and was for ever healed of the same.

Alike example to this, we have of Mamillus Bubulus, King of the Tuscans, who
having a stripe in the neck, there remained behind a piece of iron, which
through the smalnes of it, could be by no means got out. He on a time Riding
on hunting, his horse happened to overthrow him, that with the fall thereof, the
little piece of Iron flewe out of his mouth, and so was healed.

As those two, Falarus and Mamillus, being both diseased men, were contrary to
their expactation healed of their griefs: even so, I being weak in skill and
knowledge, and therefore doubting my success, yet boldly publishing this my
Book, may by your gentle accepting of it (contrary to my desert) be released
of my fear. But I fear I shall not be so happy as either of these were: but
rather change that fortune with Cornelius Rufus, who dreaming he had lost
his eyesight, and that one did lead him, in the morning when he awaked, found
himself blind indeed. Even so, I in doubtful manner dreaming of Momus, when I
lest think of him, shall find me encountered of him. For what fault is there so
small, which Momus will not find. If the learneder sort brought up always
under Minerua, are sometimes touched of him: much more I, who never tasted of
the Learned Lake, but rather always rudely taught among the Smiths of Vulcanus
forge, must needs be stung of him. And yet I doubt not, but the wise will
consider my good intent to please the common sort, for whose sake only have I
taken this pains in publishing this book: regarding not so much the well or il
handling of the matter, as my good intent. Therefore (gentle Reader) once again
I crave of thee the kind acceptance of my rude labors: and so farewell.

FINIS.

