A brief and pleasant treatise, entitled, Natural and Artificial
conclusions: Written first by sundry scholars of the University of Padua in
Italy, at the instant request of one Barthelmewe a Tuscane: And now Englished
by Thomas Hill Londoned, as well for the commodity of sundry Artificers, as
for the matters of pleasure, to recreate wits at vacant times.



Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Abraham Kitson. 1581.

The Preface to the Reader.
WHere of late (gentle Reader) in my Preface of that treatise, of the
Interpretation of sundry dreams, both of Iosephes and Salomons togethe^ I
did there promise to set forth a little treatise of Natural and Artificial
Conclusions, which now I have performed, wishyng the Reader to give his
favorable reading and report of them not set forth for any necessity of
them, but rather for the recreation of wits at vacant times. And yet I must
confess that some of them be necessary for sund^ie Artificers to know, and
the rest for matters of pleasure, as in the readyng of them shall appear.
Which (gentle Reader) taking in good part, and construyng my meaning unto the
best, then promise to further you shortly with my treatise of Problemes, and
then natural answers annexed, and that aptly answered.

And a brief Herball very rare, for the marvelous matters, and that natural,
taught in the same. And a treatise of the rare and strange wonders seen in the
air, for these many years paste in sundry Realms and Countries right
pleasant to read. All whi^ he gentle Reader, look for at the Printers hands
so shortly as may be. In the mean time buy, and give the readyng of these
unto the better hope of the rest.

Natural and Artificial Conclusions.
The property of the Adamant Stone.
FIrst, if any hold the Adamant Stone in his hand, under a goblet or silver
bole, or under a table, and that the same be moved to and fro in the hand,
then in the like manner will the Iron or Needle styng in the goblet, or on the
table, move to and fro, and round about. Also the Adamant sometimes with the
one corner, will draw Iron unto it, and with the other corner put the Iron
from it. Also if any annointeth this Stone with Garlic, it does then hinder
the Stone from drawyng any Iron or Needle unto it, although the Needle should
be laid on the Stone. And some write that this Stone will draw Glass unto
it, in like manner as it does the Iron.

The secret properties of the Egg.
ANd first the round Egg set under the Hen brings forth a Hen chicken,
and the long Egg set under the Hen, brings forth a Cock chicke^. Also the
Egg with the shell laid to steep in Vinegar for three days space, does
after so softe^ it, that any may work the same at length like unto Wax. And
the same Egg afterward laid in water, does come again unto the former
state. Also if an Egg be painted with sundry colors, and the same set under
a Hen to bring forth, she shall hatche a chicken having the like feathers,
unto the colors painted on the Egg. Also the Egg laid for three days to
steep in strong Vinegar, and after for one whole Monethe laid to dry again
in the Sun, will after come unto the hardness of a stone.

A proper conclusion of an Hasellsticke.
FIrst take an Haselsticke of a yard long, being new cut of, and the same
cleave just in the middle, giuyng the one end so cleaued unto thy companion
to hold in both his hands, and the other end hold your self in both your
hands after such sort, that both the inner parts of the stick may look
one right against the other, in the laiyng down on the ground, and must also
be laid a sunder unto the breadth of two fingers, in such sort that they
may touch together, by an overthwart manner at some one place, and within a
while after, you shall see them draw and join together again of them selves.
And this understand, that the stick must be new cleaued, soon after the
cuttyng up of it, for otherwise this stick woorketh not the proper effect.

A proper practice to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens.
FIrst to do this, take a Capo^ and pull the beallie bare of feathers, and
after rub the naked place with Nettles, setting young Chickens under him, and
he will then meruailouslie cherishe them, and bring them kindly up. And the
rather if you so accustom to use the Capon the like for a time: For by that
means he is moved the willynger to cherishe, bring up and feed, yea and to
love them so well as the Hen naturally would do. And the reason of this is, in
that through the prickyng of the Nettles, he is thereby the rather desirous to
touch the soft down, and feathers of the young Chickens sittyng under him.

To make any foul of what condition the same be, to have feathers all white.
TO do this, take the Eggs and roll them in the juice of the herb called
Mouseare, or in the herb called Houselike, or otherwise in oil (after the
mind of Cardanus) and after put the Eggs again in the Neast, for after the
hatchyng, their feathers shall grow white.

To make a Candle burn in the water.
AND to do this, take Wax, Brimstone, and Vinegar, of each a like, boil
these altogether over the Fire, until the vinegar appear all consumed, and
then after of that Wax remainyng, make a Candle and you shall see the proper
effect, as above is written.

To make a woman that she shall not eat of the meats set upon the Table.
TO do this, take a little of the grene Basil, and when one brings any
dishes of meat unto the table, then put the same herb secretly under one of
the platters or dishes, that she epsy it not, and as long as the herb so
lies on the table, the woman shall eat nothing of that meat in the platter
or dishe, which covers the herb.

A proper secret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone to burn without fire.
AND to do this, take Calamite, Brimstone, vnflecked lime, pitche, Ceruse, of
each of these three dra^mes, of Camphora one dram, Asphaltum three drammes, all
these make in powder, and put the same into a strong pot well stopped, and
after make a fire under the pot, encreasyng the same by little and little
until the powder in the pot become so hard as a stone, and when you will
have it burn, then rub the same well with a clothe, and it will burn
sodainl^: and when you will put the same out, then spit upon it, and after set
the same in a moist place, and it will go out.

To make one to see fearful sightes in his sleep.
ANd to do this, take the blood of a ^^^apwyng, and therewith anoint the
pulses of thy foreheade, before thy going to rest, and then after in thy
sleep thou shall see both marvelous and fearful sightes, as Vitalis Medicus
writes. Also he writes, that if a man eats in the Euenyng before his going
to bed, of the herb named Nightshade, or Mandrake, or Henbane, shall after
see in his sleep pleasant sightes.

How to turn water into wine, a proper secret.
IF thou will convert or turn water into wine, then fill a brass pot with
the best wine, setting upon the head of the pot a Lim^^ecke, and destill the
wine out, and the Lees remainyng after the destillation dry them, and bring
the^ into fine powder, which equally mixed with the water, does so cause the
water to have both the color, and taste of the same wine. And the like unto
this mate be wrough^ and done in a Rose Limbeck. Also a loaf of Barlie bread
hot drawn out of the oven, and broken into great pieces hot, and laid so
to soke in good wine, which pieces when they shall be well soked in the wine,
let the^ dry in the Sun, and after soke of that bread in fair Water, and it
will after receive both the color and taste of that wine.

To make a light or Candell to endure burning without going out by any wind so
long as the substance endures.
TO do this, make a week after thy disc^etion, which inf^se in the oil o^
Hempseede, and after into molten Tallowe, as you would properly make a week
or cotton Candell, lettyng the same to hang somewhat until it be cold, which
through cold, then light it in the like sort as you do a common Candell, and
it will not after go. out wi^h^na Wind, so long as the substance indureth,
and in like sort may light be made to serve in the night time, if so be that
fine linen rags be first soked in the Oil of Hempseede, and after dipped
into molten Tallowe, which so bound or wrought on a staffes end to carry
about, or otherwise on a staffes end, liyng in an Iron plate.

How to make qu^rters of wood i^ hang so fast together, that they cannot be
shaken a funder without breaking.


TO make quarters hold, and hang together thus without tiyng, must be done on
this wise: First, lay one of the quarters down, as these it. letters A. and
B. do instruct, on the which lay the other quarter, even as these two
letters C. and D. do here represent, and on that C. and D. lay the third
quarter, as the letters E. and F. do here express, and in such sort that
E. and F. must lie under A.B. And being then thrust hard together they cannot
after fall away without breakyng, in that A. and B. is stayed and held of E.
and F. and E. and F. of C. and D. and C. and D. holden of A. and B. so that
none of them can fall a sunder the one from the other. Also that place where
B.D.E. is holden or stayed together, and does the like hold together, as by a
trial of the same shall more manifestly appear. Also the more and harder they
be thrust together, the longer they so continue hangyng together. And some
suppose that a like trial unto this, may be assaied and proved, either with
three sticks made flat for the nonce, or with three knives being a like, if
they be orderly used.

How to make a color like to gold, in understanding this secret.
ANd to do this, take of Aloes Hepaticke, and of salt Niter of each six
ounces, these grind, and perfectly mix together on a smoothe Marble, or other
hard stone: that being so labored together, they can after be separated by
no means, and after distill the same in a Limbeck of glass well luted about,
that you may so draw out all the moist substance that will come. And with
this may you gilde what you lis^e, v^derstandyng how to draw this licour.
Also by a shorter way and lesser pain may you do the like, although not so
perfect as the other above said, which indeed is right me^ueilous. And ^ow
this is on this wise: First, take of Aloes Hepaticke three ounces, of Rosen six
ounces, and of oil of Lineseede well boiled a pint and a half, these set over
the fire in a pott, and mingle them well together, after strain the same
licour through a Linen cloathe, puttyng it into a pot, which you must s^op
close, and so keep the same until you have need to gilde any thing therewith.

To make Silver like any metal, which shall so continue a long time.
FOR to do this, take half an ounce of Aquafortis, and a scruple of
Quicke-siluer, and a little of the Tartare made of the white wine, and a little
Salt: These put altogether in a pot or yearthen pan, woorkyng and labouryng
the same together over hot Imbers, which so dooen, you may after with this
composition make silver like any metal you list, and to continue so a long
time.

How to stick an Iron or Steel Bodkin into the head of either Cock Hen, or
Chicken.
ANd to do this, write first these words followyng, that is to say, Gibell,
Got, Gabell, in a scroll, and bind the same about the bill of the Cock,
Hen, or Chicken, to color this secret withal, which so done, then pearce
the head of the Bird, just in the middle as you can guess, with a very sharp
poineted Bodkin, and after sent the Bird down, and you shall see the Bird so
lustely run away from you, as if nothing were strickyng into the head, if
the Pullet be big, unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. And now
the reason of this is, in that the head and brain of the Pullet, is divided
into two parts in the bone, and the bone also doubled in the midst, so that
the Bodkin may easily enter without danger, and of this the brain so
pierced, the Pullet nevertheless lives: which if the ignorant se, they will
perhaps believe, and think that the words only does the same, which is
nothing less,

To make a Candle that will not go out, until the whole substance be wasted.
ANd to do this, take the best wax and the pure Brimstone, of each a like
portion, which take and melt together, and after make a Candle thereof, which
being lighted, set the same in a Candlestick to bu^ne. And the same candle so
lighted, will not go out until the whole sustaunce be spent, thus Cardanus
writes.

How to make Iron soft, a proper secret.
ANd to do this, take the juice of the Hemlocke, and quench the Iron in it,
being well heated three or four times, lettyng it there remain every time,
until it be thoroughly cold. Also Cardane writes, that if you take oil,
puttyng into it mosten Leave seven times together, and after quench your Iron
read hot into that Oil, for four or five times together, and it will so
make the same soft to work.

To make a Sword, Dagger, or Knife to cut Iron so easily as Lead.
OF this thing Hermes writes, if a Sword, Dagger, or knife being only Iron
and fashioned, and being read hot, ^f the same be afterward quenched into the
juice of the Raddishe, mixed with the licour of the fresh Worms of the
ground, or rather the water of Artely distilled, being before some what
bruised: such a Sword, dagger, or knife says he, shall after have such a
strange edge, if the same red hot be quenched four or five times in it,
that with the same you may cut Iron so easily, as if it were Lead. Also he
writes, that if Steel be often molten in the Furnace and so purified until
the same be so white as Silver in a manner, and then after of the same fashion,
grauyng Instruments with their edges and poin^tes, orderly like as to the art
of grauyng belongs, which instruments being read hot, quenchte after
into the juice of Radishe, and the destilled water of the Worms of the earth
mixed together: Or else with that water of the Worms, drau^en through a clean
Linen clothe, so that there be so much of this water, as of the juice of the
Radishe, and then those instruments quenched four or five times, in the above
said licour. And after will the edges and poinetes of the instruments be so
hard, that you may cut and grave in any stone and Iron, so easily as the same
were Lead.

How to keep weapons clean and fair for a long time.
ANd to do this, take Barrowes grease, common Oil, new Wax, Ceruse, of each
a like, these te^per together very well over a soft fire, vn^ill they be
thoroughly incorporated, and after anoint the burnished weapon with this
ointment, and it shall so continue in the same brightness in secula secu^orum.
And there can not be a greater secret invented, for the keepyng bright of
weapons then this is, if these words be well understood.

How to make Steel so soft as past, a proper secret.
Do thus: Take the gall of an Ore. Bans urine, ^er^es, and the ^y^e of the
Nettle, of each of the^e take a little quantity, and mi^e them very
diligently together, then after quench the Steel red hot in this licour sower
or five times together, and it will after become so soft as paste. And this is
a ^ight proper and necessary secret to be understood of all such workmen
as do any matters in Steel, as grauyng and such like, if these words be
well marked,

How to make Hens lay Eggs all the winter through.
TO do this, take the tops of the Nettles when they begin to come unto
seed, and dry them: which so dried, give a little of the same with Bran and
Hempseede mingled together, to your Hens, and they shall every day after lay
you an Egg a piece.

How to make thy Chamber appear full of Snakes and Adders.
TO do this, kill a Snake, puttyng the same into a pan with Wax, and let it
so long boil until the same be through dry, and of that wax make a Candle,
lightyng the same in the Chamber, and then after shall appear as though there
were a thousand creepyng in thy Chamber.

How to make letters appear of the color of Gold, Copper, or Silver.
AND to do this, take very clear Crystal, and work the same into merueilous
fine powder on a Marble stone, and after mix the same powder with the white of
an Egg, until this be so prepared to write withal: And after with this
confection write what letters you will, lettyng the same dry, and after rub
a gold Ring, or any piece of gold on the same letters, and all the letters
shall appear like gold. And in the like sort may you make the letters either
appear like silver or copper.

How to make any piece of Iron to appear like gold.
AND to do this, take four pintes of Rain water, into which put ten drammes
of Roch Alum, and ten drammes of Orpiment, of Romain Vitrioll, and Salt Gemme,
of each one an ounce, and a scruple of Coperas: all these boil together, after
put there into a quart of Vinegar, and of Tartare, and common Salt finely
beaten to powder, of each three ounces, all these incorporate again over a
soft fire very well, and after occupy the same, which makes a color like
unto gold.

How to have fresh Roses at all times of the year, sundry ways taught.
AND first if you will have fresh Roses at any time, so well as in the Month
of May, then gather the buddes half open in a manner in the Euenyng, when as
the Sun is set, and touch them not with thy hand in the gatheryng, but with
a sharp knife properly gather them, after lay the Roses upon a board,
lettyng them to lie abroad in a fair night, al y^ night through, and then
after have in a readiness a new earthen pot well glased within and with
out, into wh^che put the former Roses before the Sun be up in the morning,
and stop close the mouth of that pott with claie mixed with Horsdung, and
flocks, all tempered well together before, whereby no air of the Roses may
pass or breathe forth. After set the same pot into the ground, coueryng
it in dry Sand, and let no moist place be near, or about the same. And
now on this wise may you have fresh Roses at any time of the year.

Also take of the Rose buds in the spring time, when they begin first to open,
and put those into a green Cane yet growyng, cleanyng the same by little and
little, until you may handsomely put in those buds, and after tie that
place with a thread, stoppyng the same about that no air breathe out, and
after cover that niece of the Cane or Reed, so bound and stopped about under
the earth, bowyng down the same stalk by little and little, that the same
break not, and cover the same well with the earth, lettyng it there remain so
long as you lift, and when you be minded to have them forth, then clean the
Cane by little and little, that you spoil not the bu^des, and after set them
in the Su^ne, or in luke warm water, and they s^a^be open and fair in a short
space, as in the midst of May.

Also if you will make dry Roses to become fresh, then take a new glased
pot, and wet the same with in with Rose water, and after shut that pot with the
Roses very close lettyng it so to stand for five days, and they shall be
fresh.

How to make Beans and other seeds grow up in four hours.
AND first, to make Beans grow up in an hours space, take the Beans and put
them in hot Oil, lettyng them there remain for a xl. days, and after dry
them. And when you will make the proof of them, then set the Beans, and go
to dinner, and by that time you rise again from the Table and go to look on
them, you shall find them grow up well a spanne high. And the like may you
do with the Gourdes.

And now to make the Gourdes grow up in the space of four hours, both with
leaves and flowers, take the seed of the Gourde, and let them lie in the blood
of a s^nguine young man, and let them there remain for fifteen days in a
moist place, and in a pot well stopped, and after take them forth, and let
them be dried well in the Sun: and when you will sow or plant them, then
take a dishe full or two of good earth, and dry the same well, after wet the
same with a little fresh water, and after have warm water powryng the same
upon this earth until it become sufficient soft, and then plant your seeds in
it, and within three or four hours after you shall have Gourdes grown up
with leaves, and with flowers.

And the like may you do with the Melons, Citrones, and other green seeds.

To make a Candle of Ise to burn like unto an other Candle.
TO do this, make a candle of Brimstone, which with the powder of a coal
smeare about, and after in the Winter time drown the same in water, but cover
the head of it with a paper, and after hang the same at the mouth of some
Gutter which droppeth fast, whereby it may so be covered with half a finger
thickness of Ise in the morning, and after being lighted it will then burn
unto the wo^deryng of such as shall see the same. Also take pure Wake and fine
Brimstone purified, of each a like, melt these together making thereof a
Candle, and after take the powder of a coal finely beaten, and brimstone the
like in powder, these sift through a Serse or linen cloth, and after heating
the Candle, smeare the Candle about so long, until it have (as it were) a
thick crust round about the same like unto the thickness of the back of a
knife, which after cover about the head of it with a paper, and then hang the
same at the mouth of a Gutter which droppeth fast, until the Ise cover it
about a finger thick, then light the same, and it will burn like as it were
all wax.

To make flesh to seem to crall full of worms.
AND to do this, take Harp stringes and cut them into very short pieces,
which straw upon meat being taken ^ot ou^ of the pot, and those pieces will
the^ move and far like unto worms.

How to make a light in the night time, that all things round about thy hall
or parlour shall appear both black and green.
TO do this, take the black juice or ink of the fish named a Cuttle, and the
like quantity of Verdigreace, these mix well together, putting the same into
a Lamp, and dipping a week in that licour, then light the same, puttyng out
the other lights in the room, and then shall all things round about that
place, and the walls also being white, appear both black and green, unto the
marvel o^ such as shall see the same.

How to make Roots to have what proper form you will on them.
TO do this take such green roots which be big, like as be the Briony
roots, Radishe roots, and Rape or Nauew roots, and of any of these roots
carue and cut as you list, and alter put the same into the earth, lettyng it
there so long remain until the same caruyng be covered with a skin. And on
such wise may you make the counterfeit Mandrakes, in fashionyng in the Briony
root as both Mathealus and Cardane do write form of a man with a Pen knife,
and settying the same root again into the earth with the head of the root
turned downward, and a little Barley put under it, which after will cleave and
hang fast unto the head of the Root, and appear like unto hair growyng out of
the same.

How to break a stone with the Fist, of the thickness of ones hand.
AND to do this, first raise the edge of a flat stone upright from a plain
boorde, or rather from a big smooth stone, in such sort that it stand of it
self without any vnderbearing or help, and after with thy fist sin hastily
or quickly that part standing upright, which failing together flat on the
plain boorde or stone, does so break in so many pieces. And if the fist be
swiftlier smitten, then the end of the stone touches the board in the falling,
then is that stroke in vain, and breaks not the same at that time. And in
the like manner may Tyles be easily broken with a small and easy stroke of
the hand, for that through the weight of the stone in the falling, and help
of the quick stroke, it does of this so lightly break, even as it were down
with the vehement stroke of a hammer.

To make an herb to grow which shall have many sauors and tastes.
AND to do this, first take one seed of the Lettice, one seed of Endive, one
of Smallage, one of the Basil, one of the Leeke, and of the Parsley, al these
put together in a hole in such sort that one seed may touch an other, but
this remember, that you plant these together in the dung of an Horse or an Ox
without any earth at al with the^. And then after of these seeds shall grow
up one proper herb, which will have so many savors and tastes, as there
were seeds sown together.

How to make sundry devises or Arms or such like, in a Rose, Carnation, or
Flowers de luse, or Lilly.
TO do this, take Salt Armoniacke, and grind the same on a Marble stone with
fine Vinegar, and a little Sugar Candy, and keep the same in a narrow necked
pot or glass, and after take your Rose, and dress the leaves in fastenyng
them with red Ware, that they may so lie plain and even, which so done, then
take a fine Pensell with the licour drawyng on the leaves what proper matter or
Arms you list, and after let the same dry of it self, puttyng upon of the
leaf gold, or the leaf silver, and after pressyng it lightly or gently down
with Bombasse, and that which sticks not then fast, falls of in the doing,
and so your work will remain trim and fair.

To write what you list on a Seel^ Dagger or Knife.
HOW to do this, take an ounce of Salt Peter, and an ounce of green Coperesse,
beat ^hese grosely together, and after put the same into a st^o^g Bottle of
glass, distillyng a water of it, which water use on this wise: First take
yellowe or red Wax, sletchyng the same upon your Dagger or Knife, so far as
you will draw or write thereupon, unto the thickness of a Paper leaf and
somewhat more, after draw or write therein what you list, drawyng or writing
unto the Steel, and then fill that hollow drawing or holes with the distilled
water, which within a day and a night will have eaten it sufficiently, and
the like may you draw^ and do in any other piece of steel.

How to break a new and big Rope with the hands only.
TO do this take and fasten the one end of the Cord or Rope, either with a
nail driven fast into it, or about a strong hook of Iron, and after wind
the same three or four times, or o^tner about thy hand, and the other end
of the Cord or Rope wind about by the top of the Palm between the fore
finger and thumb, that the one part of the cord may reach unto the Nail,
and the head or other end unto the bottom of the Plame, by which it must
again be winded about, and after that winded again once or twice about. And
this so done, then with a vehement pluck and force, assaye in the same part by
which it is so over winded or run with the Cord, for that the substance of
the Cord or Rope which is under does defend that the hand can take no
harm by the hasty and strong pull, and take heed that the uttermost fold of
the Cord slide not in thy hand. And to conclude, this conceive, that in the
mighty and hasty pluck together, the one fold of the Cord does so cut the
other in sunder, and then especi^lly when as that part shall be set soft,
which is between the hand and the nail and that both the hand be strong,
and then pluck out right and quick. And now if you will conceive this order in
the windyng of the Cord about both the hands, you may so break the same with
the only strength of the hands, yea such strong Cords or Ropes as will well
hold a Bullock or Cow, unto the admiration or wondering: of the lookers on.

How to make white Flowers like as the Lilly, white Rose and such like to be
red.
AND to do this, fill a pint pot of the best red Wine, unto the middle of it,
and within the mouth of the pot ha^g the white ^lowers so deep in, that they
touch not the wine, after that cover the mouth of the pot very close, so that
no air of the wine breath out, and then let it so stand for one whole day,
and they will after become red of color. And to make such flowers that be^
naturally white to become red, do this, first take gross earth, driyng the
same very well in the Sun, that you may after bring the same into very fine
powder, and after put the same earth into a pot or half Tubbe, where you mind
to plant your white flowers to become read, and after they be so planted in
the earth, then let the^ not be watered at any time with any other water then
this, which is made on this wise: Take water puttyng therein a certain
quantity of Brasill finely cut, and boil the same unto a third part, which
water after take and being through cold, water by little and little the same
earth, as both at morning and euenyng, and water it at no time with any other
water then this, until you see that the same water first have taken effect.

How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it self, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take a Ring round about hollow, into which put
quicksiluer, and stopp the same fast that it run not forth. After heat the
Ring somewhat in the fire, or let it lie near unto the fire, and being hot,
lay the same on a Table or Stool, which by and by after will begin to dance
of it self, until it be cold again.

To make Glewe to hold together so hard as a stone, a proper secret.
AND to do this take vnfleke Lime, and quench the same with wine, and beat the
same into fine powder, mixing therewith both Figs and Swines grease, and
after labor them well together, for this as Pliny writes passes the
hardness of a Stone. Also take Greek Pitch, Rosin, and the powder of Tyle
stones, these mix together, and when you will occupy of the same, then heat
it over the fire, and work therewith: for when the same is cold, it holds
them together so hard as any Nail. Also take of Spuma ferri one pound, of
Tyle shardes tw^^ pound, ^f vnslekt Lyme, four pound, of Oil of Linseede so
much as shall suffice to prepare, and work them together, for this Glewe is
merueilous strong, which neither fears nor yields to water nor fire.

To make an Apple move on the Table, a proper secret.
HOw to do this, take an Apple and cut the same in the midst, and in the one
half make a round hole, putting therein a black ^eetle, and so lay the same
half on the Table, and it will then move.

To make Roses and other flowers that be red, to become white.
AND to do this, take Brimstone, beating the same into fine powder, which
powder burn on a new Tylestone, holdyng such red flowers or Roses over the
smoke of it, whiles it so burns, and they will after become white, and on
this wise you may make your Roses half white and half red, or one leaf
white, and an other red, by a cappe of paper so cut for the nouce.

How to write letters on the Egshell, that the same letters may appear within
on the Egg.
AND to do this, take a little quantity both of Gales and Allome, which
work together with Vinegar, and after write with this licour what you will on
the shell, and that dried, lay then the Egge^ ^triue, or else anoint the Egg
about with Wax unto the thickness of a Paper or somewhat more, and with a
fine bodkin write deep letters that the hoales may be open, and the letters
apparent, into the which holes pour of this licour, and when the same is
dried on the Egg, then sees the Egg until it be hard, and after lay the
same to soake in sharp Vinegar, through the which soaking, the letters will so
pass through the shell, that the letters may be seen on the Egg, after the
shell is pulled of.

How to make a Bottle or a narrow mouth pot full of water or milk, not to
spill or shed forth.
TO do this, take the Bottle or narrow mouth Pot and fill the same unto the
brimme, after cover the mouth with a Paper, and then turn the mouth dounward
on the mouth of an other pot, and nothing shall shed forth* as by a trial in
fillyng the one pot with Milk, and the other may be seen.

How to kill Fleas diverse ways.
AND first to gather all the Fleas of thy Chamber into one place, anoint a
Staff with the grease of a Fox* or Headghog, and lay the Staff again,
where you list in your chamber, and it shall so gather all the Fleas by it. Also
sill a dish with Goats blood, and set the same by the bed, and all the Fleas
will come to it round about. And the like will they do by the blood of the
Headghog. Also take the fat of a Goat, and anoint what you list therewith, and
set the same under your bed, and all the Fleas will gather unto the same. Also
take Lupines or flat Beans, and boil them in water with Wormwood, and that
water sprinkle well about the Chamber, and all the Fleas shall avoid that
Chamber. Also take an Apple of Coliquintida, and infuse the same in water, and
in that water boil Wormwood, which cast about the Chamber, kills all the
Fleas. And the like does the Peache leaves, or Veruein, or Colyander boiled in
water, and so cast about.

How to make a pot of Glass not to sink in the water, a proper secret.
TO do this, first fill a glass pot full of Water or Wine unto the brimme,
for otherwise it sincke^h down and is drowned in the setting of it in the
water: the reason of which appears by this demonstration. Imagine that the pot
be D. whose neck is A.B.C. the vacant part of it A B. in that A.B. doe^h
bear about water, through the air which is contained therein: and the weight
of the glass A.B draws toward the Centere, and A.D.C. cannot descend by
straight line down, for that it shall labor in vain. And therefore the
signifier D. howeth in that D* when as the wine is set in the water, it
resists not, and therefore A.B. does descend until it come unto the upper
face of the water, but when A.B. shall be in the upper face of the water, the
part E. is then drouned, in that it is the nether part, and all the neck of
the pot.

How to make a thin Glewe very profitable, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take the Glewe made of Fishes, beatyng the same strongly on
an Anuell until it be thin, which after lay to soake in water, until it
become very soft and tender, which will be within five or six hours, and then
work it like past to make small rolls thereof, which when it is like unto
paste, stretch it or draw it out very thin, and when you will work with it,
then put of the same into an earthen pot wi^h a little fair water over hot
embers, and skimme the same very clean, and let it so sees a little while,
after work with the same, keepyng it still over the hot embers until you
have do^n with it, for so it fasteneth and binds the stronger. And in such
sort that it fastneth pieces of glass together.

How to draw a Ring of, being very hard thrust on, and the finger swelled.
AND if either man or woman has thrust a Ryng so hard on their finger, that
he or she cannot draw the same of, through the swellyng of the finger, then
threede a Needle, and draw the same under the Ryng, and wind the thread about
the finger on the other side, and so often wind the thread about, and
diligently consider that the whole joint and part of the finger liyng or
being between the joint and the Ring, be covered about with the threede, and
that no part be seen of the skin through the close coueryng of the thread,
and even draw the Needle again under the Ryng, and wind the thread like
about on the other side, and that speedely, whereby the Ryng drawn and
removed on the thread, by little and little may so pass over the joint and
come of. But whylest you are in the doing of this, make no tariaunce or delaie,
for that the finger does so lightly swell, that without great pain the Ryng
can not be drawn of.

To make fruits, as Apples, Pears Quinces, and such like, to have what
proper form you will on them.
AND to do this, counterfaite on a piece of wood being in bigne^se to the
fruit which you desire, what form you will: Or else cut Roman or other
fashione letters in it, (to express if you list) some proper word, which so
done, then make a moulde with Water and Chalk unto the thickness of thy
little finger, the same part into the just have. And when this moulde is dry
which soon dries, separate then the same from the wood with Oil before. And
when you have gotten of the moulde from the wood, and parted it in two just
halfes, then take the same moulde, and bind it mos^e close unto the fruit
being grown unto his half bigness, and let it so continue until the fruit
become unto his full bigness, and the^ take the moulde away, and you shall see
the trial of the former taught.

How to cut a Glass, a proper secret.
AND to do this, steep a threede in Oil and Brimstone mixed together, and
compass the glass with the thread in the place where you would have it parted,
and after kindle and light the sam^, and so often do thus, until the place he
hot, and after compass the same with a thread wet in cold water, and it will
part so clean asunder, as if the same had been cut with a sharp painted
Diamond.

How to soften Crystal, to imprint what you list therein, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take the blood of a Lamb, and the blood of a Weather, mixyng
these together, after take thy Crystal stone heating it in the fire burning
hot, and then quench it in the blood, which after will become so soft as
paste, then with a Copper print work therein what you list, and after set the
same abroad in the air, and it will come again unto the former hardness.

How to walk on the water, a proper secret.


FOR to do this, take two little Timbrels and bind them under the soles of thy
feet, and at a staves end fasten an other, and with these you may safely
walk on the wate^ unto the wonder of all such as shall see the same: if so be
you often exercise the same with a certain boldness and lightness of the
body.

To make a Candle to burn, a proper secret.
FOr to do this, first make a week of Silk, and infuse the same in the Oil
of Hempseede, and when the week shall be sufficiently soaked, role the same
in Snow, until it be of the bigness of a great Candle, whereby it may so
be well wrought together, and after light the same, setting it in a stick, and
it will give the like light as a Wax Candle. Also make a Candle of Purpen
stone and wax together, about the which role Snow, and the Snow will burn
until it be all wasted. Also take Snow, and mix therewith the powder of
Camphire, and of the same make a Candle, and it will burn being lighted.

How to draw many Candles the one after the other, being la^ed a foot
distaunce or more asunder.
FOR to do this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and Oil, these labor together,
and make thereof an ointment, after take so many Candles as may well serve your
Table, which lay on the Table a large foot asunder and all a roe, the one
behind the other as long as you list to lay them, yea, a hundred may you
late down on this wise a length if you lay them straight, then take a long
thread, and anoint the same in this ointment, which after lay a long on the
Candles, and after drawyng the foremost, all will follow by order.

How to cut an Apple into many pieces, without harmyng of the skin or paryng.
TO do this, take a most fine Needle with a small threede, and thrust the same
by little and little under the paryng, and thrust it in again right against the
place, until you have so gone round about the outside of the Apple. And this
also remember that you thrust the needle through the parting at straight
corners one against the other of the Apple, and this so often do, until you
come again unto the first place where you began.

And if so be you would divide the same in six or eight pieces, then draw the
thread again by a like distaunce, always taking heed to divide the Apple
under the skin and when you have thus done with the Apple and the pieces yet
covered with the skin, the^ draw ou^ the ends of the thread and you shall
a^^er divide the Apple within, without ha^^^yng of the paring or skin into so
many pieces as you list. And when you have thus drawn ^ut and taken the thread
quite away, you man keep the Apple so long as you think requisite.

How to make a Cup of Gloss being set in the fire not to burn.
AND to do this, take what Cup or Pot of glass you list, and sees the same
in common Oil, by the space of five hours, and after take it forth, and it
will be then made so strong that the said Cup of glass or pot will endure the
heat of the fire.

How to m^ke a Candle to be maruailed at a proper secret.


AND to do this, take four ounces of salt Niter, six ounces of fine
Franke^sence, three ounces of brimstone, six ounces of Oil, and six ounces of
the Mi^ke of Cataputia, all these beat fine, and mix together, after take
three ounces of Wax, and make then a Candle of altogether, in the end of which
Candlestick, stick deep a Needle, and after set the same in a narrow mouth
glass full of water, and you shall see after what the same will do.

How to make quick silver in a ma^er so hard as silver.
AND to do this, take the strongest Vinegar, and whites of Egge^ well beaten
together, and three ounces of quicksiluer, unto one of the other these first
still together in a Limbecke well luted, and in that distilled water put the
quicksiluer, and it will be after so hard that you may work it with the
hammar. Also take quicksiluer, and wash it in the distilled water of man's
blood, and every time you wash the same let it dry, and in the end it will
come to be so hard as silver.

How to see many and diverse strange sightes in an Vrinall.
AND to see these, take a new and clean washed Vrinall, into which pour
either clean water, or other runnyng water, after take the white of an new
laid Egg, and a little Saffron, bindyng it in a clean linen cloth, after
that pour a little of the water into a dishe, and put the cloth with the
Saffron into it so long until it have colored it somewhat, and being on this
wise, the^ beat the white of the Egg with this water seven or eight times
with thy ^inger, and then pour the same into the Vrinall, and you shall after
see in it Towers, Castles, Hills and many other strange sights.

How to catch Fowls without a Net.
TO do this, take Arsnick puttyng the same in water, and in that water boil
Wheat or any other grain, and cast the same forth unto Fowls, and so many
as eat thereof will not be able afterward to fly away. And take the juice of
Celidone, and infuse Wheat in the same, lettyng it there remain for three
days, after give the same unto Fowls to eat and such as eat thereof you
may after take with the hand. Also take Wheat, puttyng it in Wine Lees, and
let the same remain there eight days, after that put it into the juice of
Celandine and Horehounde to steep, which so done, then give of the same unto
the fowls to eat, and such as eat thereof, cannot after fly a way.

How to make a loaf of bread new set upon the Table to leap of.
TO do this, take a quill fillyng the same with Quick silver, and stopping it
close thrust the same after into a hot loaf new drawn out of the Oven, and
the loaf will by and by dance on the Table.

How to make an Egg fly about, amerry conclusion.
AND to do this, take a Gose Egg, and after the opening and cleansing of it,
take a Back that flies in the Euenyng, which put into the shell, then glewe
it fast about on the top, and the Back will so fly away with it, which
perhaps will be thought of some to fly about in the air of it self.

How to make Artificial fire diverse ways, and that maruailous.
AND first to make a flame of fire to pass sodeinly out of the mouth of a pot
full of water, take an Egg making an hole in the head, and draw out all the
substance of the same, which so dooen, then fill the same with the powder of
Brimstone and vnsl^ckt Lime mixed together, shuttyng the mouth with Wax, and
then let it fall to the bottom of a quarte pot full of Water, taking quickly
your hand away, and suddenly will issue forth a flame out of the mouth of
the pot. And also if thou will spit fire out of thy mouth without pain, and
to do thee no harm, take the powder of the Willowe stick, finely beaten
and searsed with the which join a little new Silk, making it round up like
unto a ball, into which put this powder, wrappyng the Silk well about it,
and after putt it within with the powder a little fine Flax, and then properly
stitche it up round about, which so dooen, then cut it open a little on the
one side, puttyng a quick coal or a light Candle unto it, to set it on fire a
little, then put it again into thy mouth, holdyng the same softly with thy
teethe, and tournyng also the part cut inward in thy mouth, and when thou will spit fire out, then hold the hall strongly in thy mouth and blow, and
the lookers on shall see then a great flame issue forth of thy mouth, and do
there no harm at all. Also to make a fire fly up in the air. Take Towe, and
wet the same in Aquauitae, and after put fire to it and blow the same away,
which after will fly up in the air and burn.

How to know a natural precious stone from a counterfaite.
AND to do this, rub the same on Lead, and if it change the color, then
it is counterfaite, if it change not, then it is a natural Stone. Also if the
stone have like unto a Bladder within, then it is counterfaite.

How to make a man appear on a flame burning without any harm.
TO do this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and common Oil, of these make an
ointment, with the which anoint thy garment all about, and thy head and
hands, and after light the same, and it will burn all at once without harm.
Also take juice of ^dders tongue, the juice of March Mallo^es, or other
Mallows, and the white of an Egg, these mix together, annoyntyng the^ewith
all about thy boot, and then cast the fine powder of Brimstone on the same,
setting it over a fire, and it will strongly burn, and neither harm hand nor
garment anointed therewith.

How to make the Chamber as light by night as by day.
AND to do this, take that part which shines of the night Worms, and
bruise them well, which after set in hot Horsdung, in a glass stopped, and
let it there so stand for fifteen days, and after distill the same in a
Limbecke of glass with a soft fire, the which water so drawn, stop close
in a narrow necked pot of Crystal glass, and hang the same in the entry of
the house, and it will so give a very bright light.

How to make two Dogs fight together, a proper secret.
AND to do this take the Secliffet of the Wolf, and cast the same between
two Dogs: and they shall so long fight together, as they lie there between
them, and when you will have the^ to cease fightyng, then take them away.

How to make a Bitche that she shall not desire to be covered with any Dog.
TO do this, take Bees and prepare them orderly, which after give unto thy
Bitche with bread, or with meat, and she will not after suffer any Dog to
touch her.

To make a blown Bladder to dance and skip from place to place.
TO do this, put Quicksiluer in a bladder, and lay the bladder in a hot
place, and it will after skipp from place to place, without handlyng.

How to cast for the any worm or Snake entered within the body.
TO do this, hail the herb Basil over a soft fire in Vinegar, which so
boile^, give unto the pacient to drink, and it shall cast the same up
forthwith. And if the same be a Snake entered within the body, then you may
take writing Ink, and good Wine, mixyng them together, which after drink,
and it will cast up whatsoever evil be in the body.

How to make a Hen to run away with great fear.
AND to do this, take the head of a Kyte, and tie the same about a Hens
neck, and she shall never cease runnyng here and there, until you have taken
away the same from her neck, and when you will take the same from her neck,
she will then move from you nothing at all.

How to find a person drouned, that has been sought for.
TO do this, take a white loaf, and cast the same into the water nere the
suspected place, and it will forthwith go directly over the dead body, and
there still abide, by which you may well find the dead body.

How to deal with Iron many ways right profitable.
FIrst to make Iron as soft as past, take Vitrioll and salt Niter, of each a
like, heatyng these to powder, which after destill in a Limbecke of Glass,
and in this water lay your ^mall p^^ces of Iron, for a day and a night,
which after eu^er us hot horsedung for 15. days, and the same will become
very so^te like unto paste, and with the same Iron you may make seals or
grave, or otherwise Imprint what you list on I^o^ so easily, as i^ to earth,
and you may al^o beat and work the same Iron so easily as Lead. Also make
a water of Roche Alome, as is above said, and in the same water quench your
Iron seven times, and it will make the Iron so easily break as glass, and to
make powder thereof. Also quench the Iron in the dung of an Ox or Cow,
tempered with Honey oftentimes, and it will become so soft, that you may
work the same like Lead^ with the hammer. Also take sa^te Armomacke well
bea^e^, an mix the same wi^h vnssecked Lime, and temper the same with cold
water, like unto a thick brothe, and in ^his water temper the Iron, and it
shall after become white, fair, and very strong. Also take the juice of the
Herb n^med Palma Christi, and with the same amount thy hands, and you may
after handle Iron fire hot without harm. And the like may you do with the
juice of Hemlocke.

Also take read Arsenicke, red Alome, of each like, these grind into fine
powder, mixyng the same with the juice of Sengreue, or Houselike, and the gall
of a Bull, and anointe thy hands with the same, and you may after handle
burning Iron, and annointyng the fecte, you may go on hot Grates of Iron or
Coals, without any danger.

To light a Candle at the mouth of an Image painted on a wall.
Take and put Brimstone to the mouth of the Image, and take a burning Candle
and blow it out. And or the week be out, set it to the Images mouth, and
it will burn. And so ye may do against a glass.

To take Fish by night.
TAke a lantern of glass, and put a burning Candle in it, and set the
lantern on the water, and the Fishes will come to light. Or else take Nettles
and Houselike, and make juice of them, and put it in a poude, and all the
fishes will gather there, and if your hands be anointed therewith, ye may
take them.

To make that no Dog bark at you.
TAke an herb called Serpentine, and they shall not bark at you.

To make birds come to your Culuerhouse.
Cast Barley steeped in Honey where they do feed, and they will gather to
your Culuer house.

To put an Apple in a Violl.
HAng the Violl on a twigge of the Apple Tree, and put a young Apple in the
mouth of the Violl, and it will grow therein. And so ye may do with Grapes
or other fruit.

To pu^ an Egg in a Violl.
Steep the Egg two days and two nights in Vinegar, and then roll it on a
table softly, and it will stre^che as wax, and then may you put it in the
Violl, or draw it through a Ryng.

To make folk seem black.
PUt Oil Olive in a Lamp, and put thereto fine powder of ground Glass,
and light it, and all that be about it, will seem black as Egiptians.

To prove if a maiden be clean.
Burn Motherwort, and let her take the smoke at her nose, and if she be
corrupt she shall piss, or else not. Otherwise take graye Nettles while they
be green, and let her piss on them, if she be no maiden they will wither
forth, or else not.

To know if a sick person^ shall dye or not.
TAke Graie Nettles while they be green, and put them in the pacientes Urine:
and if they remain green he shall live, and if they wither, not.

To make salt water fresh.
TAke claie, and put it into a bag, and strain it through till (...) be
clear, and it will be fresh.

To kindle Fire at the Sun.
TAke a very bright Basin, and put a new lookyng Glass therein, and set
the Basin in the hottest of the Sun, and lay about it very dry Towe small
chopped, and the Towe will take fire with heat of the Sun.

To see by night as by day.
Anoint your eyes with the blood of a Back.

To make flesh clean in the pot.
TAke Dwall or Nightshade, and stamp it well, and put it in the pot with
meat, and the meat will clean together.

To take Birds.
PUt Barley in the juice of Rue, and Veneger, and cast it there as the Birds
do haunte or come, and as soon as they have eaten it they can not fly, and
then ye may take them.

To make Silk Worms.
TAke the brain of a Calfe, and put it in a pit of Mader, and let it lie
three weeks, and they will breed of the brain, and ye may feed them with
Mulberies.

To take away hairs.
ANoint the rough place with the blood of a Back, after that it is shaven, and
hair shall never grow there.

To fat Hens or Capons.
MAke a deep pit in the y^arth, and make therein a bed of dunge, and a
bed of Nettles, and do so till it be full, and the^e keep your Pullen, till
the herbs begin to grow, and then let them out and within a short while,
they will be very fa^te.

That one shall not be drunk.
Drink the juice of Yarrowe fasting, and ye shall not be dronke for no drink.
And if ye were drunk, it will sober you: or else eat the marrowe of Porke fast
y^^, and ye shall not be drunk.

To make a good batte for Fish at all seasons of the year.
TAke Wheat flower, and Callowe of a new slain Sheep, and the gleire of an
Egg, and eat them all together, and have them all therewith.

To make an Egg go up to the Spear ends.
Empty the Egg at a little hole, and fill it full of May deawe, and stop the
hole close with a little Wax and Parchment glewed, that the deawe go not out.
Then stick a spear in the earth in the heat of the Sun, and lay the Egg
by the Spear, and it will mount to the top thereof by the heat of the Sun.

To make fish or flesh seem raw.
TAke the blood of a Wat or of a Kid, and dry it and keep it from the air,
then cast it on fish or flesh that is hot, and it will seem raw.

To make Potage to run out of the pot.
TAke and cast Soap in the Pot and it will run over.

To kill Hens or Ducks.
CAst to them the seed of Henbane and they will fall down as they were dead.

To make Coals to burn a great while.
MAke powder of S. Ihons worte, and when the Coals are wasted and the fire
nere out, cast it thereon and let it lie.

That a man shall not be^ weary of going.
Drink the juice of Mugworte, and bear the herb about him, with the herb
Pedilion and Crowfoote.

Ad capiendum Pisces.
REcipe luce Mulage vel scolares tortas collectum circa medium Maij. Qua^da
Luna sit plena, distemperata cum ingro sape and serua in Olla terreo, and
qua^do vis occupare vnge manus tuas and laua illa in aqua velloco vbi sunt
Pisces.

To make Yearne and linen. Cloth white.
TAke a Herryng Barrel, and fill it nigh full of good Aledregges, and stop
it fast, but ye must have a good dishe full of parched Beans, and put them in
a linen bag, and very hot put them to the dregs till they be cool, and shut
it fast the space of a quarter of an hour. Then take two pound of Alum
ground to subtle powder, and cast it therein, and let it lie four days
naturally well closed, then wash your Yarne.

To make that a Horse may not go through a streate.
TAke the guts of a Wolf, and lay the^ overthwart the Streate, and cover them
with earth or Sand, and he will not go that way, as long as the guts do lie
there. Probatum est.

To know if a Woman be with a man child or not.
TAke a dishe and put water in it, and then let her milk her Breast into the
water, and if it be a man Child, it will fleet, and if it be a woman child
it will sink.

To ease thy Feet for going.
TAke Plantine and stamp it well, and anoint your feet with the iu^ce thereof,
and it will do a way the grief.

To have fair white teeth.
TAke Barley Meal, Honey and Salt, and mingle them together, and rub your
teeth therewith, and they will be white and clean.

To take Fleas.
Anoint a pot with the Grease of a Bucke, and set it on your Bed, and all the
Fleas will go to it. Or else take the Grease of a Goupill, and annoint a place
of the house where ye will have them come and they will go thither. Or else take
leaves of Dan, and lay them under your Couerlet or where ye will, and when they
be among the leaves they cannot come away.

FINIS.

