THE NOBLENESS of the Ass.

A work rare, learned, and excellent. By A. B.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1595.

The Nobleness of the Ass.
Attabaliba of Peru, to the Asse-fauouring Readers.
ALbeit amongst all the kinds of unreasonable creatures, which are enclosed
within the Moons great concaue, those appertaining to the earth, are ever
reputed more perfect, then the other that swim or fly, and therefore
consequently are to be reckoned more Noble. Nevertheless, there is no one man
known, that determinately has censured, what one creature among those of
earthly kind, is to beheld most perfect and noble beyond all the other. Yet
diverse kinds have been continually at war amongst themselves, Beasts
contend, that man might judge of their worthiness.
making choice of some before the rest, by their commendable behavior: and
have shown the same to man, to the end he might pronounce the doubtful
sentence.

Herehence grew the reason, that men of judgment made election of five kinds
only, Five kinds of beasts made choice of.
which they have opposed against all the other: and those are the Dog, the
Horse, the Lion, the Ape, and the Elephant.

But because humane judgments are wont ordinarily to be diverse and variable,
even as their thoughts and opinions are of selfsame nature: so by proof we
find, some to perticularize his favor one way, and other some (among these
five kinds) to praise as himself pleases, which in their several writings is
easily discerned. And as I have oftentimes read them, so have they raised no
mean marvel in my mind, why no one is found amongst the number of so many
ancient writers that has looked into the Asses kind, finding him to be the
most complete, perfect, and the very Noblest beast, among all the rest that
nature ever gave life unto in this world.

And albeit among our modern men, VVriters of the Ass.
Iulio Camillo, Pietro Messia, one called Academico Peregrino, and Rao in one
of his letters, with another that made but a digression, have written somewhat,
declaring diverse considerable qualities of the Ass: yet perhaps the same has
been so succinctly, or rather unskillfully performed, as they have rather
deprived then rendered such perfection, as makes him worthy the direct
sentence, to be the most Noble, aamong all the kinds of beasts unreasonable,
whatsoever.

But the worst is, that the foresaid writers have shown, The fault of the
former writers.
I will not say little judgment, but indeed far less conscience, being so
over impudently bold, in serving their turns with authorities of holy
scripture, to recount the Asses qualities: because the meaning thereof neither
should or ought be applied to Asse-fauouring iestes, which makes them the more
worthy severe punishment, for inconsiderately have they given to words of the
old and new Testament, other expositions then should so be made of them.

Concerning what I intend to say, The Authors purpose in his proceeding.
I mean to draw my proves from sense, reason, authority, as also examples of
men skillful and learned: to the end, that this age of ours may be thoroughly
persuaded in the truth of the matter I undertake, not to leave buried in
blind oblivion, those admirable qualities, which makes this beast, not only
more perfect and Noble then the other, but the very perfectest and Noblest of
all other.

And that I stand fearlesse of murmuring toongs, The Authors protestation to
the captious.
cutting taunts, first and foremost I protest to thee, who (with ascancing
looks) make profession of prying into other men's works: that in the whole
subject of the matter, they shall find nothing to inueigh against, except after
they have peece-meale turned it over, they chance to light on some error in the
Orthographie. Then ere they offer to tear this my Asse-defending imprefe, I
would let them understand, that I moved to write it by a strong persuasion,
that the fortune hereof would be fair, good and conformable, to their
Asse-fauouring proceeding.

If they accept it, The Authors reason, why his book is not to be misliked.
as reason requires they should, despite of all malicious envy, themselves
shall soon perceive, that mine intent is good and honest; whence may ensue
this conclusion, that this work of mine, notwithstanding how earnestly soever
it is written on the Asses behalf, deserves to be commended: either because
(as I have said) it is honest and good, or for the desire I have it should
prove no otherwise. But what answer shall I make the foolish, or to
backbiting maligners: when (being caught within their Griffen-like talents)
they labor to make an Anatomy of me?

In sooth I know not what other answer I should make to fools, How fools and
maligners are to be answered.
then only not to regard them: because (in reason) they cannot well blame
another bodies actions, till first they know how to rule and manage their own.
To the maligners I say, that in using me so hardly, it is the easier discerned
how they can detract, and speak of others as of themselves. But if I light
into the hands of wise and good men; I shall be assured, that they not knowing
how to speak evil, will never say of me otherwise then well.

Heereto I may likewise add, The difference between fools and wise men.
that if by law a pain were appointed, that such as would not read this
Asse-maintaining treatise of mine, should likewise be hindered from walking
abroad, they might account it hard. But each one being at liberty to read or
leave it, they may likewise in reason spare me this freedom, of giving or
withholding it from the print.

Then such as please to read, Read that will, and leave that will.
let them read, and such as will not, let them leave it. But this I may well
say to such as read it, and yet receive not that taste and Asse-delighting
pleasure they expected, that men's understandings are diverse, and therefore
possibly it may be, that they differ far from such, who doubtless shall
find therein a savor of some sweetness. They that but beginning to read,
find neither words or sense fitting their humor: they may soon resolve on no
further loss of time, but so give over, and proceed no further.

Yet admit they go on, and read it out to the end, the blame notwithstanding
will be theirs, who made it after mine own mind, and not to answer theirs.
A reasonable admonition of the Author
Yea, their shame will be the greater, when they shall detect the work, that
has no sense but what defendes the Ass. And more agreeing is it with reason,
that they should rather check themselves: seeing without any taste of delight,
they were so simple to proceed in reading this Asses progress, a possession
whereof they may (perhaps) find in themselves, a long while after.

Nor would I (learned Readers) that any of you should enter into conceit, that
I had so much of the Ass in me, as made me bring to light this Nobility of
the Ass, otherwise then to purge some short pleasure of this world. The
Authors censure of himself.
For I am assured, that it will be thought a most foolish fopperie, a proud
folly, or rather the very proudest foolerie in the world: by reason the world
has bin so many thousand years, without knowledge of the Asses Nobleness,
and happily it might have continued so still to the end, had not I undertook
this Asse-propagating labor: to make known the Ass in his kind (as I have
said) to be the most Noble, not only of the before named five sorts of five
footed beasts, but of other beside, that ever were produced by our mother
nature. Which I doubt not to accomplish, albeit I have gathered into this
current discourse, the properties, virtues, graces, excellencies and natural
gifts, of those beasts whereof the former five several kinds have made
mention. To the end, that they contending to be equal with the Ass, it may
generally appear to them that by reason and truth will be persuaded, the
sentence ought be pronounced on the Noble Asses behalf.

In whose company I leave ye (most kind Asse-fauouring Readers) offering my
self ready and prepared to all your services.

From Peru, at the time appointed.
The Nobleness of the Ass.
The first part.
Of the Dog. 1.
WE will begin then with the Dog, whose excellence (in sooth) is such, as he
has reason to contend for perfection and Nobleness, with which soever you
will name of those other beasts. If at large I would speak of the nature and
powerful quallities of this beast, even but so much as is found written in
histories of him: my labor would rise to a mighty volume. But to impair no
part of his honor, nor selecting any particular quallitie of his, more then I
do of the other beasts which follow: I refer both you and my self therein, to
such as have most copiously written of him.

And even so might I likewise do of the Ass, stood it not now on me to
recount, not all I say (for that is impossible) but many of his qualities,
which former writers have let slip under silence.

First of all then, The gifts and quallities natural in a Dog.
the Dog only among beasts knows his master, and by means meruellous
enough, distinguishes him from any other. He ioyeth and delights by his
presence; he bears his master company; he goes before as a spy, and
finding any ambuish, by barking he discouers and manifests the same, daring
to fight with his masters enemy. Many have been so preserved by the aid of a
Dog. He is the only dilligent keeper of things, that by his master are
committed to his trust.

Thieves having slain a man, his Dog was found keeping his dead body, lest
he should be devoured by birds or wild beasts.

Sabinus being imprisoned with all his servants, The effectual love of a Dog^e.
for Neros cause, the son to Germanicus, having his Dog with him, A place in
Rome, from whence condemned men were thrown
he could not be expeld the prison, nor from his body, when he was thrown
forth from the Genioniae scalae, but lay by howling and crying wondrously,
when bread was given him, he brought it to the mouth of his dead master.
Lastly, when the body was cast into the river of Tyber, he leapt immediately
after it, and opposing his strength against the weight thereof, labored to
keep it above the water: a great number of people being then present to behold
the wonderful love of this poor beast.

The Dog knows his household soundes of voices: The natural instinct and
gifts of a dog.
he remembers his name: call him, and he turns to the place and person. He
is not forgetful of the way, how short or long soever it be. He is easily
governed: he knows home friends from strangers. Most wise is he in
finding out his game, to rowse him from his place, or where he lies hidden: he
pursues him, and has a wonderful sent.

The boldness of this he beast is such, that fear cannot boudge against the
fury of the wildest creature, be he far greater or brauer then himself: but
especially if his master be in place to cheer him on, provoke him, and call
him by his name.

Many other things might be said for proof of his nobleness, but I refer
the Reader to the writings of both our ancient and modern historians.

Of the Horse. 2.
NOw behold the Horse, The beauty, greatness, and strength of the horse.
who will not be out gone (in perfections and Nobleness) by the Dog: first
the greatness of his body, the beauty thereof, besides his strength,
wherewith not only he overcomes the Dog, but a great many other valiantly
beasts besides.

In Horses is great and proud boldness, The Horse by war shows himself
magnaim^us.
and hereof they seem to participate in better sort (especially strength)
then is convenient for their nature. Bucephalus, the Horse to Alexander the
great, when he was royally furnished, he would never suffer himself to be
ridden by any.

This Horse being brought to the winning of Thebes, The horses of Alexander
and Caesar.
would not permit that Alexander should mount himself on any other horse.

The like is read of Julius Caesar's most beautiful horse, who would not suffer
any to come on his back, but his own master.

Horses are very easy to be maistred, Horses ea^ly (...) bold in war.
and soon enstructed. At the sound of Drum and Trumpet, he stirs and
leapes, being forward of himself to run into the battle.

The kindness of a Horse toward his master, The (...).
has been found exceeding great: for we read that some of them have wept
themselves to death, as Virgill notes of Aethon, the Horse to Pallas,
Euanders son, he wept exceedingly, while they did the funeral exsequies of
his master.

Nicomedes King of Bithinia, being dead, as Pliny reports, his Horse never
afterward would touch hay or corn, but sterued himself to death.

The Horse of Antiochus seeing his master dead, would not suffer Centauretus
of Galatia to sit quietly on his back, but threw himself down from an high
rock, and so destroyed both his ryder and himself.

Nor can it be denied, A Horse seems to have bashfulnesse.
but that Horses are bashful and modest. A horse hiding his eyes, and
perceiving himself to be conjoined with his Dame, cast himself afterward from
an high place, and there died so: this was known to happen in the territories
of Reate in Vmbria.

How many grave histories are found to discourse of horses? Some, that in a
conflict, has caught in his mouth an arm, before it could fall to the ground
and has brought the same unto his master.

Many other effectual things concerning Horses, might be spoken of, which I
omit in regard of the cause before alleged: here is enough in reason, to give
him the first place of Nobleness, if the Lion take it not from him.

Of the Lion. 3.
THe Lion strives to aspire above the Horse: Temperance in the Lion.
for among other virtues, Temperance is attributed to him. He drinks but
sildome times; he takes not his sustenance every day. When he finds himself
well fed, three days together he abstaineth from meat: which likewise were
convenient for a man that were modest and temperately given.

The Lion only (amongst other wild beasts) shows most sign of clemency, The
Lion is pitiful by nature.
toward humble and submissiue actions.

A woman that through a Forest escaped from prison, and from servitude in
Africa, to return home into her own country, met with a Lion, whom she
persuaded her self would feed on her in steed of other meat. The Lions
mildness to a woman.
But she showing humble behavior, falling on her knees to the ground, folding
her arms crosse-wise, and ye tears trickling from her eyes, so assuaged and
pacified his stearnnesse, that untouched he suffered her to part from him.

Being pursued by violence of Dogs and huntesmen, in despite of them he
abides boldly in the field, that they may look on him: but when they begin to
menace the woods, then he makes away with swiftest course.

When he is hurt, The Lions nature toward his smiter or wounder.
he well observes the man that did it, and with infinite vexation goes to
seek his launcer or smiter: and because he has but wounded him, he smites him
to the ground, but will not kill him.

In the Lion is no suspicion or deceit, The Lion ioyeth to be beloved and
regarded.
his looks are not treacherous or shameless, and in like manner he loves to
be regarded.

What friendship or kindness he has received, he preserves, and is thankful
for any benefit whatsoever.

Andronicus a servant, being fled into the deserts of Africa, The gratitude
of a Lion to his benefactor
having there cured a Lions foot, which he held up to him, as requiring help:
continued three years with the same Lion in his Cave, living all that while on
the flesh of such wild beasts, as the Lion brought him. When this kind of
life was irksome to him, he departed thence, being afterward (in process of
time) taken, and brought back to his master: when in a public spectacle, he
was delivered to be devoured of wild beasts, of which company, the same Lion
with whom Andronicus had lived (being taken before, and brought to Rome) was
one.

Immediately the Lion knew Andronicus, and in all baste ran unto him, no
otherwise, but even as one friend would do to another, that had long time
desired his loving company: which moved Caesar (then present) to enquire
further thereof, when being satisfied, he freed him from the punishment: and at
the peoples entreatie, the Lion was given to Andronicus, who got much money
afterward by him in Rome.

Beside all this, The Lion is liberal by nature.
the Lion is liberal, leaving part of his pray to other beasts that follow
him. And therefore he is called the king of all beasts terrestrial. These and
such like are his qualities, whereby it appears, that the Lion goes beyond
the other in perfection and nobility.

Of the Ape. 4.
THe Ape comes, The Ape like to man.
and would preceed the Lion, by reason of his similitude to a humane body: his
eyes, eyebrowes, forehead, mouth, teeth, breast and pappes, which other beasts
have not in that place: His arms turning toward him, his hands with fingers,
the middlemost whereof is longest; his nails distinctly placed, and his inward
parts resembling them of man.

The Ape has a quick apprehension and tractable, The Ape easily apprehends
and imitateth.
whereby he understands what he is commanded, and very gently performs the
same.

He will imitate the Shoemaker, not only in shooing himself, but in exercising
the same beside.

Many other humane actions he has beside, as eating, putting the meat to his
mouth with his hand, making himself clean from filth and noisomeness, even no
otherwise then as a man does.

It is read of some Apes, that they have played ye thieves. Their young which
are engendered in their own abiding, The nature of the Ape.
they bring abroad, ioying that other shall take them and nourish them: as
understanding what pleasure they will conceive in their ioying, which behavior
is far from all other kind of beasts.

And last of all, the Ape (in many other things) shows himself to be the most
perfect, next to man, and more near to humane nature, then any beast else
whatsoever: so consequently, most worthy to bear the palm of greatest
perfection and nobleness.

Of the Elephant. 5.
YEt the Elephant would sleep before the Ape, and as he is bigger of body
then the other, so he pretends to be of far greater Nobleness and
perfection. For great matters are read and registered of this beast, whereof,
one is, a certain nature very near to humane sense.

He reuerenceth the Stars, the Moon and the Sun. In the fields of
Mauritania, there is a certain River, whereto (at every new Moon) the Elephant
goes to purify himself very solemnly: and bathing in the water, after he
has saluted or honored the Moon, he returns back to the Forest.

His apprehension is marvelous, for if he epsy the print of a man's foot,
presently he fears to be entrapped. Then staying himself, very heedfully he
turns about, snoring, and very angerly heated.

So soon as he sees the footing, he marks how the steps follow one another,
going on, till he come to the very last of all: and having compassed each part
of ye square or walk, then he prepares to fight against man his enemy.

Elephants are of great capacity, for they have this order in their
traveling, that if any young ones be amongst them, they put them foremost,
that they following, the other may pace the more gently.

They go always in herds together, and the eldest is the guide next him, the
other that seconds him in years.

At the passage of any water, they put the yoongest foremost, lest their huge
bodies going before, should cause such a strong water fall from them, as the
yo^nger coming behind, might easily be drowned thereby.

There were certain Elephants transported in a ship of Puteoli, and being
enforced to come forth, they were afraid of the spaciousness of the Bridge,
and therefore went backward, to be guile their own conceit of the Bridges
length.

We read of an Elephant that learned the Greek Charracters, and with his
truncke or snoute wrote Greek Letters: as Aubus Gellius witnessing, says; I
my self have written this, and dedicate it to the Celtique spoils.

To break an Army, or make sport, is a thing common: he has sound memory,
and so is recorded of his name.

Were he not a beast, who could deny the Elephant to be the picture of
clemency. For Pliny writes, that if he meet a man alone in any desert
place, wandering out of his way, he will go before him, and so well guide his
way, as he will defend him from all other beasts.

Let them be publicly among women, they know no adultery, nor ever was woman
hurt among them, as they have been among other, especially men.

They are much subject to amourous passione. In Egypt, an Elephant loved a
young maiden, that sold chaplets of flowers. Another likewise loved a young
man in Ptolomies Army. And another, a young damsel, that was a Perfumer.

The substance of their love is made manifest, by delighting in the presence of
the party beloved: their fair pleasing shows, and playing on their breast
with such money as people gives them.

These things with many more, the Greek and Latin Historians have written of
them: so that now I might conclude, the Elephant (of all speediest beasts) to
be the most Noble and perfect, his quallities being so nears in neighborhood
to humane nature: but that the Ass now presents himself.

Of the Ass. 6.


But behold the Ass approaching, who comes Garlanded with glory, and with a
palm, in sign of victory, obtained by his Nobleness and perfections.
Wherein he has very much outgone the Dog, the Horse, the Lion, the Ape, the
Elephant, and whatsoever other beast ye can devise to name, not only by his
head, and the other parts of his body, but in excellency of mind, which (to
speak truth) is plainly manifested, and is much more honorable then the body,
that but serves and obeyes in the emperie of the mind.

Simplicity is so naturally propper and given to the Ass, The Ass eats of
all things without making any difference.
as in one or other kind of meat, he contends not, or makes any difference at
all. Let him come into a Gardain, sooner falls he to feeding on briars and
thistles, then on good lettice, or other roots.

In life (beyond all other beasts in the world) is he most sparing, The Ass
most sparing in life.
suffising himself with any little food. And so long time will he endure
hunger and thirst, as it is thought he rather eats to live, then lives to
eat.

To his other noble qualities, this of patience may well be adjoined, patiently
enduring all kind of labor; without any alteration, without change of place,
without kicking against, or making sign of any dislike at all. At continual
strokes, he stands steadfastly, he weighs not the wounds that comes by
stern stripes, or the grievous blows that tears his flesh to the bares
bones: but willingly applies himself always to his masters service.

He refuses no burden, The Ass refuses no load, and is good in all parts.
he goes whither he is sent, without any contradiction. He lifts not his foot
against any one, he bytes not, he is no fugitive, nor maliciously affected. He
does all things in good sort, and to his liking that has cause to employ him.
If strokes be given him, he cares not for them: and as our moderns Poeth
sings; Thou would (perhaps) he should become thy foe, The Ass cares for
no beating.

And to that end do beat him many times:
He cares nor for himself, much less thy blow.


He ioyeth in peace, and takes such deep delight therein, The Ass a lover of
peace.
as ye can find no one beast with whom he would willingly meddle. For we see
he stands peaceably conuersing with them, yea, so kindly and lovingly, as all
beasts are accounted brutish to him, in regard of carnal brotherhood,
notwithstanding they are of so many diverse kinds. He will not defend his own
part of prouender laid before him, as we see all other beasts do, nor offers
he to exclude any, that puts head with him in the maunger, not only is he
content courteously to let him have part, but to express more greatness of
mind, many times he withdrawes him self, most liberally leaving all the food
to other, though himself were oppressed with never so great hunger.

Nor needs his master provide variety of meat for him, because Poor chafe
and water are his bread and wine,
Lay on his back what heavy load thou will,
Yet mourn and even is his service thine.


Not only in eating (as we have said) is he modest, The Ass is moderate in
drinking*
being contented with allowance of simplest meat: but likewise he is most
manerly in drinking, which was very well noted by our Poet, when he said; He
does not as the Horse, vnciuillie
Duck in his head to drink: scant will he touch
The water, so is he used to modesty.


Columella affirms, The Ass addicted to many lab^^^.
that there is no beast, whereof a men has more need, then of the Ass. He
breaks the earth with the plough, draws great burdens for the mill, the
bakehouse, and carries corn from place to place, so that his labor is beyond
all other. There is no Town, no house, and lastly no place, that can employ a
more necessary beast then the Ass is.

Commodiously with neck, No beast so necessary as the Ass.
shoulders, and all his whole body, can he draw, bear, and carry up and
down, all kinds of grain, and all things necessary for the use of man: so is
there no other beast that can do it, or is so apt for it.

The Horse, Mule, and Ox, are apt to draw and bear great lading: yet enter
they not the house, or if they be brought in, it is forcibly by stripes, or
such like provoking. But the Ass, very mildely, or rather familiarly, yea, at
a nod or beck only, goes every where at his masters pleasure. Into by-places,
lodgings, halles, chambers, up the stairs into Grayneries, carrying thither
all things beseeming each place: ascending and descending very perfectly, being
not troubled with the impediment of horns, as the Ox is, nor headstrong, or
untoward to drive, as the Horse and Mule are.

His master is not molested with thought or grief, to make his provision for
all the year, as ye see what care is had for all other beasts: because (as
has been already declared) he gives himself tr all sorts of meats.

By the way as he goes (although he be laden) he takes his feeding, and let
him come into what place soever, he will catch a bit, if commodiously he may.
When it so falls out, that he happens to stand two or three days without
meat, he is not therefore offended with his master, nor makes any murmr
there at by his voice. He makes no sign of choosing his meat, by any kind of
testure; as the horse does by often neighing and stamping with his feet, if
prouender be not brought him at time convenient. But the Ass, whether he feed
or fast, still goes to bear his ordinary burdens.

And yet he is so courteous and divine,
That, as the ancient proverb speaks of him,
Water he drinks himself, for other carries wine.
We know that all kinds of beasts were created by God, for the service of man:
but what beast can ye find, wherewith man may more be served, then the Ass?
He, beside all the commodities whereof already we have spoken, yet necessary
for man: suffer the bridle to be put in his mouth, carries the saddle, and
endures all other kind of harness for horsemanship, greatly rejoicing
therein; whereby our Poet proceeding in his praise, says: His trappings are
enough for him each day,
Often with his saddle does he feast himself,
And seems a Tully, if so speak we may.


When he is on the way adorned with his master on his back, not a little
does he delight him with his sweet trot, and so paceth lightly on, without any
weariness to his ryder.

Moved (as I imagined) by these and other his honorable quallities, nature
our most loving mother give him a privilege, whereof he only might vaunt above
all other creatures in the world. And this it is, that he is never molested
with any of this hated small vermin, which we call Lice: and this very
elegantly was noted by our Poet Praelibato, when of his gifts and praises, thus
he sung.

One other gift this beast has as his own,
Wherewith the rest could not be furnished:
On man himself the same was not bestowne,
To wit: on him is never engendered
The hateful vermin that does tear the skin,
And to the bode does make his passage in.
An other privilege is sollumne to himself, and nature most bounteously has
bestowed it on him: which is (as Pliny faithfully reports) that the herb
vulgarely called Ferula, sodeinly kills all other beasts that eats thereof,
except the Ass, who thereon ^eedes boldly, without any dread of harm.

Beside this, he has no gall within him, as by Anatomy hard evidently
appeared: a proof sufficient enough, without calling Aristotle to witness,
who confesses the same in his fourth book of the parts of beasts.

Therefore it is not to be meruailed at, that so brotherlike he goes with all
beasts, and trauelleth with man so quietly: which likewise was regarded by the
same Poet, when he said: The Ass does never harm, nor use deceit,
As do the Fox and Wolf, of ravenous mind:
Who still for spoil lie all the year in wait,
He boldly braues not any other kind.
To such as rydes him, he procures content,
And is a foe to war or brabblement.


Such as delight themselves in ryding on the Ass, seem to have no common or
vulgar judgment, because they make choice of the very noblest beast, that
ever was produced by nature. Wherefore it is not to be thought strange, why our
Poet exhorts to ride on him, saying: Who would not go on foot, and yet
desires
An ambling Haqueney, or fine paced lennet:
Ride he the Ass, that never fails or tires.


Afterward, to honor the Ass the more, thus he proceeds.

A good regard (by nature) has the Ass,
In Alexandria when to ride they please,
They use none else, nor in the East like case:
But we that never can our minds appease,
But we that never can our minds appease,
With what our country yields by natures grace,
Seek Dolphins on the lulles, Woolues in the seas.
The same Poet, to confirm how pleasing the delight of ryding on the Ass is,
declares in a few verses, a little merry story, in this manner.

A Pensive man I met upon the way,
Ryding no faster then his Ass would go:
His sadness grew thereby as some did say.
One ryding faster yet in scorn would know
His cause of grief: whereon poor man (quoth he)
Ride faster, and this fit will soon be gone:
Wherewith he turned, angry as might be,
Saying: My friend, leave me, and ride thou on.
I am to journey as best likes me,
This pace so sweet, and pleasing to my mind:
Is my delight; when gallopping like thee,
Such pleasure and content I should not find.
That the Ass is a beast, as apt to be taught as the Elephant, and goes very
far beyond him, though daily experience shows us much, yet shall it not be
offensive for me to recount an Asse-fauouring history, which master John
Lion, a most diligent and faithful Cosmographer of Africa, notes in the
eight part of his great volumme, where describing what notable things are found
in Africa, he discourses on matters concerning the great City of Cayro, and
(among other) speaks thus as follows.

Hither were brought many pleasant iestes, especially such as teach Cammels,
Asses and Dogs to dance, a sight very pleasing to behold, chiefly in the
Ass: for at a certain time, one of these Iesters, when his Ass had danced a
while, speaking to him, said in this manner:

The Soldane means to erect a goodly building, wherefore he shall need to
employ all the Asses in Cayro, for carriage of lime, stone, and other necessary
things. At these words, the Ass sodeinly fell to the ground, turning his
heels up toward heaven, his belly swollen, and his eyes closed, even in such
sort as if he had been dead. Then fell the man to many lamentable
circumstances, how he had lost his Ass, and entreated the by standers, that
they would help to requite him with another, and therefore to make some
gathering among them: yet they said, they did not imagine his Ass to be dead,
albeit he stirred not, but knew his counterfeit drift was, to get himself some
money and prouender for his beast. Then they turned to the Ass, bidding him to
arise: but he stirred not, although they labored him with many stripes, and
could not get to rise by all their endeavor: then the man pursuing his former
practice, said to the standers by;

Gentlemen, I give ye all to understand, how the Soldane has caused to be
published by sound of Trompet, that to morrow all the people in Cayro must go
forth to see his triumph: commanding all the fair gentlewomen in the City,
to be mounted on goodly Asses, afterward, the beasts shall eat good barley,
and drink the pure water of Nylus. No sooner had the Iester spoken these
words, but the Ass leapt up on his feet, and bravely showed signs of exceeding
contentment: whereon the Iester thus began again.

I hear it for credible, that a certain peazant of the Country where I was
borne, has even now made a request to me, that this fair Ass of mine, might
serve his foul ill favored wife to ride on. The Ass, at these speeches, (as
if he had humane understanding) laid down his cares flat, and began to go
about halting, feyning as if he had been stark lame. Then said the Iester;
does young and fair women please thee? Heereat the Ass merely lifted up his
head, even as if he had replied, that they did.

His master proceeding said; Here are many both young and fair: show me
which of them best likes thee. The Ass running to make search, where diverse
women stood to behold him, and making choice of the very fairest and most
honorable, to her he went, and touched her with his head. Then all the
standers by cried with a loud voice: Behold the Lady of the Ass, as making a
merry jest of the matter. And the man mounting on his Ass, rode to show his
quallities else where.

But what greater example of an Asses instruction can we allege, then that
which Ammonius Alexandrinus, a Philosopher of no mean esteem, affirms? to
wit, that he had an Ass was his scholar, and came ordinarily to hear his
readings. This meruell moved our Poet to sing: There was an Ass once so
ingenious,
As most attentively he heard the skill:
Of that praise-worthie man Ammonius.


But whither wander I, to gather matter of his praise in this print? when it
might suffice me only to speak of him, that which follows in our Poets
Canto, that is: In sooth I think that who so gives his mind,
T'obserue his iestures, by good proof shall see:
To Mathematique skill he is enclinde,
Because without reach of Astrology:
Above the rest he does the spring descrie,
For always by his voice the same is told,
When as he feeds, and delueth with his foot:
Or to the earth holds down his head, be bold,
Rain does ensue, to bide is no boot.


How wise and well advised (beside all this) the Ass appears to be, I think
there is not any man in the world but remembers and knows it well enough:
because he will never return any way, where he has once stumbled or fallen. And
although he may be enforced thereto by his masters stripes, yet he has a very
respective care of his stepping his foot in the former place of offense: as
with great wit our Poet notes the same, saying; Oh that the Ass were but so
happy blessed,
To have a tongue (as men have) to disclose
How much his thoughts with virtues are possessed,
Then would his deeds reveal what hidden goes.
For in what place so ere he haps to fall,
Heel'e nere return to hurt himself withal.


We cannot deny, but that the Ass serves as a spectacle, and most singular
example of patience, because it is a usual thing for fathers, mothers, and
such like, simply to advise their children or friends, that in affairs of
this world, they should seem to have the back of an Ass: meaning, that it
behoues them (in all things) to arm themselves with patience.

Should we spare to speak of his constancy, wherewith how much he is endued,
the Ass which was so displeased with them of Padua, does very well declare.
For they having drawn into the City, the water of * Bacchiglione, where
first of all the Ass used ordinarily to drink: so outragiously did he show
himself offended at this water mingling, as it is impossible ever after to
make him drink of that water. And herehence grew the Proverb: All Padua had
not the power to make the Ass drink, by reason he perseuered most constantly
in his honorable resolution. In regard whereof, if we would give him that due,
which we owe as a debt.

A hood we should provide the Ass by right,
As to a person that so well deserves it:
Shapte like the birds that sings still by night.
But to keep nothing from him that is reputed of worth, yet hold him still in
esteem, and render him such honor as is convenient for him: let it suffice
us, before we offer in ought to despise him, that first we call to memory,
that through contemning and reproving the Ass, some notable danger has
ensued: yea, matter of death.

Who knows not what happened to great King Mydas, because he offered wrong to
the Ass? Let them look on his picture, and they shall see his ears shaped
like to the Asses. And therefore very wisely our Poet wrote of him, saying.

King Mydas that the Ass so injured,
To his own shame by Bacchus was reproou'd:
And had such chastisement as he deserved.
But let us speak of some, who by the means of such wrongs offered, have
brought themselves to the extreemest point of death.

There are now certain years past, since I being in Zara, a city of
Sclauonia, I saw one led to the gallows to be executed, whose name was
Iiacomo Schiffalasino, who being first brought to prison among other
malefactors, and by the discreet Judge appointed to the torture, because he
should confess wherein they had offended, (he not having any detection
wherewith to charge them, or that was sufficient to touch them as they should
be.) But first he began to consider on the surname of Schiffalasino, and
approving that surname for a sufficient detection, terrified him thereby so
strictly, and in such sort, as the poor man confessed the faults, which both
he and his companions had committed. Whereupon, he caused him with the rest, to
be hanged by the necks, and (as the common proverb is) sent them to shake
their heels against the wind.

If this example may not be thought sufficient, let us then call to mind the
death of Philemon the Philosopher, who took offense at one of his Asses, that
in token of a singular or magnificent mind, put forth himself to eat of
preserved figs, which were served in to the Table for his master. Hereat he
fell into such extremity of laughter or derision, that there sodeinly he died;
as our Poet very excellently singing, affirms, Philemon when his Ass he had
espied,
To eat of Figs prepared for his table:
Such was his laughter, that therein he died.


But if contrariwise we would consider, what good and happy success has
ensued, such encounters wherein the Ass has received no injury, we might the
more easily resolve to honor and hold them in such esteem, as fortunate
divining auguries have deserved to be. And whosoever has made diligent
observation of them, shall find they have saved the lives of many, yea in
doubtful battles and most bloody fights, they showed before hand assured
victory.

What saved the life of great Caius Marius, who had been Consul six times, but
only an Ass? whose iestures be diligently observing, when by the Minturnes he
was committed prisoner to Fauuias house: where he noted how swiftly he rusht
out of door, and ran to drink at the nearest fountain.

He then aduising on this progress of the Ass, said: That the Gods had sent
this beast before hand, to signify, that by his sodeine running to the
^ountaine, he should receive thereby most certain augurie, that there was no
other mean left for him to escape with life, then by water. Whereupon, (having
gotten forth of the aforesaid prison) he went and imbarqued himself at the
next port, and fled into Africa, where he saved himself.

Vincentio Cartari, in his book of Images of the ancient Gods, says, that
the Ambraciotti and Sicioni, people of Greece, being in war together, an
ambush was laid in a wood, to entrap them that were to issue forth of the
City. At the same time it happened, that a man driving his Ass toward the
City, with certain lading on his back, his beast (by chance) sented a she
Ass going before, which made him follow after, braying so loud as possibly he
could. And pacing on faster then his master would willingly he should, both
the Asses (at length) began to bray together, each beast answering the other,
falling and rising with their voices, in such strange and confused noise, that
the Sicioni (terrified with the murmr) were glad to be gone from where they
lay hid, and so betook themselves to flight. The Ambraciotti being advertised
thereof, pursued and overthrew them.

Afterward they made a goodly Ass of metal, which they sent to be offered at
Delphos, in the Temple of Apollo, for a memory of their good fortune by the
Ass: and which they persuaded themselves had not else happened to them, but
only by that singular beast.

Higinus the Historian, records, that when the Gods Bacchus and Vulcan
fought with the Giants, they entered the battle mounted on Asses.

We read likewise in Hedorotus, the father of the Grecian history, that Darius
going to war against the Scithians, led with him a great number of Asses,
that only by their noise and braying, made all the enemies horses take them to
their heels. Afterward the Scithians coming to assault Persia, their horses
were again so affrighted with the dreadful voice of Asses, as they fled, and
could not be enforced to abide.

Our Poet, by these and such like effects, being earnestly solicited, very
elegantly sings in this manner.

Forced to flight by his commanding cry,
A mighty Army did the Ass dismay:
By Scithians brought to war, yet glad to fly.
Behold then, whether we have good cause or no, to hold the Ass in all
estimation: yet in these unthankful days of ours, we see him fold for a most
base, or rather a vile price: albeit in elder ages he was of dearer value then
ever was any other beast in the world.

Marcus Varro rehearses, that in his time an Ass was sold for seventy
Sestertiaes: which according to Budeus and other Computists, amounts to the
sum of a thousand and five hundred crowns. Moreover he adds hereto, that
he saw four Asies rated at four hundred Sestertiaes.

Pliny testifies, that an Ass was sold for a very great number of Crowns,
albeit the certain sum I do not now readily remember, but any one may read
it truly set down, in the seventh book of his natural history.

Lampridius tells us, that Heliogabalus the Emperor, when he would bestow a
magnificent gift on the people of Rome, used to give them certain Asses:
meaning, that a special and rare estimation consisted therein, because indeed
it was the gift of an Emperor.

Marcus Polus, in the first book of his voyage to the great Cane of Cathaia,
the eleventh Chapter, where he speaks of the Persian kingdom, says; In this
kingdom are there likewise Asses, the very fairest and greatest that are in
the world, which are wont to be sooner sold then horses. And the reason is,
because they eat less, and bear greater burdens: beside, they dispatch more
miles in a day, then the Horses or Mules are able to do, nor can they endure so
much labor as the Asses will.

Wherefore the Merchants of those parts going from one Province to another,
pass through great deserts and sandy places, where grows (...) herbs or
grass at all: and by reason of the great distance of wells and sweet water,
they make their days journey the longer, wherefore the more gladly they use
these Asses, because they are swifter, run better, and serves them with very
small expenses. They use Camells like wise, who bear great lading, and are not
chargeable: but yet they are not so swift as their Asses.

But let us admit that the Ass had not these virtues, nor that there were
found in him any of the quallities whereon we have discoursed: yet can we not
deny, but he has one only gift, which in Nobility and perfection, makes him
alone to surpass any other kind of beast whatsoever (I mean those
unreasonable) that ever nature brought forth. For the never meant to produce
the kinds of he or she Mules, whereas the Ass is the only cause they are
engendered, and maintains them in the world, to the great commodity of man, as
daily experience sufficiently testifies. Wherefore our Poet thus sings thereof.

The Ass was reckoned by his great deserts
Most honorable, and who him molested:
According to their faults were punished.
But because I would draw to an end, I conclude, that of his honorable
qualities, worthy all commendation, I have not as yet declared the least
particular: by reason they are such and so great, that whosoever would collect
them all together, may as easily convey all the water of the sea into a little
glass, or contend with a thing that of it self is infinite.

Yet will I not so give over, but adioyne to the end of this first part, that
which our Part firmly believed of the Ass, when he said, In learned Schools,
for wisdom might he read,
But infinite I know therewith dispense:
And do that office in his excellence.


In conclusion, for whatsoever either has been or may be said, the nature of
the Ass is good, pleasing, humble and courteous: which four rare quallities,
are far contrary to the theft, pride, unruliness and villainy of other beasts.

The end of the first part.
The Nobleness of the Ass.
The second part.
ALl the matters whereof we have spoken in the former part, to show the
perfection and Nobleness of the Ass, I may safely affirm to be of little or
no avail at all, or profitable in ought to humane kind: considering what
benefit is to be received by his excrements, as also from the members of his
body, after he is dead.

But to the end that all men (of what condition soever) may perceive I speak
nothing but the truth, I am determined in this second part, to make choice of
other matters then is before. Beginning with his flesh, which when the Ass is
young, is very sauourie and delicate, and may compare with all other sorts of
flesh whatsoever.

And though it be not in use, as the flesh of the Calfe, Kidde, or such like:
questionless the reason may be, that nature, the most wise preserver of all
kinds of beasts, has provided that man shall not be drawn with any desire
to eat thereof, but first has rather chosen to put into our minds, that such
as hear the meaning of such flesh, are wont to make a scornful look thereat.
And this may be to the end, that if perhaps men should taste thereof, they would
become so coveting thereafter, as despising al other kinds of flesh, they
would give themselves only to feed on the Ass, whereby sodeinly might ensue
the destruction of the Asses kind: and so they should become of such dear
value, as they were in the times whereof already we have spoken, as Marcus
Varro saw them sold, and Pliny reports.

Herehence doubtless would arise this hurt, that poor men, who maintain
themselves and family by the help of an Ass only, should not be able to buy
any, not having the means to lay out so great a sum of money.

That this kind of flesh in sweetness excel all other, the noble men in the
kingdom of Scotland are so persuaded: for I have heard of a Scottish
Gentleman, who in Sciences has made so great profit, as the principal
students in all Italy have not a little admired him, when he heard that such a
miserable slaughter of Asses was made in Mantua. The aforesaid Gentleman
affirmed to me, that no banquet in Scotland was reputed of any value, where the
flesh of a young Ass was not to be had.

In the good and memorable time of Pius Quartus, began they not to make a
usual service thereof, both in feasts and banquets of greatest importance? And
if the round table of the mighty Lord of T. called Triclinium, could speak,
hardly would be credited the quantity of Asses flesh, which in those times was
eaten thereon.

And did not Mecenates use Asses flesh, as a food most delicate?

We read at a certain time, in the City of Samaria, an Asses head was sold
for four score pence. And they that so bought them, ^ed thereon with such
sweetness and delight, as if they had eaten the very daintiest meat, that
could be bought for a greater price.

Plutarche rehearses, that in a certain war King Artaxerxes made, an Asses
head was likewise sold in his Camp for seventy Drachmaes.

But leave we the Asses head in so great esteem to be eaten, as also the flesh
wherein the bones thereof are closed: and speak we of the last and chief
benefit, which we receive by the head of the Ass, when it is cut off, and the
flesh parted from it.

What merueilous properties and virtue is included in the said Asses head, the
poor husbandman well knows, and great proof is made thereof in many places of
Italy, as also diverse other territories beyond the mountains.

Hence ensues it, that in the other parts of the land about Brescia, we see
in many places, the heads of Asses fixed on the ridge of walls and buildings:
which in opinion of the vulgar was, because Goblins and dancing Fairies that
run in courses, have been seen to play up and down upon them.

The Lapidaries say, that there is a stone in the Asses neck, called the Ass
stone, which by the opinion of Magitians, has no small virtue: and perhaps it
may be the same stone, which Albertus Magnus calls the stone Asia.

Dioscorides writes, that the liver of an Ass eaten fasting, helps them that
are afflicted with the falling sickness. The selfsame power and virtue (says
he) has the Asses hoof beaten into powder, and drunk in white wine.

The dung of an Ass, wrapped in a linen cloth, and laid on his head that has
much blood abounding in his nose, does withdraw it, and makes it perfectly
sound, as al Authors that have written in Physic do affirm.

Pliny says, that the drinking of an Asses milk, is the chiefest remedy to
help them that have received poison. Hereto we may join, that it is a present
remedy for the swelling of the joints, as also it cures the gout.

Besides this, he adds, that the same milk mingled with a quantity of
honey, is a most admirable help for them troubled with the Dissenteria,
especially if it be drunk fasting.

Finally, the universal Academie of Physicians do herein agree, that the
drinking of an Asses milk, cures many and sundry infirmities, whereof my
skill serves me not to make report.

But well I know, and thereof am able to yield a most certain testimony, that
to an especial friend of mine, who not long since was greatly grieved with the
stone, report was made of the virtue of this milk, whereof he drinking as the
very latest remedy of hope, not only received the most singular benefit of
recovery from the point of death, which he saw him unlikely to escape; but
likewise attained his former health and good disposition.

Suetonius Tranquillus reports, that Poppea wife to Nero, every morning used to
wash all her body with Asses milk: only to cherish and maintain health,
beauty and softness, as also to make the body amiable and delicate. For this
purpose she had five hundredth Asses continually kept, and such especially as
very lately before had foled their young: which use, from that time to this
present day, has been observed by many of our greatest Matrons, and among all
the rest, by Ione that was the Queen of Naples.

But to speak some what concerning the virtue of this beasts skin, do we not
read, that if it be taken and used as a mantle, to wrappe about a child while
he is in the Cradle, that it causes the virtue of courage and boldness in
such sort, as when he comes to years, he shall never know the man to be
affraide of?

See we not likewise by daily experience, that such as sleep upon an Asses
skin, or use it upon them as a covering, shall be free from vermin or Lice
about them?

Hereof proceeds it, that masters, masters mates, mariners, captains and
such like, as serve eisher in ships or galleys, have ordinarily these skins
about them.

The forenamed virtue, quallitie and gift, considered by our Poet, altogether
enforced him to sing in this manner.

I will not stand to tell the long discourse.
Of Dioscorides, Pliny, and the rest:
Whose skill in physic sprang from soundest sense,
Vrgde them to write great matters of this beast,
Concerning medicine all of sovereign might,
Which for good cause I spare here to recite.
Yet will I not forbear to rehearse, that if we have such consideration, as
ought be used about matter of great profit, we shall receive some by this
skin, when it is labored and made wih holes in many places, that it may
serve as Sieve or Searse, wherewith commodiously we take up corn, or whatsoever
kind of pulse beside, to cleanse it from the dust and other matter of annoyance:
we shall then be enforced to confess, that without the benefit of this skin,
very hardly could we deal in such business.

Hereto let us adioyne another commodity, which we receive by this skin in
the sharp assaults of war, seeing thereof is made the Drums and Tamburines,
with other such like instruments fit for the use of war: which being to such
proportion as they should be, and smitten on (as men are instructed in the
manner how) they deliver such an apt sound, as awakes and cheares the mind of
a man, although he were never so cowardly or timorous, provoking him to the
battle, making him withal, fierce and courageous, be the assault never so
hot and perilous.

What shall we then say of the Asses bones? Is it not a thing especially to be
noted, that the marrow being taken forth, such a kind of Flute is of them, as
yeeldes a very sweet and pleasing harmony?

This was the cause which moved the Ambassador of the great Duke of Moscouia,
that went to Rome the last year, to demand whereof those instruments that we
call Cornets, which in honor of him (among other musical instruments) were
sounded when he entered his lodging, which the noble Governor of Verona had
provided for him. And being answered that they were of wood, covered with this
beasts skin, he meruailed greatly thereat. And albeit he granted, that they
gave a most pleasing melody, yet he said, they were not comparable to them
made of Asses bones in his own Country.

Then may we safely (on the Asses behalf) affirm with our Poet.

Alive and dead, in flesh and bone he soundes. I am resolved then to read no
further in what I have spoken of, concerning the quallitie, virtue and
properties of the Ass, and of his bones: because if I would, it were
convenient for me (according to our Poets opinion) principally to recount.

How Sampson with the Iawe bone of an Ass,
Vanquished the Philistines: And from one tooth,
A mighty stream of water forth did pass.
Then at this Canto^s end let us conclude this point, only we must needs
except, what may not well be shadowed with silence, because it is little less
then miraculous, and is rehearsed by Apuleius, in his book of Country matters.
If any man bitten by a Scorpion, does sodeinly mount upon an Ass, sitting
with his face toward the Asses tail, all the venom of the Scorpion which the
man has received, shall part from him, and enter into the Asses body whereupon
he rydes, and the Ass shall presently be seen swollen, changed, and
complaining, as if he had been bitten by the Scorpion: so that the man shall be
soundly recovered from any peril of the poison. The proof hereof, the before
named Author affirms, that by himself it has very often and many times been
seen. If men then receive such a benefit by the Ass, he that should conceal
it from being known, I leave to the judgment of the Asse-fauouring Reader.

Likewise let him be so censured, that spares to speak, what Pliny rehearses
in his second book and twentieth Chapter, that of the corruption in the Asses
carcass, is engendered the black Fly called a beetle: which Fly, as is said
in the thirtieth book and second Chapter, the people of Egypt worshipped as a
God, persuading themselves, that it was the very image of the Sun. And this
was, because all the Beetles (as Elianus writes, and Snydas likewise
confirms) are male-kinde, and have no female among them: in this manner then
is their engendring continued.

The seed of the Ox, Horse, or dung of the Ass, spilt or spread on the ground,
which afterward they turn together with their feet, making thereof the fashion
of a bed, and so lie thereon, and circle it for twenty eight days together,
when it receives forcible heat at the time for them to take life, and thus
appears new engendered Beetles thereon, which are like to the Sun, because he
likewise spreads on the earth his virtue seminall. Thus by his continual
course are they increased, flying up toward heaven and the heat of his beams,
and as the Move renews every month, so does this kind of Beetle still
renew.

Now let us speak a little of the virtue which naturally appertains to the
hoof of the Ass, according to Pliny, when it is boiled in Asses milk, and
applied to weak sighted eyes, it helps them greatly, taking all offense
whatsoever from them, and cleares the sight most miraculously.

Plutarche writes, in the life of Alexander the great, that the poison given
him to drink, was an exceeding cold water, gathered from a certain Rock in
the Country of Nouaria, which cannot be kept but in an Asses hoof: for all
other things are not able to hold it, but will break by reason of the extreme
coldness.

Such then, and so many are the stupendous actions, notable graces, and
supernatural gifts or quallities of the Ass, which can never be sufficiently
commended: as therefore he deserves to have the chief place, amongst all
brutish beasts living on the earth. By just equity whereof, our Poet being
entirely moved, thus sings.

If I would sing his due deserved praise,
This, not another leaf would me suffice:
To name the virtues that him signifies.
And gives to him the palm of following days.
Hence is it, that we need make no great marvel, why the ancient
Astrologers, moved by his so many natural perfections, Nobleness and
excellency, do honor him in heaven with the name of two stars, placed in
the sign of Cancer, called Asinelle, and in an other place they set down
three, named Praesepe Asinelli, the Asses maunger.

Nor can I but declare (as succeeding in this place) the great and diligent
regard, which evermore the ancient magnificent Lords had, to make (as one
would say) the Asses name immortal, persuaded, moved, and provoked thereto,
by his so many rare and excellent qualities, in abundant sort bestowed on him
by nature, and special benignity of celestial favor.

To the end I may then with some gratitude of mind, leave such a memory to
posterity, as shall make the Asses name to be perpetual: note how these
things following have been entitled, and honored with the name of the Ass.

1. Cities. 2. Castles. 3. Boroughes. 4. Villages, 5. Islands. 6. Seas. 7.
Ports. 8. Mountains. 9. Rivers. 10. Bridges. 11. Streets. 12. High ways. 13.
Valleys. 14. Towers. 15. Fountains. 16. Sepulchers. 17. Books. 18. Laws. 19.
Fruits. 20. Feasts. 21. Games. 22. Oaths. 23. Proper names. 24. Families. 25.
Proverbs.
And to the end this which I have said may appearantly be known, binding my
self willingly to the Asses name, it will be hard for me to gather, and consort
in this place two named things, for each of the five and twenty before
declared: that only bear memory of the Ass, and so shall do for ever.

Nor shall I need to collect any more then two of each, though for every one I
could set down ten at the least: because I am loath to be troublesome to my
self, as also fearful to hinder any from imitating the steps of such
Asse-friends.

1 One of the most principal Cities in Persia, not far off from the great
City of Selencia, is called in the Persian tongue Zaucamora, which in our
language, is as much to say, as the Asses City.

2 In Peloponesus, or Morea, if we will so call it, near to the sea that lies
toward the West, is the City named Asinari.

1 In Calabria, at the Marquesate of Oluito, there is a Castle called, Castello
del gl'Asini.

2 In Friuli, about ten miles distant from Asola, is an other, termed Castello
Asinino.

1 In the territory of Placentia, is a village named Villa discontral Asino.

2 Near to Rome, as ye go toward Braciano, is a Village that hight Asina bella.

1 In the territory of Siena, is a Borough called Asina luuga.

2 On the way as we ride from Bologna to Florence, between Loiano and
Pietramala, we come to a Borough termed Scarcalasino.

1 Asinetta, is an Island at the mouth of the red sea, not much distant from
the land on the East side, where stands the strong City of Aden.

2 In the Eupine sea, called Mare Maiore, on the North part, near to Palus
Meotides, there is a little Islande, which abounds with sweet water, and it
is called Isola Asinina.

1 Olaius Magnus, a most diligent writer of the North parts, affirms, that
the sea which from Norway we sail by, to the Province of Lapponia called
Schiuziroffi, in our language is termed Mare Asinone.

2 The great spacious (...) which from the Realm of Ireland, passes on to
Iseland* of the Country people is called Mare Asinesco.

1 In the Aegean sea, near to the Castle which vulgarely is called Dardanelli,
on the side of Asia; is to be seen a most fair Port, though not over big,
and it is named Porto Asinino.

2 In the Isle of Cyprus, before we arrive at the haven of Famogosta, a Port is
found, which is not very sure, for yielding shelter from the cold Northeast
wind, it is called Porto Asinetto.

1 Ten miles of from Florence, may ye discern the mountain Asinaro, where the
obseruant Friars of a Monastery builded on the top of the mountain, daily
serve God.

2 On the part where Abrutium is seated in Italy, is Mount Asinello, on the top
whereof is a Church dedicated to S. Eustatius.

1 Near the water Treuio, by Abrucium, is a little River named the River of
Asino.

2 In the territories of Ragusa, or Epidaurus, within six miles distance of
the City, runs the River Asinesco, which is a nauigable water, and has a
defenceable Port at the Sea mouth.

1 Among the ruins of Aquileia, which was destroyed by Attyla, is to be seen
part of a most sumptuous Bridge, at the head whereof, stands a huge Ass of
very pure marble, which with her Dugges seeds two young Asses, and this Bridge
is yet called Pont' Asinone. On the other part of the same Bridge now ruined,
as the eldest men of the Country avouch, was another goodly Ass made like the
former, the relics whereof are yet to be there seen on the ground.

2 In Cicilia, near to the City of Catauea, within two miles, there passes
an indifferent great River, over which is a goodly Bridge of wood, whereon
four Carts may easily meet together, and it is named Pous Asini.

1 The large street, whereby we pass along from the Market place, unto the
Cathedral Church of S. Mauritus, in the City of Lypara, is called Asinesca
street.

2 In the ancient City of Perugia, there is a street which direct to the
Monastery of Couented Friars of S. Fraunces, and it is termed the Paradise of
the Asini.

1 In Friuli, on certain high down bearing hills, where the ancient family
of the Gordes of Sauorgnani have their jurisdiction, is a way that leads to a
certain Castle of theirs, named, Here fell I with mine Ass. Which words are
there engraven in very hard stones, that so fair a memory of the Ass might
not be forgotten.

2 In Apulia is a great way of ten large miles, by which they pass from the
great Tower, till they come to Mount Iargano, it is called Longasina.

1 There is a vale by the way, as ye go along from Fabriano to Cammerino,
near to the shipping place of the ancient Varrani, now Lords of the said
City, and it is named the vale of Asini.

2 Near to the parts of Heluetia, among the Cantons where Zurich is named, ye
have a valley called Asinari.

1 At the City of Bologna, there is a Tower which for height contendeth with
the stars, called the Tower of the Asinelli.

2 A Tower of lesser height is to be seen in the Province of Basilicata,
otherwise called Lucania, without the walls of the City of Venafro, on the
West side, and it is termed the Tower Asino.

1 A Fountain plentifully abounding with water, is to be seen on the
confines, between Pipeono and the Castle of Souino, it is nominated, Fountain
Asini.

2 Passing the River Pauara, and leaving the corner of the way, whereby we go
to Modoua, there turning on the left hand, and within a quarter of a mile
onwarde, stands a Fountain beautified with engraven stone, yet passing under
a goodly vault by three great pipes of metal, well near rotten and defaced;
out of them comes great abundance of water, and it is called Fountain Asinara.

Having so lately mentioned the City of Modeua, I call to mind a memory
concerning the Ass, which the said City long time kept among other things,
with good regard. And it was a milking paile, wherein a citizens Ass of Bologna
had drunk: for it happened, that about matter of the confines, wars ensued
between them of Bologna and Modeua. They of this part, at one time among
other, made a tumultuous invasion on the territories of Bologna, and finding
some encounter which they looked not for, by reason of their unorderly
proceeding: they were enforced to return, yet they sought for some booty in
the stable of Bolognian Citizen, from whence the master thereof had but
lately before taken forth his Ass, and for fear escaped away thereon. There
found they the milking paile, wherein the Ass before spoken on had drunk,
which they took away with them, and mounting it on the point of a Lance,
after the manner of carrying some great Trophee, they returned there with to the
City, all the people of Modeua running to gaze thereon, as at a most rich
spoil gotten by conquest of war: which by them long time after was kept as
an especial example: as we read in the book called the Annals of Lombardie.

But now return we to the other memories of the Ass.

1 At the City of Vercellis, in the Church of Saint Lazarus, is to be seen
a goodly ancient Sepulcher of Marble, on the couerture whereof, is very
linely carved an Ass lying along very formally, even as the figures of men
are shaped upon Toombes. And there are certain letters engraven at the feet
of the said Ass: but nothing can be made of any syllable, by reason they are
so defaced by antiquity.

Here I confess, and that for some reverence, which dutifully I bear to the
Ass, not to have found any other Sepulcher, carrying remembrance of the Ass,
but only this one: albeit I have spared no labor, in reading over books
sufficient, beside all other possible diligence employed.

1 Apuleius wrote a book entitled, the golden Ass.

2 Plautus composed a Comedy, called Asinaria.

I could never know what book that was, which gave matter to our Poet thus to
sing.

Now do I call to mind a new rare praise,
Worthy so many Dukes and Emperors,
Which in the Asses book is found always.
Wherefore I am now content to prosecute the search thereof no further, in hope
another time to understand more of it.

1 Bartolus, the famous Lawier, in L. 1. F. de sup. L. leg. speaks of a law,
which wills, that the Testator making a bond of his mooueables to a
stranger, and letting passing his settled good to his kindred, that rightfully
should as heirs succeed: this law limitteth and appointteth, that his Ass
(if he happened to have any) is not comprehended among the mooueables. But as a
good, stable and settled, without any other implication, the same Ass shall
remain to his kindred y^ do inherit the goods seated.

And this law (for this purpose) do I account sufficient, because I am loath to
trouble myself, in searching huge law Libraries for any other: for my labor
therein would exceed the Asses.

1 No sort of fruits are found, but bear name of some beast, or of a man, as
the Apple of Appius, the Prune Maximillian, of Maximillianus: and that of the
Ass, which is the sort of Prunes, named great, good, fair and yelow, being
rightly termed the Prune Asinare.

2 There is a kind of Cucumber, which much avails for medicine, and it is
called Cucumber Asini.

2 Nouius Marcellus records, that the Romans of old would celebrate the
feast of the gardein God, whereat the husbands children only should be present,
each one outbrauing other upon his Ass, and so ryding on this beast, three
times they would circle the temple about. Afterward they should cast lottes,
and his Ass to whom the lot fell, must have his throat cut; with whose blood
each filling a little glass vial, they would strive to master one another by
throwing the same in the face of statue, which represented the God of the
gardein.

2 Herodotus a most ancient writer reports, that the Greeks were wont yearly
to celebrate the feast Asinaria: in memory of that notable victory, which the
Athenian had against the Persians, near to the River Asinone.

1 Among all the pastimes, wherein most and least delighted concerning table
play, was the game called Scarralasino, to wit, vnlead the Ass: whereat, by
imitation of the Ass, who suffers himself to be ridden by all persons
indifferently, all the standers by may play, and easily learn it without any
labor.

2 Schoole-children were went to put some heavy thing on their head, and bind
an arm behind being first hood winckled; then would the rest run about him
thus used, singing.

Unload the Ass, and if he feel not,
Look to his standing, that he reele not.
1 Diodorus Siculus declares, that at such time as the Isle of Scicile was
governed by tyrants, there was a statute, that a woman offending in adultrie
should free her self, swearing she had not committed adultery, being brought
before the head of an Ass, which for this purpose was kept in the temple
dedicated to God Bacchus.

2 There was an use among the Gentiles, that they (in jest) willing to give an
oath to children, they would fasten a lamp at their garment, with a haubercher
after the fashion of a long triangle, and holding thereby, say, Swear here
upon this ear of the Ass.

Here it remains to speak of them, that of old have been named by the Ass,
and of families likewise, which have called themselves of the Ass. But because
they are infinite, and all the skins in the land of Madiam cannot contain
them: I intend only to name two, as hitherto of the rest I have done, leaving
the endless number of the other, to them that list employ their pains about
such a business.

But yet among so many, I must not forget that famous nauall victory, which the
ancient Persians brought with them out of Egypt: and Noacles a most excellent
Painter in those days, desirous to remember the same by his Art, painted an
Ass, drinking at the River Nilus, in despite of the Crocadile: which being
overcome in power, and thus subjected, stood patiently to see him drink, as
Pliny reports.

1 Then not to let pass in silence, the names of men called Ass, as their
proper names, I may first allege the name of Asinius Gallus, who was son to
Scipio Affricanus.

And who desires to know an infinite number of men, both Senators and of other
discents, which by proper name were called Asini, let him read Ciceros
Epistles to Atticus, where he shall find an endless beadrole.

2 Here may I well insert the name of a famous man, a modern Citizen of
Florence, of the ancient family of the Asini: to wit, master Asino, whom the
History of Florence faithfully reports, to reform and correct the statutes of
the merchaunts, for which his Asse-gloring name will for ever be renowned in
that City.

Pindarus, and Macrobius, in the fifth book of his Saturnalles affirms, that
the famous Greek, which made the Horse of wood, by means whereof the
Grecians got the City of Troy, was called Asinon: whereas Virgill naming him
Sinon, we may safely auouth, that the good Poet, who favored the Troyan part,
from whence the Romans had their original, was procured to alter the name of
the aforesaid Asinon: even no otherwise then the Grecians did, when by public
decree he was censured with banishment, that should speak of his name, who to
get himself fame, set on fire the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. And so to
conquer with oblivion such a famous Asinon, whose praise well deserves to live
for ever: they have taken away his names first letter, and in steed of Asinon,
call him Sinon.

1 We have already declared, that in Florence lives the noble Family of the
Asini.

2 In Pisa likewise is there another, and in Bologna that of the Asinelli,
where also is still celebrate the famous Tower, which the noble Asinelli in
elder times erected. But to what end trouble I my wits in this manner, seeking
by the light of an Asse-friending lanthorn, for names, sirnames, and families?
seeing our Poet himself thus sings.

If I should speak more matter of import,
By grounded reason I might safely say,
The Ass in men that are of learned sort,
Seems to have privilege and greatest sway.
It Is too well known, wherefore I silent sit,
As having thereof neither spoke or writ.
Beside all this, I do not marvel a little, seeing such an infinite company
of fools, who being honored with the excelling name of Ass, will yet run
he adiong to brabble and quarrel, when settling to their weapons, they will
flash and cut they care not with whom. All which happens, by reason it is no
common use, to apply the name of so Noble a beast to man: who notwithstanding
cares not for the ignomie, to be termed after other wicked beasts more
unbeseeming, as to be called Bear, Lion, Dog, and such like.

This was the cause, that our Poet moved by a thousand reasons, says; Nor
know I wherefore choler does so daunt,
A man when he is termed by the Asses name:
Whereof (me thinks) much rather he should vaunt.


Now proceed we to speak of the Asses Proverbs.

1 When a man will not repeat his words again, he uses to say, It is May no
more, or May is past: so things are avoided from twice speaking. The meaning
here of may be this, because the first month that Asses do make known to the
world, their loving nature to each other, they send forth their goodly,
sweet, and continual brayings, whereof they form a melodious and
proportionable kind of music. Nor think I that any of our immoderne
Musicians can deny, but that their song is full of exceeding pleasure to be
heard: because therein is to be discerned, both concord, discord, singing the
mean, the beginning to sing in large compass, then following on, to rise and
fall, the half note, whole note, music of five voices, firm singing by
four voices, three together, or one voice and a half. Then their variable
contrariety amongst them, when one delivers forth a long tenor or a short,
the pausing for time, breathing in measure, breaking the minim, half minim, or
very least moment of time. Last of all, to hear music of five or six
voices, changed to so many of Asses, is amongst them to hear a song of world
without end.

Hence is it, that a man being so attentive to hear this kind of Ass
music, cannot listen or lend his ear to what else is said to him, and
therefore it is lawful, by particular priulledge of the said May month, to
repeat the words to such, as without offense would learn them by heart: nor
shall it be taken so unmannerly done, as it were in any of the other months.

2 When Apuleius saw himself transformed into an Ass, he resolved to show
his master, by the effects of all his personage, the great love he bare him.
So after the manner of the house Dog, keeping his hinder feet on the ground,
and rising up with his former, he so clambred upon his master, as but a while
before he had seen the little Dog do. And albeit his kind Assehith intent
he disclosed to his master, yet such manner of salutation in him was not taken
in good part. Hereof then it comes, that when a man suspects or misdeemes of an
others familiarity, he uses to say, He plays the Asses pastime with me.

So was it went to be said; What the Ass gives in, such he receives. But
because this Proverb is evidently of it self, as if it were Omne agens
repatitur in agendo: I will bestow no more pains in declaring it, nor yet of
this which follows.

What Ass or Heart will be so bold,
To leap a pit ere he it behold?
Nor likewise of this, to wit.

Who washes an Ass head, loses his soap. Nor will I stand trifeling the
time, to know whence many words are derived, which in regard of their
excellency, are breathed forth but by a letter, or as we say in latin.

Quaestio de vmbra Asini. Asinus ad liram, and such like. This I say were no
otherwise, then as one meaning to walk hand in hand with a Physician, should
sodeinly break his head: enough is well.

Now concerning the aforesaid qualities and memory of the Ass, it is no great
marvel, that the ancient wise men should make such a great account of the
Ass, which in like manner has often made me to admire, considering, that with
all they could procure, to make the said beasts name immortal, by so many
denominations as we have seen: nevertheless, there is not found any
Commonwealth, any Emperor or Prince, that cared to bear this sign of the
Ass, not painting him in their Scutchions, as their proper Arms, not using
him as an imprese. The reason hereof may be, that in proving his deeds, they
have left him to us, who being of the Christian name, should likewise show the
same by deeds to the world: bearing him for our proper Arms, because we know
the simplicity, meekness, and other pleasing qualities, wherewith we have
seen the Ass to be richly endued.

Wherefore those ancient Commonweals, those Emperors and other Princes
barbarous or Gentiles, which builded their government upon rapine, vyelence,
deceit, fraud, and all other tyrannical behavior, would have their iron
customs discerned, by the Arms and impreses of terrible, bloody, and most
cruel beasts.

Hereof grew it, that the most proud people of Rome, took the Eagle for
their Ensign and Arms, which is a bird most ravenous and devouring. But in
reason they should rather have made choice of the Goose, remembering they
preserved their Country, liberty, and proper lives: when the soldiers awaked
by their noise, by the means of the Geese; defended the Capital from the French
men's assault.

But notwithstanding all this, the Goose was reputed a bird too simple for them
and too vigilant: even like esteem would they have made of the Ass, if by his
braying they had received the selfsame benefit.

The people of Phrigia had for their Arms, the wild Bore, a most pernicious
beast.

They of Thrace had a fleshlesse carcass, or the image of death as we may
term it, for the extremest of all things terrible.

The Goths bear a Fear, a most irefull beast.

The Alani that assaulted and sacked Spain, had the Marten, a very fraudfull
beast.

The French hear the Lion, a most proud beast.

The Lumbardes served themselves with the Ensign of the Toade, a thing which
both alive and dead is poisonous.

The Cimbrians, that were overcome by Caius Marius, they took the Bull, a
beast hardly tamed.

The Saxons made choice of the Horse, a goodly beast.

The Hebrews bear the Scorpion in their Ensign, that carries his poison
hidden secretly in his tail.

The Caithagenians had the Crocadile for their imprese, a fraudelent beast and
most deceitful.

Attila, who caused himself to be surnamed, the scourge of God, had in his
banner the Hawke, a foul that lives by rapine.

Antigonus, King of Soria, gave the Eagle, that strictly held in her tallents a
fierce Dragon.

And last of all, not Commonweals only and great Princes, serve themselves
with these beasts, fierce, brutish, and venomous, but likewise families, and
houses of private Gentlemen, yea, of simple Citizens, place in their Scutchione
the selfsame signalles. Whereas if they had changed such customs, and
embraced the true Christian faith, I am persuaded it would likewise will in
them, to change such Arms and impreses: and in steed of those most ravenous
deuourers, to place in their Banners simple and household beasts, showing
thereby to the world Christian simplicity, friendlinesse and love, as by the
Goose, the Lamb, the Turtle Dooue, and such like harmless things.

But beyond these, they should show themselves possessed of all good and
honorable custom, if they would take the Ass for their propper Arms, as
that Noble society of the City of Vicenza has done, who ever has held in
esteem, and universally used the Ensign of the noble Ass, which was taken
from the Paduans in a controversy, and had long time been hanged upon the
gallows: because the said Community of Vicenza knew not so soon, that the
people of Padua had hanged up the Ass, which they had sent to covenant with
them, to give them diverse burdens of entrails, which clothed over and
filled with hogs flesh cut into small pieces, we call a Saulsage, which by
the Asses voice was often times specified in them. But when Vicenzians had
effectually executed the same, the Saulsage was imparted to the people of
Padua, and the Ass taken down from the gallows immediately: from whence
ensued this song of children, which even until this day the youth of Padua use
to sing, on the hanging of the said Ass, to wit: Hanged, and vnhangd,
All for the piece of Saulsage.


In a certain part of Arcadia, the name whereof I do not well remember, is
yearly preserved a memory of the Ass, well worthy truly to be rehearsed in
this my Asse-defending discourse.

Thus then it is, upon one certain determinate day, an infinite number of the
people run on heaps to the market place, where from the top of a very high
Tower, he or they that is appointed for the office, make an Ass to descend
down so queintly upon certain ropes, two artificial wingges being fastened
to his shoulders, that in descent he seems to fly: and the multitude are
wont to say after they have dyned; Come, let us go into the market place, and
see the Ass fly. Nor will I spare to say, that some who hold a reverend
memory of the Ass, gladly could afford, that the foresaid Country was
Empole in Tuscane: then I think they would imagine the better of mine Ass
discourse.

Here I purposed to end my book concerning the Ass, had I not sodeinly called
to memory, a matter worthy of great consideration, and to be preserved in
mind even to the end, for the complete Nobleness, excellency and perfection
of the Ass.

In the time of the Gentiles, there was a man borne blind by nature, even at
the last step of his age, and the very final moment of his life time. Among
certain circumstances offered to him, he was demanded, what especial thing
more then any other he would desire to see, if Jove, to whose reverence he
submitted himself, would grant, that he should see that one thing and no
more. To which demand, without staying for any other premeditation, he
answered, an Ass. Which reply urged in them all an exceeding laughter, whereat
the blind man meruailing; said; Brethren, make not a jest of what I desire,
because I imagine, that if any of you were in my case, you scant would have the
like desire. For since I came into this world (which now fulfilles a great
number of years) there never passed one day, but that many hundred of times I
have heard and known that beast to be named, and they applied him to all
things whatsoever, that passed in speech or could be named.

Forbear to say, Beware the Ass, Make room for the Ass; we may well let
these pass, because I have likewise heard said, Beware the Horse, beware the
Mule, beware the Ox, and such like. But here rests the point, for common
hearing this beast to be compared, to the likeness of man's body, to the
virtue and vices of his mind; beside, giving him many and sundry preheminences
and prerogatives, well worthy of no light consideration. And to speak of some
parts of resemblance to the body, there never passes day or hour, but ye
shall hear a thousand times said: Such a one is an Ass.

He has the face of an Ass. The heart of an Ass. The music of an Ass. The
voice of an Ass. The place of an Ass. The parts of an Ass. The head of an
Ass. The ears of an Ass. The mouth of an Ass. The back of an Ass. And
flesht like an Ass.
Now as concerning moral virtues, few hours do pass, but I hear, Such a
one? Why, he is As wise as an Ass. As strong as an Ass. As modest as an Ass.
As ingenious as an Ass. As discreet as an Ass. As courteous as an Ass.


With other such like virtues. Now for vices, to wit. Such a one is, As vicious
as an Ass. As beastly as an Ass. As thanklesse as an Ass. As uncivil as an
Ass.


But when shall ye hear for any one respect, a beast, thus compared to a man,
in regard of such and so many quallities, but that in the rest is seen quite
contrary. Nor can they else remain in one subject, no more then in fire can be
both heat and cold: but for proof that they are evident in the Ass, and
never can or shall be in any other, note what follows. Often have I heard, Such
a one is, As Fair as an Ass. Wise as an Ass. Brutish as an Ass. Foolish as
an Ass. Gentle as an Ass. Gross witted as an Ass. Learned as an Ass.
Ignorant as an Ass. Simple as an Ass. Good as an Ass. Sad as an Ass. Merry
as an Ass. Melancholy as an Ass. Sleepie as an Ass. Watchful as an Ass.
Hard as an Ass. Tender as an Ass. Weary as an Ass. Rest like an Ass.
Snorts like an Ass. Quiet as an Ass. Gallant as an Ass. Theeuish as an Ass.
Brave as an Ass. Cleanly as an Ass. Shameless as an Ass. Manerly as an
Ass. Rude as an Ass. Pleasing as an Ass. Obstinate as an Ass.


With other such like contradictions, as (my mind being troubled) I cannot now
remember, but grow almost weary in this my Asse-labour: yet me thinks I hear
some absolutely say; Oh that magnificent Ass. That solemn Ass. That gentle
Ass. That dainty Ass.


Then rusheth in another, saying; Thou use me like an Ass. Thou wranglest
like an Ass. Thou laughest like an Ass. Thou perswadest like an Ass. Thou
sweate^^ like an Ass. Thou stinkest like an Ass. Thou art as amorous as an
Ass. Thou art as vnnurt^^de as an Ass. Thou eatest like an Ass. And filest
like an Ass.


In these and many other things, the Ass claims a general kindred.

Among scholars in the School making their arguments, I have heard them say;
Homo est Asinus, Brunellus est Asinus, ergo tues Asinus. With so many diverse
precheminences, prerogatives, virtues, viced, contrarieties and denominations
of the Ass, have I so often heard, that my mind has been encited with most
earnest desire, to see (ere I had seen) what beast this renowned and famous
Ass was.

Now then seeming to have spoken sufficiently, I persuade my self, that any
man but meanly enstructed in Sciences speculatiue, may in conclusion give the
sentence in favor of the Ass: declaring him for the noblest of all kinds of
beasts whatsoever remaining on the earth, excelling the Dog, Horse, Ape,
Lion, or Elephant.

And as a knitting up of my Asse-defending Treatise, I commend my self to
their consideration, whom daily I see to use such Asse-like behavior, that in
all their actions (I think) they intend to imitate the Ass. I would have them
resolve upon instituting a company, which might be termed the society or
fellowwip of the Ass: and each of them should wear a tablet about his neck,
whereon the image of the Ass should be engraven, to the end they might the more
apparently be known thereby.

So taking my leave both of you and the Ass, with this one most honored
memory of all concerning him; Remember the Savior of the world, that in all
his life time had but one days triumph, when he refusing all other beasts
beside, made choice only of the Ass, and rode thereon in greatest majesty to
Jerusalem, yet needs will our Poet with these verses knit up this Treatise.

If for some worthy Imprese I should go
Into the field among soldiers of one mind:
Bearing the Ass in Ensign for their show,
Hung but the tail as feather for the wind:
The skin as Armor both behind and fore,
Rhodomontes Serpents scales could do no more.
FINIS.


LONDON Printed by Tho. Creed, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1595.


