THE GENEALOGY OR PEDIGREE OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST MIGHTY KINGS OF
SVEDEN.
INGE MVNDVS WAS A surnamed Trolle, Knight, did live about the year of Christ
1250.

Nicholaus the first Knight and Councellor of the kingdom of Sweden, in the
year of Christ, 1285.

Christiernus the first Knight, and Governor (under King Birgerius) in
Stockholme, the chief City in Sweden, Anno. 1290.

Christiernus 2. Knight, and Esquire to the kingdom of Sweden. 1301.

Charles 1. Esquire to the kingdom of Sweden.

Catillus 1. Esquire to the kingdom of Sweden, he lived in the year of
Christ, 1330.

His Wife was Christina, the daughter of Bononis-Iohannis, Knight, he had
issue by her,

Nicholas 2. Of the Family Fortplantzer.

Charles 2. Esquire to the kingdom of Sweden, and Father to Charles 3. Knight,
and Councellor to the kingdom of Sweden.

Nicholas 2. of Biorno, Knight, Governor in Stockholme, under King Magnus, in
the year of Christ, 1360.

His wife was Christina, the daughter of John Nicholas of Guldenstern, also a
Knight, and Councellor of the kingdom of Sweden, and had issue by her,

1 Christiern 3. Of the family Verme^rern.

2 Caecilia, which was married to Thoretum Bendenum Governor in Wiburg.

3 Ingeburgim, which was a Nun in the Cloister of S. Clara in Stockhollme.

Christiern. 3. Chief Counselor, and Arch-Sewen of the Kingdom of Sweden,
dyed in the year of Christ, 1442. His wife was Margaret, a daughter of Eric
Krumdick of Tranecker, Knight, and Councellor of the kingdom, who dyed 1451,
they had issue together, 1. John. 1. The Increaser of the Kings race. 2.
Charles 4. of whom more mention shall be made by and by. 3. Nicholas 3. Baron
of Diursholm, Knight, and Commander in Westrasien and Dalecarlien* He dyed
1462. 4. Christina, who was married to Benedict John, the Kings chief Justice
in Vpland; She was mother to 1. John, Archbishop of Vpsalia. 2. Christiern,
Lord of Salestadt.



Charles 4. Knight and Councellor of Sweden, dyed at Revell before his father,
Anno 1440. He had issue with Ebba of Krumdick, 1. Catillus 2. Bishop in
Lincopin, who died of the plague 1465. 2. Eric of Norby, Knight and Councellor
to the kingdom of Sweden. His wife was Anna, daughter of Charles Benedict of
Winsetory, knight also, and Councellor to the kingdom; who the second time
married and took to wife Erichen of Guldenstern; their first daughter was


Ebba, who was married to Erichen of Lobolm, Knight, and President of
West-gothland, the son of Abraham of Eckberg. This man was beheaded in Holm, in
Anno 1520 by commandment of Christiern 2. King in Denmark; She died, 1549.
She had issue, amongst other children,

Margaret, which was the second wife to Gustavus the first of this line, King
of the Goths and Vandales, etc. She departed this life, August 26. 1551.

A.
John of Oreby, the son of Christiern 3 Knight and Councellor of the kingdom
of Sweden, departed out of this world upon Easter day, in the year of Christ,
1477. He had to wife, Bridget; a daughter of Gustavus Sture, and Bridget Turon,
who was a sister of Steno Sture, the elder of Gripsolme, and Governor of the
kingdom of Sweden.

The foresaid Bridget died in Anno, 1472. and had issue by her said husband,
Ericus 1. Of the line of Fortsflanter. Christiern 4. Of Oreby, Knight. Anna,
wife of John Turo, Marshall of the kingdom.

Ericus 1. of Gripsolm, Knight, and Counselor to the kingdom of Sweden,
Governor of Eland, etc. He was by Christiern 2. King of Denmark, beheaded in
the Marketplace, at Holm, in Anno Christi, 1520, the 8 of November. His wife
was Caecilia, a daughter of Magnus Charles of Eka, Knight and Counselor of
the kingdom of Sweden. She was also, together with other Ladies and young
Gentlewomen, cast into prison by the said King of Denmark, and shortly after
carried into Denmark, in the year of Christ, 1520, having before brought into
the world, 1 Gustavus of the line of Vermehren. 2 Marg^^et, first married to
Peter Brahe, Earl of Wisingsburg, and Baron of Ribdeholm. She was married
after to John, Earl of Hoien, who was slain in a battle that happened at
Ochsenbring, in Finland in the year of Christ 1534, the 11 of June. He was the
father of John, Bishop of Munster, and Osnabruck, who died, Anno 1574. 3 Magnus
1. 4 John 2 5 Bridget. 6 Anna, who died in the year 1514.


Gustavus, a Knight of Sweden, was borne in the year of Christ, 1490: he had
his education from his youth in the Court of Steno Sture his Grandmothers
brother: he showed his first Act of valor under Suanto, Marshall of the said
kingdom, and was mad chief Cornet of the Cavolarie under the command of Steno
the younger, where he behaved himself so well in two several Battles, in
which Steno had the victory, that his valor was highly commended: he was
after wards, and his Consorts, being demanded hostages by Christiern 2. King in
Denmark, carried Prisoners into Denmark, and so kept in a Castle called Kalp,
in Iutland; out of which, he not long after, in a disguised habit, being
unknown, escaped and arrived safe at Lubeck, in Anno 1519; from thence passing
through many dangers, arrived, in the end, safely in his own Country Sweden,
and came into Reffnas, his Cousins patrimony. But when he understood that his
Father, with others principal States of the kingdom were lately before
strangely put to death, he was so incensed against the enemies of his native
Country, that he did assemble together his Contrymen from all places, to
whom he represented the miserable estate of their native Country, and that
they were all dead men, if they did not free themselves from the present
tyranny by joint aid and assistance. Whereupon he was instantly chosen, by the
Sates of Dalien, Governor, named and proclaimed to be the Protector of the
liberties in the year of Christ, 1521. He had out of Darlecarlien a brave
Company of men, which are accounted the valiantest men in the whole kingdom
of Sweden, with whom he did pursue the Danes who had enquartered themselves in
Scandia, and did besiege Holm for the space of two years, which is the chief
City in the kingdom, and in the end took the same, and by the help of the
valiant Townsmen, did beat out the Danes that were there in Garrison. For
this heroical fact he was chosen King of Sweden and Gothland, the fourth of
June, in Anno 1523, and named a Deliverer of the Native Country, with much joy
and alacrity by all that did truly love their Country.

This being done, he did first of all (to the end he might manifest his
thankful disposition, and that he was not unmindful of the kind deeds
expressed toward him) ratify and confirm in his own and the States name of
Sweden to the City of Lubeck, Dantzick, and to other neighbor Cities, stately
and great privileges, rights and immunities granted unto them. He did not
receive the Crown till the 12. of January, 1528, after such time as he had
caused all those to be executed who might have been an hinderance unto him,
and who through the Bishops power, and abundance of riches, were grown
stubborn, who did raise one disquietnesse upon another against the Kings, and
who were also the only occasion of all the former wars and insurrections.

Now the civil and foreign wars being thus happily brought to an end, and
the wished peace appearing again, to the end that the kingdom which was thus
recovered by means of his heroical virtues and valor might be so
maintained, he took special care that good laws and discipline with the
exercise of the true Religion, should be settled and established throughout the
whole kingdom. And thus he continued and reigned peaceably the space of 40
years, until his death, which happened the 29 of November, in the year of
Christ, 1560, at the age of 70 years, and was buried in Vpsalia, He had three
wives, the first, Katharine, the daughter of Magnus 2. Duke of Low-Saxony in
Engern and Westphalia, they was married at Stockholm the 24 of September, 1531.
She had, four years after, a fall from her horse, whereof she died the 23
of September, 1535.

The second was Margaret his Kinswoman, the daughter of Eric Abraham of Loholm,
Knight, and Governor of Westgothland. This Eric Abraham was also beheaded in
Anno 1520, by the command of Christiern 2. King of Denmark: he did marry her
the first of October, 1536, in which year she was also crowned. This Margaret
dyed the 26 of August, 1551.

The third wife was Katherine, the daughter of Gustavus Governor in West
Gothland, with whom he was married in Wastein 1552 ( Chytr. lib. 17. Saxon.)
He had issue by these three wives six sons, and three daughters.

With the first.


1. Ericke, second King of the Swedes and Goths, of his name the XIIII. was
borne the 13. of December in the year of Christ 1533. He was chosen King in
the assembly of his own and foreign Princes and Ambassadors the 24 June
1561. He had war 7 years together with Frederick the 2 King of Denmark,
which in the end, namely in Anno 1570. was happily composed and agreed upon in
Stetin in Pomeren, where were present Ambassadors and Commissioners from
Maximilian the 2 Roman Emperor, from Charles the 9. King of France, from
Sigismund August King of Polonia, from Augustus Elector of Saxe, and from other
Princes. Also those of Stetin obtained this privilege. That for all the goods
in a ship, through the Sound, they should pay for ship and all for custom, no
more than one Rose-noble. At the beginning of these wars, this Eric caused
his Brother John, Duke of Finland to be apprehended in the night, and committed
Prisoner in the Castle Aboen at that time when the said John least thought of
it; Eric having no other cause than a suspicion which he had of him that he was
not to be trusted because the said John his wife, who was sister to Sigismund,
King of Polonia was his enemy, and made all his neighbors to rise against
him. Having thus held John sundry years in Prison, with his son, a child of
two years old, in the end he purposed to put them both to death, that he
might afterward give his brothers wife in marriage to the Muscouit, whereunto
they two were before agreed. But before that he could accomplish that purpose
of his, he became distracted in his senses, whereat the whole kingdom was
much troubled, and his Brother John obtained his liberty again, who held Eric
Prisoner in Orbey, and so the chance was turned; All which happened in the year
of Christ, 1568. Eric dyed in Prison, in the year 1578, and was buried in
Westrasia in Finland. He had issue from Katharine his Concubine, a woman of
mean parentage, whom at last, as some report, he did marry the 4 of July,
1568.

Gustavus a Bastard who was sent for unto Moschkaw by Boride Fedrowitz, to the
end he should marry his daughter, but he returned home again without her.
He lived a while at Prague in the Court of Rodulph the second Emperor,
(whereof M. Daniel Adamus of Mulaslaw in his Bohemian hystoricall Calendar,)
some write that he dyed in Aulitz, in Muscovia, in the year 1607.

Christopher.

Syria, who was married unto Henry Tadden Baron in Finlandt.

With the second.


John the third King of Sweden and of the Goths, Duke of Finland, etc. was
borne in Steckburge in the Province of Ostrogoth 1537, the 21 of December.
After that his brother Erick, by Gods just judgment, was grown out of his
senses; this John, together with his wife and his Son, were delivered out of
their imprisonment the 28. of July, in the year of Christ 1568. and was
crowned King the 13. of October following: and considering that his brother
Erick would not give ear, nor follow any good advice, nor admit any friendly
treaty, John, with the general consent and assistance of the whole States and
Commons in the Kingdom, besieged him in Stockholm; the reason there of was
then made known to all men by public Proclamation, and thereupon as soon as
the City of Stockholm had yielded, Erick was taken and put into the same prison
wherein John had been kept before. Two years after John had made a peace with
Frederick the 2. King in Denmark, which was confirmed and ratified by the
interposition of the Emperor and other Kings and Princes: he did also in the
year of Christ 1580 conclude a leagu with Stephon Bathori King of Polonia: the
next year being 1581, he took Finlandt from the Muscouite, and sent a fleet
of Ships into Leiflandt, took the City of Narue, and slew 5000. Muscouites.
This John dyed the 17. of November in Anno 1592. of 55 years of age, and was
buried in Vpsalia, leaving issue as follows: By Katherine (the daughter of
Sigismund first King in Polonia and Bona Sfortza, Duchess of Milan, with whom
he was married the 4 of October, 1562, and she also crowned the 10 of June,
1569. She dyed the 16 of September, 1593, and was the next buried by her
Husband in Vpsalia; as writes John Mesen in his description of the ancient and
following Kings of Sweden and Goths.

Their Issue.
Sigismund 3. of that name, King of Polonia, of whom hereafter more mention
shall be made under the letter B.

Isabella, horn in the year of Christ, 1567, dyed in her infancy, and was
buried at Stregniez.

Anna Infanta of Sweden, borne at Eschilstan, the 8 of May, Anno 1568. She
lived, for a time, in the Court of her brother Sigismund, King of Polonia, and
dyed in Stratsburg in Prusse, 27 January, 1615.

By Gumilla, the daughter of John B^elki, Governor in Ostrogoth, a principal
Family.

John, Prince in Finland and Ostrogoth, born in Vpsalia, in Anno 1589, the 18
of April. He married the 29 of November, 1612, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of
Charles, King of Sweden, and of the Goths, his fathers brothers daughter. He
dyed at VVasten where he kept his Court, in Anno 1618, and she dyed 1619, and
both are buried in the Parish Church of Lyncopin.

3. Katharine was borne 6 June, in Anno 1539 and was married to Ezard 2, Earl
of East Friesland, the 1. of October, 1559.

4. Caecilia was borne 6 November, 1540. and was married to Christopher,
Marquis of Baden, in the year of Christ, 1564.

5 Magnus Duke of Eastgothland Earl; of Dalien, was born 25. July, in Anno
1542 died distracted in Anno 1595. and is buried in Wasten.

6 Steno was borne in the year of Christ 1544. and died in Anno 1549. and is
buried in the chief Church of Lyncopin.

7 Anna was borne the 9 of June, in the year of Christ 1545. She was married
to George John Count Palatine of the Rhyne in Leitzelstein and Landereck 18.
October, in the year of Christ 1563. She was amongst other by George Gustaue
Count Palatine of the Rhyne, a Grandmother to Charles Ludouick Count Palatine
of the Rhyne, etc. born the fifth of February in the year of Christ 1609.

8 Charles the fifth was born in Ann. 1546. but died presently after he was
baptized, and was buried at Stockholm.

9 Sophia was borne 29. Octo. Ann. 1547. and was married unto Magnus, Duke in
Lower Saxe, the son of Francis I. the 4. of July 1568.

10 Elizabeth was borne in Anno 1549. and was married unto Christopher Duke of
Mechelburg in Anno 1581. in Stockholm, and there she died 19. November in Anno
1597.

11 Charles the 6 of this family, was born between the 4 and 5 of October in
Anno 1550. Duke of Finland, Sudermania and Nericia, etc. after that he had
continued in wars with Sigismund King of Polonia and Suede (who was his
brothers Nephew) was by the States of the Kingdom elected King of Sueden, of
the Goths and Vandales, the 19 of March 1600. and according to the accustomed
manner he was also the 15 of March 1607. crowned. He died in Norcopin the 29
of October in Anno 1611. of the age of 61 years, and is buried in Stregnitz He
had issue.

With Mary daughter of Ludovick Count Palatine of the Rhine, Elector. She was
married to him the 11 of May in An. 1579. and died 29 July 1589. and had issue
by him

1 Margaret Elizabeth, borne in Nycopin the 23 September, in anno 1580. and
died the 27 of August 1585.

2 Elizabeth Sabina born 12 of March, in anno 1582. but died in Nycopin the 6
July 1585.

3 Ludouicke Duke of Suderman, etc. was borne in Heidelberg 17 March in the
year 1583. but he died few days after.

4 Katherin was borne in Nycopin the 10 or 11 of November 1584. and was married
the 11 of June, in anno 1615. unto John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhyne in
New Castle, being son unto John Duke of Zweybrucken.

5 Gustauus 2, Duke of Suderman, etc. was borne in Nycopin in anno 1587 the 12
of June, and died the 4 of December. following.

6 Mary borne in Marienholm the 18. of December in anno 1588 and dyed the 24 of
April 1589.

With Christina the daughter of Adolph, Duke of Holstein, and niece to
Frederick the I. King of Denmark and Norway, etc. married the 27 of August, in
anno 1592. they two had issue together 1 Christina, borne in Nycopin the 26
november, in anno 1593. and dyed the 25 of may 1594. 2 Gustauus Adolphus King
of the Suedes, Goths and Vandales, great Prince in Finland, Duke in Esthen and
Carelia, Lord of Ingermanlande, etc. was borne in the Kingly Palace of
Stockholm the 9 of December, in the year 1594. He was crowned the 12 of
October 1617. He was married the 25 of October 1620. unto Marie Eleonora,
daughter to John Sigismund, Marquess and Elector of Brandenburg. She was
crowned Queen of Suede three days after. Their issue 1 A daughter borne dead
the 24 July in the year of Christ 1621. 2 Christina the I. borne in October
1623, but died the next year following. 3 Christina II. borne the 8 of
December 1626 at Stockholm. 3 Marie Elizabeth born the 1^ of March in anno
1596. in Orebrog, was married the 29 of November 1612 unto John Duke of
Finlandt and Ostergothland. She died in the year 1619 in Lyncopin and was
buried there in the chief Church near her husband. 4 Charles Phillip Duke in
Suderman, Nericia and Verhmlandt, etc. was borne the 23 of April in anno 1600.
He died the 25. of January 1622. of a burning Fever in his return toward
Norcopin upon the frontiers of Russia, after that his brother Gustavus Adolphus
had taken Rugen the chief City in Leiflandt.



B
Sigismund, the first Son of John the III. King of Suede and of the Goths,
was borne at Gripsolm the 20 of June 1566. He was elected in Cracaw King of
Polonia, of this name the III, December 27. in the year 1587. and the 20 of
February 1594. He was also crowned King of Suede in Vpsalia, He married

Anna, the daughter of Charles Duke of Austria, the 21 of May 1592. and was
crowned Queen of Polonia the 31. of the said May. She died the 31 of January
1598. having had issue together 1 Anna Maria, borne at Worschaw the 23 of May
1593. and died the 9 of February 1600. 2 Katherine I. borne at Stockholm the 9
of may, in the year 1594 and dyed also there the 15 of june, but buried in
Cracaw. 3 Wladistaus Sigismund, Prince of Polonia, Administrator of the
Dukedom of Seuerin and Zeruico, etc. was born in Cracaw in the year of Christ
1595. the 9 of June. 4 Katherine II. was borne at Worsaw the 17 of September. in
anno 1596. She died the 2 of June 1597. 5 Christopher was taken alive out of
his mothers belly, the same being cut, the highest necessity requiring it, the
2 of February 1598. presently baptized, and lived not full an hour after.




Constantia, sister of the full blood to Aune the former wife, was by Paul the
fifth Pope of Rome his dispensation married the 9 of December. in the year of
Christ 1605. to the foresaid Sigismund of Polonia, and had issue by her 1 John
Casimire I. borne in Cracaw the 25 of December 1607. he died the next year the
14 of January. 2 John Casimire II. Prince of Polonia, etc. was borne at Cracaw
the 22 of March 1609. 3 John Albiet Prince of Polonia, etc. was borne at
Worsaw, the 25 of May. 1612. 4 Charles Ferdinand, Prince of Polonia, was borne
the 13 of October, 1613, at Worsaw. 5 Alexander Charles, Prince of Polonia etc.
was borne the 4 of November, 1614, at Worsaw. 6 Anna Constantia was borne the
26 of January 1616 at VVorsaw, and died 24 of May the same year. 7 Anna
Katherine was borne the 17, of August 1619. at VVorsaw.


A SHORT GENEALOGICALL DEDVCTION OF THE PEDIGREE AND PROGENY OF THE PRESENT
KINGS OF SVEDEN AND POLONIA.
JOHN the first of Oreby, Knigh, and Councellor of the Kingdom of Sueden,
son of Christiern the III. chief Counselor and Arch-sewer of the said
Kingdom, and Nephew to Nicholas the II. of Biorne, Knight and Governor of
Stockholm under King Magnus.

Ericke I. of Gripsolm Kinght and Councellor of the Kingdom of Sueden, and
governor in Alandt.

Christiern, 4 of Oreby, Knight.

Anna, the wife of John Turon, the Kings Marshall.

Gustauus I. Governor the first time of Sueden, and afterward elected in the
year 1523. King of Sueden and Gothland.

Margaret first the wife of Peter Brahe, Earl of Wisingburg, then the wife of
John Earl of Hoten.

John, Bishop of Munster and Osnabrough, who dyed in the year 1574.

Of Katherine Queen, the daughter of Magnus Duke of Low Saxonte.

Erick 2. King of Sueden and Gothla^d, the 14 of this name.

Gustaus a bastard, who died in Muscouia after he had lived a while in the
Court of Rudolph II. Emperor.

Syria, the wife of Hen. Toddens, Baron in Finland.

Of Queen Margaret his kinswoman in blood, the daugh ter of Ericke Abraham of
Loholm Knht. and Governor in Westgothland.

1 John 3. King of Sueden and Gothland, Du. of Finland. 2 Katherine wife Ezard
2. Earl of astfrieslandt. 3 Cecilia wife to Christopher Marquess of Baden. 4
Magnus, Duke of Eastgothland. 5 Anne, wife to George John, Duke of Lutzelstein
Count Palatine. 6 Sophia, wife to Magnus the second, Duke of Low Saxony. 7
Elizabeth, wife to Christopher Duke of Mechelburg. 8 Charles, Duke first of
Finlandt, Sudermanlandt and Nericia, chosen afterward, viz. Anno 1600. King of
Sueden, Gothland and Wandalia, and crowned ann. 1607. look at the letter A.
Of Queen Katherine, the wife of Sigismund King of Poland.

1. Sigismund, King of Polonia and Sueden.

Of Queen Gunill^ descended of ancient and principal Gentry in East-gothland.

John, Duke of Finland and East-gothland.

Of Queen Anne Arch-dutchesse of Austria.

1 Anna Maria. 2 Katherine. 3 Vladislaus Sigism^^dus Prince of Poland. 4
Katherine. 5 Christopher.
Of Queen Constantia, Arch-dutchesse of Austria.

1 John Casimire. 2 John Casimire II. Prince of Poland. 3 John Albert Prince of
Poland. 4 Charles Ferdina^d Prince of Poland. 5 Alexander Charles Prince of
Poland. 6 Anna Constantia. 7 Anna Catherin^.
A.
Charles 6. of this name, King of Sueden, Gothland and Wandalia.

Of Mary Countess Palatine, daughter to Ludowicke Count Palatine and Elector.

1. Margaret Elizabeth. 2. Elizabeth Sabina. 3. Lewis Duke of Sudermanland. 4
Katherine. 5 Gustavus 2. Duke of Sudermanland. 6 Marie.
Of the Duchess Christina the daughter of Adolph Duke of Holstein niece to
Freder. 1 King of Denmark and Norway.

1. Christina. 2. Gustavus Adolphus, Ki. of Sueden, Gothland, great Prince of
Finland, 3. Many Elizabeth wif to John Duke of Finland and Eastgothla^d.
Charles Philip Duk of Sudermanland, Nericia and Vermla^d.
Christina 1. Christina 2.
FINIS.
TO THE READER.
THE Dutch Copy of this Pedigree first penned and printed, where, and by whom
(as thou see) was sent into England to a Person of note and quality, who
being well affected to the advancement of the honor of Christian Princes,
thought it fit to be published, and therefore translated it. Now it appears by
this Genealogy faithfully collected and set forth, that this most noble King
of Sueden (Gustavus Adolphus) is lineally descended not only of Atavis
Regibus, but of a Race of Deliverers, and himself the greatest; for the German
Churches groaning as loud, though not so long as the Jews (who were delivered
by Gedeon, Iephtah and others) have cause to call him so; howsoever General
Tilly in his Letter to his Majesty of Sueden terms him, (who is Gods anointed
King) but In the Suedish Intelligencer pa. 121
Cavalier; of whom that were much rather to be uttered which Seneca relates
one to have said of Caesar, Qui apud Caesarem dicere audent, magnitudinem ejus
ignorant, qui non audent, humanitatem. God prosper the Person, Progeny and
proceedings of this Heroical and religious Prince, Mutus sit oportet qui non
laudarit Herculem. Pindar.
to whole highest honor and happiness my hearty desires and prayers being
devoted (as I trust thine is) do thus express themselves in this short
Panegyric. And so farewell.

SPlendida quam Generis series ab origin prima
Surgit, Suecorum qualis pertexitur Ordo,
Maiorum patet hic, Gentisque Propago perosae,
Perstrictam stellae Borealis lumine Romam.
Ecce genus quantum in seros confer Nepotes
Et Proavi possunt, nascenti affulsit Adolpho,
Et quantum in Proavos possunt confer Nepotes,
Gustavus parta Rex cum virtute rependit.
Ignorant gentes genus illius; Anglus at Atlas,
Quique bibit Tanaim, torrentis and accola Gangis,
Gesta scient eius praeclara, peric'la, labores,
Quanta tulit fecitque pius pronomine Christi.

