THE OFFICE AND USE OF the Moral Law of God in the days of the GOSPEL,
Justified, and explained at large by Scriptures, Fathers, and other Orthodoxe
Divines, SO FAR AS OCCASION was given by a scandalous Pamphlet sent abroad of
late into the hands of diverse good Christians, pretending great reason and
reading for the utter abrogating and abolishing of the whole Law of MOSES since
the death of CHRIST.

By WILLIAM HIND, sometimes Fellow of Queens College in Oxford, and now
Preacher of Gods Word at BVNBVRY in CHESHIRE.

HOS. 8.12. I have written unto him the great things of my Law, but they were
counted as a strange thing.

MATTHEW. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Thomas Pavier, and are to be sold at his
shop in Ivy Lane. 1622.

Antinomus Anonymus. OR A SCANDALOVS Pamphlet of a namelesse Adversary of the
Moral Law of God, intending thereby to prove (if he could) that, In the Church
of Christ since his death, the whole Law of Moses is wholly abolished.
SIR, This pamphlet was directed and sent unto a religious and gracious
Gentleman, Mr. John Fox, late Steward to the right Honorable the Earl of
Darby, of his L. of Berry and Pilkinton in Lancashire.
you may well think me slack in performance of my promise; and not unlike
but you (in respect thereof) think that I faint in the cause: but it is far
otherwise with me, for the more that I consider of it, the more I am confirmed
in the truth of it; and the more I discern the many errors that rise out of
the ignorance of the true difference between the Law and the Gospel: Luther
on Gal. 3.21. says, The knowledge of this difference keeps all Christian
doctrine in its true and proper use; Also it makes a faithful man judge over
all kind of life; over the Laws and decrees of all men, and over all doctrine
whatsoever, and it gives them power to try all manner of Spirits. And on Gal.
4.27. he also says, As it is the most principal and special article of
Christian doctrine, To know that we are justified and saved by Christ: so is it
also very necessary to know and understand well the doctrine concerning the
abolishment of the Law, for it helps very much to confirm our doctrine as
touching faith, and to attain to sound and certain consolation of conscience,
when we are assured that the Law is abolished, and especially in great terrors
and serious conflicts. Thus far Luther: who as you see agrees with me, that
the point is of great consequence, and very necessary to be known of all that
truly seek Christ Jesus. I will set you down as briefly as I can, what I
conceive, and some testimonies for the same that are brief, and point you to
some others that are more large. The point is this: In the Church of Christ
since his death the whole Law of Moses is wholly abolished, or abrogated. For
as says Tossanus in 2 Cor. 3. Licet unus sit Deus, and una semper fuerit
Ecclesia, idemque substantia foedus, varia tamen hujus dispensatio fuit, ut
aliter agitur cum homine in infantia, aliter in adolescentia, aliter maturajam
aetate. Quo nomine Paulus ad Galatas 4o. Iudaeorum populum puero inter tutores
educato comparat. Lex fuit quidem a Deo data, per virum Dei Mosen promulgata,
nec sine peculiari gloria: sed Euangelium suam habet propriam gloriam, quod non
est literale solum ministerium aliquod jubens, sed habet conjunctam efficaciam
and (...) Spiritus sancti, 1 Cor. 2. Gal. 3. And Gualther on Gal. 3.19, 20.
Quia homines non semper stant conditionibus quas Deus ipsis praescribit, aliter
atque aliter cum ipsis agendum est: Ideo tunc queque propter causas legem addi
oportuit, quae ad tempus duravit, quam diu ejus usus fuit. At nunc novi
Testamenti tempus est quando lex and Prophetae Euangelio cedunt, ut tam
Gentibus quam Iudaeorum reliquijs in Regnum Dei vim facientibus locum dent.

1. The whole Epistle to the Galatians imports so much, for it is the
general argument of that Epistle. And that there is meant the Moral law as
well as any other, in Gal. 3.19.23. See also Calu. Just. 3.19.4.
Beza in Gal 3.22. Perkins on Gal. 3.11.23. Pareus in argumento in Gal. 3. and
in Columna 153. D. 229. A. 232. C. 246. C.D. 274. D. who though they speak but
only upon one or two places, yet it will appear that the like must be
understood in the whole Epistle. One word in chap. 3.19. mis-translated in most
vulgar translations draws many men awry; Serves. Neither the Greek nor any
Latin translation has it. But grant the word must needs come in to make up
the sense; I cannot see how it can be sensibly in the present tense, but rather
in the preterimperfect tense, seeing it is a question, and the answer to it is
in the preterimperfect tense plainly, as both Bezaes note, and others expound
it. Not unlike to this is in Romans 3.20. comes, or is, which being read came,
or was, of the time past, makes the sense good: otherwise I cannot understand
the words: for the time it is adverse to Now that follows immediately after,
and therefore cannot be the same. Another thing in this Epistle is worth
noting, that the Apostle cap. 4.1. by the Heir in minority, means the
Synagogue or Church of the Jews, before Christ, or the Jews themselves, and by
full age he means the Church of Christ since his death, or Christians
themselves. See Socrates lib. 5. ca 21. Tho. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 91. a. 5. and 2.
2. q. 1. 7. 2. Calv. in Gal. 3.24. and 4.1. Gualther in eundem. Beza in eundem.
Piscator in eundem. Pareus in Gal. 4.3. col. 265. B. and 274. A. and 276. A.
and 290. D. Perkins in Gal. 4.3. sets it out very fully, and withal shows
most plainly, that the words, We or Us, are to be understood of Paul himself
and others that were Jews: And so does Pareus expound them on Gal. 3.24.
Luther not well understanding this exposition, but generally taking the nonage
of the heir to be the state of the unregenerate, and the full age to be the
coming of Christ in spirit to any man, concludes the end of the Law to be at
the coming of Christ into any man's heart, though on the same Gal. 4.1. he
acknowledges an end of the Law at the coming of Christ, but does not fully
handle it so. Whereas it is plain that the Apostles meaning was so: For he
writ to the Churches of Galatia, which were in a sort fallen from Christ, Calv.
in Gal. 1.2. and not particularly to them alone that were true believers, as he
did to the Romans, Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians. Neither did he
distinguish between the true believers and others, but writ to them that
professed Christ, calling them all brethren 10. times in that Epistle, and
shows them all that they are now no more under the Law, cap. 4. First by the
Simile of the Heir, and after by an allegory of the Freewoman and the Bond,
and ca. 5. exhorts them to stand fast in that liberty, yet not as an occasion
to the flesh, but by love to serve one another, which is as much as if they had
fulfilled the Law.

2. The whole Epistle to the Hebrews is to the same purpose. In the very first
verse he opposes the speaking of Christ to all that were before him, he being
Heir of all things, whom the Angels must worship, and the heavens and earth
must vanish, Call. in Ier. and Heb. Vatablus in Ier. Tremelius in Ier. Musculus
lo. com. Zanchius in Hos. 2.21. and on Ephesians. 2. Hyperius in Hebr. Sarcerius lo.
com. Eras. paraph. on Luke 24. Coruinus postil. 2 Cor. 3. Peter Martyr lo. co^.
Tho. Aquin. in Heb. Goranus in Hebr. Haymo in Hebr. Gagneius in Heb. Zegedinus
in Ier. Arminius in These. Bucanus lo. com. Iunius in Paral. Piscator in Hebr.
Sanchius in Ier. Pareus in Hebr. Cor de lapide in Hebr.
but he remain: and cap. 3. Moses was his servant, and cap. 8. he is the
Mediator of a better Testament, which being the new Testament, he abrogateth
the old, confirming it by Ier. 31.31. etc. where by the old Covenant is meant
that which was written in the Tables of stone, as Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 5.2. And
Augustine says, lib. de spiritu and litera cap. 20. that Paul wrote that of 2
Cor. 3.6.7. from this place of Jeremy. See the Geneua note on Ier. 31.31. and
all other expositions that yet I could see, as in the Margin. The tabl^s of the
Testament, which were the 10. Commandments, Deuteronomy. 10.4. were removed together
with the Candlestick, Shewbread, and other like adjuncts of the earthly
Tabernacle, which gave place to the better Tabernacle, Heb. 9.4. and drawing
toward a conclusion of the Epistle, cap. 12. coming to exhortation after his
manner, he presses it, not by the Law given in Sinai, verse. 18. but by the
Gospel given in Mount Sion, as Isay 2.3. verse. 22. which out of Aggai 2.7.
shakes both heaven and earth, and remoueth such things as are shaken, which
are plain to be the Law, that the Gospel not shaken may remain.

3. The practice of the Apostles in all their Epistles uses brotherly
exhortations, still calling them brethren, and groundeth their exhortations,
neither upon Moses Law, nor any other Commandment, but on the mercies of God
in Christ, as may be seen in all their Epistles: And though sometimes, yea
often, they use the Imperative mood and some words of commanding, yet they are
so tempered with mildness, and without penalty, as that there is no form of
Commandments, much less any allusion to Moses Law or the 10. Commandments,
for it is the goodness of God that leads to repentance, Romans 2.4. and 2. of
Peter 3.9. and not the thundering Law.

4. Wheresoever the Holy Ghost handles the abrogation of the Law, there is
never any exception of Moral.

5. Moses Law was given only to the Jews, Exodus 19.3, 4. etc. and 20.2.12.
Deuteronomy. 4.1. etc. and 5.1. etc. and 7.6. etc. and 14.2. and 26.16. etc. and 33.4.
Psalm. 147.19, 20. Psalm. 103.7. and Psalm. 81.4.5.8. Matthew. 10.6. and 15.24.26.
Act. 14.16. Romans 7.14. and 3.19. and 9.4. Heb. 1.1.2. See also Tho. Aquin. 1.2.
q. 98. art. 40. Calvin in his Epistle that Christ is the end of the Law, and in
Romans 3.19. Augustine. in Gal. 3. Dom. Soto lib. 2. de just. and jure q. 5. art.
4. Sarcerius in postil. page 535. Eras. parap. in Gal. 3.24. and in Romans
2.14.28. and 5.13. and 7.1. etc. Zanchij fides ca. 13. q. 7. Bucanus lo. Com.
lo. 22.. 18. Calu. instit. 2.7.1. and 2.11.11. And Eras. Paraph. and Piscator.
and Pareus in Romans 3.19. Doct. Whitaker de pontific. Romano page 860. Perkins
on Gal. 3.23.

6. Moses Law was given to continue till Christ's death at the most, Luke 16 16.
Romans 7.1. etc. Luther. in Gal. 3.25. page 173. B. and 174. B. and 157. A. in
the English. Eras. parap on Rom 7. and on Gal. 3.19.25. and 4.1.21. Call. in
Gal. 3.23. and 4.1. and in 2 Cor. 3.6. Perk. in Gal. 3.19. Pareus in Gal. 4.
col. 275. D. and Eras. parap. on Romans 6.14.15. and Heb. 7.19. and in 1 Timothy
1.8, 9.

7. It was instituted to be a schoolmaster to the people of God till the
Coming of Christ, Gal. 3.24. August. de Doct. Christ. lib. 3. ca. 6.
Gualtherus in Gal. 3.19.20. Beza in Gal. 3.23. and 4.1. Perkins in Gal. 3.23.
Zanch. in Ephesians. 2.

8. It was given in Mount Sinai the Bondwoman. Gal. 4.24.25. See Erasm. parap.
thereon, to be cast out, verse. 30. being in the wilderness where was no abode.
See further Erasmus parap. on Act. 2.1.

9. It is no part of the new Testament, 2 Cor. 3. being removed in and with the
Tabernacle, Heb. 9. and to give place to a better Testament than it self, Heb.
8.7.6.13. and 9.11. etc. compare Heb. 9.19. with Exodus 24.6, 7, 8.

10. It was given with manifest tokens of Gods wrath against the wickedness of
the Israelites, which moved the Lord to give it. Exodus 16.2.3. and 17 23. and
20.20. See Eras. parap. on Gal. 3.21.24. It is called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
It was given with great terror to the people. Exodus 19.12. etc. and 20.18. Heb.
12.21. and Beza on Romans 8.15. and Gal. 3.19.

11. I cannot find that salvation was ever promised to him that should keep
the Law. But I suppose that God from all eternity decreed the means of
salvation, to be faith in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. and not
the fulfilling of the Law, for it was added 430. years after the promise, to
remain till Christ, Gal. 3. Besides the reward of him that keeps the Law is
by debt, but the inheritance of everlasting life is only by grace, Romans 4. See
the Geneua note thereon.

12. Repentance is a part of the Gospel, Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. See Calvin on
Acts 5.31. For the Gospel is contained in Repentance and Remission, Calvin.
Harm. on Matthew. 3.2. and on Acts 2.38.

Many other arguments might be drawn from the insufficiency of the Law, and
the all-sufficiencie of the Gospel, and the true difference between them, and
the worthiness of Christ before Moses, and from the doctrine of Christian
liberty: which for breuity sake I omit: they will follow upon the due
consideration of these things which I have set down; yet for your further
satisfaction I refer you to Musculus Common places, in many places thereof: but
more specially in the place of the Law, and most specially Of the abrogation of
the Law of Moses. Of the Covenant of the difference of the Old and New
Testament. And before, Of the abrogation of the Lawish Sabbath, on the fourth
Commandment. And to Zanchius in loco quinto theologico ex cap. 2. ad Ephesians.
verse. 14, 15, de legis Mosaicae abrogatione, where he disputes the point very
fully, yet he does not plainly expound the places that seem to contradict it,
of which I will give you a taste. That of Matthew. 5. cannot be understood of
the form of Moses Law, but of the matter of it, or of the Law of Nature, for
it cannot be denied but that the matter of the Decalogue being the Law of
nature, is in force as it is the Law of nature and understood philosophically:
but how it can be in force theologically understood (for that is our question
in hand) being we have no warrant in Scripture for it, but the contrary, I
cannot see.

For the other place Romans 3. by the context it may be and is to be understood
of the whole Law as well Ceremonial as any other, and the same for the time
past, but how the Moral law alone can be there understood, I marvel what
should move any man to think so. See Eras Parap. on it.

In Erasmus Paraphrasts on the new Testament you may find much upon this
point: The book though commanded to be had in Churches is too much neglected:
books of far meaner quality are much esteemed. Luther on the Galatians has
much, for he says in two places at the least, that all Laws are abolished by
Christ, page 176. b. 177. a. 223. a. Yea the 10. Commandments themselves, and
the like says Beza on 2. Cor. 3.11. Others are enforced to acknowledge it,
though their judgments be against it, for it so stands in their way that they
cannot avoid it. All that any man can say against this doctrine is, that the
Moral law or the Decalogue is perpetual in nature, saving the fourth
Commandment, no man denies it, but where the perpetuity of it in divinity is
to be found in Scripture would I feign see: For the holy Ghost in the new
Testament does not exact natural precepts such as the Decalogue is, Aug. de
spirit. and liter. cap. 14. In december praeceptis excepta Sabbati observatione,
dicatur mihi quid non sit observandum a Christiano.
for that is fulfilled in one word Love, Gal. 5.14. But the exhortation is to
the works of the Spirit, none of which are properly commanded in the Decalogue.

I forgot to illustrate the conclusion of my fifth section before with a
familiar Simile, which here I will add. Suppose the laws of Venice to be the
same for the most part with the laws of England: And yet if in England the
books of the Venetian laws should be brought out and read, either to condemn
or acquit a man accused, or to give direction for order and government here
with us, I think few men in England would hold themselves bound by virtue of
those laws or book in any such manner.

One other Simile to illustrate the general point: 2 Pet. 1.19. The Apostle
likeneth the Prophets to lights shining in dark places, meaning as I suppose
the Moon, Stars, or candles in the night till a greater light appear: And
Malachi 4.2. Christ is termed the Sun of righteousness: so when this Sun
is risen, neither Moon nor Stars are seen, and candles are of no use. And
Oecolampadius in Isai. 2.5. says, Stultitia erit, in meridie lucernis esse
addictos, quibus Sol, si non ignavi essemus, lucerer.

To conclude, I wish that all men, especially Divines, would take pains
rightly to understand the Doctrine of Christian liberty, the difference of the
Law and the Gospel, and of the old and new Testament, and of the Covenants of
both; And so the ^ight abrogation of Moses Law. The study of all which is too
much neglected, by ignorance whereof they run into strange questions, as men in
darkness stumbling at one thing and catching hold of another thing that
auailes them nothing.

I might a little illustrate my second section with a word or two. If a man
make two Testaments or Wills, it is known to every man that the latter, and
that whereupon he died is only in force, and the former is not.

The Lord give us all the true knowledge of his truth.

THE OFFICE AND USE OF THE MORAL LAW OF GOD IN THE DAYS OF THE GOSPEL.
The Preface.
THE counsel of the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Paul is well worth the hearing, yea, and the following also, for all that are
willing to seek and embrace the truth: Try all things, and hold fast that
which is good: for, as all is not Interdum orichalcum magis exprimit colorem
auri quam auru^ ipsum. Ludou. Viu. de Causis corruptarum Artium, lib. 3. page
127.
gold that is gilt over, nor every metal good silver that gives a good sound;
so neither is every plausible opinion true doctrine, nor every colorable
conceit a current truth; no, though it seem to be gilt over with Scripture, as
with pure gold, or to sound as shrill as silver, by the voices and testimonies
of religious and learned men. This did the Spirit by which he wrote, both see
and foresee, that as there were many then, so there would be even in our days
not a few, who neither contenting themselves with, nor consenting unto 1 Timothy
6.3.
wholesome words, even the words of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and to the doctrine
which is according to godliness, would teach otherwise and other things, even
(...). Act 20.30.
distorted and perverse things, not only besides, but even contrary to the
doctrine which was delivered unto them: and therefore not without just cause
does the Apostle 1. John 4.1.
John also, speaking by the same Spirit, admonish us of the same thing, to try
the spirits whether they be of God or no. And both of them to this end, that
bringing the doctrines, and opinions of men to be tried and examined by the
Scriptures, as the Goldsmiths brings counterfeit coin or suspected metals to
his touchstone (for so much the Greek word [(...)] in both 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1
John 4.1. See also 1 Pet. 1.7
places does import) we might upon due trial better Phil. 1.9, 10.
discern of things that differ, and judge aright betwixt truth and error, and
so not only entertain the truth, when we find it, but (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
(...). Heb. 4.14. Reu. 3.11.
hold it fast (as it were) with all our strength, and (...). Iud. Epist. 3.
maintain it when once we are in possession of it: Which course and counsel
of the Apostles for trial of the truth, and maintaining of it, was not only in
their days of great use and good success to establish the Churches and
children of God, in the sound profession of the truth, against the damnable
errors, which men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth brought in
amongst them, as against the 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 19.
gangrene of Hymeneus, and Philetus in Paul's time, and against the heresy of 1
Ioh. 2.18, 23. Bez. in 1 John 2.18.
Ebion and Corinthias in the days of John: but in succeeding Ages also, was
wonderfully blessed of God, and crowned with many a glorious victory by the
disputes and writings of the Lords Worthies, confuting and confounding the
errors and heresies of their times, as Act. 18.24.28.
Apollo did the Jews, being eloquent men and mighty in the Scriptures, and
speaking and writing by such a measure of Gods As Steven did Act. 6.10.
Spirit, as the Adversaries of Gods grace and truth were not able to resist.
Such the Lord in his gracious providence ever raised up in the distresses of
his Church, and distractions of his children, to be as Obad. v. 21. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Saviors unto his people, to preserve them from the froward and crooked
generation, and to continue them in their steadfastness, lest otherwise they
should have been 2 Pet. 3.17.
plucked away with the common error of the wicked. Such a one was Just. Mart.
Dial. cum Tryph.
Justin Mart. against Trypho the Jew, Jrenaeus adversus Haeres. scripsit libros
5.
Ireneus against Valentinus and many other Heretics, Origin. scrips. lib. 8.
contra Celsum.
Origin against Celsus, Tertull. scripsit lib. 5. contra Marci.
Tertullian against Marcion, Cyprian, in Epist. 3.8.12. lib. 1.
Cyprian against the Novatians, Athan. Orationes 5. contra Arrianos.
Athanasius against the Arrians, Cyrill. Alexand. contra Iulianum libros 10.
Cyril against Julian, Jerome against the Luciferians and many others;
Augustine against the Donatists, who also wrote a whole book against Heretics
and heresies, both of former and latter times; as also did Epiphanius. So did
Hilary also, Eusebius, Vincentius Lirinensis, and others, as they had any more
special occasion so to do. Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 30. Nicephor. Callist. lib.
14. cap. 48. Theodor. de Haeret. fabulis. Now as there were some of these
Heretics that rose up in arms, as (...), against God and Christ his son (as
the Vide Magdebur. Cent. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Valentinians, the Manichies, the Arrians, the Donatists, and many other) so
there were some of the same litter, stirred up by Satan, as (...), to bark
against Moses, and the Prophets, the Moral Law, and the whole Old Testament
(as the Vide Magdebur. Cent. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Marcionists, and Manichies, Basilidians, Cerdonians, and Camorar, in Catalog.
Haereticoru^.
many others) as Augustine testifies, who also wrote two special books of
purpose, Contra Adversarium legis and Prophetarum. Danaeus in August. de
Haeresibus. And as the flames which the former sort of Heretics kindled in the
Church are not yet so fully quenched, but that here and there some brands taken
out of those fires (as out of that of Arrius, which as Ingemuit totus Orbis,
and Arrianum se esse miratus est. Hieron. tom. 2. adversus Luciferian. page 143.
Jerome witnesses, had almost set the whole world in combustion) do now and
then fly abroad to work like mischief: So neither are the Heresies of the
latter sort so extinguished, but even at this day some Bulling. advers.
Anabapt. lib. 2. c. 15.
sparks thereof are blown up and cast abroad again, if not to burn up the
whole Old Testament, (as Q. Curt. lib. 5. p. 145.
Alexander being drunk, set Persepolis on fire) yet to set the whole Law of
Moses on a light fire, for the utter abolishing of the same, and therein
especially the Moral Law of God, as if that were, now, worthy of no better
entertainment amongst Christians, then such as Ierem. 36.23.
Iehoiakim gave unto Ieremies Prophecy, when in a furious passion he cut it in
pieces, and cast it into the fire; or as if men had resolved to say unto the
Lord, Job 21.14, 15.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the
Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have, if we pray
unto him? Psalm. 2.2, 3.
Let us break asunder these bands, and cast away these coards from us, we will
not have this man to Luke 19.14.
rule over us. Such metal as this, and of the same stamp, coined in the mint
of man's reason, and bearing the image, not of Caesar, but of Christ (as though
it must needs pass for current amongst all that profess the Gospel) being of
late come abroad, and put into my hands; I held it requisite to make some 1
Ioh. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
trial of it, and for that end to bring it to the touchstone of Gods word, and
to weigh it in the balance of the Sanctuary, that (as far as well we may)
we may judge aright both of the worth and weight of it. The coin that is
suspected to be but base metal, and going for gold to be at the best but
copper gilt, and is now to be further tried and examined is this: That in the
Church of Christ since his death, the whole Law of Moses is wholly abrogated
and abolished. Of which both coin and Coyner, matter and Author, I may say as
August. contra Adversarium Legis, and Prophetarum. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Augustine said of a book of the like subject against the Law and the
Prophets, diuulged first by a namelesse Author, and afterward sent unto him by
his friends for answer; Prius quaesivi cujusnam esset erroris, non enim soli
Manichaei legem Prophetasque condemnant, sed and Iren. advers. Haeres. lib. 3.
cap. 12.
Marcionistae, and alij nonnulli quorum sectae non ita innotuerunt populis
Christianis, nescio cujus sit Haeretici, mihi non apparet cujus sectae sit iste
blasphemus: I first inquired what kind of error or heretic this should be,
for, not only the Manichies do condemn, and so go about to abolish the Law
of Moses, yea the whole law and wholly too; but the Marcionists also and Bucan.
loc. 19. de lege, q. 28.
many others, as do the Libertines, Bulling. advers. Anabapt. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Anabaptists, Familists, and Antinomians even of our times also. But seeing I
could not find out, either his name or sect by his writings, as neither could
Augustine in the like cause and case, I resolved then to frame my answer as
August lib. 1. con. Adversar. legis. c. 1.
he did his book, Contra Adversarium legis and Prephetarum, and upon the same
ground, defendenda August. ibid. cap. 1.
est adversus ejus linguam Scriptura divina, quam malelicis disputationibus
insectatur: I will God willing defend the moral law, the written word of God,
against his word and writing, tongue and pen, and that much after the same
manner also as Augustine did. Et August. lib. 1. cont. Adversarium legis. cap.
1.
quoniam quoquo modo Christianum se videri cupit, unde and ex Euangelio and ex
Apostolo ponit aliqua testimonia; etiam Scripturis ad Novum testamentum
pertinentibus refellendus est: That seeing he would seem to be a kind of
Christian, and so sets down diverse testimonies of the new Testament, and of
the learned expositors of the same, he shall in like manner be encountered and
confuted by them both, yet I say not, to the same end, ut August. ibid.
ostendatur in reprehensione veterum inconfideratias quam versutius insanire;
but that, being contrary minded, he may be instructed in the spirit 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.
of meekness, to see if God peradventure will give him repentance to the
forsaking of his error, and acknowledging of that truth which I hope he shall
see, is not abolished, but established in and by our Savior Mat. ^.17.
Christ Jesus. And so I come to look this Adversary of the moral law of God
in the face, and to try both the worth of his treasure whereof he Revel. 3.17.
boasts not a little, and the force of his armor wherein he 1 Samuel 17.45.
trusts too much: Yet not in any confidence of my own either power or
policy, but in the name of the Lord, and in the power of his might, whose
counsel and strength I crave for this war, and who does not only furnish his
soldiers with spiritual weapons ( 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
mighty through GOD to cast down strong holds) but teaches also their Psalm.
144.1.
hands to fight, and their fingers to war, and their arms to break even a
bow of steel. Thus came 1 Samuel 17.45, 50.
David furnished and encouraged against Goliath, thus came the poor simple
Ruffin. Eccles. Histo. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Confessor against the proud and witty Philosopher, and both of them prevailed
against their adversaries, David against his for his confusion, the Confessor
against his for his conversion.

Adversary of the Moral Law. (...).
SIr, you may well think me slack in performance of my promise, and not
unlike but you in respect thereof think that I faint in the cause: but it is
far otherwise with me, for the more that I consider of it, the more I am
confirmed in the truth of it, and the more I discern the many errors that rise
out of the ignorance of the true difference between the Law and the Gospel.

Though I be slow, yet am I sure. And I wish you had been as provident to
bestow your studies well, as you are confident that your cause is good; or that
your confidence be not greater then either your cause, or your handling of it
can well afford; for what is there in this your cause, viz. [In the Church of
Christ since his death, the whole law of Moses is wholly abolished and
abrogated] that can assure you of any warrant for the truth of it? and what is
there in your manner of dealing in it, that can bring you any comfort, or breed
so great confidence in the so resolute defense of the same? Had you drawn your
pen, and sharpened your style either against the August. Quaest. Veter. and
Nov. Testam. quaest. 69.
Ceremonial Law, that it is wholly vanished (as a shadow) because the Body is
exhibited; and abolished (as a type) because the truth is come Christ Jesus; or
against the Et cont. Adamant. cap. 16.
Judicial, that it is abrogated also, so far as it was peculiar to the
Mosaicall and Jewish policy: you might peradventure have found some sorry See
Dana. in August. de Haeresib. Centur. 2^.
Adversary elsewhere, both of former and of latter times, but the most
judicious Divines both ancient and modern, you should have found your surest
friends. Nay further, had you been of opinion, that even the Moral law as it
was given by God to Moses, and by Moses to the Church of the Jews, is now in
some circumstances of time, place, persons, tables, Testament, manner, measure,
terror, rigor, and the like, Vide Call. Harmo. in 4. Lib. Mosis p. 442, 443,
444. See these Fathers Iren. aduers. Haeres. Lib. 4. cap. 21. etc.

Numquid haec decologi praecepta cessasse dicenda sunt? Absit, inquit Augustine.
Quaest Vet. and Nov. Test. cap. 69. and in Gal. cap. 3.


altered and changed in the Church of Christ since his death: you would not I
think have found many (if any at all) much differing and dissenting from you.
But seeing you have drawn out your sword (such as it is) against the whole Law
of Moses, not against the Ceremonial and Judicial only, but even against the
Moral also, and that, not to alter or change it in some circumstance, but to
abrogate and abolish the very substance of it, and that not in part, but wholly
too; I know not the man that will stand with you, strike one stroke for you,
or bid you so much as God speed in this cause, or course. Numb. 12.
When Aaron and Miriam rose against Moses in great bitterness both of spirit
and speech, the Lord took them up sharply with this rebuke, My servant Moses
is faithful in all my house, how then were ye not afraid to speak against my
servant Moses? I make no doubt but even at this day the Lord does reckon of the
Moral Law as of his servant, yea and does esteem it in his use a faithful
servant in his Church also: how then were not you afraid to speak, to write,
to fight with all the wit and power you have against the whole body of the
Moral Law? and that not only to weaken the credit and power of it, but
utterly to abolish the very substance and being of it therewithal? Seems it
a small matter in your eyes, absolutely to abolish both Ceremonial and
Judicial Law, Lex Christianis est thesaurus absco^ditus etc. vide Irenae.
advers. Haer. lib. 4. cap. 43.
which yet retain a Bulling. advers. Anabap. lib. 2. cap. 15. and lib. 4. cap.
4.
spiritual and moral equity, and as they are part of Gods Word shall endure
for ever, but you must needs deal in like sort with the Moral Law also? You
are far I hope from Ester. 3.5, 6.
Hamans mind, though in this your courses be not much unlike: he thought
scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, therefore he sought to destroy the whole
people of the Jews in one day: and you think scorn to abolish the
Ceremonial and Judicial law alone, and therefore you seek to destroy the
whole Moral Law of God also. If Ierem. 11.19.
Jeremy held them to be of a cruel disposition, that devised devices against
him, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him
off from the land of the living, that his name be no more remembered: of what
disposition then shall we take you to be, that would cut down this tree of
Gods Law, together with the fruit thereof, first Manu formatoris nostri, in
ipsis cordibus nostris veritas scripsit, Quod tibi non vis fieri, ne feceris
alteri. Vide August. in Psalm. 57. verse. 1.
planted in Paradise in the heart of Adam, some roots whereof do yet remain
in the natural man, which being Lex Dei in cordibus scribitur, non quia per
naturam praeventa sit gratia, sed quia per gratiam reparata est natura. Vide
August. de vera Innocent. cap. 258.
transplanted by grace into the heart of the regenerate and spiritual, and
there rooted by faith, watered by the word, and warmed by the spirit, do yield
sweet fruits of righteousness and holiness to the praise and glory of God by
Christ Jesus. But seeing we cannot stay your hand, let us see if we can take
away the dint of your stroke, and abate the edge of your axe, wherewith you
strike to destroy the whole Moral Law. Wherein howsoever we may fail, yet are
we well assured, that rather shall the head fly from the helue, and both fall
into the bottomless pit, and you cry out and confess, as once one of the
sons of the 2 Kings 6.5.
Prophets did in such a case, Alas master, it was but borrowed, than ever this
tree of the Moral law of God shall be hewn down by your hands.

And first I cannot but admire again your high conceit of your self, great
confidence in your cause, and settled resolution to Elati, sibi placentes,
Hypocritae, quaestus gratia, and inanis gloriae, operantes. Omnes hi decidunt a
veritate, alienum ignem afferentes ad altar Dei, i. alienas doctrinas. Vide
Iren. aduersus Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 43.
stand stoutly to the defense of it; for whereas your friend to whom you write
might think that by reason of your slacknesse, you did faint in the cause (as
you object for him) you answer for your self in these words: But it is far
otherwise with me, for the more that I consider of it, the more I am confirmed
in the truth of it, and the more I discern of the many errors that arise out
of the ignorance of the true difference between the Law and the Gospel. Big
words, messengers of a brave heart. Your cause (concerning the whole abolishing
of the whole Moral Law) is now no longer a bare assertion, but a settled
persuasion, for you are confirmed in the truth of it, neither came you unto
this by any light opinion, but by mature deliberation [for you have more and
more considered of it] and this consideration has brought you with it, a
greater measure of illumination, for by the light of this truth you are able to
discern many errors which (by reason of their blind ignorance) none else can
see, but such as you think good to lend your spectacles unto, to discover
them. And from all these arises your courage and resolution, that it is so
far from you to faint in the cause, that being more and more confirmed in the
truth of it, you are now fully resolved to set your best wits, and your friends
aworke stoutly to maintain and defend it. But what said the 1 King. 20.11.
King of Israel to the King of Syria, Let not him that girdeth on his harness,
boast himself as he that puts it off. Be not so confident that your
building will stand, unless the foundation be sure, and the frame sound and
good. If the Luc. 6.48, 49.
foundation be ^and, and the frame 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
hay and stubble, it will never abide the touch, much less the force either of
water or of fire. Many there are that build Castles in the air, and think
them to be turrets of truth and forts of defense: But when the Lord shall
awaken them out of their dream, and anoint their eyes with the Reu. 3.18.
eie-salues of grace and 1 Ioh. 2.27.
truth, they shall then see that what they built was but upon the sand of
fancy, not upon the rock of Faith, and their whole frame more like the Genesis
11.4, 9.
Tower of Babel, then the fort of Cant. 4.4.
Sion. For as Prou. 18.11.
the Rich man's riches are his strong tower, but only in his own imagination;
so are the poor man's fancies his fortresses of faith and truth, but alas only
in his own Romans 1.21. 2 Cor. 10.5.
vain conceit and opinion.

But to make way unto your matter, you seem to give some reason of this your
great confidence and resolution, (...).
because (say you) the ignorance of the true difference between the Law and
the Gospel, does breed many errors which you have discerned, and the true
knowledge of this difference keeps all Christian doctrine in its proper use.
And for this you cite Luther on Galat. 3 21. Irena. advers. Haeres. lib. 3.
cap. 12. Et ea quae est sec. Mosen Lex, and Gratia Noui Test. utraque apta
temporibus, ad utilitatem humani generis, ab uno and eodem praestita Deo.
Irenaeus advers. Here Is lib. 3. cap. 12.
Ierenaeus observed of the Marcionists: Omnes qui sunt malae sententiae, Mosis
legem diffimilem and contrariam Euangelij doctrina arbitrantes, jam non sunt
conversi ut differentiae utrinsque Testamenti inquirerent causas. You shall
anon have a particular answer to your own reason. But first of all, seeing you
have appealed unto Luther, unto Luther shall you go. That which you allege
out of him on Gal. 3.21. we do willingly acknowledge as good, and wholesome
doctrine; which how little it will stand you in stead, nay how much rather it
stands against your opinion, you shall hear by and by, if first we may hear
Luther plainly deliver his judgment touching the abolishing or continuing of
the moral Law. Writing upon the same Epistle and chapter which you cite, and
verse. 24. he has (as you may read) these words: The Luth. in Gal. 3. verse. 24.
true use of the Law is to teach me, that I am brought to the knowledge of my
sin and humbled, that so I may come unto Christ and be justified by faith.
But faith is neither Law nor work, but an assured confidence which
apprehends Christ who is the end of the Law, Romans 10. And how? not that he
has abolished the old Law, and given a New, or that he is a Judge that must be
pacified by works, as the Papists have taught, but he is the end of the Law to
all those that believe, that is to say, every one that believes in him is
righteous, and the Law shall never accuse him; The Law then is good, holy and
just, so that a man use it as he should do. By which evidence we may justly
give sentence both against your opinion (for the whole abolishing of the whole
Moral Law) and against your allegation also out of Luther, upon whom you would
father the base and bastard fruit of your own brain, to make it either more
plausible or more probable by this means: Seven Observations out of Luthers
allegation.
for may we not hence most evidently conclude that Luthers judgment concerning
the Moral Law is this: first, that it is not abolished: secondly, that it is
of good use: thirdly, that it serves to bring us to the knowledge and sense of
sin: fourthly, that it drives us out of our selves and our own
righteousness which is of the Law, to seek for righteousness by faith in
Christ only: fifthly, Jrenaeus is of the same judgment for establishing the
Moral Law. In lege and in Euangelio primum and maximum praeceptum est,
Diligere Dominum Deum ex toto cord. Irenaeus advers. Hares. lib. 3. cap. 25, 26
that Christ has not abolished the old Law: sixthly, that the Law may be said
to be at an end in Christ, because as it cannot justify, so can it not justly
accuse or terrify any that are righteous by faith in him: lastly, that the
Gospel does not abolish the nature and right use of the Law, (for according to
the Apostle, the Law is holy, just, and good) but only takes out of the hearts
of true believers the accusing and accursing power of it. Which points being so
apparently contrary to your position. I have the more fully and distinctly set
down for your better satisfaction, that you may either let fall your opinion,
seeing you have Luthers both heart and hand against it, or else never run
again under his wing to seek for any succor or shelter for the same. I now
come unto your reason which you seem to allege for your so great confidence
in this cause: (...).
namely, Because the ignorance of the true difference between the Law and the
Gospel does breed many errors, which you say you have already discerned, and
the true knowledge of this difference keeps all Christian doctrine in its
proper use.

[that the whole law of Moses is wholly abolished] you notwithstanding do
acknowledge not only that the Ergo Lex Creatoris etiam ab Adversario probata
est: nec dispeadium sed compendium ab eo consecuta est. Tertul. advers.
Marcion. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Law is, but also that it is of good, and great use, pulling down with the one
hand that which you have built, or would build with the other: for if the whole
Law of Moses be abolished, then the ignorance of it will breed no error, nor
the knowledge of it can build no truth: for young Logicians can tell us, that
Non entis non est actio nee scientia.

Again, if the whole Law be wholly abolished, it is not possible it should be
distinguished by any difference from the Gospel; for as Non entis non est
scientia, so Non entis non est differentia. What difference can be designed
betwixt that which is not, and that which is, that which is wholly abolished,
and that which is established? If you say as before, that the difference of the
Law from the Gospel may be known and acknowledged, and be of good and great
use; then I say you are too bold in your assertion to maintain that the whole
Law is wholly abolished: for if this were true, you leave the Law neither
breath nor being, neither nature nor use, neither substance nor circumstance,
neither difference nor (...). Diog. Laert. lib. 9. p. 694.
Accidence; neither place in the book of God, nor so much as a nights lodging
under the roof of the Church of God. Which to affirm because it were both
absurd and impious, I hope upon better advice you will see, and acknowledge,
that your point was cut out too long and too large, when you thus set it
"down. The point is this, That the whole Law of Moses "is wholly abolished:
and the rather, because you have now cut it shorter and narrower with your own
hands, telling us that it is not abolished [for it is] nor wholly abolished
[for it is of good vse] it has essence and difference, and may be known, and
not only known in it self, but distinguished from the Gospel, and the
distinct knowledge hereof so profitable and needful, that the ignorance hereof
is a mother of many errors dangerous and hurtful. If I acknowledge this with
you for a truth, then must you acknowledge with me your position for an error,
and if you will have your position [That the whole Law is wholly abolished] to
be true, then is all this that you have spoken of the profitable and necessary
knowledge of the difference of the Law and the Gospel false. You seem to
boast that you faint not in the cause, and that you are confirmed in the truth
of it, but consider I pray you, whether you fail not in your Hieron. adversus
Ruffin. p. 218.
course, seeing you do not only trip and interfere, but stumble and fall at
your first setting forth: Statim de portu egrediens navem impegit. So said
Jerome to Ruffin, and I unto you. Cic. Tuscul. lib. 1.
Is the truth divided, or does the truth differ from it self. Statim de portu
egrediens navem impegit. So said Jerome to Ruffin, and I unto you. Cic. Tuscul.
lib. 1.
I see a man may take a fall though he do not faint; and think himself
confirmed in the truth, when he is unsettled in uncertainties, and divided from
it. Pugnantia te loqui non vides? ubi est acumen tuum? But to recover your
self again you say, Luther agrees with you in this point: How should Luther
agree with him that cannot agree with himself? But how or wherein does he
agree with you? Antinom.
That the point is of great consequence, and very necessary to be known of all
that truly seek Christ Jesus. That the knowledge of the difference of the
offices of the Law and Gospel is of good and great use, for preserving of true
Christian doctrine, for judging of all kind of life and laws of men, and for
trial of spirits: And all this we willingly grant, and assent unto. And how I
pray you "does this point agree with yours; [That the whole Law "of Moses is
wholly abolished?] Nay does it not rather pull yours in pieces, and wholly
devour your whole Law, and your wholly too? As Exodus 7.12
Aarons rod devoured the rods of the Inchanters of Egypt? Luthers rod has
this truth written upon it, The Law of Moses is of great and good use; therefore
it deuoures yours which "bears engraven upon it this error, The whole Law of
"Moses is wholly abolished. But take you good leave to make your own Argument
your self, and let us see of what strength and consequence it will be. Luther
(say you) Antinom.
affirms that the Law of Moses is of good and great use, for preserving of
true Christian doctrine, for judging of all kind of life and laws of men, and
for trial of spirits: Therefore you conclude that he agrees with you in this
point; That the whole Law of Moses is wholly abolished. Answer.
As much agreement there may be betwixt fire and water, light and darkness,
truth and error, as betwixt his Antecedent, and your consequent. Will you see
what life and light, sinews and joints it has, by another like unto it. The
Ancient Canons of the 4. first general 1. Council. Nicen. 2. Constantinop. 3.
Ephesin. and 4. Chalcedon. Vide Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Theodoret. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 6. and 9. Euagr. Histor. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
Counsels are of great and good use, for preserving of true doctrine, for
judging all kind of life, laws, and opinions of men, and for trial of
spirits. Ergo, All the Canons of the first 4. general Counsels are wholly
abolished and abrogated. What connection is here betwixt the Antecedent, and the
consequent? Would not the clean contrary be more necessarily concluded; Ergo,
All the Canons of the 4. first general Councels are yet in force, and neither
wholly nor in part abolished, nor abrogated. Non Cicero lib 4. Acad. quast.
ovum ovo similius quam Servilius Servilio: One egg is not more like another,
then this Argument is like to yours. And what think you of this; Luther
himself on Gal. 3. (the same chapter which you allege for you) does most
evidently fight against you. Luth. on Gal. 3. fol. 131, 152.
There is (says he) a double use of the Law, the first use is to bridle the
wicked and to restrain sin, as men use to restrain Lions and Bears with
bonds and chains, that they tear and diuoure not every thing they meet. And
this he calls a civil use of the Law. Another use of the Law is divine and
spiritual, which is (as Paul says) to increase transgression, i. o reveal
unto man his sin, his blindness, his misery, his impiety, his ignorance,
hatred and contempt of God, death, hell, judgment, and the deserved wrath of
God. Of this use the Apostle entreats notably in the 7. to the Romans. Luther
you see does otherwise judge of colors then you do: certainly either your
eyes were not matches, or your spectacles not of the same, nor so true a sight
as his were. You say the whole Law is wholly abolished: he says, and not only
faith it, but proves it by Scripture too, That it is not wholly abolished, but
has yet his double use both civil and spiritual. Quint. Orat. Instit. lib.
5. cap. 12. Asc^nius Paedi. in Cic. Orat. pro M. Scauro. Valerius Max, lib. 3.
cap. 7.
Q. Varus Hispanus Marcum Scaurum Principem Senatus, socios in arma, ait,
concitasse: Marcus Scaurus princeps Senatus negat: vtri vos, Quirites convenit
credere? You (I know not who) say, that Luther a Captain of the Lords host,
has both stirred up others, and taken arms himself for the abolishing of the
whole Moral Law; Luther a leader of the Lords armies does utterly deny it;
whether of you two should now be better credited let the Christian reader
judge. But it may be you take hold of this, that Luther mentions the Luth. on
Gal. 4.27. fol. 222.
abolishing of the Law, saying it is necessary to know and understand well the
doctrine of the abolishment of the Law, etc. Gal. 4.27. Men that are in danger
of falling or drowning, will catch at any thing which may seem to help them,
although it be utterly unable to do them any good. So said Hieron. advers.
Ruffin. Apol. lib. 2.
Jerome of Ruffinus, Tantum me diligit ut raptus turbine and in profundum
dimersus, meum potissimum invadat pedem, ut mecum aut liberetur aut pereat. You
catch at this word Abolishment of the Law, and yet it will neither stay you,
nor stand you in any stead, for Luther speaks only of the abolishing of
certain uses of the Law, as, for righteousness, justification, life and
salvation, for terrifying, accusing, condemning those that are justified by
faith in Christ Jesus; so far he acknowledges, and we with him, that the
Calu. de usu legis. Harmon. in 4. Libros Mosis. p. 442 August. de Spiritu and
litera. cap. 4. and 5. and 10.
Moral Law for these offices and uses is abolished. The very light and
evidence of the opposition, which in the same sentence he makes betwixt Moses
and Christ, works and faith, servitude by the Law, and liberty by the
Gospel, justification and condemnation, terrors and conflicts of conscience,
and sound and certain consolation of the same, might have manifested and made
known thus much unto you, had you been as careful to seek the truth of his
doctrine, and to taste his true meaning in it, as you were willing to feed your
own fancy only with the bare letters, and leaves of it. Tertul. Scorpi^c.
advers. Gnostic. cap. 7.
Tertullian says, Verba non sono solo sapiunt, sed and sensu: nec auribus
tantum audienda sunt, sed and mentibus. As Hieron. in Gal. 1. Non in verbis sed
in sensu, non in superficie sed in medulla, non in sermonum folijs sed in
radice rationis. page 162.
Jerome said of the sense of the Scripture, it is not in cortice orationis, sed
in radice rationis, so may we say of men's writings, we must seek for the
meaning, by the matter as well as by the letter; and lend our ears to listen
and observe what they desire to speak, and not make them speak only what we
desire to hear; unless we will be like little children who having some fancy
running in their heads, imagine the bells to ring and sing as they think and
speak. Let me in love advise you, when you allege an Author to give evidence
for any point, bring not in testem sine testimonio, a man that has nothing to
say for you, much more take heed you call not in such to speak in your cause,
as are opposites and adversaries unto it, and cannot but speak what they have
heard and seen, and set both heart and hand against you. Let Luther your first
witness second my advice, and if you will suffer him to speak, he will
discover your strange dealing, in bringing him to give evidence against his
conscience, and to speak to your mind that which he never meant. Luth. on
Gal. 4.27. p. 223.
In the very next page to the words which you allege as his opinion, that the
whole Law of Moses is wholly abolished, he thus cleereth himself: We say that
the Moral Law, or the law of the ten Commandments has no power to accuse and
terrify the conscience in which Christ Jesus reigns by his grace, for he
has abolished the power thereof. Mark well his words. What has Christ
abolished? The power of the Moral Law, not the Law it self, nor the whole Law
wholly, but the power of it: and what power? not all power, but the power of
accusing, terrifying and condemning: and in whom has it lost this power? not
in the wicked, unregenerate, and reprobate, but in that conscience in which
Christ reigns by his grace. And in the page following Luth. on Gal. 4.27. p.
223. b.
he has these words to the same purpose; When our sin is pardoned through
Christ who is Lord of the Law, the Law being a servant, has no more power to
accuse and condemn us for sin, and we are now made free, forasmuch as the
Son has delivered us from bondage. And in this sense both he, and we, do
acknowledge that the Law is wholly abolished to them that believe in Christ
Jesus, notwithstanding, Prosecto illam Dei legem, non solum illi tunc populo,
verum etiam nunc Nobis, ad instituendam recte vitam necessariam, nemo
dubitaverit. Aug. Lib. 3. contra duas Epistol. Pel. ad Bonifac. cap. 4. and
lib. 4. cap. 5.
it remains still in force for some special offices and uses, both against
the wicked, and for the godly, and that not only to drive them unto Christ,
upon sight and sense of their misery, to seek for relief in his obedience;
but to direct them also how to walk aright in the ways of God, when they are
once come unto him. Yea and further also, (because in many things we sin all,
and there is no man that sins not) the best of Gods children, even after
their effectual calling and conversion, stand in need of some of the Hieron.
Augustino Tom. 2. p. 341.
offices of the Law, as 1. to know the Romans 7.7.
nature and quality, manner and measure of their sin by the Iam. 1.23.25.
glass of the law, for as Paul knew that concupiscence (even without consent)
was sin, because the Law (that is, the tenth Commandment) says, Thou shall
not covet: so he that will find out his sin, must discover it by the light,
and measure it by the line of Gods law, for sin (says 1 John 3.4.
John) is transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. and Paul affirms, that where
no Law is, there is no transgression, Romans 4.15.2. It serves also to Ad hoc
lex data est, ut superbo suam infirmitatem nota faceret, etc. vide plura apud
Aug. de poenit medicina c. 1.
convince the conscience, to afflict the heart, to break the spirits and
subdue the pride even of godly and gracious men, and all this only to humble
them, not to discourage them, to make them to remember and consider whence and
whither they are Reu. 2.5.
fallen, that they may repent, do their first works, and recover their first
love, and that in the sense of their misery (when the Lord shall power the
Zach. 12.10.
spirit of Grace and supplications upon them) they may look upon him whom they
have pierced, and mourning over him, may seek and sue for mercy and refreshing
from him alone that has promised to heal the Isay 61.1.
broken hearted, to ease the burdened, and to Math. 11.28.
refresh them that are tired with the labor, or wearied in the ways of sin.
Thus did the Luke 15.18, 19.
Prodigal, I will go unto my father. Thus did Adulterous Hos. 2.7.
Israel, I will return unto my first husband, for then was it better with me
then now, Hos. 2.7. And hereunto Luth. on Gal. 3.19. fol. 154. b.
Luther gives further testimony, Gal. 3.19. The Law is as a glass that
shows unto a man himself, that he is a sinner, guilty of death, and worthy
of Gods everlasting wrath and indignation. To what end serves this humbling,
this bruising and beating down by this hammer, the Law I mean? To this end,
that we may have an entrance unto grace. So then the So also says Aug. epist.
89. ad Hilarium. Iubet ideo ut facere jussa conati, and in nostra infirmitate
sub lege fatigati adjutorium gratiae poscere noverimus. vide etia^ August.
Tract. 17. in Joh.
Law is a Minister that prepares the way to Grace, for God is the God of the
humble, the miserable, the afflicted, etc. Can there be any more plain and
pregnant evidence to convince you of error in this your opinion [That the whole
Law is wholly abolished] then this which is given in against you, by your own
witness, that it is not only yet continued, but also for so necessary uses,
offices, and services, for ever established? even so long as there shall be any
need for a sinner to be humbled, and of a Veniat Medicus and sanet aegrotes.
Medicus quis est? Dominus noster Jesus Christus. -- -- August. in Eua. Ioh.
Tract. 3.
Savior to be sought unto. And yet if all this be too little, hearken to his
admonition, and observe his protestation touching this particular, and you
shall yet have a more ample and effectual satisfaction and conviction in the
same. Luth. on Gal. 3.19. fol. 153. b.
Luther on Gal. 3.19. Here I admonish (says he) all such as fear God, and
especially such as shall become teachers of others hereafter, that they
diligently learn out of Paul, to understand the true and proper use of the
Law, which, I fear after our time will be trodden under foot, and utterly
abolished by the enemies of the truth. Hearken I pray you to this admonition,
and try the truth of your opinion by these four points contained in it. 1.
That yet there is a true and proper use of the Law. 2. That Paul the Apostle
does teach what the true and proper use of the Law is. 3. That all that fear
God, especially Ministers, ought to learn it, as he does teach it. 4. That
they are enemies of the truth, that go about to tread it under foot and to
abolish it. And now observe his protestation: Luth. on Gal. cap. 3.19. fo. 154.
a.
Forasmuch as we teach those things both diligently and faithfully, we do
therefore plainly testify, that we reject not the Law and works, as our
Adversaries do falsely accuse us, but we do altogether establish the Law, and
require the works thereof, and we say that the Law is good and profitable. Put
your position in the balance and scale with this protestation, and it will be
found lighter then vanity it self: For first whereas you say the law is
abrogated, as if it were now of no use at all, Luther says, it is good and
profitable. Secondly, where you say the whole Law is wholly abolished (as if
you would place it in the same condition with Rahels children for which she
mourned because they were not) Luther says, We do altogether establish the
Law, and require the works of it. Thirdly, whereas you charge Luther to be one
that goes about to abolish or reject the Law, he takes you for no friend, but
for an Adversary in so doing, and reckons no other of your allegation out of
him, but as a false accusation laid against him.

Antinom.
But if Luther will not serve your turn, you can make a fresh supply by
Tossanus and Gualter, whom you have set to stand in subsidiis paulo post
principium: And what help can you have from them, that speak nothing more in
your cause, nay much less (if less can be) then Luther did; for where Tossan.
in 2. Cor. cap. 3.
Tossanus says, Licet unus sit Deus, and una semper fuerit Ecclesia, idemque
substantia foedus, varia tamen hujus dispensatio fuit, ut aliter agitur cum
homine in infantia, aliter in adolescentia, aliter in matura aetate; and you
would hereupon conclude, that the whole law of Moses is therefore wholly
abolished; Simile adds thereunto, might have shown you so much at the first
view, if you had with any heed and diligence looked upon them: for when he
grants that the So does Aug. contra Adversa. Leg. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Covenant both before and since the coming of Christ for substance is the
same, differing only in the manner of dispensation, Novum Testam. in veteri est
figuratum, and Vetus in Novo est reuelatu^. Vide Hyper. in Heb. cap. 3. p. 158.
or administration, does he not plainly confirm the contrary to your
conclusion? viz. "Therefore the whole Law of Moses since the death of "Christ
is wholly abolished: For how can that which for substance is the same, be said
to be wholly abolished? And how can that be wholly abolished, which only in
some circumstance is altered and changed? An utter abolition argues a
destruction of the substance. A diverse dispensation intimates only an
alteration of that which for substance remains the same still. And this the
Simile which he annexeth may teach you, unless you will deny that Samuel 1 Samuel 3.1.
standing before Eli, is not the same Samuel which his mother Hannah 1 Samuel
1.23.
nursed, because he is now of riper age, wears a linen Ephod, and eats of
the Priests portion, whereas then he was a Babe in a childs coat, and had no
other meat but milk which he sucked from his mothers breasts. After this manner
says Tossanus may we judge of the Covenant, Idem Deus, eadem semper Ecclesia,
idemque substantia foedus. But God our Father deals with his Church as with
his child. In her Ezekiel. 16.
infancy he feeds her with 1 Cor. 3.2.
milk, in her riper age with Heb. 5.14.
strong meat, or as a father nourtureth his son in his minority, He keeps
him under Gal. 4.1.
Tutors though he be Lord of all, but when the time appointed of the Father is
come, he sets him at liberty, and puts him in possession of the inheritance
provided for him. The Jews were as the Lords child, Exodus 4.22.
Israel is my first borne, heirs of the same promises, and having interest in
the same 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
Covenant of grace with us, but they were but in their Gal. 4.3.
infancy and minority in comparison of the Church under the Gospel, fed with
carnal and with earthly things, and under the regiment of Moses Laws, and
Ceremonies, as under so many severe Tutors, and sharp Gal. 3.24.
Schoolemasters, taught as it were, the principles of Religion by Heb. 10.1.
Types and figures kept Gal. 4.9.
in bondage under the rudiments of the world, pressed and oppressed with an
intolerable Acts 15.10. Vide Justin. M. Dialog. cum Tryphone Iudeo.
burden of Legal and Leuiticall rites and ordinances, and all this to break
the spirits of a (...). Justin Mart. Dial. cum Tryphon. Jud. p. 205.
stiffnecked people, to convince them of all unrighteousness, to humble them
by the rigor of the Law, and the terror of the Curse, and either to lead or
drive them to seek for life and liberty, righteousness and happiness in
Christ alone, as he was darkly shadowed unto them in their ceremonies and
sacrifices, and in the fullness of time should be exhibited in great power and
virtue, beauty and glory. To this very purpose does the same Tossanus allege
out of 1 Cor. 2. and 2 Cor. 3. That the Gospel has his proper and peculiar
glory, and that above the Law. Cum non sit literale solum Ministerium aliquod
jubens, sed conjunctam habeat efficaciam and (...) spiritus sancti. Which we
willingly yield and assent unto, seeing the law contained in the 10.
Commandments did exact absolute obedience, but gave neither promise nor power
of grace to perform it: But the Gospel in the Heb. 8.10.
Covenant of grace, requiring us to Marc. 1.15.
repent, and believe the Gospel, promises and powers out upon us the spirit
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Zach. 12.10.
of grace to work this repentance and faith in us, and to cause us to walk in
his Statutes, and to keep us that we do not depart from him any more. And in
this sense the Apostle says of the Romans 6.14.
Romans and all true believers, You are not under the Lex j^bere novit, Gratia
juvare. Aug. ad Innocent. Epist. 95.
Law, but under grace. As it he had said, neither does the Lord now urge, nor
do you now accept of the Law, upon the former condition (Do this and live) as
if we were to seek justification and salvation by the works of it, but the
Lord has left it, and we receive it as Psalm. 119.105.
A light unto our feet, and a lantern to o^r steps, that being his Ephesians.
2.10.
workmanship in our new birth created unto good works, which God has
ordained that we should walk in them, we might have some good help by the law
Romans 12.2. Romans 13.9, 10.
to prove what is the good and acceptable will of God, and so viewing our faces
in this Iam 1.23, 25.
Glass, and in that also of the Tit. 2.11.
grace of God which has appeared unto us, we might learn to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live religiously, soberly and righteously in this
present world. Thus may you see that the testimony which Tossanus is brought
in to give on your behalf, will not stand you in any stead to procure any
credit or to add any strength unto your cause; and as little either comfort or
help does that afford you which Antinom. Gualt. in Gal 3. ver. 20.
you allege out of Gualter to the same (that is as I conceive) to as little or
no purpose; for in the place you cite on Gal. 3.19, 20. speaking of the Law,
Quae duravit ad tempus, quamdiu ejus usus fuit; he means the old Testament or
Mosaicall government, which consists in the substance of the Ceremonial, and
in some circumstances of the Moral Law; and this (we grant) was but to endure
for See Tertullian ^dvers. Iudaeos cap. 3.4.5 6.
a time, viz. until the coming of Christ. Which to be the true sense and
meaning of the words, appears most evidently by three opposite clauses, which
follow in the very words which you allege. 1. At Gualt. in Gal 3.19, 20.
nunc novi Testamenti tempus est] therefore he speaks in the former words of
the old Testament. Haec Occonomia abrogatur. Bez. in Gal. 3.24. and in Gal. 4.1.
2. Quando lex and Prophetae Euangelio cedunt] therefore he speaks of the
Mosaicall government; the Ceremonies and Circumstances whereof, were all
abolished, and all the Prophecies thereof accomplished at the coming of him
that was the Heb. 10.1. Ioh. 1.17.
truth of those Types, the substance of those Col. 2.17.
shadows, yea the aim and Rom 10.4.
end of the Law and the Prophets, Christ Jesus. 3. Vt tam gentibus, quam
Iudaeorum reliquijs in regnum Dei vim facientibus locum dent,] therefore he
means, not (as you would have him) that the Moral Law is wholly abolished,
but only so much of Moses Law, as made any difference betwixt Ephesians. 2.14, 15.
Col. 2.14.17.
Jews and Gentiles, or might prove any hinderance to their happy entrance
into the kingdom of God, so much only is vanished away as a cloud, or mist, at
the rising of the Malac. 4.2.
Sun of righteousness, in the Romans 13.12, 13.
day of the Gospel. But it may be you reckon of these whom hitherto you have
set forth, as if they were but milites levis armaturae, scouts or light
horsemen, to try the coast and to make a flourish. Now you begin to plant your
great Ordnance, to muster your men, range your Army, and to charge the enemy
with a sharp assault for the utter abolishing of the whole Moral Law. For the
effecting whereof Antinomus.
you are bold to say; 1. That the Fortunam Priami cantabo, and nobile bellum.
Quid dignum tanto feret hic promisser hiatu? Horat. de Art Poetica.
whole Epistle to the Galatians imports so much. 2. That the whole Epistle to
the Hebrews is to the same purpose. 3. That the practice of the Apostles in
all their Epistles confirms the same, seeing they never ground any
exhortation upon Moses Law, nor use any form of commandments, much less make
any allusion to Moses Law or the ten commandments: and so you go on with
fourth, and fifth, etc. until you have made up a full dozen. The mother of
Judge. 5.28.
Sisera trusting too much in her sons valor, his chariots, and his men of
war, fed her fancy with a conceit, nay with an assurance of a joyous and
glorious victory; Why is his chariot so long a coming? Why tarry the wheels
of his chariot? Her Judge. 5.29, 30.
wise Ladies answered her, yea she returned answer to her self, Have they not
sped? have they not divided the prey, to every man a Damsel or two, to Sisera
a prey of diverse colors? But yet for all this Sisera being cut short of his
life, by Judge. 5.24.
Iael the wife of Heber, the mother of Sisera also came short of her hope, and
the success of that war was nothing answerable to the confidence and conceit
which she had, and held of it. I fear me, the conceit of your great
preparation, together with the confidence in your men and munition, has bred
in you not much unlike both spirits and speeches in this conflict, and it may
be some of your wise friends (as her wise Ladies) have been ready enough to
soothe you up with some answer, answerable to your present humor: Yea (rather
then fail) you will return answer to your own words: Great helps breed great
hopes. What? Shall we not speed? shall we not divide the prey? shall not this
conflict end in a conquest? and shall we not obtain honors and favors, as a
prey of diverse colors? If your conceit be such and so high, take heed, both
you and it do not take a fall? Judge. 5.26, 27.
A hammer and a nail in the hand of a weak woman, if the Lord will give
wisdom and strength to handle them aright, may quickly dispatch Sisera, dash
his mothers hopes, and turn all his, and her joys into sorrows, and their
glory into shame. And is not my word, says the Lord, as an hammer Ierem. 23.29.
, and are not the words of the wise (that is, such as speak according to this
word) as Eccles. 12.11.
nails fastened by the Masters of the assemblies? What though there be want of
wisdom in the head, and of strength in the hand of him that shall use them,
yet he that stands in Gods 2 Chronicles. 20.15.
cause, and fetches his Ier. 23.22. Ephesians. 6.11.13.
weapons out of the Lords Armory, and comes in the 1 Samuel 17.45.
name of the Lord against his adversary, may rest assured that the Lord will
manifest his wisdom in foolishness, and perfect his 2 Cor. 12.9.10.
strength in weakness, and that he will so teach his Psalm. 144.1.
hands to fight, and his fingers to war, that as the 2 Chro. 20.15.17.20.
battle is, so shall the victory be the Lords also. In this confidence alone I
have entered this encounter and am come forth into the field against you. The
mounting of your great ordnance with so "great words, The whole Epistle to the
Galathians, etc.

The Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Horat. de Art. poetica.
whole Epistle to the Heb. the practice of all the Apostles in all their
Epistles, etc. does not so much amate me as amaze me. I do not so much fear
the danger as wonder at the manner of your dealing. The pieces which you
mention, I acknowledge, and reverence as some of the Lords great ordnance: but
all the powder and shot that you have given them, can make them neither speak
nor do any thing against the truth, but for the truth. You have mounted them
too high, and have ouercharged them too much, so that whiles you would
discharge them against one of the bulwarks of Sion, you ouer-shoot your mark,
and cause them with greater force to recoile upon your little Babel, which you
have built to make you a name in the earth, inter filios terrae, among the
sons of the earth.

Antinomus.
You say, The whole Epistle to the Gal. imports so much, for (say you) It is
the general Argument of the same. Does the whole Epistle to the Galath.
import, that in the Church of Christ since his death, The whole law of Moses is
wholly abolished and abrogated? Or is this the general Argument of the same?
whole abolishing of the whole law of Moses, be neither the general Argument of
the whole Epistle, nor any special or particular Argument of any part or
parcel of the same? The Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians.
It is very likely that what you affirm herein, you have rather taken upon
trust, than upon trial; for had you but searched into the Epistle it self for
the subject and special scope of it, and well considered the estate of that
Church, at that time, when the Apostle writ unto it, you might have easily
understood, that the purpose of the Apostle, was not to prove that the whole
law of Moses was wholly abolished; but that only in the matter of justification
by faith in Christ, the law of Moses neither Ceremonial nor Moral, could
stand them in any stead. For whereas at that time, Hieron. in Ep. ad Galat. cap.
1. August. p^aefat. in Epist. ad Gal.
certain false teachers had labored to withdraw the mind and hearts of the
Galatians, from that sincerity of the Gospel (touching the righteousness of
faith in Christ alone) which Paul had taught them, by inducing and persuading
them to entertain the Ceremonies of the law of Moses, as necessary to
justification and salvation; and so to join the work of the law with faith in
Christ: Paul being much troubled at their backsliding, and desiring to recover
and recall them to their former standing, directs this Epistle unto them;
wherein as he justifies both his calling to be an Apostle, and the Doctrine of
faith in Christ alone for justification and salvation, to be of God and not of
men, so he evidently proves, that by the works of the law no flesh can be
justified, that Tertullian also justifies this, that not the abrogation of the
moral, but of the ceremonial law, is the Argument of the Epistle to the
Galat. Sed quae velit intelligi elementa, primas scilicet literas legis ipse
declarat, di^s observatis and annos, and sabbata opinor, and coe^as pu^as, and
j^j^nia, and d^s magnos: cessare enim ab bis sicut a circumcisione oportebat.
vide Tertul. advers. Marcion. lib. 5. cap. 4. See also Justin Mart. Dial. um
Tryph. Iudaeo.
Circumcision, new Moons, Jewish Sabbaths, and all other ceremonies, types,
and figures of Moses law, (leading as a Schoolmasters unto Christ) were now
abolished, and that if either Jew, or Gentile, did either entertain or
maintain them as necessary to salvation, mingling Law and Gospel, faith and
works, types and truth, Moses and CHRIST together, for our acceptance and
reconciliation with God, they did not only abase themselves in returning unto
beggarly rudiments, and putting themselves under their former yoke of bondage,
but they did further (as far as lay in them) make void the death of Christ,
and fall from Grace; whereupon he exhorts them to stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free, and so to use their liberty that it be
not any advantage to the flesh, but that they may serve one another by love,
Galat. Chapters 2. 3. 4. 5.

That this is the scope and drift of the Apostle, and the special Argument and
subject of the Epistle to the Galat. if the Text it self, which I have cited,
do not make it evident, or the Testimony which I have given thereof, seem to
you to be insufficient, Hieron. praefat. in Epist. ad Galat.
I pray you admit of the evidence that two or three more eminent and more
ancient witnesses will give in unto this point. Hierom. in Prooem. in Epist. ad
Gal. Sciatis eandem esse materiam, and Epistolae Pauli ad Galatas, See Tertul.
again more plainly determining of the Argument of the Epistle to the Gal.
Principalem adversus Iudaismum epistol^m nos quoque confitemur quae Galata^
docet: ubi Apostolus in Christo post Iohannem revelato, vetera infirmat, nova
vero confirmat. Tertull. lib. 5. adver. Marc. cap. 2.
and quae ad Romanos scripta est. Nullus quidem Apostoli sermo est, vel per
epistolam, vel praesentis, in quo non laboret docere antiquae legis onera
deposita, and omnia illa quae in typis and imaginibus praecesserunt, i. otium
sabbati, circumcisionis injuriam, calendarum, and trium per annum solemnitatum
recursus, scrupulositatem ciborum, and per dies singulos lavacra iterum
sordidanda, gratia Euangelij subrepente cessasse, quam non sanguis victimarum,
sed sides animae credentis impleret. Et paulo post scribit Apostolus ad eos qui
ex gentibus fidem Euangelij receperant, and rursum retro lapsi quorundam
fuerant authoritate deterriti, asserentium, Petrum quoque and Iacobum, and
totas Iudaeae Ecclesias Euangelium Christi, cum lege veterimiscuisse: ipsum
etiam Paulum aliud in Judea facere, aliud nationibus praedicare, and frustra
eos in crucif^rum credere, si id negligendum putarent, quod Apostolorum
principes observarent.

By this you may perceive, that Saint Hierom takes the Argument of the Epistle
to the Galatians, to be the same with the Argument of the Epistle to the
Romans; wherein the Apostle proves, that by the works of the law, whether
Ceremonial or Moral, no flesh can be justified before God; using the same
words in both Romans 3.20.28. and Gal. 2.16. And this he urges as the principal
scope of the Epistle to the Galat. That Paul labors to reprove them for
their declining from the simplicity of the Gospel unto Jewish Ceremonies,
teaching them that Circumcision, their new Moons, solemn Feasts, and all
other their Legal Services and Sacrifices were utterly abolished, and in no
sort to be mingled with the Gospel. I say therefore in a word with Saint
Jerome, Onera See Aug. lib. 4. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonif. c. 5.
legis Ceremonialis esse deposita, and opera legis Moralis in justificatione
peccatoris esse perpetuo deponenda. And if you shall object as you do, Do you
not then make void and abolish the Law through faith, I answer with Romans 3.31.
Paul, one greater than Ierom, God forbid, yea we establish the Law. And if S.
Paul establish the Law, how dare you go about to abolish it?

Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Chrysostom also gathers the Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians, out
of Gal. 5.2.4. I Paul say unto you, That if ye be circumcised Christ shall
profit you nothing; and again, Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye
are fallen from grace: Whereupon he inquireth, Quid igitur tandem hoc erat; and
immediately answers, Qui ex Iudaeis crediderant partim occupati persuasione
August. is of the same mind, in praef^t. in Epist. ad Galat.
Iudaismi, partim inanis gloriae fiti temulenti, dum sibi doctorum cupiunt
parare dignitatem authoritatemque, profecti ad Galatas docuerunt, illis opus
esse circumcisione, servanda sabbata and novilunta, nec tolerandum esse Paulum,
qui harum rerum tolleret observationem: Nam Petrus, Iacobus, ac Johannes, haec
(ut aiebant) non prohibebant, etc. And a little after he adds, Proinde cum
cerneret totum Galatorum gentem inflammatam, ac periculosum incendium adversus
illorum Ecclesiam excitatum esse; scribit Epistolam ad universos ad ista
respondens, etc. Compare your Assertion with Chrysostomes opinion, and you
shall find that the Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians is not (as you
would have it) that the whole Law of Moses is wholly abolished, but that the
Ceremonial Law is ceased, and may not in any sort be joined with the Gospel;
and that the works of the Law, both Ceremonial and Moral, are for ever in
the matter of justification and salvation disinabled and discarded. Theodor in
Arg. Epist. ad Galat.
Theodoret is of the same mind, with Chrysostom, and sets down the
Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians, in almost the same words. Oecumenius
in Arg. Epist. ad Gal.
Oecumenius also to the very same purpose says, Quum been decti ab Apostolo
Galatae fuissent, sincereque in Christum credidissent, peregre profecto
Apostolo, sic a nonnullis surrepti sunt, ut circumciderentur, Apostolus scribit
ad eos, redarguit cos quod stulte egerint, and immutati fu^nt: ^isserit de
lege, and de ea quae secundu^ Abraham est, side, argumentaturque tum ex lege
ipsa, tum exuxoribus ipfius Abrahae allegorice sumptis, quod and umbra and
circumcisio ipsa ad tempus usque data fuit, and Christi adventu superva^aea
facta. By the judgment of Oecumenius therefore, touching the Argument of the
Epistle to the Galatians, your judgment being put in the scale with it, will
be found to be too light, there being no dispute (in his opinion) for the whole
abolishing of the whole Law of Moses, Moral as well as Ceremonial, (as you
would have it) but only for the abrogation of the Ceremonial, now that Christ
is come in the flesh (as he does deliver it) and we willingly assent unto it.
Agreeable hereunto is the judgment of Au ust. lib. contr. Faustum.
Augustine, Ambros. in Epi. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Ambrose, Her. in Psalm. 118. (...).
Hilary, Beda. in Arg. Epist. ad Gal.
Beda, Justin. Mart. in Dial. cum Tryphon.
Justin Martyr, whose testimonies I have not leisure to set down at large, the
places I have quoted, you may search if you desire to see; Only I pray you
consider, what Erasm. in Arg. Epist. ad Gal.
Erasmus whom you allege so often and commend so much, has himself set down
concerning the Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians. Agit in hac Epistola
quod nusquam non agit, ut a legis Mosaeicae servitute, invitet ad Euangelij
gratiam: and afterward, Demonstrat legem Mosaicam ad tempus modo fuisse datam,
and ad unum Christum illum, spectasse omnia: and lest you should mistake his
meaning, as if he comprised the Moral Law herein together with the
Ceremonial, he shows evidently by the words following, that he means only
the Ceremonial and not the Moral Law: And therefore he adds: In illa
[Mosaica lege] fuisse carnem, in Euangelio spiritum; in illa umbras, in
Euangelio lucem; in illa imagines, in Euangelio veritatem; in illa ser vitutem,
in Euangelio libertatem. Could you see thus much in Erasmus, and that upon the
Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians, so directly crossing that which you
affirm, and not rest satisfied therewithal, to the altering of your opinion,
touching the Argument of the same Epistle? Or were you so unadvised, that you
would not your self advise with one of your best friends, what his opinion
were of this Argument, and yet commend him unto others to seek, and take
advice and satisfaction from him in this point? But we will leave you to advise
better with Erasmus, if yet you will take pains to look upon him, and come
now to consider what counsel or comfort you have from Calvin, Beza, Perkins,
Parraeus, whom I guess by your quotations you have consulted withal. These
Antinomus.
you allege, to prove that the Moral Law is wholly abolished as well as the
Ceremonial, as if they had interpreted that place of Gal. 3.19.22.23. to that
purpose. Answer.
Let us examine your witnesses, and see if the evidence they bring in, will
serve your turn. You cite Calvin. Instit. lib. 3.19.4. Calvin has not one
word for the whole abolishing of the Moral Law in that place; he only shows
that the faithful are now freed by Christ from the yoke and rigor of the
Law, that now they obey the Law not as constrained by force, or compelled by
fear, but as of a willing and ready mind, induced thereunto by love, knowing
that they come to God as children to a father, that will in Christ accept of
their obedience to the Law, albeit they come far short of that perfection
which the Law requires in rigor at their hands: and this he makes manifest
by one precept of the Law: Legis praeceptum est, ut diligamus Deum ex toto
cord, ex tota anima, etc. This, says he, the best cannot do in that
perfection that the Law requires, Volunt, aspirant, conantur, sed nihil ea qua
decet perfectione faciunt: What then? he Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect.
5.
answers in the next section, That when poor souls shall perceive that
(being freed from the severe exaction and rigor of the Law) paterna leuitate
se a Deo appellari; hilares and magna alacritate vocanti respondebunt, and
ducentem sequentur. Is there one word or syllable in all this, tending to the
utter abolishing of the Moral Law? Nay is there not much to the contrary? For
does he that says, we are freed from the rigor, yoke, and bondage of the Law,
affirm (in so saying) that the Moral Law is wholly abolished, or are we
therefore discharged of all obedience to the Law altogether, because by faith
in Christ's obedience, we stand not charged with the exact and rigorous
observation of the same? Does not Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19 sect. 4.
Calvin himself in this very section which you allege, give instance in one
precept of the Moral Law as now in force and of great use, for believers to
frame their hearts and lives in obedience thereunto? Does he not say plainly,
Legis praeceptum est ut diligamus Deum? He does not say (as it seems you would
have him) Legis praeceptum fuit, as implying the Law was once, but now is not;
as, Virg. Aeneid. li. 2.
fuit Ilium, and ingens gloria Teucrorum, sed jam seges est ubi Troia fuit; or
as Tullie also could say: Cicer. Tuscul. quaest. lib. 1.
Triste vocabulum [fui] subest enim haec vis, habuit non habet: but he says
[legis praeceptum est] as being yet still in force [ut diligamus Deum] as
binding himself and all the faithful, to a filial and cheerful, not to a
rigorous and servile obedience in the duties of it. But seeing you have done
Calvin so great wrong, as contrary to his mind and meaning, yea to his words
and writing, to charge him with that he never wrote, spoke, nor thought, will
you do him that favor, as to let him speak for himself, and deliver his
own opinion, in his own words, whether he be of your mind or no, touching
the utter abolishing of the whole Moral Law? Neque hinc recte quis colligat
(says Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 2.
he, having proved that the Law has no place nor power in the justification of
a sinner before God) legem fidelibus supervacaneam esse, quos non id^o docere
and hortari, and stimulare ad bonum definit, tamet si apud Dei tribunal in
eorum conscientijs locum non habet: and he adds a little afterward, In hoc
fitum est legis officium, ut eos officij sui admonendo ad sanctitatis and
innocentiae studium excitet. Me thinks Calvin seems to frame his speech of
purpose, as if he meant to answer one in your coat, and to meet with your
opinion, though he were never acquainted with your person. For you will have
the whole Moral Law to be wholly abolished; he blames the very conceit of such
as think it needless or superfluous; indeed he acknowledges that it is of no
force for our justification, but confesses withal, that it is of great use
for edification and sanctification. You will have it not only ceased, but
abrogated, as having neither any office nor use: he says, it is so far from
being abrogated, that yet it does not cease to teach, to exhort, and to prick
the faithful under the Gospel, forward unto that which is good, and
testifies that it is a special office of the Law, by admonishing them of
their duty, to stir them up unto holiness of life. You say, The whole
Epistle to the Galatians, and the general Argument of it imports, that the
whole Moral Law is wholly abolished: and he to the clean contrary, adds
these to his former words: Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 3.
In hoc cardine totum fere argumentum Epistolae ad Galatas vertitur; giving us
thereby to understand, that by the Argument of the Epistle to the Galatians,
the Moral Law is not abolished, but in special office and use, even now and
for ever in the days of the Gospel to be continued. The words I have cited
out of Calvin, I have not fetched very far, being so near neighbors to the
place whence you took yours. Yours out of the fourth section, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 4. and sect. 2. and. 3.
where yet you have nothing which makes for you, and mine out of the second and
third section, where you may see almost every line is drawn to my hand, clean
overthwart and cross unto your opinion. What may a man (that would willingly
think well of you) think of your dealing in this allegation? Did you read
the fourth, and not the second nor third sections? That had been great
negligence, especially, there being so necessary dependence one upon another:
Did you read them and not understand them, taking that to be for you, which
was altogether against you? That had been too gross ignorance. Did you read
and understand, that Calvin in those sections had nothing to confirm, but much
to confute your opinion? And would you notwithstanding, bear us in hand that
he stood as firm on your side, as you had set him fair in your margent? This
were wilfully to shut your eyes against the light, and to endanger the comfort
of a good conscience. Which of these faults you are fallen into, I leave to
your second thoughts to consider, and to amend what you find amiss. Thus we
leave Calvin, who does neither prove, nor approve your opinion, but plainly
reproues it rather. Let us now examine Beza Antinomus.
your next witness, and see if his testimony will stand you in any stead, for
the utter abolishing of the Moral Law. Galat. 3.22. he speaks something of
the abrogation of the Ceremonial, but not a word of the abolition of the
Moral Law: his words will witness what I say, and convince you of no small
fault in this allegation also. Beza in Gal. 3.22.
Antea docuerat (says he) legem ceremonialem abrogatam esse, tum quatenus nos
arguebat peccati, ac mortis per transgressiones, tum quatenus fuerat ipsius
damnationis externum Chirographum: Nunc autem eandem ceremonialem legem
considerans (ut promissionum Euangelicarum suo tempore exhibendarum umbram and
figuram) docet, illam quoque hoc respectu cessasse, etc. What could be said
more distinctly, or more effectually, for expounding that very verse of the
abrogation of the Ceremonial, which you say, he expounds of the abolishing of
the Moral Law? Beza Beza in Gal. 3.23.
says, That the Apostle understands the Ceremonial Law in this 23. verse, and
that (being but a shadow and figure of the promises of the Gospel) it ceased
when Christ was exhibited: and you say (how truly let others judge) that the
same Beza says, that the same verse is to be understood of the Moral Law, and
that he proves thereby, that the whole Moral Law is wholly abolished. There
may be as much agreement betwixt light and darkness, fire and water, truth and
error, as betwixt Beza his Assertion and your Allegation in this point. But
will you with patience hear his opinion direct and downright, not for the
abolishing, but for the establishing of the Moral Law? Quid igitur, says Beza
in 2 Cor. 3.11.
he, writing upon 2. Corinthians. 3.11. Number lex abolita? sane, quod ad ceremonias
attinet, cessavit. At enim dices, number hac in part abolitum est Mosis
ministerium? minime vero, semper enim sunt homines ad Euangelium praedicatione
legis praeparandi. You may here see, if you will but turn your eye aside unto
this place, that he is so far from thinking the Moral Law to be abolished,
that he answers that objection, and so dasheth out the brains of your
opinion with a minime vero, and further affirms, that the Vide Bez. Theol.
Epist. Epist. 10. p. 104.
Law is to be preached as frequently and necessarily as men are to be prepared
for the receiving of the Gospel. Consider also what the same Beza in 1 Epist.
Joh cap. 2.7. Lex posita est regendae sanctorum vitae etc.

Est igitur damnanda Antinomorum and Libertinorum detestanda ^esis, Bez. in 1.
Tim. cap 1. v. 9.


Beza says, writing upon 1. John. 2.7. A New Commandment I write unto you:
there he putting a difference betwixt the Moral Law and the Gospel, says,
Lex quid sit faciendum, Euangelium quid sit credendum docet: sciendum est
igitur sic esse haec duo distincta, ut tamen unum alteri subserviat. Nec enim
Euangelio lex aboletur, quatenus quod rectum est praecipit, sed duntaxat
quatenus mortem omnibus ipsam perfect non praestantibus minatur. Lex mortis
terrore nos monet ut de vita in Euangelio quaerenda cogitemus, lex jam nobis
suavis est seccundum interiorem hominem magister, sicut copiose docet
Apostolus, Romans 6.7.8. capitibus. Hinc illud toties a Christo iteratum de Deo
and proximo diligendo mandatum. I pray you consider these particulars out of
this testimony, and tell me then whether Beza be with you, or ouer-against you.
1. That the Law and Gospel are distinguished, but neither of them both
abolished. 2. The Law and the Gospel do mutually serve one another in their
several offices and uses. 3. The Law is not abolished by the Gospel, but
established by the same. 4. The Law to them that are in Christ, See Bez. Epist.
Theolog. Ep. 20. of the use of the Moral Law even for Christians, at large.
is a sweet Master or Teacher, in whose lessons and instructions they delight
in the inner man. 5. That all these offices and uses of the Moral Law, are
warranted and confirmed by the authentical Authority of Christ himself, and
his Apostle Paul. All these points being set down by Beza so sound and
sufficient for establishing the Law, are as so many strong Arguments to
convince you of error, that go about to abolish it; and as so many rebukes
also of your unadvised and injurious dealing with so worthy a Divine, whom you
will needs draw in, to speak to your mind, though never so contrary to his
own true meaning. Let us now come to hear your third witness [Mr. Perkins]
whether he can speak any more to the matter than Calvin and Beza have already
done. Antinomus.
You cite him on the Galatians. No man is justified by the Law: Perkins in Gal.
3.11.
he says, that by the Law is meant, not only the Ceremonial, but also the
Judicial, and the Moral Law, and that Paul enlarges his disputation, from
one part to the whole Law. And he gives a good reason why he would abrogate
the use of the Moral Law, as well as of the Ceremonial, in the matter of
justification: for they (says he) which thought Ceremonies necessary to
justification, would much more think Moral duties necessary. All this we
willingly acknowledge with Mr. Perkins: What would you conclude hence? Is this
your Argument from this place? No man can be justified by the works neither of
the Ceremonial nor of the Moral Law, ergo, the whole Moral Law is abrogated
wholly as well as the Ceremonial Law. We grant the Antecedent, and deny the
Consequence, or Argument. For how does this follow, The Moral Law does not
justify, ergo, it does not instruct nor edify? unless it had no other
neither office nor use, but that alone. Will you see the fallacy, (...), by
another of the like stamp? 1 Samuel 8.7.
Samuel has ceased to rule, correct, condemn the people as a Judge; ergo, 1 Samuel 12.23, 24.
Samuel has ceased to pray for the people, and to teach and show them the good
and right way, as a Prophet: Or to use the Apostles comparison, A Gal. 4.1.
Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster cease to nurture, and keep his scholar under the rod, and in
the rudiments of Grammar as a child, ergo, he has no sufficiency nor ability
to teach him greater or better things, being now of riper age.

But to leave this Argument weak and feeble as it is, shall I be bold to ask
you a question? Do you read and allege your Authors for satisfaction or
contention, for coloring and countenancing of an error, or for searching and
lifting out the truth? I would gladly if I might safely, conceive the best; but
it seems strange unto me, that seeing Perk. on Gal. 3.12.
Mr. Perkins in the very next leaf, upon the 12. that is, the very next verse,
has so plain and evident sentences to confute you, that ever you durst
allege any thing out of him, as standing with you or for you. His words be
these: I say that the law written in our hearts, is still the law of Moses. And
again, Since man's fall, the Lord repeates the Law for weighty causes: 1. To
teach us that the Law is of a constant and unchangeable nature: 2. To advertise
us of our weakness, and show us what we cannot do: 3. To put us in mind that
we must still humble our selves under the hand of God, after we have begun by
grace to obey the Law, because even then we come far short in doing the
things which the Law requires at our hands. Who would once imagine that a man
fearing God, and bearing an honest mind to learn and seek out the truth,
would not have sought and seen a little farther into Mr. Perkins, before he
would or durst have produced him for a witness against himself, and against
the truth also. If all this be not yet sufficient, will you for your full
satisfaction, hear his final determination of the question. He proposes it
thus; Perk. on Gal. 3.23. p. 251.
How far forth is the Law abrogated? and answers this. The Moral Law is
abrogated in respect of the Church, and them that believe, three ways: First,
in regard of justification, and this Paul proves at large in this Epistle:
Secondly, in respect of the malediction, or curse, Romans 8.1. Thirdly, in
respect of rigor; for in them which are in Christ, God accepts the endeavor to
obey, for obedience it self. Nevertheless, the Law as it is the rule of good
life, is unchangeable and admits no abrogation, and Christ by his death did in
this regard establish it, Romans 3.31. What say you now to these words of Mr.
Perkins? Does he determine the question with you and for you, that the Moral
Law is wholly abolished, or does he not plainly resolve to the contrary, that
as it is the rule of good life it is unchangeable, and for ever by the death of
Christ established.

Antinomus.
Your next Testimony is out of Paraeus, in Argumentum Epist. ad Galatas, and in
other places upon that Epistle. Paraeus be much contrary to himself (which I
cannot so easily conceive of so judicious a Divine) you shall see I have reason
to think that upon the Galatians he speaks nothing for your opinion, seeing
upon the Hebrews, Cap. 8. page 400. 401. Paraeus in Heb. 8. p. 400. 401.
he purposely and advisedly writes so much against it. Lex Moralis (says he)
est aeterna justiciae norma; and then he shows how far the Old Testament is
abrogated. 1. Quantum ad doctrinae spiritualis gratiae circumstantiam de
futuro. 2. Deinde quantum ad conditionem impossibilem perfectae obedientiae. 3.
Quantum ad onus legalium rituum, and sacerdotij Levitici. Denique quantum ad
jugum polity Mosaicae, populi Iudaici cervicibus impositum. Whereupon he
infers thus, Vnde Manichaeonum and fanaticorum refutatur error, qui
abrogationem veteris Testamenti non folum ad tria illa, sed ad legem etiam
moralem male trahebant; and a little after he adds, De Lege Morali, and de
Mosis atque Prophetarum libris and doctrina, aeternitatem agnoscimus, de
ritibus and politia minime. By this you may evidently perceive, that Paraeus is
of opinion, that howsoever the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses be
abrogated, yet the Moral Law is perpetual and eternal, and that they are men
tainted with heresy or frenzy, that would draw the Moral Law into the same
estate of abrogation with them. And if you will look back a little to the
seventh Chapter and sixteenth verse of the same Epistle, you may see as much as
this, and somewhat more. Paraeus in Heb. cap. 7. ver. 16.18.
Obiter hic annotemus discrimen legis Moralis and Ceremonialis. Illa perpetua
and spiritualis est, ista caeduca and carnalis fuit: And again upon verse 18.
Probat nunc legis abrogationem inde pendentem. Et est taecita occupatio:
Quicquid sacerdotio fiat, lex Dei est immutabilis. Id inquit, non nego, de lege
Morali, nunc vero loquor de praecepto carnali, lege Ceremoniali. See more in
Paraeus, in Ep. Romans cap. 3.8.31. and cap. 7.7. Nam Valenti^ani. etc.
And this may sustice to clear Paraeus, that what you have taken, you have
mistaken from him, as approving your opinion upon the Galatians, which you see
he disproueth on the Epistle to the Hebrews. Let us now proceed to that which
follows.

There is a word Antinomus.
you say Galat. 3 19. mistranslated in most vulgar translations, which draws
many men away, Serves; Wherefore then Serves the Law? Neither the Greek (you
say) nor any Latin translation has it. If neither the Greek nor any Latin
translation have it, Serves, serve your turn? Because (forsooth) it is in the
Present Tense, Serves, and not in the Preterimperfect Tense, Served, Wherefore
then [serued] the Law? And why would you have it [serued] and not serves?
Because I guess you would have all men to know, that the Law was of some force
and use in times past, but now is of neither for the time present, and so
[serued] in the time past, serves your purpose very well for the present
business. But be it as you would have it, served; is served either in the
Greek or any Latin translation? or does not the Law now in the days of the
Gospel, serve to the revealing, conuincing, and condemning of transgressions,
as before it served to the same end and use in the days of the Law? or suppose
it served more then to that end than now it serves; serves it now therefore
to no other use at all? But you say, Many have been drawn awry by this word
[serueth:] Surely you are the first that ever I heard either make any exception
against it, or stand in any danger or fear of it. And Beza in Gal. 3.19.
Beza whom you allege, may be understood to take it rather in the Present,
than in the Preterim-perfect Tense: Quorsum igitur lata lex est, and, Quum lex
posita sit hominibus redarguendis: Implying thereby, not only whereunto the Law
served when it was first ordained, but that it Vide Beza in 1. Ep. Tim. cap. 1.
v. 9. Finis legis est charitas. (...). 1. Tim. cap. 1. v. 9.
serves yet to the same use in some respect, though in diverse things the use
be changed. Not unlike unto this, you say, is in Romans 3.20. Comes or is, By
the Law comes the knowledge of sin, which being read [came] or [was] of the
time past, makes (you say) the sense good. Not unlike unto that, is this
indeed, i. of as little either weight or worth. And why may not, (...), be thus
translated; For by the Law [commeth] the knowledge of sin, but must needs be
rendered thus, For by the Law [came or was] the knowledge of sin? You have
your reason, I hope, in readiness; for if the former stand in the present
time, then your opinion must needs fall presently: for then there is a present
use of the Law to discover sin. But if that fall and the latter come in his
stead, then you conceive hope that your opinion for the abolishing of the Law,
being now in danger of falling, shall hence have a prop to stay it up withal;
and what a one I pray you? why surely a sorry one, either this or none; By the
Law [came or was] the knowledge of sin, Ergo, the Law is now abolished, and
by the Law comes not now any knowledge of sin. This is indeed (as you said
truly) not unlike the other; the Law served for restraining, or condemning
transgressions, ergo, now it serves neither for these nor for any other use at
all. But does not the Apostle prove by the Law whether written in Tables of
stone, or in Romans 2.15.
Tables of the heart, that both Jews and Gentiles are Romans 3.19, 20.
all under sin; not only that they had been, but that even then at that
present they were. And was not this in the time of the Gospel, and does he not
convince them all of sin, by the present use of the Law? Observe what he
says verse 19. Now we know that whatsoever the Law, (...), it speaks to them
that are under the Law. Does he not use the present time, for the manifesting
of the present use of the Law, three times together in this verse, and
concludes in the next, That therefore by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall
be justified in his sight, because by the Law comes, or is, the knowledge of
sin. So Beza in Romans 3.19, 20.
Beza on this place does expound it; and Paraeus in Romans 3. v. 20.
Paraeus renders the words thus: Per legem habetur agniti^ peccati; whence he
concludes, ergo, non justitia; and Calvin. in Romans 3.20. and alibi. Quid enim
quaeso is it. sibi volunt tegem propter transgressiones positam esse, Gal. 3.19.
per legem esse cognitionem peccati, Romans 3.20. legem, peccatum efficere. See
Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 6. See Aug. lib. de Spiritu and litera,
cap. 13.
Calvin gives the sense of these words, Per legem agnitio peccati, to be this,
Lex convincit nos peccati and damnationis. You see then these learned men take
these words otherwise than you do; That by the Law comes [not came] or is
[not was] the acknowledgement of sin. As for that which you allege out of
Galath. 4.1. I must confess, I neither know how it makes any thing at all for
your point or purpose, nor can I conceive, what you mean to go about to make
so large proof of that which no man does deny. What here you write, has
neither dependence nor consequence, neither ioints nor sinews; much like unto
a shadow, which having some proportion of a man's body, has yet neither life
nor substance in it: For what if we yield you all this, that the Apostle by the
Heir in his minority, means the Church of the Jews before Christ, and by
the same in his riper age, the Church of Christ since his death? What is there
here, I say not of any power, but of any color to prove the abolishing of the
Moral Law? Is the Moral Law therefore wholly abolished, because the Mosaicall
regiment in Rites and Ceremonies, in Types and Figures, in Legal burdens, and
Leuiticall services, together with the rigor and terror of the Law, is now
ceased and abrogated? You might as well say the Heir when he was a child was
kept in, under sharp and severe Tutors and Governors, but being now come to
age, he may now live as he list: Or, the Church in her infancy was in bondage
to the Ceremonial Law, therefore in her riper age she is not bound to obey
either God or man, by the duties of the Moral Law. I could wish, you would
advisedly consider what our SAVIOVR CHRIST himself says; I came not to Est
igitur damnanda Antinomorum and libertinorum detestanda haeresis, says Bez. in
1 Timothy 1.9. and so say I.
destroy the Law, but to Mat. 5.17, 18, 19.
fulfill it; and whosoever he be that shall break one of the least of these
Commandments, and shall teach others so to do, he shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven. And remember again what S. Paul has
once told you already: Romans 3.31.
Do we make void the Law by faith? God forbid, nay rather we establish the
Law. Christians indeed, are freed from the bondage and burdens of the Law of
Moses, but yet must they take upon them Mat. 11.23, 29, 30.
Christ his yoke and burden, for his yoke is easy, and his burden light. Yea
they are charged to bear one another burdens, and so to fulfill the Gal. 6.2.
Law of Christ; that their faith may Gal. 5.6.13.
work by love, and they by love serve one another, and so show that they
delight in the Romans 7.22.
Law of God concerning the inner man, Luc. 1.74, 75.
serving the Lord in righteousness and holiness all the days of their lives,
that is, according to both the Tables of the Moral Law. Touching your
quotation out of Socrat. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. I have seen what he
says, but can see nothing for the abolishing of the Moral Law. He blames
them that contend so much for Jewish Ceremonies, keeping of Easter, observing
Days and Months, as never having well considered, that Quando religio Iudaica
erat in Christianam commutata, accurat. is illas Mosaicae legis observationes,
and rerum futurarum figuras penitus evannisse; and so urges that out of
Galath. 4.21. against them. But what will you say, if out of the same Chapter,
I bring you some evidence, that Socrates does not abolish, but establish the
Moral Law? Socrates Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. p. 21.
Apostolis propositum fuit, non ut leges de festis diebus celebrandis
sancirent, sed ut recte vivendi rationis, and pietatis nobis authors essent:
The Apostles, says Socrates, never purposed to make laws for holydaies, but
to teach us both by words and writing the way of godliness and good living.
And did not the Apostles this, especially by urging and applying the duties of
the Moral Law in both Tables unto Christians, both for their persons and
callings? Read and consider, Romans 1.2.6.7 12.13. Cap. 1 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 3.
Ephesians. 5.6. Chapters. Moreover, Socrates in the same Chapter, complains of
the Churches of the Gentiles, for the breaking of the Moral Law and violating
the Acts 15.20.
Apostles Commandment, Acts 15. Caeterum nonnulli his neglectis omnem
scortationem rem quidem indifferentem arbitrantur, sed tamen de di^bus sestis
tanquam de vita decertant, Dei Vide Iunium de polit. Mosis cap. 8. col. 1552.
praecepta evertunt, ipsis sibi leges sanciunt. In which words, does he not
blame such as professing themselves to be Christians, did yet account
fornication (which is a breach of the seventh Commandment in the Moral Law)
to be a thing indifferent, and so following their own lust, did overthrow Gods
Law? You have gained nothing then by your allegation out of Socrates, but lost
more than you looked for, at his hands: And as little have you got by that which
you take from Mr. Perkins again, out of Galat. 4.3. Antinomus.
who as you say, sets it out very fully. What is that which he sets out
so fully? The abrogation of the Moral Law? If you mean that, never scattered.
Or is it, that the Church under the Law, was but as the Heir in his minority,
but the Church under the Gospel, as the Heir come to age? If this be your
meaning, we acknowledge he handles this point of difference betwixt them very
fully, and as many other Divines also do, very soundly too. But what of all
this? Mr. Perk. on Gal. 4.3.
Perkins says, The Fathers of the Old Testament, were children in respect of
us, two ways: First, in regard of the Mosaicall government, because they were
kept in subjection to more Laws than we: Secondly, in regard of revelation,
because God has revealed more to us than to them. And this he says truly and
well. Is there any thing here to be found for the utter abolishing of the
Moral Law? If there be, why do you not show it? If there be not, why make you
such a vain flourish for it?

Have you yet any more to say out of the Epistle to the Galatians? Antinomus.
Yes it seems you yet look for some help from Luther upon Galat. 4.1. where
you say, He acknowledges an end of the Law at the coming of Christ, but does
not fully handle it so. Me thinks you have no great confidence in this
allegation; Luther, I doubt, has not so fully handled the matter, as to
fulfill your mind in it. You know right well, that Luth on. Gal. 4.1. See
Muscul. in Mat. 5.17.
Luther speaking of the ending of the Law two ways; First, at the coming of
Christ in the flesh at the time appointed of his Father, Galat. 4.4. Secondly,
at the coming of Christ unto us daily by his Spirit; does only mean such an
end of the Law, As that when Christ is come into our hearts by faith, the Law
has not that dominion over us, to accuse, to terrify, to kill, to condemn us
spiritually, and before God, as formerly it had: And all this we acknowledge
may well be, and yet the Moral Law be of good and great use still. Antinomus.
But though Luther did not fully handle it so, yet it is plain (you say) that
the Apostles meaning was so: have it, (to wit, that the Moral Law is utterly
at an end) then might this our labor be plainly at an end also. But because
some others (it may be) cannot see this so plainly as you can, we desire it may
be made a little more plain unto us: For, the reasons which Antinomus.
you render; That the Apostle writes not particularly to true believers alone
amongst the Galatians ( as you say, he did to the Romans, Ephesians,
Philippians, and Colossians) but without distinction of true believers from
others, to them that professed Christ, calling them brethren, and that (as you
affirm) he shows them all, that they are now no more under the Law, Cap.
4.1. by the Simile of an Heir, and after by an Allegory of the free woman and
the bond, and that Cap. 5. he exhorts them to stand fast in that liberty.
These reasons I say, Galatians, to put an absolute end to the Moral Law, for
the utter abolishing of the same (as you would have it) but that the Gal. 2.16.
Cap. 3.11, 12, 13.
works of the Law, whether Moral or Ceremonial, in the matter of our
justification before God, and salvation by faith in Christ, are utterly to be
excluded, and abandoned, and that by Gal. 3.26. Cap. 5.1.
faith in Christ alone, the Galatians and all other true Christians, are freed
and set at Iren. aduers. Haer. lib. 4. cap. 5.
liberty, as from the burden and bondage of the Ceremonial Law, so from the
rigor and terror, dominion and malediction of the Moral also. Gal. 5.1.
And this is the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and wherein the
Apostle exhorts them to stand fast, and not to be again entangled in the
yoke of bondage. That this is the true sense and meaning of the Apostle, it is
most manifest and plain, by that his earnest and zealous protestation, which
immediately he annexeth: Behold I Gal. 5.2, 3, 4, 5. See Tertullian advers.
Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 33. lib. 5. cap. 2.3.4. that the Law is fulfilled in
Christ, not abolished by Christ.
Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing: For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to the whole Law. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of
you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. For we through the
spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, etc. Thus far we have
followed your steps in the Epistle to the Galatians, where we have not left you
so much as the breadth of a foot, to ground or settle your opinion upon. Now
you fly to the Epistle to the Hebrews, where you look for succor and
shelter as in a City of refuge; for you say, The whole See Zanch. judgment of
the Argument of the Hebr. Zanch. in Hos. cap. 2. p. 45.
Epistle is for your purpose: But we will pursue you with the sword of the
Lord, and of Judge. 7.18.
Gideon, i. The word of God, and the writings of the Lord his In Epist. ad Heb.
principalis propositio est, Ceremonias veteris legis esse abrogatas. Chemloc.
de lege, Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 7.
Worthies, and doubt not but we shall either draw or drive you thence also.

Is the whole Epistle to the Hebrews to the same purpose? viz. For the utter
abolishing of the whole Moral Law, for having any being or well being, any
office or use in the Church of Christ? It seems indeed you have taken
possession of the gates, the middle and the utmost parts thereof, as if all the
forts and fences, the turrets and towers, were your own already. But shall we
make an assault, and try what right or reason you have so to do? Antinomus.
Your first reason of so bold a speech, is this; In the very first verse he
opposes the speaking of Christ to all that were before him, he being Heir of
all things, whom the Angels must worship, and the heavens and earth must
vanish, And what makes this for your purpose? Is the Moral Law therefore
abolished, because Christ is opposed to all that went or were before him? Or is
this an opposition of contrariety or of disparity? Does the speaking of God by
Christ argue an abolishing, and not rather an accomplishing of all that was
spoken before him? Or can any man with any show or shadow of reason infer,
that because in former times God spoke (...) and (...), by the Prophets in
visions and dreams, by ceremonies and sacrifices, by revelations and
prophesies, by thunderings and lightnings, and the like, and by all these more
darkly and obscurely, not so effectually, spiritually, and comfortably, as in
the latter days he has done by his Son; Can any man, I say, infer
hereupon, that the Moral Law is wholly abolished? Nay has not Haec omnia non
dissolventis erant legem, sed adimplentis, and dilatantis in nobis, Iren.
advers. Haeres. li. 4. cap. 27.
Christ from his blessed mouth charged us not once to think that he came to
destroy the Law? He came not to destroy it, but to fulfill it: And does not he
renew the beauty and vigor of the Law, when he does clear it, and deliver it
from the foolish and false glosses of the Pharisees, and commends the duties
thereof to the practice of his own followers and Disciples? Besides all this,
seeing Christ in this first verse, is as you allege, opposed to the Prophets,
you may by as good reason conclude, that all the sacred Records of the Prophets
are now cancelled and cast out of the Church by the coming of Christ, in whom
they were accomplished, as that, the Moral Law first written by the finger of
God, is now utterly abolished, because by Christ himself it was fulfilled, and
if by that which follows [the heavens and earth must vanish, but he remaine]
you mean, that the Moral Law must needs utterly perish if Christ remain,
remember then I pray, that Christ himself has said the like of the Moral
Law, which the Apostles said of him; Heaven and earth shall pass, but one jot
or tittle of the Law shall not pass, till all be fulfilled. Upon which words,
Bulling. in Mat. 5.18.
Bullinger says, Per collationem rerum maxim stabilium and immotarum,
significavit perpetuam legis constantiam. Calu. in Mat. 5.18.
Calvin, Bez. Muscul. Vitus Theod. Perk. on the same.
Beza, Musculus, Vitus Theodorus, Perkins, are all of the same mind, writing
upon the same place. Of these I will only mention Mr. Perkins his words. The
meaning of this verse, says he, is, That the Law of God is unchangeable, not
only in the whole, but for every part thereof, and the fulfilling thereof shall
never have an end. But you go forward, and out of cap. 3. Antinomus.
you say, Moses was his servant. It is true, God that penned the rest of the
holy Scriptures too; What then? must it needs follow, that because Christ is
come as Lord, in, and over his own house, (which is his Heb. 3.6.
Church) that he has disallowed and disanulled whatsoever Moses or others of
his servants have done before him? This were enough to shake the very
foundation of the walls of Sion, and to lay level with the ground the stately
palaces of Jerusalem. What they have done, either in, or for the building of
Gods house, touching the substance and essential parts thereof, whether Ephesians.
2.20. Heb. 6.1, 2.
foundation of faith, or Phil. 3.16. Gal. 6.16.
rule of life, that Christ himself tells you again, he came not to destroy;
though they were but his servants in the house, and he Lord over it, yet think
not, says he, that I am come to destroy, either the Law, which is the Iam.
2.8.12.
rule of life, or the 2 Pet. 1.19, 20.
Prophets, which are a part of the foundation of faith. He came not to abolish,
but to Bez. Epist. Theologic. 20. page 104.
establish these things. But why did you allege only the former part of the
verse, [Moses was a Seruant] and not the latter [for a testimony of those
things which should be spoken after] to show what service the Apostle speaks
of in this place? Why? there was a reason in it, for the latter words speaking
of Moses service in the matters of the Ceremonial Law, (as Paraeus and other
worthy Divines do give the meaning of them) the alleging of these would have
quite maid your Market in that, for which you brought in the former, namely, to
the overthrow and abolishing of the Moral Law. As for that you add, Antinomus.
out of Hebrews Cap. 8. He is the Mediator of a better Testament, which being
the New, he abrogateth the Old, Ierem. 31.31. And that by the Old is meant, as
you say, that which was written in the Tables of Stone, Deuteronomy. 4.13. I answer
with reverend Bez. in Heb. 8.6. Tertul. advers. Iudaeos, cap. 3.4.5.6. and
advers. Marcion. lib. 5. c. 4.
Beza, That Christ is said to be the Mediator of a better Covenant, having
better promises; Nempe quoniam figurabant ritus Levitici, quod ipsi non
praestabant, cum credentium animos ad Christum venturum, sive ad novum pactum
remitterent. He opposes the Evangelical Covenant to the Leuiticall, as the
better to the worse, the New unto the Old, entering into the comparison of the
Old and transitory Testament, being but for a time (whereof the Leuiticall
Priests were Mediators) with the New, (the everlasting Mediator whereof is
Christ) to show that this was not only better than that in all respects, but
also that that was abrogated by this. This proves not then the absolute
abrogation of the Moral Law, as you intend it, but only the abolishing of the
Leuiticall Priesthood, with all their Mosaicall Sacrifices and Ceremonies, as
by the words going before, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 8.4, 5, 6, 7.
you may plainly see the Apostle meant it. Antinomus.
And because you appeal to the Geneua Note upon Ierem. 31.31. as approving
your exposition of that which out of Hebrews 8. you allege for the abrogating
of the Moral Law, Tertull. expounds this place Ier. 31. v. 31. of the
abolishing of the Ceremonial, and not of the Moral Law, Lib. advers. Judaos
c. 3.
Upon these words ( I will make a New Covenant, Ier. 31.31.) the Geneua Note is
this, Though the Covenant of Redemption made to the Fathers, and this which was
given after, seem diverse, yet they are all one, and grounded on Jesus Christ,
save that this is called New, because of the manifestation of Christ, and the
abundant graces of the Holy Ghost, given unto the Church under the Gospel. May
not this Note give you notice of thus much; That the Divines of Geneua, making
but one Covenant, both in the days of the Law, and in the days of the
Gospel, do only acknowledge an alteration thereof in some circumstances of
manner, measure, persons, places, times, and types, means, and ministers, and
the like, and that partly in the Moral, but especially in the whole In
Epistol. Theol. 8. Bez. and Epist. 20. Vide Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 11.
sect. 7. in hunc locum ex Ierem. 31.31.
Ceremonial Law; but do not so much as intimate any utter abolition of any
part of the substance of it, whether concerning the foundation of faith, or
rule of life? And how then do you imagine can the Geneua Note make for your
purpose, to prove by this place the abrogation and utter abolition of the
Moral Law? To give some weight unto your light opinion and slight exposition
of this place, you have burdened your margent with a multitude of witnesses, as
if they had now jointly settled and established you in the same: Not much unlike
me thinks herein, unto Philotus Cous mentioned by Athen. Dipnosophist. lib. 9.
cap. 23. and lib. 12. cap. 29.
Athenaus, who was of so light and slender a body, that he had weights of lead
tied to his heels, left by some blast or puffed of wind, he should have been
whirled and blown away. But wherefore do you bear us in hand, that so great
a cloud of witnesses as you have painted your margent withal, do all stand
for you, and with you, in the utter abolishing of the Moral Law? And yet you
have not drawn one drop from them all, to give us some taste of their uniform
consent with you in your opinion: Are they clouds without water? witnesses
without testimonies? Titles without evidences? Like Apothecaries boxes, that
bear goodly and fair names without, but have not a drugge nor a dram of any
thing that is good within? The Authors which you name, I acknowledge to be good
men, and full of good things, as 2 Cor. 4.7.
Vessels of the Sanctuary, trusted with the Lords treasure, and employed for
their 2 Timothy 2.27.
Masters use: And I have sought, and searched Calvin. Vatah. Tremel. Musc.
Zanch. Hipp. etc.
their Calvin. Vatah. Tremel. Musc. Zanch. Hipp. etc.
storehouses, with what diligence for the time I could; yet can I find none of
your leaven in their lump, nor any of their Gold to gild your dross. Shall I
deal plainly and fairly with you? I will make you a free and frank offer.
Set me down the Testimonies of the Authors which you allege for the utter
abolishing of the Moral Law, set them down, I say, [totidem verbis] and if,
of the two and twenty which you name in your margent, I do not prove, that one
and twenty are utterly against you, I will acknowledge you victor, and yield
you the whole cause without more ado. Cicero de Orat.
Tully says, That an Orator as well as a Warrior must do something, ad
specimen, non ad vulnus, something for a flourish, not all for fight; and so it
seems you do, though not as a glozing Orator, yet as a Teren. in Eun. Act. 4.
sc. 7.
bragging Soldier, you brave us as with a troop of horse and foot, and then
they be but shadows in stead of soldiers; much like those images of men which
(as Jul. Frontin. lib. 3. stratag. cap. 8.
Julius Frontius records) Cyrus the King of Persia besieging the City of
Sardis did put upon long Poles and armed them like Persian soldiers, and set
them upon one side of the City as an Army of men, to delude and terrify
Craesus and the Citizens therewithal. Now surely if any should be so credulous
as to believe, or so timorous as to fear, that all these Authors are armed
soldiers, which you have set up in the margent, as upon one side of your City
to defend your cause, I would have him answered only with the words of Judge.
9.36.
Zebul to Gaal, Judge. 9. Thou see the shadows of the Mountains, as if they
were men. But now to leave your shadows, and to deal with the substance of
that which you think yet remains in the Epistle to the Hebrews, for the
utter abolishing of the Moral Law; Antinomus.
You urge, That because the Tables of Stone wherein the Moral Law was written,
were removed with the Tabernacle, and other like Adjuncts, therefore the Moral
Law is utterly abolished. a remotione Accidentis, ad remotionem subjecti? Must
it needs follow, that because the Tables of Stone wherein the Law was written
be abolished, that therefore the Law it self is utterly abolished together
with them? Were the Tables of Stone so essential to the Moral Law, that it
had neither birth before them, nor being after them? Nay was it not written in
the Tables of the heart, first in the state of Primordialis lex data est Adae,
and Euae in paradiso, quasi matrix omnium praeceptorum Dei, Tertul. advers
Iudaeos cap. 2. ibi lege plura de lege.
Innocence, as in fair and golden Characters, and continued after the fall as
the Law of Nature, but as it were in dim and dark letters; and yet more
plainly August. quaest. Vet. and No. Test. quaest. 4.
renewed to Genesis 17.1. and 18.19.
Abraham and the Patriarchs, before it was ever written in Tables of Stone, for
the more manifest direction and conviction of the August. quaest. Vet. and No.
Test. quaest. 4.
Jews? And has not the Lord according to the Covenant of Grace, changed the
Tables of Stone into the fleshie August. de vera Innocentia ca. 258.
Tables of our hearts, the killing letter into the quickening spirit, not
putting out, but putting in, his August. de spir. and litera, cap. 14. and 21.
laws into our mind, and writing them by his Spirit upon our hearts, and so
causing us to walk in his Statutes? And has he not done all this, that as
Luc. 1.74, 75.
Zachary speaks, We might serve him according to his Law, without fear, in
righteousness and holiness (the sum and substance of both Matt. 22.37.39.
Tables) all the days of our life? How then does the removing of the Tables of
Stone, prove unto us the remouall of the Law written in them? Nay, if the
removing of the Tables of Stone, would prove the abolishing of the Law written
in them, then the Moral Law was abolished not only, as you say, after Christ's
death, but many hundred years before Christ's birth. For in the Second Temple,
there was not the Arc of the Testimony wherein the Tables were kept, nor the
Tables themselves neither: As not only Joseph. lib. 5. de Bello Iudai. cap. 14.
Josephus and the Petrus Galat. de Arcanis Catholicae verit. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Jewish Rabbis, with others, Morn. de veritate Chr. Relig. cap. 29.
Phil. Morn. De veritate Rel. Ludov. Vives de veritate Chr. fidei lib. 3. cap.
11.
Lud. Viv. de verit. Christ. fid. lib. 3. do record, but the sacred 2 King.
24.13.
Story also bears witness, seeing all the Vessels of the Temple, and all the
precious Instruments thereof that were of gold (as the Ex. 15.11.
Arc it self was, wherein the Tables of Stone were kept) were all carried
away to Babel, either in the former Captiuities of Iehojachim, and Ieconiah, or
the last which was the worst, of 2 Chronicles. 36.7.10.18.19.
Zedekiah when the City was sacked, the Temple spoiled, and both by the
Chaldaeans burnt with fire. Besides all this, it is most certain that as the
Arc of the Covenant, and the parts of it, the Cherubins, and the Propitiatory
Covering, or Mercy Seat, were all Ceremonies, and Types of CHRIST, and shadows
of good things to come in the days of the Gospel, so was both the writing of
the Law in Tables of Stone, and the putting of those Tables (being the Deuteronomy.
9.9, 11.
Tables of the Legal Covenant) in the Deuteronomy. 10.5.
Arc, which was therefore called the Deuteronomy. 10.8.
Arc of the Covenant; these also I say, were Typical and Ceremonial, but the
Law it self, both before, and then, and now, and for ever was, and is, and
shall be Moral still. To make this a little more plain. The Arc was a figure
of Christ, and a pledge of Gods gracious Numb. 7.89.
presence, where he promised to speak with his people, and whereunto he called
them to speak with him: This did signify, that there could be no intercourse
of mercies and duties betwixt God and us, but in and by Matt. 3.17.
Christ alone. The Exodus 25.21. Deuteronomy. 10.8.
Tables of the Covenant were put in this Arc and kept in it, to signify, not
only that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were hid in Col. 2.3.
Christ, but that the Law of God is fulfilled, and the justice of God
satisfied, and the wrath of God appeased, in and by 2 Cor. 5.18, 21. Act. 4.12.
Christ alone. These Tables were of Stone, Exodus 34.1, 4.
having the Law of God written by the Deuteronomy. 9.10.
finger of God in them, to signify that in the New Covenant, he would change
our hearts of stone, into Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
hearts of flesh, and write his laws by the 2 Cor. 3.^
finger of his spirit in the fleshy Tables of our hearts, and both cause us to
walk in his Statutes, and also accept of our obedience in Christ Jesus. The
Arc when the Tables of the Law were put in it, had a Exo. 25.17, 21.
Propitiatory Covering put upon it, Exodus 25. This did signify another part of
the Covenant, That in Christ alone the Lord will cover Heb. 8.10, 12. Romans 3.25.
and be merciful to our sins, and remember our iniquities no more, Hebr.
8.10, 11. Romans 3.1 Ioh. 2. Upon the Propitiatory or Mercy Seat, were the two
Exodus 25.20.
Cherubins looking down into the Arc: this did signify, That as the holy
Heb. 1.14.
Angels were appointed to be ministering Spirits, for the good of them that are
Heirs of salvation, so do they desire and delight to 1 Pet. 1.12.
look into Christ and his Church, and the mystery of the Gospel revealed in
the same. Now these things considered; this I say, That so far as these
Tables of the Covenant had any thing Ceremonial in them, or any thing
concerning other circumstances, of persons, time, place, terror, rigor, and
the like, being peculiar to the Church of the Jews in that estate of the
Mosaicall Pedagogie; so far I say, they are Temporalli horum administratio
fuit, Iren. advers. Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 8.
removed together with the Arc and Altar, Tabernacle and Temple, and other
Leuiticall Sacrifices and Ceremonies, Judicial types and rites whatsoever. But
the Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments, could not be Ceremonial, no
more than a substance can be a shadow, (for then should Moral and Ceremonial
have been confounded, whereas even by their writing in Tables of Stone, and
that by the finger of God they were distinguished) neither was there then any
thing for the substance of it, nor is now, (as now it stands upon record in the
Book of God) but it does concern us as well as them, according to that of the
Apostle, We know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully: and therefore,
though the Tables of Stone be removed, the Age, Marcion, omnesque jam
commiserones and coodibiles ejus Haeretici, quid audebitis dicere? Resciditne
Christus priora praecepta, Non occidendi, non adulterandi, non furandi, etc. An
and illa servavit and quod deerat adjecit? vide Tertull. adver. Marcion. li. 4.
ca. 36.
Moral Law is yet continued, and has (exceptis excipiendis) his proper use
and force still. That which you draw from Mount Sinai, has not strength enough
to withdraw all use of the Moral Law from Mount Sion. The Heb. 12.12, 13.
Apostle enforces his exhortation unto Christian obedience and patience, under
the Metaphors of lifting up their hands that hang down, and their feeble knees
(the better to enable them to resist, and hold out in running the race that is
set before them) by Arguments drawn from the comfortable and admirable
privilege of the Gospel and kingdom of Grace, far above those which the
Hebrews themselves had, under the regiment of Moses, in the estate of the Law.
This you say truly, and we do acknowledge, That greater mercies require
greater duties: But when you say, He does not press his exhortation by the Law
given in Mount Sinai, you are convinced of a gross untruth, by the two last
Heb. 12.28, 29.
verses of the same Chapter, where the Apostle presses this exhortation [Let
us have grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly feare] by an
Argument drawn from the Law, Deuteronomy. 4.24. viz. Antinomus.
For our God is a consuming fire. That which the Heb. 12.26, 27.
Apostle allegeth out of Agg. 2.6.
Aggai, and you urge out of both, concerning things that are shaken, may indeed
shake in pieces all the Jewish Ceremonies and Sacrifices (as most Divines do
agree.) But the Gospel is so far from shaking the Moral Law in that manner,
that it does rather join, and shake (...). Vide Justin Mart. Quaest. and Resp.
ad Orthod. p. 354.
hands with it, as if, that which is spoken in another place, were also
verified in them: Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace
do kiss each other. So far therefore as the Lord has joined them together,
let no man be so bold as to seek or sue out a Bill of Bez. Theol. Ep. Ep. 20.
p. 103.
divorce to put them asunder.

Thus have you seen and felt too, if you be not darkened in your mind by
prejudice and self-conceit, and so strangely hardened (which God forbid)
against all touch of truth, what sorry success you have had, in discharging
your many Arguments out of the whole Epistle to the Galatians, and out of the
whole Epistle to the Hebrews, notwithstanding all the powder and shot which
you have borrowed from so many men, or rather by fraud and force have taken
from them. We come now unto your third great Argument, namely, the practice of
the Apostels in all their Epistles; which you seem to me to have both mounted
higher and charged deeper, as a principal piece of Ordnance, for this special
service of battery and beating down to the ground, not only the walls and
windows, but the stateliest and strongest towers and bulwarks of the Moral
Law. Antinomus.
You say, The practice of the Apostles in all their Epistles, uses brotherly
exhortations, still calling them brethren: This English I understand not, but I
conceive you would say, Moses himself both spoke and wrote against the Moral
Law, when endeavoring to keep men in obedience to the sixth Commandment, he
used brotherly exhortations, and called them brethren; Act. 7.26. Exodus 2.13.
Sirs you are brethren, why do you wrong one to another? Act. 7.26. And tells
us, not only that they two were brethren, but has left it upon record, that
they were also his brethren, Exodus 2.12.
Exodus 2. And Lot also (like enough) practiced somewhat against the Moral Law,
when laboring to prevent the villainy of the Sodomites in the breach of the
seventh Commandment, he used brotherly exhortations, calling them brethren,
saying, Genesis 19.7.
I pray you Brethren, do not so wickedly. I had thought, that neither the name
of Brethren, nor brotherly exhortations, had been so peculiarly appropriate to
the Gospel, but that both might be used for the furtherance of the duties, and
restraint of the breaches of the Moral Law. Neither are rebukes, or threats,
(in my opinion) so proper to the Law, that they may not have their place and
use in the Gospel also. Ahab was never a whit the better, because he could
say, (in foolish pity) of King Benhadad; Is he yet alive? he is my 1 King.
20.32.
Brother. For there is August. ad Macedon. Ep. 64. Sicuti est aliquando
misericordia puniens, ita and crudelitas parcens.
crudelitas parcens. Nor was Paul ever the worse, because he wrote so sharply
to the 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, 13.
Corinthians, and dealt so severely with the incestuous person, as to deliver
him up to Satan; for there is misericordia puniens. The Apostles in their
Epistles have not only oil to supple, but wine to search; imitating that good
Luc. 10.34.
Samaritane that used both, in the cure of the wounded man: Neither do they
always apply mild lenities, but sometimes sharp corrasiues, to their ill
affected, or afflicted patients. Could you observe, that the Apostle calls
the Galathians ten times Brethren in that Epistle, and could you take no notice
of the sharp and bitter rebukes and reproves, which he uses against them?
Gal. 3.1, 3.
O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you? Are ye so foolish? I am Gal.
4.11, 20.
afraid of you. I stand in doubt of you. Gal. 4.9.
How turn you again to beggarly rudiments? Behold I Gal. 5.2, 3, 4.
Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing. Christ is become of none effect unto you whosoever of you are
justified by the Law; you are fallen from grace. I Gal. 5.12.
would they were even cut off which trouble you; yea if he were an Gal. 1.8, 9.
Angel from heaven let him be accursed. Have not these ten rebukes, almost ten
times as much acrimony and tartness, as the naming of them ten times brethren
has lenity and mildness? Paul a Preacher of the Gospel, knew there was use
of both, and at this present saw, that even the Galathians (his Gal. 4.12, 19.
brethren and his little children) had need of both, although a people that had
received and did profess the Gospel. If then your reason be good; The
practice of the Apostles stands against the Moral Law, because they use in
their Epistles brotherly exhortations to them to whom they write, and call them
brethren; then the practice of the Apostles stands against the Gospel also,
because in the same Epistles, they oftentimes rebuke them as wicked, and
threaten them sometimes as accursed creatures. But Antinomus.
you say, They ground their exhortations, neither upon Moses Law, nor upon any
other Commandment, but on the mercies of God in Christ, as may be seen in all
their Epistles. Now certainly, and making some show of reading and learning as
you do. Are you such a stranger in the Epistles of the Apostles, that you
could yet never find any of their exhortations, grounded on the Commandments
and terrors of the Law? And dare you be so bold as to say, They are all
grounded only on the mercies of God in Christ? And that this may be seen also
in all their Epistles? Have you read, Romans 12.1. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a
living sacrifice, etc. And have you not read in the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 4.1.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, preach the Word, etc. Romans 11.22.
He that bids us, behold the goodness of the Lord, bids us behold his severity
also; unto the Jews that fell severity, but toward us goodness, if we
continue in his goodness, otherwise we are threatened to be cut off also: And,
Some (as Ep. Iud. v. 23.
Jude speaks) we must deal withal in compassion, and by the looking for of
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life; and others we must save
by fear, plucking them as brands half burnt, out of the fire. He that
exhorts us to Col. 3.13.
Forbear and forgive one another (if any have a quarrel against any) and that
upon this ground of Gods mercy in Christ [euen as Christ for gave us,] Col.
3.13. does likewise exhort us, Not to Romans 12.19.
avenge our selves, but rather to give place unto wrath, upon another ground of
Gods justice, and that taken out of the Law, Deuteronomy. 32.35. [for it is written,
vengeance is mine, and I will repay it says the Lord.] He that says of the
Ministers of the Gospel, as of 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors of peace, We beseech you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto
God, says also (being himself one of the same) as an Herald of Arms: 2 Cor.
5.10, 11.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to give an account of
whatsoever we have done in our bodies, be it good or evil: knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. All their persuasions and
exhortations then, you may see, are not in all their Epistles grounded (as you
say) upon mercy, but some upon justice; not all upon love, but some upon fear;
not all upon the promises of the Gospel, but some upon the threatenings of the
Law, against all disobedience both to Law and Gospel: According to that of the
Apostle Iud. Ep. v. 14, 15.
Jude: Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all
their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoke against him: And that also of the
Apostle 2 Cor. 10.5, 6. See Tertull. on this place, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. lib. 5.
adver. Marc. cap. 16. Vide etiam Zanch. in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
Paul; We have in readiness to take vengeance of all disobedience, 2 Cor.
10.5. which the Lord Jesus shall accomplish, when he shall be revealed from
heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punis^ed with everlasting destruction from the presence of the lord, and from
the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8^ Had you advisedly considered these and
other such like passages in the Epistles of the Apostles, you would either
never have thought what you have said before, or never for very shame have
written that which follows after, viz. And though sometimes, Antinomus.
yea often they use the Imperative mood, and some words of Commandment, yet
they are so tempered with mildness (you say) and without penalty, as that
there is no form of Commandments, much less any allusion to Moses Law, or
the Ten Commandments. So tempered with mildness, 1 Cor. 4.21.
Corinthians with a rod, as mildly offer to come unto them in love, and in the
spirit of meekness? Or did you not consider, that the same Apostle does not
always as it were stroke their heads, and commend them in terms of love,
but (as occasion requires) sometimes strikes their naked consciences, with
some sharp rebukes, and threats, some bitter taunts, and terrors, as with the
twigs and ierks of his rod also? He that says, 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 11.2.
Now I praise you Brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances as I delivered them to you; takes them up more sharply for the
abuse of the Sacrament even in the 1 Cor. 11.22.
same Chapter, verse 22. What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? Or
despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say
unto you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. And he that in another
1 Cor 4.14.
place says, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I
admonish you, 1 Cor. 4. does he not afterward upon just occasion, more sharply
rebuke them? I speak to your 1 Cor 6.5. 1 Cor. 15.34.
shame; Is it so that there is not a wise man amongst you? no not one that
shall be able to judge between his brethren? And again, Some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15.34. Are not these
words as sharp and tart, as the former are mild and gentle? Is there not a
burning fire of zeal in the latter, as well as a warming fire of love in the
former? Fire I acknowledge in both, and holy fire too, but yet of a different
degree and temper; the one milder, and the other sharper, and both of special
use in their time and place. In distilling of flowers and herbs, a soft fire
will serve the turn, which in melting of mettles will do no good at all. And
although according to the common Proverb, A soft fire will make sweet Malt,
yet must it be a hot fire to make good Hos. 7.6, 7, 8.
bread, or good Exodus 1.14.
brick. This wisdom God has given the Isa. 28.26, 27, 28.
Husbandman, to beat out Fitches with a staff, and Cummin with a rod, but to
thresh with a threshing Instrument, and to turn the Cart wheel over the
stronger grain, that the bread Corn may be bruised and fitted for present
use. And this wisdom God has given his Isa. 28.26. 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Pet. 3.15.
Apostles as his chief Husbandmen, that in dealing with his people which are
Gods husbandry, they should use both mildness and sharpness, lenity and
severity, a staff, or a threshing instrument, as the nature or quality of the
seed, soil, or season, shall require. But who would not think (to hear and
take your words) that all the Epistles were so full of mild speeches and sweet
exhortations, that there were not any sharp rebukes, much less any ironicall
taunts, and least of all any terrible threats at all, to be found in all, or
any one of them? For Antinomus.
you will have, All to be mildness without any sharpness; all, but commanding
words without any form of Commandments; all, mercies and promises, without
any penalty or punishment; no urging of any precept of the Law, no not so much
as an allusion to Moses Law, or the Ten Commandments. And all this you urge,
to this end, to prove, That now in the days of the Gospel, the whole Moral
Law is wholly abolished. Prophecy not unto us right things, but speak unto us
smooth things, prophecy deceits: The Prophet Isa. 30.8, 9, 10. The Apostles do
reprove sins, and threaten sinners, out of the Moral Law. See (...). Ran.
Ceasu. Praelect. 183. p. col. 861. 862. 863.
Isay was charged, to write it in a Table, and to note it in a Book, that it
might be for the time to come, even for ever and ever: That this is a
rebellious people, lying children that will not hear the Law of the Lord. If
you go about to teach the Apostles to speak, and forbid these Seers to see,
saying, They neither command severely, nor rebuke sharply, nor threaten
terribly: i. They Prophecy no right things unto us, but speak all smooth
things unto us; all mildness, no sharpness; all mercy, no judgment; all
promises, no penalties; all words of commanding, but no form of Commandments;
all love and favor, but no rigor nor terror; take heed, lest your sin be
not written as with a Ier. 17.1.
pen of a Diamond before the Lord, and the censure thereof also, (for you, your
leaders, and followers,) made as remarkable for the time to come, as ever it
was upon the Jews, and even in the same words: This is a rebellious people,
lying children, (and that even for the same reason) Because you stand so much
against the Law of the Lord. But to proceed yet a little further, for your
better conviction and satisfaction in this point. If I shall show you out of
the Epistles of the Apostles, not only The Apostle S. John proves hatred of
our Brethren to be a sin, because it is a breach of the Moral Law, viz.
[Murther] offending against the sixth Commandment, and so does not only prove
it, but reprove it also, 1 Ioh. 3.14, 15. as deserving death, and depriving us
of eternal life. So does Paul also, rebuke and threaten Covetousness, because
it is Idolatry, a breach of the first Commandment.
sharp rebukes, (as you have heard some already) but some bitter and ironicall
taunts, many serious and severe Commandments, for avoiding of the sins and
performing of the duties of the Moral Law, many terrible threatenings of
dreadful judgments and curses, and that not only by way of allusion, but by
plain allegation of the Moral Law: If (I say) I shall show you all these out
of the Epistles, will you then honestly and ingenuously confess your error,
(having so boldly affirmed the contrary) and so rest satisfied with the truth
in this particular? Upon this subject a man might gather enough to fill a
Volume, and might spend more days then I can spare hours for this business.
A touch of some, and a taste of others, shall serve the turn. When the Apostle
1 Cor. 4.8.
Paul saw the Corinthians swollen and puffed up with a vain and insolent
conceit of their own excellency, as now boasting of their gifts; and, that
being now full by their elegant and eloquent Teachers, they began as it were,
to loath the honey comb of the Word in Paul's preaching: he wisely labors to
let out this wind of vanity, with an ironicall and bitter rebuke, as sharp
and piercing as the point of a spear or sword. Now (says he) ye are full,
now ye are rich, now ye have reigned as Kings without us: we are fools for
Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; 1 Cor. 4.10.
we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised.
Some Quintil. Instit. Orat. lib. 6. cap. 3. and lib. 9. cap. 2.
learned men do hold, that this and such like ironicall Lyra in 1 Cor. 4.8.
Ironice loquitur ut ostendat praesumptionem little derisibilem.
derisions, are the sharpest and seuerest reprehensions: Like unto that of our
Savior Christ, Mar. 7. where sharply reproving the ceremonious and
superstitious Pharisees, for preferring their humane Ordinances before Gods
Commandments; Full (...). Rajn. Censur. pra^ect. 169. See Beza advers. Sycoph.
p. 136. ut Amos. 4 4. ^e Bethel, and peccate.
well, says Mar. 7.9, 10.
he, do ye reject the Commandments of God, that ye may keep your own
Traditions. For Moses said, Honor thy Father and Mother, and ye say, It is
Corban, etc. Or like unto that bitter mock of 1 King. 18.27.
Elijah, against the worshippers of Baal, 1 King. 18.27. Cry aloud, for he is a
God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleeps and must be awaked. The same Apostle Paul also,
warning the Philippians of false Teachers, of wicked livers, and of them of the
Circumcision that were amongst them, does he not rate such persons as Dogs, and
scoffingly term their Circumcision Concision? saying, Beware of Phil. 3.2.3.
Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the Concision; and does not the same
Apostle give direction unto Tit. 1.11. (...).
Titus, to muzzell and stop the mouths of such Dogs, and branding the Cretians
with reproachful names, by a Verse alleged out of Epimenides, one of their own
Poets: ( Tit. 1.12.
(...).
The Cretians all are liars still, bellies slow, and beasts ill.)
Tit. 1.13.
He allows of this testimony as true, and thereupon charge Titus, to rebuke
them (...), cuttingly, or sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. As if
he would have Titus, to use these sharp reproves and reproaches, as
Chirurgions sometimes do their keen rasors, to cut away all brutish and base
sins, (as either dead or proud flesh) that so they might be cured of their
errors, and made sound in the knowledge and profession of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus. By all which bitter taunts, sharp reproaches, and cutting rebukes, any
that has either sight or sense, may plainly see, and perceive, that all Paul's
Epistles are not tempered with such mildness, as you have ignorantly and
rashly affirmed, (as if there were not so much, as any taste of tartness or
sharpness in them at all) But that Paul retaining his 2 Cor. 13.10. 1 Cor.
4.21.
Apostolical liberty (sometimes to smite with his rod of rebuke and censure,
as well as to speak in the spirit of meekness) did not only himself
(inflamed with holy and heavenly zeal) rebuke sharply, reproach bitterly, and
reprove grievously; but did also charge Tit. 1.13. 2 Timothy 4.2.
others of Gods Ministers severely (as occasion should require) so to do. And
all this he did with a wise heart, and merciful hand, to humble the people of
God, not to discourage them, for 2 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10.
edification, not unto destruction, to make them sound in judgment, and holy
in affection and conversation.

Now, whereas Antinomus.
you say further, That there is no form of Commandment in the Epistles, no
penalty, no urging of the Moral Law, nay not so much as any allusion unto
Moses Law, or the Ten Commandments: I say no more, Tim 6. I 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.
give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before
Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou
keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukable until the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And unto 2 Timothy 4.1. I 2 Timothy 4.1.
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom: Preach the word, be instant in
season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering, and
Doctrine. See also 2 Timothy 2.14. 2 Timothy 2.14.
Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that
they strive not about words to no purpose, but to the subuerting of the
hearers. Consider now these places, and tell me I pray you, if the Apostle do
not in these words as severely and seriously charge Timothy to keep the
Commandment which he had given him, for the duties of his person and calling,
as ever did Moses the people of Israel for observing of the Commandment of the
Law, when Deuteronomy. 30.11, 15, 18, 19.
he said, This Commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, etc. Behold I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that
I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing. For whereas Moses
calls heaven and earth only to record against Israel, Paul conuents Timothy,
as it were before the Lord of heaven and earth, and does not only command him
with all authority, but charge him with all severity, That as ever he would
have any benefit by Christ as his 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.
Redeemer [witnessing a good confession before Pontius Pilate] or would ever
render up his account unto him [ as a 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
Iudge] with joy at his appearing, he should be careful and faithful in
keeping his Commandments. Look also upon 1 Cor. 7.10. 1 Cor. 7.10.
And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife
depart from her husband: And upon Ephesians. 4.17. This I say therefore and
testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk, not as other Gentiles walk,
in the vanity of their mind. And 2 Thessalon. 3.6.10.12. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 10, 12.
Now we command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly. And that also,
1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 6.25.
I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, and before the
elect Angels, that thou observe these things. Consider, I pray you, these
places advisedly, and tell me whether you have not erred too too grossly, in
saying so confidently, That although in the Epistles of the Apostles, there
were some words of commanding, yet was there not so much as a form of
Commandment in them, seeing you have here many and worthy Commandments, both
for matter and form in full measure. But you say, Antinomus.
They are without penalty: Romans 6.21, 23.
Death, Romans 14.23.
Damnation, the Ephesians. 5.6.
Wrath of God, the 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Vengeance of God, 1 Cor. 3.17.
Destruction, 1 Cor. 11.32, 34.
Condemnation, 1 Timothy 6.9.
Perdition, flaming fire, Iud. v. 7, 8.
Eternal fire, and such like, (against ignorant, disobedient, ungodly, and
unbelieving persons, such as know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ) to be penalties, and not only penalties, but dreadful
judgments, yea the very terrors of God that fight against such sins and
sinners. If you say, they be, (as you must needs, if you will say the truth)
then were you deluded with a lying vanity, and (which is worse) would delude
others also therewithal, when you said and set it down; That the
Commandments of the Apostles in their Epistles, were without penalty. Aug.
contra Adamant. Manich. ca. 3.
Sacrae Scripturae non temerarios and superbos accusatores, sed and pios and
diligentes lectores desiderant, August. I marvel, whether ever you read that
terrible sentence, 1 Cor. 16. If any man 1 Cor. 16.22.
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema maranatha. If you did, do
but tell me by what Argument the Apostle does here urge and enforce the love of
Christ Jesus, whether by promise of mercy, or threatening of penalty? Or whether
here be not as dreadful a curse threatened against those that do not love the
Lord Jesus Christ, as there is [ Ephesians. 6.24.] a gracious promise made to all
that do; viz. Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. It were
absurd and impious to deny, that here is a promise of a blessing to them that
love him, and as impious and absurd it is to say, that the other denounces no
terrible penalty to them that love him not: For the very words themselves,
Anathema maranatha, do import an execrable curse, such as the Lord when he
comes in Ecce autem quod and in clausula tribunal Christi comminatur, utique
Iudicis and vltoris, in Romans 14.10. Tertull. advers. Ma^i. lib. 5. ca. 14.
judgment shall inflict upon all wicked reprobates, being separated from
Christ's presence, and cast into utter darkness. So Paul uses the word (...),
Romans 9.3. Gal. 1.8. as Accursed, and 1 Cor. 12.3. for Execrable: And the other
Cornel. Pertram. praefat. in Gram. Heb. and Syriac.
Maranatha, consists of two Syriack words, (...) which properly signifies,
Dominus noster, and (...) venit, The Lord comes. Which words, being the
beginning of Enochs Prophecy, cited by Jude, as containing the dreadful
judgment of God at the last day, against all the wicked and ungodly, were
usually taken up by the Jews, as they are here by Paul, to express the Bez.
in 1 Cor. 16.22. Aug. Ep. 78.
great Curse (which is hopeless, helpless, and endless) as their portion and
just recompense, which do not love the Lord Jesus.

In the next place, you proceed from evil to worse, when you say, There is not
so much as any allusion unto Moses Law, or the Ten Commandments, in all the
Epistles. When Peter, liking well of the ease and peace, beauty and glory of
Mount Tabor, made a Luc. 9.31, 32, 33.
motion for building of Tabernacles, that they that were there might dwell
there, saying, Master it is good for us to be here: The Holy Ghost has
observed, That he was heavy with sleep, and wist not what he said. Surely me
thinks, in such a like mind and mood were you, when falling into a dream of
Mount Sion, and liking well of the fancies that ran in your head; of grace,
and peace, mercy, and mildness, promises, and gentle exhortations, all tending
to life and glory, you have labored to build this your Tabernacle for a place
of rest, and said in your heart, It is good to be here, unwilling altogether to
hear any mention of Mount Sinai, or of any allusion to the Moral Law: But we
will bear with your weakness, and plead your excuse; The spirit of (sleep,
or) slumber was upon you, and you wist not what you either did, or said: For
had you been well awakened, and your eyes well opened, you might have seen in
the most, if not in all the Epistles, not only some allusions, but many
allegations out of the Ten See Iam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 4.10, 11.
Commandments, or See Iam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 4.10, 11.
Moral Law. Does not the Apostle, in the Epistle to the Romans, make often
mention of the Moral Law? Romans 3.20.
By the Law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. Romans 4.31.
Do we then abrogate the Law by faith? God forbid, nay rather we establish the
Law, Romans 4.31. Romans 7.7, 12, 22, 23. See Tertull. upon these and other places
of the Epistle to the Romans 7. Quia lex peccatum? Absit: Erubesce Marcion.
Absit. Abhominatur Apostolus criminationem legis: o summum praeconium legis.
Tertull. aduers. Marcion. lib. 5. cap. 13.
I had not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not covet: wherefore the Law is holy, and the
Commandment, i. the tenth Commandment, is holy, just, and good. I delight in
the Law of God after the inner man. So then in my mind I serve the Law of God,
but with the flesh the law of sin, Romans 7.7, 12, 22, 25. Are not these plain
allegations of the Law, more than bare allusions? And do not these pregnant
Testimonies graciously establish the nature and use of the Moral Law, which
you most wickedly go about to abolish? Will you yet see more evident, for
better satisfaction and assurance? Owe nothing to any man, says the Apostle,
but to love one another. Love is a Christian duty, you will not deny, 1 Cor.
13. By what argument or reason does he press them hereunto? Even by a sound
Argument drawn from Gods Law; For he that loves another has fulfilled the
Law, (he means partibus non gradibus) and what Law he shows, by reckning up
the several Commandments of the second Table: For this says Romans 13.8, 9.
See Paraeus in Romans 13.8, 9. and Aug. de spirit. and lit. cap. 14.21.
he, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if there
be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; Love works no ill to his
neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law. May you not now
Erubesce Marc. Abhominatur Apostolus criminationem legis.
blush at your bold ignorance, to say, and that with such confidence, That in
all the Epistles, there is not so much as any allusion to the Moral Law or Ten
Commandments, seeing there is here so express mention of the same? And what
will you say to that exhortation of the Apostle to the Ephesians? Children
Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right: And how does he enforce this
duty, and prove the equity of the same? Does he not plainly allege the first
Commandment of the second Table, and the promise annexed thereto, for this end
and purpose? saying, Honor thy father and mother, (which is the first
Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live
long on the earth? The evidence of this one place is such and so sufficient to
convince you of gross blindness in this particular, that I will not seek any
further for more lights, but only leave this in your hand, and pray that the
scales may fall from your eyes, that you may see the truth by it.

I come now to the reason which you render of all this: Antinomus.
For it is the goodness of God (say you) that leads to repentance, Romans 2.4.
etc. 2 Pet. 3.9. and not the thundering of the Law. To this I answer, Romans 2.4.
But, where you absolutely exclude the thundering of the Law, as of no use nor
force in this business, tell me I pray you, what you think of the very next
verse; Romans 2.4, 5.
But thou after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds. Whether are these
any thunderings of the Law or no? Every word has his weight. Wrath of God, day
of wrath, righteous judgment of God, just recompense, according to the work
so shall the wages be. If the goodness of God lead unto repentance, do not
these threatenings drive unto it? If the mercies of God move us to obedience,
do not the terrors of God remove us and withdraw us from impenitency and
profaneness? Nay, does not the Apostle in the same place, for this very end,
join them both together; Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10.
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; but glory, honor, and
peace, to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile? As for that which Antinomus.
you allege also out of 2 Pet. 3.9. The long suffering of the Lord to us ward,
2 Pet. 3.9.
not willing that any should perish, but that all shall come to repentance: I
acknowledge it as a point of the mercy and truth of God. 2 Pet. 3.5, 6, 7.
5, 6, 7. verses of the same Chapter, and be not willingly ignorant of the
judgments of God there mentioned, by the ouerflowing of waters, whereby the
Old world perished, and by the burning and flaming fire, whereunto this world
is reserved against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men: And
look forwards also to the very next words following, viz. 2 Pet. 3.10.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up. And tell me whether these threatenings of the Day of the Lord, be not as
terrible as the lightnings and thunderings at the giving of the Law; the seeing
and hearing whereof made Exodus 19. Heb. 12.18, 19, 21.
Moses to say, I exceedingly fear and tremble. And if you think these be not
urged to lead us or draw us to repentance, then consider I beseech you, what
use and application the Apostle makes hereof, even unto all the faithful, in
the words following: 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness. Now for conclusion of
this point; Let us hear how the Author to the Hebrews does urge us, To
provoke one another to love and to good works. This he does, not only by the
boldness or liberty which we have to enter into the Holiest by the Heb. 10.19.
blood of Jesus, but also by the Heb. 10.27.
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. And this he enforces further, not only by an allusion, but by a
manifest allegation of Moses Law. Heb. 10.28, 29.
He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses.
Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, etc. For we know him that has said, Heb. 10.30.31.
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord: and again,
The Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.

And this shall suffice for answer to your third general Argument, drawn from
the practice of the Apostles in all their Epistles.

Your fourth Argument is this: Antinomus.
Wheresoever the Holy Ghost handles the abrogation of the Law, there is never
any exception of the Moral.

This is utterly untrue; The abrogation of the Law handled diverse ways. First,
in the matter of Salvation. Secondly, in the matter of justification.
in the matter of Salvation, as Acts 15.1, 10. and there in the same Chapter,
the Moral Law is excepted, because abstaining from Idolatries and Fornication
(being breaches of the first and second Table of the Moral Law) is there
inioined as from things of necessity to be refrained, Acts 15.28. Or secondly,
in the matter of justification, as Romans 3.28. We conclude, says the Apostle,
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law: and yet there
also unto that objection [Doe we then make void the Law through faith] he
answers as it were with detestation, God forbid, yea we establish the Law,
Romans 3.31. So in the like Argument, in the Epistle to the Galathians, where he
does utterly abolish the Law for righteousness, in the Gal. 2.16. Romans 3.28,
31.
act of justification, he does yet establish the use of the Moral Law, for
leading a godly and Christian life, when he tells us, that Faith Gal. 5.6.
works by love, and by love we are bound to Gal. 5.13.
serve one another, and the rule of love is the Moral Law, which he there
urges, as a bond even now in full force and virtue, binding all Christians to
obedience, when he adds this reason: For all the Gal. 3.14.
Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, Leuit. 19.18. Matt. 22.39. And is not this an evident exception of
the Moral Law made by the Holy Ghost, and that even in the same Epistle, nay
in the same Chapter, where he handles the abrogation of the Law also? Thirdly,
the abrogation of the Law is handled, as it was a wall of partition.
Or thirdly, the Holy Ghost handles the abrogation of the Law, as it was a
wall of Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15.
partition betwixt Jews and Gentiles, as Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15. and yet in the
same Epistle he requires and urges the duties of the Moral Law; as, Ephesians.
4.24, 25, 26, 28.
Cast off lying and speak the truth: Be angry and sin not: Labor with your
hands and steal not: Ephesians. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Walk in love and hate not: fly fornication and all uncleanness and name it
not: And all this to be done upon promise and penalty, as ever they will have
any inheritance in the kingdom of God, or avoid the danger of the wrath of
God. Nay further, to cut off all occasion of cavil, as if one should object,
That these duties are not urged for obedience to the Moral Law, but to the
Gospel, the Apostle by a special direction of the Holy Ghost, does in express
words (exhorting children to obey their Parents) make mention of the Ephesians.
6.1, 2.
first Commandment with promise, and sets down both precept and promise
out of the Moral Law, as yet of special force to draw them thereunto: And yet
we do not say, that these duties are either so urged upon us, or performed by
us, as duties of the Law for righteousness, to live by them, Romans 10.5. but as
fruits of the righteousness of faith in the Gospel, discerned and measured by
the Law, yet not by the rigor, but by the Romans 12.2. and 13.8, 9.
tenor of it, offered also and accepted only in the obedience of Christ Jesus,
who according to his Covenant, has put his Heb. 8.10. and 10.16.
Laws in our minds, and written them by the finger of his Spirit, not in
Tables of stone, but in the 2 Cor. 3.3.
fleshy Tables of our hearts, That (as the Apostle speaks) the righteousness
of the Law might be Romans 8.1, 4.
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: Or
fourthly, Fourthly, the abrogation of the Law is handled, touching Jewish
observation.
the abrogation of the Law is handled, as touching Col. 2.16, 17.
Jewish and superstitious observations, Col. 2.16, 17. and typical
signification shadowing Heb. 10.1.
forth good things to come, as Hebr. 10.1. And yet in both these Epistles,
where the law of carnal Commandments, i. the Ceremonial Law, is cancelled
and abolished, the Commandments of the Law which is spiritual (namely the
Moral Law) are confirmed and established, as evidently appears by the
plentiful and powerful exhortations and injunctions, for the performance of
both general and special duties of the Moral Law. As for example, Col. 3.14.
Col. 3.12, 14.
Above all things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. Heb. 10.24.
Heb. 10.24.
Let us consider one another to provoke unto lsue and good works: And Romans
13.8, 9.
love (you have already heard) is the fulfilling of the Law; and when Gal. 5.6.
faith works by love, faith works by the rule of the Law; and he that
walks in love, Gal. 6.16.
walks by the line of the Law: Which may yet be further seen, by those
special duties of Superiors and inferiors appertaining to the fifth
Commandment; as of husbands and wives, parents and children, governors and
servants, Col. 3. and 4. and Heb. 13. mentioned and urged out of the Moral
Law, in both places.

By this time you may perceive, that even in the same places, where the Holy
Ghost handles the abrogation of the Law, there is (contrary to your assertion)
some exception of the Moral Law. Nay I say more, that wheresoever the Holy
Ghost handles the full and final abrogation of the Law, for all exercise in
Gods worship or use in the Church of Christ, there he ever gives instance in
the Ceremonial Law, and never either mentions or means the Moral Law. And
again, where he handles the abrogation of the Law, only in some
circumstances, or for some particular ends or uses, he sometimes ioineth the
Moral and the Ceremonial Aug. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 3. Calu. in Romans 3.20.
both together, as Romans 3. and Gal. 2. and 3. Romans 3.28.
By the works of the Law (whether Moral or Ceremonial) Gal. 3.16.
no flesh shall be justified. Gal. 3.19.
The Law was given because of transgressions. Gal. 3.24.
The Law was our Schoolmaster unto Christ. Take then whether of these you like
best. If in handling the full and final abrogation of the Law, you say, there
is no exception of the Moral, and thereupon infer, that the whole Moral Law
is wholly abrogated; why may not I as well conclude the clean contrary, In
handling the full and final abrogation of the Law, there is no mention made of
the Moral, therefore the whole Moral Law is not wholly abrogated, but rather
established and confirmed. And if you say, that in handling the abrogation of
the Law, touching some circumstances only, or some particular ends or uses,
there is no exception of Moral, and therefore the whole Moral Law is wholly
abolished; then I say, that your Antecedent is too weak to infer this
Consequent, and fitter a great deal to serve my turn against you (if it be of
any force at all) in this conclusion; ergo, The Moral Law in some
circumstances, and for some ends and uses only, is abrogated: and so you fail
of your proof and purpose, laboring thereby to prove, that the whole Moral
Law is wholly abolished.



Antinomus.
Moses Law was given only to the Jews, Exodus 19.3, 4. etc. and 20.2, 12. Deuteronomy.
4.1. and 5.1. with diverse other Testimonies to the same purpose, ergo, The
whole Moral Law is wholly now abolished.

Moses Law, you mean the whole body and bulk of the Ceremonial, Judicial,
and Moral Law, and also, that both for circumstance and substance, term and
time, end and use, persons and things, it was thus given to the Jews only:
then is this your Antecedent false; for howsoever these were first and
principally charged and imposed upon the Jews, as his Exodus 19.5.
peculiar people; the Zanch. in Hos. cap. 2.44.45.
Ceremonials for Gods worship, the Judicials for civil government, and the
Moral Law for some special circumstances and uses, more binding that people
unto God in the form of a Covenant, than any other people in the world
besides: Yet were not all Exodus 12.38. Vide August. Ep. 49. quaest. 2. Cum enim
nonnulli commemorantur, etc.
other people or persons so excluded or debarred, but that if they did renounce
their Idolatry, and would become Proselytes, entertaining the Exodus 12.44, 48,
49.

See Beza in Mart. 23.15. of Proselytes.

(...). Rajn. These. 4. page 113.


Jewish Religion, they were received into the fellowship of the Covenant, and
that by Gods special Commandment, and made partakers of the Seals and
benefits thereof, together with the Jews accordingly. So were the mixed
multitude that came out of Egypt with the Israelites, the servant bought with
money, and the stranger and sojourner, were admitted to the Passover (if they
would first be circumcised) and then they were accepted into the Church, as if
they had been borne in the land. Exodus 12.49.
One Law shall be to him that is home borne and to the stranger that sojourneth
amongst you, and that not only for the Ceremonial, but even for the Moral
also, as is expressly set down in the fourth Commandment, where both
Magistrate in Assembly and Master of a family stand charged, to look that the
Exodus 20.10.
stranger within the gates do keep holy the Sabbath day.

Secondly, If by the Law of Moses you mean the Doctrine of Moses, which as a
holy Prophet he has written and set down upon record in his five Books, and
which Christ himself alleges by the name of the Law of Luke 24.44.
Moses, as testifying of himself and his sufferings, Luke 24.44. I say, the
Law of Moses in this sense, was given as well unto us of the Gentiles, as to
them of the Jews, seeing Whatsoever is Romans 15.4.
written, is written for our instruction and edification: And Paul himself
made this use of the Act. 28.23, 28, 30, 31.
Law, when being at Rome, unto such as came unto his lodging, He expounded and
testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of
the Puerilis error est ( says Fla^. Illyric.) libros legales nihil continere
quod ad Euang^lium spectat suspicari. Clau. Scrip. par. 2. p. 30.
Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets; and this he did not only to the Jews,
but to the Gentiles also, Acts 28.30, 31.

Thirdly, If by the Law of Moses, you mean the Ceremonial observations which
Moses by Commandment from the Lord, prescribed to the Jews, as the manner and
form of his solemn Worship, and as Figures and Types of good things to come
in Christ (as the Evangelists and Apostles do usually, when they Act. 15.5.
and 13.38. Luke 2.22.
speak of the Law of Moses) then I say, The Law of Moses in this sense, was
given unto the Jews only, not only as a partition wall betwixt them and the
Gentiles, but as a yoke to restrain them, a Col. 2.13, 14, 15.
handwriting to convince and condemn them, and as a sharp and severe Gal.
3.24.
Schoolmaster, to drive them to seek for help and Mal. 4.2.
healing under his wings, who was and is, the Ioh. 1.17.
truth of those types, and Col. 2.17.
substance of those Heb. 10.1.
shadows, Christ Jesus. But the Law of Moses in this sense, will do you but
little service, to the drawing in of your conclusion, for the utter abolishing
of the Moral Law.

Fourthly, If by the Law of Moses, you understand the Moral Law or Ten
Commandments (as needs you must, if you will dispute ad idem, or speak to any
purpose) then why might you not as well have set it so down, and dealt
plainly, as wrap up your meaning in such ambiguity and obscurity, and that not
only in this Argument, but in five or six of those also which follow after? We
will then take your Argument, as we think you intend it, Antinomus.
to be this: The Moral Law was given only to the Jews; ergo, The Moral Law
in the Church of Christ, since the death of Christ, is wholly abolished. If the
Antecedent were sound, Exodus 19.3, 4, and Exodus 20.2, 12. Antinomus.
Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 5.1. and 7.6. and 14.2. and 26.16. and 33.4. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
Psalm. 103.7. Psa. 81.4, 5, 8. All which places I have searched, and seen, and
will now tell you what I have found by fishing in them. That of Exodus 19.2, 3,
Exodus 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
etc. you seem to urge on this manner; Moses had charge from God to speak to
the house of Jacob and to the children of Israel: If ye will obey my voice and
keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people, and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy nation; and
hereupon you would infer, that the Moral Law was given unto the Jews only.
That the Moral Law for the manner of delivery, promulgation, and diverse
circumstances, of persons, times, places, and form of Legal Covenant, was
peculiar to the Jewish Nation, we do now again (as often before) most
willingly acknowledge. Moses was to the Jews a Deuteronomy. 18.18.
Prophet to teach them, a Ioh. 1.17.
Lawgiuer to govern them, a messenger and Gal. 3.10, 19.
Mediator to deal betwixt God and them, Gal. 3.10, 19.
a rigorous exactor of absolute obedience, a Heb. 2.2. and 10.
severe auenger of all disobedience, 28, 29.
yea he was a minister of 2 Cor. 3.7, 9, 14.
condemnation to all them that could not see through the veil that was upon
his face, into the end of the Law Christ Jesus; and thus the Jews even until
this day (the veil remaining yet upon their hearts in the reading of the Old
Testament) will needs be Ioh. 9.28.
Moses disciples still. But as thus the Law was given unto them by Moses, so
was Job. 1.17.
grace and truth, with the true end and use of the Law, brought unto us by
Christ Jesus, who being our Act. 3, 22, 23.
Prophet, Iam. 4.12.
Lawgiuer, Act. 5.31.
Prince, and Heb. 8.1.
Priest, Malac. 3.1.
Messenger, and Heb. 8.6.
Mediator of a better Covenant, our Heb. 7.22.
surety, and Matt. 1.21.
Savior from all our sins, has redeemed us from this Jewish Paedagogie and
bondage Gal. 4.4.
of the Law, and yet has according to his Covenant, Heb. 8.10.
put his laws into our minds, and written them in our hearts, by the finger 2
Cor. 3.3.
of his spirit, and reckons and accounts us (as much as ever he did the
Jews) to be now his 1 Pet. 2.9, 10.
peculiar people, a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, or a kingdom of
priests, a holy nation, his 2 Cor. 6.18.
sons and daughters, children of Abraham according to the Romans 9.7, 8.
faith, though not according to the flesh, Heb. 8.8.
the house of Jacob, the house of Judah, and Gal. 6.16.
the Israel of God. By which titles, dignities, and privileges, the Apostles
Peter and Paul and others, do call us of the Gentiles, to obey the
Commandments of the Moral Law, even now in the days of the Gospel, as Moses
did the Jews in the place which you allege ( Exodus 19.2, 3, 4, 5.) by the
same means at the giving of the Law. For example, because we are a 1 Pet. 2.9,
12. compare with Exodus 19.2, 3, 4, 5. and Tit. 2.14. with Deuteronomy. 7.7. and Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. with Iam. 2.8, 10, 12.
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, etc. therefore we must be of honest
conversation, 1 Pet. 2.9, 12. because we are his peculiar people, therefore we
must be zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. because we are the Israel of God, we
must therefore walk according to this rule; because he has put his laws and
his spirit in our hearts, therefore we must so speak and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the Law of liberty. Of all these we may say, as S. John 1
Ioh. 2.7.
says of the Commandment of love, (which is the sum of the Law) Brethren,
we write no new Commandment unto you, but the old Commandments which ye had
from the beginning. These are no new Commandments of the Gospel, but the old
Commandments of the Moral Law renewed in the Gospel: In which respect, we
may say again with S. John, 1 Ioh. 2.8.
A new Commandment, or, these are new Commandments, which we write unto you:
And as Christ Ioh. 13.34.
himself said in the same sense, A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye
love one another: which yet was an old Commandment, enioined by Leuit. 19.18.
Moses in the Moral Law, and now only renewed and reenforced by Christ in the
Gospel, who came not (as you imagine) Matt. 5.17.
to destroy the Moral Law, but to fulfill it, to repair the breaches and
renew the beauty of it: These things thus considered, we say plainly, That
whatsoever appertained unto Moses his literal, carnal, legal, personal, and
terrible ministration, or promulgation of the Moral Law, that, together with
all the circumstances thereof, was peculiar to the Jews only, and we now make
no claim to any part or parcel of it: But whatsoever was then in the
Decalogue or Deuteronomy. 1.13.
Ten words of God, substantial, moral, spiritual, just, and good, teaching
and prescribing all duties of Matt. 22.37, 38, 39, 40.
love to God and man; that, we say (for ought yet we see) is Matt. 5.18.
perpetual, and remains still Romans 13.8, 9, 10.
in force and use for Iam. 2.12.
us, as the Moral Law of God, recorded by Moses as a Ioh. 5.46, 47.
penman of the Holy Ghost, expounded by the Matt. 22.40.
Prophets, Matt. 3.15. and 5.17.
fulfilled, Matt. 5.19, 22, 28, 34, 39, 44.
renewed, and Ioh. 13.34.
established by Matt. 5.19.
Christ himself; Act. 28.23.
preached and Romans 7. and 13. Iam. 2.10,
pressed by the holy Apostles, upon 11, 12.
all that bear the name of Christ and profess the Gospel, and so further to
be published and urged by the Matt. 28.20. See Bez. Epist. Theol. Ep. 20.104.
Ministers of the Gospel, as occasion shall require, even unto the Matt.
28.20. See Bez. Epist. Theol. Ep. 20.104.
end of the world. Neither do we now receive the Moral Law as Moses
disciples, to the same end, and upon the same terms as did the Jews; but as
the disciples of Christ, who is our Iam. 4.12.
Lawgiuer, who has taken away the 2 Cor. 3.14.
veil from Moses his face, and has so revealed by his spirit, both the image
of God, and the good and acceptable Romans 12.2.
will of God in the Moral Law, through the Ephesians. 5.8, 9, 10.
light of the Gospel; that now we all as with open 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.
face beholding (as in a glass) the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image from glory to glory; and being enabled by his spirit, which he has
(according to his Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. 2 Cor. 3.17.
Covenant) put within us, to walk in his statutes, and to do his will; we
delight in the Law of God after the inward man. Romans 7.22. and show our love to
God in keeping his Ioh. 14.15.
Commandments, which now are not 1 Ioh. 5.3.
grievous, as they were in the letter to the Jews, but easy and Matt. 11.30.
light, as Christ has made them by his spirit unto us; they being driven and
enforced to obedience by the spirit of Romans 8.15.
bondage and fear, we drawn and allured thereunto by the 2 Cor. 3.17.
spirit of liberty and love; they under the Moral Law as a Law of Gal. 3.24.
cruel tyranny, and we under it only as under a Iam. 2.8, 12.
royal Law of liberty: So that as the Ioh. 4.42.
Samaritans, which formerly had believed the report of the woman, concerning
Christ the Savior of the world, when once they heard him themselves, said unto
her; Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this indeed is the Christ the Savior of the world: So
may we say concerning our obedience to the Moral Law; Now we obey, not because
Moses did in that manner and measure charge and command the Jews to keep the
Moral Law; but, because we have heard the Lawgiver himself, whose voice then
Heb. 12.26, 27.
shook the earth, and has yet once more shaken not only the earth but the
heaven (in removing those things that may be shaken) confirming the Moral Law
unto us, Matt. 5.22, 28, 34,
clearing it from the false glosses of the Pharisees, 39, 44.
opening the true meaning of it to his disciples, requiring a 2 Cor. 8, 12. 2
Cor. 9.7.
willing and upright, not an absolute and perfect obedience unto it, and giving
Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 9.8. 2 Cor. 8.16.
ability to do what he requires, unto all that believe, and obey the Gospel;
and yet further, both threatening a Matt. 5.19.
judgment unto all whosoever they be, that shall wilfully break one of the
least of the Commandments, and shall teach others so; and promising a blessing
unto all that shall willingly do them, and teach the same to other men
accordingly.

Antinomus.
But it may be, you think the Moral Law was given to the Jews only, because
there be some reasons (urged to enforce obedience thereunto) which may seem to
belong only unto that people and no other, to which purpose (as I conceive) you
allege Exodus 20.2, 12. where mention is made of their deliverance out of
Egypt, and their inheritance in the land of Canaan. To this I answer, That we
do not deny, but, Exodus 20.2, 12.
of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, (being but Exodus 19.1.
three months before the giving of the Law) which being yet so fresh in their
memories, and the remembrance thereof so sweet unto them, was held in the
wisdom of God (considering their dullness unto holy duties) to be as a spur,
or a goad, to quicken them and provoke them to yield obedience unto the Moral
Law, both in general, (as in the Preface to the Law, in this and other places
which you allege) and in Deuteronomy. 5.14, 15.
special to the fourth Commandment, in keeping of the Sabbath day, Deuteronomy.
5.14, 15. And yet we know for certain, that this reason taken from their
deliverance out of Egypt, was temporal only, and not perpetual; both because
the Lord does charge the children of Israel, upon their deliverance out of the
Babylonian captivity, to say no more, The Lord lives which brought up the
children of Israel Ier. 16.13, 14, 15.
out of the land of Egypt, but, The Lord lives which brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of the North: and also because the deliverance out of
Egypt, being literally and personally taken in these places, could bind no
more of the children of Israel to hear and obey the Law, but only them, that
in their own persons ware so delivered, and with their own ears Exodus 20.1,
2.
heard the voice of God, speaking all the words of the Law unto them; and so,
not only the force of this reason (taken from their deliverance out of Egypt)
but the Law it self also for which it is urged, should both have fallen
together with the carkases of those that fell in the wilderness, seeing Number.
14.29, 30.
not one of all those that in their own persons were delivered out of Egypt,
and heard the voice of the Lord in the giving of the Law (except Caleb and
Iosuah) did ever enter into the holy Land. You see then, that the particular
conueniency of this reason, taken from their deliverance out of Egypt, will not
bind the Moral Law in absolute propriety to the Jews, neither only,
nor always: And also, that, not so much the special quality of the benefit,
as the general equity of the same, See Muscul. loc. com. in Explicat. primi
praecepti.
is to be weighed and considered in this reason: for if corporal deliverances
were, or else might have been of some force to draw carnal Israel to hear
and obey the Moral Law; why are not, or ought not spiritual deliverances be
of like effect and power, to prevail with all Believers, the Romans 9.6. Gal.
6.16.
true Israel of God, to the same purpose? And who doubts, but a Minister of
the Gospel, to draw the people of God to perform the duties of piety and
charity in the first and second Table, might by analogy and like equity, preach
and proclaim; Thus faith the Lord, hear o Israel, I am the Lord thy God,
which have delivered thee from the Col. 1.13.
power of darkness, and translated thee into the kingdom of the Son of my
love: Thou shall have no 1 Cor. 8.6.
other Gods before me, etc. Especially, seeing there was never any Ioh. 3.16.
mercy matchable with this mercy; never 1 Ioh. 4.9. Ioh. 15.13.
any love like unto this love, the Lord being more Romans 5.8.
gracious and glorious in this deliverance, than in any other since the
beginning of the world whatsoever. And yet in so doing, (for ought I see) he
should not offer any violence to the Moral Law, not any wrong to the Lawgiuer,
no more than if he had said, Hear o Christians, The Tit. 2.11.
grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared, and teaches
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and
righteously, and godly, in this present world, which is the sum Armin.
disput. de peccato actua. these. 8. sect. 4.
and substance of the whole Moral Law.

As for that promise of long life and prosperity, Exodus 20.12.
annexed to the fifth Commandment, Exodus 20.12. which Antinomus.
you urge, as if it were appropriated only to the Land of Canaan, that you
might bind fast the Moral Law unto the Jews only; The Apostle Paul, Ephesians.
6.2. shall give you (upon the same ground of general equity) an effectual and
full answer thereunto. For, pressing and persuading there, diverse duties of the
Moral Law, he requires and allureth children to honor and obey their
Parents, both by precept and by promise of the first Commandment of the second
Table: Children, says he, Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right: Honor thy father and mother,
which is the first Commandment with promise, that it may be well with thee,
and thou may live long on the earth. The precept he sets down in the
same words, as it is written in the Law, Exodus 20.12. The promise he a little
changes, not in the substance and quality of it, but in the circumstance of
persons and place, and that according to the rule of general equity and
conueniency, for the better understanding and enjoying of the same. The
substance and quality of the promise, to such children as honor and obey their
Parents, is one and the same, be they Jews or Gentiles, viz. long life and a
prosperous estate in this world, and this is perpetual as the precept it self
is. The circumstances of persons and place, are different in both places. For
in the giving of the Law, Exodus 20.12. Exodus 20.12.
the promise was at that time directed to the people of the Jews, to be made
good in the Land of Canaan; running in this tenor, That thy days may be long
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. But in the renewing and
applying of the Law, in and since the days of Christ, the promise is directed
to all believers, both Jews and Gentiles, as the Apostle does here deliver it
to the Ephesians in these terms, That it may be well with thee, and that thou
may live long (not only in Canaan or in Ephesus) but on the earth, i.
whatsoever thy estate, or wheresoever thy abiding be. How opposite and contrary
to the Apostles judgment and dealing, is your position and opinion? You will
needs wholly abolish the whole Moral Law, the Apostle does establish it; you
will needs have it to be given to the Jews only, the Apostle says it
belongs to the Gentiles also; you will needs abolish the precept, because of
some circumstance wanting now in the promise, the Apostle passing by or letting
fall the circumstance, (as temporal) preserves and maintains the substance
and equity of them both as perpetual; you will needs restrain and confine the
blessing of long and happy days unto Canaan, the Apostle does extend and
enlarge it to every City and Country, to every corner and quarter of the
earth, even over the universal world.

Let this suffice for answer to the scriptures which you have brought out of
the 19. and 20. Chapters of Exodus; Antinomus.
as for the rest which you heap up out of Deuteronomy and the Psalms, to the
number of a dozen more (being all one in substance with the former) and diverse
of them the very same in the same words: Me thinks you deal as wisely herein,
error, with some color and show of truth, I will follow you no further in this
maze, but either put you over for answer unto that which I have answered to the
former of like nature, or else give you over to run round in your own
circle, until you wax giddy with your own conceit, and course, as many
others of like temper have done before you. Those which you allege out of the
New Testament, some of them are flat against you, and not one of them will
prove your point, That the Moral Law was given to the Jews only. That of
Matthew 10.6. I send, and 15.24. Matt. 10.6. Matt. 15.24. See Calu Instit. li.
2. cap. 11. sect. 12.
I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, would serve
with greater show of probability, to prove that the Gospel was not sent unto
the Gentiles, than that the Law was given only to the Jews: Howbeit, the
meaning of Christ is not to bind himself or the Gospel only to the Jews,
and to exclude the Gentiles, but that for his personal ministration he was
first, and so they Act. 13.46.
principally to offer the bread of life to the Jews being Gods children, and
so to seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And albeit he commanded his
Apostles for a season, that they should not go into the way of the Gentiles,
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, yet after his resurrection,
when he renewed their commission, he gave them in charge, to go and teach
Matt. 28.19, 20.
all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. The Apostles were first indeed to offer the food of the Gospel unto the
Jews, but when they as wanton or wicked children turned away their food from
them, they waxed bold, and said, Lo, Act. 13.46.
we turn unto the Gentiles; that the Prophecy of Isaiah might so be fulfilled
in all this; Out of Isa. 2.3.
Sion shall go forth a Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isaiah
2.3.

As for that of Acts 14.16. How does this follow? Antinomus.
The Lord in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways,
Ergo, the Moral Law was given to the Jews only, for the time past, and not
unto us of the Gentiles for the time present. Romans 2.15.
written in Tables of stone, to teach them to walk in the ways of God, so
evidently as the Jews had; yet had they the effect of the Law written in their
hearts in times past; but now since the days of the Gospel, the believers of
the Gentiles have the same Moral Law written in the fleshy 2 Cor. 3.3.
Tables of their heart, by the finger of Gods Spirit, with much clearer light
Act. 2.17, 18.
of knowledge in their minds, and much greater power of grace in their hearts
Heb. 8.10, 11.
and lives, than ever the Jews that first had it written in Tables of stone
had. For proof whereof, if other Scriptures were silent, yet those which you
produce for your self, will speak enough to serve my turn, Romans 7.14. and
3.19. and 9.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Hebr. 1.2, 2. For, if the Moral Law be Romans 7.14.
spiritual, if it Romans 3.19.
convince the whole world as guilty before God, if it belong unto the true Romans
9.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Israel, the children of Abraham, Romans 9.6, 7. compared with Hebr. 8.10. and if
God has in these last days spoken Heb. 1.1, 2.
more plainly, and opened his will more effectually by his Son, (as the
Scriptures you allege bear witness with me) then have we that are believers
of the Gentiles, the Moral Law of God, both in a clearer light of 1 Ioh. 2.27.
knowledge in our minds, and in a greater Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
power of grace in our hearts and lives, than ever the body of the people of
the Sea Muscul. loc. com. de leg. cap. de lege spiritus, and Vrsin. de lege
diuina. p. 278, 279.
Jews had, which if it be true, then have you spunne a fair thread, who
drawing out a line, and twisting a cord, to bind the Moral Law upon the Jews
only, have (before you were aware) made them both of that length, and strength,
that they reach unto, and bind it upon the Gentiles also.

I come now unto the Testimonies of learned men, whose names and writings you
pretend for your cause, and pervert, to your own purpose, as being of the same
mind, and wrapped in the same error with you, That the Moral Law was given to
the Jews only. But take heed whilst you bear men in hand, that you have
witness from them, lest upon due search, you your self be found to bear
false witness against them. Let us make trial of your dealing with some of
the most judicious and religious of them. And first, for Calvin, I have read
the Epistle, Calu. Epist. 58.
That Christ is the end of the Law; but as you cite no sentence, so can I find
no syllable to prove that the Moral Law was given to the Jews only; he that
must find out what you set him to seek, especially in so large a field, had
need to plow with your heifer, and to have some more particular marks of your
meaning, to lead him thereunto. But although I found not what I sought, yet in
seeking, I found what I there sought not, viz. That Calvin speaking of the
Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the Law, has these words: Lex nihil adduxit ad
perfectionem, tantum instar Gal. 3.24.
paedagogi, dirigebat and deducebat ad Christum, qui legis ipsius finis Romans
10.4.
est and complementum, vt tradit Apostolus. Now it may be, that you finding
these words in Calvin, (that Christ is the end of the Law) did imagine that
Christ had made an utter end of the Moral as well as of the Ceremonial Law,
either not knowing or not observing that there is an Christus, finis
perficiens, non interficiens. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 55.
end of accomplishment, as well as an end of abolishment. Christ has both
accomplished and abolished the Ceremonial Law; the Moral Law he has
accomplished but not abolished. That which See Calu. Ep. 58.
was imperfect in both, touching the Legal Covenant for righteousness by the
works of both, is abolished in both, and only perfected in him, who for
righteousness is the end of both, CHRIST JESUS, to all that believe in his
name, Romans 10.4. Upon which place, Paraeus in Romans 10.14.
Paraeus has these words: Consens^ legis and Christi hinc apparet, and errant
qui putant legem repugnare Christo, Christum abol^ legem: Hence appears,
says he, the consent of the Law and Christ; and they are deceived that think
the Law is contrary unto Christ, or that Christ does abolish the Law.

Antinomus.
Your next quotation of Calvin Romans 3.19. tells us, That whereas the Jews
would needs put off all those rebukes and threats of the Law, from themselves
unto the Gentiles, the Apostle does there apply the Law to them particularly;
Calu. in Romans 3.19.
Ne ad solas Gentes restringant, quae in ipsos promiscue competunt, Lest they
should restrain unto the Gentiles only, those things which did belong unto
them both together. Romans 3.19. (...).
stop every mouth, i. to convince both Jews and Gentiles of sin, in such a
manner as that they can have nothing to plead for their clearing or just
defense, and not only so, but to hold fast the whole world as liable to Gods
curse for the breach of it. If you have advisedly read the other Calu. Instit.
lib. 2. cap. 1. sect. 1. and li. 2. cap. 11. sect. 11.
places and Chapters of Calvin, Instit. lib. 2. cap. 1. and lib. 2. nay if you
have but read the very contents of the Chapters, and 13.14.16. and 17.
sections, you cannot but sin against knowledge and conscience too, in citing
these places as making for you, which stand in open force and fight against
you. For albeit Calvin does acknowledge, that both the Moral and Ceremonial
Law were given unto the Jews, which no man does deny; yet does he not say,
that the Moral Law was given unto the Jews only, which is that which you
affirm. And although he grant, as we do, that the Ceremonial Law is now by
Christ abolished, yet does he manifestly prove, that the Moral Law does yet
continue and retain some special force See Bez. Theol. Ep. Ep. 20. p. 103.104.
and use still, which is that which you deny. I refer you to the same Book
of his Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Institutions which you allege, and section 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. of the
seventh Chapter.

Ad Sacramenta pertinent, Circumcisio carnis, Sabbatum temporale, neomenia: Ad
mores autem, non occides, non machaberis.
Augustine in Galat. 3. has nothing that I can find, to prove that the Moral
Law was given to the Jews only: something he has to the clean contrary. For
distinguishing the works of the Law, into Ceremonial and Moral, Nunquid ergo
potest Apostolus non curare, etc. Aug. in Gal. 3.
he demands, whether the Apostle could as little care, whether a Christian
were a murderer, an adulterer; whether he were chaste, and innocent, as he
cares not, whether he be circumcised, or uncircumcised in the flesh? By which
his demand it may evidently appear, that howsoever he thought the works of
the Ceremonial Law were now ceased, yet he thought also, that the works of
the Moral Law were now to be practiced, and so the Moral Law it self not to
be given to the Jews only, but still to be continued amongst Christians also.
See Aug. contr. Advers. leg. and proph. lib. 2. cap. 7.

Erasmus in his Paraph. in Gal. 3.14. speaks of the Ceremonial Law, which he
faith, was given unto the Jews, as a Schoolmaster to a rude people; Vt
paulatim proficientes ad Christum perducerentur, a quo solo veram expectarent
justitiam, pristinis diffisi ceremonijs. And how will this prove, that the
Moral Law was given unto the Jews only? But does he Erasm. on Romans 2.14, 15.
not say in his Paraphrase on Romans 2. that the Gentiles were a lege Mosaica
alienae? Yes he does, and he tells you what he means, when he adds; Nullo
Mosaicae legis praescripto monebantur, but only had rem legis, non tabulis sed
mentibus inscriptam: Antinomus.
They were not admonished what to do, and what to leave undone, by any
prescript of Moses, but only had the substance or effect of the Law engraven,
not in Tables, but in their hearts. And what of all this? Ergo, The Moral Law
was given unto the Jews only, and not unto us Christians of the Gentiles, no
more than unto those that were without God and without Christ before us? Ad
Graecas Calendas.
When you prove this Argument to be good, I will acknowledge your skill to be
greater, and your cause to be better, than it does yet prove to be. The like
answer and offer I make to the quotations out of Erasmus in Romans 5.13. and 7.1.

Antinomus.
That which you bring out of Zanch. de fide cap. 13. sect. 7.
Zanch. de fide cap. 13. sect. 7. is spoken of Moses Law, opposed to the
Gospel, as may appear by the differences which there he sets down betwixt
them, and so he says it was given to the Jews only. Zanch. de fide cap. 13.
sect. 8.
next section (which it seems you took not pains to read) he testifies to
all the world; That, in as much as the Doctrine of the Gospel requires
repentance and holiness of life, and that we should live soberly, Vide Calvin.
Har. in 4. lib. Mosis p. 443.
righteously, and godly in this present world; Eatenus etiam non tollit legem
de moribus, so far forth it does not take away the Moral Law: and he gives
a good reason hereof, Tota enim consentanea est cum doctrina Euangelij de
vitijs vitandis and virtutibus persequendis: For the Moral Law is wholly
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the eschewing of vices,
and ensuing of virtues.

Antinomus.
Bucan. loc. 22. quaest. 18.
Bucanus 22. loc. 18. q. says, That the old Covenant did properly belong unto
Abraham, and his posterity the Israelites, but the New unto all Nations. And
what will you infer hereupon? That the Moral Law was given only to the
Jews, and does not now at all belong unto us? If this be your Argument, I say,
the Law and the Gospel, and the several uses of the Moral Law, even now
amongst Christians, as Bucan. loc. 22. and loc. 19. and 20. and 21.
Bucanus does, and yet dare you be so bold, as to piddle and pick out
something out of his writings, (and those the very same, which testify against
you) as though he had given you his hand, or lent you his sword, to strike one
stroke at least in your behalf. Read over Bucan. loc. 22. again, and loc.
19. and 20. and 21. and tell me at your leisure, whether then you think him to
be a man of your mind, for the utter abolishing of the whole Moral Law: In
the mean time, take I pray you, one note out of the same Bucan loc. 19.
quaest. 28.
Bucan. loc. 19. for your admonition. It is the error of the Let Antinomus view
his face in this glass.
Antinomians and Libertines (says he) to think that Christians have now no
use of the Moral Law of God, nor that the Decalogue is to be preached in the
Christian Church, because the faithful are regenerate by the spirit. I know
not whether you be of this number, but I fear me you are much of their temper.
Hiero. August. Tom. 2. page 341.
Manichaeus and Marcion destruebant Legem, quam and sanctam, and spiritualem,
juxta Apostolum novimus, says Hierome.

Paraeus in Romans 3.19. you have mistaken; there is nothing in that place to
serve your turn: and Perkins in Gal. 3.23. has been cleared before. I only
add, that if you will be pleased to read and receive that which Mr. Perkins
has written upon that Chapter, nay upon that verse, touching the nature and
use of the Moral Law, I am of opinion, you will never look hereafter, that
Mr. Perkins will ever be brought to open his mouth in this business any more.

But Moses Law (you say in your sixth Argument) was given to continue till
Christ's death at the most, Antinomus.
16.16. Romans 7.1. Ergo, the whole Moral Law is now wholly abrogated and
abolished. Moses Law you mean the Moral Law (as in the former Argument I have
shown that you must and ought) then is your Antecedent false; if by Moses Law,
August. contr. duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonif. lib. 3. cap. 4.
you understand the whole body of the Ceremonial, Judicial, and Moral Law,
as it was given to the Jews in that their estate of minority, and legal
seruility, then I grant your Antecedent, and deny your Consequent. The
Scripture which you allege out of Luke 16.16. (The Luc. 16.16.
Law and the Prophets were until John) may as well prove that the Prophets are
now of no force,
as that the Moral Law is now of no use. The meaning thereof is this; That
whereas the Ioh. 5.16.
Law and the Act. 3.24.
Prophets did testify, promise, signify, and prophecy of Christ to come, and
all this but more darkly Romans 16.25, 26.
and obscurely, few taking any great notice thereof until the days of John:
yet now (Christ being come in John's days) John bears better witness of his
coming, not only seeing him with his own eyes, but showing him, and Ioh. 1.29.
pointing him out as it were with the finger unto others, yea Ioh. 1.32, 33,
34, etc. See Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. ^.16. and cap. 11. sect. 5.
preaching him to be the true Messiah, promised before, now exhibited; figured
in Ceremonies before more darkly, now manifested in his own person more
clearly; seen and sought after but of a few before, but now so followed and
flockt unto, that since the time of John's preaching of the kingdom of God, The
Luke 16.16. Matt. 11.12.
kingdom of God suffers violence, and every man presses into it. This
Scripture then may prove, that upon John's preaching of Christ (Behold the Ioh.
1.29, 36.
lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world) all Ceremonies and
Prophecies, concerning Christ to come, were now accomplished, and the Moral
Law by him, and in him alone, to be fulfilled, which we willingly grant, but
not, that the Tertull. expounding this place, Luke 16.16. says, Legis and
Prophetarum ordo exinde cessavit, per adimpletionem non per destructionem, lib.
4. c^nt. Mar. cap. 33.
whole Moral Law is wholly abolished, which is that which you willingly would,
but yet cannot prove.

For evidence and assurance of this which I say, I need seek no further than
your own witnesses, Luther, Erasmus, Calvin, Perkins, Paraeus, who all in the
very places you allege (speaking of the continuance of Moses Law only ^ntill
Christ's death) do plainly avouch this, only of the Jewish Paedagogy, the
Ceremonial Law in types and shadows, the letter of the Law, the rigor and
terror of the Law, the burden and seruility of the Law, etc. but not one of all
speaks one word of the utter abolishing of the Moral Law together
therewithal.

Luther says, Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10. Luth. on Gal. 3.24, 25.
p. 173.
And how? not that he has abolished the old Law, and given a new, but he is
the end of the Law to all that believe, that is to say, every one that
believes in him is righteous, and the Law shall never accuse him, Luth. in
Gal. 3.24. And albeit he speak of the abolishing of the Law by Christ's death,
page 6. yet let his own words clear his own meaning in the page following.
Luth. on Gal. 3. v. 25. p. 174.
As touching the conscience we are fully delivered from the Law; and therefore
that Schoolmaster must not rule in it, that is, he must not afflict it with
his terrors, threatenings, and captivity, for Christ has removed all these
offices of the Law out of the conscience, putting out the handwriting that was
against us, Col. 2.

Erasmus in Romans 7.1. speaks only of the Ceremonial Law. Antinomus.
At Mosis lex quoniam typis and C^remonijs Christum adumbrabat, ad tempus
aliquod tantum data est, donec exoriente luce cederent umbrae, and apparentibus
veris facesserent simulachra verorum. Erasmus in Gal. 3.19, 25. and in Gal. 4.1.
To the like purpose he has the like words in Gal. 3.19, 25. and 4.1. but
neither word nor syllable for the absolute abrogation of the Moral Law, either
at, or after Christ's death.

Calvin writing upon Gal. 3.23. says, The Apostle compares the Law to a
prison, when he says, before faith came we were kept under the Law, shut up
unto the faith which should afterward be revealed: and a little after, he
shows what is meant by faith, and what Law that is whereof the Apostle
speaks, saying, Fides, hic, proprie significat plenam revelationem eorum quae
tunc latebant sub obscuritate umbrarum legis: Calu. in Gal. 3. v. 23.
Faith in this place, does signify a full revelation of those things which
then did lie hid, under the darkness of the shadows of the Law. And writing
upon verse 25. Calu. in Gal. 3. v. 25. Vide Zanch. in Hosea. cap. 2. p. 45.
col. 1.
he directly proposes and answers the question in hand. Quaeritur an lex ita
sit abrogata, vt nihil ad nos pertineat. Respondeo: Legem quatenus regula est
been vivendi, and fraenum quo in timore Domini retinemur, and stimulus ad
corrigendam pigritiam carnis nostra, denique quatenus utilis est ad docendum,
corrigendum, etc. hodie non minus valere, quam olim, manereque intactam. Now
surely, I do wonder how you could ever with any honesty produce Mr. Calvin,
and cite this very verse, for abolishing the Moral Law at Christ's death, (as
his opinion) seeing he does so directly resolve and determine, for the
establishing of the right use of the same Moral Law, (even before your own
eyes) and that unto the worlds end? What should I say? either your blindness
is palpable, or your boldness most intolerable, in this strange dealing.

Perkins on Gal. 3.19. abused. Vide Calu. de usu Legis Harmon. in 4. lib. Mos.
p. 442.443.
After the same manner do you deal with Mr. Perkins, who writing upon Gal.
3.19. moves this question: Whether the Law serve to reveal sin, after the
coming of Christ, for Paul says, it was added for transgressions, till
Christ; and answers, The Law serves to reveal sin, even to the end of the
world; yet in respect of the Legal or Mosaicall manner of revealing sin, it
is added but till Christ. Mr. Perkins does acknowledge there is use of the
Moral Law, even unto the end of the world, and you will needs have him to be
on your side, and to say as you say, That it did continue but till Christ's
death at the most.

Paraeus in Romans 10. p. 1043. and in Romans 3.20.
Lastly, Paraeus finds no more favor, nor receives any better measure at your
hands, as he that has list and leisure may see, in Romans 10. page 1043. 1002.
in Romans 5.20.

Thus are you well and worthily beaten with your own rod, though not in that
severity which your injurious dealing with so worthy men does deserve: for I
hold it much better to convince and instruct, in the spirit of meekness, than
to reprove and rebuke, with too much acrimony and sharpness, unless a man be
forced ad urendum and secandum, when no other milder means will serve the
turn; as sometimes even the best and gentlest Chirurgions are constrained to
do.

Your seventh Argument follows, Quia velut carne spoliatos artus ostendit, as
Quintil. Instit. Orat. lib. 5. cap. 12.
Quintilian says of such an Argument, Instit. Orat. lib. 5. It was instituted
to be a Schoolmaster to the people of God, till the coming of Christ, Galath.
3.24. Ergo, The Moral Law is now utterly abolished.

Is there any sinews or joints, nay is there any life or soul in this
Argument? What if the Law were given as a Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster to the Jews? is therefore the Moral Law of no force nor use to
us Christians of the Gentiles? But I demand, what Law is it which you say was
instituted as a Schoolmaster unto the Jews? If you say the Ceremonial, we
grant that it was a Schoolmaster, not only teaching obscurely, by signs and
sacrifices, types and figures, that Tota Legis Occonomia rudis quaedam erat
disciplina, rudibus conaeniens, Beza in
rude people of the Jews, in their nonage to look unto Christ to come, but
also conuincing and condemning them severely of all manner of sin, and
keeping them continually under the rod and whip, in Gal. 4.3.
the bondage of servants, (as an heir in his minority is under sharp Gal.
4.1. Calvin. Jnstit. li. 2. ca. 11. sect. 2.5.
tutors and governors though he be lord of all) that so they might be driven to
look and long for the time of release and liberty in Christ, appointed by the
Father. If you mean the Moral Law, we do not deny, but for the manner of
delivery, measure of obedience, form of Legal Covenant, rigor in exacting,
terror in threatening, and severity in accusing and condemning, (as it was in
Moses hand the 2 Cor. 3.7, 9.
ministry of condemnation, and a killing letter) it was then to the Jews a
sharp and severe Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster to drive them unto Christ Jesus, not directly, as teaching,
pointing out, or promising Christ unto them, but indirectly, and as it were
occasionally, forcing them by Ioh. 3.14.
sorrow, and fear, and despair of their own righteousness, (for obtaining
life by the Law) to cast about, and seek for some remedy and relief elsewhere
(as sick men enquire for a Matt. 9.12.
Physician, and such as are wounded seek for a Surgeon) which because it
could no where be found under heaven, but Act. 4.10, 11, 12. See Calu. de usu
Legis in Harmo. in 4. lib. Mos. p. 442.443.
only in Christ Jesus, they were occasioned by the Law, to fly unto the
Gospel, and enforced as it were, to appeal from Moses unto CHRIST, resting
and relying upon him alone (who has Mal. 4.3.
healing under his wings) for Luke 4.18.
binding up all their Ad justitiam Christi lex moralis homines revocabat, ut ad
medicum, Bez. in Romans 3.21.
wounds, and curing all spiritual maladies and miseries whatsoever. And thus
also for the substance, though not for every circumstance according to the
Jewish Paedagogie, the Moral Law (as we have often said before) has yet in
the Church of Christ some special use, and office still, and that not only for
the wicked to humble them, but even for the godly to convince them, to rebuke
them, to stir them, and spur them up to all holy duties, and to teach and
instruct them what to do, and what to leave undone, even after they are called
to believe, and live in Christ Jesus. To this purpose, Luth. on Gal. 3.24. See
Calu. summa legis in Harmo. in 4. lib. Mos. p. 440.441.
Luther speaks most excellently upon Gal. 3.24. [The Law was our
Schoolmaster unto Christ] The Law does not only terrify and torment (as the
foolish Schoolmaster beats his scholars, and teaches them nothing) but
with his rods he drives us unto Christ, like as a good Schoolmaster
instructs and exercises his scholars in reading and writing, to the end
they may come to the knowledge of good letters, and other profitable things,
that afterward they may have delight in doing of that, which before being
constrained unto, they did against their wills: and a little after he adds;
The true use of the Law, is to teach me, that I a^ ^rought to the knowledge of
my sin, and humbled, that so I may come unto Christ, and be justified by
faith, etc.

That which you allege out of August. de Doctr. Christi. cap. 6.
August. de Doct. Christ. cap. 6. helps you nothing in this business, for he
speaks only of the Jewish Paedagogie, in their Sacrifices and Ceremonies,
which their estate, he calls servitutem, and custodiam tanquam sub paedagogo
puerorum, and terms their Ceremonies, signa, saying they were signa quae
temporaliter erant imposita servientibus. And what is this to the abrogation of
the Moral Law?

Beza in Gal. 3.23. and 4.1, 3. again abused. Puerilis est jactantiae,
accusando illustres homines, nomini suo famam quarere. Hieron. Ep. 13.
Beza you do abuse again: he mentions the Ceremonial Law only in both
places, Gal. 3.23. and Gal. 4.1.3. Nunc eandem Ceremonialem Legem confiderans
ut Euangelicarum promissionum umbram and figuram, docet illam quoque hoc
respectu cessasse, quam comparat cum paedagogo, and postea cum tutore, Gal.
4.1. And will you infer upon this; Beza says, The Ceremeniall Law which to
the Jews was a Schoolmaster and Tutor, unto Christ, is now ceased; Ergo, The
Moral Law is utterly abolished since the death of Christ?

The place of Mr. Perkins, Galath. 3.23. has been cleared before; let me now
stop your mouth once for all, for ever mentioning Mr. Perkins name, as being of
your opinion, for the utter abolishing of the Moral Law; and I will not go
far to fetch a stoppell, but even to the other side of the leaf which you have
quoted. Perk. on Gal. 3.23.
Seeing faith is now come (says he) it may be demanded, what is the guard
whereby we are kept now? Answ. The precepts of the Moral Law. The sayings of
the wise are as nails and stakes, fastened to range men in the compass of
their duties, Eccles. 12.11. If this stoppell will not serve, your mouth is
huge wide, and till you send me the measure of it, I shall not fit it right to
serve your turn.

Antinomus.
Unto your eighth, ninth, and tenth, short Arguments, I will make no long
answer: Aug. ad Bonif. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Law of Moses as it was given unto the Jews in the letter, for the outward
form of Legal Covenant in Mount Sinai, Hagar, that brings forth children
unto bondage (as she did Ismael) and being given in such horror and terror,
bestows nothing but the spirit of fear upon her children. And in this
regard, we say, It is the old, and no part of the new Covenant, See Muscul.
loc. Com. de Discrim. Veteris and Nov. Iestam.
that is, of the Gospel, which on the contrary, brings forth children unto
spiritual liberty, (as Sarah did Izaacke) and bestows upon them the spirit
of Adoption, making them heirs of promise, and fellow-heires annexed with
Christ Jesus. But what is all this to the utter abolishing of the Moral Law?
Such things as were but accidental or Zanch. in Hos. cap. 2. p. 45. col. 1.
accessory to the Covenant made with Abraham, or to the promulgation or
administration of the Legal Covenant amongst the Jews, are all abolished. But
the Moral Law, which for substance was ever the same rule of righteousness,
before the fall, before the Muscul. loc. de foedere Dei. p. 144.
Law given by Moses, and before the publishing of the Gospel by Christ Jesus,
was then, and is yet still of good and great Vrsin. de lege divina. p. 278.
use in the Church of God. For as the Aug. Ep. 49. ad Deog^at.
Covenant of Grace, made betwixt God and man in Christ Jesus, was ever since
the fall, one and the same, in the days of Adam, Abraham, Moses, and of Christ
and his Apostles, though the administration thereof was diverse, according to
the different ages and estates of God, Church and children: so the Moral Law
of God, was ever the rule of obedience, in all those times, for all duties of
love to God and man, and shall so continue together with the Gospel, even unto
the end of the world, although it was not always either delivered unto, or
urged (after the same manner) upon Gods people. Abraham Vide Zanch. in Hos. c.
2. p. 44. col. 2. Paraeus in Romans 2. v. 25. Genesis 17.1.
before the Law written, having a portion of this Covenant, was charged to
walk before God, and to be upright. I demand, by what rule must Abraham thus
walk? Doubtless by the rule of the Moral Law written in his heart, and by
the word and will of God, revealed by his Spirit. Moses, David, Samuel, Daniel,
and all other holy Prophets and holy men, in the days of the Law, were in the
same Hyper. in Heb. cap. 3.1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Aug. cont. duas Ep. pelag. lib.
3. ad Bonis. cap. 4.
Covenant of Grace by faith in Christ Jesus; and yet, as (during the time of
the Jewish Paedagogy) they conformed themselves in the outward worship of God,
to the Ceremonial Law, looking by faith unto Christ, the Col. 2.17.
substance of those Heb. 10.1.
shadows; so did they frame their affections and actions, for a sober,
righteous, and holy life, according to the Moral Law, which yet they did not
follow for righteousness, to be justified and saved by the works of it (as
the greatest number of the Romans 10.3, 4, 5.
Jews did) but because they knew that the Law of God was a Psalm. 119.105.
light unto their feet, and a lamp unto their paths, and God did call them to
the Law and to the Isai. 8.16, 20.
Testimony, and charged the Prophet, to bind up the Testimony and to seal up
the Law amongst his disciples, Isa. 8.16.20. So likewise has our Savior
Christ and his Apostles, (the 2 Pet. 1.19.
night of dark Ceremonies being dispelled by the bright day of the Gospel)
continued and Matt. 5. cap. and 22. cap. v. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Gal. 5.14. Iam.
2.8, 9.
established the Moral Law of God being now a part of his written word and
revealed will, to be for ever unto all Christians the rule of life, and the
line of love, by which we must measure out all our duties and services of piety
toward God, and charity toward men, before him, and his, for ever. In which
regard, love which is the sum of the Law, is said by the Apostle 1 Ioh. 2.7,
8.
John, and by Ioh. 13.34. Ioh. 14.15. Ioh. 15.10, 11, 13.
Christ himself, to be both an Old Commandment, and a New; an Old
Commandment, because the duties of love were ever enjoined and required from
the beginning; and a New, because the same Law of love, was upon new grounds of
love, both renewed and reenforced by Christ himself the Lawgiuer.

That because the Moral Law was given with manifest tokens of Gods wrath,
Antinomus.
in great terror, and is called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. therefore it was given
to the Jews only, and so consequently is now utterly abolished, Might you not
as well and wisely, i. indeed, as absurdly, conclude also, that because the Day
of the Promulgation of the Gospel, is called by the Prophet Joel, and by Joel
2.28.
Peter, The great and terrible day of the Lord, a day wherein the Lord will
show Act. 2.16, 17.
wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and
vapor of smoke; when the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon
into blood, therefore the Gospel (sure) being given, and the Holy Ghost being
sent with such manifest tokens of Gods wrath (as also by a Act. 2.2, 3, etc.
rushing and mighty wind, and fiery tongues, which did make many amazed, and
(as it were) at their wits end) do both belong unto them that were then
present, whether Jews or Proselytes; but neither of them unto us Christians,
to whom no such fiery fears and bloody terrors do belong at all. For, shall
not the like causes in the like case, produce and bring forth the like effects?
Or shall fires and fears, prove the abolishing of the Law, when the like
means are used (by the wisdom of God) for the publishing and establishing of
the Gospel?

Antinomus.
than his fellows have done. I cannot find (say you) that salvation was ever
promised to him that should keep the Law. Law? Or who is he that maintains
the use of the Moral Law for this purpose? How often have we told you, That we
look for salvation, and justification, by the Romans 3.24, 25, 28.
righteousness of faith in Christ Jesus, and not by the keeping or fulfilling
of the Phil. 3.9.
Moral Law? If the Moral Law indeed, had no other use but this you speak of,
then had your Argument spoken something to the purpose; but seeing it is urged
and used by us, as a crystal glass of Gods will, to discover unto us the
spiritual blemishes and beauties of our hearts and lives, and as a guide to
teach us to walk in his ways, telling us what to do and what to leave
undone; and seeing it has many other special Vide Calu. de usu Legis in
Harmo. in 4. lib. Mos. p. 442, 443.
offices, (as formerly you have heard) both for Gods glory and our good, we can
never yield this unto you for a sound Argument, That therefore the Moral Law
is now wholly abolished, because you cannot find that salvation was ever
promised to the keeping of it. But tell me in good earnest, could you never
find, that ever salvation was promised to the keeping of the Law? Have you not
read Leuit. 18.5.
what is written in the Law? You shall keep my Statutes and my judgments,
which if a man do he shall live in them. Or do you think, (as some
Basilidiani, Pepusiani, Adamit. Danaeus in Augu. Haeres.
Heretics have done) that this and the like promises made unto the Jews,
concern only the comforts of this temporal, and not the blessing of eternal
life? Think you what you list, it greatly skils not, so long as we know that
the most judicious and religious Calu. Harmo. in 4. lib. Mos. page 445. 450.
August. contr. Faust. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Divines, even such as are pillars in the house of God do think otherwise,
the Scripture bearing witness to their opinion herein, when it tells us, That
in the keeping of the Law, there is a Psalm. 19.11. Eccles. 1.2. and 2.11. Psalm.
119.1, 2.
great reward, a reward of greater weight and worth, than any or all earthly
things (being but vanity and vexation of spirit) can afford; this being the
best end of all, and the whole man, both for his duty and felicity, to fear
God and to keep his Commandments. For, Blessed are they that are undefiled in
the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord: and blessed are they that keep his
Testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart. Came this blessedness then
(may you say) upon any, or could ever any attain unto it by the works of the
Law? I answer, Never any either did or could attain unto this blessedness of
eternal life, by their keeping August. lib. 4. cont. duas Epist. Pelagian. ad
Bonif. cap. 5.
of the Law, by reason of their wants, and weaknesses, defective, and imperfect
obedience unto the same; but all that ever were, are, or shall be so blessed,
must attain thereunto only by the righteousness of Phil. 3.9.
faith, in the absolute and perfect obedience of Christ Jesus. And yet
notwithstanding, that which you say you could never find, we have now not only
found out for you, but brought it to your hand, viz. (that salvation has been
promised to him which should keep the Law) whosoever he were that could
fulfill it in all things accordingly. A further proof whereof, you may yet
take if you please, from the answer of our Luke 10.28. Matt. 19.16, etc.
Savior to the Scribe, or Lawyer, demanding of him what he should do to
inherit eternal life? What is written in the Leuit. 18.5. Ezekiel. 10.11.
Law, says he, how read thou? And when the Lawyer had answered, out of the
Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as
thy self: Christ replied unto him, Thou have answered right, this do and thou
shall live. In which words, our Savior Christ does both expound the promise
made in the Law, to the keeping of the Law, viz. [doe this and liue] not of
this temporal, but of Luke 10.25, 28. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
eternal life; and also makes himself, a promise of Salvation to him that
would keep the Law, if so be he could do it accordingly: Certainly it is
strange to me, that you could never find out thus much before, seeing both
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, have laid it down so plainly
before your face, that had your eyes been in your head (as a wise man's are)
nay had they been but in your heels, you might have run and read, seen and
found, the (...). Rajn. Censu^ Praelect. 183. col. 862.
promise of salvation made unto him that should keep the Law, both in the old
and new Testament. The Mark. 8.24.
blind man in the Gospel, that had but a little glimmering light and sight,
saw men walking as trees; and you that would be loath to be reckoned amongst the
blind or (...). 2 Pet. 1.9. Genesis 21.15, 19.
purblinde, cannot see wood for trees, but like Agar cry out, you can find no
water, and yet the well lies open before your eyes. But it may be, though the
well were open, yet your eyes were shut, (as hers also were) that she could not
see till the Lord had opened them, which I pray, the Lord may do for you also,
and then shall you see more plainly, both this and other points of Gods truth,
which though you have sought, yet have you not seen, and though you have
groped after them, yet have you not found them, because the Lord has hid them
from your eyes.

I come now unto your last Argument, Of such Arguments as these your dozen are,
Quintilian speaks thus; Si non possunt valere, quia magna non sunt: valebunt
(forsan) quia multa sunt. Orat. Instit. lib. 5. cap. 12.
which makes up the full dozen. Repentance (you say) is a part of the Gospel,
Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. It is, And what do you collect or conclude hence? Ergo,
the Moral Law is utterly abolished. Of what force this your Argument is, you
may see by the like. The Prodigals returning to his Father, was a part of his
reconciliation with him; Ergo, his humiliation upon the sense and sight of his
sin, was of no use at all for that purpose. Remission of sin from God, is a
part of justification; Ergo, confession of sin to God, is now of no use at
all. The promises of grace are a part of the Gospel; Ergo, the precepts of the
Law of God are no rules of obedience in the days of the Gospel. If these
Arguments be firm and sound, then such is this of yours also; but if they be
so feeble and weak, that they have no strength either to bear or bring forth
a good conclusion, then must I take yours in this cause for the like, until
you can show me some difference or dislike betwixt them: for what though
repentance, See Lactan. li. 6. de vero cultu. cap. 24. de vocab (...), p. 377.
(...).
(...), (being taken for our (...). Romans 12.2.
effectual renouation, (...). Tit. 3.5.
regeneration, (...). Act. 15.13.
conversion, (...). Romans 6.4.
newness of life, turning from our sins to embrace and obey the Gospel) be
indeed a part of the Gospel, (because none can come unto this, but they that
have the Act. 2.18.
spirit of grace powered upon them, and the word of grace Iam. 1.18, 21.
ingraffed in them, and the Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29.
gift of grace to believe and obey the Gospel bestowed upon them) yet
nevertheless, this makes nothing against the special offices and uses of the
Moral Law, either for the Act. 2.37.
conviction of sinners, or direction of Saints, to prepare them for repentance,
by Act. 2.37.
pricking of their Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10. 2 King. 22.19.
hearts, or to bring forth fruits worthy of Mat. 3.2, 8, 10, 12.
repentance, for the well ordering of their lives. The Law has his use, to
work Mat. 27.3. Vide Bez. in Mat. 3.2. and in Act. 5.31.
(...), poenitentiam: The Gospel his force, to work 2 Timothy 2.25.
(...), resipiscentiam; and both are needful for Christians, even at this
present, as formerly they have ever been.

Calu. in Act. 2.36.
Calvin speaking of the last clause of Peter's Sermon, wherein he charge the
Jews, that they had crucified Christ Jesus, says, he did this, Vt majori
conscientiae dolor tacti, ad remedium aspirarent, and so lays open the
heinousness of that sin in these words: Cujus caedes, non crudelitatis modo
and sceleris plena erat, sed etiam immanis adversus Deum perfidiae, sacrilegij,
ingratitudinis, denique apostasiae testimonium: and then he gives in the next
words, this reason of this course; Verum ita vulnerari oportuit ne ad
quaerendam medicinam tardi essent. Here I do demand, whence had the Jews this
sight and sense of so many sins in that one, of crucifying the Lord Jesus; as
of cruelty, wickedness, perfidiousnesse, sacrilege, ingratitude against God,
and apostasy from God? Whence had they that Act. 2.37.
prick in their hearts, and wound in their conscience for these sins? Had
they no light by the Law to convince them, no stroke by the Law to wound them?
If sin be a 1 Ioh. 3.4.
transgression of the Law, and by the Law comes the Romans 3.20. and
knowledge of sin, and if sin be not 5.13. and 7.7.
imputed nor pressed but by the Law, how can it be, but the Law had some hand
in wounding and afflicting their hearts for these sins? and in opening their
eyes to see and discern the same? I deny not, for I doubt not, but the Ioh.
16.8.
Spirit as the finger of God, had his especial and principal work in their
humiliation and conversion; that is not the question. The Spirit may work by
the 2 King 12.19.
Law, to make us sensible of sin, and to cast us down under the weight of
Gods wrath for it, as well as it may work by the Isai. 61.1. Act. 10.43, 44.
Gospel, to make us look up unto Christ, and to raise us up to some hope and
assurance of the mercy of God, for pardon and forgiveness of the same. It is
sufficient for me, both against your position and allegation, if in the work
of their repentance, containing both their Act. 26.18. Act. 3.19. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Auersion from sin, and their Conversion unto God, the Moral Law had any,
either Lex facit ut non modo intelligam sed and cum morsu conscientia sentiam,
and experiar in me esse peccatum. Muscul. loc. com. de legib. p. 135.
force or use, which I am well assured any judicious and indifferent Reader by
this which has been said, will judge, that it had.

When Dionysius (as Apollod. de Orig. deorum. lib. 3. p. 57.
Apollodorus reports) had cast Lycurgus into a fury or frenzy, he in that
distemper taking a hatchet in his hand, whiles he thought he had smitten down
the branch of a Vine, with the same hand and hatchet slew his own son. What
Dionysius he was, that cast you first into this fit or frenzy, error or
heresy, I know not; but it seems, whiles you have lift up your hand and your
hatchet, your skill and pen, to cut down the Moral Law, a branch of Gods
Vine, the dint and danger of the stroke, has light unawares upon your own
soul, as his did upon his own son, though not absolutely to kill it, yet to
wound it unto death, unless the Lord recover it by giving you repentance, and
effectually cure it by pouring in the balm of his mercy and truth (which I
pray he may do) in the offerings and sufferings of Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.24,
25, 26.


Antinomus.
Terent. Eun. Act. 4. Scen. 16.
Simalio, Dorax, Syrisce, sequimini. C^do alios; ubi centurio est Sanga? and
manipulus furum? Eccum adest. Vbi alij? Thus do you well resemble bragging
Thraso, behauing himself proudly, and brauing his adversary vainly, both with
that he has, and also with that he has not: For having brought out your best
appointed forces into the field, you call on still, Vbi alij? as though there
were yet so many, and so many, and many more behind; whereas poor man, you
have not a man more, neither tag nor rag to follow you, seeing solus Sanio
seruat domum. Take so much of this to your self and your former Arguments, as
may best fit you; and reserve the rest for the other, which yet sit at home
with Sanio to keep the house.

Your reference to Musculus Common-places, gives no better satisfaction, now we
have taken the pains to view all the quarters and corners of those special
places which you have been pleased to send us unto for that purpose. For if
either you will stand unto Musculus, or Musculus will not stand against
himself, you may and shall, even there, and thence, receive resolution to
satisfy you, that there we find no such satisfaction, as you have dreamed may
be found in those places.

He that seriously reads, and advisedly considers, what Musculus has
written in the place, De abrogatione Legis Mosaicae, may easily perceive both
by the title and the text, that he principally aims at the abrogation of the
Ceremonial, and Judicial, and the Moral Law, only so far, as it was Lex
litera, Muscul. loc. com. de abrogatione Legis.
Magisterium Mosis, Ministerium Mosis, virtus peccati, litera occidens, iram,
maledictionem and mortem operans. And all this neither hurts us nor helps
you, for the utter abrogating of the whole Moral Law. For albeit, for these
offices it may be said to be abolished to them that are true believers in
Christ Jesus, in which respect they are said, not to be under the Law but under
grace; yet for other uses and offices, the Moral Law is in force still, as to
be a rule of obedience, to discover corruptions and transgressions, to be a
bridle of restraint unto sin and sinners, Muscul. loc. de vi and effica.
Legis. Loc. de abrog. Legis. Dei enim similis quisque factus ipse Legem facile
implet, nec erit sub illa sed cum illa. August. lib. Exposit. quarundam propos.
ex Epist. ad Romans Call. instit. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 13, 14.
as Musculus in the same place and elsewhere does acknowledge, alleging that
out of the Romans, Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law but under
Grace? God forbid, and giving us thereby to understand, that such as are in the
state of grace, even the sons of God, are servants unto the Law for obedience
unto righteousness, though they be freed from the law of sin and death. They
are not indeed under the Law, as a rigorous exactor, and terrible auenger, but
they are under it, as a righteous commander, and holy conducter, to lead them
in the ways of righteousness and holiness. Agreeable hereunto, is that which
Musculus infers hereupon, Qui Christianus est (says he) etiamsi non sit sub
Magisterio Mosis, propterea tamen non est liber ad faciendum ea quae sunt impia
and injusta, adeoque and factu illicita. Now I would gladly know, seeing
nothing can be impious and unjust, but that which is illicitum, unlawful; and
nothing is sin or unlawful, but that which is known and acknowledged to be
so, by the light and line of the Moral Law: how shall a Christian once
imagine, that the Moral Law is to him wholly abolished, seeing he continually
stands in need of it, as of a lantern unto his feet, Psalm. 119.105. Psalm.
19.7, 8-11.
and a light unto his paths, and must have daily recourse unto it, Iam. 1.25.
to see what is right and what is wrong, what he ought to do, and what he
ought to leave undone? And if here you reply, Tit. 2.12.
that the Gospel teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live godly, righteously, and soberly, in this present world: I answer, It is
most true, that such as have their eyes enlightened with the light of the
Gospel, and their hearts seasoned with the grace of it, Iam. 1.25. Romans 7.
Act. 26.9.20. Gal. 5.6. Gal. 5.22.
looking into the glass of the Moral Law, do see more clearly into the
beauty and glory of it, judge more wisely of things that differ in it, work
more effectually by love in all the duties of it, renounce and resist more
powerfully all the affections and actions of sin that rise against it, and
make all the Commandments thereof more easy, Matt. 11.28, etc. Ephesians. 6.1, 2,
etc. Iam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 3.17. 1 Ioh. 5.3.
and the burden more light, than otherwise it could be unto them. All this the
Gospel teaches and works in us, and for us, but it teaches all this, by
the lines and lessons, precepts and prohibitions, of the Moral Law, and
works all this upon the Moral grounds of love in the Law, and walks in
obedience by the spirit of adoption and liberty, not in the spirit of fear and
slavery. And therefore by all this, it may easily appear, that so long as the
Gospel is established, the Moral Law can never be wholly abolished. This
conclusion receives further strength from another, made by Musculus himself
in the same place, Muscul. loc. com. de abrogatione Legis.
to the same end. Quare, Christianus faciens contra ea quae praecepta sunt in
Decalogo enormius peccat, quam si sub lege constitutus faceret, tam abest ut
liber sit ab ijs quae illic praecipiuntur; etenim tamet si liber est a Mose,
hand tamen liber est ab obedientia Christi, ac vera justitiae. In which
sentence we may observe these several propositions, all serving to maintain
the use of the Moral Law amongst Christians. First, that the Decalogue, i. the
Moral Law or Ten Commandments, being a part of the written word, and revealed
will of God, does yet for the substance of it continue, and concern all
Christians. Secondly, that the precepts and prohibitions of the Decalogue, do
bind all Christians to allegiance and obedience. Thirdly, that a Christian
doing any thing against the Decalogue or Moral Law, sins more grievously
under the Gospel, than any Jew committing the same sins under the Law.
Fourthly, that Christians do not entertain, nor maintain the Moral Law as
Moses disciples, receiving it and obeying it upon the same conditions, and to
the same ends, as Moses did deliver it, and impose it upon the Jews; but as
the disciples of Christ Jesus, who is the Lord of his house, and the only
Lawgiuer for the well ordering of it. Now forasmuch as Christ testifies of
himself, that he came not to destroy but to fulfill the Law, Matt 5.17, 18.
clearing the beauty and renewing the spiritual vigor and virtue of it, Romans
6.14, 15. Romans 7.12. Matt. 5.19. Heb. 8.10. Iam. 2.8.
taking away the terror and abating the burden and rigor, but not changing the
nature, nor abolishing one jot of the substance of it: yea further, not only
commending and commanding it to all his disciples, and in them to all true
Christians, Accedente gratia, idipsum quod lex onerose jusserat, jam sine ouere
and libertissime implemus. August. 83. quaest. quaest. 66.
but putting it into our minds, and writing it by the finger of his spirit in
our hearts, and making it unto us a royal Law of liberty, not a yoke of
bondage and fear; therefore do we now willingly receive and obey the
Commandments thereof, and do not now account them grievous, but in Christ
gracious, holy, just, and good; the duties whereof we desire and endeavor to
perform with delight, knowing that our infirmities are covered, our wants
supplied, our sins pardoned, and our services accepted, in the absolute and
perfect obedience of him that did absolutely fulfill the Law for us, that is,
of Christ Jesus. Romans 7.22.
According unto these grounds, we may say with Musculus; That although a
Christian be free from Moses, yet is he not free from the obedience of Christ,
nor of true righteousness; and if he be not free from the obedience of Christ
[that is, such as both by precept and pattern, he taught and required,
according to the precepts of the Moral Law] then is a Christian bound in the
days of the Gospel, to the obedience of the Moral Law: And if a Christian be
not freed from the obedience of true righteousness [and the rule of true
righteousness be the Moral Law] (as all Divines do agree, and as Christ and
his Apostles have taught the Churches) then is a Christian bound in the days
of the Gospel, to yield obedience unto the Moral Law. Now if you be pleased
to lay all these together, the reckoning will arise to another and a greater
sum, than you imagined or expected, at this time and place; and that, not to
feed your fancy and serve your humor, for the utter abrogation of the whole
Moral Law, but to confirm the contrary truth, for ratifying and establishing
thereof amongst Christians, in the days of the Gospel. Shall I trouble you
yet with one other conclusion out of Musculus, for your further satisfaction,
that he is not (for certain) of your mind, for the utter abrogation of the
Moral Law. Muscul. loc. com. de abrogatione Legis.
Quare tam abest (says he) ut damnemus usum Decalogi, ut admodum etiam
laudemus eorum studium and diligentiam, qui primi illum ad catechizandum
neophytos vsurpandum esse judicarunt: We are so far from condemning the use
of the Decalogue, or Moral Law, that we do much commend their care and
diligence, which first did judge it fit to be used for catechizing nouices or
the ruder sort in religion. By this you may see, how far Musculus is gone
from you, though you labor never so much to draw him to stand by your side,
and to speak in your behalf. He is far from condemning the use of the
Moral Law; you are eager and hot in pursuing of it even unto death and utter
destruction: He will allow and commend the use of it, and them that use it too,
for catechizing children or nouices in religion; there is neither man woman nor
child, younger nor elder, that can entreat you, to give them leave or liberty,
to have any thing at all to do with it. And here by the way I pray you be
advertised, that howsoever this allegation be sufficient to confute your
opinion, yet do not I so allege it, as altogether to approve it, nor can I so
either think or speak of the Decalogue or Moral Law, as here your Musculus
does write of it: for whereas he will not allow it any other place in the
Church but in the Catechism, nor the explication thereof to be needful for
any but for nouices and children; I am of opinion, that the ministry and
industry of the most judicious, religious, and best experienced Divines, may
well and worthily, profitably and comfortably be employed, in seeking and
searching out the infinite and admirable wisdom, together with other the deep
things of God, which are hid in the Moral Law, and that not only for their
own private instruction, but for the edification of the ripest and chiefest of
Gods children. And whosoever he be, that thinks so little and so light
knowledge of the Moral Law will serve the turn, that it is to be held only as
milk for babes, and not as strong meat for men of riper age, I am afraid that
as he does depresse and abase the Law of God more than is meet, so does he
advance himself too high above his pitch, being rashly puffed up in his fleshly
mind, and knowing little or nothing in this particular as he ought to know.
For howsoever it be true, that in the Moral Law there be some general things
so easy and shallow, that even a little lamb may wade in them; Psalm. 19.7.
Psalm. 119.18.
yet considering the infinite variety of matter contained in the specials and
particulars of the same, there are many things to be found of greater depth and
difficulty, wherein a huge Elephant may swim also. Otherwise I can hardly
think, that ever the holy Prophets being all interpreters of the Moral Law,
and Christ himself the Lawgiuer, Matt. 5. Iam. 4.12.
best worthy and best able to expound and explain the true meaning of it, and
Christ's Apostles who were taught by his spirit the true sense thereof, would
ever either all or any of them, have taken all or half that pains, in opening
and applying, extending and enlarging, Execrandi igitur s^t Libertini,
Antino^i, and cateri Legem Moralem repudiantes. These. Geneu. these. 28.
clearing and explaining, urging and enforcing, of the Moral Law, and that
both by word and writing, preaching and exhorting, as we know by their public
records they have all done, and that amongst the Priests and Prophets, Doctors
and Expounders of the Law, Scribes, and Pharisees, and Rabbines, such as
professed the greatest skill and understanding of the Law, if either all or any
of them had been of his mind, That it is sufficient for such as are more ripe
in faith, to know this sum of the Law, Love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and thy neighbor as thy self, but for the ruder sort and nouices, it
is meet that they be instructed in the Decalogue, being a more plain form of
living, and fit for such persons only.

Antinomus.
The other places of Musculus which you point your finger at, Musculus his
Common-places, for establishing of the Moral Law, and the right use thereof,
seeing your reference for the utter abolishing thereof, does neither serve your
turn, nor satisfy me at all. In that place de Legibus, Muscul. loc. com. de
Legib.
and those sections, de usu Legis Mosaicae, and de vi and efficacia Legis, he
has sufficiently expressed himself, that (howsoever his writing in other
places might be taken or mistaken by others) yet he is of opinion, Muscul. de
usu and effica. Legis.
That the Moral Law is now in the days of the Gospel of special use and
efficacy, even for himself and others, for the godly and for the wicked, as
men stand in the estate of nature, or in the state of grace. Now if it so fall
out, Muscul. loc. com. in divisione Decalogi.
that Musculus may seem unto you in those places which you have mentioned and
the like to cross himself, and to be of another mind, concerning the
continuance, office, and use of the Moral Law amongst Christians, in the days
of the Gospel; what answer can be fitter both for him and you in this case,
than the very same which he himself gives unto Augustine, when he found him
inconstant and differing from himself, in the division of the Decalogue: Quaso
quomodo aequum esse poterit, ut unius, idque sibi ipsi non constantis
authoritas omnibus alijs praeferetur? Deinde si placuit authoritas Augustini,
quare non placuit in eo quod una cum reliquis antiquioribus concorditer, magis
quam in eo quod and ab alijs, and a seipso diversum scripsit? How is it meet, I
pray you, that the authority of one [ Musculus alone] and he not agreeing with
himself, should be preferred before all other men? Again, if Musculus his
authority like you so well, why does it not please you in that which he has
written agreeably and jointly with others more ancient, for the establishing of
the Moral Law, rather than in that wherein he differs from others, and from
himself also, for the utter abolishing of the same?

Now, where you put us over also unto Zanchius, upon Ephesians. 2. v. 14, 15. de
Legis Mosaicae abrogatione, Where (you say) he disputes the point very fully,
Antinomus.
yet he does not plainly (say you) expound the places that seem to contradict
it: Zanchius is little beholding unto you for your allegation, wherein you
commend and discommend, approve and reprove, what he has written, with one
breath; Erasmus.
Vno spiritu efflas calidum and frigidum: Like the Husbandman, that returning
from his work in a cold winters day to his dinner, did with one and the same
breath, both warm his hands which he felt were too cold, and cool his pottage
which he feared were too hot; which when the poor Satyr saw, he feared to
dwell with him, Senec. lib. 2. de Benefic. Plant. in Aul. Altera manu fort
lapidem, panem ostentat altera. Gregor. Theol. ad Eusebius. Caesar. citat. ab
Erasm.
and fled from him. Seneca calls such a benefit, panem lapidosum, and
somewhere else I have read the like fact reproved in words not much unlike.
Manus altera panem, altera fert lapidem: and in another Language, yet to the
same purpose, (...). as if a man should claw a man's head with one hand, and
smite him on the cheek with the other. And do not you deal with Zanchius
after the same manner? you seem to claw his head with this approbation [he
disputes the point very fully] and presently you smite him on the cheek with
this rebuke [he does not plainly expound the places that seem to contradict
it]. You say, he disputes the point very fully; but tell me, does he determine
the point for you? Does he wholly abrogate the whole Moral Law, as you would
have us to think of him? Or does he only abrogate it in regard of some
circumstances, preserving the substance thereof entire still? Zanch. in Ephesians. 2.
loc. de abrog. Legis.
Nay does he not first distinguish the whole Law of Moses, and divide the
Commandments thereof into mandata principalia, and mandata accessoria? The
principal comprised in the Moral Law, the accessory in the Ceremonial and
Judicial; the principal continued, the accessory abolished; and then
determine, That because in the Moral Law (as it was given by Moses to the
Israelites) there were some things of circumstance, and some of substance, some
essential, some accidental, some temporal, some eternal: All such things as
were matters of circumstance, accidental, and temporal, in the Moral Law, as
it was given by Moses, are utterly abolished; but all such as were matters of
substance, essential, and eternal, are so far from being abolished, that
they are for ever (being confirmed by Christ himself, Matthew. 5. and Matthew. 22.
and by his Apostles, Tit. 2.11.) to be continued: Such are all and every one of
the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, containing the express form of Gods
eternal will, and the sum and substance of all duties of piety to God in the
first Table, and of charity toward men in the second: Vide etiam These. Geneu.
these. 28.
All which, says Zanchius, God required, from the beginning of the world
before Moses; in the time of the Law by Moses; after Moses by the Prophets: Et
nunc tandem in finem usque mundi, per Christum perque ejus Apostolos
requisivit, and requirit a nobis: And now at length even unto the end of the
world, by Christ and his Apostles, he has required, and does require of us.
And so a little after, he sets down his conclusion in flat opposition unto
your opinion; Constat hoc sensu legem simpliciter non esse abrogatam. It is
evident, says he, that in this sense the Moral Law is not simply, or wholly
abrogated. Antinomus.
But why do you censure him for not expounding the places of Matthew. 5. and
Romans 3. plainly? The plain truth is, Cic. Orat. pro Sexto Rosc. Amerino.
So I have heard and read, that one C. Fimbria an audacious fellow, having at
the funeral of C. Marius, caused Qu. Scaevola, a noble citizen of Rome, to be
wounded, and finding afterward that the wound was not so mortal but that he
might happily recover of it, did presently call Scaevola into question by
course of Law; and when it was demanded of him, what he had against, or whereof
he could accuse such a man, whom no man else could sufficiently commend; he
answered in a furious passion, Quod non totum telum corpore recepisset; That
receiving a wound in his body, he had not received the whole weapon also even
up unto the hists.

Antinomus.
But to amend what Zanchius has done amiss, you say, you will give us a taste
out of Matt. 5.17. I am not come to destroy the Law but to fulfill it: Which
place (you say) cannot be understood of the form of Moses Law, but of the
matter of it, or of the Law of Nature. Why tell me, Moses Law? Do you mean,
the inward or outward, the essential or accidental, the temporary or
eternal, form of the Moral Law? I hope you mean not the inward, essential,
and eternal form of it, which can never be severed from the matter of it, and
the matter you say is perpetual. If you mean then the outward form, in the
manner of delivery by Moses to the Israelites, together with all the
circumstances of persons, time, place, and other accessories of the same, (as
what else you should mean I cannot imagine) then let me taste your meaning I
pray you a little better, by one or two demands touching this point and place.
First, did not Christ come to destroy this outward form of the Moral Law?
Secondly, did Zanchius ever say otherwise, Zanch. in Ephesians. 2. de abrogat.
Legis.
viz. that Christ came not to destroy the outward form, i. the circumstances,
and accessories of the Moral Law? Thirdly, does not Zanchius avouch evidently
the clean contrary? Fourthly, why then do you blame his exposition, as
establishing the form as well as the matter of the Moral Law? Fifthly, how do
you that have so long stood out against the Moral Law, for the absolute
abrogating of it, even the whole Law, and wholly too, now so come in unto
Zanchius, and others that have stood for it, that you yield them and us the
whole substance and matter of the Moral Law to be in force still, and content
your self only to carry away the shadows, accessories, and circumstances of
the same, to feed your fancy with an idle and adle conceit of a glorious
victory. Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla tulisti. Virgil. Exhortat. ad
Confiliarios Regis Galliae.
It is recorded of Paulus Vergerius, (a man very gracious with Pope Paul the
third) that when he attempted to write against Luther, he was so overcome with
the force of Luthers Arguments, that he changed his opinion and became a
convert of Luthers religion. I wish it were so well and no otherwise with you,
that the Lord would give you such a teachable and tractable heart and spirit,
that whereas you have read Zanchius, Luther, Calvin, and other Orthodoxall
Writers, with a mind and purpose to draw them to your error, and so to call
them in, both as witnesses and counselors against the Moral Law, you may so
be convinced your self, by the evidence of the truth which they deliver, and
the force of the reasons which they render, for the continuance and maintenance
of the Moral Law, that if hitherto you have not, yet henceforth you may,
renounce your error, and embrace the truth with them.

But I see you have made your self a bolting hole, that by way of distinction
you might have an evasion. For (say you) it cannot be denied, Antinomus.
but the matter of the Decalogue, being the Law of Nature, is in force as it is
the Law of Nature, and understood Philosophically; but how it can be in force
Theologically understood, (for that (say you) is our question in hand) being we
have no warrant in Scripture for it, but the contrary, (you say) you cannot
see. And I say, if the mist of Philosophy had not blinded the eyes of your
Theology, you might have seen as much as this comes unto, and more too. For I
demand, First, may it not now be denied, that the whole Moral Law is wholly
abrogated, as you affirm, seeing it cannot be denied but the matter of the
Moral Law is yet of force, as you now confess? Secondly, if the matter of the
Moral Law be of force at this present, as the Law of Nature commanding; is not
the form also in force by our conformity thereunto in obeying? And thirdly, if
both matter and form (the essential parts of the Moral Law) be yet
continued, [as it is the Law of Nature] that is, a natural rule of
righteousness and holiness to such as are in the state of nature; is it
therefore so deprived of all spiritual force and use, that it cannot be also a
spiritual rule of righteousness and holiness, to such as are called to the
estate of grace? Fourthly, shall Plato and Aristotle confine us for teaching or
learning of Natural or Moral duties, to their Physics, or Ethics, their
Natural or Moral Philosophy? Or would you restrain Christians from harkening
to Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, for their better
instruction and direction in the same? Surely, if true believers have now no
other benefit, nor use of the Moral Law, but as it is the Law of Nature and
Philosophically understood; then is the Law (written so distinctly by Moses, a
penman of the Holy Ghost) not written, Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16.
as other Scriptures are, for our learning. Then was Abraham's direction for
reformation to no purpose; Luke 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Then may infidels and
heathens, see as far into the nature and danger of sin as true Christians
can. Then may natural reason be a light unto our steps, and a lantern unto
our feet, without the Law written. And when all this proves true, then shall
(...) prove (...), and your Natural and Moral Philosophy, true Divinity.
Calvin writing de usu Legis, says, Calu. in Deuter. Append. de usu Legis.
Merito vocatur been and just vivendi regula, atque hic finis Legis omnibus
fere notus est. Naturaliter quidem insculpta est boni and mali notitia
hominibus, quo reddantur inexcusabiles. This last he speaks of the Law of
Nature, as common to all men, and serving only to leave them without excuse;
and presently after he speaks of the Moral Law, written by Moses, and given
by God by a singular privilege to the Israelites and so to us, as the Doctrine
of good-liuing; Romans 4.15.
which albeit (as Paul says) it be in it self holy, and the Commandment just
and good, yet Asperum est (says he) quod alibi dicit, legem iram operari, and
propter transgressiones esse positam. Gal. 3.10, 19.
And mark I pray you, to whom this is asperum, so sharp and bitter, nempe
hominibus profanis qui tantum Philosophice judicant. Consider and observe by
this, that in Caluins judgment, they that will judge of the Moral Law
Philosophically, they are such as are offended with it grievously, and live
profanely. Consider also, that seeing the Doctrine of the Moral Law, delivered
expressly and distinctly in writing to the Israelites, was for that time a
singular privilege and pledge of their adoption, above and before all other
people, (if you will absolutely cancel this writing, and deprive us of all
lawful use of this Law, being so holy and heavenly a Doctrine and rule of
good-liuing) consider I say, lest you make us Christians in worse estate than
the Jews, and in as bad as the Gentiles, our privilege less than the
Israelites according to the flesh, and our portion no better than theirs who
are strangers from the life of God, Antinomus.
according to the faith. But (you say) how the Moral Law can be in force
Theologically understood, being no warrant in Scripture for it, you cannot see.
a blind man see; only we will lay the matter so plainly in open view, that he
that can and will see, shall and may see, that which you say you cannot see. To
this end it is very requisite that we sift out your meaning, what it is to
understand the Moral Law Theologically. By the opposition which you make of
understanding it Philosophically, and Theologically, it should seem, that as
they understand it Philosophically, which understand it naturally by the light
of natural reason only, Romans 2.15.
without the written Word, or revealed will of God, without any ordinary means
of illumination, or instruction, and so beholding the matter of the Moral Law,
but very darkly and confusedly, and feeling the work in their hearts by their
conscience witnessing, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one another, and
their wills grudging and rebelling against the tenor of it: So do they
understand the Moral Law Theologically, which besides the natural light and
sight of the Law, written by nature in their hearts, do consider it and
receive it as the written Word of God, as an express form of a principal
part of the revealed will of God, a right rule of direction for religion, and
religious conversation, a portion of the Covenant of Grace, as it is written in
our hearts by the finger of Gods Spirit, a part of Gods image which in the new
man is created after God in righteousness and true holiness; the knowledge
whereof they attain unto by the word of Grace, and the sense and feeling of
the work thereof by the spirit of Grace, so beholding the beauty thereof more
clearly and distinctly, and feeling the power thereof more effectually, and
obeying the precepts thereof more willingly, and looking for the acceptance of
their imperfect obedience, in and by the only perfect and absolute obedience of
Christ Jesus only. They that thus, I say, do understand the Moral Law to be
in force in the days of the Gospel, (as for ought I know the best Divines and
best Christians do) do understand it Theologically, which as yet, you say,
you cannot see that you can do. Iunius de Theolog. vera cap. 2. these. 5. cap.
3.6. ca. 4. these. 7. cap. 7. and cap. 8.
Iunius that great Scholar and worthy Divine, in his Book de Theologia, will
help you to light your candle, if that will do you any good in this your
darkness. He gives this definition of Theology; Theologia est rerum divinarum
sapientia: and this division; Theologia est (...) nimirum Dei ipsius sapientia,
aut est (...) a Deo informata. And leaving the former rather to be adored than
curiously inquired into, he afterward subdiuides the latter to be Theologia
visionis, or Revelationis: and then he tells us, that this Theologia
revelationis, is either naturalis, or supernaturalis; and in handling these
two, he worthily sets forth the weak sight and light of humane
understanding and reason, according to the principles and conclusions of the
Law of Nature, and notes the error, obscurity, and insufficiency of this
natural wisdom therewithal: And then a little after, he defines the absolute
supernatural Theology (which does especially concern the present business)
after this manner: Iunius de Theolog. vera ca. 12. these. 23.
Theologia absolute dicta est sapientia rerum divinarum secundum veritatem
divinam a Deo inspirata, and per enuntiativum sermonem in Christo commissa
servis ejus, atque in Testamento Vetere and Novo per Prophetas, Apostolos, and
Euangelistas consignata, quantum ejus hic nobis expedit revelari ad gloriam
ipsius, and Electorum bonum. According to the tenor of this definition of
Theology, I will now prove unto you if I can, that the Moral Law of God is now
in force, being understood Theologically.

Whatsoever in it self is now divine, the knowledge whereof is divine wisdom,
inspired of God according to divine truth, and by word in Christ committed to
his servants, and in the Old and New Testament ratified by the Prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists, as much of it as here is meet to be revealed unto
us, to Gods glory and our good; That same is, and may be [according to the
definition of Theology.] Theologically understood, and is now in force so
understood. But the Moral Law of God is divine, and the knowledge thereof is
divine wisdom, inspired of God according to divine truth, and by the
Enunciatiue word in Christ committed to his servants, and in the Old and New
Testament ratified by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, as much of it as
here is meet to be revealed unto us to Gods glory and our good. Ergo, The
Moral Law is and may be (according to the definition of Theology)
Theologically understood, and is now in force so understood. The Major of this
Syllogism is evident by the definition of Theology; The Minor is made good by
the Scriptures, and by the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the
judgment of the most judicious and Orthodox Divines, as in every branch
thereof may be proved by the Scriptures alleged, and by the testimonies before
and after mentioned and produced. The Moral Law is diuine] because it is holy,
Romans 7.22, 24.
spiritual, just, and good, Romans 7.22, 24. The knowledge thereof is divine
wisdome] because it makes the simple wise, Psalm. 19.
illighteneth the eyes, Psalm. 119.
and makes David wiser than his teachers, because it teaches the fear of God
which is the beginning of wisdom, yea the end of all and whole man, fear God
and keep his Commandments, Psalm. 111.10. Psalm. 112.1. Eccles. 12.13. It is
inspired of God according to divine truth] because God has put it in our
minds, and written it in our hearts, by the finger of his spirit, Heb. 8.10. 2
Cor. 3.3, 17, 18. Nehe. 9.13, 14. And the things of God knows no man, but the
spirit of God, which searches and reuealeth the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2.10, 11. And by the Enunciatiue word in Christ committed to his seruants]
because it was given by audible voice, by word and writing unto Moses, and by
him to the Israelites, and so by and in Christ, a Prophet like unto him, given
also by word and writing unto us, Act. 7.38. Hebr. 11. Matthew. 5.17, 18, etc.
And in the Old and New Testament, ratified by the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists,] by David, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 119. throughout, by Esaias,
Isa. 8.16.20. Seal up the Law among my disciples, to the Law and to the
Testimony: by Matthew, Mark, Luke, Paul, Peter, James, and John, Matt. 22.37,
38, 39, 40. Mark. 12.29, 30, 31. Luke 10.26, 27. Act. 28.23. Romans Chapters
2.3.4.7.13. 2 Pet. 2.15.21. Iam. 2.10, 11. 1 Ioh. 2.7, 8. and 3.23. and
infinite other texts of Scripture which might be heaped up to this purpose. And
is not the end of the Law [for Gods glory and our good] justified out of the
Scripture also? seeing by the light of the Law, shining in the works of the
Law, God is glorified here, Matthew. 5. Phil. 1.11. Luke 1.75. and we when our
faith works by love, gather and get assurance that we shall be glorified
hereafter, Gal. 5.6. 2 Pet. 1 10, 11. Psalm. 119.1. Iam. 1.25. And thus may you
see, if you can see any thing at all, that the Major of this Syllogism being
granted, and every branch of the Minor now proved, the conclusion against you
must needs follow as necessarily inferred: That the Moral Law according to the
definition of Theology, is and may be Theologically understood, and is now in
force so understood. If yet you desire to hear what our Divines speak also
for this point, albeit I think you can find none to speak a word against it,
yet to do you a pleasure, I will call in one or two sufficient witnesses to
give testimony thereunto.

Calvin having rebuked them that judge Philosophice of the Moral Law, Calu.
in Deuteronomy. in Append. de usu. Legis. pa. 441, 443.
adds these words, to show there is now a Theological use of it: Ille vero
legis usus Theologicus est quia nihil aliud potest quam detegendo nostram
injustitiam, mortem duntaxat afferre. And as he shows, this is one
Theological use of the Law by discovering unrighteousness, to bring us in
danger of death, so does he afterward in the same place, find out another
Theological use of it: Vbi autem intus cordibus legem suam insculpsit, simul
prodest exterior doctrina legis: sic enim filios suos gubernat spiritu
regenerationis, ut simul tamen velit ad vocem quoque suam esse attentos and
dociles: That so soon as the Lord has written his Law in our hearts, then
does the doctrine of the Law do us good, making his children by his spirit
more teachable and tractable to hear and obey his will.

Iunius also in his learned Book de vera Theologia, brings in the Moral Law,
jus Morale, as opposite to the Law of Nature, which he calls, jus Naturae,
and there very plainly auerreth, that the Moral Law is a principal or
special part of the subject of true and sacred Theology. Fran. Iun. lib. de
vera Theolog. cap. 13. these. 24.
His words be these: Hoc vero jus morum quo homines ad Deum oportet accedere,
and sacrae voluntati ejus quam maxim fieri potest conformari, sacra Theologia
exponit perfectissime. Now if sacred Theology do most perfectly expound the
Moral Law, then is the Moral Law [Theologically vnderstood] yet in force,
which you have not yet the eyes to see; and not in force only [as it is the Law
of Nature] as you have had the face and forehead to affirm. Now because you
say, There is no warrant in the Scripture for this, that the Moral Law
Theologically understood is yet in force, I pray you answer me directly to this
one question, which I hope will clear the point in question; Did Saint Paul
when he said, I had not known concupiscence to be sin, Romans 7.7.
except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet: Did he understand the Moral
Law Philosophice or Theologice? You cannot say Philosophice, for then he might
have known so much by the Law of Nature before his conversion, having as he
had a double help, the light of natural reason, and the benefit of Gamaliels
Doctrine, and yet he acknowledges that without the Law, sin was dead, i.
until he had a spiritual insight into the tenth Commandment, he had no
manner of sense and feeling of concupiscence to be sin against it. Besides,
neither Plato nor Aristotle, nor the wisest Moralists that ever wrote, could
ever search into this depth, and find out this truth of God, hid from the eye
of Nature in the tenth Commandment, that inclinations to sin, or motions and
imaginations of sin without consent or delight, were to be accounted a breach
of the Law, and worthy of death. If he then did not understand the Law (when he
so said) Philosophice, I conclude, he must needs understand it Theologice, and
so without question he did, speaking of it so divinely, graciously, and
religiously, and disputing of the nature, and use, fruits, and effects thereof,
both in the estate of nature and in the estate of grace, so spiritually, so
feelingly, and effectually.

For the other place, Romans 3.31. which you except against, as not plainly
expounded by Zanchius, Antinomus.
Because (you say) it may be understood of the whole Law, as well Ceremonial
as any other, Do you not offer Zanchius some hard measure, in charging him to
expound it of the Moral Law only, which he does not, and the Apostle also,
saying, he speaks of the time past, whereas the words which the Apostle uses
(...), and (...), are both of the time present? And do you not see, how in
yielding this place to be meant of the Moral Law, though not of it only, you
do convince your self of an error, in going about to abolish the Moral Law,
which by confessing the truth with the Apostle you do now establish?

As for Erasmus, Antinomus.
we have seen enough of his mind already, and returned you more by way of
recompense and satisfaction from his writings, than you will be willing to
receive either from his or our hands. Erasmus, an impertinent and needless
piece of service, and worthy no other answer than was once given in a like
case; Plut. apoth. Lacon. in Antalcida.
Quis quaso vituperat? But you say with some indignation, His Paraphrase though
commanded to be had in Churches, is too much neglected. That is a fault: And
books (you say) of far meaner quality are much esteemed. That I fear me is a
scornful flout. If you aim at the Defense of the Apology of the Church of
England, Jewels Defense of the Apology and his Reply.
now commanded to be had in the Churches, consider I pray you there is room
enough for both, and though the Apology be admitted, yet the Paraphrase is not
excluded. Can you not think well and speak well of Erasmus his gold, but you
must cast out some words of disgrace against our Jewel? Let the Ring and the
Diamond have either of them their due place and praise. If herein I miss of
your meaning, bear with my mistaking, and hereafter either speak more
plainly, or not so dangerously.

Antinomus.
As for that which follows, you bring me such confused stuff, such shreds and
pieces, gathered here and there out of Luther on Galath. Bez. 2 Cor. 3.11.
August. de spirit. and lit. as is wonderful! One Simile runs after your fifth
section gone many a mile before, another looks hard after the general point,
and then you conclude with an exhortation, and then (having made an end before
you had done) you come in with a word or two to illustrate your second section.
I cannot but conceive that now your head grew mazy,

Luther on the Galathians, has not so much by much as you say, for the
abolishment of all Laws by Christ. For in the first place, page 176. Luth. on
Gal. page 176.
a. b. he speaks of the abolishing of the Jewish Ceremonies, where once one
has put on Christ Jesus: Where Christ is put on (says he) there is neither
Jew nor Circumcision, nor Ceremony of the Law any more. For Christ has
abolished all the Laws of Moses that ever were: he means all such as might
accuse or terrify a believing conscience, and stand in opposition unto CHRIST,
as the words following do manifestly declare.

And in the next place, page 177. Luth. on Gal. page 177.
he speaks of the abolishment of all Laws indeed, but only in the matter of
justification before God, deserving of grace and eternal life. Will you hear
him deliver his mind in his own words? God has indeed (says he) many
Ordinances, Laws, Decrees, and kinds of life, but all these help nothing to
deserve grace, and to obtain eternal life. So many as are justified
therefore, are justified not by the observation of man's Law, nor Gods Law, but
by Christ alone, who has abolished all Laws. These be Luthers own words. Now
if you will needs conclude hereupon, that Luther is of opinion that the whole
Moral Law is wholly abolished, should you not deal injuriously with him, and
deceitfully with us? You have been already told of the fallacy, A dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter: you have here occasion to remember it
again.

Your last place of Luther, page 223. Luth. Galat. p. 223.
has been answered before, and so has that of Beza, in 2 Cor. 3.11. and that
also which you repeat again of the perpetuity of the Decalogue in Nature, and
the perpetuity of it in Divinity, unto all which I say now no more, but if I
cannot stay you, but you will needs Cramben bis coctam ponere, (...).
you shall not draw me to taste any more thereof, nec Actum agere.

Juvenal. Sat. 7.
Nam quaecunque sedeus modo legerat, haec eadem stans
Proferet, atque eadem cantabit versibus ijsdem.
Occidit miseros crambe repetita Magistros.
One thing there is in the last clause, touching the perpetuity of the
Decalogue in Nature, where you have interlaced as an exception against the
perpetuity of the fourth Commandment; Antinomus.
The Moral Law or Decalogue (say you) is perpetual in nature, saving the
fourth Commandment. Deuteronomy. 4.12, 13. August. de spirit. and lit. cap. 14.
If it be Ceremonial absolutely, then how comes it to pass that it was
delivered by the voice of God, and written by the finger of God in Tables of
Stone, being one amongst the rest of the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law,
which are all perpetual in nature? seeing nothing absolutely Ceremonial
amongst all the Ordinances of Moses, was ever so delivered, or so written?
Again, how can that be a Ceremony which was given of God unto man in the
estate of innocence, Genesis 2.2, 3.
when yet there was no sin, and so no need of a Savior, and therefore no use
for any Ceremony, Exodus 16.29. and Cap. 35.3. Ier. 17.21. Act. 1.12. Exodus
35.2, 3.
to signify or set forth either one or other. That there was something
Ceremonial in the fourth Commandment, as it was specially given by Moses to
the Jews in their Legal worship; as that Seventh day which they did
celebrate, their strict rest from all bodily labor, their Sabbath days
journey, their kindling of fire, etc. we do not deny; but that therefore the
fourth Commandment is not moral, nor perpetual in Nature, this does not nor
you cannot prove. As for that which you allege out of Augustine, August. de
spirit. and lit. cap. 14.
de spirit. and lit. cap. 14. [In december praceptis, excepta Sabbati
observatione, dicatur mihi, quid non, sit observandum a Christiano:] I cannot
but wonder and wonder again, that you going about to batter down the fourth
Commandment, and borrowing an Engine out of Augustine for that purpose, have in
your simplicity brought with you such a one, as does not demolish, but
underprop and establish all the rest of the Commandments of the Moral Law, to
be now of force and use, amongst all Christians. For I may say out of Augustine
also as you do: August. lib. 3. cont. Faustum.
Dicatur mihi in december praeceptis quid non sit a Christiano observandum? Let
any man show me what there is in the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law, which
is not now to be observed of all Christians? August. tractat. 20. in Johan.
As for the Sabbath which Augustine seems to except, he means the Jewish
and Legal Sabbath, taking it in the letter for corporal rest, and that
figuratively, as signifying both a rest from sin (which he takes to be that
servile opus, August. ad Inquisit. Ian. lib. 2. cap. 12.
from which the Jews must rest) and the heavenly rest also, of which he thinks
the Sabbath was a type. And unto this I say, Whatsoever Augustine can prove by
the evidence of the Scripture, to be Ceremonial and Jewish in the fourth
Commandment, we will not challenge that to be moral nor perpetual: But if he
only say, the fourth Commandment is figuratively to be understood, and that no
corporal rest from labor, but a spiritual rest from sin is there signified
and commanded, and that corporale ocium Sabbati, is not to be observed of a
Christian, because that figure is fulfilled in Christ, and yet do not prove
what he says out of the Word of God; we will take that good leave and liberty
which elsewhere he has given, not to believe it, August. ad Hieron. Epist. 19.
August. adver. Cresconium lib. 2. ca. 31.
because he has said it, but because he has brought some probable reason or
evidence of the Scripture to persuade us of the truth of it, and until then to
stand persuaded as we do, that even the fourth Commandment as well as the
rest of the Moral Law (excepting some Jewish Ceremonies annexed thereunto) is
yet in force, not only as the Law of Nature, and Philosophically considered,
but Theologically and in true Divinity, truly understood. And here, we pray
you, not to mistake us in this point concerning Augustines judgment: he does
not absolutely abolish the fourth Commandment, in abrogating the Legal and
Jewish Sabbath, but that he teaches and maintains that though the day be
changed, August. Epist. 119. ad Ianuar. cap. 12. and Epist. 86. ad Casulan^m.
which was the seventh observed from, and for the Creation, yet the first day
of the week succeeded it, in regard of Christ's resurrection, called dies
Dominicus by S. John, celebrated in holy duties by the Apostles; Iunius in Genesis
c. 2.
and that as Iunius says, non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius
observatione atque instituto, and so commended to the Churches and received by
them, as Augustine himself confesses and declares more at large elsewhere.

Antinomus.
Now whereas you say, That the Holy Ghost in the New Testament does not exact
natural precepts, such as the Decalogue is, for that is fulfilled in one word
Love, 5.14. I answer hereunto, That if you have as great felicity, as I see you
have facility to contradict your self, and to mar with one hand what you
have made with the other, you are worthy more pity than blame, and have more
need at this present of a Physician to purge you, than of a Divine to answer
you: Notwithstanding we will yet make trial, whether you can be sensible of
your error, and see what you have said or done amiss herein, by asking a
question or two, and craving your direct answer to the same. I demand then, Is
not the Epistle to the Galathians a part of the New Testament? Gal. 1.1.
Yes it is. And did not the Apostle Paul pen that Epistle by the instinct of
the Holy Ghost? Gal. 5.13.
No doubt he did. And did not the Holy Ghost by Paul, require and exact of the
Galathians, Gal. 5.6.
the duty of love? Yes he did, for he commands them verse. 13. Romans 13.8, 9, 10.
To serve one another by love. And is not this love both a fruit of faith, and
a duty of the Moral Law? Yes indeed it is both, for in this very Chapter, Gal.
5.6.14.
the Holy Ghost testifies that a true faith works by love, verse 6. and in
the 14. verse (erewhile alleged) tells us also, that this work or duty of
love must be measured by the Moral Law, For (says he) the whole Law is
fulfilled in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Why now you have
dealt honestly, you have answered directly and truly. Gather up your several
answers now, and bind them up in one proposition and you will find that as
(...), are (...), Sed sero sapiunt Phryges.
your second thoughts are often wiser than the first, so your latter position
is better and truer than your former opposition. Your former opposition was,
That the Holy Ghost in the New Testament does not exact natural precepts, such
as the Decalogue (or Moral Law) is, for that is fulfilled in one word, Love,
Gal. 5.14. and now your latter and truer position is this; That the Holy Ghost
in the New Testament, even in the Epistle to the Galathians, does require love,
not as a natural, but as a spiritual and moral duty, being both a fruit of
faith, and the sum and substance of the whole Moral Law, Gal. 5.6. and
13.14. Gal. 5.6, 13.14.
Certainly if your left hand be not better able to defend your self than your
right hand has been to offend your adversary, you will feel the smart of
your own weapon thus beaten down upon your own head more sensibly hereafter
in a better mood, than yet you can do for the present, in your hot blood.

As for that piece which you patch, and add to the same sentence, Antinomus.
That none of the works of the spirit are properly commanded in the Decalogue.
What? witchcraft, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
hatred, heresies, murder, drunkenness, and the rest mentioned Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. Are not all these forbidden in the Law, and the contrary virtues or duties,
as chastity, purity, piety, charity, etc. commanded in the same also? Take the
Law as Paul takes it, not as it stands in opposition to the Gospel, but as it
stands in communion and conjunction with it, and the same spirit of truth
speaks in both, and requires spiritual duties in both, Phil. 1.11.
as the fruits of righteousness and holiness, to the praise and glory of God
by Christ Jesus. Romans 7.12, 14.
Besides such as the Law it self is, namely spiritual, Iam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11,
12.
holy, just and good, such must also the works of the Law needs be. Lastly, S.
James bears witness hereunto very plainly and effectually, saying, If you
fulfill the royal Law according to the Scripture [Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy selfe] ye do well. This the spirit speaks unto the
Churches by James upon the same ground of the Moral Law, and that not only in
that general sum of the second Table [Loue thy neighbor as thy selfe] but
in mentioning some of the special Commandments, as, Do not commit adultery,
Do not kill; proving also that the Christians to whom he writes among the
twelve Tribes now dispersed, stand now bound to obey the whole Moral Law.
First, because if they fail in one point, they are guilty of all; as if they
commit no adultery, yet if they kill, they are become transgressors of the Law.
Secondly, because they are charged not only to shun that which is evil, but
to follow that which is good, and that according to this rule of the Moral
Law, Iam. 2.12.
as in the very next verse the spirit speaks and commands: So speak ye
and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty. I would you
would take the pains to read Augustines Epistle unto Hierome, August. Epist.
29. ad Hiero.
touching the exposition of this place of Saint James; you shall there I doubt
not, find him of an other mind than your self, for the continuing of the
office and use of the Moral Law, in binding all Christians to all duties of
love, even in the days of the Gospel, required in the same. The like you may
also see in his first Book, de doctrina Christiana, August. de Doct. Christ.
lib. 1. cap. 30.
in his Books de litera and spiritu, and contra adversarium Legis and
Prophetarum.

And now having delivered your self of your maine business, Antinomus.
and rid your hands of that confused stuff which stuck in your fingers, you
are at leisure to bring us in a Simile to illustrate, as you say, the
conclusion of your fifth section, and another to illustrate the general point.
If your section and your point have no greater light than your Similies bring
them, nullum Simile currit quatuor pedibus; no Simile runs upon four feet; but
how shall that run, or go, or stand, which being maimed and stark lame, has
never a sound neither leg nor foot at all?

If Venice and England, in your supposition, were under one and the same King
and Governor, under the same Law and Lawgiuer, yet with some difference of
circumstance, considering the diversity of place, people, and condition, for a
season, until the Kings son and heir take the government more eminently and
conspicuously upon him, at which time he shall renew the former Laws, removing
all difference of circumstance, and establishing the same Laws in substance,
by writing them in fairer Tables, and confirming them by better both seals and
witnesses, unto them both as to one people: I would then know of you out of the
depth of your English or Venetian policy, whether now the Venetian Laws being
brought and read, either to condemn or acquit a man accused, or to give
direction for order and government here with us, we in England might not hold
our selves bound by virtue of those Laws to yield obedience thereunto
accordingly, and yet not as unto the Venetian Laws (as formerly they were in
diverse circumstances imposed and exacted) but now as unto the royal Law of one
and the same King, who by one and the same Law, will rule and govern both
Venice and England, as one and the same people. If you be pleased to take the
light of this comparison in your hand, it will show you (if your sight be any
thing like) both the vanity and weakness of your conclusion in your fifth
section, and the darkness and obscurity of your sorry Simile, which you have
brought to set a fairer gloss upon the same.

Your other Simile which you bring to illustrate the general point, has I
acknowledge much more light in it, if by the general point you mean the Law
given by Moses, as it stands in opposition against the Gospel, according to
that of John, Ioh. 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by Christ Jesus. For whether
you understand the Ceremonial or Moral Law, or the Prophets, either as
interpreters of the same, or foretellers of the good things to come imported by
any of them, 2 Pet. 1.19.
it is most true (as you allege out of 2 Pet. 1.19.) That the Doctrine of the
Gospel does as far exceed for beauty, brightness, and glory, the Doctrine
of Moses, and the Prophets, as the Sunne-light does Starre-light, Mal. 4. Col.
2.17. 2 Cor. 3. Ioh. 12.46.
and as the body does the shadow, and the face of Christ the veil of Moses. In
which respect Christ himself said of himself, That he was the true light that
was come into the world, and that his disciples were happy and blessed that saw
those things which they saw, Luke 10.23, 24.
and heard the things which they did hear, whereas many Kings and Prophets had
not seen them, though they had desired to see them. And in regard hereof, he
is termed by the Prophet Malachy, The Sun of righteousness. Mal. 4.2. Isa.
9.1, 2. Ioh. 1.17.
So then we say, They that sat in darkness have seen a great light, and unto
them that sat in the shadow of death, has the light shined. Whatsoever was
darkness in Ceremony it is dispelled, Act. 3.24.
whatsoever was a far off in Prophecy it is fulfilled, Luke 24.44.
and whatsoever was a handwriting against us in the Law of Moses, it is
cancelled. Col. 2.14, 15.
But what light does this your Simile give to the utter abolishing of the whole
Moral Law, which by the coming of Christ is not obscured, but more
beautified, Romans 3.31.
and not abolished, but more established and confirmed?

In the next, but not in the last place (as me thinks in good manners according
to due order it should have done) comes in your conclusion, by way of
exhortation and Doctor-like direction to all Christians, Antinomus.
especially Divines, to take pains rightly to understand the Doctrine of
Christian liberty, etc. Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1.
but love edifieth, and if any man thinks he knows any thing, he knows
nothing as he ought to know: and again, Gal. 6.3.
If any man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. It had in my opinion sauoured of more humility and modesty, if you
had, after you had set down your judgment and reasons for the utter
abolishing of the Moral Law, in meekness of wisdom submitted your self and
your writings, to the judgment of the religious and judicious both Ministers
and people in our Churches, 1 Cor. 14.32.
(for even the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets) and not to
have cast such odious aspersions of ignorance and negligence, as you do upon
them. For suppose some amongst many deserve so sharp a censure and rebuke, yet
I doubt not but even they (seeing your gross ignorance, great negligence, and
I fear me, some things even against knowledge and conscience too in these your
own writings) will quit you with this or the like answer: Et si nos quidem
digni sumus hac contumelia, Maenius absertem Neuium cum carpe^t, heus tu,
Quidam ait, ignoras te? Horat. Ser. lib. 1. sat. 3.
tu omnium indignus qui faceres tamen: Although we have deserved such a
contumely or reproof as this, yet you of all others might worst do it. For,
Quis tulerit Graccos de seditione loquentes? Who can endure the turbulent and
seditious Gracchi to speak against sedition? Or traitorous Athalia to cry out,
treason, treason? Or a man that for want of light, or diligent looking to his
ways, does himself stumble and tumble, and fall dangerously oftentimes, to
reproach others (and some it may be, more vigilant and diligent than himself)
with such ignorance and negligence, Antinomus.
that they run into strange questions, as men in darkness stumbling at one
thing, and catching hold of another thing that auailes them nothing. If these
be not swelling words of vanity, viz. The Doctrine of Christian liberty, the
difference of the Law and the Gospel, and of the Old and New Testament, and of
the Covenants of both, and so the right abrogation of Moses Law: I suppose
there is not one of all those, but has in handling of this business been
already touched, and so has given some light, both to discover your error, or
heresy, (if you hold it wilfully) in going about to abolish the whole Law of
Moses, and that wholly too; and to clear this truth also, that the Moral Law
of God given by Moses to the Jews, is not since the death of Christ, in the
Churches of Christ, wholly abolished and abrogated, but is yet in force still,
for many holy offices and spiritual uses, confirmed by Christ, and continued
by his Apostles, for the good of Christ's Church, even unto the worlds end. Now
if you think that all that has been said and done, be not, nor cannot be of
any such force with you, as to convince you of error, or to confirm this
truth; it may be herein, the fault will prove rather yours than mine: For as
Non est Oratoris persuadere; sed dicere quae ad persuadendum sunt idonea: It is
not required of an Orator to persuade, but to deliver such things as in
themselves may be fit and auailable for persuading. So neither can it be
required of an Answerer, to satisfy a wrangling Disputer, but to give what may
serve for a sufficient satisfaction to his insufficient objection. Ezeckiel is
commanded to speak, Ezekiel. 3.4.7.
even though Israel will not hear: And Paul does charge Titus, Tit. 1.9.10.
to endeavor by some doctrine and exhortation, to be able to convince the
gainsayers, and to stop the mouths of such as are (...), unruly vaine-talkers,
and deceivers, subuerting whole houses, and teaching things they ought not, for
filthy lucre sake. Upon like occasion, and in a matter not much unlike, I held
my self charged after the same manner, to endeavor according to my ability, to
convince you of this your error, and to stop your mouth, if it may be, (which
you have opened so wide against the truth) with the witnesses and with the word
of Truth. And this was I (after a sort) enforced to attempt, because I knew you
had labored by speaking and writing (if not for filthy lucre, yet for foolish
humor sake) things which you ought not, not only to corrupt the minds of the
simple by words of deceit, but to subvert the hearts and houses of some of my
nearest and dearest friends, with a great and pompous show of reading and
learning, which (had they not formerly been better instructed and established
in the true knowledge of Gods Word, both Law and Gospel) might easily have
bred some distraction in their minds, and trouble in their hearts Pudet haec
opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refell^. I may truly say, I
held it both sin and shame, that so opprobrious things should be objected
against the holy Law of God, and put into the bosoms of good and gracious
people, as a parcel of Gods truth and a pledge of your love; and not to be
resisted by some encounter, August. Bonis. Epist. 23.
and refuted by some answer to the same. Respondi sicut existimo quaestionibus
tuis, says S. Augustine to Bonifacius, quantum attinet ad minus capaces, and
ad contentiosos non satis; quantum autem ad pacatos and intelligentes plus
forte quam sat est. Let me speak unto you in almost the same words, I have
answered as I think, your positions and oppositions against the Moral Law of
God; for such as are less capable and such as are contentious, not
sufficiently enough neither for length nor strength, but for such as are
tractable and teachable, peradventure more than enough for both. And here, if
the length of my answer procure me any blame, either with you or other of my
friends, seeing your Pamphlet was but short, which drew the same from me; I
must plead my just defense as Augustine did his to the same Bonifacius,
requiring a brief answer to some hard questions proposed unto him: His literis
(says he) lectis and relectis and recordatus sum Nebridium amicum meum, qui
valde oderat, de quaestione magna responsionem brevem. In like manner having
read over and over again your short Pamphlet, and seeing the question was
great, and quotations many and large, though your paper was not much nor long;
I could not abide to frame a short answer, nay I must needs frame a long,
August. Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
to so large and great a question, and that for the same reason which moved
Nebridius so to desire an answer at length in such a case: Because in matters
obscure, ad pietatis doctrinam maxim pertinentibus, especially appertaining to
the Doctrine of piety (as this of the Moral Law especially does) he that would
diligently search and see into them, had need to enlarge himself and hold that
course.

Concerning your last Will and Testament, and the light that it brings to
your second section, Zanch. in Hos.
I refer you to Zanchius in Hoseam, where you shall find the like Simile,
and withal a pair of snuffers to top your light that it may burn more
clearly: And if that will not serve, you may have Torchlight from Calvin,
which I will now put into your hands before I leave you, (you may see how loath
I am to leave you in the dark) whereby you may once more be admonished of your
error, and the danger of it, and have light enough to lead you unto the truth,
and provoke you also to the entertaining and embracing of it. Speaking of the
sweetness and lightsomnesse of the Moral Law, unto all that can do as David
did, i. find and apprehend Christ the Mediator in the same: He adds these
words; Quod discernere dum imperiti quidam nesciunt, Calvin. Instit. lib. 2.
cap. 7. sect. 12.13.
totum Mosen animose explodunt, duasque legis tabulas valere jubent: quia
scilicet Christianis alienum esse arbitrantur adhaerere doctrinae quae mortis
administrationem continet: Which different office and use of the Law, says
Calvin, whiles some ignorant persons know not how to discern, they do boldly
and courageously hiss out all Moses Law, and bid farewell to the two Tables of
the Moral Law; because forsooth, they think it strange for Christians to
cleave unto that Doctrine which contains the administration of death or
damnation in it. Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. You may view your face in
this glass, and take every word home with you to your own house; and withal,
take I pray along with you, what he adds in detestation of this your opinion.
Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 13.
Facessat long ex animis nostris profana istac opinio: Let this profane
opinion be far removed from our minds: And consider seriously I beseech you,
of that which he speaks so resolutely, for the establishing of the Moral
Law, as well as in the commendation of the use of it. Quod si absolutum (says
he) in ea justitiae exemplar eminere nemo inficietur, aut nullam esse nobis
recte justeque vivendi regulam oportet, aut ab ea nefas est discedere: But if
(says Calvin) no man can deny, but that in the Moral Law there is manifestly
to be seen a most absolute pattern of righteousness; either we must have no
rule at all of right and just living, or it is great wickedness to depart from
the Moral Law. Certainly me thinks, to a reasonable and ingenuous man this
might be sufficient satisfaction, for embracing the truth and relinquishing of
so unsound and unsavory an opinion. I could compass you about with a cloud of
witnesses to this purpose: But it must be even this Law of God, written in your
heart by the finger of Gods Spirit, which through the power and grace of Christ
shall help to illighten your eyes to see the beauty, and convert your soul to
feel the virtue, even of this Moral Law of God, which you now so oppose and
oppugn, which I doubt not but in due time the Lord will do, if (as I hope you
do) you belong unto him. Meanewhile we will pray for you, and wait in
patience, to see if peradventure the Lord may give you repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth; 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
that when you shall have recovered your self out of this snare of Satan, and
we shall hear or see that he which persecuted the Law in times past, does now
publish and profess obedience thereunto, we with other of Gods children that
wish you well in Christ, may be provoked by your light which may shine in the
works of love the sum of the Law, Gal. 1.23.24.
to rejoice in your recovery, and to glorify God in your behalf.

FINIS.

