MYSTICAL BABYLON, OR Papal Rome.

A Treatise upon those words, APOCAL. 18.2. It is fallen, it is fallen BABYLON,
etc.

In which the wicked, and miserable condition of Rome, as she now is in her
present Babylonian estate, and as she shall be in her future inevitable ruin,
is fully discovered:

And sundry Controuersiall points of Religion, betwixt the Protestants, and the
Papists, are briefly discussed.

By Theophilus Higgons, Rector of the Parochial Church of Hunton, near
Maidstone in KENT.

PSALM. 119.126. It is time for thee, LORD, to lay to thine hand; for they have
destroyed thy Law.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, for Matthew Lownes and William Barret.
1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HENRY MOVNTAGV, Knight, Baron of KIMBOLTON,
Viscount MAVNDEVILLE, Lord President of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy
Counsel.
Right noble, and truly Christian LORD;
SInce I have presumed to appear thus in public, and to treat peculiarly of
this subject [Mysticall Babylon] rather then of any other, and, finally, to
recommend this Treatise unto your favorable patronage; I stand therefore
obliged to express my Motives, and Reasons, in the two former points, for the
general satisfaction of others; and, in the last, for the particular of your
Honorable Self.

As for the FIRST; I am not moved, upon any oblique respect, to take up the
Sword of my Pen, in this spiritual warfare: I am not vexed with the ambition
of preferment, nor affectation of applause; for I desire earnestly of God, that
the divine sentence of Saint Paul may be deeply graven in my heart; The World
is crucified unto me, and I unto the World.

Neither am I provoked unto this design out of any spleen, or vindictiue
humor against the Church of Rome, or any person therein: and indeed I have
been so far from giving them any special distaste, that I have observed the
terms of civil, and moral respect toward some of them, to my greater
prejudice, then I will either brag, or complain of, unto the World.

But the true, and proper causes are these. First; I am bound, as a dutiful
Son of my Mother Church (from whose sacred breasts I drew the first nutriment
of my faith) to succor, and comfort her, in her distressed estate, while the
little Foxes of Rome eat up her Grapes, and the wild Boar thereof seeks to
enter into the Vineyard of God. And therefore, since every man (endued with any
faculty of writing) should perform his service unto the Church of God,
especially, when, and where, the contagion of Heresy does dilate it self (as
Saint Augustine does gravely advise) I could not be silent in so necessary a
time: for as we shall answer unto God for our idle words, so we shall
answer unto him for our dangerous silence.

Secondly; to make some satisfaction, thereby, unto the Church of God; which,
being unjustly wronged by my means, does justly challenge this remedy of my
pains; that the hand, which has hurt her, may somewhat help her; and that,
as I have made a wound, so I may make a cure again.

Thirdly; to procure the sweet peace of my conscience toward God, that I may
heal the wound, which I have formerly made unto my own soul; Christian
Wisdom teaching me to power some Oil into that, to supple it, which has
found so much Vinegar to fret it; and therefore I am resolved to neglect all
troubles without, that I may find this comfort within.

Fourthly, to exempt, hereby, all scruple out of their hearts, who desire to
understand the state, and disposition of my conscience in the matter of
Religion. For as Saint Hierome, being vehemently suspected of the infection of
Origens errors, did therefore divert that suspicion, by clear publication of
his mind in writing, That they, who would not believe his tongue, in his
denial, might yet believe his Pen, in his refutation thereof (as he does
ingeniously write in this behalf) so I find my self very deeply charged, in
the point of conscience, and discretion, to give sufficient notice unto all the
sons of my Mother (touching my Faith, and Religion) by some Treatise, now to
be published unto the World, and to remain) I hope) after my decease, as a
Record, what I do certainly believe, concerning the doctrine of faith
professed in this Church of England, and oppugned by the Church of Rome.

SECONDLY, therefore, I have made special election of this subject (concerning
Rome, and her ruin) as being of greatest importance in it self, and specially
in these days. For whereas the most usual subjects of disputation, betwixt
us, and the Papists, are particular, and therefore have a particular issue of
verity, or falsehood therein; this is of an higher nature, of a larger extent,
and of a more general effect; for that it does concern not only a part of
her doctrine, but the whole being of the Church of Rome; it touches not a
branch, or two, but the very root it self; it reaches not only unto a piece
of her building, but unto the very foundation thereof. And therefore this
disputation ( viz. Whether, and How the name of Babylon, in the visions of
Saint John, does agree unto Rome) is of singular consequence; thereby to
confront the audacious insultations of her politic Agents; to give an Antidote
against the poison, which they seek to instill into many unsettled hearts: that
so, they, who are fallen from the truth, may be happily reduced unto it; and
they, who are falling, may be strongly confirmed in the same.

Now THIRDLY, and lastly, it remains (most worthy Lord) that I make true
remonstrance of the causes, which have bred this confidence in me to offer up
this little Treatise, upon the Altar of your Honorable favor. I speak not of
your descent, and extraction out of a Noble Family, nor of your high degree of
Honor, nor of your special advancement in the State (for which respects, many
men apply themselves unto the service, and attendance of great persons) but,
above all things, I am comforted in your sincere, and constant profession of
the Truth; which grace seems to be hereditarie in your House, as being
spectable in all the branches thereof.

Since therefore Greatness, and Goodness have mutual conjunction in your
Lordships person, I cannot suppose, that a Work of this nature can want your
acceptance, nor the Author thereof your protection. Whereof also I conceive
the greater hope, because I have known heretofore (by the double testimony of
mine eyes, and ears) the gracious inclination of your Honor toward me; and
that only for the Truths sake, and the Words sake: as, indeed, I have ever
found them to be my most assured, and certain friends, that have affected me
in this regard.

But if I should need, or seek any external, or farther motive, to induce
your Honor to vouchsafe your patronage unto me, and unto this Treatise, I
would not go out of your own Family (though it must be from the living to
the dead) but I would entreat it by the dear, and precious memory of that
religious, learned, and most accomplished Prelate, your famous Brother, JAMES
(lately Lord Bishop of Winton) whose kind entertainment of me in private, and
favorable testimony of me in public, were more sufficient arguments of his
love, then of my desert. For I may truly say, by the certain experience of
sundry occurrents in my life, that I have tasted a little of Gods deserved
wrath, but a great deal more of his undeserved grace: whereof I account this
no small part, that he has given me so much interest in the good opinion,
and affection of sundry persons of eminent quality, and particularly of your
Honorable Self; whom I beseech the Lord of all mercies to bless in your own
Person, and in your noble Posterity, with the temporal blessings of this
life, and the eternal of the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in
whom I am, and will ever remain

Your Honors most humble, and truly devoted Servant, THEOPHILUS HIGGONS.
London. Ian. 27. 1623.
THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR UNTO THE CRHISTIAN READER.
COurteous, and ingenuous Reader; Since no man can enter well into the rooms
of any Treatise, but by the door of a Preface, therefore I commend these
ensuing Observations unto thee, to prepare thee, the better thereby, unto the
reading of this Discourse.

First; though sundry Expositions are extant upon this part of Scripture (as
likewise upon the whole Book of the sacred Revelation) and certain Sermons
have been preached upon it, and then commended unto the Press, yet I
confess, that (opening my heart unto God by prayer, to illustrate my
understanding with a true, and sufficient knowledge thereof) I followed chiefly
such general notions touching the same, as were laid up formerly in my mind;
and willingly sequestered from me the help of other men's labors in this kind
(excepting such as I shall presently name) least I should build upon another
man's foundation, and so drown the discourse of my understanding in the
conceits of other learned men, with whom I had a resolution not to consult,
before I had finished the impression of this Treatise. Mistake not my meaning,
and purpose, good Reader; for I do not intend hereby to arrogate any thing
unto my self above other men (since I am conscious of mine own infirmities)
but to prevent their exceptions, who may suppose, or pretend, that I have
framed a collection, only, in this Treatise, out of the Sermons, or Books of
other men.

Secondly; whatsoever I may seem to owe unto any Author of our side, I
confess it to be due, principally, unto the learned, and indicious Pen of our
gracious Sovereign Lord, King JAMES, in his Paraphrase upon this Book, as
thou will easily observe (gentle Reader) in certain passages of my Discourse.
As for Authors on the Adversaries part, I had no small advantage, and
furtherance out of the writings of two learned Jesuits, Ribera, and Viegas, of
whom therefore I make frequent mention, as serving, in many things, exactly for
my purpose.

Thirdly; if any acerbitie of style appear in this Discourse, know that it is
drawn from me, rather by the necessity of the matter it self (which could
not be well expressed otherwise) then that it came out of the disposition of my
mind; which, hating the errors of Babylon, does yet pity, and love the
persons of all (and specially of some) that are ensnared with the same;
wishing, and desiring, their salvation from my heart, in Jesus Christ.

Fourthly; I enter upon this disputation, not out of contention, but out of
conscience, with a secure, and certain persuasion of truth, and soliditie
therein; whereof because I make some larger mention hereafter, I will say the
less in this place.

Fifthly; though this Book, in all the pages thereof, bears the title of a
first, and of a second Sermon, yet understand, that, after I had preached two
Sermons, at Maidstone in Kent, to this purpose, and had recollected my
meditations, I framed them afterward more copiously into the body of a
Treatise, which therefore I present unto thee, rather under this name; as
exceeding the proportion, and, in some things, differing (perhaps) from the
quality of Sermons.

Sixthly, and lastly; if it shall please any of the Roman side, to stand
against me, in the defense of his Mother Church of Rome, and to make answer
unto my Discourse (unto which business, as I challenge no man, so I fear not
the performance of any man in this kind) he must follow me in his answer, as I
have gone before him in this Treatise; not flying up, and down without order,
nor concealing my proofs, and reasons; but, from point to point, making a
clear, and a substantial refutation thereof. As for bitter words, and
calumnious writing, though I can steep my Pen in Vinegar, and Worme-wood, as
well as they, yet I resolve not to follow any adversary in this course: but,
as Tertullian says in his disputation against Hermogenes, Viderit Persona; cum
Doctrina mihi quaestio est; so I will leave the person, and come unto the
matter it self.

An Advertisement.
WHereas some of my Brethren in this Church of England, and some of my
Adversaries in the Church of Rome, expect of me an Answer unto mine own Book
of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead (sometimes published by me in foreign
parts) I assure them both, that I had made a collection of sundry notes for
this intent, and that they were growing into the proportion of a Book, had not
the necessity of publishing this Discourse so soon, prevented my desire in
the other; which yet may follow in due time, if it shall please God to grant me
better health of body (the state of it being much attenuated by infirmities)
with the accession of such helps, as are requisite for them, that enter upon
this controuersiall kind: for want of which necessary means (together with my
bad health) in the private, and rusticane course of my life, I may be compelled
to desist wholly from the same; contenting my self hereafter with the exercise
of my Pastoral Office in that little Congregation, which it has pleased GOD
to commit unto my charge. Farewell.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
GOod Reader; thou shall find the Errata, or Faults (which are committed in the
Impression) observed, and amended in the end of this Book; where the
principal errors are noted with this mark, * because they chiefly, above the
rest, require a correction by thy Pen, before thou entrest into the reading of
this Treatise. As for the lesser errors ( viz. in Points, in Orthographie, in
defect of some Letters, in placing small Letters in steed of capital, etc.)
they are left unto thy prudent, and ingenious censure.

MYSTICAL BABYLON, OR PAPAL ROME. The first Sermon.
APOCAL. 18.2. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon.


THis Text is little in words, but great in consequence; as Benjamin was a
little Tribe, but great in dominion: Psalm. 68.27. It is part of a Proclamation
made from Heaven: and three things inuit us unto a serious attention thereof.
FIRST; The Person proclaiming: an Angel [verse 1.] even Christ Jesus himself;
as some conceive (amongst whom I may particularly name our profoundly learned
Sovereign, in his judicious and well composed Paraphrase upon this mystical
book) who is described here, by his excellency [he had great power] and by his
operation; the earth was lightened with his glory.

SECONDLY; The manner of his proclamation: He cried out mightily, with a loud
voice [verse 2.] with a voice, more then Stentorian; and no marvel: for it was
Verbum a Verbo; a word from the Word: a word powerfully spoken by the Word
ineffably begotten.

THIRDLY; The matter it self; It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon: the place
is considerable; for it is Babylon, by quality, and name; also a great City
by amplitude of place, and power. The ruin of it is markable: for it is a
fall, extreme, and final: and it is fallen; in the time past (though it be yet
to come) by an enallage of the tense: and again; it is fallen; by an
anadiplosis: the one, and the other, showing an infallible certainty of event.
Thus now my Text is like Rebeccaes womb; it has twins in it, [Cecidit,
cecidit] as if the ruin of Babylon were sounded forth by the two silver
trumpets, Number. 10.2. It is a double voice of ruin; fall upon fall: so that I
may use the words of the Psalm; God has spoken it once or twice. Psalm. 62.11.

And as my Text is double here, by the ingemination of one word; so it is
double by the repetition of the same sentence elsewhere, viz. Apoc. 14.8.
Again, that, which, in both these places is spoken of, mystical Babylon
(Rome; as an one you shall hear) is foretold by prophecy (and we have seen
it verified by experience) of literal Babylon [the renowned City of Chaldaea]
in the Praedictions of Esaias 21.9. Babel is fallen, it is fallen. This
consonancie is in the Scriptures; this resemblance in sin, and ruin, betwixt
the old Babylon, and the new. For Babylon ^s the first Rome, and Rome is the
second Babylon.

I come to the words of my Text, wherein there is a fatal conjunction of two
things: Culpa, and Poena: the Sin of Rome, employed in her name; Babylon: and
the punishment of Rome, annexed, or prefixed rather; it is fallen, it is
fallen. We may Logically therefore make this partition of my Text: here is the
SVBIECT; Babylon: and here is the PRAEDICATE; it is fallen. In order of the
words (as they stand herein my Text) Babylon is last, but, in order of sense,
it is first. For, in Grammar, the nominative case goes before the Verb; In
Logic, the Subject goes before the Praedicate; and in Divinity, the Sin
goes before the Punishment: Pride goes before Destruction; Pro. 16.18.
Wherefore, in the prosecution of my Text, I will change the place of the words;
and, as Jacob gave the prioritie to Ephraim [Gen. 48.14.] in the advised
imposition of his hands; so I will give the precedence to Babylon (the last
word in my Text) and then I will reflect duly upon her fall, expressed in the
first place thereof.

The FIRST part; concerning the Subject, and Sin in the Text; BABYLON.
THough I have affirmed this Babylon to be Rome; yet I require not your
sudden belief, without a substantial proof. So that, to deduce this matter
fairly, and clearly to your understandings, I must propose a double
inquisition; in pursuit whereof, we shall come securely unto the haven of my
desire, and then arrive happily upon the coast, unto which I direct my thoughts.

First: What is this Babylon in my Text.

Secondly: Why this name is imposed upon that place, which is thereby signified
unto us.

These two points being sufficiently discussed, for the true explication of my
Text, and illustration of this name; I will conclude the first part of my Text
with such observations, as shall kindly, and properly ensue upon the same.

The FIRST Inquisition; What is this Babylon in my Text.
THis Babylon is not literally to be understood, neither for that ancient City
in Chaldaea, nor for that famous City in Egypt (once called by the name of
Memphis, and now of Cair) since the general scope, and purpose of this book,
does not intend any such sense: and many circumstances therein do sufficiently
refute it; and, finally, not any Author, in former, or later times, no Father
in the ancient Church, no Doctor in succeeding ages, did ever so conceive of
this place.

This Babylon, therefore, is mystically to be understood, according to the
common, and usual tenor of this book. That whole book of the Revelation of
Saint John is spiritually to be understood, by the judgment of Saint Hierome;
Epist. 148. And hence it is, that Dionysius, sometimes Bishop of Alexandria,
confesses of this obscure, and profound book, that it cannot be understood,
according to the first, and obuious sense thereof (as Eusebius relates;
Histor. Eccles. l. 7. c. 24.) but that there are deep, and hidden mysteries in
the same. Deep, I confess, and hidden, till that Time (the mother of truth)
in the success, and event of things, was the midwife to help the Church of
God, which traveled long in bringing forth the true, and proper sense thereof.
For as Sampson was directed, and guided, by his servant, unto the pillars, upon
which the house did stand [ Iudic. 16.26.] so the success of things,
conspiring with the Oracles of this book, has conueighed us unto a sound, and
evident knowledge of many mysteries therein; unknown to former ages, but
revealed in this: in regard whereof this book does now more fully answer unto
its name; for now it is a Revelation indeed, as it was before in title.

Since therefore this Babylon is here so called by a Mystery, we will pass
along, by a gradation, through four several interpretations thereof, that so
we may discover in this point, how far the ancient Church digressed from the
mark: then, how nearly, at the last, the Romish Church is come unto it, and
thereby to know her self: and then finally, how the Reformed Church has
directly hit the mark: as the Beniamites could sling stones at an hair
breadth, and not fail, Iudic. 20.16.

The FIRST Interpretation.
THe first interpretation is framed by S. Augustine, whom many follow in this,
and sundry other points, rather for the reason of his authority, then for the
authority of his reason, and therefore are carried into error by the
venerable estimation of his name. He confesses, that Rome is another Babylon,
de ciuit. Dei. l. 16. c. 17. and that she is the daughter of Babylon, l. 18.
c. 22. but not in regard of her sin and ruin (as it is now in my Text) which
things that greatly learned Father never seemed to suspect: and therefore
teaching truly, that there are two Cities in this world (mixed together in
outward things, but severed in their inward qualities, and tending,
consequently, unto different ends) he assumeth falsely, that this Babylon (out
of which we must fly: Apoc. 18.4.) is only the general City of the Devil
and his members; whereas the other City is a Spiritual Jerusalem, and the
City of God. Read S. Augustine, de Ciuit. Dei, l. 18. c. 18. In Psalm. 26.
enarrat. 2. In Psalm. 61. and though the Homilies upon the Revelation (passing
under his name) are not his genuine Works, yet they truly contain his
opinion in this behalf, Homil. 11. and 16.

This sinister, and misconceiued interpretation, of S. Augustine, does sometime
qualify the fear of Bellarmine; who finding that Rome shall be destroyed,
near the end of the world, by deduction (as he affirms) out of the Reuelat.
cap. 17. Videtur (says he) this may seem so to be; but he recollecteth
himself immediately in this manner; Augustine, with many others, does
conceive, that this City of Babylon is the general City of the wicked, and
not the particular City of Rome. De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 4.

It is no marvel, that Bellarmine (like a man ready to be drowned) takes
hold of every straw for his relief. The marvel is rather, that Augustine, a
man so learned, so ingenious, so judicious, should not clearly discern, by so
many circumstances in the Text, that this Babylon is a particular City, and
not a general Society: and farther, that this particular City is Rome, and
not any other place.

But the glorious luster of the [then] present state of Rome (in the Empire, so
potent, and in the Church, so religious) might, and certainly did breed an
eclipse of this evident truth unto S. Augustines eyes, looking more earnestly
upon the condition of the time, then deeply into the coherence of the Text.

I conclude, therefore, the first interpretation, and advise men that converse
in the Monuments of the ancient Fathers (without which no man can be profound,
and exact in the knowledge of Divinity) to draw their wine, and to leave their
dregs; and not to esteem that current in them, which is not weighed in the
balance of holy Scripture. For the Sun of this sacred Book has native
light of truth without any darkness of error; whereas the borrowed light of
the Moon [the best Fathers, and most commended Interpreters] does shine with
the spots of infirmity, which attends the nature of mankind.

The SECOND Interpretation.
THe second Interpretation is that, which Saint Hierome does follow; who saw a
part of the truth, but not the whole: as the blind man, upon the first, and
imperfect recovery of his sight, saw men, but he saw them walking like trees,
Mark. 8.24. He confesses then, that Babylon is Rome; that Babylon, at the
least, whereof Saint Peter does make mention ( Epist. 1. cap. 5. v. 13.) whose
authority he pretends to follow in this point; de Scriptor. Ecclesiastic.
in nomine, MARCUS. But in the time of Saint Peter (if, by that name of Babylon,
he did understand Rome) it was Ethnicall Rome, which the Romanists themselves
do willingly confess, and usually pretend to have been styled by that name,
which they suppose was not, and cannot be extended unto the Christian [or
rather Antichristian] Rome in succeeding ages.

But, to understand yet more punctually the resolution of Saint Hierome in this
case, let us observe, that he affirms Rome to have been Babylon in his own
time, when there was a true and a glorious Church of Christ in Rome: and
therefore, in the name of certain religious Ladies [ Epist. 17.] he advises
Marcella to fly out of that Babylon, and to repair unto Bethlehem. A passage
very rhetorical, and full of insinuation (rather then found, and
substantial) to breed in her tender heart an alienation from the City of
Rome, as being that Babylon, whereof we now entreat; though elsewhere he
seems wholly to free, and discharge Rome from the scandalous imputation of
this title, as belonging to ETHNICALL Rome, in her former, and past estate.
Vrbs potens, vrbs orbis domina (says he: contra Iouinian. l. 2. in fine)
scriptam in front blasphemiam Christi confessione dele^isti, etc. O potent
City, o Lady of the world, thou have, by the confession of Christ, blotted out
the blasphemy written in thy forehead. Upon which passage, Marianus Victorius
(a learned Babylonian) writes to this effect. Hierome imputes this name of
BABYLON unto Rome, as she was ETHNICALL, as she persecuted the Christians,
and was drunken with the effusion of their blood; and therefore it cannot be
appropriated unto Rome in these latter times, as the Heretics do falsely
surmise, and maliciously pretend. With him a multitude of Babylonians does
conspire in this behalf; and therefore Master Robert Parsons [in his three
Conuers. of England; part. 2. c. 5.] passes his verdict in this manner: The
name of BABYLON is applied to the state of the persecuting Emperors, and
afflicted Christians, which state (says he) has been abolished, as we have
seen already fulfilled.

Thus as Agag, the King of Amalek, came pleasantly before Samuel [1. Sam.
15.32.] persuading himself, that the bitterness of death was past; (which was
yet to come, and was then at hand) so these miserable Babylonians, by poor,
and weak euasions, persuade themselves, that the scandal, and horror of this
name is past, and that condition of Rome is expired, and so Rome is safe:
whereas the imputation cleaves fast unto her, and her future ruin does
certainly attend her present state; as we shall see anon, in the orderly
pursuit of this point. For, as yet, the question is not, upon what Rome
[Ethnicall, or Christian] this hateful name and direful calamity does fall:
whether upon Rome in her estate past, present, or to come (which particular
shall afterward ensue, in the process of my Discourse) but simply and
precisely; whether this Babylon be the particular City of Rome (as Saint
Hierome does conceive; though he be variable, and inconstant in the manner of
his assertion) or whether it be the general society of the wicked, as Saint
Augustine does, in an Allegorical sense, somewhat wittily, but very
improbably, divine.

That this Babylon, in my Text, is the City of Rome, it appears evidently by
many, and clear circumstances in this Scripture, but specially two. FIRST; in
regard of her Dominion: She fitteth upon many waters. Chap. 17. Verse 1. Which
Waters, the Angel does interpret to be the multitude of Nations: Verse 15. And
therefore, Verse 18. he says, that she reigned over the Kings of the Earth.
This was the condition of Rome, in the time of Saint John, to whom this
Revelation was made; and therefore the Commentary upon the Revelations, which
bears the name of Saint Ambrose, says expressly upon this place; hoc
manifestum est, etc. This thing is manifest (namely, that the Angel speaks
this of Rome) For we know (says the Author) that, in this time, the Romans
did obtain Souereigntie over the Princes of the Earth. SECONDLY; in regard of
her third situation upon seven hills, or Mountains (for so the seven heads in
the third Verse are expounded by the Angels in the ninth) which description
agrees fairly unto Rome, standing (once wholly, and now partly) upon seven
hills of markeable note; whence the Grecians called her (...), the Latins, in
the same sense, septicollis; both agreeably here with the Spirit of God.

Hence it is, that (a learned Jesuit) duly expending the concurrencie of these
proper and individual marks, does ingenuously confess; Omnia profecto, nisi
in Romam, non conueniunt; all these things agree upon no other City, but Rome
alone; as I shall further observe anon. Hence it is, that Bellarmine
concludes, by demonstration of these notes; Babylon was certainly Rome; and
therefore he insisteth upon it, as a matter of special advantage, to prove
that Saint Peter was at Rome. De Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 2.

Thus much concerning the second interpretation of this name of Babylon. We
have found the place; it is Rome: we are yet to enquire of her state; whether
it be past (as it was Ethnicall) or whether it be present (as we conceive it
is) or whether it be future; as some learned Papists themselves do teach. So
still we draw nearer, and nearer unto Rome, till she say unto me, as Ahab unto
Eliah: Have thou found me, O mine Enemy? 1. Reg. 21.20.

The THIRD Interpretation.
THe third interpretation of the name of Babylon in this place is this; that
Rome is Babylon, not only as she was Ethnicall (nay rather she is Babylon here
not as she was Ethnicall, nor in her estate now already past) but in another
state, which was future, and yet to come, in the time of this prediction, and
was then to succeed, in ensuing Ages; after that Paganism was extinct; after
that Heathenish Idolatry did decrease; after that Persecution by the Emperors,
did cease; and after that peace was restored unto the Church. This
interpretation I will approve, by three Remonstrances, to be sincere, proper,
and true.

FIRST; by the plain evidence, and coherence of this Scripture; by two
perspicuous demonstrations out of the same. First; because this Babylon is
here so called by title, and she is so indeed: when? near upon the period,
and consummation of the World; not that she shall then begin to be this Babylon
(for this opinion of some Papists, pretending that Rome shall be Babylon
within two or three years of the end of the World, and not before, I shall
refute in due place) but because she continues so, in the decourse of many
years, and Ages (after the time of her Ethnicall estate) near unto the
determination of the World. The truth hereof does clearly appear by the
consequence of things, and connection of events in the seventeenth, eighteenth,
and nineteenth Chapters of this Book. For the sin of Rome, and her ruin
(together with the causes, and Concomitancies thereof) being copiously
expressed in the seventeenth and eighteenth Chapters, we find that, immediately
thereupon (in the nineteenth Chapter) the Saints praise God for the notable
judgment executed upon this City; and therefore our learned Sovereign does
well observe in the title, and argument of that Chapter, that the Saints praise
God, because the Pope is destroyed: for it is he, whose excessive pride, and
exorbitant proceedings, draw this scandalous name, and doleful vastation upon
this unhappy place. Secondly; because we find [ Chap. 17. v. 12.] that ten
Kings (whether precisely ten, I do not now enquire) arose, and assumed Royal
power unto themselves, upon the dissolution of the Roman Empire; for as it
fell into pieces, by the vast magnitude thereof, and could not subsist under her
own greatness, so, out of her parts, sundry States, and Principalities did
arise.

It follows Verse 13. that these Kings gave their power unto the Beast:
namely, the Second Beast, arising in the place, and after the decay of the
first (as we read Apocal. 13.11, 12.) that is to say; they had no sooner
obtained their dignity, and estate, upon the dissolution of the Empire, but
they surrendered a great part of their glory and authority unto the Pope; who,
by degrees; artificially, and cunningly invaded the Imperial Seat, and power;
so that, in admiration of his excellency, these Kings, as devoted sons (or
rather Servants, or rather Slaves) of his SANCTITY, submitted a great part of
their Royal Scepter unto his triple Crown. This prediction as we read in
this divine Book, so, what the accomplishment thereof has been, the
Histories of sundry Nations, and the passages of succeeding Ages, do
sufficiently declare. But let us proceed again. It follows [ verse 16.] that
after this submission of their Regal power unto the Beast (with whom, or near
about that time, they arose even at one hour: verse 12.) they shall hate the
Whore, and burn her with fire (to wit, Rome, this Babylon) though formerly
they gave their Kingdoms unto the Beast: but how long? until the Words of God
be fulfilled; until the appointed time. And what shall incline these Kings to
withdraw their obedience from this Second Beast, and to associate themselves,
in this fearful expedition against him, and his City? God shall put this
motion into their hearts, for her sins against his Majesty: and Papal
injuries, done against the Crown and Royal dignity of these Kings, shall
excite them unto this war; as hereafter it shall more evidently appear. But
now this is the point, upon which I do insist; that this great, and fatal
destruction of Rome, being yet to come, and not yet fulfilled, this name, and
this estate of Rome is not already past (as Victorius and Parsons, and the
most general number of Papists do simply and ignorantly pretend in this
behalf) but her sin is present (for she now is Babylon) and her punishment is
future; for she shall hereafter fall; as I shall clearly demonstrate, in the
succeeding passages of my speech. Mean while let us observe with joy unto our
selves, and with gratitude unto God, that the success and event of this
Prophecy does already begin, for that many Kings do hate this Whore, and
have discovered the quality of this second Beast, and, as I hope, shall ever
continue in that disposition of mind, and rectitude of judgment, till God
shall induce other Princes to concur with them, in the final accomplishment
of this great and glorious work. And so much concerning the first
remonstrance, to prove thereby, that Rome has the name of Babylon, in, and for
her estate, which was not present but future, in the time of Saint John, and
that she shall be destroyed in regard of her sins, in that estate, when her
Ethnicall condition is past, and nearer unto the consummation of the World.

SECONDLY; I make remonstrance of this position, by observation of the nature,
and property of God; and that in two respects. First: by the TRVTH of God. For
he has promised unto every particular man, turning from his former sins,
that he shall surely live, and not dye: yea, that all his former iniquities
shall not be mentioned, but he shall live, in regard of the righteousness,
which afterward he has done. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. If this be true in a particular
person, shall it not be true in a particular City? Is God merciful to one,
and not unto many? even many thousands? It is his own just plea for his
singular mercy unto Nineueh, upon her repentance: Should I not spare Nineueh,
that great City? Jonah 4.11. Now therefore, since Ethnicall Rome is past, and
that state is abolished (says Parsons) for which cause she did bear the name
of Babylon, and Saint Hierome, has assured us, that Rome, by her confession of
Christ, has blotted out the blasphemy, written in her forehead (which point
the Babylonians do greedily embrace, to their unhappy excec^ation) since Rome
has turned from her former sins, and done righteousness, since she has had
a glorious name by her renowned Faith (after the time of Paganism, Idolatry,
and Persecution under her ancient Emperors) since, in our opinion, she was a
glorious member of the Church (and, in their opinion she is still the Head,
Queen, and Mistress thereof; embracing, and propounding the truly Catholic
Faith) and, finally, since her ensuing repentance has cleared the score of her
preceding sins; how can it consist with Gods Truth, that, in regard of her
sins, so long past, and so deeply repented of, he should lay a destruction
upon her in the time yet to come (for it is yet to be fulfilled) and that in so
terrible and vnexemplifiable a manner? Apocal. 18. Her ruin, therefore, (and
such a ruin) which is yet to come, when her Ethnicall estate is so long past,
does sufficiently prove, that later sins, in a future age should renew and
revive her old name (if Babylon ever were the name of ancient Rome, according
to the tenor of the Scriptures) and bring her unto this lamentable end: it
being one of the last Tragical acts of Gods Justice, upon the great Theater of
the world; as it appears in the historical predictions of this Scripture.

Secondly, I make farther remonstrance of that position, by the JUSTICE of God.
For he will not punish the children for their fathers sins; every one shall die
for his own, Ezekiel. 18.4. Since therefore Rome is yet to be destroyed, this
destruction does not attend her ancient sins (committed in her Ethnicall
estate, and done away by her repentance in her Christian estate) but for latter
sins, in latter ages, wherein she was to bear the scandal of this name, and
to suffer ruin for the same. Innocent Rome shall not perish for nocent Rome:
not the latter for the former: not the Papal for the Imperial: not the Church
for the State: there cannot be injustice in God. Shall not the Judge of all
the world do right? Yet I confess, that, in succeeding ages, God does
sometimes remember the sin of ages past; and so it is said of Babylon, Apocal.
18.5. God has remembered her iniquities: but, in this case, latter ages do
renew, imitate, and increase the sins of the former. And so I grant, that,
for her old sins of Idolatry, Persecution, etc. renewed afterward, Rome
shall suffer this ruin; as Ribera, and Viegas, the Jesuits do confess.

Mean while, this is the point, which I commend here unto your prudent
observation. If Rome were sinful Babylon (here spoken of) only in her
Ethnicall estate (which is a plausible delusion) she should have suffered her
fatal punishment (here threatened) during that Ethnicall estate; and not in her
Christian condition: whereas the special calamities of Rome (since the time of
this prediction) ensued upon Christian Rome (not Ethnicall Rome) by the furious
incursions, and impressions of the Goths and Vandalls; which were castigations
of Christian Rome, and not of Ethnicall, nor Antichristian Babylon: whose
final and utter subversion, being yet to come (and nearer unto the end of the
world) therefore Gods Truth and his Justice do clearly euince, that she was
to be Babylon again (if she were so once before) and to be stamped with
this hateful name; after the time of her entertainment of Christian Religion,
and after the expiration of her Ethnicall estate; this name arising out of a
latter condition of sins, for which she should fall, and in latter times, in
which she should perish, by the just indignation of God, and Man. And so much
for the second remonstrance.

THIRDLY; I make remonstrance of my position, by the ingenious, and fair
confession of two learned Babylonians themselves (they also being Jesuits of
eminent quality, public Readers in their Schools) who, by diligent
inquisition into the very Text of this Scripture, and careful observation of
the circumstances thereof, oppose themselves against the common error of their
own side, and clearly deduce out of the coherence of many circumstances in
this Scripture, that this BABYLON does signify Rome, not in her Ethnicall
estate only (as the Papists do more ordinarily conceive) but near the
conclusion of the world: that then she shall, by her great sins, deserve
this name, and therefore come to ruin. Neither do I make use of their
confession, because it comes from adversaries, but because they make it out
of the conscience of truth, grounded upon the clear evidence of the Scripture.
For I should think meanly of my cause, if the truth and certainty of my
assertion stood upon the falsehood and error of their confession, and had no
better strength to support it self.

The first Babylonian, is Ribera, a man of no vulgar note, as being a Doctor of
Divinity, and professor thereof in Salmantica, a famous Academy of Spain.
This man wrote a Commentary upon the Revelation of Saint John; where, treating
upon these words, Apocal. 14.8. Babylon, that great City, is fallen, he
proves by sundry infallible circumstances of the Scripture [ Apoc. 17.] that
this Babylon is not the general society of wicked men, but a particular
City; and, finally, the City of Rome; and therefore he concludes his
disputation (as I noted before) upon that point, in these words; Omnia
profecto, nisi in Romam, non conueniunt; certainly all the circumstances in
the Text cannot agree unto any other place, but unto Rome alone; in cap. 14.
number. 31.

Then he comes [ number. 32.] to explicate the state, and condition of Rome, in
regard whereof this name [Babylon] and this ruin [shee is fallen] belong unto
her in this sacred Revelation. And here, suspecting the scandal, and offense
of his own brethren, he enters upon this discourse, with a preoccupation, in
this sad, and grave manner; Offensionem pio Lectori amoueri volo, I will that
no pious Reader [a Roman Catholic, that is to say, a Babylonian] should take
offense at my exposition, as if it were aduantagious unto the Heretics [the
Protestants] who assume unto themselves an occasion, upon this name of Babylon,
ascribed here unto Rome, to lay an imputation upon the Church of Rome, and our
holy Father the Pope. Wherefore [ number. 34.] he says, that this name of Babylon
agreed unto Rome, as she was in her Ethnicall State, an Idolatrous,
persecuting City; but now, says he, the case is altered, for she is, and
long has been, the Mistress of Faith, and the Mother of Christians. Then he
adds immediately; Si quando haec eadem fecerit, quae Iohannis tempore
faciebat, iterum Babylon vocabitur; if Rome shall commit the same things
hereafter, which she committed in the time of John, she shall be called
Babylon again [marke this well good hearers, for now the Jesuit draws near
unto the point] as it was in the case of Jerusalem, which, of a faithful City
once, became afterward a Whore. So he.

But let us hear the man tell out his tale; he has yet more to say, to
acquit his Mother Church, and Father-Pope; and therefore [ number. 38.] he
affirms, That this name of Babylon is never applied unto the CHVRCH of Rome,
but only unto the CITY; howbeit, not as the City long has been under the
Pope, and now is under him, nor indeed shall have this name, while the Pope is
Lord, and Governor thereof: but, as she was Babylon in her Ethnicall state,
so she shall be hereafter again, upon her defection from the Pope, and from
Christianity, near the end of the world.

Now because Ribera feared another censure here, he makes another
preoccupation [ number. 40.] in this manner; diuinare me dicet quispiam; Some man
perhaps will say, that I take upon me to be a Prophet, and to foretell things
to come; but (says he) I would entreat that man to lay aside his prejudice,
to examine the whole matter with mature judgment, and to believe me no
farther, then reason, and truth shall persuade him in this case.

Then he adds [ number. 42.] That, for as much as Rome, in her Ethnicall state
was so idolatrous, so wicked, and so cruel against the Christians (for that
all the Martyrs, throughout the Roman Empire, were put to death by the
authority of Rome, and by the power of Roman Magistrates) therefore it is
just, and meet that she her self should once suffer for her impious courses;
which being not yet done [according to the purport of this Scripture] shall be
done hereafter, when she shall be no less wicked, then she was in former times.

Then [ number. 43.] he proceeds in a fair, and ingenious manner of
Theological discourse; saying: Whereas this extreme desolation shall fall
upon Rome, near the end of the world; it is very just, and equal, in good
congruitie of reason. Why? Because the City is still the same; which, being
once so defiled with sin, must one day be purged with fire. Besides (says he)
there are many Citizens in Rome at this day, who by their name, and stock,
boast of their descent from the ancient Romans, who always increased there in
great number. Then he adds further; that, as a City, built out of the
ruins of a former, is reputed to be one, and the same City with it; so here,
in this case, the latter Citizens of Rome [when she shall be destroyed] may be
accounted the same Citizens with the former (though they be not of their blood,
and kindred) because they join themselves unto the former, and become as it
were, one body, and one commonwealth with them; but specially by their
imitation of the facts, and sins of their Predecessors. This (says he; Number.
44.) is the cause, therefore, why the latter Romans, near the end of the
World, following the impieties of the ancient, shall be punished, and the more
grievously also in that regard. So that (says he) though her old sins,
[committed in her Ethnicall state] were forgotten by God, in regard of her
Christian profession, which she entertained afterward: yet now, upon her new,
and like Impieties, near the end of the World, the old are remembered again,
and therefore she shall be burned for them both together.

Excellently, and divinely spoken; according to the true tenor of the
Scriptures elsewhere, and particularly of the Revelation it self; and
therefore Ribera began to grow warm in the conclusion of this discourse;
protesting in this manner; We know this truth so perspicuously, by the words of
this Revelation, VT NE STVLTISSIMVS QVIDEM NEGARE POSSIT; so that the veriest
fool in the world cannot deny the same. Then he adds; Since Babylon shall
be the shop of all IDOLATRY, and of all impieties; therefore it cannot be
doubted, but that this shall be the condition of Rome hereafter. And thus
having made his explication of the Text, he propounds a very fit question, in
the end of his discourse [ Number. 51.] namely; By what means the City of Rome,
near the end of the Vorld, should attain unto so great a power, and abundance
of riches? He answers first; that no man can certainly know the reason
thereof; and secondly, that this may come to pass, partly, by reason of the
ten Kings, who shall make a conquest of the whole World, and divide it
amongst them; and partly in regard of Antichrist, who shall be advanced in
this time; by means whereof Rome shall shortly return unto her ancient power,
and shall have these ten Kings under her government, who a little after shall
reign in the whole World: but, finally, these Kings shall destroy Rome; Apoc.
17.17.

Here the conjecture of Ribera (founded upon the vain speculations of some
ancient Fathers, not understanding the nature of this mystery, nor the sense
of the Scriptures in this behalf) failed him very much; as not knowing, that
Ecclesiastical Rome is this Babylon, and that the Pope is the second Beast
therein (by which means, truly, Rome has been elevated in a new, and second
greatness in the World, in some sort excelling the former, in her Ethnicall
estate) as, by due remonstrance it shall hereafter appear. Mean while (good
hearers) excuse my tedious declaration (taken out of the Commentary of this
learned Jesuit) as containing much variety of matter of very markeable
observation for my purpose.

My second Babylonian Author is Viegas; a Jesuit also, and a Doctor of
Divinity, and Professor thereof, first at Conimbrica, then at Ebora (two
Universities of Portugal) who framed a more copious, and elaborate
Commentary, upon this sacred Book of the Revelation; insisting very often in
the steps of Ribera, and especially in this point, whereof we now entreat.
Therefore, though it be material to express the judgment of Viegas also
upon the same; yet I may contract his long Discourse into a few words.

This Viegas, then [ in Apocal. 17.. 2.] confesses that the destruction of
this Babylon [ foretold cap. 18.] shall be in the last times, before the end of
the World. Afterward [. 3.] he says, that this Babylon is the City of Rome;
howbeit, not as she is now, under the Pope, but as she was heretofore in her
Ethnicall condition, and as she shall be hereafter in the time of Antichrist,
upon her defection from the Pope, and from her Christian Faith; and then he
shows, in many words, the quality of her sins, and manner of her ruin
(conformably with the judgment of Ribera) and that, for old sins, joined
with the latter, God shall execute his wrath upon her, by these ten Kings; as
he does more largely deduce also, in cap. 18.. 6.

Thus you have heard the consonant exposition of these two learned persons, the
second treading in the steps of the first; and both (for the maine point, now
in question) in the steps of the holy Scripture. Now, therefore, I should
proceed to collect, out of them both, such observations, as are suitable to our
purpose, but that I am a little stayed, and hindered, by the voluminous
Commentary of Ludouicus ab Alcasar (a Jesuit of great esteem in Spain)
which he published, upon the year 1612. [many years after that the two other
Commentaries, upon the Revelation, near extant; for the latter, of Viegas, was
commended to the Press, upon the year 1599. and the former, of Ribera,
certain years before that; for Ribera died upon the year 1591.] in which
Commentary a man would, therefore, reasonably suppose, that some more
excellent matters should now come to light, and especially, after the diligent,
and painful discussion of so many points, by his learned Brethren, preceding
him in this kind. But mark the event, in this our present issue; how this
learned ignorant man, this wise foolish man, this judicious absurd man, this
acute obtuse man, this Expounder of the Revelation, or rather this compounder
of Fables, does herein comport himself. Two things then in this passage,
deserve your careful attention [shall I smile at his folly, or laugh at his
misery, while I propose the same?] The first is this; that this Babylon is Rome
indeed, but only, as she was in her Ethnicall state, and not in any state
ensuing hereafter. The second is this; that the fall of this Babylon was
mystical, and spiritual; namely, from Ethnicall Idolatry to Christian
Religion [an happy fall] from the superstition of Pagans unto the profession of
Christ; which fall being past, he says, that this was mystica vltio [O
mystical, or rather, O miserable Foole] a certain mystical revenge of God
against the old Idolatrous Babylon; which vltion (says he) is eternal; for
the City of Rome shall never return unto the vomit of IDOLATRY again. These
particulars, as they are worthy to be noted, so they are unworthy to be
confuted, in this profound Mercurialist; who can extract such senses, out of
the Scripture, against the sense of common reason; and therefore I leave him
unto the censure of Ribera; who, proving the contrary assertions, by the clear
evidence of the text, gives his verdict against this Ludouicus (and the
associates of his simple opinion) that he is worse then a very Fool: (as you
heard before) and therefore let him accompany Spalatensis; who (upon his
return to Babylon) is said, for all his ambitious expectations of a Cardinals
Hat to get nothing but a Fools Cappe, but (I doubt) with a Knaves heart; as
any man may well suppose that this Ludouicus does bear in his breast; seeking
to obscure, and to draw into question, the true, clear, inexpugnable
confession [according to the point, whereof I now intreat] which his more
judicious, or more conscionable, fellows had formerly made in this behalf.

Now therefore, leaving this grave, and tedious Jesuit, with his profuse, and
foolish Book, I reflect upon such observations, as, out of Ribera, and Viegas,
are markable in the issue, upon which I now proceed. For though they are not so
Regular, as that I dare follow them in all things; yet I will first take such
things, as they grant, upon the evidence of the Text, and then prove such
things, as they deny, in their misprision of the same. The points, which I
will collect out of them, are six:

The first; They confess, that Rome is (or shall Babylon after her Ethnicall
estate, in a later condition.

The second; They confess, that IDOLATRY, Rome, in this her later condition.

third; They confess, that Rome, in this condition, shall persecute, and
oppress the faithful professors of Gods Truth.

fourth; They confess, that Rome, in this condition, shall have great power,
authority, and command in the World.

fifth; They confess, that, in this condition, and latter estate of her
IDOLATRY, Antichrist shall possess this City, and so it shall be a
spiritual Babylon; a sink of sin, and shop of Idolatry, which shall be
derived unto the World, under the government of Rome, in the latter days.

sixth; They confess, that Rome, in this condition, shall be destroyed, burnt
with fire, made desolate by ten KINGS; and so shall come unto her extreme
ruin, by the just judgment of God, for her former, and for her latter sins.

All these points (being enforced out of the plain testimony of the
Scripture) we admit as true; and such, as either the veriest Fool cannot
deny, or, at least, the wisest can never impeach.

Now though Ribera, Viegas (and others that follow their interpretation) lay
this scandal upon the City only (and not upon the Church of Rome) and upon
the City also when she falls from her obedience to the Pope, and not
before; yet I will demonstrate, that this goodly Song is not tuneable to the
Text, but that it is a poor evasion, upon a miserable necessity, which shall
be no City of refuge for the protection of their CHVRCH; howsoever being
weather-beaten by the storm of the Text (afflicting their hearts) they are
driven unto this Harbor of their invention; wherein the Conscience finds
small comfort, and reason it self (observing the events of things, and the
occurrencies of times) does force them immediately out of this silly creek,
into a troublesome Sea.

Wherefore, I come now unto the fourth, the last, and the substantial
interpretation of my Text, which lays this name of BABYLON directly, and
clearly upon the CHVRCH of Rome, as she long has been, and now is, and
(though declining in her glory) as she shall continue unto the fearful time
of her unhappy fall; and the whole River of Tyber (though it were all made Holy
water by Popish incantation) shall never wash away this scandal of her name,
which now truly does, and long has done, and shall for ever cleave fast unto
her; as the Leprosy unto Gehezi, and unto his seed for ever.

The FOVRTH Interpretation.
FOurthly then, and lastly (for now we are come unto the main and principal
issue) I confidently proclaim, and will clearly prove, that, as this Babylon
is, Rome, and Rome after her Ethnicall estate; so it is Rome in regard of the
Church, and not only of the City, as both are under the Pope, and this I will
evidently deduce by five Reasons.

FIRST therefore, I prove my assertion in regard of the very edifices in Rome;
the Churches, the Chapels, the Monasteries, the Palaces of the Pope, the
houses of Cardinals, and sundry Ecclesiastical places, which take up a
special part of Rome; being now a Papal Rome, the seat of the Spiritual
Monarch; the second Beast (as you shall hear anon) inuading the Imperial Seat,
and dignity of the first therein: so that all motion in Rome is to the Center
of the Church there, whose Circumference (by dominion, and power) is so largely
extended in the World: all reference there is unto Saint Peter's Chair (in
whose person they suppose that the actual Souereigntie, now exercised by the
Pope, did habitually dwell) there the splendor of the Church darkeneth all the
glory of the City, which also, now, by a Popish Metaphor, is translated into
the Church; for that the City, and the Church, are now coupled in union
together, both being in subjection to one head: in regard whereof, it is
Ecclesiastical Rome, rather then Civil; the City being swallowed up of the
Church, as Pharaohs fat Kine were devoured by the lean. The name of Babylon,
then, agreeing to Rome (as we shall more clearly perceive anon) falls
eminently upon the Church there (rather then upon the City) having all the
properties of Babylon, which the Revelation does assign; as in the sequel of
my Sermon, you shall very sensibly discern.

SECONDLY, therefore I prove my assertion, by the reuiew of that Merchandtze
in Rome, which is spiritual, and of the Church there; not temporal, and of
the City; as some do poorly conceive, and weakly prove. And because this is
a matter of especial consequence, I resolve to sound the depth of this
mystery, and to lay it forth in lively colors; as it shall please God to
guide, and to direct my thoughts.

The (...) Merchants of this Babylon are soule-merchants, dealing in spiritual
affairs, under the great, and terrible Monarch of the Church therein, sitting
as God, in the Temple of God. This is not mine invention, but the very
testimony of the Scripture it self; Apocal. 18.13. For the Spirit of God,
making a large enumeration of the Wares, and Merchandise of this Babylon (a
Spiritual Babylon, and, consequently, spiritual Wares, under a spiritual
Prince) concludes it with the SOVLES of men; as the proper, and pretended
subject of their negotiations; though, under, and by the pretense of spiritual
things, this Papal Monarch does exercise a temporal, and an earthly
domination; as the principal scope of his subtle practices, and operations in
the World. And because this point is exellently delivered by the learned pen of
our gracious Sovereign, I will express it in his own words. Babylon shall
have many that shall be Merchants unto her of the souls of men, by selling,
for Money, PARDONS, given by that Monarch [the second Beast] which shall be
thought to have power to save, redeem, and free men's souls; namely out of
Purgatory. Wherefore it was truly affirmed in a Book, composed by the Clergy
of England, in the Reign of King Henry the eight, (unto the which all the
principal members of the Clergy did subscribe; as by name, Gardener, then
Bishop of Winton; and Boner, then Archdeacon of Leicester, etc.) that it was
necessary, that such abuses be clearly put away, which under the name of
Purgatory, have been advanced; as to make men believe, that, through the
pardons of the Bishop of Rome, SOVLES might be clearly delivered out of
PVRGATORIE, and all the pains thereof.

But since I shall have occasion anon to touch this ware, and other
merchandises of Babylon, more nearly to the quick, let us observe here by the
way, what the learned pair of Jesuits does conceive of this traffic; whether
it may be taken in a Litteral, or in a Spiritual sense; whether it may
appertain unto the Church, or unto the City of Rome.

RIBERA comes first in order; who, treating of these Merchants (in Apoc.
18.3.) speaks of their repair unto Babylon, to fill her with all variety of
things; and afterward ( in v. 11.) he says, that the Merchants shall weep,
and lament for the destruction of Rome, where they had so great negotiation,
because they can have no more traffic in that great and opulent City.

VIEGAS follows, and speaks more copiously upon this point; in Apoc. 18.3.
For he says, that Merchants shall flow together to Rome ( being Babylon, near
the end of the world) out of al parts of the earth, and shall lament the fall of
Rome, because their traffic with her shall be intercluded for ever. Afterward [
nu. 6.] he says, that it is manifestly gathered, by so much, and such precious
merchandise as is expressed here in this Chapter, that Rome shall attain unto
very great power, and abundance of riches, and that her Empire (which shall be
most flourishing) shall be largely propagated in all the world. And again, he
affirms immediately thereupon; that, in the last times, Rome shall be a most
flourishing City; her Empire very large; that she shall live in great pleasure,
in great abundance of al things; that she shall then serve IDOLATRY; and, that
thus being Babylon, she shall come unto a fatal, and woeful end.

Thus they hunt counter in the literal sense of temporal merchandise, and other
Babylonians also, with them (or rather before them) run in the fame course; as
by name, our countryman D. Bristow (to whom D. Worthington, from who^ I
received this notice, did attribute very much, for his sober, grave, and deep
judgment) who, long before the commentary of Viegas came forth (and, as I
suppose, before the commentary also of Ribera ever saw the light, was confident
in his opinion that this should be the condition, and estate of Rome, in the
latter days, which I have now related out of their works.

O fools, and slow of heart, to believe that, which is so clearly revealed in
the Scriptures; if you compare their prediction with the event of things! For
first, these Merchants are called the Merchants of Souls; as I noted before,
upon the point of Indulgences, of which I shall speak more anon. With which
spiritual merchandise we may join many other matters of their traffic; by
dispensations, absolutions, appellations, faculties, inuestitures, and many
pretended interests of the Church of Rome; in a word, by their courts
Legantine, by the discursations of Legates, and Apostolical officers, in
Temporal, and Ecclesiastical estates; to the singular advantage of Babylon,
and the negotiators of that Apostaticall See.

Secondly; it is extremely improbable, that Rome should become such a Tyrus
[such a Mart of the Nations; Esaias 23.3.] as these men pretend; a place of such
traffic, and negotiation; it being, by situation, and want of conueniences,
incapable of so great employments, as neither she enjoyed in the highest pride
of her Paganicall estate, nor any City (if the Text be are purely a litterall
sense, in so many verses; 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 23; amplifying
her merchandise with rare variety of phrase) of most commodious situation,
endued with all benefits of Art, and Nature, did perhaps ever enjoy the like.

Thirdly; it is morally impossible, that Rome in this future, imagined estate,
should increase to such an immoderate, and vast power, as is described in this
place; Apoc. 18.3. ALL NATIONS have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication; and THE KINGS OF THE EARTH [euen they that, chap. 17.3. gave their
power, and authority unto the Second Beast] have committed fornication with
her; and THE MERCHANTS OF THE EARTH are waxen rich with the abundance of her
pleasures. This rare, and portentuous event in Rome [after her Ethnicall
estate; after her entertainment of Christian Religion; as the Jesuits
confesse] does require no small extent of time, and opportunity of means;
such time, and such means, as cannot be found in this supposed pedling,
merchandising Babylon.

For first; if you consider the extent of time (according to the common
judgment, and general conceit of these Babylonians, themselves) you may
palpably discover the vanity of their surmise. Understand therefore, and well
observe; that, in their opinion (taken by them out of many Ancients; and
mistaken by them out of some passages of the Scripture) the reign of
Antichrist is confined unto the space of three years, and an half. Again,
consider that, in their opinion, Antichrist, and his adherents, shall destroy
the City of Rome; and that, until the defection of Rome, from the Pope, upon
this very time, the Pope shall retain this City, as the place of his Papal
Seat; as being affixed unto the same. See Bellarm. de Pont. l. 4. c. 4.

Now therefore, since Rome shall be Babylon again, communicating her Idolatry
to all Kings, and Nations, and shall have a large Empire in the world, and
there shall be the exercise of great traffic, and commerce, by the Merchants
of the earth, and she shall attain unto an immensitie of riches; may we not
perceive, that this new, and extraordinary condition of Rome does require a
good sufficiency of time to compass, and effectuate such an admirable event?
And yet, forsooth, Rome shall not fall from the Pope, till upon this very time;
so that, after his departure (voluntarily, or rather necessarily out of Rome;
now beginning, as they say, to become a Babylon again) all these wonderful
effects must ensue in Rome, and in the world; and yet all this must be done
within a very little time (as you see) against all probability of reason, and
all possibility of things; as you may easily discern, by comparing one part
of their suggestions with another; which are arena sine calce, sand without
lime (as Caligula spoke of the writings of Seneca) supposed points, without any
coherence of semblable truth. But, in our apprehension of this Scripture, all
points have a fair, substantial, and orderly connection; for as much as Rome,
being Babylon, under the Pope [who is her Second Beast; as the events,
concurring clearly with the prediction, do sufficiently deduce unto our
knowledge] has therefore had not only a spacious time, but a proper means
also, to atchieue, and perform such strange designs; to communicate IDOLATRY
to the world, and to obtain an Empire in the world, and to attain great
riches, and state; and finally, to have commerce with the world by her
spiritual wares; wherewith she does entangle, and ensnare the world, by her
artificial delusions; covered with the glorious veyle of APOSTOLICAL terms.

Therefore, secondly; whereas an opportunity of means is required in such a
rare success of things, the Babylonians themselves are puzzeled to invent some
colorable device in this behalf. Whence it is (as I noted before) that Ribera
[in Apocal. 14. number. 51.] pondering deeply upon this point, says; I think
that no mortal man can certainly know, by what means, Rome [in the end of the
world] should come unto such an incredible power, etc. Notwithstanding (says
he) a man may, in some sort, conjecture out of the words of the Apostle;
Apocal. 17. where we read, that the purpled Whore sits upon a Beast,
having ten horns, in which are understood ten Kings, who shall subdue, and
divide the whole world betwixt them. In their time shall Antichrist reign;
whence I do suspect, that Rome, having cast out the Pope, shall, in a short
time, reuert unto her ancient power, so that she shall have those ten Kings
under her government, who, a little after, shall reign in the whole earth.
And yet these (forsooth) are also the ten Kings, that must finally destroy her
with fire, and sword. What probability is in this supposed means, to produce
such prodigious effects, and that within so little time, let any man, endued
with reasonable capacity, with ingenuity, and with conscience, consider
advisedly with himself; and he may perceive, that, as the Jews, being
convinced out of the Old Testament, concerning Christ, have certain
diuerticles, and poor euasions, to escape the force of truth: so here this
Jesuit, being convinced out of the New, touching Babylon, and the condition of
Rome (masked in that name) will not see his own Antichrist, who is truly the
Second Beast; to whom these ten Kings, long ago, surrendered a great part of
their Royal power (whereby Rome aspired unto such dignity in the world) and
thence it is, that Rome has such a new Imperial State, under the Papal
Crown, and by spiritual wares (belonging to the shop of a spiritual Monarch)
has traded so generally with many parts of the Christian world.

Fourthly; we may discern the vain conceit of their pretended Literal
sense, concerning this Babylonian Merchandise, because they now change the
coppie, and tenor of the very Text; which being Mystical (as I noted before)
and a Mystical Babylon understood therein, they run suddenly from the Mystery
to the Letter, from the Tree to the Bark; taking all now in an open, outward,
obuious sense, against the general purport of this Book, and particular of
this place. And yet I deny not, but that Rome has some use of Merchants, and
merchandise in a Litterall sense; to furnish her Idolatrous Temples, her
masking Masses, and thereby to commend her spectable vanities unto men of
popular judgment, and of carnal hearts.

And thus much, here by the way, to dissolve the knot, wherewith the Jesuits
would tie our understandings unto an apprehension of much temporal
merchandise, which shall abound in Rome, for a few years (or days rather)
before her final end; accompanied with the very end of the world.

Now, therefore, I return again unto a reueiw of the spiritual merchandise
in Rome,; and particularly of INDVLGENCES; which are dispensed from this
Apostolical Seat alone; as Bellarmine says in praefat. lib. de Pont. Romans
Vnde habemus Indulgentiarum communicationem nisi ab hac sede? Whence have we
the communication of Indulgences, but from this Seat alone? What are these
Indulgences? A relaxation of temporal pains, inflicted upon souls in
Purgatory. Oh the falsehood of this execrable merchandise. Did the ancient
Church of God so believe, and teach? No; not for a thousand years; Indulgences
were then a relaxation only of Ecclesiastical censures, inflicted upon
penitents, by the Church: and therefore Peter Lombard (the studious collector
of the whole sum of Religion; who flourished upon the year 1172.) made no
mention of this great mystery of Papal Indulgences; which began a little
after, by the sophistications of dark, and subtle Schoolmen; Roffensis
himself confessing, that the use, and practice of them was lately received in
the Church. And therefore you may observe, that Bellarmine (treating last of
all, concerning Indulgences, which gave occasion of the public, and just
discession of Protestants from the Church of Rome) proceeds not in this
disputation (as in the rest) by that fair, and ingenious method; viz. by
Scriptures, by Counsels, by Fathers, by Reasons framed out of the grounds of
Scripture, and Religion) but, in a new, obscure, intricate course; of
Positions, Suppositions, Conclusions, vain Opinions of dark, and obscure
Schoolmen, etc. which made the learned Doctor Raynolds say, that, till he saw
this Treatise of Indulgences, he took Bellarmine to be a man of some
conscience, and that he wrote out of his persuasion; but now he conceived of
him otherwise. But I proceed, and hasten unto a conclusion of this point. This
Babylonian ware of Indulgences is that traffic of the Church of Rome, whereby
she keeps her intimate correspondencie, and participation with all her
members, tying thereby their consciences, by a secret, and strong obligation,
unto the Pontificiall Seat; it being also of singular use in the manner of her
proceedings. For, as this Merchandise is the daughter of many false doctrines [
Supererogations: Merits, even the hateful, and dangerous merit of Condignitie:
of an Ecclesiastical treasure, arising out of the merits of Christ, and also
of the Saints; the same being more, then they were bound unto, and therefore,
being not rewarded unto them in heaven, may be communicated to the poor
souls in Purgatory; and the dispensation of this mystical treasure is
committed unto the Pope, by virtue of his keys, etc.] so it is the mother of
many wicked practices, for the advantage of their Church; as being the very
bellows, which blow the fire of treason against the Persons, and States of
Princes. This is the ware, whereby Babylon bewitcheth not only private men, but
great Kings; for her Merchants are the great men of the earth; Apocal. 18.3.
Therefore infinite store of this Babylonian trumperie was transported unto the
poor Indians, for the pretended benefit of their souls, but for the intended
benefit of a Princes worldly estate. This is the ware, which Leo the tenth so
freely, and bountifully dispensed for the redemption of souls out of the
Purgatorian fire (which keeps warm the kitchen of his Holy-ship) in the
compassion of his charitable heart, and fullness of his Papal power. Said I
freely? Forgive me this wrong: it was for the commodity, and relief of his
sister Magdalen (as Guicciardine, a Popish Historian, does relate; lib. 13.)
who had her Factors to distract, and vent this Babylonish ware; whence
Magdalen, the sister, had the gain, but Leo, the brother, had the loss; for,
upon this occasion (no less just before God, then acceptable to the Christian
world) Martin Luther began that course, which has succeeded so happily to the
further discovery of Babylon, and scandal of her wares; for, since that time,
her brocage has suffered a great decay. Finally; this is that ware, whereby
this merchandising Babylon does principally subsist, in honor, authority,
riches, and applause of the world; inebriated with such incantations of her
whorish cup, and deluded with the vain hope of these miserable helps.

What should I speak of the Pedlery of Meddalls, Beads, Grains, Holy Water,
Images, certain peculiar Churches, Chapels, and other places of blind
devotion? unto which sundry Pardons are appendant, as being the means, and
instuments of Papal benignity, thereby to dispense, and communicate
Indulgences unto poor, seduced souls; even as certain Friars, receiving
temporal relief from their devoted followers, pretend to communicate the
merits of all the Saints of their own order, unto them for their help; and
some, Laymen, by wearing a Franciscans Girdle, and using certain Ceremonies
(according to the Rites of the Papal Church) are made partakers of the merits
of Saint Francis, and of all the brethren of that religious Order. All which,
and many more Wares come, originally, out of the Storehouse of Rome.

To conclude then: unto these Indulgences (some of them being for an hundred
thousand years; so liberal is the holy Father) I may add other spiritual
ware of Babylon; as of Agnus Dei (which is a ware of special virtue, and
force) but chiefly of Dispensations; which are sometimes the dissipations of
divine, and humane right; of natural, and moral bands: as full of great
presumption against the Laws of God, and Nature (to tie some Princes in
unlawful Marriages, and to untie many subjects from lawful obedience) as of
singular art, thereby to entangle Souereignes, and subjects, in the obedience
of that predominant See, and to keep them under the captivity of the Triple
Crown. Therefore the Pope does greatly applaud his own felicity, when
Princes (ensnared with the love, or terrified with the greatness, or oppressed
by the power of this Apostaticall Seat) will humbly sue unto him for
Dispensations, or accept such gracious favors kindly at his hands; whereby he
gains ground upon them still, to keep them more securely within the
obedience of the Church; which they shall not dare to offend, without the
peril of their lives, and states.

And now since this Romish ware is Spiritual, and of the Church, and for
souls (not temporal, not of the City, and for this life) I conclude the
second proof of my assertion; namely, that this Babylon, in my Text, is the
Church of Rome, or Papal Rome, or Ecclesiastical Rome, wherein the greatest
Monarch does reign (next under the King of Heaven) above all the Kings of the
Earth; as we know by their own pretenses, challenges, doctrines, and
usurpations in this behalf. And so I proceed unto a new, and the third proof
of my said assertion.

THIRDLY, therefore, I prove my assertion, to be true, because the whole World
(as the Jesuits say; perhaps they mean the Roman World, according to the
phrase of Scripture; Luc. 2.1. and the sense of the ancient Fathers: or some
great part thereof, and specially in Europe) shall be under the government of
Rome, and so she shall make a general communication of her Idolatry unto the
same. Now, in this great dependencie of the World upon Babylon, and in this
universal reference of Nations unto her, how can this be verified of the
City? How should the City arrive unto such a large Dominion in the World,
and, specially, in so little a time, as the Babylonians do prescribe? You have
heard the difficulty proposed lately by Ribera himself; and how he resolves
it, by a poor conjecture. But the truth is clear, and easily seen, where God
does open the eye; namely, that Rome had this general Dominion once, in, and
by her Imperial State; not only under the Emperors (succeeding Julius
Caesar) but while the dignity of Rome remained in the Senate, and the
authority in the people. During this Imperial State, Rome received Idolatry
from all Nations; as Leo (sometimes Bishop of Rome) does speak; Sermon. 1. in
Natal. Petri and Pauli: and the civil Stories of Liuie, Plutarch, and others
do sufficiently declare, how ambitious, rather then zealous, or how
senseless, rather then religious, the old Ethnicall Rome was, in bringing
foreign Gods, and extraneous Idolatry into her bosom, for the public
honor, and safety of that blinded City. Therefore Rome had once her
Pantheon; a Temple of all the Gods; converted since into a Church of all the
Saints. This former Dominion was lost, this imperial State was dissolved; but
behold a second Beast (of whom I have spoken much before, but you shall hear
more fully of him anon) entering, by little and little, into, and upon the place
of the former, with a pretense of greater authority, carried with a new form,
and under another color; and, in this Papal State, Rome has sent, and
communicated her Idolatries unto the World: having a cup of gold in her hands,
full of abomination, and filthiness of her fornication [Apoc. 18.4.] which she
does not now receive from others (as in her Ethnicall condition) but others
receive it from her, by her Papal incantations, and by the venditation of her
sacred power.

Hence it is, that Babylon has such dominion in the World; extensiue; by such
a large dilatation; and intensiue, by so strong an operation thereof. Therefore
Apocal. 13.11. the second beast appeared like a Lamb; as the Pope entered upon
this dominion, with a fair pretense of a Catholic Pastor, a Successor of
Saint Peter, a Vicar of Christ, etc. and he had two horns; which word [horne]
signifies power, very frequently in the Scripture: so that his two horns are
indeed two powers, which this second Beast [with his humble style of Seruus
seruorum Dei] does pretend; whence Babylon has gained so great authority, and
veneration in the World.

The first power, which he did originally pretend, was only Spiritual; the
power of the KEYS: and therefore the Pope does arrogate all this power, in the
whole Church, unto himself; and says, that, from him, it is derived unto the
inferior Pastors there of; as the power of Order, and the power of
Jurisdiction, which all Bishops, and others in the Clergy, hold immediately,
or mediately, from his Apostolical feate, as the true, proper, and only
fountain thereof. From hence all Dispensations do flow: to it all
Appellations do tend: she has all fullness of power from Christ; others have
a part of it from her: nay, (if we may believe her principal Doctors) her
Peter gave their Pastoral authority unto the other Apostles (else Rome could
not be the Mother Church, in Bellarmines judgment; de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 23.)
and therefore as all Ecclesiastical power was deduced only from S. Peter at
the first, so now it is deduced only from his personal Successors, in this
Apostolical seat.

Now, unto this Spiritual power in the Church, they subject all temporal
power in the State (as I will presently declare) as being of greater
excellency, and virtue. And it is true indeed, that the spiritual power of
the Church excels the temporal in the State: but how? ratione finis;
because the end of the Churches power, is eternal life; and ratione medij;
because the courses, whereby she works, are spiritual means; namely, such
as are contained in the Word of God, conducing unto this end. But yet this her
spiritual power excels not the temporal power of Princes in dominion,
command, sublimitie, and glory; which are properly appendant to their Crowns.

The second power, which Babylon does challenge by her second Beast, is
Temporal; which her Popes have affected with many insinuations, and sometimes
with open vendication thereof: and her nearest friends advance it with the best
art, which wit, and learning can minister in this behalf. And certainly this
is the opinion, which daily increases in Babylon, and which they will endeavor
to support with might, and main; though some, more moderate, Babylonians do
not yet give way unto this highest Antichristian course. For I find three
several Opinions in the Church of Rome, upon this point.

1. The first gives all temporal dominion directly unto the Pope, as the
principal Sovereign of the World; from whom all Princes dependently hold
their Crowns. These are true Babylonians indeed; but all such are actual
Traitors, against the dignity, and supreme honor of the Crowns of Princes,
under whom they live.

2. The second gives all spiritual power (not temporal) to the Pope; but yet
indirectly drawing on a temporal power over Princes; in ordine ad spiritualia,
in ordine ad Deum, etc. viz. that the Pope may depose an heretical, or an
irregular Prince, from his Crown, as having authority over him, in this case,
to deprive him of his estate. All such Babylonians are habitual Traitors;
disposed, and always resolved; in preparation of heart, to execute any Papal
sentence of deposition, as far as they can, against their own natural Lords,
and Sovereign Princes.

3. The third opinion (denying the second of these, as the second denies the
first) gives a mere spiritual authority unto the Pope, to excommunicate a
Prince, for his correction, and salvation, and to bring him to a penitent
submission unto God, and his Church; but without any such temporal effect, as
the second opinion does enforce. And hence it is, that the Oath of Allegiance
in this Kingdom, so wisely devised, and necessarily enacted, though it
subvert, and contradict the first, and second Opinions, yet it leaves this
last, and third Opinion untouched, neither affirming, nor denying it, because
all moderate Papists, that treat of the Popes power (as namely Doctor Barkley,
and the more mild Babylonians in England) denying it in the first, and second
degree, do yet constantly affirm it in the third. But these men find least
grace in Babylon (which is more delighted with the second Opinion, and chiefly
with the first) and therefore we see that, as the first grows daily more
strong in Rome, so the second has lately gotten more advantage in France (in
the minority of the King) by the subtle Oration of Cardinal Peron; which our
most excellent Sovereign has clearly refuted by his divine, and learned Pen.

To conclude, now, the third proof of my assertion; you may perceive that the
large Dominion of Babylon (which the Jesuits truly find in Rome; but falsely
conceive it to be there within a very little time only, before her ruin) does
appertain unto the CHVRCH, and not unto the City; but so far forth, as it is
the place, wherein the Pope does reign; so that, in it, his Successors must
continue (even until the time of Antichrist; when they shall be expelled out
of the confines thereof) and there they shall exercise their domination, not
only with Saint Peter's Keys, but also with his two Swords. This is the power
of Babylon, which the Revelation does truly foretell, and which these Jesuits
could not discern therein. But as humane reason disapproueth their idle
conceits, and naked conjectures, so certain experience, joined with divine
prediction, does confirm our assertion in this point. And so I come unto a
fourth, and a more important, proof thereof.

FOURTHLY, therefore, I prove it, out of the conformity betwixt the prediction
of Saint Paul, and the Revelation of Saint John; both containing one sense of
matter, under different form of words; the point it self being one, as
proceeding from one Spirit.

First, then, it is the prediction of Saint Paul, that Antichrist shall be
revealed, and destroyed, before the great Day of the general Judgment (2 Thessalonians. 2.) which seems to ensue not long after the performance of that
glorious work. In like manner, Saint John in his Revelation, passes from the
destruction of Rome (under the name of Babylon: cap. 18.) unto a description of
the new Jerusalem (cap. 21.) following the ruin of the new, and second Babylon
(nothing being interuenient betwixt these two, but the gratulation of the
Saints, for the fall of Rome, cap. 19. and a brief recapitulation, made of
things past; cap. 20.) and so he proceeds immediately unto the conclusion of
this present world, cap. 22.

Saint Paul does farther assure us (2 Thessalonians. 2.3.) that Antichrist shall be
disclosed, before he be destroyed; which shows, that he had an existencie
before his discovery; and that he should grow, by a mystery [2 Thessalonians. 2.7.]
unto his greatness, before he be discerned. Therefore Saint John, according
with Saint Paul, tells us [ Apoc. 18.5.] that Babylon had a name written in
her forehead, and it was a Mystery. A great mystery, indeed, that the
successor of a Fisherman (as Hierome calls him, writing unto Damasus) should
aspire, by little, and by little, unto such an immensitie of power, that Kings
are his vassalls, and that, his own Lord being finally deprived of his
Imperial Seat, this Beast should enter upon it, and exercise the old power
under a new name.

Saint Paul goes forward, and informs us, that Antichrist cannot be
disclosed, nor advance himself unto that eminency, wherein he shall excel
all Potentates of the earth, until the supreme power of the Roman Emperors
were taken away. For that power was then the chiefest, and therefore it kept
down the Papal Dominion, and restrained the growth of the Pope; for
Antichrist could not be lifted up, till the Emperor was cast down. This is
the clear, and evident purpose of Saint Paul in these words; HE, which now
withholdeth, shall first be taken out of the way: and then that wicked man
[Antichrist] shall be revealed; for two such powers could not consist
together, at one time, in the Imperial Seat. That this withholder was the
Roman Emperor, the very tenor of the Text it self does bear it; and the
success of things does give witness thereunto; and this was the common
exposition of the ancient Doctors; as namely, of Saint Chrysostom, upon the
very place; of Saint Hierome; Epist. 151. quaest. 11. and, long before them, of
Tertullian; de Resurrect. cap. 30.

Thus the Christians had a prescience touching the period, and expiration of
the Roman Empire, which the Pagans conceived to be Eternal; and therefore
Saint Paul delivered this dangerous point in secret, and obscure terms, least
the public notice thereof should minister cause of persecution against the
Church; as Saint Hierome does collect.

But let us observe the words of Tertullian; for they contain a point of
special note. Quis (says he) who is this that does withhold? He answers;
Romanus status; the Roman, and Imperial State. Now therefore, as by the word
HE [ He, that withholdeth] S. Paul does not understand an individual person,
not Nero (who was then living) but a civil State, which had a succession of
Emperors therein,; so, by this word, THE man of sin; THE adversary, etc.
Saint Paul does not understand some one particular person, but a State (and a
State Ecclesiastical, as we shall see anon) having a succession of Potentates
( viz. Popes of Rome) succeeding in the Imperial Seat (when the Emperor was
taken away) and exercising supreme dominion therein. Thus far Saint Paul
has conducted us in the interpretation of this Babylon; that, by his
prediction, we might certainly understand, that this name agrees unto the
Papal, and Ecclesiastical estate, succeeding unto the Imperial, in Rome.

For he, which withheld, being taken away, Antichrist will appear; and before,
he cannot (for two such great powers cannot stand at once) and afterward, he
shall immediately arise; for so, in the decourse of all ages in the world, as
one supreme power (in the four Monarchies) did decay, so another did
presently exalt it self. Now, since He, that withheld, is taken away (to wit,
the Roman Emperor, or Romanus status, as Tertullian speaks: for that, which
now remains, is titular, rather then real; scarce a member of the ancient
body: and also the Pope sits above this Roman Empire; as translated into
Germany by his means; and as a creature of his ordination; the Emperor, being
by the Pope, and true Papalls, reputed, and styled no other, then Electus, or
an incomplete probationer, till consecrated, and inaugurated, or approved by
him: and so a vassal, and a subject unto the Papal power) therefore, by the
doctrine of S. Paul, that high, great, and glorious State, which immediately
succeeded unto the dissolved Empire, is Antichristian; he, that holds it, is
Antichrist; and that Rome, wherein he sits, is consequently Babylon; and
therefore, finally, this Babylon in my Text is not the City alone, but the
Church also, or Ecclesiastical Rome, wherein the Pope is advanced (after the
Emperor) as the highest Potentate in the earth.

And if the Pope be not the man (to wit, the man of sin; as Saint Paul
speaks) or rather the Beast (as you shall hear by Saint John) that entered
upon the Imperial Seat, and Dignity; who is that Man, or who is that Beast?
For some one, or other we must find, since he, that withheld, is taken out of
the way, so long before our time. If any man suppose, that the TVRK is that
Antichrist, which appeared upon the decadencie of the Roman Empire, I answer;
no: he is not the Man, or Beast, of whom we now enquire. First, because
Antichrist, succeeding in the Roman Empire, was to sit in the Temple of God;
so did not the Turk; but so does the Pope, namely, in Ecclesia, or rather supra
Ecclesiam. Secondly, because Antichrist should possess Rome, as the Seat, and
Center of the Empire; so does not the Turk; but so does the Pope; not by a
donation of Constantine, but by his insinuation into that glorious City.
Thirdly; because Antichrist ought to extol himself, if not in all, yet in the
most principal, and essential parts of the Roman Empire; so does not the
Turk: but so does the Pope; in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Poland, etc. so
he did in England; but so he shall do no more: so is my prayer, and so is my
hope. Fourthly, and lastly; the most general, and approved opinion of the
learned Doctors, in the Church of Rome, exempteth the Turk from the scandal,
and infamous name of that Antichrist, which is here intended by Saint Paul. And
therefore, whereas Feuardentius (following the erroneous conceits of some less
judicious Romanists) inclined strongly unto their fancy, that impute this
crime unto the Turk, he was censured amongst his own Catholic brethren, in
this disgraceful manner; the opinion of Feuardentius is not only false, but
dangerous; and the authors, whom he alleges, never thought, nor wrote any
such matter. Feuard. annot. in Irenaeum. l. 5. c. 30.

Since therefore the Pope is truly that man of sin, who appeared, in his
superlatiue power, upon the declination of the Roman Emperor (for thence we
enforce, by the verse words of Saint Paul, that Antichrist is come; even as the
Christians prove, against the Jews, that Christ came long ago, because the
Scepter departed from Judah; and then the Messiah was to be borne, according to
the prophecy of Jacob) we may conclude, that the Babylon, wherein he
sits, is Rome; not the City alone, but the Church, which seems to be
entayled unto that fatal place, in the judgment of her chiefest Doctors. Thus
far out of Saint Paul; and now we come unto Saint John.

Secondly then, this prediction of Saint Paul is a fitting key to open the
visions of Saint John, in this behalf; in cap. 13. and 17. For, in his
thirteenth Chapter, he had a vision of two distinct beasts; the very same,
which we have already seen in the prophecy of Saint Paul. Behold therefore
the description of these Beasts; and yet first understand (I pray you) what the
name of BEAST does generally purport, as well in this Revelation of Saint John,
as in the prophecies of Daniel (whereof also I am now to take some special
notice) namely cap. 7. v. 4. Four great Beasts (says he) came up from the
Sea. Every word has weight, as I will show you in the retrograded order of the
Text. They came from the great SEA; signifying, that the conuersions of public
States should bring great troubles, and perturbations in the world. They came
up; or ascended: for the great Monarchies had small beginnings, and were
advanced unto a very high estate. They are Beasts; for these Monarchies did
with fury and violence, enter, increase, and govern in the earth. Lastly;
they are four; whereof the last is the Roman Monarchy, thus characterized,
and marked by Daniel; v. 7. The fourth Beast was fearful, and terrible, and
very strong, etc. and it had ten horns; which, in the twenty fourth verse,
are interpreted ten Kings; for the Roman Monarchy had a various, and difforme
government; of different nature, from all precedent Monarchies; till the
Caesar's (who are here called the little horn) rose up; who, subduing a great
part of their strength, drew the principality unto themselves, and erected the
Monarchy in their own persons: and this is the true, genuine, and proper
interpretation of that text. Now I return unto Saint John.

The FIRST Beast, which Saint John did see; Apocal. 13.11. etc. is the same
Roman Monarchy; and expressed in this manner; A Beast arose out of the Sea,
having seven heads, and ten horns, etc. and then follows the persecution,
raised by this Beast, against the Church of God. This Beast was certainly the
Roman Empire; which, in the public government (by the Senate, and by the
people) and in the private afterward (by one person) was still one, and the
same Beast (having indeed ten horns at the first; till, afterward, one little
horn carried the sway, when it grew unto great power) that reuelled in
Babylon, and domineered in the world; by whose Edicts, and Authority, the
Christians, so generally for many years, suffered cruel deaths, and horrible
tortures, for the glorious name of Jesus Christ.

When this Tragedy was ended, and that this first Beast (though now grown
more mild, and tamed by the knowledge of the true Faith) began afterward
daily to decline from his greatness (and, at the last, to be taken out of the
way; according to the words of Saint Paul) then began a SECOND Beast, to come
up out of the earth; Apocal. 13.11. that is to say, some other great, and
principal Potentate (for so the word Beast imports here, as it does in
Daniel before) began to rear up himself; and therefore is here said to come
up; as having an inchoation, and then an augmentation of his power; and it is,
not without cause, said here, that he came out of the earth (whereas the former
Beast, verse 1. came out of the Sea; as the other three Beasts also did; Daniel
7.4.) because, as he is contrary to Christ (who came from heaven) so he has
a different entrance into the world, from the former Beast (with Saint John
saw) and from the other three (which Daniel saw) because those four Beasts had
a tumultuous, violent, and troublesome beginning of their Empires; which came,
as it were, out of a raging Sea; but this Second Beast (here in Saint John)
has a quiet, secret, peaceable ascension (as it were out of the earth) coming
up with the mild aspect of a Lamb; not suddenly advancing himself (like the
other Beasts) with terror, but cunningly insinuating himself into the hearts,
and affections of men (as Ribera does well expound this place) and is therefore
well said, to come up out of the earth, because, being little, and mean at the
first (in comparison of his future glory) he does afterward attain unto a
special, and extraordinary power in the world even, to do all, which the
first Beast could do before him, v. 12.

Mark now this passage well. It does appear, that the First Beast (viz. the
Roman Empire in the civil state) was now taken out of the way. How does that
appear? Because this second Beast did all, which the former could do before
him; therefore the former was gone; that is to say, the great Imperial power
of Rome was now decayed, and another arose up after it, in as great dignity,
and power, as the other did obtain. These two Potentates [the first, and
second Beast] stood not together in their greatness: two Suns shine not in
one firmament: and the Pope did well espy this, when he compared the Roman
Empire to the Moon, and the Roman Papacy to the Sun; as being of greater
excellency; so that the Empire had her light from it, and lost her light
before it; as being not able to shine in the glorious presence thereof. And
this is true indeed: for, O thou poor Empire of Germany; what art thou before
the conspect, and shining light of the mighty Papacy of Rome, which leaves
thee an empty Title, and possesses the full power thereof? But I proceed.

It does now also appear farther; that this second Beast (who could not aspire
unto the proportion of his greatness, during the consistencie of the former)
is mounted up into the Imperial Dignity, and Seat, (but after the expiration
of the Roman Empire; for that Beast is gone; that supreme power is abolished)
as he has invaded his Dominion, to do all, that the other could do before
him.

If you ask how this came to pass? I answer; not by Sword, not by Conquest,
not by forcible means; (for this Beast came out of the earth; in a more meek,
and mean fashion; and like a Lamb) but by a fair pretense of his
Evangelical Keys; which afterward became no less powerful then Swords, and
two Swords [spirituall power; which was the first horn that grew; and then
temporal power; which was the second horn, annexed unto the former: both
which Powers they understand in the two Swords, Luc. 22.38.] and then the
Beast, that appeared with the horns of a Lamb before, spoke like a Dragon
(says Saint John) with the voice of blasphemy; being now grown up unto high
estimation, reverently, and obsequiously intertayned in the World. All this
falls clearly, and irrefutably upon the Pope, and upon the Pope alone; as
being the next great, and Sovereign Potentate, arising upon the decay of the
Imperial State.

Wherefore the most excellent Majesty of our gracious King James does
prudently, and truly observe, concerning this SECOND BEAST; that it is the
false, and hypocritical Church, which does exercise all the power of the
former Beast: it teaches the Kings of this Monarchy, and of this Seat, by
what means they shall allure, and compel the people to obey their commands,
etc. It shall persuade them, that this heretical Monarchy ought for
conscience sake to be obeyed, by all persons, in whatsoever it commands, as
if it could not err.

Here the Church, and the Pope do import, really, but one thing: for the
dignity of this Church arises from the Pope: and therefore he is called also
the Church; as we shall see hereafter. Mean while we observe, that this
second, or Papal Beast in Rome has the authority of the former ( viz. the
Imperial) but under another title, in another kind, and carried with another
course. Wherefore this Babylon, in my Text, being the seat, wherein this
second Beast (the spiritual Monarch) does reign, as the most puissant, and
sovereign Lord in all the earth, I conclude now the third proof of my
assertion, as well by Saint John here, as by Saint Paul before; that the name
of Babylon does not extend merely unto the City of Rome (as the Jesuits do
pretend) but unto Ecclesiastical Rome; as it is governed, and swayed by the
POPE; usurping the place, dignity, and superiority of the former Beast
therein.

Now I come, in a word, or two, unto the seventeenth Chapter of Saint John;
where we read of a Beast, unto whom the ten Kings (arising near upon the
time of his advancement) gave their power, but afterward God inclines them to
work the final destruction of Babylon, wherein this Beast does reign. This
Beast is certainly the great Antichrist, as the Text does enforce, and the
Jesuits do confess: the question therefore is; whether this Beast be the
same, here, with the SECOND BEAST before; for if he be not the same, then that
second Beast is not Antichrist; and, consequently, the Pope (whom we presume to
be that second Beast) is not Antichrist; as we conceive him to be.

I answer therefore, that this Beast (Cap. 17. 12, 13.) is the very same with
the second Beast; Cap. 13. 11. whose exaltation, and quality is described
here in more precise, and ample terms, then before. For here we see his
gradation, how he came to so great power; it was by the means of the ten
Kings, who submitted a part of their dignity unto him; but, finally, Babylon
(wherein the Beast does reign) shall come unto her ruin by these ten Kings;
the same, not in person, but in succession.

Now it is apparent, that the man of sin, in Saint Paul (succeeding the
Emperor) being the second Beast, in Saint John (as I declared before) must
therefore be the Beast in this seuenteeenth Chapter; who is the Antichrist,
reigning in Babylon, with the subjection of his Kings; so that these three are
all one indeed. For the Beast, Apoc. 17. being Antichrist, is therefore also
Saint Paul's man of sin; revealed, when the Emperor was taken out of the way:
and this I have proved to be the Pope.

The Emperor, then, being the first Beast (Apocal. 13.1.) it follows
necessarily, that the Pope is the second Beast Verse 11. And so, lastly, it
ensues by clear, and evident deduction, that the second Beast ( Cap. 13. 11.)
is the same with this Beast ( Cap. 17. 12.) the Pope (or Papal Empire) being
signified, and intended in both; so that still, this Babylon, in my Text, is
Ecclesiastical Rome; the seat of that SECOND BEAST.

If any man say (and it is the only cavil, which they can pretend) that the
first Beast (Apoc. 13.1.) is the same with this Beast ( Apoc. 17.3.) because
that first beast is described with seven heads, and ten horns (Apoc. 13.1.)
and so is this Beast also; Apoc. 17.3. I answer; that the first Beast (which
is certainly Imperial Rome in her Civil state) has great conformity, in
power, and dominion, with this Beast, which also is the very same with the
second Beast before) and therefore this Beast here ( Cap. 17. 3.) is described
much according to the same fashion, with the said first Beast; because of the
resemblance, and similitude, which this does carry of that; having a like
superiority, a like souereigntie, doing all, that the said first beast could
do (as it is said precisely of the second Beast; Apoc. 13.12. being the same
with this) and persecuting the sincere professors of Christian Religion, as the
first also did persecute the Christian Martyrs: and as the first Beast had ten
horns (even as Daniel also did foretell in the Roman Empire) so this Beast
(which is Antichrist) has ten Kings, by whose subjection he does support his
dominion; and, by their service unto him, does reign powerful, and shall
continue in great honor, till these Kings (withdrawing their obedience from
the Beast) shall also consume his seat; which is the true, naturally,
unforced, and certain interpretation of this Scripture. So that the similitude
of their seven heads, and ten horns, does no more prove the said first
Beast (Apoc. 13.1.) to be the same with this Beast ( Apoc. 17.3.) then that the
first Beast is the same with the Dragon; who is also said to have seven heads,
and ten horns; as it is Apoc. 12.3. Finally observe; that if the said first
Beast (Apoc. 13.1.) be Antichrist (and so be the same with the Beast, Apoc.
17.) then it follows, that after Antichrist (whom yet the Papists hold to be
the last Potentate in the earth; and to reign but three years, and an half)
another Beast, or another Potentate, must arise; having as great authority,
and power as the first; for so it is said; Apoc. 13.11, 12. I saw another
Beast: and this second Beast did all, that the first could do; which
consequence stands not (as you see) with their position.

It remains therefore still (and so shall it ever be) most clear, most
conformable to all reason, and judgment (as a point most fairly deduced,
without any difficulty, or absurdity) that since the Pope reigns thus in
Babylon (upon the exclusion of the Emperor, and decay of the Empire) therefore
this Babylon is not the City alone, but Ecclesiastical Rome, as it is the
seat of the Pope; advanced, and bearing rule therein; according to the
Prediction of Saint Paul, and the Vision of Saint John, both concurring (as you
may evidently perceive) in one, and the same issue; which being of special
importance, I have therefore insisted very long upon it; and so I hasten unto
the fifth proof of my assertion, wherewith I will speedily conclude this whole
point, and, with it, the first part of this discourse.

FIFTHLY then, and lastly, I prove my assertion to be true, in regard of the
markeable corruptions, and abominations in Rome; for which she shall be
destroyed by the just, and severe judgment of God; as Ribera, and Viegas, do
both confess, upon the certain, and indubious evidence of the sacred Text.
Since therefore all the iniquities, and impieties, for which Rome deserves the
name of Babylon in this Scripture, are pregnantly, and notoriously found in
Ecclesiastical, or Papal Rome (as I will demonstrate in the next, and second
part of this Sermon; wherein we shall behold the similitude betwixt the two
Babylons; the Mother in East, and the Daughter in the West; the literal, and
the spiritual) and since the justice of God will punish Babylonian Rome, in
her second, and latter condition (after her Ethnicall estate is past) because,
in this latter condition, she will imitate the wickedness of Rome in her
former, and so become a Babylon again (as these Jesuits infer out of the
Text) and indeed she is now, and long has been, such a Babylon in regard of
these iniquities (whereof I shall presently entreat) therefore Ecclesiastical,
or Papal Rome is Babylon; truly to be styled with that name, and justly to
be destroyed for that cause.

The impieties, to be found in Babylon, are found in Ecclesiastical Rome: how
can she, then, avoid her title; but that she is Babylon? or how can she
escape her ruin; but that she shall fall? as the Angel does here proclaim;
It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon, etc.

Thus now, at the length, I have finished the fourth, and last interpretation
of this name [Babylon] being the subject of my Text, and containing the sin
of Rome. For as Solomon ascended, by several steps, unto his Royal Throne,
so, by certain gradations, we have passed, from one point unto another, till
we arrived unto the true, certain, and indisputable knowledge of this
mystical name; which, in many Ages, has so much exercised the wit of many
learned men.

FIRST; some conceived, that this name was imposed upon the general society
of the wicked: but we have proved that it does belong unto a particular place.

SECONDLY; some conceived that this particular place is Rome indeed; howbeit in
her Ethnicall estate only, which is past long since: but we have proved that
it is Rome in another estate also, succeeding after the Ethnicall, by the
testimony of learned Jesuits, founded upon the plain, and certain sense of
this holy Writ.

THIRDLY; whereas they lay the scandal of this name, and crime thereof, upon
the City alone (but not upon the Church of Rome) and upon the City also,
after her defection from the Pope (but not before) therefore we have proved,
that this mystical name belongs truly, and properly unto Ecclesiastical, or
Papal Rome, according to the present condition, wherein she continues, after
many Ages, and shall so remain, until her doleful ruin. In a word then:
this BABYLON is Rome, and no other place: it is Rome in her present condition
also, and not only past: it is Rome, not only in regard of the City, fallen
from the Pope, but as it is the Papal Seat, and flourishing under the Pope;
whose power shall one day fall with her glory; the Whore being burnt with
fire, and the Beast being destroyed by the united forces of the ten Kings; who
have loved the Whore, and honored her Beast, but shall mortally, yea
immortally, hate them both.

And now, in this explication of Babylon I do so securely, and confidently
reappose, that I do not esteem it probable only, and in such a measure, that
no Babylonian can lay the like probability upon any other PERSON, except the
Pope, to be the Antichrist, foretold by Saint Paul [2. These. 2.3.] and to be
the second Beast, foreseen by Saint John [Apoc. 13.11.] nor upon any other
PLACE, except Rome Ecclesiastical, to be this Babylon in my Text; but I
esteem it to be so certain, so clear, so easy, and so fairly deduced unto
the understanding of every ingenious Auditour, that no Babylonian, though he
bark at it, shall bite it in sunder, nor ever be able, with Art, Learning,
Judgment, and Conscience, sufficiently to refute the same.

Here then is place of admiration, as well as of commiseration, to behold so
many blind Babylonians, that do not, or rather will not see the truth, but run
on with prejudice against it, and never reflect, with an indifferent mind,
toward it: abusing their wit to folly, their learning to ignorance, their
study to vanity, their talent to loss, and their time to unprofitableness
in this dispute. Shall I then inueigh against their courses in this behalf?
No; I will pray for them, with the earnest zeal, and tender affection of my
heart. O Lord, open thy truth unto the knowledge of their hearts, and frame
their hearts unto the obedience of thy truth; that, searching for Babylon, they
may find it; finding it, may hate it; hating it, may fly it; flying it, may
give notice of it unto others; that they, who are fallen, may come out of it;
and they, who are falling, may not come into it; but live in thy fear, and dye
in thy favor, to their unspeakable comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord;
Amen.

The SECOND Inquisition; Why this name of Babylon is imposed upon
Ecclesiastical, or Papal ROME.
THough the greatest difficulty, in my Text, be now past (for that we have
now a sufficient notice of Babylon; and do understand, that Papal Rome is the
spiritual Babylon therein) yet we must discover, what is the conformity
betwixt the old Babylon, in the ancient Prophets [ Esaias, and Ieremy] and the
new, in our prophetical Evangelist Saint John; that the knowledge of the first
may conduct us unto the knowledge of the second.

Wherefore, though the Jesuits, finding Rome to be Babylon in two estates (the
one Ethnicall, and past; the other Antichristian, and to come, as they suppose)
do here compare Rome with Rome it self: Rome, in the latter condition, with
Rome in the former; and so seek out the correspondencie of Antichristian Rome
with Ethnicall Rome; yet I will now disclaim that manner of proceeding, and
rather follow the purport of the Scripture, then the practice of the Jesuits
in this kind. First; because I do not yet sufficiently conceive the said
twofold estate of Rome, in this Chapter (as they pretend) to be vayled under
this name of Babylon; as if Rome near twice here entitled with that name; but
that she is certainly called here by this name, after the extinction of
Ethnicall Idolatry, and after her reception of the Christian Faith; and after
the decay of the Roman Empire; and as she was to be under Antichrist; which
estate, we say, is already come, and the Papists expect it, as yet to come,
near upon the end of the world. Secondly; because Saint John, in this Chapter
(according to the vision, offered unto him) does only compare Rome with Babylon
(that famous City of Chaldaea, the last Seat of the first Monarchy) and
compares it with Babylon, not only in the very words of the Prophet Esaias
[21.9.] here repeated in my Text, and reinforced, to the same purpose, by the
Prophet Jeremy [51.8.] but by many other sentences, and passages, exemplified
(as it were) out of those Prophets, and translated into this place.

I proceed, therefore, now (according to my design) to show you the
resemblances (not all, but some) betwixt that Babylon in Asia, and this in
Europe (the first being so, in a litterall name; the second, in a mystical
sense) whereby we shall easily perceive, that Rome does truly communicate with
her, in the similitude of her name, because she does aptly resemble her, in the
quality of her sins; according to that excellent rule of Tertullian, in this
behalf; Scriptura diuina vtitur translatione nominum, ex comparatione
criminum; The Scripture does use a similitude of names, from the comparison of
crimes. So it is, Esaias 1.10. The Princes of Jerusalem are called the Princes of
Sodom. So it is, Ezekiel. 16.3. where the Father of the Jews is called an
Amorite, and their Mother an Hittite. Then he adds; Sic and Babylon, etc. and
so Babylon in the visions of S. John carries the figure, of the Roman City;
being therefore great, proud in her Empire, and a persecutor of the Saints.

This is the comparison (in three points, as you hear) which Tertullian framed
betwixt Babylon in Chaldaea, and the City of Rome. But either Rome, in that
Ethnicall state, was not this Babylon (of which Saint John does speak) or, at
the least, it being Babylon, afterward in another estate (as the Jesuits
confess) we must now enquire, what are the crimes of Rome (as she is Babylon
in latter times) and how the similitude, therein, does stand betwixt that
litterall Babylon in the East, and this mystical Babylon in the West.

And now, because we live in the time of the event of things, and see that, by
experience, in Rome, which Tertullian could not foresee in his judgment
(nothing being less to be suspected in his days, then that the Pope should
invade the Imperial Seat, and that Papal Rome should be spiritual Babylon)
and therefore, looking barely into the prophecy, could not compare it with the
effects of the time (as we may do; this being the true, and proper means to
expound all obscure prophecies; as Irenaeus does well observe; lib. 4. c. 43.)
therefore I will proceed a little beyond the two crimes of pride, and cruelty
(which Tertullian found in the Ethnicall State of Rome) and make an addition of
some other offenses, which went before in litterall Babylon, and now follow
after in Papal Rome. The points, then of comparison, betwixt these two, being
many (for now plenty it self has made me poor) I will select five, at this
time; which also I shall rather briefly note, then copiously discuss.

The FIRST Comparison, betwixt Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome.
THe first point, wherein this comparison does stand, is IDOLATRY; it being a
peculiar invention of Babylon (as Saint Ambrose does relate; in Romans 1.23. (and
thence derived unto other Nations of the world. This sin of Idolatry is a
regnant sin in Ecclesiastical Rome; which is thence commended, and commanded
unto the whole Church of God; and this Idolatry I note specially in four
particulars.

The FIRST particular instance of Romish Idolatry, is in their Sacramental
adoration; where a creature is worshipped in stead of the Creator; bread in
the place of the body of Christ (for the worship of Christ's humane Nature
flows from the union thereof with his divine Person: and the same worship,
which is due unto Christ, as he is the Son of God, the Papists, therefore,
give unto bread, as being transubstantiated into his body; which, by
concomitancie, is knit unto his Divinity) and all this Idolatry is founded
upon their false interpretation of these words; This is my body: that is, say
they, The bread is now become his body, by a substantial conversion: which is
contrary to the nature of a Sacrament; where there is a corporal absence of
the thing it self, represented in the sacrament, but yet it is joined, by
sacramental union, with the sign thereof; as Irenaeus does truly affirm; It
is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things; an
earthly, and an heavenly; lib. 4. c. 34. Where are those two things (in the
Popish Eucharist) those two Res? For to say, there are the accidents of bread
[colour, figure, taste, etc.] and the substance of Christ's body, it does not
satisfy this definition of Irenaeus; and it is repugnant to the plain
resolution of an ancient Bishop of Rome (Gelasius by name) who says expressly,
That the substance, and nature, of bread, and wine do remain in the
Sacraments: unto whom the learned Father, Theodoret, does evidently subscribe;
saying, That the mystical Symbolls [of bread, and wine] go not out of their
proper nature, but do remain, in their former substance, after their
sanctification. Whence it is, that Cyprian first, and Augustine after him,
speak both in one sentence; viz. Sacraments bear the names of the things,
whereof they are Sacraments; there is the name of the thing, by Sacramental
appellation, and there is the thing by Sacramental union: but there is not the
thing it self, by substantial mutation of the former element; for what
absurdities, and blasphemies must then succeed? viz. Worms breed out of the
body of Christ; Dogs, and Cats eat the body of Christ; which things
sometimes do, or may come to pass, upon their reservation of this Sacrament,
if their opinion thereof were true.

But now, since, in the clear purpose of Christ (according to the judgment of
the ancient Church) there is, in the Sacrament of his body, true, and
substantial bread (yet remaining after Consecration) and the same is not, by
any supernatural operation, converted into the substance of his body (which
yet the Papists pretend to be the only substance there, and vayled under the
accidents of bread) what is, or can be, or ever has been, palpable Idolatry,
if this be not, to give divine worship (due unto Christ, first, as he is God,
and then to the Manhood, as it is joined by personal union with the Godhead)
unto a piece of bread (for so I am forced to speak, in regard of the true
substance thereof; though it be now no common bread, but Sacramental, and, in
a manner, divine) unto the work of our hands, even unto that, which, being
masticated in the mouth, digested in the stomach, is finally eiected into the
draught? Whose heart may not tremble in the apprehension of such blasphemous,
and unlearned follies?

If any man say (as King Henry the Eighth once spoke to this effect) That,
since I conceive there is now no bread in the Sacrament, but only the body of
Christ; and do found this my conceit upon the words of Christ (saying; This is
my body) and thereupon, out of this persuasion of my heart, do give divine
worship unto the Body of Christ, which I suppose to be vayled in the figure of
bread, this is now no Idolatry in me, if indeed the bread it self do still
remain; for, in the act of my understanding, I worship not any bread, but the
body of Christ alone.

I answer; thy false opinion does not excuse thine Idolatrous act. For if a
misguided opinion could simply defend thee in this case, then the Pagans were
no Idolaters, when some, in rude ignorance, worshipped stocks, and stones,
supposing the Idol to be a very God; or, at the least, they, who were more
acute, and learned, did conceive that the Deity did dwell, and inhabit
therein (as Olympius, a Philosopher, did instruct the people; Sozom. l. 7. c.
15.) and, therefore, according to their persuasion, they also committed not
Idolatry, in the prostitution of their bodies unto Statues, and Images, which
have a powerful force to inchant the mind.

Again; whereas some may perhaps imagine, that, if this be an act of Idolatry
in the Papists, yet it is a material Idolatry, rather then a formal, because
there is such a Christ, and there is such a body, to which divine worship is
due, though this body be not thus substantially in the Sacrament, where they
adore it; I answer; that, in the judgment of Saint Augustine, the Israelites
did thus adore the golden calfe; not taking it to be God, but that God was
present in it; yet their action was Idolatry; and so is this in the Papists,
even formal Idolatry, because, though there were a Deity, to be worshipped,
yet it was not to be worshipped in this matter, nor manner: and so, though
there be a body of Christ, which is to be worshipped, yet it is not in this
place, not under these accidents; under which, and with which, there is bread
still, and therefore no body of Christ, and therefore not to be worshipped
there; and consequently, this Popish worship, though it be intentionally done
to Christ's body, yet it is really done to the very bread; since bread is there,
and the body is not there.

If any man reply, and say; When Christ himself conuersed hereupon the earth
(and might then truly receive divine adoration, in his humane nature) suppose,
that a stranger had worshipped Saint John, in stead of Christ; was this
Idolatry, when only the party was mistaken ( John, for Christ) and the error
was only in the application of the worship unto the particular subject, there
being then a Christ to be worshipped thus; though John was not that Christ?
This was not Idolatry; or, if it were any, it was material; it was not formal.

I answer; that this Idolatry is indeed purely material, in regard of the
mistaken subject (since Christ was then upon the earth, and was capable of this
divine worship in his humane nature, wherein he then lived here, and wherein
afterward he did suffer, and die here) and this is not formal; since there
was such a Christ, and was then so to be worshipped, in the carnal presence
of his real body. But this supposed case differs very much from the Popish
adoration: because Christ's body is never really present in the Sacrament
(according to their fained conversion of the bread into it) there is no such
presence taught by him, there was none such believed by the ancient Church: but
he is corporally in Heaven, he reigns there, he remains there, and, by
local motion, he shall from thence descend, visibly, at the last day.
Therefore; since there is no such corporal presence of Christ (as the Papists
conceive) in the Sacrament, but this is fiction of their own, a false opinion
of their own, without the warrant of Christ's word (nay against the warrant of
the same) I conclude, that their adoration of Christ's body there (which is not
there) is Idolatry; clear, and gross Idolatry; materially (because Christ's
body is not there, but bread alone) and formally; because they have not his
word for their warrant (that there is ever any such presence at all) but they
have falsely, foolishly, blasphemously devised this presence, out of their own
brains, and so adore the work of their own invention; which conceit, being
totally erroneous (in matter; which is not there present: and in form; which
was never prescribed unto them, for any such presence) it leaves them to be
totally Idolatrous, both materially, and formally; pure IDOLATERS, without all
possibility of defense. Where are now the reconcilers of light, and darkness,
that can reconcile a Protestant with a Papist in this high, and important
Mystery? wherein, if Papists err, they err as intolerable Idolaters,
worshipping a breaden God: if Protestants err, they are blasphemers,
heretics, and insufferable wretches, to traduce the ordinance of Christ, and
the practice of his Church. One of these two inferences must necessarily ensue;
and, which is truest, I need not say, where the conscience of every auditour
can ease me of that pains. Wherefore I proceed unto the other instances,
which I will handle more succinctly, for that this is a capital point; unto
which therefore I have assigned the first place in this dispute.

The SECOND instance, then, concerns their adoration of Images (as they call
them; but Idols, as they use them) unto which they ascribe the very same
worship, which is due unto the thing it self; of dulia unto the Image of Saint
Peter; of hyperdulia unto the Image of the blessed Virgin; of Latria unto the
Image of Christ, or any representation of God. So many, and such adorations, as
they give unto the very things (exhibited, and remonstrated unto them,
respectively, in every Image) the very same (no lesser, nor other) they give
unto the Images thereof; with the same reverence of mind, with the same
gesture of body, elevation of eyes, extension of hands, contusion of the
breast, with genuflexion, prostration, and whatsoever act is due, in their
conceit, distinctly unto Peter, Mary, and Christ himself; and their reason is,
because, with one act of understanding, they assume the Image, and the thing it
self, into their apprehension, there uniting them in one notice, and in one
worship.

O subtilitie! which as the poor ignorant people cannot reach unto (seldom,
or never practicing according to this rule) so the more ancient Papists did not
attain unto it, in former ages; when Images were reputed historical
resemblances, and Laymens Books, and then motiua obiecta; objects, whose
sight did excite, and stir up the mind, unto a contemplation of the things,
represented in the same. But now these observations, and courses cannot content
them; for, by a relative worship of the Image, terminated (forsooth) in the
thing it self, they are ascended unto such a speculation, by their witty
foolerie, that Christ, and his Image have one, and the same worship, from a
Papist, in his soul, and body. Why then did Epiphanius deface an Image, for
fear of Idolatry, if this be none? Why did Serenus Bishop of Massilia break
the Images, if this be not Idolatry? Yea Gregory himself, disapprouing the
fact of Serenus, does yet reprehend the popular adoration of Images in that
time; which certainly did not exceed (if it did equal) the Papisticall in our
days. And though Doctor Carrier (who seemed not therein to understand the
Papists, or not himself) pretends gloriously in his Letter to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, that the point of Images, and the worship thereof, is a
small matter, of none offense, etc. yet my eyes, my heart, do teach me
otherwise; and therefore, notwithstanding all their sophistical distinctions,
I must resolve with Erasmus; It is more easy to take Images out of the Church,
then to define, by what reasons they may stand therein.

Finally; their doctrine, in this point, is so false (contrary to Gods Word, to
the judgment of the ancient Fathers, to the opinion of many former Papists
also) and their practice so wicked, that, in this odious, and execrable
Idolatry, you may see the old Babylon revived in the new; which, varying from
the Scripture, from the Church (yea from her self) comes more nearly unto
the pattern of Babylon, whose name she bears, and (as you may easily see)
she bears it not in vain; but the daughter, daily going forward in the
courses of her Idolatry, will, at the last, excel her Mother; notwithstanding
all her distinctions: to which she may add this; viz. There is a double
Idolatry; Ethnicall, and Christian; or rather Antichristian: as we shall yet
more evidently discern.

The THIRD instance concerns their exorbitant, and irregular adoration of the
Pope. For howsoever they delay the heat of the matter with the cool water of
a moist, and empty distinction (as the oppressed Emperor Barbarossa spoke
under the feet of the insulting Pope; non tibi, sed Petro; not to thee, but
unto Peter I submit my self, even to this base conculcation: to whom the Pope
answered again; Et mihi, and Petro; it is unto Peter, and also unto me: or
else by some other evasion of civil, religious, and divine worship, or the
like) yet, if we consider, with what opinion of his excellency (which they
attribute unto this Babylonian Idol) they adore the Pope; what Divinity, in
regard of his pretensed office, they ascribe unto his insolent person; and
lastly, with what power, and authority they inuest him we may well perceive,
that this is Idolatry, and not of the meanest degree.

Hence it is, that, immediately upon his election, so soon as ever he is now
Sanctissimus, the most holy Lord (howsoever wicked before) the Cardinals come
to their service of adoration (for so is the very term, imposed upon this
solemn action) and, with most kisses of his sacred feet (for he is greater
then Kings, who vouchsafe us the kisses of their hands) every Cardinal does
perform his homage, in sign of subjection unto the new aspiring Potentate of
the earth. And because this action should better express their Idolatry in
this point, his new Holyship is advanced upon an Altar (the place of the God of
their Mass; the Idol of bread) and (as I have understood by the relation of
others) he is there, or thence adored, as the God of the Church, the God of the
World of which presumptuous Titles I shall speak more in a more convenient place
of my discourse. And the truth is, though this adoration may seem too much,
yet it is the less to be admired in them, if we consider, that, in the opinion
of his Babylonian vassals, he is a pardoner of sin, and a deliverer from pain;
that, can, by his Pontificial authority, draw souls out of Purgatory; that
can depose Kings; that can dispose Kingdoms; that can absolve subjects from
the strong obligations of Oath, and Nature; that can absolve Princes from the
bond of a just, and necessary Oath, made unto their Subjects (as in the case of
our King Henry the Third, whence ensued the public calamity of this Kingdom)
that can dispense against the Scriptures; that can define matters of faith, as
infallibly as the Scriptures; yea, says Gregory de Valentia (a Jesuit; for
who, but a Jesuit, were a fit Author for so strange a speech?) that cannot
err, that must be believed in his Pontificiall definitions, Whether he use
diligence, or not, in understanding, and determining the point; for we believe
that, if he will pastorally define any thing, with purpose to bind the Church
unto his definition, he shall not, he cannot err therein. So writes the
Jesuit in his Analysis fidei. O sure anchor of their Religion; the rock
(their petra) upon which Christ builds his Church, and they their faith. Do
you marvel, then, at the outrageous title, ascribed unto him, by a Canonist
(the same being printed, and reprinted, and never corrected) that this second
Beast in Babylon should bear the the style of Dominus noster, Deus Papa? Our
Lord God the Pope? And do you marvel, that, whom they so extol in dignity,
more then all Kings, they should so adore with worship, no less then a God? If
this be not Idolatry, what is Idolatry, and what does deserve that name? The
child humbles himself unto his Father; the subject unto his Prince; and this
honor is due. If you will call it adoration (though the word be not received
publicly into such use) I will admit it, because it is a civil action,
founded upon the Word of God, and warranted by the examples of his Saints; in
regard of a certain divine authority, which, by Gods holy ordinance, does
shine in their persons. But since the Pope assumeth this honor (of an higher,
and different nature also) without the warrant of Gods Word, and against the
rule of Gods Word, with immoderate exaltation (as Gerson spoke of Popes in his
time; volunt adorari, vt Dij; they will be adored as Gods; yea by Kings also,
who are the Gods of this earth; by Gods own approbation; for so he speaks
also of inferior Magistrates; Psalm. 82.1.) unto which as he has no proper
right (by any warrant from God) so no mortal man (the greatest Sovereign that
is, or ever was; were he the only Lord of all the World; as the Pope does
gladly believe of himself; and there are sundry Babylonian Parasites, that
applaud his insolency in this kind) can have right by Gods Word, unto the
like; I conclude, therefore, that this adoration of the Pope (the God of
Babylon) is Idolatry, and such as is not to be found any where, but in Rome,
where the Pope sits in the Temple of God, lifting up himself above all,
that is called God. Saint Paul says not, that, which Is God (to wit in nature;
for so the Pope pretends a subjection unto Christ) but that, which is called
God (to wit in title, and office; as Kings are most properly) for, above all
such Gods, this man of sin does exalt himself (as you have heard a little
now, but shall hear more anon) howbeit also it is true, that he exalts
himself above the God of Heaven, and earth; while he makes the state of
Religion to depend upon the oracle of his mouth, corrupts the Sacraments,
mutilateth them, depriueth the people of Gods allowance unto them in the holy
Cup, peruerteth the condition of the Church, makes himself a Monarch therein,
trampleth upon the Crowns of Kings, dispenses against Gods Word, makes that
lawful, which God made unlawful (in subjects to rise against their
Souereignes) makes that unlawful, which God made lawful (in the Clergy to
have their wives) and so, in these, and other courses, sets himself against
God, and above God, as some do understand that Scripture; 2. Thessal. 2.4.
Both these expositions are true, and, according to both, the Papal Monarch
does so advance himself, that he is adored with divine worship, rather then
civil, and humane.

The Fourth, and last, instance concerns their invocation of Saints; which
has sundry ingredients of Idolatry, of which it is compounded; as you may
observe by four particular points.

The First point is, by taking away that right which is incommunicably proper
unto God alone, as the tribute of Mankind, payable only unto him, in the two
duties of Prayer, and Thanksgiving: so that this very term [of Inuocation]
without injury unto the divine Majesty, cannot be impropriated unto Saints;
as the Papists do commonly use the same; de sanctorum Inuocatione, being the
title of Bellarmines dispute: Li. 1. de Sanct. c. 15. Which word the Scripture
(containing the Mother-language of the children of Gods Church) does peculiarly
attribute unto our Religious service of God; Inuoca mae, etc. Call upon me, in
the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee; Ps. 50.15. And, quemodo
inuocabunt, etc. how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
Romans 10.14. For this cause the Scripture directs us ever unto God in the Old
Testament; and thus, according to the tenor of the New, all our petitions are
framed in the name, and mediation of Jesus Christ, our Lord: neither is there
any one syllable in all the New Testament, teaching (by precept, or by example)
any other course of Prayer, unto, or by any other Mediator (of Redemption, or
Intercession: there being but one of both) then only by Jesus Christ. As for
the Old, though some inconsiderate, and more dull Babylonians, did heretofore
produce sundry passages out of it, to prove their invocation of Saints, yet
the latter, and more circumspect, have utterly forsaken that course, as
implying a contradiction; because the souls of the ancient Fathers, being then
in limbo, and secluded from the vision of God (which vision of God is the
ground of their petitions unto Saints, as therefore having a knowledge, in him,
of our requests unto them, etc.) they were then incapable of our requests. So
then, neither in the Old Testament (as they confess) nor in the New (as I dare
confidently avouch) is there extant one precept, one example, one proof
directly, or indirectly, by any plain assertion, or clear deduction, that any
such prayer is to be made by us unto Saints, or that any such was ever made
unto them, by any Apostle, Evangelist, Pastor, Doctor, or any faithful
Christian whatsoever: till, at length, either uncertain tradition was
pretended without the written word, or humane persuasion (guided by carnal
affection, and a perverse, but pleasing, imitation of the Gentiles) gave an
entrance unto this error at the beginning; which, standing rather by example
of men, then by the Law of God, gained a daily increase; and finally, from a
lesser, to a greater degree, is come unto such an exorbitancie, that the Mother
of Christ has ten petitions made unto her, in stead of two, that are made unto
her Son; besides innumerable requests, tendered unto inferior Saints.

The Second point is, that Papists take, hereby, Gods authority from him, and
confer it upon the Saints; which is to make them Idols, by advancing them in
the place, and office of God: and this appears in all kinds of things, which
we can desire of God. In things Spiritual; as, increase of grace, faith,
defense from the Devil, etc. which they entreat of Saints, not only as
suitors for them, but as collators of these benefits. Wherefore they pray thus
unto the blessed Virgin; Tu nos ab host protege, Et hora mortis suscipe: Da
nobis virtutem contra hosts tuos: Defend us from the enemy; receive us in the
hour of death; give us strength against thine enemies. So that, in, and upon
the point of death, the mouths of the sick (if able to speak) sound still;
Jesus, Maria; (joining them both together; and it is well, that they give the
precedencie unto the Son, since they often call upon her, with these
blasphemous words; Monstra te esse Matrem; Iure Matris impera: Show thy self a
Mother; command him, by the right of a Mother, etc.) or others, standing by,
sound it in their ears with their loudest voice, and strongest sides; which I
have sometimes heard, and do now remember, with unspeakable grief.

In things Eternal; for they pray unto Saints, that they would open heaven
unto them, and receive them into their joys; and particularly unto the blessed
Virgin; to whom all the petitioners do especially resort (even with the plain
neglect of Christ) by reason of fabulous stories, and fond visions.

In things Corporal; for as particular Saints (in the simple dotage of these
blind Babylonians) have a particular care of certain creatures, and a gift of
cure for their maladies (so S. Anthony is for Hogs; S. Roch for Dogs; S. Low
for Horses; whereof I have seen a fair company, tied about his Chapel, in
the time of Mass, celebrated therein, that came for help unto that Hospital)
so they have a faculty, or power, to heal particular diseases in men: for
here, again, S. Anthony is a special Saint for the fire, which therefore
bears his name; but (not to be tedious also, in so ridiculous a point) S.
Mumlyn is the only Saint for teeth, near the City of S. Omer: thither the
tender Infants (vexed with breeding their young teeth) are carried in their
mothers arms, and commended, by them, unto the pity of that obscure Saint,
from whom (upon my certain knowledge) one Infant never obtained remedy, but
dyed, without any compassion, or relief, from any Saint; either he, or she.

The Third point is, that, hereby, the Babylonians take Gods privilege from
him, and bestow it upon others, by granting unto Saints the knowledge of our
cogitations, and hearts, which are the Sanctum Sanctorum, into which God alone,
and no man (living in earth, or in heaven) can enter. But, say they, the Saints
have a fruition of God, and so, in him, a vision of our hearts, and of other
things; of which silly pretense, and witty delusion, I will speak more in the
fourth point; which does presently ensue. Mean while; if this fruition of God
be the cause, that they do so confidently invoke the Saints in heaven; then
may the Father make a petition unto his Child-Saint, who, deceasing after
baptism (wherein original sin is forgiven) before the commission of an
actual sin, goes certainly to heaven, and has there the fruition of God;
and, by vision in him, may be a petitioner for his Father, who is a petitioner
unto him. What is the impediment, or defect? what impeachment is there of this
practice? unless they say; either that the Father is not certain of the
intention of him (or her) that baptized his child; and so the want of due
intention makes a nullitie in the Sacrament, and consequently leaves his
child in the state of damnation [o pitiful doctrine; yet such is theirs] or
else, that so young a Saint deserved not the grace to be a Mediator, to
receive petitions from us in earth, nor to present them, with effect, unto God
in heaven. I have spoken for the Babylonians, what I can, in this case; if they
can say more for themselves, they shall have audience, when they please.

The Fourth point is, that, hereby, they ascribe such an omnisciencie, or
knowledge of all things (and that in an instant) unto the Saints, whereof no
creature (though beatified) is, or may be capable, by the evidence of
Scripture, or consequence of reason. Let us then put the case, as a thing
possible (which is very probable also) that, in one indivisible point of time,
a million (yea many millions) of suitors make their petitions unto the blessed
Virgin, by prayers conceived in the heart, or uttered with the mouth (for that
is all one, in effect, since the Saints know our petitions in God) which need
an immediate success; the same prayers also, being often diverse (and sometimes
contrary) in regard of the matters, which they concern. Now consider the
absurdity of the Babylonians in this behalf; that the blessed Virgin
instantly hears (or rather sees) all their prayer; instantly presents them
unto God; instantly sends such a variety of helps unto her distressed
suitors. This is not to beatifie a soul, but to deifie a creature; to make it
a God, at the second hand; to give that knowledge of all things unto a Saint,
which, being in God, cannot, without communication of the Godhead, be derived
unto any Creature. Therefore only the Son of God, and the Holy Ghost, have a
knowledge of all things with the Father, because the person of the Son is
from the Father; and the person of the Holy Ghost is from them both; with the
communication of Deity to the Son in his generation, and to the Holy Ghost
in his procession. But since every blessed soul remains in the condition of
a creature, in substance (though glorious) in knowledge (though increased)
therefore it has a finite knowledge; for as the state of beatitude requires a
great addition of knowledge, so the state of a creature requires a
determination of knowledge; whereas the Babylonians extend it infinitely, by
the vision of God, in whom these souls see all things, as they suppose

This general error is ancient, and the special author of it is venerable;
S. Gregory the Great: but not so great, that, without any Scripture to justify
this point, we should subscribe unto his assertion. Yea, but it is his fair
conclusion, inferred out of a true position. How? Vident videntem omnia: the
Saints see him, that sees all things. What then? Ergo vident omnia: therefore
they see all things. It seems to be an ingenious, but it is no substantial
inference. Let us examine the position, and then the conclusion, deduced out of
the same.

As concerning the position; it is true: The souls in heaven see God, not
sensibly, with any corporeal eyes, nor imaginarily, in any fancy; but
intellectually, by immediate intuition (without any veil, or other means)
into the divine Essence. But how far forth? Not by total comprehension of
the Deity, which they behold (for so the Son sees the Father; and the Holy
Ghost sees them both) but by such a participation of God, as a creature can
receive, and is necessary unto the blessedness thereof; which consists in the
fruition, and in the vision of God.

The conclusion, therefore, of Gregory (out of the said position) is lame, and
cannot stand by the strength thereof; since he only sees all things in God,
who sees God absolutely, and fully, by comprehension of the Deity; as Christ
sees his Father: but so, and in such a plenitude of vision, no creature can
see the Creator. As for the soul of Christ, that is of an higher knowledge,
because the humane nature has the vision of God, by union with God, in the
person of the Son.

So then, the poor Babylonians are still in the case of Idolatry; for they, by
this falsely conceived omnisciencie in the Saints, translate them, or (to speak
in their own language) transubstantiate them into God. Neither does their
device of Speculum (that God is the looking glass of the Saints, in whom they
see things, as you heard before) relieve them from the crime of Idolatry: for
this conceit issues from the former, and is all one with it in effect; and
both are poor euasions. For though God be a looking glass unto the Saints,
yet he is voluntarium, a voluntary one, to represent, what he will (in the
freeness of his pleasure) not necessarium, a necessary one, to represent unto
the Saints all that, which is in the compass of his excellency, and
knowledge: for then, why should they not as well foresee (or rather see) all
future things, as well as all present things, in him? Finally; if they see all
our prayers, and so all other things in him, by the very nature of their
beatificall vision (as the Babylonians do fondly collect) why then do some of
the ancients teach, that the souls, in heaven, are informed by Angels
(executing a ministerial office here in the earth) of sundry occurrences, that
pass here in the militant Church? Which opinion, standing with good congruitie
of reason (according to the passages of Scripture, and principles in divinity)
does therefore necessarily conclude, against the supposed omnisciencie of the
souls (knowing all things in God by the vision of his divine Essence) that
they have such a latitude of knowledge, as the Babylonians do conceive; but
(as you see) without any sufficient testimony of Scripture, or pregnant
inference, well deduced out of certain, and approved grounds.

Now, as you have heard their Idolatry, in sending up empty, and unfruitful
prayers unto the Saints (for they must convert them into the nature, and
dignity of God, to make them understand the thoughts of our hearts, and the
multitude of occurrences in this world) so behold their Idolatry also in
murmuring out their Pater noster unto Saints (yea, before the Images of Saints)
to whom they direct that excellent, and incomparable prayer; which though
Christ taught us to pour out unto his Father, yet many among them present unto
the Saints. Which practice of simple people, in the Church of Rome, I cannot
say how far the learned do maintain (I have not read, nor did I ever ask
their opinion in this behalf) but I find, that, upon this deep point, an
egregious disputation was held in Scotland (and it is related immediately after
the martyrdom of Adam Wallace, in the Acts, and Monuments of the Church,
published by Master Fox) where some profound Doctors of Babylon did
substantially resolve, that primario, formaliter, principaliter, vltimate, and
capiendo stricte, this prayer may be said only unto God; but secundario,
materialiter, minus principaliter, non vltimate, and capiendo large, it may be
said unto Saints. What is so absurd, and impious, which, by distinctions, may
not be defended in the Church of Rome? And why may not that prayer be directed
by them unto the Saints, since, Dominus being changed into Domina (our Lord
into our Lady) the Psalms of David, whereby he comforted himself in the Lord
his God, are turned by the Papists, into an invocation of our Lady? And why
may not both be done by them, who find such an exact conformity, betwixt our
Savior Jesus Christ, and their S. Francis, that he may also be truly
styled; Jesus Nazarenus, Rex Iudaeorum; Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews?

But since there is no end, in the prosecution of their blasphemous absurdities
in this kind, I will conclude this last point of Romish Idolatry (in their
invocation of Saints) and, finally, observe, that it is an idolatry also in
them, thus to transfer the peculiar, sufficient, and glorious Office of
Christ his Mediatourship unto any Saint; he, or she; though his own Mother,
(toward whom though he bare a filial respect, according to humane nature, yet
you shall never find in his acts, or words, any one passage, or inclination,
which might seem to entitle her unto such exorbitant honor, as the
Babylonians assign unto her; by a boundless, and groundless superstition)
and specially, since, as necessity did not compel them, so no good reason
could persuade them, unto this service. Why? because all, and more is to be
found in Christ, then in any, or in all the Saints, in this behalf. For what
do we, or can we, desire in any intercessor? Power with him, of whom he
does entreat any thing: Affection to them, for whom he does entreat: and a
sufficient Capacity of hearing, and receiving their requests.

First, then for Power with God: have all the Saints so much, as he, with the
Father? who testifies of him; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Matthew. 3.17.

Secondly; for Affection unto us; is any Saint more kind, more loving, more
facill, and gracious? No: none is like unto him. Why? First; because he took
our whole nature (not the person of one man) and espoused it to his own
person: it being truly endued with all natural affections, and sanctified with
grace, without any measure of the Spirit. Therefore, in this regard, he is as
near unto me as any man; nay nearer then all men. And secondly; because, in
this nature, he suffered for me, with passions of body, and soul; he died
for me; he satisfied Gods wrath for me; and so bought me for his own:
therefore, in this regard, I am more dear unto him, then unto his blessed
Mother, or unto all the Saints, that reign with him in glory. Hence it is,
that He sends us not unto them, but calls us unto himself; Come unto me,
etc. Matthew. 11.28.

Thirdly; as for his Capacity of hearing us; who can deny it to be infinite
in him, who, being, God is infinite in every thing? And as for his humane
nature, who can sufficiently judge of the capacity of it also, in this behalf,
which, by the grace of personal union with God (and so by the glory of
extraordinary vision in him) has such a Sea of knowledge, as we are not able
to comprehend in the little shells of our understanding?

Therefore, as Saint Peter said; to whom shall we go, etc. so I say; to whom
shall we rather go, then to him, in whom all these things so happily concur?
Why shall I give his honor away unto another, and thereby take away my comfort
from my self? So shall I be an injurious Idolater against his excellency, and
my own salvation; as they are generally in the Babylonian Church; where the
most sweet inuitations, and comfortable assurances of Christ unto us, are
applied unto his Mother: as; Come you all unto me: and; suffer little children
to come unto me; with other of like nature: which divine sentences I have seen
(for my evidence is from mine own unhappy eyes) appendant, in papers, upon
Tapistrie, or upon the walls of their Chapels, and ascribed unto her (upon a
Festival day, solemnly dedicated unto her service) with this Motto; Intrate
per me, enter in by me [words peculiar, and merely proper unto Christ
himselfe] fairly written, in capital Letters, and placed over the door; to
instruct all men thereby, that came into the Chapel, that they must enter
into the Church, by the invocation of her name, and into Heaven, by the
mediation of her Prayer. Let them now distinguish, again, with stricte, and
large, primario, and secundario, etc. yet their consciences cannot escape the
crime of Idolatry in this course, which they esteem to be very devout, but we
know it to be very profane.

And thus much concerning the first general point of comparison [which is in
the matter of Idolatrie] betwixt the old, and the new Babylon. I proceed,
therefore, unto the second.

The SECOND Comparison betwixt Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome.
THe second point, wherein this comparison does stand, is PRIDE; a sin of
special note in the first Babylon; the Lady of Kingdoms [Esay 47.5.] but
what is her end? Desolation, and ruin. How, and for what cause? I will make
the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and I will cast down the pride of
Tyrants; faith the Lord; Esaias 13.11.

But here the second Babylon exceeds the first; the daughter, coming after
the mother in the order of time, goes before her in the degree of pride. We
have heard of the pride of Moab; he is exceeding proud; says the Prophet
Jeremy; 48.29. So I may say of this Babylonian Beast; his pride, his
arrogancy, his fastuous carriage of himself toward the whole civil State,
and toward the whole Church, is such, as may argue him to be the successor of
Tarquinius Superbus (in whom the Regal authority of ancient Rome did expire)
rather then of Saint Peter, whose succession, and Apostolical power he does
pretend; but without conformity to his Apostolical doctrine in these things;
who teaches all men to be subject unto the King, (...), as to him that
excels, or that is the chief, or (as the very word does bear) that
ouer-haueth; having, indeed, all others under him; 1. Pet. 2.13. Did not Saint
Peter include himself in this precept? Then he was not sincere. Or not his
successors? Then he was defective in this point. But the truth is; he was truly
an humble person (though of a fervent spirit) and prescribes that doctrine,
which he followed, and his successors embraced; acknowledging their due
respect, and service unto the Emperors; till the subject became the Sovereign
of his Prince, and a spiritual Pastor was changed into a temporal Monarch.

Likewise, for the Church of God, the same Saint Peter does thus instruct all
Pastors; To feed the flock of God, etc. [which is an Office now too base for
so great a Monarch] and then, not to comport themselves, as if they were Lords
over the heritage of God; as it is 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. For what is more contrary
to an Apostolical spirit, then pride, exaltation, advancement of themselves,
with the contempt of others? For which cause, the Bishops of Britain (upon the advice of an holy person in those times) rejected Augustine the Monk (whom
Gregory the Great sent into England) and refused to treat with him, when they
discovered the pride, and insolency, which appeared in his demeanure; as
venerable Beda himself (though very favorable to the proceedings of
Augustine) does recount in the History of our English Church.

Now let us observe the Apostolical stomach (for what is not Apostolical in
that seat? a glorious name to ensnare poor seduced souls) of the holy Father
in Babylon; and whether such courses, examples, rules, and ordinances of
monstrous Pride, were ever known, or do remain upon the Records of
Antiquity, even from the beginning of the World, unto this present day, in any
other Monarchy, Kingdom, or State, of whatsoever quality, or degree? This
Luciferian pride (the fittest Epithete for the Papal; you must go into Hell,
and leave the Earth, if you will find the like) does appear in five
particular instances, as being sensible demonstrations of the same.

FIRST; the pride of the holy Father appears in the particular facts of
certain Popes, upon the presumed Souereigntie of their Apostolical seat. He
was a Pope, that crowned, and decrowned Henry the Sixth (the Germane Emperor)
with his foot; showing thereby, that, as the Imperial Crown was under the
Papal, and subject unto his Dominion (even under his foot) so it is in the
Popes great power, upon his holy pleasure, to give Kingdoms, and to take away
Kingdoms; to erect Kings, and to suppress them again; as if they were the
Tennis balls, wherewith his Holiness does play. He was a Pope, who, in
disdain of the Imperial dignity, made Henry the Fourth attend, barelegged,
and barefoot, with his Empress and their son, by way of penance, in the
Winter season, at his Apostolical gates. He was a Pope, that, treading upon
the neck of Frederick Barbarossa, the Emperor, with his Apostolical foot,
insulted gloriously upon the poor dejected Prince, and profanely abused the
sacred Scripture to his Apostolical purpose; Thou shall walk upon the Lion,
and Aspe: the young Lion, and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet; Psalm.
91.13. It is no marvel then, that our King Henry the Second did humble
himself so far, as to kiss the knee of his Legate, whose foot to have
kissed, is a matter of special grace; according to the Constitutions of the
Papal Church; as you shall immediately perceive: for now we insist only upon
the matters of fact, whereof I have made a little remonstrance in a few
examples; referring you unto the Histories, which yield copious testimonies in
this kind.

SECONDLY, then, this pride appears in their own Ceremonial Ordinances,
formally prescribing the courses of humility unto Christian Princes, in their
attendance of the Apostolical Father. There the Emperor holds his bridle,
when the Pope rides in Apostolical pomp; there Kings, and Princes (being
marshalled according to the new Herauldry of Babylon) march before him in their
ranks. Sometimes the Pope being advanced upon men's shoulders, in a goodly
Chair of Apostolical state, the Emperor, and Kings precede, in their due
order, as so many Vshers of his Holiness, who throws abroad his Apostolical
benedictions upon the people, with his sacred fingers. This pride may yet seem
to be humility in comparison of his glorious exaltation in the Church of Saint
Peter (for under his name passes all this exorbitancie) where Monarchs,
humbling themselves upon the ground, meekly kiss his Apostolical feet, and
then are afterward admitted unto so great a favor, as to kiss his cheek.
All which was performed in the person of Charles the Eighth, the French King,
unto Alexander the Sixth, as Guicciar dine relates in his first Book; with
humble service, in so great a Prince, deserves the note of base deiection unto
the Triple-crowned Beast. But thus the purpled Whore can either inchant with
her cup, or subdue with her Sword, the greatest, and most puissant Princes of
the World. Where is the exemplum dedi, from Christ Jesus in this case? The
Vicar, and the Master stand in Diametricall opposition almost in every point,
as well as in this; the Master kissed the feet of his poor Disciples; but
here the Vicar requires the greatest Monarchs unto the kisses of his feet; he
proudly challenges this submission from them: and they basely perform it unto
him; that so he might appear to be, what he is; even Antichrist, Lifting up
himself above all, that is called God.

THIRDLY, this pride appears by his usurpation over the Crowns of Princes;
and that in different manner. Sometimes, by a particular interest; as he
pretended in Scotland, to divert thence the military forces of King Edward the
first. Sometimes by donation, or surrender; as he pretended in England, by the
submission of King John, and therefore called his Son, Henry the Third, by
the ignoble style of his Vassal: and, so, by artificial insinuations, and
colorable Titles, he intrudeth upon several Dominions; to make some special
challenge thereunto.

If no such oblique, and sinister course may serve his turn, yet he has two
other ways, to come unto his designed ends: and that is; either INDIRECTLY,
(and as he is Pastor of the Church) to take Kingdoms from their owners, for
their offenses, and to collate them upon other Princes (as, for example, the
Pope stirred up Charles, the Earl of Angeow against Manfredus, the King of
Sicilia, the true Lord, and possessour thereof by the gift of his Father,
Fredericus the Second; and also the Pope stirred up the said Charle, against
Cunradinus, the Son of Conradus, and Grandchild of the said Fredericus, to
deprive him of his life, and to disseize him of his lawful inheritance in the
Kingdom of Naples: both which Kingdoms he bountifully bestowed upon the said
Charles: in like manner the Pope dealt with John d' Albret, King of Navarre,
and with our late renowned Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, and glorious
name; though not with like event) or else DIRECTLY, and as he is Lord of the
World (from whom all Princes have their dependent power) to bestow them at his
pleasure, as just occasion shall move, and good discretion shall direct his
Holyship in this case; which last opinion has a daily growth in Babylon,
amongst the Parasites of the Court. For you must distinguish, with Gerson,
betwixt Aula, and Ecclesia; the Court, and the Church of Rome.

This Pride, in the head of the Church of Rome, descends unto the members.
For as the Cardinals (who are the great regotiatours in the public affairs
of the world) are the cosins of mighty Kings (who salute them by that affable,
and gracious name; as being glad, and ambitious of the affection of these
purpled Fathers in the Apostolical Court) so the whole body of the shaued
Clergy pretends an exemption from the lawful jurisdiction of their natural
Lords; as being subjects, secundum quid, after a certain manner, or measure;
and a body rather collected, and united under the Pope, then under their own
Souereignes; in whose Lands they received their first breath, and under whose
protection, they enjoy their liuelyhood, with the preservation of their lives.

FOURTHLY, this pride appears in his domination over the whole Church: as
first; that all spiritual power (of order, and jurisdiction) is derived from
his Apostolical Seat; that he can deprive, suspend, excommunicate such, as
withstand his pleasure; that appellations may be made, and, in some cases, must
be made unto him, from the sentences, and censures of Bishops, in all places of
the world; that he may demand, and receive a supply of monyes, and necessaries,
for the use, and benefit of his Apostolical greatness; that he is answerable
to no power in the Church, or State; that he may, by reseruations, and
provisions, bestow Ecclesiastical benefices upon whom he will, in any part of
the Christian world; that he is greater then all the Church, and is, in truth,
and effect, the very Church: which being essentially, in the whole society of
Christians, is representatiuely in a lawful Council, and virtually in the
Pope; so that, finally, the Church, their Mother, is the Pope, their Father;
who is the Lord, the Head, the Guide, the Pastor, the Universal Bishop of the
Church. Which insolences, and oppressions, in the Holy Father, made Gerson
bitterly to complain; That the Head of the Church was grown too heavy for the
whole body thereof; and our learned Countryman, Bishop Grosthead, to
pronounce, That the Church would never be freed from the yoke of her Egyptian
bondage, but by the dint, and edge of a bloody sword.

FIFTHLY, and lastly, his pride appears in his great, and glorious titles;
taken up partly by himself, and partly ascribed unto him by others, with
grateful appobation of the Apostolical Seat. As for example; he is a
Vice-God (as in that inscription; Paulo Quinto Vice-deo: where the numerall
letters, V. L. V. I. V. C. D. make up the fatal number of 666. containing the
mystery of Antichrist his name, Apocal. 13.18.) but this is too little;
therefore he is plainly a God; nay that is too little also; he is our Lord
God; as I showed you once before; and yet sometimes,

Nec Deus es, nec homo, sed neuter es inter vtrumque; Thou, o Sovereign of the
World, art neither God, nor man (therefore Antichrist; for Christ is both) but
art, betwixt both, neither the one, nor the other. He is Dominus dominorum,
quoad potestatem; the Lord of Lords, in regard of his power; though Seruus
seruorum quoad humilitatem (says bald Baldus) the Servant of Servants (and be
it so; but in the sense of Noah, in his malediction of Canaan; Genes. 9.25.) in
regard of his meekness. O meek, and humble Saint; whose ordinary title has
been his Holiness, his Blessedness; more compatible with his Apostolical
office, then his Majesty; which is, indeed, the pleasing, and acceptable
style, unto which their proud, and tyrannical usurpations do aspire. And
therefore this was well attibuted unto Paulus the fifth, by Ludouicus ab
Alcasar, the Jesuit, in his dedicatorie Epistle, prefixed before his miserable
exposition of this mystical book. Yet thou wast more wise, and circumspect, o
noble, and victorious Julius Caesar, that did refuse the title of a King:
and thou wast more modest, o Princely Augustus, that did reject the title
of a Lord. But behold, here is a greater then both; which accepts all,
allows all; as, indeed, challenging a great deal more. Let him then take one
title more, to furnish up his glorious style; he is Lucifer in his pride,
ambition, and insultation over all States, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, as the
pretended Lord of both.

The THIRD Comparison betwixt Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome.
THe third point, wherein this comparison does stand, is INIVRIOVS VIOLENCE
against the Crown Imperial, and Estates of Sovereign Princes; in which
tempestuous courses the Spiritual Babylon of Rome does exceed the Literal in
Chaldea; and the rather, because the later had a special commission in this
behalf, which the former does vainly pretend, by lame deductions, and
inferences, but cannot prove directly by the testimony of any Scripture.

The commission of Nebuchadnezzer was under the warrant of God himself, as
being the executioner of his severe Justice; and therefore God affoordeth him
the title of his Servant, not only for his expedition against Tyrus [Ezek.
29.18.] but against his own people; Ierem. 25.9. Now our Babylonian Monarch,
not by the authority of Gods Word, not by any clear evidence of reason,
founded upon the same, not by any example of his predecessors (or of any other
Bishop) in the more pure, and innocent state of the Church, but, out of his
own appetite, and desire of temporal power (which Christ gave him not, which
the ancient Popes challenged not, which they durst not pretend, nor could they
execute, till the decadencie, and expiration of the Roman Monarchy, in these
occidentall parts) has often thrust the sickle of his forged authority, into
the harvest of other men's Kingdoms.

Witness the distressed King of Navarre, John d' Albret (mentioned before)
sententially deposed by the Pope, and a part of his Kingdom, thereupon,
invaded by his neighbor, the King of Spain.

Witness my dear Country of England, in the time of that unfortunate Prince,
King John; whose Kingdom was, by Papal authority, exposed unto the fury of
the French; the King himself, being compelled (like a silly man) to surrender
his Crown, upon his knees, into the hands of an Apostolical insolent Legate;
and so, remaining, for the space of five days, without a Crown (committed now
unto the benignity of the Church) he received it again, upon such base, and
ignoble terms, as it pleased my Lord, the Legate, to impose upon him: one
whereof was (if the Babylonians say true) that he should hold it, by fealty,
from the Church of Rome, and, for acknowledgement thereof, pay an annual
tribute unto the Pope: so wise, and skillful are these men to fish in troubled
waters; being now, not fishers of men, but fishers of Kingdoms.

Witness England again in the time of King Henry the eight; who, by a Papal
process of Paul the third, was deprived of his Kingdom, and his subjects
commanded, by force, and arms, to eiect him out of the confines thereof: the
success whereof was, for a time, troublesome to the King, but, in the end,
inglorious to the Pope: the tenor of whose roaring Bull, and Capitoline
thunderbolt, deserves your special observation, for that he exciteth the
subjects of England, against their King, by a most impudent, and ignorant
application of the Scripture; We, being placed (says he) in the Seat of
Justice, according to the prediction of the Prophet [Ierem. 1.10.] saying;
Behold, I have set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms to pluck up,
and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down, etc. This is a Text, which
sounded to his purpose; and therefore Carerius (de potest. Romans Pont. l. 1. c.
3.) makes this perverse gloss upon that text; The Prophet Jeremy speaks
this, in the person of Christ, unto the Bishop of Rome; that if Kings be
wicked, he may punish, and correct them. A terrible correction unto a King, to
be deposed from his Imperial Crown, by the Babylonian Beast, and to be
exposed unto the cruelty of his own subjects. This is their art, and this is
their piety, in the exposition of the sacred Scriptures, to bring them unto
their own fancies. But thou, Carerius, and thou, o Paul; you lay violent hands
upon Christian Princes, and upon Gods own Word. You say, that this was spoken
by the Prophet, in the person of Christ [that so you might bring his title, in
this point, unto the Pope, as being his Vicar, and so endued with this power of
deposition, under Christ] but it is not so: for God speaks it precisely unto
his Prophet. You say, that therefore the Pope is placed over all Kingdoms, to
excommunicate Princes, to give away their Kingdoms, etc. It is not so: but God
gives a commission to his Prophet, to denounce his judgments against sundry
Nations (as he does afterward) and to foretell their ruins; according to his
prophetical, and pastoral office, that God did impose upon him to this effect.

But I leave these Babylonians, in their absurd, and presumptuous,
interpretation of the Scriptures, and proceed unto their tyrannical actions.
Witness then, here again, my dear, and native Country, under the most
happy, prosperous, and gracious administration of our late Sovereign Queen
ELIZABETH; twice deposed by these furious Beasts; first, by Pius the fifth, who
bestowed her Kingdom, most liberally, upon the King of Spain (to get it by
Arms, if he could) and this Pontifical donation stands in Azorius, the
Jesuit, for one principal instance, and president of the Papal authority in
this behalf. By virtue (or rather vice) of his Bull, the subjects were
absolved from their obedience; and thereupon some, taking up Arms in the
Northern parts, came unto alamentable, but a deserved end; whose blood, being
shed by the Justice of England, will be justly required of Babylon, the cruel
Mother of her Children; and so shall the blood of many Priests, and other
Romish Catholics, who dyed justly for their transgression of the Statute, made
against Romish Priests (coming into England) and all persons entertaining
them; as culpable of highest treason. Why? for now the Popes Emissaries, the
Priests, came with a resolution to maintain his proceedings: and they, whom
the Priests reconciled, were now spiritual members of that Church, which
sought the perdition, and ruin of their Prince. Was it not now necessary (and
it was not done till now; upon the thirteenth year of her reign) to provide
the antidote of such severe Laws, against the poison of such unnatural
Subjects? Secondly; she was deposed again by Sixtus the fifth, upon the time
of the great invasion, to be executed by that invincible Armado from Spain, in
the year 1588. Near upon which time (by the negotiation of Parsons, the
Jesuit) Allen was promoted unto the dignity of a Cardinal, for the better
accommodation of all matters, in that execrable design: who, therefore, wrote
an Admonition to the Nobility of England; as full of fraud, falsehood, and
impossibility, in that, which he undertook to assure, as of malice, treason,
and villainy against the person of his Sovereign Lady; who, finally, had the
glory in their shame, to the contempt of Babylon, and admiration of the world.

Witness France, in the tyrannical, and proud fury of Boniface the eight (who
came into his Apostolical Seat, like a Fox, reigned in it like a Lion, and
dyed like a Dog) against Philip, surnamed the Fair, whom that Babylonian
Monarch (vendicating unto himself all power, Spiritual in the Church, and
Temporal in the world) deposed sententially from his royal Dignity, and
State; disposing the same, by his Apostolic liberality, unto Albertus, King
of the Romans: but that Heroical, and Magnanimous Prince preserved, and
maintained both, to the great ignominy, and contempt of the usurping Beast.

Witness Germany, where Henry the fourth, by the Papal insolency of Gregory
the seventh (a true, and evident Antichrist) was abandoned by his subjects,
violently persecuted by Henry the fifth, his natural, unnatural son; who,
succeeding in that nominall Empire (the Pope being the real Emperor) was
afterward, by the divine vltion of God (though by the Apostolical operation
of the Pope) forsaken by his own people; the Empire (such as it was) being
collated upon another. What should I say of Philippus, the Emperor (brother of
the said Henry) and Otho, Duke of Saxony, erected, by Pontificiall means,
against the said Philip? Who suffered both under the Babylonian Beast. What
shall I say of Frederick the second (son of the said Philip) persecuted,
circumuented, oppressed by the spiritual Fathers of Babylon? His son also,
Conradus, suffered like outrages by the Father of the Roman thunderbolts,
exciting the Lantgraue of Thuring against him, and persecuting the royal
family of Barbarossa, till it came, finally, unto that ruin, which the
Babylonian Beast did long desire, in his heart, and, at the last, did
effectuate by his means. And now, by the way, we may here observe the
miserable condition of Princes, who must wear the Babylonian yoke, to their
shame, or cast it off, to their danger; standing upon the dreadful terms of
deposition, murder, and other disastrous calamities, when, one Prince being
deposed by Papal fury, another Prince (rather out of desire of his Kingdom,
then out of obedience to the Pope) is ready to invade his Dominions; so that
one of them is made the executioner of another, and all of them instruments of
the Papal Tyranny; till, by this means, the Papal jurisdiction, over them
all, grows strong by prescription [ Nos sanctorum, etc. being a better plea,
for the Popes, in latter Ages, then it was in the time of Hildebrand, the Pope,
who pretended the example of his predecessors, for the deposition of Princes]
and so, in process of time, all Princes (as the Popes do cunningly affect)
shall hold their Kingdoms, as donatiues of the Babylonian Seat.

I am wearied (and so perhaps are you) in the prosecution of this unhappy
argument; wherefore I will gather up my sails, and conclude this tedious
Voyage with two remarkable observations.

The first concerns the Papal intrusion upon the City of Rome it self, the
center of that Empire, whose circumference was so largely extended in the
World; the proper, and peculiar seat of the First Beast (Apocal. 13.1.) till
the Second Beast (Apocal. 13.11.) by his artificial proiects, and the popular
applause of the Citizens, diuested, and disseized the true Lord of his ancient
right. For Leo, the lawful Emperor of Rome, residing in Constantinople (as
many of his Predecessors before him) was excommunicated by Gregory the Second
(bearing the name, but not having the disposition of the first) his subjects
were released (by Apostolical dispensation) from their Oath of Allegiance;
and, upon these proceedings, the Romans (like wicked Traitors) submitted
their City unto the Pope (a more wicked Traitor then they) as unto their
Sovereign Lord; if that be true, which the Jesuit Azorius does affirm;
Instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 4. c. 20. Thus, the old Lord being unjustly
deprived, a new Lord entered unjustly into his place.

The second concerns the Papal intrusion upon Infidels (for he must go out
of the World, that will go out of his reach) upon whose estates also, and
Kingdoms, this Babylonian Monarch stretches out the line of his Apostolical
power. Witness America (poor, distressed America) in the liberal donation of
large, and ample Territories therein, unto the Kings of Spain. For he was a
Pope (but a Catiline, a Judas; the man of sin, or rather of all sins) even
that execrable villain, Alexander the sixth, who, out of his mere motion, and
liberality (as the Beast roareth in his Bull, to that purpose) did bestow all
the great, and mighty Kingdoms, in these parts, upon Ferdinand, King of
Arragon, and Elizabeth Queen of Castile, and upon their heirs for ever.
Therefore Francis Lopez, in his general History of the Western Indies, lib.
1. cap. 19. expressing the title, and interest of the said Princes in these
rich, and spacious Kingdoms, sets down the Bull of Alexander the sixth
(who, out of his Papal authority, and particular affection to his Country,
freely, and powerfully bestowed them upon the said Princes, and their heirs)
to this end, and purpose, That all men may understand (says he) that the
conquest, and conversion of these Countries, which the Spaniards do make, is
by the authority, and donation of the great Vicar of Jesus Christ. Is this,
then, the title, and right, which Spain pretends to have in this new, and
other World? Is this the color, and pretense for the cruel, and infinite
effusion of blood (humane, though not Christian) in these miserable Countries
(whereof Benzo, an Italian, and Bartholomaeus a Casa, himself a Spaniard, do
so pitifully complaint) converted now (as you may perceive) unto Christian
Religion, so powerfully by the Sword? Wherefore I may truly say, that every
drop of Indian blood, shed in this discovery, and conquest, shall be required
of Babylon; as truly guilty of the same; according to the prediction of the
Angel; In her was found the blood of all them, that were slain upon the
earth; namely, in the Dominions of Infidels, as, well as of the Prophets, and
of the Saints, in the Christian World it self. Apocal. 18.24.

And now, because the diligent observation of this particular prepares us unto
a fourth Comparison, betwixt the Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome, therefore I
pray you to cast your eyes back, a little, upon this passage of the Scripture,
that so you may look forward, the better, unto the sequel of my speech. Well
says the Angel, that the blood of ALL MEN, slain upon the earth, was found
in Babylon: for, in her is the blood of these Indians; in her is the blood of
her own Pseudo-Catholikes, shed in England, by the Sword of Justice; in her is
the blood of all them, that perish in, for, or by her designs: in her is the
blood of many Christians, shed for the truth of Gods Word, in so many
Countries; in her is the blood of many thousand persons, shed upon the
contentions of her Popes; in her is the blood of so many people, taking arms,
upon her incantations, against their Sovereign Lords; in her is the blood of
so many thousand Christians, in their unlawful wars against other Princes,
upon her prouocations; in her is the blood of many poor subjects, against whom
she has incited their own Princes. Thus Rome began in the blood of two
brethren; it increased in the blood of many neighbors; it was enlarged by the
blood of many Provinces; it stood in the blood of many subjects; it continued
in the blood of many people; first by Emperors; lastly, by Popes: and it shall
end in the blood of her self, and her followers, as you shall see more
clearly hereafter, when we come unto the second part of my Text. Mean while,
I proceed unto a new comparison, which fitly takes its beginning from the end
of this discourse.

The FOVRTH Comparison betwixt Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome.
THe fourth point, then, wherein this comparison does stand, is CRVELTIE,
bloody cruelty, very spectable in that ancient Monarchy (the figure of the
Papal) as the Scriptures themselves (in the two Prophets; Esaias, and Jeremy)
besides civil Histories, do sufficiently deduce unto our knowledge; unto
which, for brevity sake, I must now remit you; as men expert, and skillful, in
the sacred Sriptures: it being a great part of your happiness, that you have
Gods Word in your own tongue (which many other Nations, though bearing the
name of Christians, do not enjoy) to read it, and observe it, for your
instruction, and unspeakable comfort. Well then; let us leave the first, and
come unto the second Babylon; which, in this point of barbarous, and inhumane
cruelty, exceeds all example of Ages past, and preuenteth the example of all
that are to come, unless it be in the persecutions, which she, perhaps, may
yet raise against the Church of God: for the instruments of cruelty are in
their habitations: which Jacob spoke of his bloody sons; and I may speak it
of our more bloody mother.

Her voice is the voice of blood; Surge Petre [Paule quinte] Occide, etc.
Arise, O Paul the fifth in name [but Peter in Office: so is every Pope; and
therefore none takes that name upon him; when, in their entrance upon the
Papacy, they leave their former Christian names, as coming unto an
Antichristian place] arise, and kill the Venetians (says that flattering,
false, cruel Baronius, their learned Cardinal) kill them with thy
thunderbolts [which rarely kill any, but men of softer metall] despoile them of
their Dominion, expose them unto ruin, because they dare so insolently resist
thy great, and mighty power.

Here was a killing Text in deed; especially, by virtue of SAINT PETER'S name,
who knew well how to handle a Sword; and because he cut off a servants ear,
why may not his successors cut off a Princes head? For what Text, if it touch
Saint Peter, does not animate, and confirm these Babylonian Monarchs, unto
Depositions, Assassinates, Poisons (though in their sacred Host it self; as
Henry the sixth the Emperor knew very well by woeful experience) and, finally,
to ruinate Christian Princes, that dare withstand their Antichristian pride?

Yet wonder not at the former Text (for that perhaps may bear some show of
blood) but wonder at this; that, Pasce oues meas [Feede my Sheep; says Christ
unto Peter; John 21.16.] should approve these killing courses in the Pope,
these violent depositions of Princes, these rebellious insurrections of people.
But it does so: and in whose judgment? even of Bellarmine himself; De Romans
Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7. Who thence infers a certain, and necessary power in
the Pope, to depose two sorts of Princes; the one, heretical, whom he
compares unto cruel Wolves; the other, irregular, whom he compares unto
unruly Rams; and therefore (says he) since the Pope, is Pastor of the
universal Church, and has an Office to feed the SHEEP (that is to say, all
faithful Christians) he must have a power to restrain, and resist such
WOLVES, and RAMS, as trouble, and infest the flock. So that, in conclusion,
Pasce in Bellarmine, and Occide in Baronius (according to the new Grammar, and
Divinity of Babylon) meet both in one center of signification, and in one
issue of sense. O skillful Mercurialists, to draw blood out of the veins of
the holy Scripture. Yet these are the men, that opprobriously, and scornfully,
object this textuall folly unto the Divines of the Reformed Church, in
misapplying the Scriptures unto their misguided fancies. But now I proceed to
make a sufficient remonstrance of bloody cruelty in their mystical Babylon,
by four several, and invincible demonstrations thereof.

FIRST, then, the cruelty of Babylon appears, in raising up subjects against
their natural Lords, to the inualuable expense of Christian blood. England can
say some thing in this behalf, not only in the more ancient times (as of King
John; who, with his people, suffered much by the instinct, and operation of
Rome) but in these latter times, both of King Henry the Eighth (against whom
some noble Persons conspired, and some meaner Subjects rebelled, by the
procuration of Rome, to the loss of their blood, which shall be found in her)
and in the Halcyonian days of Queen Elizabeth (by insurrections in the North:
by clancular, and secret Treasons of damnable Parricides: by hostile invasions,
resolved against England, and in part effected in Ireland; all depending upon
Babylon, and issuing from her designs; which instructed her Priests to seduce
the people here from their just obedience; whence ensued the just execution of
both, by the necessary provision of the Laws) and in the happy Reign of our
most gracious Sovereign Lord, King James; who therefore enacted a special,
and prudent Law (by consent of the Peers, and People of this Kingdom) to try,
thereby, the allegiance, and fidelity of his subjects: which Oath finding so
much opposition, and impugnation, from the Babylonian Monarch, did minister an
inevitable necessity unto this State, to draw some blood from such Priests, as
rather observed, and respected the Papal Seat of Babylon, then the Royal
Crown of England. And this blood, so justly shed, will be found, not in
England, but in Babylon it self.

But France may speak much more, in that general, and bloody Massacre under
Charles the Ninth, procured by Babylonian operations; and therefore, when the
report thereof came unto Rome, she like a bloody Whore (so the Scripture
calls her) applauded that Thracian, or rather Scythian cruelty of her
children; sang her Te Deum, in public gratulation of that horrible fact,
disbursed her Indulgences, out of her spiritual Treasures, for the benefit of
the cruel Murderers; and so sent her gifts abroad, as rejoicing in their
ruin. Apocal. 10.11. etc. France can yet speak more, which, in the end of the
Reign of Henry the Third, and beginning of the Reign of Henry the Fourth,
opened the veins of her body, and let forth streams of her own blood, by
the provocation of Babylon, till it was stanched by the unhappy submission of
that great King unto the Triple-crowne. Yet then also he could not be secure;
for some principal Babylonians, supposing that the King confessed that with
his mouth, which he denied in his heart, John Chastell (a young Disciple of
old Jesuits) was suborned to offer violence upon the sacred Majesty of the
Kings person; but could not perform that Tragical act, which Rauilliac did
afterward effectuate with his most wicked hand. But I proceed.

Germany can speak more, then any other Nation; whose terrible wars
(stirred, continued, and supported by the means of Babylon) for many years,
in the reign of sundry Emperors, embrued the earth with copious effusion of
Christian blood; making it a true Adamah (an earth red with blood) and giving
it her original name again. As for Italy, she cannot be silent in this case,
if she remember the bloody faction of her Guelphs, and Gibelines, with sundry
wars, raised up by Papal fury, and sometimes managed by their own persons;
forgetting, that they, who take the sword, shall perish by the sword, Matthew.
26.52.

What shall I say of the Holy Land it self, which in tedious, and expensiue
wars (procured, enterprised by Papal motions; and what the Pope could not
perform, with his own temporal means to assist this war, he performed by
the Spiritual Exchequer; dispensing his Indulgences thence, to further, and
advance the same) consumed much treasure of the Christians, and more of their
blood? But you will say; it was an heroical, and glorious act. I answer; look
unto the Popes designs, and intentions therein, with the issue of that glory.
You will say; it was a pious, and a religious act. I answer; the pretense is
more specious, then the enterprise is always just, in such a case. For it may
be disputed; Whether, or how far forth, it is lawful for Christian Princes,
upon the pure, and sole title of Religion, to make such wars upon the Turk;
who, by the power of the sword, and by submission of the people, and by long
possession, has such an interest into those lands; the matter of faith, and
religion, neither giving unto any Prince, nor taking from any, the propriety
of his temporal, and worldly state. Such is the doctrine of the sacred
Scripture; such was the practice of the ancient Church.

SECONDLY, The cruelty of Babylon appears, in stirring up persecution
against the professors of Gods eternal, and invincible truth; which no
policy of man, no fury of devils, can possibly extinguish; because it is
founded upon the true rock, Christ Jesus; and not upon the pretensed rock (or
rather stock) of the Apostaticall Seat in Babylon. Now if I should here make
a particular account of her cruelty in this kind, against the persons of many
Martyrs, it would exceed the proportion of one, or many Sermons. Or, if I would
make it yet more general, by a survey of persecutions in many Countries, by
sword, and by fire (which burning zeal yet lodges in their Scythian hearts)
the relation would be as tedious, as it is unnecessary, since the histories of
sundry Nations are extant in this behalf, and a great part of them is
diligently collected by the industrious pen of Master Fox in his Acts, and
Monuments of the Church.

But why do I repair unto more ancient times, for proof of their cruelty?
The sound whereof has so lately passed the Seas from miserable France, unto
happy England; the secure, and comfortable harbor of many distressed souls. O
France, still cruel unto thy self: the blood is yet warm in thy fields,
which the Cadmaean brethren (thy unfortunate children) have lately spilt in
mutual, and intestine conflicts. But by what incantation? Of Babylon; whose
powerful operation in the malignant, and active spirits of the Ignatian sect,
has so bewitched thee, to sacrifice thy blood unto her Altars; for, in her,
God shall find it, when the justice of heaven shall hear the cry of the earth.
Have thou not yet seen, by sundry ouertures (o miserably seduced France) the
injustice of thy proceedings, in the infelicitie of thy success? Every
several drop of the Hugonots blood has had a resurrection into so many new
several Hugonots, which have sprung, and risen out of the same. So truly is
the blood of Martyrs the seed of the Church. Remember thy S. Bartholomew; thy
Sicilian vespers, in that great, and dreadful massacre; when, in the very
instant, and moment of the hottest persecution, God gave thee a present, and
prodigious sign of the future, and strange event. For many are yet alive in
Paris, who saw, to their admiration, that, beyond the course of nature, and
above the judgment of reason, a white thorn tree, in a certain Churchyard of
that populous City, was suddenly clothed with a garment of white blossoms,
as in the month of May. Sundry were the conjectures upon this sign,
acccording to their several inclinations; some supposing, that God gave
thereby a sufficient notice unto the Romish Catholics, of the new glory, and
flourishing estate of their Church; others conceiving, that God did thereby
minister a comfortable hope, or rather a certain assurance, unto the
Protestants, that, when, in humane judgment, they might seem to be utterly
destroyed, and brought to final ruin, yet God, against, and above the opinion
of mortal men, would restore them unto a more happy condition, then ever they
did enjoy before; with an vnexpectable augmentation, and rare increase. Now
(says Thuanus; a more moderate Papist; but yet no Hugonot) if we cast our
eyes upon the issue of this bloody fact, the success may easily show, which
interpretation was more true, and proper in this behalf. Thus you have heard
the general cruelty of Babylon, in sundry Nations; but particularly in
France; the public Theater of Tragedies in this kind.

And now, my native Country of England; remember thy blood, which Babylon has
shed; and wherewith she is not yet satisfied; that horse-leech has not yet her
fill. The heat, which is in the stomachs of some Babylonians, breaks out in
the fire of their mouths, when they dare vomit up the malice of their hearts,
and speak of fire and faggot, while their own necks (by power of the Laws,
standing in force) lie under the danger of the sword. Babylon cannot put off
her cruel nature; such Mother, such Children; a Panther is not more cruel to
a man, then a true Babylonian unto a sincere Christian. O Lord; if sinners may
be suitors for grace, and favor at thy merciful hands, deliver not thy poor
children into the power of Babylon again.

THIRDLY, the cruelty of Babylon appears in the destruction of her own
children; when, one Pope rising up against another, and a third against them
both, every Peter betook himself unto his sword; one excommunicating, and
deposing another, with such a general distraction of Europe, that (as our
Countryman, Tho. Walsingham, does relate) two hundred thousand persons lost
their lives in these bloody contentions of the Antipopes; so that the Church
may more justly say unto the Pope; Thou art a bloody Father unto me, then
Zipporah could say truly unto Moses; Thou art a bloody husband unto me: for
she cut off only the foreskin of her child, to save the life of Moses; but
the Church lost many of her childrens lives, to save the glory of the Pope;
whose blood shed for, and by Babylon, must also be found in her.

FOURTHLY, the cruelty of Babylon appears in her approbation of the most
execrable treasons; as namely, in Henry the fifth (the Emperor) against his
own Father, Henry the fourth; which prodigious fact, as Babylon did incense
him unto, so she commends in him, for an act of singular piety, and devotion
unto the Church, as preferring his spiritual Mother before his natural
Father. But by whose pen does this incredible villainy appear? even of Baronius
himself; a Babylonian flatterer, a sycophant, extolling that fact with praise
unto the heavens, which the heavens blushed to see, and the earth trembles to
remember.

But what testimony can France afford unto us in this kind? I spoke before of
Babylons exultation, and joy upon the news of that bloody massacre. Well
Babylon; thou have thirsted after blood (as Tomyris said to Cyrus, when she
threw his head into a vessel, filled with blood) drink thy fill of blood, by
thy barbarous cruelty; thou shall, one day, drink thy fill of blood by the
divine vltion of the greatest Judge; now thou drinkest other men's; then thou
shall drink thine own.

But I let pass this example (though never to be forgotten) and I come to one
(in stead of all) which requires your best attention, and due ponderation; and
that is, the murder committed by James (falsely surnamed Clement; as Polydore
Virgil says, that many Popes also bear their names untruly; Pius, yet wicked;
Clemens, yet cruel, etc. as, in Greek, the same word signifies a bow, and
life; whereupon Heraclitus said well; A bow has the name of life, but the
work of death; so had this Clement; so have many Popes) upon the person of
Henry the third, the French King, of unhappy condition, and name also; even as
that of Caius was in the family of the Caesar's; few of them came unto a mature,
and peaceable end.

Now, though I cannot certainly say, that Babylon, or some special agent for
her, did particularly instigate this Clement unto that bloody fact, yet I may
more truly say of him, that he was plenus Babylone, full of Babylon in his
heart (and so, for her sake, was incited unto that odious treason) then Campian
(more rhetorical in his flashes, then substantial in his proofs) says of
Pultrot, who killed the Duke of Guise with a shot, that he was plenus Beza;
full of poison, drawn from the breast of Beza; who never gave counsel before,
nor approbation afterward, unto that act of Pultrot, as Mariana the Jesuit
has approved that execrable fact of Clement: yea, Sixtus Quintus himself
gave extraordinary applause thereunto, upon the first arrival of that news in
Babylon. Mark it well, as a matter of special importance, for sundry causes.
For whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty, in his learned, and accurate
writings, published by himself, to justify the Oath of Alleagance (impugned
by Babylon) did worthily object unto the Romanists the approbation of this
horrible treason by Sixtus, in his Oration, pronounced unto the Cardinals, in
his Consistory, to this purpose; Bellarmine does confidently answer, that
this Oration was never delivered by the Pope; that he, living in Rome, heard
no mention of it; that the Cardinals, conuersing then in the Court, protested,
that they never had any knowledge of the same; and so the point is utterly
denied, and must be reputed for a device of such, as were the enemies of the
Church.

O bloody City; it is all full of lies, says Nahum the Prophet, of Nineuch,
and I may now so speak of Rome: for here is lying added unto murdering;
impudency unto cruelty: what verity then, what equity, what conscience can
you expect from her?

Note therefore, that amongst some Romish Priests, that took, and defended the
Oath of Allegiance (though, for this cause, they have been censured,
publicly in the Sermons of some Jesuits, by the name of Wolves; such as had
no commission to teach, to absolve, to minister the Sacraments, etc. as having
lost their whole authority, by taking this Oath, and persuading others to do
the like, to the high prejudice, and impugnation of S. Peter's Seat, from
whence it was derived) there was one William Warmington, Chaplain unto
Cardinal Allen, upon the very time, that this panegyricall Oration proceeded
from that vainglorious Pope; who, by his Pontificiall excommunication,
deposed our late gracious Queen, and now, in a solemn speech, commended the
murder (by way of admiration) which Clement had perpetrated upon the sacred
person of that unhappy Prince.

This Warmington therefore, in a book, published for the defense of the said
Oath, does freely, and ingenuously confess, that, this Oration being uttered,
in the Consistory, by Sixtus, the Pope; his Lord, and Master (being then, and
there present) was earnestly requested, by some of the Cardinals, to recollect
the speech of his Holiness, and to commit the same to writing; which he (being
a man of singular memory) did accordingly perform, with the commendations,
and thanks of the said Cardinals; affirming, that, to their best remembrance,
this coppie, presented unto them by Cardinal Allen, did truly contain, word
for word, the very Oration, pronounced unto them by his Holiness; so that
this was the original, and Mother-coppie, whence so many transcripts were
made, and issued forth into the public view. And he says further, that his
special friend, Master William Rainolds [author of Caluino-Turcismus]
remaining then in the Low Countries, and receiving a transcript of the said
coppie from him, conceived the said speech to be a certain approbation of
that fact; as, indeed, the form, and matter thereof do sufficiently euince.

O Bellarmine; where is thy conscience of the truth? O Sixtus; where is thy
tender respect of Christian blood? yea more, of Princes? and yet more, of the
first borne, and eldest son of thy Church? O Babylon; where is thy shame,
that dare thus admire, approve, extol (without one word, or syllable of
dislike; that ingenuitie is not in thy whorish breast) such a murder, so
wickedly executed, and upon so great a Prince?

FIFTHLY, and lastly, the cruelty of Babylon appears, by her doctrines
tending to the effusion of blood. She can depose Kings from their States: she
can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance; she can bestow Kingdoms at her
pleasure: she can stir up hostile invasions: she can authorize secret
murders of Princes, by Daggers, Poisons, or any other detestable means; as
you shall hear in my second Sermon, from Mariana, a Jesuit; as far from the
true nature of Jesus, as near unto his sacred name.

Hence it is, that many Emperors, and Princes, in ancient times, fearfully
observing the powerful incantations of Babylon, and that their lives, with
their estates, stood (by virtue thereof) in perpetual danger (for he may
easily take away the life of another, that contemns his own; as many
enchanted Babylonians do) were therefore compelled, by humane fear, to
entertain that unity, and correspondencie with her, in outward terms, which
they hated, and contemned in their inward thoughts. For as Porsenna, the
ancient King of Hetruria, was induced to spare the life, and farther torment of
Mutius (a confident, and glorious Roman; who offered private violence unto his
Royal person) when he heard Mutius solemnly protesting; that the death of
Porsenna was certainly concluded upon, by a number of Romans, no less
resolute unto that action, then himself, and no less resolved to suffer any
torment, then to adventure upon any peril, for that end, and purpose; and
thereupon Porsenna, desisting from his wars, made a peace with the Romans,
out of fear, and not of love: so there have been sundry Princes, in former
Ages, that perceiving this vehement, and formidable inclination in the
Romanists, to act any villainy, and to suffer any penalty, so that they might
attain unto their desired end [to subvert Kingdoms, to depose Kings, to lay
violent hands upon their persons, etc.] were thereby enforced to submit
themselves unto the Babylonian Monarch; rather choosing to live under his
tyranny, then to die by his designs. Thus also every man, that stands in
special opposition unto Babylon (the Mother of Murders) may truly say with
David; There is but a step between me, and death. 1. Sam. 20.3. Howbeit, that
should be the resolution of every Christian Prince, in the behalf of Gods
truth, which was the reckoning of virtuous Hester, in the behalf of her
people; If I perish, I perish.

Yet fear not, O Religious Princes; it is Gods cause, which you maintain;
therefore he will also maintain you: he will defend the defenders of his
Faith: he has a better guard of holy Angels about your Royal persons. The
diffidence of his preservation, in any arises from the imbecillitie of faith,
not resting upon his word, and promise. If the noble aspect of Scipio bred such
an awful reverence in the hearts of thieves, and murderers, that they did
therefore rather admire his virtue, then seek his life, when they came into
his presence; doubt ye not, but that God will work such an impression of
fear in the hearts of Babylonian Traitors, that they shall not dare attempt,
or (at the least) not effectuate any course of violence, and iniquity, against
your sacred Persons.

Finally, to conclude this point of Romish cruelty; let no faithful, and
sincerely affected Nazianzen an earnest Preacher, a zealous Writer, a well
deserving Prelate, or Minister in the Church) despair of Gods protection,
though a Murderer dare undertake to assail him in any private manner, or
secret place; as sometimes it fell out in the case of that learned, constant,
and glorious Bishop; related by himself, in the description of his own life.
Be courageous, then, in the behalf of Gods eternal truth: fear not the
cruelty of Babylon; death is the debt of Nature, by the desert of sin: to
die for Gods cause, it is an act of glory in this World, and it has a reward
in Heaven. Let thy tongue, therefore, speak; and thy pen write; and thy heart
pray; let not our fear of Babylons cruelty increase their hope of our ruin.
I say, then, unto every soldier of Jesus Christ in this spiritual warfare, as
the Angel unto Gedeon; The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man. Iudic. 6.12.

The FIFTH Comparison betwixt Literal Babylon, and Papal Rome.
THe fifth, and last point (which I now resolve to touch) in this comparison,
is, IMPIETY of life. As for the old Babylon, she was incurable in her sinful
courses. We would have cured Babylon, but she would not be cured; Ierem. 51.9.
It follows therefore; Her judgment is come up to Heaven. It came down from
Heaven also: for God stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to execute his vengeance
upon the Lady of Kingdoms, and the hammer of the World.

As for the new Babylon, she answers fully unto her type: for as Rome went
before in Babylon, so Babylon follows afterward in Rome. I speak not now of
the common people, nor of any Lay persons of more eminent quality; I come unto
the Clergy it self; and not in the more ignoble sort, but in the higher
degree of the Cardinals; of whom as Calvin says truly, that, Vna cum suo
capite sensim creuerunt [these principal members of the Roman Church grew up
by little, and little, into this amplitude of power, and dignity, together
with their head] so, together with the increasing impiety of the Popes, they
increased also in their impiety of manners. The Histories are extant; their
conditions are known; I leave therefore the members, and come unto their head
himself; in comparison of whom the Monarchs of Literal Babylon may seem to
be just, and holy; as God testifies of Jerusalem, that she had justified
Samaria in all the abominations, which she had done, Ezekiel. 16.

Do you now expect of me a Catalogue of their names, and a repetition of
their crimes? Platina, the Writer of their lives (an Author of their own,
that had experience of many matters in Babylon) can tell you that, which is no
less odious for you to hear, then tedious for me to speak. But descend from
ancient Writers unto Baronius (though one of the most perfidious, and dissolute
Historians, that ever took pen in hand) even their own Cardinal Baronius;
and you shall see the tender hearted man, melting into tears, upon the
recordation of Papal impieties; and particularly of John the Twelfth. You
shall find Baronius lamenting the condition of the Church under such Heads, and
wondering that such an impure, and wicked wretch should assume so gracious a
name, as that is both by signification, and by the persons, that did sometimes
bear the same. Whereupon he says, that, in his opinion, the Pope did thereby
intend to deceive the World, which might suppose, that there was a man, sent
from God, whose name was John. So writes he of that Boy- Pope; that egregious
Varlet, who, by the means of a Whore, sat in the Whore of Babylon; as a fit
Incumbent of that Apostolical See.

Now if I would prosecute the History of those Popes alone, who did untruly
wear the garment of this name (which might seem to cover the turpitude of
their lives) it were more easy to find a beginning, then an end of my
discourse: for Babylon had many John's (besides a Ioane) but few of them good;
and the last of that name ( John 21. or 23. for the Papists disagree upon the
number of these Popes) had such accusations produced, and verified by Oath,
against him, for matters of doctrine, and of life, in the great Council of
Constance, upon the year 1414. that, as the name of Tarquin was hateful in
Rome, so the name of John became execrable in the Church; and no Pope delighted
to take it upon him, since the time of that Council.

But why do I, or rather why should I take fruitless pains in this behalf,
yea, disaduantagious also unto mine own cause? For now I pray you to observe
diligently, with me, two passages in Bellarmine, very artificially framed; the
one to prevent our belief; the other, to pervert our judgment. In praefat.
lib. de Summo Pont.

For first, being to treat of the impieties of his holy Fathers (such, so
prodigious, so innumerable, as perhaps no State of Pagans can parallel, much
less of Christians; be they Princes, or be they Prelates) mark how cunningly
he seeks to bring his Reader into a suspicion of all Histories; which he had
rather accuse of falsehood, then we should accuse his Popes of impious, and
wicked life. Thus therefore writes the learned Cardinal; Quidam parum probi
Pontifices: etc. Some Popes, being of little honesty, did sometimes possess,
and govern the Apostolical Seat. Parum probi? Away with that term of
diminution: improbissimi, impijssimi, diabolissimi, etc. were fitter words for
such monsters, whose villainies no tongue can speak with modesty, nor pen
describe. But let us proceed. Who were those parum probi? He tells you:
Stephanus the sixth, Leo the fifth, Christophorus the first, Sergius the third,
Johannes the twelfth, Alexander the sixth. Then he adds; alijque non pauci.
Speak more plainly, Bellarmine, mince not the matter; say not, non pauci [not
a few others] but a great multitude of Popes; for so there was, if their own
Historians may deserve our belief. But here the Cardinal casts in his
doubt; Si vera sunt, que de eorum vita, and rebus gestis, apud historicos eorum
temporum scripta leguntur: If (says he) those things be true, which the
Histories of those times record concerning the lives, and actions of these
Popes. If they be true? His desire was to deny all the accusations; but,
having not ability to disprooue the matters, he draws the Histories into
question, and breeds a secret dubitation in the mind of his Reader. This is
the first passage in Bellarmine: and he is more ingenuous, and modest in this
case, then Baronius is often in the like; not only drawing an obscurity, or
some doubt upon such Histories, as distaste his palate, and are against his
purpose, but sometimes disclayming them, correcting them at his pleasure,
forging others, without any apparent evidence; with many such indirect, and
preposterous courses; which the Venetian Authors (while the controversy
depended betwixt their State, and Paul the fifth) do carefully note in that
dishonest Author; whom the Spaniards, the Benedictines, the said Venetians,
and sundry Roman Catholics, upon several occasions (all tending to one
crime of injurious falsitie) do brand most deeply in this behalf. And thus
having spoken some thing of these two Cardinal Brethren [the Castor, and
Pollux of the Roman Church] I will end with him, with whom I did first begin.

His second passage, therefore, is of more excellent note. He would discredit
the Histories, as false: he could not: behold now a greater advantage unto his
Church, if they be true. How can that be? Is he so skillful a Workman, that
he can make a Mercury out of every block; be it never so crooked, and
knottie? He is: for mark his dilemma. If those Histories be false, then they
make nothing against us. If they be true, yet they make very much for us. How
can this be? Because the wickedness of the Persons does prove the sanctity,
and perpetuity of their Seat: so that the issue of my labor (in showing
their impieties) would be the prejudice of my cause.

Hear therefore the Cardinal speaking in his own words; Nihil est quod
haeretici, etc. It is to no purpose (says he) for the heretics to take so
much pains, in searching out the vices of certain Popes. Why so? For we
confess that they were not few. A good confession: though before we heard him
speak in another Language; Si vera sunt; if those things were true. Well: now
they are true: now he confesses the accusation: but why? For he has invented
a new defense of the Seat by the old offenses of the persons. Hear him,
therefore, again in his own words; Tantum abest, etc. This is so far (says
he) from obscuring, or diminishing the glory of this Seat, that thereby it is
rather exceedingly amplified, and increased; for that thereby we may perceive,
that it consists by the special providence of God. So he.

But I perceive no such matter; howbeit I perceive that nothing was so absurd,
which some Philosopher would not maintain: and nothing is so true, and
forcible, which these Babylonians will not either deny, or elude. And farther
I perceive, that recitasse, confutasse est; to recite their opinions, is to
refute their follies.

And lastly I perceive, that as it is Gods singular patience to suffer these
Monarchs of Babylon a while, so there is a time of wrath to come (and it cannot
be far off) when the Whore must perish by fire, and her Beast must yield
unto the Sword. For as in this Sermon, you have heard of a Babylon [the sin
of Rome] in the subject of my Text, so, in the next, you shall hear of a
cecidit [the punishment of Rome] in predicate of the same.

Mean while I conclude, by due, and true remonstrances in the first, and
second Inquisitions [two distinct parts of my discourse; the one showing, by
good, and pregnant reasons, that Rome, in her present condition, is the Babylon
in my Text; the other declaring the conformity betwixt the Literal Babylon,
and Papal Rome; and so expressing the congruitie of this title of Babylon,
applied here unto Rome] that since Rome does imitate (nay much exceed) the
sins of Babylon, therefore she does justly, and must necessarily, bear her
name; agreeing unto it, in regard of the Church, and the City, as both are
under one, and their common head, the Pope. This was the clear intention of
the Angel; this is the certain exposition of this Scripture. Wherefore as
Simeon, and Leui are called fratres in malo [Gen. 49.5.] brethren in evil, so
Babylon, and Rome are sorores in malo, sisters in evil; like in condition, and
in quality, to their own confusion; as the name of the first does originally
import, and does likewise ominate unto the second.

Observations pertaining to Faith, and Manners, framed upon the passages in the
two former Inquisitions.
NOw I come thirdly, and lastly, unto such Observations (according to my
promise, and project in the Page 4.
beginning of this Sermon) as do kindly, and proper ensue upon the precedent
passages of my discourse; and they are ten: which I will prosecute with such
convenient brevity, as the matter of each will particularly bear.

FIRST, then, as the Church of God does stand specially indebted unto him for
this divine Book of the Revelation, wherein we may plainly discover the
prescience of God, in things to come, and the care of God in the administration
of his Church, so, it being more dark unto the ancient Fathers [so many
syllables, so many mysteries therein] and breeding more admiration, then
bringing utility unto them, by the great obscurity thereof (so that the
Penman of this sacred Book might truly say, Scripsi, and non scripsi; I have
written, and not written, I have revealed, and yet concealed, the future
condition of the Church) therefore, now we stand bound unto God in a new, and
farther obligation, for that we, in the success of time, and event of things,
have attained, in sundry particulars of greatest consequence (and namely, in
this mystery of Babylon) unto such a perspicuous, and infallible understanding
of this Book; which is the Benjamin of Jesus Christ (the principal Author
thereof) the Son of his right hand; the last borne, in the whole Issue of the
Scripture, which he begat unto his Church; the conclusion of that Oracle,
whence we derive our Faith.

This Book is, therefore, unto us, the apparent Seal of Gods providence, a
strong bulwark of our Faith, an incurable wound of the Babylonian Monarch, a
certain expugnation of the Antichristian Church. For though the learned
Jesuit Ludouicus ab Alcasar, in his copious exposition of this Book, does so
pervert the sense, and purpose of the Holy Ghost therein, by laying the name of
Babylon upon Rome in her Ethnicall estate alone, and pretending that this fall
is only in a spiritual manner, by falling from her ancient Idolatry, unto the
Faith of Christ, and therefore concludes his exposition of this Book in these
brauing words; Maxima sum voluptate perfusus, etc. I am filled with singular
contentation, and joy of heart, because, through the favor of God, I have now
clearly discerned, how glorious this Book of the Revelation is unto the
Roman Church; yet we may contemn his folly, or rather commiserate his
blindness in this case. But we will leave him unto the censure of Ribera, so
well discerning that this Babylon is Rome, in another estate, succeeding after
the intertainment of Christian Religion, and that this fall is by a great, and
final ruin of that Idolatrous City, that he pronounces them to be worse
then very fools, that will not see, and confess this point.

The truth is this (good Christian hearers) that though Ribera first, and
Viegas after him, do confidently deny, that Rome is Babylon now, or that the
Church of Rome ever shall so be, or that the City it self, while she
remains in subjection to the Pope, shall deserve that name, yet, by making
such a plain, and fair confession (which the very evidence of the Text, with
the due coherence of all circumstances therein, did necessarily extort from
their pens) that Rome is Babylon also in another, and ^^ second estate; and
that it shall be so full of Idolatry at home, and communicate it abroad; and
that she shall have great negotiation of Merchants; and that she shall have
another Empire, largely patent, and greatly potent in the world; therefore not
only a strong suspicion, but a manifest conviction must fall ineuitably upon
Papal Rome (as we have deduced by many substantial proofs, against the
vain, and poor surmises of Ribera, and Viegas to the contrary) the true
Babylon (of which I have spoken heretofore) that shall come unto the lamentable
fall, whereof I shall speak hereafter.

This consequence Ludonicus ab Alcasar, either well perceiving, or vehemently
suspecting it to ensue upon the said confession of his brethren, has therefore
cast a new mist upon the matter, drawn a veil before our eyes, contradicted
their exposition, wrested the sacred Text unto his foolish, and ridiculous
fancy (as if the state of this Babylon, and her fall, were past) that so we
might not discern the true Babylon, which is now present, nor her certain
fall, which is yet to come. But let me here speak a word, or two (for I am to
pass unto other matters) touching this learned grando; Ludouicus ab Alcasar.
If this Babylon be Rome, only in her Ethnicall estate; and if Rome have not
any other fall, but only a mystical fall; viz. by falling unto Christian
Religion from that estate (which estate has now been extinct, near upon the
space of one thousand and three hundred years) and yet it appears, in the
frame and tenor of the sacred Book of the Revelation, that no special and
notable matter of prophetical prediction therein, does interuene, or come
betwixt the ruin of Babylon (which is described historically, Chapter 18.
there being a prolepsis only, or brief anticipation thereof, Chapter 14.8.)
and the consummation of the world (for, after the fall of Babylon, Chapter 18.
S. John proceeds, Chapter 19. to an applause of the Saints, for her
destruction: then, Chapter 20. to a recapitulation of things past, with a
declaration of the general Judgment, being then shortly to come: then,
finally, Chapter 21. and 22. to a description of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
the happy condition of the Saints therein, etc.) it must necessarily follow,
that this voluminous Jesuit of Alcasar (this man of the Land of Nod) in the
tohu, and bohu [the vanity, and inanitie] of his large, and copious
Commentary upon this divine Book, has left open so wide a gap of one
thousand and three hundred years (or near upon that space) already past,
besides that time, which is yet to come in the state of the Church, and of the
world, without any sufficient matter, of Historical prediction, to fill up the
same. And yet who does not perceive, by the beginning, and the ending of this
Book, that it does, in the passages thereof, generally contain a perpetual,
and a continued History of the Church, in her whole decourse; even, from the
time of Saint John, unto the end of the world?

Farewell, then, gentle Ludouicus ab Alcasar, with your little wit, and less
honesty: and so I return (my benign, and courteous Auditors) unto you again.

Rejoice you, therefore, in this inestimable Book; embrace it with gratitude;
converse in it with diligence; admire what you understand, and, what you
understand not, admire it the more; search it with industry; enter into it
with prayer; despise not the opinion of others; presume not upon your own; let
not the obscurity of some things, yet unknown, make you neglect the utility
of so many things (and, particularly, this mystery of Babylon) already known
therein. Read it, reverence it; repute it (as it is) the sacred Oracle of God,
committed unto his Church, to sustain her patience, and to confirm her faith.

SECONDLY; we have great cause to commend Gods goodness, and to applaud our
own happiness in the certain, and clear discovery of Babylon in this
divine, and mystical Book. For as the Star did lead the Wisemen to find
out Bethlehem, where Christ was borne, so this Scripture does guide, and
conduct us unto the knowledge of Babylon, wherein Antichrist does reign. Rome
shall not, therefore, infatuate us with her glorious title of the
Mother Church; for now we know her to be the Mother of Fornications: she
shall not insult with the fair privilege of the Apostolical Seat; for now
we know her to be an Apostaticall Synagogue: she shall not bear us down
with the supremacy of a Papal Head-ship; for now we know, who is the Second
Beast, intruding upon the Seat, and Dominion of the former, with a larger
challenge of power; extensiue, in place, and intensiue, in degree: now we know,
who he is, that aduanceth himself over Kings, and Emperors; over States, and
Crowns; over Church, and Commonwealth, by his false Keys, and pretensed
Swords.

THIRDLY; whereas this Romish Babylon cries out upon our separation from her
Society, we are warranted, nay we are commanded thereunto, by the voice of
God himself; Go out of her my people; and the reason is not there taken only
from her sins, in that she is Babylon, but from her punishment also, in that
she shall fall; for so it follows; that you be not partakers in her sins,
and that you receive not of her plagues; of which I am to treat, when I come
unto the predicate of my Text.

Mean while you may observe, that this Exodus, this departure out of Babylon,
is Corporal (and not spiritual only) unto sch, as have Local communion with
her, and dwell within her walls: but it is Spiritual only, and not corporal,
unto such, as, dwelling in England, France, etc. have doctrinall communion with
her; and are members, depending upon her head: so that this word her [goe out
of her] imports not only her site, and place, but her society, and errors.
Go then specially out of these, o you his people, whether within, or without
her walls; whether you be in Rome (where God has some people, even by the
testimony of the Text) or whether in any other part of the world. And since
she casts you out of her society, desire it not; for it is unto your own
danger; she does that for you, which God requires you to do for your selves.

And now let me, in a few words, address my speech unto rhetorical Campian,
insulting upon the Protestants, with his terms of derision, and contempt;
Audito nomine Ecclesiae hostis expalluit, says he: our adversary waxed pale,
when he heard the very name of the Church; as if the Protestant could produce
no Catalogue of names, for any visible existencie, and lawful succession of
his Church; which Rome only has, and the Protestant has not. How shallow,
weak, malicious, and unlearned a pretense this is (either against us, or for
themselves) it is now no convenient time, nor proper occasion to dispute: I
will attend both, as it shall please God, in his providence, to direct me in
this behalf.

But unto Campian I return my answer, truly, fairly, and pertinently, by
the verdict of my Text. Audito nomine Babylonis hostis expalluit; our
adversary waxed pale, upon the very name of Babylon: it troubled his wit; it
vexed his heart; it is a terror unto his soul: for he lives in that, from
which he ought to fly, if he have any part in Gods people.

Now, as the cause of our separation from Rome is necessary, in many respects,
and is grounded here, upon such a principle, as cannot be denied, so we need
not depart from Rome, but because she is Babylon, and as she is Babylon, as she
is departed from God, and from his truth (standing upon his Word) and as she is
departed from her self, as she was in the more pure, and ancient times, in
which no Catalogue of names can be produced, to justify any succession in
those doctrines, wherein we justly dissent from them, and they unjustly from
the Primitive Church. O how gladly would we return unto Rome, if she would
return unto her self? She will not do the one; therefore we cannot do the
other.

To conclude this point; since the iniudicious auoydance of one error draws
us into the danger of another ( Arrius was in opposition unto Sabellius; and
Eutyches unto Nestorius; but all in error) let men be well, and soundly
advised in their departure from this Babylon, lest they erect a new Babylon,
compounded of their own fancies, by Anabaptisticall fury, and Anarchicall
paritie, through a misprision of things, upon false, unlearned, and dangerous
principles; namely, that the way, to come nearest to the truth, is to go
farthest from the Pope: that the Church of Christ must stand in an universal
contrariety unto Rome: that the means, to bring things unto a medietie, and
proper state, is to run into an opposite, and contrary course; as, to bring
a crooked stick unto straightness, you must wreathe, and force it the other,
and the contrary way. Which instance being made to this purpose, by a learned
man (standing in the terms of inconformitie to the Church of England) Master
Hooker (that Oracle of Theology) made answer unto him very well; that the
Church of England was already come to her medietie, and settled estate; but, by
this instance, it seems that the said learned man, with some others (running
a way of extreme opposition) were yet to come unto some other medietie, and
condition, after they had thus bowed things unto a contrary course. And, to
say the truth (upon certain experience) to avoid the Scylla of one
shipwreck, some men run indiscreetly upon the Charybdis of another; being so
transported with intemperate Zeal, that, without Learning, Wisdom, or
Conscience, they impute the name of Popery unto any thing, that they
ignorantly distaste, and cast the aspersion of a Papist upon any person, that
they maliciously disaffect. Such civil wars in the Church have their end
without triumph; of which point I shall speak more anon.

FOURTHLY; great is the happiness of our Church, and State, being delivered
from the yoke, and tyranny of Babylon, which held them both in servitude, and
captivity, for many years. For if any Land may justly complain, that cruel
Lords have had the dominion over them; ENGLAND might complain of this
indignity, and did often complain of it, with many, and bitter tears; and
particularly in the Reign of King Henry the Third, whom (as Matthew Paris
does relate) the Babylonian Monarch styled his Vassal, and England his Jade;
for she did bear his burdens of oppression, in sundry expilations, and deep
exhaustions of her Treasure. Afterward, in the reign of his Son (King Edward
the first) he sent forth peremptory interdictions unto all the Clergy of
this Land, requiring them upon virtue of their obedience unto the Apostolical
Seat, not to contribute their Subsidies, and just relief, unto their
Sovereign Lord, the King; directly, and clearly against the prescription of
Saint Paul unto all Christian subjects (though under unbelieving Princes)
instructing them to give tribute, unto whom they owe tribute, Romans 13. O the
rare Divinity of Babylon! The Clergy of England must give moneys unto the
Pope, if he require them; but not unto the King, if he forbid them.

Upon this occasion ensued a rebellious opposition in the Archbishop of
Canterbury [Peckham by name] against his lawful Sovereign; that victorious,
and puissant King (as, indeed, the Pope seldom wanted a Prelate in that See,
to concur with him against the King) to the just provocation of his Royal
displeasure, and no small inconvenience of the whole Clergy in this Land.

But leaving temporal things (wherein this Island suffered great calamity, and
vexation by the Babylonian Monarchs; drawing moneys out of men's purses, and
withdrawing their obedience from their natural Lords, and Kings) I come unto
spiritual things, wherein your deliverance, from Babylon, pertains unto the
soul, and ministers unto you matter of higher contemplation; as namely, that
you are freed from dangerous errous of false doctrines; from the oppression of
conscience, wherein the Pope did reign, and tyrannize; from the uncomfortable,
and ridiculous service of God in an unknown tongue; from prostitution of the
body, and soul unto stocks, and stones; from Idolatrous adoration of a
breaden God; from the vexing fear of fained Purgatory; from the vain hope of
Babylonian Pardons; and finally (in a word) from the vanity of uncertain
traditions, with a number of superstitions, and fopperies, whose observation
was with great difficulty and little profit; yea rather with singular
detriment, unto the glory of God, and perfection of his Church. Which things
being justly cast out of this Church (as Christ expelled abuses out of the
Temple; John 2.15.) you have a peaceable state of conscience toward God, in the
sweet liberty of his truth, under a gracious, and learned Sovereign; a
sincere Professor, and a constant Protector of the same.

FIFTHLY; they bear a special obligation to God for his singular mercy, whom
he has drawn out of the society of Babylon, and from the contagion of her
cup; which, with Circaean intantations, metamorphizeth men into beasts,
intoxicating them with her venomous dregs; till God, of his mere grace,
seeking them, who had lost themselves, take away the veil of error from their
eyes, and make them understand, from whence [Apoc. 2.5.] and to what, they are
fallen. Though they wanted his preuenient grace, and therefore fell, yet they
had his excitant grace, and therefore rose again: and if they have assistant
grace, none are more humble in their minds, none are more careful of their
ways, none are more grateful unto God, none are more serviceable unto the
Church. Let not the elder brother repine at the reuersion and entertainment of
the younger: why should man show his envy, where God does show his pity?
Acknowledge thy own infirmity in thy brothers fall: commend Gods grace in his
restitution to his estate; the nearer he was to Hell, the nearer he may be to
Heaven.

SIXTHLY; whereas many, out of the insufficiency of knowledge, or weakness of
judgment, or neutralitie of Religion (setting up the sail of their conscience
unto the wind of time) incline strongly unto Rome, or prostitute themselves
wholly unto her communion; let them consider, that it is BABYLON (hated of God,
and ordained to destruction) which they embrace: and though they live
corporally in England, France, etc. that yet they live spiritually in her; that
they are members of this City, and that therefore they must wear the liuerie
of her name; they are BABYLONIANS, in their true, and proper title. Let them,
then, reject the name of a PAPIST (the invention, they say of LVTHER, but well
accommodated, for many causes, unto the vassals of the POPE) let them contemn
the imposition of it (though they cannot avoid it) but yet they shall never
decline this title, which the sacred Scripture it self, so anciently, so
notably, so ineuitably does fasten upon them, to their outward shame, and
inward grief. Let them glory in Rome, which the Scripture declares to be
Babylon, if it be any glory to triumph in her, that, from exaltation (as the
name of Rome does signify in the holy tongue) shall come to confusion; as the
name of Babylon does import: the name is changed ( Rome into Babylon) the state
is changed; glory into shame. Know then, O unhappy children of the Roman
Synagogue, that you are Babylonians, carrying the name of your Mother,
according to the verdict of Scripture, as well as Papists, carrying the name of
your Father, according to the proof of reason. So then we will speak with the
Scripture, and not with Luther; you are Babylonians; this is your name; answer
unto it; for by it, you stand indicted at the Bar of the divine judgment.

SEVENTHLY; if Rome be Babylon, and we must go out of it, why do some men
persuade you to go unto her, or, at the least, to meet her? As if the
differences in Religion, betwixt you, and her, were not so material, but that
you may relinquish your opinions; or else not so real, but that you, and she,
by the advice of some Modificators, and temperate men, might be reconciled
together.

But I will discover the impossibility of their devise, by four evident, and
perspicuous Reasons.

First; there are many points, which admit no reconciliation; especially such,
as concern the Subject; namely, whether the thing, upon which we dispute,
simply be, or be not at all. As for example; the Papists dispute amongst
themselves, whether Purgatory be in Hell; whether it have a corporal fire;
whether Devils be the Tormentors; whether a soul be in it for ten, or one
hundred years, etc. but they dispute not, among themselves (by way of doubt)
whether there be a Purgatory or not; for they differ only about the
Praedicata, or attributes, thereof, whereas they all agree concerning the
Subject; that there is an estate of souls in temporal pain. Now we deny
the Subject it self; and therefore the question, proposed betwixt us, and them
is; Whether there be any PVRGATORIE or not? Which either is, or it is not; and
so there is no reconciliation in the differences of this nature, betwixt us,
and them: for, betwixt est, and non est [it is; and it is not] there is no
middle thing.

But if the question be de Praedicato, how this, or that agrees unto the
subject (as namely, what real presence of Christ's body is in the Sacrament)
here, perhaps, some reconciliation might have been devised in this behalf,
had not they, in this (and so in many other points) excluded all means of
reconciliation also, by their definitions, resolutions, and modifications of
the Praedicate, in such a manner, as cannot consist with the truth of Gods
Word, and evident principles of reason. As namely, they have defined the real
presence to be by Transubstantiation of the Elements into the body and blood
of Christ, having an invisible existencie under the forms of Bread and Wine.
This modification, being thus concluded by them, and now reputed an essential
Article of Faith, there is no means of reconciliation in this case also; nor
in many other points, of like quality, and condition unto this; for what
communion has light with darkness?

Secondly; therefore, they have, by certain Councels (the infallible, and
irreuocable Oracles of their Religion) so defined, and so resolved these, and
many other things, that, if we cannot come to them, in their points (in regard
of certain falsehood, or of uncertain truth in them) they cannot come to us,
in our points, in regard of their own principles, from which, if they once
depart, they renuerse, and overthrow the very foundation of all their faith,
standing wholly upon their late Councels, and Popes.

Whence it is, that they give us no leave to speak dogmatically, and
problematically of the meanest point in their Religion (as of Purgatory,
Indulgences, etc.) in such a manner, as that the point may have a supposed
truth, or that it may have a possible falsehood; but they bind us to receive it
indisputably, as to be believed by necessity, and upon the certain peril of
salvation; and the reason is, because (as Bellarmine teaches; De Laicis cap.
19.. Quinto) There is one, and but one rule of faith, whereby we believe all,
and every point of faith; namely, the Word of God, expounded by the Church;
meaning their late Roman Church. Therefore it is all one danger, to deny all
their Articles, or to deny but any one Article [ Indulgences, or the like]
resolved by a Council, and so propounded by their Church; which, if she had a
certainty of error in one point, should have an uncertainty of truth in
all. Where then is the means of reconciliation, or what reconciliation can you
make, while they insist in this course? You must come wholly to them, for they
will not come, in any one part, or parcel, unto you; and that were not a
reconciliation with Rome, but a submission unto her.

Thirdly; the Babylonians have assumed unto themselves the only power of
calling Counsels (the most proper means to determine all matters of Religion,
by the verdict of Gods Word, and testimony of his Church) the only suffrages
to define; the only authority of doing, and proceeding after their own
pleasure; and, finally, an unquestionable infallibility to oblige us unto
that, which they canonically resolve, and conclude. Where then is the means of
reconciliation? If they could retrograde, and go back from any point,
already determined by them, or from this course of determination, it would be
as great a miracle unto us, as the retrocession, or going back of the Sun, in
the dyall of Ahaz.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Babylonians themselves defy this business of
reconciliation; they scorn it as ridiculous; they detest it as odious; they
reject it as impossible. Therefore when Cassander (as being a moderate
Pontifician) entered upon this design, the rigid, and more severe Babylonians
(as namely Johannes a Louanio) wrote vehemently, and sharply against this
attempt; whom Bellarmine [de Laicis cap. 19.] does follow, insisting in the
same steps. Whence it is, that Master Robert Parsons, the Jesuit, writes, in
his Treatise of Mitigation, precisely in this manner; We agree with the
Protestants in this, that there can be no agreement betwixt us, and them, in
Religion. Chap. 2. number. 5.

Wherefore I may well approve the advised, and judicious answer of Beza unto
the late, unhappy French King, Henry the fourth; That he would endeavor to
reconcile the persons [Protestants, and Papists] but not their Religions; the
first being a charitable office; the second an impossible work.

To conclude this observation, then; be not deceived by the pretenders of
Reconciliation, who would entangle your minds with this unlearned, foolish,
and erroneous project; as Vlphila, a Bishop of the Goths, did sometimes ensnare
the credulous, and ignorant people; assuring them, that the differences,
betwixt the Catholics, and the Arrians, did consist rather in the form of
words, then in the substance of matter; as Theodorit does report; lib. 4. cap.
37.

Now as the Reconcilers of the two Religions do justly deserve your censure,
so the secret Babylonians, that hold outward conformity with England, and
inward correspondencie with Rome, are to be lamented, as well as detested;
being no less dangerously affected in the state of their own souls, then
against the state of this Church. These are men, that stand like a needle in a
dyall; North, and South: personally in England, affectionately in Rome:
heterogeneous members of both, and neither Church: amphibia, creatures living
in the two Elements of Sion, and Babylon: they speak both languages, of the
Jews, and Philistines: they comport themselves so wisely, that the present
times may bear them, and the future receive them: men more subtle for
themselves, then sincere to any. It were to be wished, that, as men believe
(if such men do believe any thing) so they would confess: For with the heart
we believe to righteousness, and with the mouth we confess to salvation.

EIGHTHLY; since Papal, or Ecclesiastical Rome, is that Babylon, which Saint
John does here propose, and exhibit in lively colors unto our view, I cannot,
without indignation, or rather compassion, observe, that this truth (being of
such clear evidence, and of so great consequence for the consolation of Gods
Church, afflicted by her, and confusion of Babylon, triumphing in her pride,
malice, and cruelty upon us: as also provoking the divine Majesty, by her
monstrous Idolatries, by her false doctrines, by her base superstitions, by her
taking from the people the key of knowledge in the holy Scriptures, with many
more absurd, and impious courses) should be so little regarded by some
(ungrateful therefore unto God for this sacred Revelation, made unto his
Church) or so much questioned by others: who either, out of negligence, search
not into this truth; or, out of a puzzeled understanding, cannot comprehend it;
or, out of a prejudice, will not discern it; but, like men in a secure, and
pernicious Lethargy, with heavy and drowsy spirits, raise not up their
thoughts unto a more acute penetration of so excellent, and so necessary a
point; for the prediction whereof, so long before, we owe much unto the
providence of God, and for the discovery of it, now so long after, in these our
days, we owe much unto his goodness. And I do more earnestly press all
Divines in this Church, unto a serious, and diligent contemplation of this
mystery (now so revealed unto us, which was concealed from our fathers)
because they shall thereby enable themselves, with more sufficiency of means,
to confirm many in the truth; and to recall many from their errors; when they
shall, by good discourse of reason (founded upon the circumstances of this
Scripture; comparing it with other Scriptures, and with the events of time; the
success of things, in later Ages, concurring with the prediction in former)
clearly, and fairly perceive that Rome (as now she is, and long has been,
under the government of the Pope) is the Mystical Babylon, the Mother of
Whoredoms, the Seat of the Second Beast, the very Synagogue, wherein
Antichrist does reign. For defect of which certain knowledge in the
understanding, and secret persuasion of the mind therein, a greater gap is left
open for the entrance of Babylon into many hearts: whereof I could say
something by the particular experience of my unhappy self.

Since therefore, I do so well apprehend the force, and efficacy of this
truth (for which I give most humble thanks unto my benign, and gracious Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ) I do more willingly excite, and stir up my learned
Brethren, to settle their judgments upon a perfect, and exact knowledge
thereof; being able, and ready, by special demonstration, and strength of
discourse, to explicate the same in particular manner, and form, omni
poscenti, to every one, that shall ask a reason of their assertion, and
belief in this point; wherein now the Jesuits themselves (Ribera, and Viegas)
have carried us securely, and firmly, beyond the speculation of Augustine, and
some others (conceiving this Babylon to be the general society of the
wicked, and no particular place) and beyond the decision of Hierome; supposing
it to be Ethnicall Rome, and so to be already past; at which we do not
marvel, since Hierome by experience, saw that State past, but could not, by
divination, foresee this to come; namely, that the Pope should be the Second
Beast, and that Rome should be Babylon under him; a matter not imaginable in
those more happy times.

Therefore, though the said Jesuits, going beyond Augustine, confess this
Babylon to be Rome, and, going beyond Hierome (yea beyond the most general
conceit of other Babylonians) confess it to be Rome, in a new, second, and
latter estate (after the entertainment of Christian Religion therein) but deny
it to be so, in regard of the Church at all, or of the City, as it now is,
and while she shall so remain under the Pope; yet we see them so wrapped up
in sundry inextricable difficulties, to maintain this their determination of
the point, that, till we come unto the perspicuous, and solid resolution
thereof (by laying so great a power of Babylon, which they saw in it, upon the
Papal Souereignety; and so large a Dominion, which they saw in it, upon the
extension of his authority in the world; and so much Idolatry, which they saw
in it, upon the superstitious, and foolish practices of the Roman Church; and
such a correspondency with the world, which they saw in it, upon the
communication of her Wares, and negotiation of her Merchants with it, together
with the dependencie of of States, and Churches upon it) there is no means, in
congruitie of reason, and in ordinary sense, to untwine, and loose the doubts,
which arise thereupon, and bind up these men so fast; viz. How Rome, within the
space of three years, or thereupon (with which limits of time they
circumscribe the reign of Antichrist; out of a false, and erroneous opinion of
the Ancients) should attain unto such a vast power, and so ample a Dominion in
the world; with such gross Idolatry, diffused so copiously from thence, into
the world; with such a subjection of Kingdoms, and Provinces unto it: which
things, though they saw truly, and affirm constantly (by the certain, and
infallible evidence of the Text it self) yet they would not, or they could not
(by reason of their forestalled conceit, which they have of the holy Father,
and of his Apostolical State) behold, and discern them there, where only
they are to be found; where only, the Scripture does assign them; where
only, the palpable events, and clear ocurrences of the time discover them;
where only reason, and her discourse, does bring them forth unto sufficient
notice.

He therefore, that now sees not this truth, has a shallow head; and he,
that, seeing it, will yet dissemble it, has an hollow heart. Such men
therefore I may truly compare unto Achan; for as he took the Babylonish
garment, and covered it in his Tent [ Josh. 7.21.] expecting a more convenient
time, to make some further use thereof; so they lay up Babylonian doctrines,
and superstitions, in their hearts, expecting a time, to make more public
practice thereof; as opportunity may give them security in this behalf; men,
therefore, that look downward unto the changeable times in the earth, but not
upward, unto immutable eternity in heaven.

NINTHLY; since Rome is Babylon, therefore unity, and peace, and concord
should reign in the Church of God (which she labors to undermine with her
policy, and to ruinate with her power) that all may conspire in a sacred
expedition, to perform the word, and work of God, against Babylon; the den
of that accursed Beast. For, if the diversity of tongues hindered the setting
of Literal Babylon up, the diversity of hearts will hinder the pulling of
Spiritual Babylon down. Let us pray, then, for the peace of Jerusalem; let
them prosper that love it: let every man endeavor to cure domesticke wounds,
and make none; that every honest heart may bear witness unto it self, and
say with the wise woman of Abel, in her Apology for her City; I am one of
them that are peaceable, and faithful in Israel, 2. Sam. 20.19.

TENTHLY; and lastly, I conclude with a Moral observation upon this point.
Since Rome is degenerate from her ancient state, in purer times (when she was
a professor of the truth, and a protector of them, that repaired unto her for
defense thereof) having lost her Excellency, and forfeited her Name (by a
sorrowful change of Glorious Rome, into Impure Babylon) we may therefore
consider, that the Grace of GOD is not tied to any place, not fixed to any
City, not bound unto any Kingdom; but as he gives it freely, by his favor,
so he takes it away justly for our sins. Hence it is (according to the
construction of this point, by Ribera, the Jesuit) that this Rome (now
faithful, in his opinion) may become, and shall become Babylon hereafter, in
her Idolatry, Dominion, Power, Riches, etc. (though indeed she is now so, in
all these things; neither can it be presumed, by any reason, that she should
become so within a little time, even the space of two or three years, as they
ridiculously conceive, but necessarily suppose, for their own discharge) and
that she shall be a Cage of unclean Birds, and that she shall truly deserve
this name of Babylon, by the confluence of all Impieties, that shall then
reign therein. Which future (as he pretends, but present, as we see) estate
of Rome, and change of her name, in the change of her condition, he approoueth
by the instance of Jerusalem (as I noted before) once a faithful City, the
place of Gods special delight, etc. yet afterward a rebellious City, a
Where, in her Idolatries, and sins: wherewith, afterward, she provoked him
unto his fierce, and vindictiue wrath.

And indeed, well might this calamity fall upon Rome, if it fell upon
Jerusalem [How is the faithful City become an harlot? thy silver is become
dross, thy wine is mixed with water: Esaias 1. 21.] since Jerusalem was
privileged with more Immunities, by Gods own concession, and testimony, then
ever was that fatal City of Rome; howbeit, under the Emperors, she boasted
of her eternity, and, under the Popes, she braggeth of Saint Peter's Chair,
as being fastened immovably unto her sides; for so does Bellarmine conceive,
and earnestly press this point ( de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 4.) as a most
probable opinion, and piously to be believed. And though she may be burned
in the time of Antichrist (says he) yet that shall not be till the end of
the World: yea, by their computation of Antichrists reign, perhaps within a
year, or two before it, since Antichrist (reigning but three and an half)
cannot presently subdue other parts of the World, and bring his power against
this City.

But leaving Bellarmine, with his fellows, entangled in the bird-lime of their
own absurdities, let us not marvel at this mutation in Rome, which we now
behold (the name of it being thus translated into Babylon, since the dignity,
and glory, and luster of her ancient virtues are now extinguished by the
inundation of her sins, mentioned before, leading her into the Sea of her
perdition) nor at the mutation of Jerusalem, of which you heard before (her
name signifying, they shall see peace, but she saw, and felt the misery of
wars, for her great and many sins) let us, I say, not marvel at the one,
or other, but let us fear the like unto our selves, if God leave us unto our
selves, to dye, and to perish in the course of our sins. He may take away
the kingdom from us, and give it unto another Nation: he may remove our
Candlestick, and place it in another Region: so may Albion (this white and
fair Country of England, wherein we dwell) loose her name, and be turned
into a black, dark, and dismal Land; and then also God may be glorified in
our destruction, as he has been glorified in our preservation, and great
felicity; even to the admiration of all Lands, and envy of some, that have
complotted, but could not effect, our ruin.

Therefore, while we have the light, let us walk in it, and cast away the
works of darkness, that Gods truth may ever dwell in our Land; that, as we
have received it from our Fathers in peace (though they left it unto us by
their blood) so we may transmit the same unto our Children, and be ever
ready also to seal it with our blood; if God shall vouchsafe us that double
honor; to believe in his Son, and to suffer for his sake.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON. WHEREIN IS DISCVSSED the Second Part of this Text; Namely,
the PREDICATE, expressing the punishment of ROME; It is fallen; it is fallen.
AS Zarah first appeared in the birth, but, retyring himself, gave way, and
passage unto Pharez, to come, before him, into the world [ Genesis 38.29.] so the
Punishment of Rome (being first here in order of place, but last in order of
sense) has resigned its prioritie unto the Sin of Rome, in the method, and
disposition of the parts, which I have followed in the pursuit, and discussion
of my Text. Now therefore I come, from the Subject, to the Praedicate; from
Babylon, to her fall; from the Sin of Rome, to her Punishment; so confirmed,
so ratified, and entayled thereunto, that no wit (though subtle) no learning
(though great) no policy (though deep) no Art (though curious) no strength
(though mighty) shall be able to divert, nullify, and prevent the same; as
hereafter we shall in due place, most clearly discover and discern.

As for the Subject, BABYLON; whether it be Rome, or not; and in what estate;
and for what causes; the serious, and diligent tractation thereof required a
large extent of time, to speak sufficiently, and exactly thereof; to instruct
the ignorant, to confute the adversaries, to dissolve doubts, and to settle the
conscience of every intelligent, and indifferent hearer, in a very plain, and
certain apprehension of the truth: for that was my desire; and, I hope, it is
my success. But now, being to treat of the Praedicate [IT IS FALLEN] which is
so certain to ensue, and so easy to understand, I will speak thereof with
such brevity, as may not be obscure, and such length, as may not be tedious
unto you. And because method does make the discourse more easy, and the
memory more firm (as well in the hearer, as in the speaker) First; I will
speak of the time of this Punishment; why it is expressed in the preterperfect
tense; it is fallen; as Secondly; of the Duplication; why it is set forth with
this Ingemination: it is fallen, it is fallen; since it shall fall thus but
once; with a final, and irrecouerable ruin. Thirdly; of the quality, a fall,
and what the Spirit of God does intend thereby.

The FIRST point; concerning the Time, in the preterperfect tense; It is fallen.
THe word it self, according to the original Text, being in the aorist,
signifies a fall in a time indeterminately, or uncertainly past; and is more
aptly rendered, is fallen, then has fallen; as ( Ioh. 11.14.) our Savior says
of Lazarus; (...); he is dead; as it is to be translated in that place: where
(as in my Text) is imported an act, (which is past, and done) with a
CONTINVANCE in that state. For Lazarus did die, and then continued in the state
of the death: so here; Babylon IS FALLEN, and remains in the condition of her
ruin: from whence she shall not have her resurrection to worldly glory:
(though Lazarus had his resurrection to temporal life) for she shall fall,
and never rise again; as we shall afterward perceive.

But now, as the blessed Virgin desired to understand of the Angel; How shall
this be? Luc. 1.34. that she (being a Virgin) should yet conceive a son; so,
how can this be that Babylon, being in her Imperial souereigntie, at the time
of this Praediction (which yet, in the very letter, carries the form of a
relation, and report) and now being, after so many hundred years, in her
Papal eminency standing then and not being fallen yet, she should
notwithstanding be here said, to be already fallen; as if that were then
past, which is not yet come?

I frame my answer out of the learned disputation of Epiphanius, haeres. 79.
where he does well observe, that Esaias (the Evangelical Prophet) foresaw some
things, which were then to come, as if they had been already past; and that
they are expressed rather in the manner of a Narration, then of a Prediction;
and this was chiefly for two causes. First; to help the weakness of the
Prophets faith; and, secondly, to declare, thereby, the firmness of Gods
promise; in whose preuision, counsel, and purpose, the things were already
past unto, and before him, though they were yet to be fulfilled, in their act,
and execution, unto, and before men.

These two reasons hold due proportion, and just correspondency in, and with
our present case: where S. John (the Euangelical Prophet of the new Testament)
does understand, by revelation of the Angel (or rather of Jesus Christ
himself; as it is Apoc. 1.1.) that the proud and tyrannical Babylon is fallen;
that God has executed his fierce wrath upon that usurping City.

FIRST, then, God did, by this form of speech, confirm the faith of his
servant then, and of us now, that the length of time might not shake the
constancy of his, and our faith, in expectation of this event, but that, with
patience, we might attend the certain pleasure of God, though to be fulfilled
in an uncertain time. So in the Prophet Esaias: chap. 53. verse. 4.5. etc. He
was despised: he carried our sorrows: he was wounded for our transgressions:
he was afflicted, etc. thus Esaias wrote of the sacred Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which ensued near upon the space of eight hundred years, after the
time of this Prediction (or Narration rather: for so it is in the tenor of the
words; which do rather Historically relate, then Prophetically foretell) and
thus the Prophet (and, with him, the faithful Jews) does comfort himself, in
the secure expectation of so great a blessing, in the solid stabilitie of this
faith: in which, or rather by which, he saw that with the eye of his soul,
which he never saw with the eye of his body. The thing was infallible; but the
time was not so revealed unto him (at least, he never revealed it unto us) as
unto Daniel, that excellent and glorious Prophet, Dan. 9.25. This example alone
might suffice in this behalf; but that we have another, more answerable to our
present purpose, as being the very type, and true figure thereof; Esaias 21.9.
Where the Prophet, by vision, does understand the ruin of Literal Babylon,
expressed, and set down in the very like form of words; Babel is fallen: all
the Images of her Gods has he broken unto the ground. There God does support
the faith of Esaias, and of his children; to whom he does so clearly reveal
(as if the act were absolutely past) the destruction of that potent, rich, and
stately City; which was Gods Scourge to afflict his people, and his Hammer to
ruinate the City of Gods delight, and Temple of his presence. In like manner,
God does, here in my Text, give great consolation unto S. John, his servant,
and unto us, his brethren, in the seen (rather then foreseen) ruin of
mystical Babylon; which, in her Imperial state, did, for certain ages, with
Heathenish cruelty persecute, spoil, murder Gods Saints, with copious
effusion of their blood, which was the Seed of his Church: and in her Papal
state, has for many Ages, with Antichristian fury, afflicted, tormented,
killed many a member of Jesus Christ; which, for love of his truth, and fear
of his Name, could not, and would not participate in the Cup of her
incantations, wherewith she bewitcheth many Kings and Kingdoms in the World.

The point, then, which I here observe, is this: that our faith makes us
happy, and secure: our faith lifts us up, above sense and reason: our faith
is Jacobs staff, whereby we pass over, and through the Jorden of this World:
our faith is Manna, which feeds us in the Wilderness of this World, and
never cease, till we come into the Canaan of Heaven: then, and not before,
her Commission does expire. For as Barzillai conducted David over Jorden, but
went not with him to Jerusalem; so faith carries us out of this miserable
World, but goes not with us into the heavenly Kingdom, where the fruition of
God, and vision of his essence, exclude the nature of belief.

Two things therefore (here by the way) are fit for our instruction, to know
them, and for our meditation, to contemplate, and ruminate thereupon. FIRST;
the excellency of Faith in it self: it makes us secure in things to come, as
if they were already past; or, at the least, it makes them present unto us,
by bringing, and presenting them inwardly unto our minds. Wherein Faith
differs from Hope: for as Faith exceeds Hope in the extent of the object
(Hope looks only upon things desirable, and good; Faith upon all things,
generally, that are revealed by God) so where they meet in one object (the same
thing being believed by Faith, and desired by Hope; as life eternal etc.) they
have a different relation thereunto: for that is present unto Faith, which is
future unto Hope: Hope carries us unto the things; Faith brings the things
unto us. For as David's Worthies brake through the Host of their Enemies, and
brought water out of the Well of Bethlehem unto him, for which he longed: so
Faith ascends into all places be they never so high; descends into them,
be they never so deep; flies unto them, be they never so remote; pierces
into them, be they never so close, and brings us the thing, which we long
for, by an effectual, lively and forcible demonstration thereof unto the
soul. Hope therefore does comfortably attend; Faith does infallibly assure:
Hope sustayneth us in the expectation; Faith puts us in the possession.

SECONDLY; the benefit of Faith unto us: it is the eye of a Christian soul,
and (as Luther well observed) the reason of a Christian man; Credo, Domine: I
believe, O Lord; Mark 9.24. To which purpose well speaks one of the
Ancients; Fides credat, intelligentia non requirat: Let Faith believe, let not
the Understanding seek: Nay, Credendo intelligimus, non intelligendo credimus:
we believe not, by understanding; but we understand by believing. By this is
Abraham justified, Romans 4.17. for above Hope (the hope of humane reason) he
believed under Hope; the Hope of divine Faith.

By this Saint Paul does live; I live by Faith in the Son of God: Gal. 2.20.
By this Saint John conquereth all worldly things; this is the victory, that
overcomes the World; even our Faith. 1. John 5.4. To conclude, therefore,
according to the subject of my speech: Let Babylon extol her self, and
oppress others; let her advance her self, and deiect others: let her proceed
in her Cruelty, Idolatry, and Pride, etc. Yet for all these things, God shall
bring her to judgment. I believe it; I am certain of it; for he assures me
that she is already fallen. Faint not then (O Religious, and Christian hearts)
under her tyra^nie; but comfort your selves in her assured, and infallible
ruin; which God does certify, and Faith does apprehend, and time shall
manifest, at the last: but believe this; for, if you believe not, you shall not
be established: Esaias 7.9. Therefore I say unto all my brethren, as Iehoshaphat
unto his subjects; Put your trust in the Lord your God; believe his Prophets,
and you shall prosper. 2. Chron. 20.20.

Now, therefore, since Faith is of this excellency in it self, and brings
this benefit unto us (as that, by it, we enjoy things yet to come: by it we
behold things far distant: by it we are risen again, before we be dead: by
it we are ascended into Heaven, while we are yet in the Earth: by it we are
happy, though we be yet in the vale of misery) let us make three uses of this
incomparable gift of God.

First; to praise God for this grace, and particularly in this subject, whereof
I now entreat: that as he has revealed unto us the ruin of our capital
enemy [BABYLON] in his holy word, and by his own son, so he has given us
an assurance of Faith to believe it confidently, and so strengthened our faith
by the certainty of the prediction, as if we had seen it already fulfilled
with our eyes. Therefore, against her power, and glory, and dominion, and
reputation, and all outward splendor, and, finally, the concurrencie of her
friends, or slaves, to support her greatness, whereby she may seem to subsist
by a solid, and inconcussible foundation of her estate (the same being
strengthened by the depth of policy, and adorned with all variety of
Learning; as Saint Gregory himself did foresee, that the Ministers of
Antichrist were the Locusts, Apocal. 9.7, 10. having Crowns on their heads,
signifying literature, and knowledge: having also stings in their tails,
signifying power, and ability) I still oppose Gods purpose, revealed in his
Word, that cannot be frustrate, and my Faith, founded upon his Word, which
cannot be erroneous. For as Saint Augustine does ingeniously, and gravely
collect out of the Prophet Daniel, that the resurrection of the dead (so
clearly foretold by him) shall certainly be effectuated in due time, because
other things, in that Prophet (so long before set down in his Prophecy) have
had their real, and actual accomplishment, according to his prediction (which
being true in the rest, cannot fail in this) so my Faith is established
firmly here in this point, by diligent observation of all othet passages in
this Book (once very obscure, but now daily more, and more clear) because
other things being so notably discovered in their event, and the predictions of
this mystical Scripture being made so apparent in the success of time; I may
not, I will not, I cannot doubt of the adimpletion of this particular, but that
Romish Babylon shall finally come unto her fatal ruin, as she is already
fallen in Gods certain Preuision, eternal Counsel, and immutable Decree.

Secondly; we ought to nourish this faith by all possible means; especially,
by reading the holy Scriptures, and conferring one place thereof with another,
which is a singular key to open unto us their sense, and meaning; according to
the prescription of the two learned Fathers, Saint Hierome contra Pelag. lib.
1. c. 4. and August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. c. 9. and lib. 3. c. 26. So this
particular; the collation, and comparison of the Scriptures (one part of the
Revelation with another: the predictions of Saint Paul with the Visions of
Saint John) together with the observation of manifold occurrences in the Civil
and Ecclesiastical state, from time to time, since the declination of the
Empire, and corruption of the Church (as the Histories of each may sufficiently
deduce unto our knowledge) does notably discover this Babylonian Mystery unto
us, with the beginning, progress and decadencie of her estate.

THIRDLY; since Faith is the special gift of God, who sanctifies unto us the
outward means to increase, and confirm the same, we must humbly sue unto God
by devout, and earnest Prayer, with the Kingly Prophet David; Psalm. 119.18.
Open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see the wonderful things in thy Law.
Otherwise, as the Jews read the old Testament, and yet cannot find Christ
therein; so men may may read the new, and cannot see see Antichrist therein.
Why? because their hearts are hardened, their understandings are forestalled
with prejudice, the veil is over their eyes, they walk in darkness, and will
not see the light. For such I will pray that God would open their hearts, that
they may entertain his saving Truth. But for my self, and others, who have
bin in the like condition with me, (whose eyes were blinded with the glory of
Babylon; for as Zebul said unto Gaal, Iudic. 9.36. the shadow of the Mountains
seem men unto thee; so the shadow of many things seemed a substance of verity
unto us) I will thank God, for that he has opened our eyes to see this
mystery, and misery of Babylon; that she is fallen, that she is gone into
perdition, that God has destroyed her for ever. Credo Domine: O Lord, I
believe thy Word, not my own reason; which I captiuate into the obedience of
faith; and therefore I pray with thine Apostles; O Lord, increase our faith;
(Luke 17.5.) that we may believe thy Word.

And thus much be spoken concerning the first cause, why the Fall of Babylon,
which is yet to come, is expressed by a time already past.

SECONDLY; by this form, and tenor of speech, God does evidently declare unto
his Church the truth, and certainty of his promise in the destruction of
Babylon; that we may repose securely in this expectation of her ruin: his
dixit is a fecit: it is spoken, and it is done, in regard of his infallible
Word, and constant promise.

And that we may more clearly understand this point, we must observe a double
kind of Prophecy in the holy Scriptures. The FIRST is a Prophecy of
Commination: as God did threaten the fall of Nineveh within forty days; but
he threatened her fall, that she might not fall: for the effect of such a
Prophecy depends upon our comportment, and carriage thereupon toward God by
Repentance; and therefore it has a condition (employed here, though not
expressed; as sometimes it is, Jeremy 18.7, 8.) upon which the execution does
stay, or go forth, according as we perform, or neglect the same. So that this
Prophecy is conditional, and not absolute: it contains Gods sentence, and
not his Decree: and therefore it is expressed in the future tense; Nineueh
shall fall. In this case the Prophecy is changeable, if we be changed; and
therefore God calls us to Repentance, that we may escape his judgments. And
though this kind of Prophecy be not now particularly directed against thy
Country, nor thy person (as, in the holy Scriptures, it is often so directed
against such a Nation, such a City, and such a man) yet as the general
comminations of God against sinners do include us, and will take hold upon us,
if we return not unto God with the tears of true repentance; so the
particular examples of his comminations, denounced, and executed against some
Cities, and some persons, do, by equal reason, and a like cause, appertain
unto us; according to the rule, and observation of our blessed Savior; Except
you amend your lives, you shall likewise perish. Luke 13.3, 5. When Nineueh is
threatened by Jonah, England is threatened: when her ruin is declared by Nahum,
how can England be secure? Pares culpa, cur impares poena? why is she unlike to
Nineueh in punishment, who is so like to her in sin? we fear the
destruction, and not the sin: the effect, and not the cause. But it is the
Lords Mercies that we are not consumed.

The SECOND is a Prophecy of Predestination (as I may call it) depending
indeed upon our sin, but yet resolved by God, as well as declared; in which
respect it is absolute, and not conditional, once decreed, and never revoked:
concluded in Gods immutable counsel; foreseen in his infallible prescience;
and it is rather pronounced, then denounced by him. Therefore it is expressed,
either in the time past (as here in my Text, and Esaias 21.9.) or in the time
present, though the effect do not yet appear. For we may observe, that, in
the Prophecy of Jonah, (there being a commination against her, at that time)
it is delivered in the future tense; Nineueh shall fall: but, in the Prophecy
of Nahum (there being now a resolution of God, declared concerning her
subversion) it is delivered in the present tense: the Horseman lifts up the
bright Sword: a multitude is slain: they stumble upon their corpses. Chap.
3.3. and then, in the seventh Verse; Nineueh is destroyed. So that, (in this
kind of Prophecy) these two tenses, to wit, the present and the preterperfect,
have a coincident sense, and purpose, concerning an infallibility of the
event. Whence it is, that the Prophet Esaias joins them both together in the
Passion of Christ, and Mystery of our Redemption; saying of him, that he is
despised; he is a man full of sorrows; he is brought, as a sheep unto the
slaughter; Esaias 53.3.7. as well as, he was oppressed; he was afflicted, etc.

Thus we see, by the conference of Scriptures, that the fall of Babylon here,
certified unto us in the time past [it is fallen] does truly import an
inevitable event; a sentence never to be recalled; proceeding from a decree,
never to be changed; because God hereby does insinuate unto our knowledge,
that she would not be renewed by repentance, and that he would not confer
that grace upon her, but leave her to perish in the course of her own sins.

And this truth is farther assured, and amplified, by all the circumstances,
preceding her ruin; accompanying her ruin; following her ruin, in three
several chapters; 17.18.19. in such large and ample terms, that the very Image
of Babylon, in all these things, is effectually and lively exhibited, thereby,
unto our eyes; as a matter of present action, rather then future
accomplishment; rather to be seen, then to be believed.

Wherefore, the promise of God being thus verified unto us, in this form, and
manner of speech, let us (by the way) make a little reflection upon this point,
for our use and observation; as being of so great consequence, for the benefit
of Gods children, and advancement of his truth. First, then, the fidelity of
Gods promise herein does exclude, and confute their error, who suppose that
this is a prophecy of Commination only, and not of Resolution against Romish
Babylon; as though she might turn from her sins, and consequently, God
might turn from his wrath. In which opinion S. Hierome himself was involued,
as it appears, in his dark, uncertain, and perplexed discourse, touching
Babylon, and her ruin, in the conclusion of his second book against Iovinian;
whose errors did then begin to possess many in Rome, and to entangle them in
his snare, composed artificially out of sundry passages of the Scripture.
Whereupon S. Hierome makes a patheticall Apostrophe unto Rome in this manner;
I will speak unto thee, O Rome, which by the confession of Christ, have
blotted out of thy forehead, the blasphemy written therein. There, the name
Babylon is laid upon Ethnicall Rome, as if Rome were afterward to be
discharged for ever of this scandal; which misprision, and error I have
refuted in my former Sermon. But let us proceed with S. Hierome, who adds
immediately, by way of acclamation; O potent City; O Lady-citie of the world;
O City, commended by the voice of the Apostle; interpret thine own name:
according to the Greeks, it is a name of FORTITVDE: according to the Hebrews,
it is a name of SVBLIMITIE; Keep that, then, which thou art called: let virtue
make thee high, let not pleasure make thee base. All this pertains to her
honor, and exaltation; but then he gives his advice unto her presently, in
the very next words; Thou may, by thy repentance, escape the malediction,
which our Savior has threatened unto thee in his Revelation. No, not so, S.
Hierome, by your leave: she shall not escape: this is not a simple Commination
against Rome, which may be prevented, but a resolution, which must be
fulfilled. And now to conclude this observation; I here discover some
perplexity (as I said before) and uncertainty, yea, perhaps, contradiction in
this Rhetorical passage of this learned Father. For since he does confess,
that, howsoever Christian Rome had wiped away the infamy of her Ethnicall
estate, and does, notwithstanding, immediately affirm, that the Commination of
Christ (specified here in my Text, and more largely discoursed in the residue
of this Chapter) is yet in force against her, and that it is yet to be executed
upon her, if she, by repentance, shall not divert and euacuate the same; one of
these two things must necessarily here ensue: namely, that either she will be
Babylon again, in succeeding ages, and justly deserve this ruin (and so S.
Hierome, by the former words, does not discharge Rome from the name of Babylon,
for the time to come, but only in that her present state) or else that God
shall punish her in the time to come, for her sins already past; which I
doubt how it may stand with the Truth, and Justice of God, as I have more
largely deduced in my former Sermon. And so leaving it unto your judicious
censure, what you will determine of S. Hierome in this case (since this
judgment is laid upon Rome, in the name of Babylon, and for her Babylonian
sins) I end this observation with the confession of the learned Jesuits, as
well as of some ancient Fathers, that Rome being Babylon, shall be certainly
destroyed; howbeit, not by Antichrists power, as they conceive, but for
Antichrists pride, as we have partly seen heretofore, and shall see more
hereafter.

A Second use, to be made of this point, is, for the consolation of Gods
children: she curses them, she excommunicateth them, she deposes Kings,
she disposes Kingdoms, she exposes both to ruin, she absolueth subjects
from obedience, she stirs foreign powers against them, she burns, she
drowneth, she spares no means to extirpate them out of the world. Comfort
now your selves in Gods promise; she is fallen, with him: she shall fall
before us: for Gods Word shall not fall. Again, she takes upon her to
foretell our ruin, and destruction. Pererius, a learned Jesuit (but a blind
Babylonian) in his exposition of Genes. 15.16. complains bitterly of the
persecution of Catholics in England, which (says he, meaning England) though
she remain in the course of her sins, yet she enjoys great felicity; but he
recollecteth himself with that speech of God unto Abraham; the sins of the
Amorites are not yet full; ENGLAND (says he) though full of sin, has not
yet fulfilled the number of her sins: but, when they are come to their
height, she shall certainly perish: and, if any man think, that this time is
not far off, he, in my opinion, is not far from the truth. Now though we
are to learn something of our enemies (but more by the examples in sacred
Scripture) that we may repent and change our lives, that so God may show his
mercy, and compassion toward us, yet two things I observe here; the one for
their reproof; the other for our comfort. The first is for their reproof; for
(as S. Augustine does truly note) the Devil, to gain the reputation of
Prescience, and Deity, foretells such things, as he is resolved to effect,
and bring to pass, by his own power, and means; if God give permission unto
his desire: so the Ianizaries of Babylon, the progeny of Loiola (Frogs in
the Revelation, 16.13. as some have ingeniously conceived, for that a Jesuit
is, ordinarily a politic, and active Polypragmon; and so an Amphibion, that
conuerseth in two elements of Civil, and Ecclesiastical affairs; of the
Church, and of the state) may seem to be Prophets in foretelling the ruin of
my dear, and native Country, whereas they foretell that, which themselves do
project, and labor to atchieue; and it had been effectuated long before this
time, but that he has had mercy upon England, who will show none to Babylon,
and has not left this other better world of Britain unto their pernicious
designs.

The second is for our comfort; they have prophecies of our destruction; but
written in their own wicked, and treacherous hearts; and therefore I may say
unto such a Prophet, as Nehemiah unto Sanballat; Neh. 6.8. It is not done
[saith he; it shall not be done, say I] according to these words, that thou
say; for thou fainest them of thine own heart: Thy prophecies are vagabond
lies, flying up and down in wandering papers of no weight, or value; but this
our prophecy (or rather S. John's, or rather Christ's by him) is registered in
the sacred Scripture of infallible truth. So that we may say securely
(concerning the ruin of Babylon) with our (not their) S. Peter: 2.5.19. We
have a most sure word of a Prophet, to the which we do well, that we take
heed: for Babylon shall fall (since Gods Word cannot fall) the sentence is
past, the execution is at hand.

And thus much of the first point, to be observed here in the second part of
my Text; namely, the TIME of Romes punishment; which, being then, and yet to
come, is expressed by the Angels proclamation, in the time already past.

The SECOND point, concerning the duplication of her punishment; It is fallen;
and again, it is fallen.
AS our blessed Savior sent forth his Disciples, two, and two; Luc. 10.1. so
he sets forth the notice of Babylons ruin, by a doubled voice: And as the
Law of the Decalogue was written twice by the finger of God; so the fall of
Babylon is proclaimed twice by the mouth of Christ. The reasons whereof, with
such circumstances, as deserve due ponderation in this case, I will examine
with perspicuous brevity, and so proceed to the maine substance of my Text.

The FIRST reason is that, which S. Ambrose upon the Revelations (or the Author
of that Commentary, which is graced with his name) does assign in this
manner; Babylon is said twice to fall, because a great multitude fell from her
communion, and entertained the Christian Faith; and because she shall be
punished, in the last day, with eternal death. So he resolves, that Babylon
falls twice, but he never came once near unto the truth of the point; for he
seems either to speak of Babylon, as it is the mystical City of sin, and
not as the particular City of Rome; or else he means, that this fall does
signify the fall of Rome from Paganism unto Christ; which, being a fall of
singular felicity, and joy differs much from the fall intended in this
place; which is a fall of great misery, sorrow, and fear; as you shall
perceive anon, when I come unto the third part of my Sermon; where I am to
treat directly of this point.

Therefore I come now unto a SECOND exposition, which seems to be ingenious,
but is not substantial: namely, that Rome has a double fall: the one in
respect of Gods truth and grace, wherein she sometimes stood, and from whence
she is long since fallen. But though she be so fallen, yet this fall is
included in the subject of my Text [BABYLON; which implies the condition of
Rome in her sin] and not in the praedicate; IT IS FALLEN: which signifies her
estate in her punishment, so that the second fall of Rome is her extreme ruin,
by the vindictiue Justice of God. And indeed this the fall, here to be
understood; for that (as I said before) the Angel speaks here of the
punishment, and not of the sin of Rome; and so this second fall ensues upon
the first: for, because she is Babylon (fallen from Gods truth) she shall
therefore have another fall (expressed here by repetition) and perish by Gods
judgment.

THIRDLY, then, this Fall is here repeated, to show the certainty of the
event, as written in the Book of Gods immutable Decree: Pharaoh had two
Dreams, which differed in form, and resemblance, but agreed (and were one) in
the sense thereof, and purpose of God; Genesis 41.32. etc. The ruin of Rome is
here expressed by one word, twice uttered, but with the same meaning, and the
same intention; that as the Dream was doubled unto Pharaoh, because the thing
was established by God, so the subversion of Rome is inculcated here in my Text
unto us, because this thing is established by God, and shall be performed
infallibly in the due and appointed time. Therefore, as before, her fall was
notified in the preterperfect tense [she is fallen] so here it is ratified in
the duplication of the same word; it is fallen; it is fallen. For who could
reasonably, and probably conceive, according to the evidence, and appearance of
things, in that time (or long after) that Rome, so glorious in the Empire, so
venerable in the Church, so potent in Kingdoms, so rich in estate, so renowned
in fame, should come to this despicable, and deplorable end?

Thanks, therefore, be unto our God, who, as he can, and will humble her
Pride, abase her Glory, break her Power, dissolve her Strength, and defeat
her Policies, to her confusion, and the honor of his Name; so he has now so
clearly revealed, and so certainly assured this Truth, and the certainty
thereof, unto us, for our comfort; that now we envy not her greatness,
because we know her fall: we fear not her malice, because we see her
misery: we regard not the insolent venditation of her supposed eternity,
because we perceive the doleful expiration of her estate.

But here, by the way, we may observe, to our admiration; that many
Babylonians should not yet discern, and fear this extreme vastation, so
certainly to fall upon that miserable City; so constantly pronounced, so
vehemently reiterated by the Angel unto Saint John; and that, being simply
gulled with the false opinion of her Ethnicall estate (already past) they
should be so blind, and obdurate, in the knowledge, and acknowledgement of so
clear, and so evident a truth.

Notwithstanding, when I reflect upon the judgments of God, inflicted upon
other people, I see, that, before their fatal destruction, they have suffered
an extraordinary defect in humane policy, and ordinary wisdom, (the justice
of God concurring with the merit of their sins) so that they could not
carefully prevent an eminent, and imminent danger, nor wisely foresee the same.
So the Lord himself does give his own testimony of the excecation of the
Edomites (otherwise an ingenious, and circumspect Nation) in this manner: Is
wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel perished from their children? Is their
wisdom vanished? Jeremy 49.7. And that this their excecation proceeds from
God, he himself does declare by the Prophet Obadiah; Verse 8. Shall not I, in
that day, even destroy the Wisemen out of Edom, and understanding from the
Mount of Esau? Whence it is, that they could not discern a false friend from a
true enemy; who under the pretensed terms of love, and unity, did supplant,
and undermine their State. Therefore it is said in the Verse, immediately going
before: the men, that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee: whereupon
the Lord passes his Divine censure upon Edom in these words; there is none
understanding in him. For as the Philistims put out Samsons eyes, and then made
him grind for their use, so GOD permits the secret, and malicious enemies of
some Nation, to put out the eyes of their wisdom, by sugared delusions, and
then make them to serve under the burdens, which they impose upon them.

FOURTHLY, and lastly; this duplication of Babylons fall, is to show the
conformity betwixt the Old Testament, and the New, in this behalf; and that
one Spirit, in sundry Ages, did, in the like manner direct, and assist the
Church. For thus we read (as I noted once before) in the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
21. Verse 9. Babell is fallen, it is fallen. Thus the Antitype of new Babylon
answers to the type of the old; the Spirit to the Letter: the thing to the
figure. For as the Seraphims cried one to another in the same words, holy,
holy, etc. Esaias 6.3. so the two Testaments have mutual consonancie of words in
this point; to signify thereby unto us, that, this being spoken once (nay
rather twice) of Literal Babylon, and being fulfilled in her; it, being now
spoken again the second time of the Mystical Babylon, shall be completed in
her likewise; since, by the Historical evidence of things, that are already
past, we may securely repose in the Prophetical prediction of things, that are
yet to come. It is still the same God that pronounces it; the same Spirit that
reuealeth it: the same Providence, that guides all things to their certain,
and determined event.

Hence therefore we may deduce, for our instruction; that the presidents of the
Old Testament should direct, and inform us under the New, to trust in God,
whose Truth is still the same; to love God, whose Goodness is still the same;
to fear God, whose Justice is still the same; who, by the examples of his
severity in the Old Testament, frames us unto the reverence of his Name, and
obedience of his Will, in the New; as Saint Paul himself does gravely, and
divinely teach us; 1. Cor. 11.6. These are ensamples to us; and again, Verse
11. All these things came unto them for ensamples, and were written to admonish
us. If, therefore, Babylon hear of a ruin, denounced by Esaias, Let Rome fear
her ruin revealed by Saint John. And let us also conceive (for it is a truth,
and worthy by all means to be received) that as a general destruction of my
people in the Old Testament, is an admonition to any Kingdom or Nation in the
New, so a particular destruction of any person there, is an example, and
premonition unto me, and to thee, and to every one in his degree, quality, and
place, to avoid the like sin, by which the former perished, and fell, through
the exemplarie justice of God; esteeming his case to be a prediction of ours;
as if our very names, and persons, were expressed in that Scripture, and in
that example; as indeed it is, really, though not verbally; not in such
apparent, and identicall terms, as the ruin of Mystical Babylon here is
discovered in the ruin of Literal Babylon there.

And so much of the second point, which I proposed before in the distribution
of my Text, and have now explained in the orderly pursuit thereof.

The THIRD point, concerning the nature, and quality of this ruin; what this
Fall of Babylon does here import.
NOw I am come unto the substance of the matter: for the former points
(concerning the time past, and the Duplication of the fall) are accidents, and
circumstances of the Fall, whereof I now entreat, but yet such, so proper, and
so effectual, as that they bring an especial light thereunto; and therefore I
have handled them before, as being accessorie helps for us, to understand the
principal point it self.

As for the word [Fall] it is plain, and easy, but very significant, and
Emphaticall in this place; it being a fall of special, and extraordinary note;
as we shall perceive, in the third sense, and acception of the same.

FIRST, therefore; according to the primarie, and simple meaning of the Letter;
it does import a local motion, whereby some thing of an higher place, or of a
firm consistencie before, is lapsed into a lower (properly upon the Earth) or
so dissolved into pieces, that it does not cohere, and stand in the former
quality, and manner: as the house fell upon Jobs children [ Job 1.19.] though
by a violent means; and the walls of Jericho fell down [as it Josh. 6.20.]
though by a miraculous means; signifying in a sense allegorical, the fall of
Impiety at the sound of Gods Word.

Though Babylon shall have a fall, of a more markable nature (as anon you shall
hear) yet this fall does likewise appertain unto her, in her glorious
Churches, in her sumptuous Monasteries, in other magnificall Palaces of his
Holiness, and his Cardinals (whom he makes Princes in all Lands; as some
have blasphemously applied that Text: Psalm. 45.16.) in the stately houses of
the Citizens, and finally in her walls; the carcass of that proud, and
insolent City.

O that spacious, ancient, and venerable Church of Saint Peter: it was
sometimes a Sanctuary, and protection of the miserable, distressed Citizens of
Rome (as Sozom. does relate, lib, 9. c. 9. and Saint Augustine himself does
insinuate; De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. c. 1. and 4.) when the furious, and barbarous
Goths spoiled, and ransacked, the City, and made a cruel massacre of the
people. But now it is defiled with Babylonian Merchandise:) and, when the Day
of this vengeance does come, it shall fall; it shall be cast down to the
ground; it shall have no Sanctuary for its own protection. That shall be
verified in her, which was fulfilled in the desolation of the Temple; One stone
shall not be left upon another. And this is the first fall of Babylon in this
place.

SECONDLY; this Word does sometimes note the act of death; whence the name of a
carcass (in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin) is derived in the several
originals; for that, by death, we fall and cannot now stand) and we fall into
the earth; as the Center of gravity, to which all heavy things do tend, and
where they have their rest.

Now death is either natural, or violent. NATVRALL; as Psalm. 82.7. You Princes
shall fall like others: that is; you shall dye (as it is in the words, next
going before) and as you had one Genesis by birth, so you shall have one Exodus
by death, with the poorest, and meanest of the people. Here is something for
our Humiliation; the strong, the rich, the mighty man shall fall, and fall
into the earth; the mother, out of whose substance he is framed, and into which
he shall be dissolved again. What is my condition? I am a piece of clay,
molded into humane shape, what is my end? I must fall into the matter, and
principle of my beginning, O that I could ever think of this fall into the
earth, by my death; that I might never fall from Heaven by my sins.

This fall is no special judgment unto the Citizens of Babylon, which is a
general necessity of all men in the World. But let us observe something for
our Consolation, and then we shall see more. For our fall by death is not
without hope of a Resurrection, and that also unto eternal glory (for the
resurrection of the dead is the confidence of Christians, as Tertullian
speaks) but the fall of Babylon (by the Sword, by fire, by extreme
desolation) has no hope of a civil resurrection, to arise, after her fall,
unto any splendor, or dignity again: and therefore I may say of her, as
Jacob of his eldest son, the firstborn of his strength; thy dignity is
gone, Genesis 49.4.

The second kind of fall by death, is VIOLENT; and now we come nearer unto the
point. This kind of fall is often remembered in the sacred Scriptures; but, out
of many places, I will select a few, as Exodus 32.28. There fell of the people
about three thousand men; when Moses handled the peoples cause, with God, by
Prayer; but Gods cause, with the people, by Swords. And Psalm. 36.12. They are
fallen, that work iniquity.

This fall may well be applied unto Babylon, because her ruin is not only
local (for houses and walls) but personal, for the Inhabitants themselves
(Clericall, and Laicall (who, dwelling within her precincts, shall fall by the
extreme fury of the Sword, which shall devour their flesh, in the Day of the
LORDS vengeance.

Tremble, therefore, O ye unhappy Citizens, at the voice of the fatal ruin
of that unfortunate place; your knees may smite, the one against the other (as
Balshazzars, Dan. 5.6.) with the extremity of your just fear, for that
disastrous calamity, which shall fall upon you, or upon your posterity, and
succession. Therefore depart out of her; it is Gods own premonition unto you;
and they, that are his people, will depart out of her, either corporally, to
save their lives, or spiritually to save their souls. And, as for you, that
are yet immaculate, and not defiled with her contagion, hear not her
inuitation, be not entangled with her voice. She cries; Venite; come unto me,
the mother of the faithful: but Christ says; Exite, go out of her, my
people, that you be not partakers of her plague; for she is the Mother of
Fornications. And so much of the second fall of Babylon, which has now
prepared us unto the third.

THIRDLY, then, this word does signify such a ruin, as is without recovery,
with extreme vastitie, horrible misery, unspeakable desolation; which Babylon
shall more sensibly feel, then we can truly declare; res superat fidem; the
matter exceeds belief: humane belief, that stands upon reason, but not
Divine, which is grounded upon revelation; as I shall have special occasion to
declare more fully, in my ensuing Discourse.

Meanewhile, to justify this last acception, and sense of this Word, according
to the tenor of the holy Scriptures, I produce unto you certain instances,
very agreeable to our purpose. For if we speak of the persons, inhabiting in
Babylon, then David writes aptly of such falling; Psalm. 36.12. They [mine
enemies] are cast down [they are fallen; in the words immediately before] and
shall not be able to rise. But, if we speak of the place it self; Jericho is
an example in this case Josh. 6. The walls fell down; man, and woman, young,
and old, with all the cattle, were destroyed therein. And to fill up the
measure of the calamity thereof, she was to lie buried in the Tomb of her
own ruins; and a curse laid by Joshua upon the man, that should repair, and
reedifie the same. To conclude; the pitiful (but unpitied) vastation of this
Babylonian City, her doleful fall (to follow the prescript evidence of my
Text) is resembled in the just affliction, which fell upon the Citizens, and
City of Sechem, which Abimelech destroyed, and sowed the place thereof with
Salt; Iudic. 9.45.

Such shall be (if any pattern can exemplify her case) the fall; the fatal
end, the woeful period of this great, and glorious City. It is final; for I
read of none after it; it is singular; for I read of none such before it.

For, to pass by the conflagration of Rome by the Gauls (when she was yet in
the time of her minority, and youth) and to come to the state of her
declination, in the time of Honorius, the Emperor, upon the year of Christ
414. we find in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Histories, that Alarichus, King
of the Goths, took the City of Rome (rather by Famine, then by the Sword, as
Saint Hierome does relate) burned some part thereof, slew the Citizens,
despoyled them of an infinite abundance of riches; but (as I noted before) gave
them their lives, that could take Sanctuary in the great and magnificent
Church of Saint Peter. After his decease (which happened within a short time
after this expilation of Rome) his kinsman Ataulphus returned unto Rome with a
mighty power, resolving to put all the Citizens to the sword; to raze the
City unto the very foundations; to erect another in some commodious place, and
to impose the name of Gothia upon it: from which resolution he was diuerted by
the humble supplications, and gentle persuasions of his dearly beloved wife
Placidia, sister unto Honorius: and so Rome did then escape that ruin, unto
which she is yet reserved, and which she shall certainly feel in the due
appointed time.

Afterward, upon the year 450. Gensericus, King of the Vandals, so sacked, and
ransacked the City of Rome, that, for some time, it remained without any
inhabitant to dwell therein. But much more grievous, and fearful was her
desolation by Totilas, King of the Goths, upon the year 547. a great part of
the walls being cast down, the houses burned, the Citizens killed; so that
neither man, nor woman remained therein; as Bellarmine himself (out of
Blondus) does briefly recite C. de Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 7.) but to a very poor,
and simple purpose; as you shall hear anon in the passage of my discourse.

Mean while, descending nearer unto our times, I smile at the fearful
apprehensions of Pope Alexander the sixth (upon the year 1494.) when he was
troubled, and all Rome with him, at the military approach of Charles the eight
of France; and therefore upon a treaty of peace, he accepted the Articles,
imposed upon him by the victorious Prince, for the time (but with a perfidious
heart, as the sequel of things did discover) who thereupon was received into
Rome with tender demonstration of singular respect, and love; otherwise, he
had certainly imitated the president of the conquering Gauls ancient times,
and burnt the whore with fire; which work did rather appertain unto his
successors in the Crown of France; as time, the mother of truth, shall one
day reveal to fulfill that, which Truth, the Son of eternity (Christ Jesus
himself) does here foretell.

But, leaving Rome in that passion of fear, let us behold her in the passion
of sense, upon the year 1524. when the Imperial Army of Charles the fifth
(marching under the conduct of the Duke of Burbon, who was fatally slain
before the walls of Babylon) first surprised the Suburbs, and then invaded the
City it self; in whom it is doubtful (says Guicciardine, lib. 18. which
History well deserves your reuiew) whether bare more rule; the humor of
cruelty to kill, or the appetite of lust to deflower, or the rage of avarice
to spoil. What honor, and reverence did these Catholic Soldiers perform
then unto the holy Father, and his worthy Prelates? As for him, he was made a
prisoner in his own Castle, and redeemed himself from farther dangers at a
great proportion of monyes, and remained in custody, until it pleased the
Emperor, out of his special grace, to release him again. As for them; many
of them were set upon Asses, and lean Moyles, with great dignity, and
contempt, having their faces reuersed to the crowpe of the beasts; and so,
being apparrelled with the habites, and marks of their dignity, were made a
spectacle of derision in the public view; while some other Cardinals being
naked, and soled along with buffets and bastinadoes, redeemed their lives with
deep exhaustion of their plate, and treasure.

Now, if in these calamities of Rome, which are the praeludia, and, as it were,
the figures of her future destruction, we see such furious actions of
hostility against her, not only by barbarous enemies, but by them, who carry
the names, and titles of Christian, and of Catholic, by particular style, what
incomparable cruelty will so many several Nations exercise against her, with
implacable hatred under the Ensigns of so many several Princes, enraged
against her, for her violation of their Crowns, and stirred up by the special
judgment of God? O vnexemplifyable fall; I want terms to express it. And
therefore as the Painter, being to represent, by a lively Image, the behavior
of the father of Iphigenia (lamenting, and bewayling her pitiful death) drew a
veil before his face; that being a more proper signification of his grief,
which could not be expressed in any shape, or color, so I will in silence
admire, (and I would condole it also, but that I find the Saints rejoice
thereat: Cap. 19. 1. 2, 3.) this fall, (I say) of Rome; and thus by silence, as
wanting all words, I shall speak more, that if I could deliver the nature of
it in many.

Thus now, at the last, I have made an interpretation of this fall; comparing
it with other falls, which were some shadows of it; Rome being her own type
herein. Howbeit as the Prophet [ Esaias 9.1.] calls it a light affliction of
some Tribes of Israel, by Tiglah Piesar, in comparison of the greater
captivity afterward, under Shalmaneser, so the former falls of Rome were light
in comparison of this fall; nay rather they were concussions, and shakes, this
only is the fall, and ruin thereof.

Consider therefore the very words of the Text, wherewith I will finish this
part of my Discourse; Chap. 18. It is become an habitation of Devils; reward
her, as she has rewarded you; fill her the Cup double: her plagues shall come
in one day; death, sorrow, and famine; she shall be burnt with fire: no man
buyeth her ware any more: her Merchants shall howl and cry, etc. Then Chapter
19.3. her smoke rose up for evermore. And so much of the fall; namely, for the
manner and quality of the same. Whereby you may perceive the simple subtlety
of some learned Papists, who suppose this fall of Rome to be merely
spiritual (in falling from Ethnicall Idolatry unto Christian Religion) and not
a material fall, by outward ruin; as Ludouicus ab Alcasar does vainly dream;
standing in a foolish opposition herein unto the judicious resolution of
Viegas, and Ribera; his more ingenious, and exact compeeres.

Now, for conclusion of this whole matter, I must take notice of four
Questions, which are appendant, and belonging unto this fall; by fair
discussion whereof, I shall exempt, and take out of your minds, certain Doubts,
which may arise (and perhaps are already risen) in your apprehension of this
fall.

The FIRST Question.
FIrst, therefore, if you desire to understand, by whose means, and operation,
Babylon shall thus fall, and who shall be the instruments of Gods vindictiue
Justice in this behalf; I answer, from the sacred Oracle of God himself;
that it shall be executed by the uniform, and powerful concurrencie of many
Kings, and States; concerning whom three things are markeably delivered in this
Prophetical Word of God.

First; there is observed their beginning, and exaltation; Apoc. 17.12. The
ten horns, [to wit, of the Beast: Verse 3. which is the second Beast in
Babylon, succeeding in the place of the first: Apoc. 13.11.] are ten Kings,
which yet have not received a Kingdom to wit, in the time of Saint Iohn] but
shall receive power, as Kings, at one hour with the Beast. For, as the
several Dominions of the Kings, and States in Europe, were members of the
great and mighty body of the Roman Empire, which was dissolved afterward
into these parts, of which it was formerly compounded, and made; so these
Kings, and States, arose near upon the same time, which is here called one
hour; not in an exact measure of time, but in a convenient propinquitie, and
neernesse of time, according to the phrase of holy Writ; wherein the word hour
is taken in this sense; as 1. These. 2.17. We were kept from you, (...), for an
hour: and Philem. 15. Onesimus departed from Philemon his Master, (...), for
an hour: and Saint John 1.2.18. Little children; it is (...), the last hour,
etc. It follows; that they received this power at one hour with the Beast;
beause as the Imperial dignity, and glory did decay, by fraction, and
partition of the potent Empire, so the second Beast in Babylon, [the Papal
State] began to advance it self, and to succeed, by a pretense of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, in the place of the former Beast [the State
Imperial] as he began to decrease; according to the prediction of S. Paul;
which I have touched before in the precedent Sermon, unto which, I must
therefore, remit you for the more clear understanding of this point. But now
you may see, what these Kings are; whence, when, with whom, and from whom,
they took their Royal dignity, and power.

Secondly, there is observed the subjection, and submission of their power unto
this second Beast, whose Ecclesiastical glory, and estimation, did ensnare
the civil Dominion of these Kings: for so it follows, Verse 13. They shall
give their power; and authority unto the Beast; upon which he cunningly
intruded, by fair pretenses of his succession unto the Prince of the Apostles,
and of his immediate function under Jesus Christ; whose name he abused to the
corruption, and suppression of his Evangelical Truth. Thus these Kings became
his instruments also, to serve his turn, in the oppugnation of Christ's
Doctrine, and in the persecution of his members, as the prediction, in the
fourteenth Verse, does truly bear, and the event of things does notably
declare. And now they were made the horns of this second Beast, that is to
say, his strength and corroboration (as this word horn does often signify, in
the Scriptures; but more specially in the Book of Psalms, as in the
Prophecies of Daniel) whereby he should subsist in power, honor, and command:
for all these things shall decay in the Beast, when these Kings shall withdraw
their obedience from him, and resume their own power; which as they did fondly
submit unto him, so he does proudly vendicate unto himself; for so he was
foretold by Saint Paul, that he should lift up himself above all, that is
called God.

Thirdly; there ensues their action of hostility, and enterprise of war
against Babylon, wherein this Beast does reign; for so it is written; Verse
16. The ten horns, which thou saw upon the Beast, are they, that shall hate
the Whore [what? are they like Amnon, whose love to Tamar turned into hatred?]
and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire; the old punishment, which in the Law of Nature, was inflicted upon
Whores, Genes. 38.24. Here is a strange Metamorphosis; Friends changed into
Enemies; setters up into pullers down, Defenders into Expugnators; Babylons
lovers into her haters; the strength of the Beast into his ruin. This is the
Lords doing (as you shall hear anon) and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Meanewhile, I cannot pass forward, unto the discussion of other points,
without a serious consideration of this; namely, that these Kings, thus
submitting their Royal power unto the Beast (partly to take a Crown by his
donation; partly to hold it ratified by his confirmation: partly to hold it)
upon terms of fealty to him; partly to acknowledge all their Dominion to be
derived from his plenitude of power; partly to suffer him to execute foreign
jurisdiction in their Realms; partly to stand in awe of his sentententiall
deposition; partly to suffer an expilation of the goods, and revenues of their
subjects, issuing forth of their Kingdoms, to the supportation of Babylon;
partly to permit their Clericall subjects to be exempted from their Regal
authority; and many other courses, whereby the proud usurping Beast does
either closely, like a Fox, insinuate into their Crowns, or violently like a
Lion, insult upon the same; by their own folly, tenderness, and ignorance in
the beginning; that so Gods Word might be fulfilled herein) I say, I cannot
neglect the observation of this point; that now these Kings (not the same in
person, but in succession) should begin to be wise, to understand his
tyranny, to see their own misery, and to revenge these wrongs with fire, and
with sword, without compassion, and without remorse. Leo; a Bishop of Rome, but
in more happy times (yet one, that, in some things prepared a way for the
advancement of this second Beast; which, from a Pygmie became an Hercules, and
by several augmentations, grew up more, and more, from small beginnings, unto
the full proportion of his greatness, wherein he stood long, but now begins
to fall) thou, O blessed Leo, by the venerable authority of thy grave, and
gracious person, by thy perswasiue Eloquence, and gentle intreates, did
once divert the hostile invasion of Attila (King of the Hunnes) from Rome (not
then Babylon) and thou wast a Savior unto her (as many of the Judges in
ancient Israel were called) not by a Sword, but by thy word, full of power, and
efficacy in thy religious mouth. But now this Spirit, this excellency shall
not be in thy successors, when the fatal hour of her last desolation, and
fall, is come; for the wrath of these Kings shall be specially incensed
against this Beast; a Lion indeed, not in heroical fortitude, and Christian
magnanimity, but in cruelty, oppression, insultation; stirring up these Kings
unto this fury, which no persuasion, no eloquence, no policy can appease.

And now, to conclude this point; I find two observations, that attend this
last passage of my discourse. The FIRST concerns a dogmaticall error, and
false opinion, prevailing very much in the Synagogue of Rome; to wit, that
Antichrist shall destroy Rome: which false opinion by misinterpretation arose
out of the true doctrine of S. Paul, viz. That Antichrist shall not be
disclosed, until the Roman Emperor were taken out of the way; which then
withheld, and so kept down all other power, that Antichrist could not exalt
himself. Hence the ancient Fathers (as namely S. Hierome; epist. 151. quaest.
11. and, long before him, Tertull. in apologetic. cap. 32. whose judgment also
S. Augustine does follow, de Ciuit. Dei, l. 20. c. 23. but upon another ground,
taken, and mistaken out of the Prophet Daniel) do very truly deduce, and
infer, that the Roman Empire shall not be destroyed, until the coming of
Antichrist; and therefore they seemed reasonably to suppose also, that it shall
be destroyed by him; and so, consequently, that Rome it self shall suffer her
final ruin by his power, and by his means. Which erroneous deduction seems
to have had a general applause in the ancient times of the Church; as we may
see by the testimony of Lactantius, who lived in the time of Constantine the
Great, upon the year 320. Thus therefore he writes; Institut. divine. l. 7.
c. 25. That the end of the world will not come, till the destruction of Rome:
and that the abominable Tyrant [Antichrist] shall perform that work. But as
Lactantius, with many other Christians, was infected with sundry false
appehensions (as, in this very Chapter, That the world should stand but two
hundred years after their time; and else where; That Christ should reign a
thousand years on the earth, etc.) so, in this particular conceit, he, and
others, digressed apparently from the truth, as wanting the clear evidence of
times, and the success of things, to help them in the right interpretation of
the Scriptures, in this prophetical kind.

It is then a very certain, and pregnant truth, which Tertullian, Augustine,
Hierome, Chrysostom, and others did conceive, that the Roman Empire should
stand, till the revelation of Antichrist (according to the prediction of S.
Paul.) And again, it is true, in a great part, that Antichrist has destroyed
it; for the Popes were a special means to exclude the Emperor out of Italy,
and Rome (which they have invaded) and, erecting a new Empire in the Kings of
France, and after in Germany, they finally made this Nominall Emperor, of
Rome, a Real slave of Babylon; though sometimes with great reluctation, and
opposition of the Emperors, as he was able to resist; whom therefore the Popes
did gladly suffer to be deprived of their rights in Italy; the same being a
Country, specially accommodated for the advantage, and security of his
greatness, because there are sundry forms of governments, and many particular
states therein: In regard whereof, as one has a diligent eye to observe, and
hinder the increase, and enlargement of another, so, if any of them oppose his
Holiness, he is ready, with his thunderbolts, to shake that State in pieces,
and to raise up other Princes there, to make an execution of his sentence. And
because he does pretend some particular interest in the goodly, and rich
Kingdom of Naples, he therefore installed the Kings thereof, with this caution
and reservation, That they should never take the Empire upon them; fearing,
thereupon, the potencie of so near a neighbor, as being prejudicial unto his
triple Crown. This was a matter of special exception, taken against Charles
the fifth, in his election unto the Imperial State; though not pursued,
because there was no remedy against so mighty a Prince; who, as he seemed to
accept the Empire, against the ancient provision of the Popes, so he seemed
unmannerly to resign the same unto Ferdinand, his brother, and to establish
him therein, without the notice, and approbation of the holy Father. Thus
far, then, we agree with the judgment of antiquity, touching the Roman
Emperor, and Antichrist, because it agrees very well with the prediction of
Saint Paul. But the predictions of Saint John do sufficiently refute the last
opinion (which seems to be inferred out of the former, by an empty, and
barren speculation) to wit, that the City of Rome shall be destroyed by
Antichrist, and his associats; as Lactantius lib. 7. c. 16. does erroniously
conceive. For the Second Beast in Rome is Antichrist himself, to whom the ten
Kings gave their power; and Babylon shall be destroyed, not by this Second
Beast, but for this Second Beast; the ten Kings not being now his helpers, and
assistants in this subversion of Babylon, but his enemies, and assailants, to
ruinate Babylon, (wherein he reigns) because of his abominable comportment
therein; as the context of the Scripture it self does infallibly demonstrate,
and conclude. And therefore, as in many other points, concerning Babylon, and
Antichrist, the ancient Christians were much deceived; so particularly in this,
namely, to imagine, that he should destroy Rome, who is the Man (or rather the
Beast) that bears rule therein, as in the very Seat, and Center of his
Dominion.

The SECOND observation, which from thence I frame, and tender unto your
religious hearts, is a Moral truth; namely, that God does often punish our
sins, by such means, and instruments, as were serviceable unto us therein,
to the accomplishment of our desires. So we read, Ezekiel. 16.37.39. etc. that
whereas the Jews committed spiritual fornication with the Idols of Egypt,
and Assyria, and reapposed more in the help of the Egyptians, and Assyrians
sometimes, then in the protection of God; therefore he threatens to give them
into their hands; who, being instruments of their sins against him, should
be also instruments of his judgments against them. Sundry are the examples in
this kind, which I cannot now produce: but leaving the ponderation of this
point unto your own hearts, I advise you, in the tender fear of God, so to
please him in all your ways, that not only all men, but all his creatures may
be disposed, and inclined by him to our incolunitie, and preservation. So
says the Wiseman: When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will also make
his enemies at peace with him, Prou. 16.7. To this purpose spoke Eliphaz, in
Job. 5.23. The stones of the field shall be in league with thee, and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee; But if we sin impenitently
against him, every creature in heaven and earth, is ready pressed by his
instinct, and motion, to revenge the injury done unto him, who is the Creator
of heaven and earth. And so much concerning the first question; I come
therefore unto the second.

The SECOND Question.
SECONDLY; if you require of me, what are the causes, for which these ten Kings
shall take up their Arms against Babylon; I answer (partly out of the
evidence of the Scripture, and partly out of the demonstration of reason) that
three principal causes concur in this behalf.

The FIRST is a meritorious cause, by congruitie, and condignitie (as they use
to speak of the merit of their works) in regard of her sins (which I have
touched heretofore, in the comparisons betwixt the Mystical, and the Literal
Babylon) which, being a burden unto the earth, cry for vengeance unto heaven.
And now here is a collection of her sins; the old, and the new come into one
reckoning, and account. They were past in act, but remained in guilt; wherefore
it is said, Apoc. 18.5. Her sins are come up unto heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquities; for though he always remembered them in his
providence, and knowledge, yet now he declares his remembrance by the
execution of his Justice.

Thus we perceive, that God has a time, to permit sins, and a time to punish
sins (the former, and the latter sins together) of any state, or of any
person, when our repentance binds not up the hands of his justice, but our
continuance, addition, and renouation of sin, draw the sword out of the
scabbard, and compel him unto the manifestation of his wrath; as it is here in
the fall of Babylon; whose sins are bound up together, in this great, and
fearful judgment.

But since she will make no benefit of this instruction (as being obdurate in
the course of her sins, and prepared for destruction) let us observe it
(brethren) for our own use, since we know the just severity of God, which
leads us unto speedy repentance; least he arraigne us at the bar of his
Justice, for our ancient and for our latter sins. This observation pertains,
first, unto a Kingdom, and State; he does not forger her sins, though he
remember them not presently in judgment. After many hundred years, he called
Amalek unto an account; I remember (says he unto Saul) what Amalek did unto
Israel; how they laid wait for them in the way, as they came up out of Egypt;
therefore he sent Saul upon an expedition against the Amalekites, to destroy
them from the face of the earth. O that my native Country would take notice of
this at the heart, and not add sin unto sin, new unto the old; provoking God
unto great indignation against her. But two things comfort me here: the one;
that God will spare the Land, because he has many faithful servants therein,
that mourn for the sins of England; and that (as Eliphaz speaks in Job
22.30.) the innocent shall deliver the Island. For it is not the Sea, that can
defend us from invasion; it is not any Castle, that can save us from the enemy
(and sin within the Land, is of greater force to destroy it, then any foe
without) but some righteous men are in the Island, and God does spare it for
their sake. The other is, that (according to David's option, and choice) we
shall rather fall into the hands of the Lord, then of men, for the punishment
and castigation of this Land.

This observation pertains, secondly, unto the Church; which, falling in her
inward purity, cannot stand long (as Gregory noted) in her outward glory, If
we have not a place in the conscience of men (by our effectual doctrine, and
our exemplarie life) that we have a mansion in their very hearts, then the
Law, our Government, our Temporalties, all outward provision for the Ministers
of the Church, shall make them but a weak consistencie, and a feeble station
in the world. Let not our sins prevail against us, to provoke God, and we
shall not fear the complotments of any mortal man, whose breath is in his
nostrills.

This observation pertains, thirdly, unto every particular person, of
whatsoever quality, or condition; rich, or poor, high, or low. For, for if
thou addest the sins of thy age, unto the sins of thy youth, (for which David
entreats pardon of God; Psalm. 25.7.) and make an accumulation of thine
iniquities, of latter unto former, without remorse of thy conscience, and fear
of Gods displeasure, saying; I shall have peace, although I walk according to
the stubbornenesse of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst; know
then, that the Lord will not be merciful unto thee, but then the wrath of the
Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against thee, and every curse, that is
written in his book, shall light upon thee, and the Lord shall put out thy
name from under heaven. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. yea out of heaven also: that is; he
shall declare, that thy name was never written there; according to that in the
Psalm; Let them be put out of the book of life. Psa. 69.28. And so much
concerning the first cause, why these ten Kings assemble against Babylon, to
work her fall.

The SECOND is an efficient cause; and that is, God by his justice; his justice
being provoked by her sins; according to that of the Prophet Esaias 42.24. Who
gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord, because
we have sinned against him?

Thus we have a connection of the first, and second cause, in this one sentence,
which meet in Babylons case. For first, we hear of the meritorious cause of
her fall, Apoc. 17.2. The Kings of the earth have committed fornication with
her, and the Inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her
fornication; to wit, in her Ecclesiastical State. Then, secondly, we hear of
the efficient cause of her fall: v. 17. God has put in the hearts of the ten
Kings to fulfill his will, and to do with one consent, for to give their
Kingdom unto the Beast: How long? Until the words of God be fulfilled. What
then? They shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and burn
her with fire. Upon what motion? From God; as the Text does plainly bear. And
therefore our most learned, and prudent Sovereign does truly and aptly observe
in this place; The hearts of the greatest Kings, as well, as of the smallest
subjects, are in the hands of the Lord, to make them his instruments, and to
turn them, as it shall please him to employ them. Here then I note three
things.

FIRST: though Kings may be carried by their proper motion of malice, or
avarice, or of some other affection, in their wars against some people, and
in bringing them to ruin; yet therein we may observe, and must confess, that
it is digitus Dei, Gods finger, or rather Gods hand in this work. So
Nebuchadnezzar himself (a cruel, proud, insolent Prince) in his wars, did
so perform the will, and purpose of God therein, that God himself gives him
the title of his servant, and commends his service done unto him, not only
against his enemies (a people that knew not his Laws) as it is Ezekiel 29.18.
but also against his own people; Jeremy 25.9. And so in his sacred expugnation
of Babylon, these Kings are Gods servants; they do their work from him; and
he does his work by them. Therefore Saint Ambrose (or whosoever is the Author
of that Commentary upon the Revelation) does ingeniously deliver his judgment
upon the words of my Text [ Babylon is fallen: it being here the voice of God
to declare it; and the hand of God to effect it] that, in this case, dixisse
Dei, fecisse est: dixit enim cecidisse Babylonem, quia ipse fecit, vt caderet.
The speech of God is the work of God: for he said, that Babylon is fallen,
because he brought it to pass, that Babylon should fall.

SECONDLY; we may here consider, that, as there is mercy in God to receive us
unto grace, so there is Justice in him to punish our sins. Marci^ knew not
this; but, because of different operations, proceeding from God, he made a
diversity of Gods; one good, another just, or rather cruel; one the maker of
the body, another of the soul; one, whom he would love; another, whom he would
fear; one in the Law, another in the Gospel. But we know one God alone;
only good, only wise, only gracious; whose mercy is free, and proceeds
from himself; whose justice is right, and is provoked by us: for as we have
malum culpae, to offend him, so he has malum poenae to afflict us. Amos 3.6.
Esaias 45.7.

THIRDLY, and lastly; though Reason may seem to persuade us (as it persuades
Babylon her self) that she is so strengthened by the confederacy of Princes
(as, in many dangers, she has not neglected the terms of prudencie in this
behalf) by the amity of her Friends, by the diligence of her Negotiators, by
the policy of her Counselors, by the art of her Learning, by the abundance
of her Riches, and, finally, by a general confluence of all outward means,
for the supportation of her Estate, that she shall never fall (for so she
says in her heart; I sit being a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no
mourning; Apoc. 18.7.) yet Faith assures me, that her own Friends, her own
Vp-holders (her horns) these ten Kings, her old Lovers, shall bring her down
to the Earth; to fall so low, that she can fall no lower; I mean not in
place, and situation, but in condition, and estate. Now; if Rome ask; or if my
own reason demand of me; how can this be? I answer; God has said it, and he
will do it; I have heard his Word, and now I do expect his Work. Away then
with quomodo (how can this, or how can that be?) when God speaks, and God
assures us, and God reuealeth his Will unto us. This Word comes in with
incredulity, and want of faith; as the divine Preacher Saint Chrysostom does
excellently note upon the question of the Jews; John 6.52. How can this man
give us his flesh to eat? Therefore I rest upon the truth of God; that is it,
which I believe, and I am no farther scrupulous, in regard of many
improbabilities, and difficulties, which reason suggesteth, and presents unto
me in this point. If I have (as now I have) Gods Word, that this Work shall be
performed, I am not curious to inquire of the manner, and means, how he will
bring the same to pass. And so much concerning the second cause of the fall of
Babylon, by the cooperation of these Kings.

The THIRD is an excitant cause; inward, in respect of the just wrath of these
Kings; but outward, in respect of the provocation thereof, by the indignities,
and injuries of Babylon, against the Potentates of the Earth. Now, as in the
first, and second causes, I had the plain testimony of Scripture; so here,
in this third, I have the certain assurance of strong reason to confirm, and
settle my judgment therein; for now I begin to discover some impulsive
cause, arising from Babylon, that stirs up these Kings unto the execution of
Gods Work.

First, therefore, Babylon has treasonable doctrines against the state, and
dignity of Kings (though they were the horns, and strength of the second
Beast therein) as namely; to depose Kings from their royal seats; yea, to
take away the fair Titles, wherewith she had invested them before; as this
Beast had once taken upon him to deprive Francis, the French King, of his Title
of the most Christian King, and to translate it unto Henry the Eighth of
England (as Guicciardine, their own Historian, does record) though afterward,
with greater fury and indignation, he proceeded against the same Henry, who
had been a principal horn, to corroborate, and confirm the Majesty of the
Triple Crown. Again, this Babylon exposes the persons of Princes unto
private violences, and public impugnation by their own subjects, as well as
their States, unto the Rapine, and Invasion, of foreign power. Lastly; this
Babylon does advance her Beast above all civil Lords, and Souereignes; not
only by an indirect authority over them, in case of Heresy, and for
spiritual ends (to which opinion only, and no farther a multitude of
Babylonians do incline, though with the peremptory censure of the Beast
himself, and violent oppugnation of his chief Adherents, in that behalf) but
by a direct, and superior authority over them, as Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings. So Boniface the Eighth, intruded upon the Crown of France, but found
the strong opposition of Philippus Pulcher, to his great disgrace. So Sixtus
the Fifth, (that subtle, and insolent Beast) disdayned the Works of their
Learned Bellarmine himself, because he did not attribute this direct
Omnipotency unto the Pope (as a true, and lawful Superior of all Kings) and
therefore did conceive a purpose to suppress, and extinguish his Writings,
that seemed to limit, and circumscribe, the transcendencie of his power; as D.
Barkley (a Pontifician in other points) does relate in his very impugnation of
Bellarmines opinion; that being also false, scandalous, and dangerous unto the
state of Christian Princes, and, in some respects, more absurd, then the other,
which Bellarmine did before reject; though, in his Reply unto D. Barkley, he
seems to incline (like a Cardinal now) unto the challenge of his holy Father
Sixtus, and from an indirect power, grows toward a direct; which doctrine
passes freely amongst the Canonists; is much embraced by the Jesuits; is
diligently furthered by the Popes; and does daily gather strength in Babylon.
No marvel then, if, as the proportion of Hercules his body was collected by
the quantity of his foot; so, by these foote-steps of Antichristianity,
Christian Princes do now begin to discern, and discover the second Beast
himself; and to be excited justly unto the ruin, and perdition of his estate.

Secondly; Babylon has treasonable practices against the lives and states of
Princes; and these same issuing also out of her very doctrines, by a powerful
incantation of bewitched souls; as namely out of Purgatory, Indulgences,
Merit, Satisfaction, and the like; besides a blind, and unquestionable
obedience, whereby many stand more specially devoted, and also obliged unto
this Beast.

Now therefore, though it be so, that Christian Princes should be more jealous
of Gods honor, then their own state; of his glory, then their own safety;
of his truth, then their own lives; (and certainly, for these causes, God
shall raise them up, unto this sacred expedition, against Babylon, and her
Beast) yet now their own cause shall incite them forward to the same; their
state, safety, and lives, being in danger, by the basest Vassal of this
Purpled Whore. For if his Holyship may justly depose a Prince, from his Royal
Seat, by a Papal sentence, and if execution thereof cannot otherwise proceed;
then that may well follow, which Mariana (a learned, but a wicked Jesuit) does
prescribe in this case; namely, that such a Prince may be lawfully empoysoned
[if it were in their very Sacrament it self, Papists know the practice of this
villany] or, by some clandestine, and secret means, deprived of his life. And
the truth is, that, if the general, and current doctrine of Babylon (for
deposition of Princes) be sound and substantial; then such practices (and
specially for defect of some other course, to put the Papal sentence in
execution) are by the verdict of good reason, and by fair consequence of that
doctrine, to be maintained, and to be performed; which horrible, and damnable
impiety, is convinced by the testimony of Gods Word, by the piety of the
ancient Church, and by the judgment of sundry Papists themselves; not so
deeply, and dangerously infected with the leaven of Babylon, in this point, and
therefore less near, and dear unto the Triple-crowned Beast.

And thus you have a decision of the second point; namely the causes (with the
several branches thereof) why these ten Kings shall conspire in this action,
for the fall of Babylon; and therefore I will now proceed unto the third.

The THIRD Question.
THIRDLY, then, if you require of me; when the ten Kings (these glorious
stars in the firmament of the World) shall meet in this conjunction, which
shall be so fatal unto Rome; I answer; it is a curiosity to enquire the
time, and temeritie to define it. For who can look, without his peril, into
the Arc of the Divine providence? Wherefore, in an uncertain point, I will
follow the greatest certainty, which the Scripture itself, and my best
observation, will direct me unto in so doubtful a case. The points, which I
tender unto your consideration, are four.

FIRST; this fall of Rome (described Chap. 18.) is not long before the period,
and conclusion of the World; for (as I noted in my former Sermon) the Saints
rejoice for her ruin, Chap. 19. then, Chap. 20. there is a recapitulation of
things past in the state of the Church, with a description of the general
Judgment: then, in the two last Chapters, ensues a description of celestial
Jerusalem, and the happy condition of the Triumphant Church; the state of the
Militant being now consummate, and ended (as it seems) in, or upon, the fall
of Babylon; as being one of the last glorious, and obseruable Acts, preceding
the general Resurrection of the dead. Howbeit I cannot determinately affirm
with Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 25. that the World shall receive her end immediately
upon this vastation of Rome; which, (as he falsely supposed) should be performed
by the great Antichrist; and consequently, according to his account, and the
general opinion of the Ancients, the World cannot stand longer, then the space
of three years, or thereupon, after the fall of Rome; since he, and they, did
generally conceive, that the Reign of Antichrist was confined within the
compass of three years, and an half. But as their speculations in this kind
had no sufficient ground, and the very courses of times, with the success of
things therein (besides the more clear, and certain exposition of
Prophetical Scriptures in this later Age) do foundly convince the same; so
they infer with them this palpable absurdity, that, they, who see this
extinction, and ruin of Babylon, shall have an infallible knowledge, that the
World shall determine, and end within the space of such a time (the fire, in
Romes destruction, giving them this light) which consequence as it is evident,
upon their ground, so it needs no refutation; since it implies sundry points
of markeable error, which I leave unto your prudent censure.

SECONDLY; her fall attends the complement, and full number of her sins;
according to a semblable case, Genesis 15.16. When the sins of the Amorites are
full, etc. when the latter times of Rome have filled up the measure of her
iniquities; when this Harvest is ripe, then comes the Sickle of Gods
vengeance: or (to follow the very words of GODS Spirit) this fall shall come
unto Rome, when the words of God are fulfilled (Apoc. 17.17.) concerning her
tyranny, pride, and insolency; which must have their due course, before her
fatal end.

THIRDLY, then, we may reasonably conclude, that the time of her fall is near
at hand; for what can future Rome add unto the sins of the former? -- eadem
facient, cupientque minores, (as the ingenious Poet spoke of Imperial Rome,
upon fifteen hundred years ago) they, that come after, shall desire, and do
the same things with them, that went before. What Tyranny, what Oppression,
what Persecution, what Antichristian Pride, what Insolency against Princes,
what Delusions, what Impostures can we expect from Rome hereafter, which we
have not already found?

FOURTHLY, and lastly; we may observe, that, as the mystical condition of
this Babylonian Rome is, by clear remonstrance (made by learned, and judicious
men) notoriously discovered unto all the World, so the horns of the Papal
Beast have begun to fall from his head; his power being thereby much abated,
and never likely to be recovered again; but one horn, after another, shall
be plucked off. Wherefore, as I may certainly conclude, that the Turk shall
not destroy the states, and dignities of these ten Kings, (whatsoever Zanchius,
a learned, and profound Divine, did conceive to the contrary; for which he
suffered some opposition, as, in the second part of his Miscellanea, it may
appear; and whatsoever Melancthon himself delivered in his public Lectures;
that all Germany should be possessed by the Turk) and my reason is grounded
upon the Scripture; showing, that the ten Kings, which arose with the second
Beast in Rome, shall destroy Rome at the last (and therefore if the Turk
obtain their Kingdoms, it must be after the fall of the Rome, which they must
first ruinate) so I may very reasonably, and probably affirm, that the Kings,
which are already fallen from the Beast [the Pope] shall never return unto
him again, to give their power, a second time, unto him, and to submit their
Royal States unto the Papal Crown.

But if Babylon should advance her self in England again (which we have no
cause to fear, nor Papists reason to hope) yet that shall not hinder the
accomplishment of this work: for Babylon must fall; it is decreed by GOD; it
shall be performed by these Kings.

Notwithstanding; since Babylon is full of malice, and indignation, playing,
first, the Fox, to enter into the Lords Vineyard, that she might be a Lion,
afterward, to kill the Keepers thereof; let us not be secure in observing her
courses, nor fearful to sustain her conflict. Let us be prepared for that,
which may not, perhaps, be prepared for us; We must not be wanting to
Martyrdom, though it may be wanting unto us: ne desit animus Martyrio, says
Saint Cyprian; Let us not want a mind to die for the truth of Christ; he may
be an habitual Martyr ever, that is an actual never; in preparation of mind,
not in passion of body; in will, and not in work: as Saint Bernard speaks
of Saint John the Evangelist, that he was a Martyr in will, though not in
work; whereas the Innocents were Martyrs in work, but not in will; and Saint
Stephen in both. But here let no man deceive himself with a sudden
apprehension of Martyrdom, as a matter of little difficulty to undergo; but
let him consider rather, that multi ante persecutionem Leones, in persecutione
cerui; many are Lions in the time of peace, but Hearts in the time of
persecution (as one of the Ancients spoke, by experience of those times) that
many, who speak gloriously of their resolution, appear cowards in their
performance (as the history of Doctor Pendleton, and Master Sanders may
testify) and finally, that they, whom God calls unto so great a work, shall
be prepared by him with gifts, convenient for that purpose. Therefore Saint
Ambrose (writing unto his sister Marcella; Epist. 44.) says modestly of
himself; because God knew me to be weak, he has not yet given the Devil
power over my body. And though I should desire martyrdom, and offer my self
unto it, perhaps he does judge me yet to be unable for so great a strife, and
therefore does exercise me with other labors, and diverse afflictions; but
has not tried me in this kind. O the rare humility of such an excellent
spirit! Let us, then, by his example, be willing, not boasting; ready, not
desirous, to dye for the cause of God, if Babylon should yet again try us in
the fire of her persecution, before she come to the fire of her own ruin.
And so much of the third point; namely, the time; when Babylon shall be
destroyed by these Kings.

The FOVRTH Question.
THe FOVRTH, and last question concerns the state of the Pope, of Papists,
and of Popery, upon this fall of Babylon; whether he, and they, and it, shall
come unto a final extirpation with Babylon; or what may be conceived,
probably, of each, in the discourse of judgment, and reason, by deduction out
of the sacred Scripture it self. This question, then, has three several
branches, as you hear, and therefore I will treat of them all in order, as it
shall please God to assist me with the celestial illumination of his blessed
Spirit.

The FIRST Branch of the fourth Question; concerning the POPE.
WE do not now enquire concerning the Person of the Pope (whether a John, as
many were, or a Iohne, as one was supposed to be) but concerning the State,
place, office, and dignity of the Pope, and as he is the Second Beast in
Babylon; inuading there the Imperial Seat, and, by another form, or color of
government, usurping the Imperial power; as the ancient Fathers do usually
speak of Antichrist (according to the tenor of the Scripture it self, in
this behalf) and as the experience of latter ages does really verify, and
exhibit the truth of their judgment herein, unto our eyes.

I answer then; that as Bellarmine does vainly flatter himself ( lib. 4. de
Pont. Romans cap. 4.) concerning the time of this ruin of Babylon (namely, that
it shall not be until the end of the world, and in the time of their
chimericall, and imagined Antichrist, whose reign, enduring three years, and
an half, is ended by the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, as they
simply pretend) so he does delude himself, and others, when he says, that,
in the time, and after the time of her ruin, the Pope shall be called, and
indeed shall be, Romanus Pontifex, the Bishop of Rome. For the truth is
apparent, by the tenor of the sacred Book of the Revelation, that the Papal
Beast is the cause of the expedition, made by the ten Kings against Babylon;
that this war, made upon Babylon, is in regard of the pride, oppression, and
other sins in Babylon, as she is borne up, and supported by the second
Beast; whose Dominion was advanced by their submission unto him, and shall be
suppressed by their concurrencie against him. It is not, then, a quarrel
against the Citizens, or the edifices of Rome, but against her usurpations,
exercised by the Triple-crowned Beast therein. Neither had these Kings
performed their design, if, when they burnt the City of Rome, the Beast
should still remain. Therefore, as Babylon it self shall fall, so the power
of her Beast shall be destroyed by these Kings, as being coupled, and commixed
with the same. For as the ruin of Literal Babylon was accompanied with the
ruin of the Chaldaean Empire, so the fall of Mystical Babylon shall be
accompanied with the fall of her Beast; whom these Kings will now permit no
more to tyrannize, with Papal dominion, in the Civil, or Ecclesiastical
State; for as the power of the Beast stands by these Kings, so it shall fall
by these Kings. This is understood in the words of the Scripture; Apoc. 18. No
man buyeth her ware any more of her; that is to say; The traffic of the
Whore, and spiritual negotiations of her Beast (by Pardons, Dispensations, and
other fornications, as they are called) shall cease upon her ruin, made by
these Princes of the earth. Whereas, then, Bellarmine says, the Pope shall
still continue Bishop of Rome; I answer; not by any Souereignety, and
Dominion; which Bellarmine perhaps may pretend, that Antichrist shall not
permit him actually to exercise in that time; but we affirm, by demonstration
of the Scripture, that the ten Kings shall deprive him of that power in the
world, which he formerly enjoyed by their concession; which shall then expire.
Notwithstanding, if Sibylla do truly prophecy of Rome, that it [being once
(...); strength, and power, as S. Hierome descanted upon her name] shall
afterward become (...), a street, (as Lactantius does record; Inst. l. 7. c.
25.) the Bishop of Rome may, perhaps, remain then in the quality, and place
of an ordinary Bishop; but shall not be received any more, as universal
Pastor of the Church; not as the Beast was before; not with such latitude of
power; not insulting again over States, and Churches. And, if the prophecy of
Hildegardis (a sacred Virgin, of great reputation, upon the year 1150.) be of
any force, the Bishop of Rome shall be reduced unto the condition of other
Bishops, etc. as I have seen, and read in a very fair, and ancient Manuscript
of parchment, concerning the predictions of that religious person. If therefore
I may express a grave matter by a light example (namely of Sir Thomas Moore;
who, having resigned his office of the Lord Chancellor, came himself, upon
the next Sunday, unto the Pew of his Lady, in the Parish Church of Chelsey;
speaking unto her in his facetious, and witty manner; Madame; will you go? My
Lord is gone; which were formerly the usual words of her gentleman Usher; when
the Lord Chancellor departed out of the Church) so may I say in this case;
when Babylon shall be wasted with fire, and the Beast shall be despoyled of his
power; Our Lord the Pope is gone; but yet the Bishop may still remain. And
then Christians may reckon ab vrbe euersa, as Pagans did, ab vrbe condita; when
the power, honor, and glory of Babylon, and her Beast, shall perish, and be
extinguished, by the concordable operation of these great, and puissant Kings;
who therefore will continually suppress it, that it may never increase, and
gather strength again.

The SECOND Branch; concerning PAPISTS.
I Speak not now of ordinary Papists, but chief Babylonian Papists; that is
to say, such, as have a special union, and conjunction with the Pope, in those
things, which appertain unto the Mystical impiety of this second Beast.
Wherefore the name of a Papist is taken either from Popery, which he does
defend, or from the Pope, to whom he does adhere.

In the first acception; I esteem him a Papist, that, leaving the Pope in the
principal, and essential points of the Papacy, does yet believe sundry
errors, defined, resolved, and maintained in the Romish Church, under the
government, and administration of the Pope; of which kind of Popery, and sort
of Papists, I shall treat more particularly in the third Branch, which does
immediately ensue.

But now (in the second acception) he is really, and formally a Papist, who is
united unto the Pope, not in regard of the Popes person, but in regard of his
seat, place, and dignity, which he usurps in Babylon; and therefore does
especially believe, and follow the Pope in such particular points, as depend
upon his Papal Office; as namely; The Popes temporal Superiority over all
Princes, as being the chief, and, in truth, the only Sovereign of the World
(which is the peculiar, and intimate character of the Antichristian Beast) or,
at the least, if he have not this temporal power over all Princes directly, as
their Lord, yet indirectly, as Pastor of the Church, to depose, and dethrone
them, (which indirect authority does yet inuest him with a pretended
jurisdiction over all the World; and is a more subtle insinuation of the
Babylonian Beast) and that he has an infallible judgment, as Pope, in the
controversies of Religion, to bind the whole World unto his definition, upon
pain of Ecclesiastical censure (which opinion, being greatly embraced in
their Church, and daily increasing, suffered much opposition by the Sorbonists,
and generally by the Church of France) and that, from this Papal seat, all
Christians have the practice, and benefit of Indulgences (the peculiar Ware of
Babylon) that this Apostolical, and Supreme Seat has power to dispense with
Oaths, and with Marriages in certain degrees of consanguinitie, and affinity,
and that all Christians must have recourse unto her for Dispensations,
Absolutions, etc. that, unto this seat belong Appellations, from all parts of
the Christian World, as unto the highest Authority upon Earth (by which
courses they exhaust much treasure of all Kingdoms, and vex the subjects with
tedious, and expensiue travels) that this Beast has power to call general
Councels, and to ratify, or nullify their Decrees; and other Babylonian
doctrines, belonging to the mystery of the second Beast. In this sense, and
acception of a Papist, King Henry the Eighth, in his just, necessary, and
conscionable discession from the Church of Rome, upon the point of his
unlawful Marriage with the Lady Katherine, his Brothers Wife (which, by Papal
Dispensation, was contracted against the Word of God, and Law of Nature;
especially as her case did stand) was now no longer a Papist; because he
rejected the Pope in these Mysteries of the Papacy, and in all points, that
had dependencie upon his Seat, Office, and pretensed Authority in the Church.
Whence it is, that this magnanimous Prince (justly provoked, but unjustly
handled by the holy Father) writes unto Charles the Fifth, and to all Christian
States, in these very words; Orbis intelligat varias PAPISTARVM frauds, etc.
and again; ne Papa Regum authoritate ad extir pandas crescentis Euangelij
radices, etc. abuti possit. So that, though this King remained still a Papist
in the first acception (howbeit he made an happy entrance also to the purgation
of sundry abuses in the Church; as by taking away some superstitious Feasts,
some highly respected Images, some much adored Relikes; the Word of God was
translated into the vulgar tongue; and many other things were done in his time,
for the reformation of blind, and ignorant stupiditie in the Church) yet
notwithstanding, in the main, and essential things, which specially give the
true denomination of a Papist, he is to be exempted clearly from the crime,
and contagion of this Title. And yet as Iehu did perform the Work of God,
imposed upon him, for the ruin of Baal, and that Idolatry, but departed not
from other sins of Jeroboam, and the Kings of Israel, so this excellent
Prince destroyed the Baal of Rome, and his power, within the confines of this
Kingdom, but, in many other things, he still followed the doctrines of Rome:
but yet so, as he conceived them (though untruly) to be built upon the Word of
God, and conformable to the judgment of the ancient Church.

I answer therefore, FIRST; that, when these ten Kings shall take up their
Arms against Babylon, many Papists [of the second, and worst degree, and
acception] shall firmly combine with the Pope [the second Beast] and shall
seek his defense, against the incursion of these mighty Kings: such Papists,
I mean, as specially the Jesuits are, and the Canonists, and all such, as
adore this Beast for his supposed excellency, and glory; so that, by the
opposition of their own force, and by their excitation of their Adherents,
they shall make all possible (but yet a vain) resistance against this general
enterprise of these potent Kings; because they love, reverence, defend with
writing, propugne with their power, and (above all other Papists) maintain, to
their uttermost, this second Beast in Babylon; as their dearest Lord, and
highest Potentate of the Earth; to whom (as they say) all men must be subject,
upon the necessity of their salvation.

SECONDLY, therefore; I infer, that, since the Beast himself shall fall with
his Babylon (as being a fall not only of one particular place, but of some
great power) these Papists also, concurring in his defense, and opposition of
these Kings, shall certainly come unto a final ruin. For as these Kings
shall bring the Beast unto desolation, so they will not suffer such to live, as
shall, by doctrine, justify, and magnify the power of this Beast (which they
hate, and will destroy) or; by politic means, seek his advancement, or, by
forcible contradiction, procure his supportation, and defense, against their
invincible arms, which, by Gods own warrant, they shall take up against
Babylon, and against the Antichristian vassals, that admire the glory, and
follow the poison of the second Beast therein.

As for other Papists (of inferior note, and not of this mark, or stamp) I
will deliver my judgment in the third Branch; unto which, therefore, I
address my speech.

The THIRD Branch; concerning POPERY.
THough this word [Popery] seems to include all erroneous doctrines in the
Papal Church (which are many in number, and not reconciliable with the truth of
Gods Word) yet we must distinguish here, as we have before; for that such
points, as depend upon the Popes pretended office, and bear special reference
thereunto (as namely they are, for which some Papists have their principal
denomination, as I did observe in the second branch) are truly, and really
Popish, not in regard of the person of this, or that Pope (as Heresies do most
generally carry the name of their inuentor; and, in this case also, it were
not hard to show, that some Popish doctrines had either their beginning, or
else their principal corroboration from certain Popes, and might therefore
well be stamped with their names) but in regard of the Papal See, office,
dignity, and usurped superiority of this second Beast; and therefore such
points of their doctrine, and practice, issuing from the Pope, as he is Pope
(and not as he is this, or that particular person) and being a part of the
Mystery of Iniquity (which Saint Paul did foresee) are Popish, and Popery,
and therefore this kind of Popery (connexed to the Papal Seat and Office)
will have a certain end, and determination, with the fall of the Pope; this
second Beast; whose ruin is implied in the fall of Rome it self. And
therefore we may here, not impertinently, observe, that, in the points of
Popery, all are not of one, and equal degree; but such do specially bear the
mark, and cognizance of Antichristianitie, as do more highly advance this
beast in his pretended authority over all Kings, and civil States, over all
Churches, and Ecclesiastical persons; in, and over the consciences of men (in
which he sets up his Dominion, to reign therein) and finally, whereby he
does most nearly oblige, and tie men unto him, by the glorious ostentation of
his great, and sacred power.

Secondly, there are other points of Popery, not unjustly so called; as being
defined by Papal Councels (whose infallible Decrees depend upon the Popes
assent) as being parts of that corrupt body of erroneous doctrine, which is
taught in his Synagogue, sustained by his authority, defended by his Writers,
propugned by secular Princes (as servants of the Pope; though styled by more
honorable names) finally, such as tend to the confirmation of the Pope, and
that Babylonian Church, in which the mystery of iniquity (beginning long
ago) has now fully declared it self, in so great an Apostasy, and defection
from the truth. And if you require a special catalogue of these Popish
errors, they are (for the greatest part) comprised in the twelve Articles of
the new Creed, framed, and proposed by Pope Sixtus quartus [in Bulla, super
forma iuramenti professionis fidei] which contain the principal errors of
the Papal Beast, and of the Papists, miserably seduced therein from the
integrity of Gods Word, and extremely different from the Catholic sense of
the more pure, and ancient Church.

I answer therefore; when God shall deliver his Church from the Egyptian
bondage, which it suffers under this Babylonian Beast, that, in due
probability of reason, if not all, yet many of these more gross, absurd, and
enormious errors (now predominant in the Church of Rome) shall be corrected by
the more sound, and Christian judgment, even of those, who live in the outward
communion of the Romish Church (for there never wanted some more Religious
spirits, that did dislike, oppose, and seek to redress the growing, and
grown errors therein) and that Christian Princes shall willingly concur to
the reformation of Popish errors, when a more free, and indifferent course
shall be opened for a general Council (then can be yet obtained, while this
Babylonian Beast does reign) to treat, dispute, and conclude upon things,
which appertain unto the peace, and purity of the Church.

To conclude this passage therefore, I shall entreat your prudent, and
judicious consideration of three markable points, which I now tender, and
present unto your religious hearts.

The FIRST; that the Church of Rome (as it stands at this day) offending
rather in additions unto Gods truth (in regard whereof they foolishly call ours
a Negative Religion; which does truly deny, and justly impugn their additions)
then in subtractions from the same (though they err also in this kind; taking
lawful authority from the civil Magistrate; taking half the Communion from
the Laity; taking away the Word of God from the people, by concealing it in an
unknown tongue, etc. and so in other things; against which, therefore, our
doctrine is affirmative, in opposition of their errors) I say, that the Church
of Rome does hold, and teach the fundamental points of Christian Religion,
positiuely, in the Articles of the Creed (though it have some doctrines, that,
by force of consequence, may seem to contradict the same) and that this Church
of Rome does well, and soundly conceive of many great, and principal points
(as namely, of the two Natures, and one Person of Christ; as learned Zanchius
himself does confess; de Incarnat. lib. 2. cap. 9. and elsewhere) but it does
err chiefly, and dangerously, in the Office of our Savior Jesus Christ, by
destroying the merit of his Passion, and by false application thereof; not
only by the means of Holy water, and other Babylonian inventions, but by such
means, as are contrary, and repugnant thereunto; as namely, by the pains of
Purgatory; where our Satisfaction concurreth with his, and his is applied by
ours; as the Book of Cardinal Peron, passing under the name of Master Henry
Constable, does blasphemously teach. Finally then; her many truths cannot
justify her prodigious errors; her many errors cannot infringe her certain
truths: but the truths therein cannot so securely save, as the errors therein
will greatly endanger the soul of any Babylonian captive, inthralled, and
ensnared with the peril of truly Popish errors.

The SECOND point, therefore, is this; that all particularities, which bear
the name of Popery, in the censure, and judgment of some men, are not so in
truth; but are so esteemed by reason of their ignorance, and precipitation, and
for want of experience in the Monuments of venerable antiquity; as being
carried with the affection of Aetius, who (as Socrates does report; l. 2. c.
28.) conuersed not in the Books of ancient Writers, but rejected such, as were
of greatest reputation in the Church; following the sophistical conclusions of
his own captious brain. Hence it is, that the intemperate Anabaptists
condemn the baptism of Children, as the invention of a Pope. Hence it is,
that the pestilent Trinitarians profanely teach, that the doctrine of the
Trinity is the fable of a Pope, and that therefore this popish mystery is
aptly signified in the triple Crown. Hence it is, that the certain, and
indubious distinction of a Bishop, and a Presbyter (the first having a
paternall superiority over the second, in the administration of the Church)
is, by some Aerian spirits, branded with the note of a Popish Hierarchy; as
being ignorant in the perpetual government of the Church, or presumptuous
against all ages, and all succession in the same. Hence it is, that the few,
innocent, convenient Ceremonies in this Church (issuing from the practice of
the reverend, learned, and holy Fathers) are scandalized with the contemptuous
name of Popery. But by whom? By men commonly of unlearned hearts, strong
passions, and weak judgments; so that (as I observed before) whatsoever thing
they dislike, it is Popery; and, whatsoever person they distaste, he is Popish
in their poor conceits. Much like, though not in heretical opinion, yet in
simple carriage, unto the followers of Artemon, who taught that Christ was a
pure Man, without any divine Nature; and pretended that this true, and ancient
doctrine was first corrupted by Zepherine, a Bishop of Rome, as Eusebius does
relate l. 5. c. 25. So ancient is this course. To end this point therefore; I
wish all men, of ingenious minds, to conceive wisely of Popery, what is so to
be esteemed; and all men of religious hearts, to detest it with a good
conscience, grounded upon a sufficient knowledge.

The THIRD, and last point is this; that we cannot probably conceive, by any
deduction of reason in humane discourse, that all, and singular Articles of
Popery (which are, indeed, erroneous, and may therefore justly deserve that
name) shall ever be totally, and fully purged out of the Church of God (after
the ruin of Babylon) but that there will be variable, and contrary judgments
of learned men in some matters (truly deserving reformation) until the final
dissolution of this present world; so that, in this case, we must bear what
we cannot amend; and rather enjoy our solid unity in things of greater
importance, then, upon every difference in things of lesser moment, make a
perverse distraction in the Church of God, and an unhappy rent in the
seamelesse coat of Jesus Christ, our Lord; remembering, to tolerate that for
unity, which yet we hate in equity; as Saint Augustine does divinely speak.

And thus much concerning the Praedicate in my Text; the FALL of Babylon,
discovered in this my second Sermon. I should now entertain you with some
observations in the conclusion of this, as I did in the end of the first; had I
not, in the perpetual course of this Sermon, (upon incident passages) taken
some occasion, by the way, to make application of the several points unto your
hearts; to show you the providence of God in his ordination of this fall; his
love of his Church in his prediction of this fall; his vengeance against sin,
in his operation of this fall: our comfort in knowing this fall; our patience
in attending this fall: our instruction to prevent our own fall by his Justice
(which will ensue upon our fall from his Truth, and Grace) an advertisement to
Papists to leave their Local communion with Babylon (if they dwell within her
walls) or Spiritual communion, if they be devoted unto her Beast; since both
must go into perdition; and therefore, finally, here is an admonition unto
such, as decline from the comfortable truth of Gods Word, unto the dark
superstition of Babylonian errors, to consider well, and seriously in their
hearts; I go to BABYLON; which shall be burnt: I submit my self to that
BEAST, which shall be destroyed: What fear, what suspicion, what terrors will
then possess thy soul? what security have thou in such dangers? what comfort
in such frights? what happiness have thou, when thy Mother Church of Rome, and
thy Father-Pope therein, shall come to so great a ruin? Can thou be
innocent, when they are guilty? Have thou no sin, when they are punished?
Can thou stand, when they fall? O consider this, ye that forget God, lest he
take you away, and there be none to deliver you.

But since these particulars are touched more exactly before, therefore I will
conclude this Sermon (and so my whole Text) by stirring up all degrees, and
conditions of men, unto the performance of Gods design; that, what we yet
hear in Verbo, prophesied in Gods Word [It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon,
etc.] we may once see in Opere; fulfilled also in Work.

FIRST, then, I begin with them, who are the peculiar instruments of Gods
Justice in this behalf; the ten Kings, as the Scripture it self does speak.
O Noble, and Heroical Princes, Gods Vicegerents (armed with his power, and
sacred with his own name) you have the special place in this warfare; God
has pressed you unto this service, and not only warranted, but required you
unto it. You are sent against Rome (as Saul against Amalek) to destroy it with
fire, and sword. It is no voyage unto the holy Land (where Christ did suffer
for our sins) but to impure Babylon; in which as it may be truly said also,
that Christ himself did die, in sundry respects (but then she was in her
Ethnicall state) so, in it, Christ does still suffer, in regard of his Truth,
there oppressed; in regard of Antichrist, there advanced; in regard of the
Faithful, by him persecuted; for it is done usually through the operation of
this Second Beast, abusing the authority of Kings, and Princes, to this wicked
purpose. There he sits, that trampleth upon your Crowns, and Scepters;
there he sits, that deposes you from your States; there he sits, that
absolueth your subjects from the two indissoluble bonds, of Oath, and Nature;
there he sits, that disposes your Kingdoms, at his pleasure, that exciteth
your own people against you (by the curses of his Excommunications, that
stirs up your friends, and neighbors) to make war upon your hereditary
lands. Now the time is come [it is past with God] it is now at hand, that you
may, you must, you shall take up a temporal against his spiritual Sword;
diuest him of his pretended power, expose him unto scandal, ignominy, ruin,
extreme desolation; reward her [or him; it is all one in effect; the one does
imply the other] even as she has rewarded you, and give her double, according
to her works; and, in the cup, that she has filled to you, fill her the
double; as it is: Apocal. 19.6.

Now if you require of me the names of these ten Kings (I mean not the names
of their Persons, but of their States) I cannot, I dare not deal so punctually
in this case, as some, who presume, by particular commemoration of their ten
Kingdoms, to muster up the names of these ten Kings, that shall effectuate
this great, and glorious work. It may be a question (and so it is with me)
whether this number of ten may be taken in that distinct, and precise account;
or whether it be not a certain, for an uncertain number, as the Scripture
does usually speak; or rather, whether, in these numbers of special
perfection (the Septenary, the Decenary, the Centenary, the Millenary) a whole,
and universal company is to be understood, or not. And I do the rather so
conceive it to be understood, because Saint Augustine himself has framed this
opinion in my breast. For this learned Father, treating of the persecution by
Antichrist, and the consummation of the World (ensuing presently thereupon)
supposes, that (in the Prophecy of Daniel, chap. 7.8.) the little horn,
arising amongst the ten horns of the fourth Beast (which certainly is the
Roman Empire) and plucking away three of the former ten horns, is ANTICHRIST;
who, as Lactantius said before Saint Augustines days (out of the common error
of those times) shall subdue three of these ten Kings (for so the ten horns
are interpreted, Verse. 24.) and conioyne his power with the other seven, to
destroy the Roman Empire, and to sack the City of Rome. Inst. lib. 7. cap.
16. Which error was so pregnant in the time of reverend, and constant
Athanasius, that, therefore, he thence inforceth a probability against
Constantius (the wicked Arrian persecuting Emperor) to be the ANTICHRIST; as
having sundry marks of him; and, in particular, having subdued three Kings;
Britannio, Gallus, and Magnentius, who striued with him for the Imperial
Crown. Athanas. in Epist. and solitar. vitam agentes. Now though in this
point, they were all inuolued, and wrapped in a misprision of that Scripture
(for that little horn is not Antichrist, as they were persuaded; nor the
Turk, as some more lately have imagined; but Julius Caesar, and his
successors, who translated the Empire of Rome, from the public state, unto a
particular person) yet Saint Augustine proceeds with better advice, when he
comes unto a reuiew of those ten Kings in the Prophecy of Daniel (who yet
are not the same, as you may very easily observe, with our ten Kings, in the
Revelation of Saint John) and therefore he writes in this manner; Vererime
sane fateor, etc. I confess that I am in fear, least perhaps we be deceived
in the ten Kings, whom Antichrist seems to find, as ten persons; and so he
may come before we be aware, there being not then so many Kings in the Roman
World. For what, if, by this number of TEN, the whole company of Kings be
signified, after whom he is to come? as by the Millenarie, Centenarie, and
Septenarie numbers, the university of things is often imported in the
Scripture. So Saint Augustine; De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 23.

By this his prudent, and remarkable observation (fitly to be applied unto my
present purpose) I may very reasonably collect, that a great, and general
number of Kings (whose states were sometimes members of the Roman Empire;
whereof they have invaded a part, by their particular Dominions, but Antichrist
the whole, by his supreme power) shall arise, in a confederacy, and
expedition, to burn the Whore [Babylon] and to subdue the Beast [the Pope] and
so to accomplish that Royal work, unto which God has already consecrated
them in his holy Word.

SECONDLY; I direct my speech unto you, my Fathers, and Brethren, of the sacred
Tribe of Leui; you, who bear the silver Trumpets, and blow the alarm; you,
that take up your spiritual arms (for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal; but yet mighty through God; 2. Cor. 10.4.) against this odious Whore,
and execrable Beast: fight against them with a learned tongue: that is not
enough; fight also with your advised Pen: it conquereth more, then Alexanders
Sword. O detestable silence in so necessary a cause; hateful modesty, in so
needful an enterprise; cursed fear, in so just a quarrel; which is Gods in
Heaven, and so many Kings in earth. Thou call others to fight, and sit
thou still? and in so needful a time? Remember that of the Poet; (...):

A good, and faithful Minister will be writing with his hand, aduising with
his head, and fighting with his tongue. Let Rome understand her sin; that she
is BABYLON [one word, but a stinging word; it compriseth all iniquities] and
let her know her ruin [that she IS FALLEN] to come in act, but past in his
preuision, who has confirmed it by his decree. Tell these Kings, that, if they
be now auerse from this work, yet God shall incline, and bow their hearts unto
it, as Alarich^^ was inwardly urged, and compelled to take Arms against Rome.
Sozom. lib. 9. c. 6. Tell the whole world, that though it seem a difficult
work, yet it is Gods work, unto whom nothing is impossible; and that it is
revealed in his Word, in which nothing can fail; therefore Babylon must fall,
and fall thus; for his Word cannot fall, who gives us certain assurance of
this infallible success.

THIRDLY; I speak unto you; noble in descent, great in dignity, rich in
goods; Stars of greater light in the firmament of the State (but borrowed
from the primigeniall, and original light of the Sun therein; the glorious
Sovereign thereof) you that by proper valor, can perform much your selves,
and, by special example, may provoke others: if God shall call you unto this
employment, attend your Princes, go with their persons (or go upon their
commands; for I know not, whether they shall go, personally, to this war, or
not; certain I am, that they shall go in their power, in these people, in
their treasure) set forward this great design: it is not to accompany Caesar,
to conquer Provinces for the glory of Rome; nor Alexander, to subdue the
Persian Monarch; it is no such politic attempt for humane ends; but it is the
work of heaven, and earth, conspiring in her destruction, who inslaueth you
with her tyrranny, poysoneth you with her heresy, defiles Gods name with
blasphemy, conculcateth all royal dignity with her pride, murdereth Gods
Saints with her cruelty; work therefore her ruin, that seeks yours.

FOURTHLY; I speak unto you, who are Subjects of an inferior degree; I doubt
not, but (in regard of your Christian piety, and zeal) I may say of you, as
Deborah of her magnanimous people, Praise the Lord, for the auenging of Israel,
and for the people, that offered themselves willingly. Iudic. 5.2. Many Volones
shall then appear to offer themselves in this sacred expedition. There is no
necessity of disputation, in this case, whether, in such a war (so just, and
lawful) voluntary, or mercenary warfare may be approved, or not. And you, that
are pressed unto this war, by your rightful Princes, shall not be troubled
with that scruple (which so much vexes the Schools) how far, in what
causes, with what limitations, a Soldier may fight, upon the commandment of
his Prince (since the authority of undertaking war is in the King; the
ministry of executing it is in the Subjects; as S. Augustine writes; contra
Faustum l. 22. c. 75.) for you see, that the proclamation, and ordination of
this war is from the unquestionable authority of God himself; and therefore
as you shall serve your Souereignes, so they shall serve God therein. This
war, therefore, is honorable, religious, necessary, and to be preferred
before a base, cowardly, and profane peace. If Iehoram speak of peace, yet
Iehu will hear of none, because he is the minister of Gods Justice. Pax ab
illis, non cum illis, says S. Bernard of wicked persons; so I say here; have
peace from Babylon, in not meddling with her society; you can have no peace
with her, in treating with her upon sweet, and amicable terms.

FIFTHLY, and lastly; I end with that, which is the beginning of every
successful enterprise; Prayer. Souereignes must pray with Moses, while their
Subjects fight with Amalek. Constantine the Great attributed his victories unto
the force of prayer; and therefore he had a Tabernacle in his Camp, framed
according to the model of a Church. Theodosius conquered a puissant enemy (
Maximus, in name, and power) by the preuayling virtue of prayer. Let prayer
also arm the Soldiers of this war; it is more defensive, then any Shield,
and more offensive, then any Sword. And you, that go not forth with them in
person, to fight against Babylon, yet fight also by your prayers, for their
safety, and success. He, that has not an hand able to fight, nor a tongue
learned to preach, may yet have an heart well affected to pray. Pray then, pray
all, for the peace of Jerusalem, and the ruin of Babylon; cry with one voice,
and cry still, cadat, cadat, [let it fall] till we hear, actually, cecidit,
cecidit, it is fallen.

And though God does more respect, herein, the goodness of the cause, then of
our persons, in the issue of this war, yet let us be armed with piety,
virtue, grace; that we may be more fit, and proper instruments for his purpose;
according to Gods own precept; Deuteronomy. 23.9. When thou go out with the host
against thine enemies, keep thee then from all wickedness. So shall our
wars prosper abroad, and peace continue at home, with the advancement of Gods
truth, both there, and here; which the Lord of all mercies conserve unto us,
and unto our posterity after us, even till the glorious appearance of our Lord
Jesus Christ; Amen.

FINIS.
A Correction of the Errata.
In the FIRST Sermon.
PAge * 10. Line 28. put out third p. 11. l. 2. Read (...). p. 11. l. 8. read
unto for upon. p. 15. l. 21. read excecation, p. 24. l. 12. mere for nere. p.
25. l. 10. and I doubt. * p. 29. l. 2. put out four. p. 31. l. 22. read
dis^^^sions. * p. 33. l. 2. it being. * p. 45. l. 4. read time of Antichrist,
woording to the common doctrine of Babylon; when.* p. 49. l. 26. read unto
Mahomet, and the Turk.* p. 5^. l. 17. read Apocal. 13.1.* p. 55. l. 6. read
fourth in stead of third p. 57. l. 15. powerfully. l. 18. natural. * p. 73. l.
5. put out most. * p. 83. l. 19* read they have not such. p. l. 91. l. 8. which
for with.* p. 127. 29. and in a second.

In the SECOND Sermon.
Page 10. Line 11. Read: So in this. p. 19. l. 24. as it is the. p. 20. l. 14.
this is the fall.* p. 24. l. 5. any people** p. 31. l. 28. indignity.* p. 32.
l. 25. read then, in stead of that. p. 36. l. 1. and in stead of as. p. 38. l.
28. some of them, in stead of they. *p. 39. l. 29. they were, for he was.* p.
48. l. 10. his flesh. * p. 50. l. 18. footesteps for stoolesteps.


