THE PATHWAY TO PRAYER AND PIETY.

CONTAINING, 1 An Exposition of the Lords Prayer, with an Apology for
public, and private set Prayer. 2 A preparation to the Lords Supper, with Ma.
ZANCHIVS Confession, concerning that Sacrament. 3 A Direction to a Christian
life, both in our general and particular callings. 4 An instruction to Die
well, and a Consolation against all Crosses.


WITH DIVERSE PRAYERS, And Thankesgiuings fit for this TREATISE. By ROBERT HILL,
Doctor in Divinity.

Pray to Receive: Receive to Live: Live to Die once, Die to Live ever.
This is the sum of this Book.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Edward Blunt, and William Barret. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, LORD Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel; Grace and Peace.
RIght Honorable; as it is the safety of a Ship to have good Pilotes, the
strength of a palace to have sure Pillars, the security of the body to have
clear eyes, and the safeguard of sheep to have vigilant shephards: So is it
the safety of a Country, and safeguard of a Kingdom, to have many wise and
watchful Counselors. Is this ship tossed? These Pilots will guide it. Is this
palace shaken? These Pillars will uphold it. Is this body in peril? These eyes
will ouersee it. Are these sheep in danger? These shepherds will defend them.
And as, where there is no vision, the Church is naked: So, where no counsel
is, there the State is naked.

Of all the miseries which befell the Israelites, this is recorded to be one
of the greatest, That either they had no King to rule them, or that their Kings
were but children, who ruled them: yet as that ship is safer that has but a
bad Pilot, than no Pilot; that palace stronger that has but wooden Pillars,
than no pillars; that body securer, that has but a squint eye, than no eye;
and those sheep better, that have any shepherd, than no shepherd: So is that
nation in far better case, which has but bad governors, than none at all.
Is it a blessing to be commanded by the bad? what a blessing then is it to be
governed by the good? Have we good Ministers? they are the horsemen and
chariots of 2. King. 13.14.
Israel. Have we good Magistrates? they are the light of our eyes, the breath
of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord; and under their shadow we are
preserved Lam. 4.20.
alive.

Amongst many Right Honorable and truly honored Senators, both Church, and
Commonwealth bless God for your Honor. You are blessed of the Church as an
vncorrupt Patron; you are blessed of the Commonwealth as an impartial Judge.
In the one, you desire to plant piety, in the other, you are ready to
supplant iniquity. In the one you are careful, that one have not all; in the
other, you are watchful, that each may have his own. In the one you provide
for the preaching of verity; in the other you pronounce the sentence of
equity. Are you in the one to administer Justice? I may say with Basil; Your
arrow ever aims at the white: with Epictetus; Your hand ever holds an
equal balance: and with Erasmus; Your sun shines alike on the poor and
rich. Are you to confer Ecclesiastical preferments? You will not give that
Iaakob bleare-eyed Leah, who has served many a year for fair Rachel. You
will not make him a shepherd of men's souls, who is rather to be a shepherd
of men's sheep. What good you have done to this Church of ours, let Churchmen
judge: you love our Nation: you have provided for us many decayed Synagogues,
and put many poor Preachers into the poole of Beth^sdah, who have been cured
of their long disease of poverty, without the descending of any one Angel.

Experience I have had of your favor to poor Ministers, in my first certain
maintenance that ever I had in our Church. For though I was afraid even to
look upon you, yet you were not forgetful to provide for me; and without any
either suing or seeking of mine, it pleased you to annex unto my Lecture at S.
Martins, S. Margarets in Friday street.
that small Benefice, which I now have in London, and where I am careful to
Preach every Sabbath, though I cannot live there for want of an house.

In a thankful remembrance of your love to our Calling, and an hopeful
acceptance of this enterprised service, I am bold to present again this book
to your Honor. It was penned at the first for the benefit of this Parish: and
published by authority, for the good of the Church. This Parish of S. Martin
moved me to pen it: Doctor Vaughan.
and that late Reverend Bishop of London allowed me to Print it.

In regard of both these, I doubt not but your Honor will afford it your
patronage. You are to the one a most honorable benefactor, providing for the
living, by your charitable alms; and for the dead, by procuring a new, and
most needful Churchyard. You were to the other a most honorable friend: you
loved him in his life, and did unfeignedly mourn for him at his death.

Of whom, I may say (considering the encouragements I had from him in my
ministry) as El^sha said, when his master Eliah was taken from his head, 2.
King. 2.12.
My Father, my Father, the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots thereof.

S. John's in Cambridg
He was an honor to our College, in which he once lived a painful student:
and an ornament to our Church, in which he was (as we have many Reverend
Fathers now he is gone) a preaching Bishop. For his admirable learning in our
University of Cambridge, he was long since created a Doctor in Divinity: and
for his ability to rule, he was after Consecrated Bishop of Bangor, and
immediately translated to the Diocese of Chester, and after a while from thence
to London. In these aduancements of his, how much he was beholding to your
Honor, I had rather be silent, then say little: but surely he was worthy you
should do for him.

For the gifts of his Ministry, he was a powerful and skillful Preacher: for
the use of his authority, he was a most watchful and temperate Governor. Was
he to speak? his words were sententious: was he to advise? His counsel was
religious: was he to admonish? his exhortations were gracious: and was he to
censure? his sentence was judicious. Did he observe any Minister painful in
his calling? he ever did encourage him to go on: did he see any either
negligent, or turbulent? the one he would advise to greater labor; the other
bring on, to greater peace.

For his judgment in Divinity, what it was, the Church can judge: he was a
profound Preacher of the truth, a zealous enemy to all superstition, and a
great exhorter to all piety and godliness. He halted not betwixt two
opinions: he spoke not with those Jews, Nehe. 13.24. partly the language of
Ashdod, and partly the language of Canaan, but every way showed himself a
Protestant indeed.

His learning was good, his life better; and his death, for himself, best of
all. His learning was without comparison, his life without exception, his death
without suspicion. By his learning he instructed, by his life he shined, and
by his death he yet smells as a sweet perfume. What his learning was, this
Land knows; what his life was, London knows; and what his death was, those
learned men know, who were about him in the time of his sickness.

He was Bishop of this Diocese, not much above two years: in which time this
City much rejoiced in him; and surely no marvel. For he was a Clemens to
this Rome: a Polycarpus to this Smyrna: a Iustine to this Naples: a Dionysius
to this Alexandria: a Cyprian to this Carthage: an Eusebius to this Caesarea. a
Gregory to this Nyssa: an Ambrose to this Mill^yne: a Chrysostom to this
Constantinople: an Augustine to this Hippo: and a Ridley to this Diocese.

And as Ambrose was wont to say of his people, so questionless he said often
of his; Non minus vos diligo quos genui ex euangelio, quam si suscepissem ex
contugio: gratia quippe vehementior est ad diligendum quam natura: I love you
no less, whom I have begotten by the Gospel, then my own children: For grace
procures greater love then nature. Nay it seems he loved them more: for he
impouerished the one, to enrich the other. But blessed be that most reverend
David, that will have care of Ionathans children, now he is dead.

Dead he is indeed, in regard of his presence; but alive for ever, in regard
of his remembrance: for, the righteous shall be had in an everlasting
remembrance, when the name of the wicked shall rot. He died not rich in goods;
it was an argument of his goodness: he died rich in grace; it was an argument
of his godliness. With Bernard he did live in terra auri, sine auro: In a
Kingdom of gold, without gold: and seemed to think, as Lactantius did write,
that Qui apud Deum dives est, pauper esse non potest: He that is rich in God,
cannot be accounted a poor man.

Did Abner, says David, die as a fool dies? And did this Bishop of London
die, as that Bishop of Rome, who said, Vixi dubious, anxius morior, nescio quo
vado: I have lived doubtful, I die doubtting, I know not whither I shall go?
no he did not. But with Ambrose he said, I have not so lead my life, that I
was ashamed to live: neither fear I death, because I know I have a good Lord.
He said not with Nero, Me mortuo ruat mundus: I care not what befalle^ after I
am dead; but, These were almost his last words.
modo me moriente viuat and floreat ecclesia, fiat voluntas Domini: So that
after my death the Church may flourish, the will of God be done.

Thus, a good life has the years numbered, but a good name endures for ever.

Not to be troublesome to your Honor: by his departure, his wife has lost a
loving husband, his children an indulgent father, the Church a worthy Prelate,
and I (a poor Preacher) one of the most honorable friends that ever I had,
having deserved so little of him.

Isa. 57.11.
Do the righteous perish? we must regard it. Are merciful men taken away? we
must consider it in our hearts. After Ambrose was dead, Italy was troubled:
after Augustine was dead, Afrike was spoiled: After Luther was dead, Germany
was distracted. After Bucer was dead, here religion was altered. And after the
death of so many worthy men, as we have lost within these few years, the
Lord grant that we be not plagued.

I am no Homer to commend this Achilles: no Chrysostom to commend this
Babylas: no Augustine to commend this Cyprian: no Melancthon to commend this
Luther: no Parker to commend this Bucer: only in honor to him who honored God
in his life, I presume thus to write of him being dead. Your Honor well knows
that I have written the truth: and the Lord knows I desire to write nothing
but the truth.

Thus craving pardon for my boldness, and once again most humbly entreating
your Honorable entertainment of these few sheets of Paper, as they are now the
fifth time enlarged, I humbly take my leave; beseeching God to continue you
long a trusty Counselor to our Gracious King, an upright Judge to our
Christian people, and a good Patron to the despised Clergy. From your Parish
of Saint Martin in (or rather now by reason of many new buildings near) the
Fields. June the 16. 1613.

At your Honors service, ROBERT HILL.

A PREFACE OF PRAYER: TO MINE Honorable, Worshipful, and Christian Auditors,
at Saint Martins in the Fields; Grace and PEACE.
CHristian Auditors: There are three things in regard of God which every good
person must be acquainted withal; the first is how he must talk with God;
The second, how he must live before God; The third, how he must come to God,
when the seal of his salvation is offered in the Sacrament. Of all ^hese three
I am bold at this time to present unto you this little Manuell.

Lycurgus, a Lawgiver amongst the Lacedaemonians, made this one Law of
sacrificing to the gods, that they should not be presented with many things,
and those of either small or no great value. If things are to be esteemed
rather by weight, then worth, I have observed this law in this present gift. I
offer unto you but three things; the first number of which, all can be spoken.
And I present unto you but small things; for what can be contained in so few
sheets of paper? yet if it please you to give these few sheets the reading,
you shall know better how to pray, learn better how to live, and understand
better how to come to Gods table, so long as you shall either pray, live, or
receive. And because I have concerning the first, Preached to you of late many
Sermons, The dignity of Prayer.
I am willing at this time in way of Preface, to commend unto you the dignity
of Prayer.

By it we confer and talk with God and by it we procure much good unto man:
By it we do pierce the very clouds, and by it we have whatsoever is meet.
Do we want any thing that is good for us or others? Prayer is the messenger
whom we must send toward God. Have we received any special favor from him?
Prayer is our Ambassador to give him thanks.

Are we in the morning to begin our work? this is the Key to open the day.
Clauit diei.
Are we at evening to shut our selves in? this is the Sera noctis.
lock to seal up the night. If we would bind the Almighty Vinculum
inuincibilis: Bern.
to do us none hurt, here is the band by which he is tied Vis Deo grata.
Chrysostom.
. And if we would untie him to do us good, here is the porter of the gates of
heaven. It is our Oedypus to dissolve our doubts, it is our commentary to
understand Gods word Clauis Scriptura. Origin.
It is a Deo sacrificium, diabolo flagellum, homini subsidium. August. The
praise of prayer.
sacrifice to God, a scourge to the devil, and an help to our selves in all
our troubles. Wherefore, as the Apostle by examples, commended faith to the
Hebrews, so may I by examples commend prayer to you.

By it Abraham's servant obtained a wife for Isaac, and by it Moses obtained a
pardon for Israel. By this, the same Moses overcame the Amalekites, and by this
Abraham interceded for the Sodomites. By prayer Jacob was delivered from Esau;
Iosuah from the men of Aie; David from Goliath; The Prophet from Jeroboam;
Elizeus from the Samaritans; Hezechiah from death; Iehosophat from the
Aramites; Manasses from captivity; Jeremiah from his adversaries, and Daniel
from the Lions: the d^seased from his leprosy, the Apostles from prison, and
the Church from persecution. By prayer Hannah obtained a son, David
deliverance, Solomon wisdom, Elias the restoring of a dead child, Elizeus the
opening of his servants eyes, Nehemiah the kings favor, the Centurion his
servants health, Christ comfort in his agony, the Apostles a successor to
Judas, Stephen pardon for Paul, and Monima the conversion of her son S.
Austin.

In Psalm. 63
Thus true it is which that Austin says, Great is the profit of pure prayer,
and as a faithful messenger, delivers her arrand, and pierces thither,
whither flesh cannot come. And this it was which made Bernard to say; Brethren
let none of us lightly esteem his prayer: I tell you, that he to whom we
pray does not lightly esteem it: after it is out of our mouth, he writes it in
his Book: and one of these two we may doubtless expect, either that he will
grant our petition, or that which he knows to be better for us.

Call upon me, and I will hear, says God: ask; and you shall have, says
Christ. Before they cry I will hear them, says Isaiah. The Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him, says David, but to such as call upon him in truth. And
if we may believe the Apostle James, the prayer of a righteous man avails
much.

Pray therefore, and we had need to pray. Why we ought to Pray.
Satan will devour thee: pray for deliverance. The world will allure thee:
pray for assistance. The flesh will betray thee: pray for defense. The wicked
will seduce thee: pray for continuance. What, beloved? If God had commanded us
a great thing, ought we not to do it? how much more when he says, pray and
prevail, ask and have, seek and find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you? ask Temporal things, and have them, seek for Spiritual things and find
them, knock for Eternal things, and the gates of heaven shall stand as open
to you, as the gates of the prison did to the Apostle Peter.

By this, with Eliah, you may open and shut the very gates of heaven, and by
this with the Apostle you may shake the foundations of the earth. O precious
prayer, what could not only we, but even the whole world, do without thee!
Thou increasest the earth, calmest the sea, asswagest the fire, purgest the
air, protectest our Governors, confoundest our enemies, preseruest our
health, instructest our minds, blessest our actions, encreasest our wealth,
exaltest our honor, speak but the word, and we are preserved.

Prayer in all places.
Pray we therefore in all places, at all times, for all persons, and for all
things. Pray we in all places, but in every place lifting up pure hands unto
God. Thus, Isaac prayed in the field, Iakob in his bed, Israel in Egypt, Moses
on the Mount, Iosuah at Jericho, Elias in the chamber, Hezekiah on his couch,
Jeremy in the dungeon, Jonah in the Whales belly, Daniel in the Lions den,
Christ in the Garden, the Disciples in a ship, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul
at the sea side: and the Jews at Jerusalem. Call upon him in thy private
chamber, and cry unto him with thy family in thy parlour. Thou need not to
fall down at some pillar with hypocrites, but praise him especially in the
congregation of Saints: for there many voices are Gods best melody.

Pray also at all times: at evening, Pray at all times.
and morning, and at noone day, will I pray unto thee, yea at midnight will I
rise to call upon thee, nay seven times a day will I praise thee, says David.
Daniel did so three times a day, Paul did it day and night, Hannah did it all
the days of her life, and the Psalmographer vows it, I will praise the Lord
as long as I live, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises to my God.
Pray continually, not as those Heretics, Euchitae.
who would ever do so, but as Christians who know when to do so.

With morning prayer, the day begin:
With evening prayer the night shut in.
Without this prayer sit not to eat:
Without Gods praise rise not from meat.
And forget not to pray for all persons, Pray for ad persons.
for the King as the head, his Senators as the eyes, his Clergy as the mouth,
his Soldiers as the hands, his Subjects, to all trades, as the feet upon
which the Commonwealth does stand. Art thou a Minister? pray for thy flock.
An Auditor? for thy Preacher. A Father? for thy child: an Husband? for thy
wife: a Master? for thy servant: or a Governor? pray for thy family. Is any
Sick? pray for his health: Poor? for his wealth: Imprisoned? for his
liberty: Seduced? for his recovery: Confirmed? for his constancy: or in any
Distress? for his delivery. Pray for all men, that their bodies may be
preserved, souls saved, estates maintained, that thy, and their thoughts may
be sanctified, your words seasoned, and your actions ordered by the Spirit of
God.

To whom we must Pray.
Will you know now to whom we must pray? not to a Calfe, as the Israelites did,
nor to Baal, as his Priests did, nor to an Image, as Idolaters did, nor to any
Saints, as our fathers did; but as we are bound to serve God alone, so are we
bounden to pray to God alone; for he alone knows our wants, hears our
petitions, has promised to help us, is able to do for us, and is the alone
present helper in the needful time of trouble.

I will draw to an end. You have seen beloved, the necessity of this service,
How we must Pray.
let me show you a little the qualities of this service. Pray we must in
knowledge with understanding, in faith by believing, in remorse with feeling,
in zeal without cooling, in intention without wandering, in reverence without
contemning, in constancy without reuolting, and in love without revenging. Let
our eyes be fastened, hearts fixed, knees bowed, mouths opened, and our hands
lifted up as to the King of Kings. And as Jacob would not let the Angel go
till he were blessed, so let not us let him go till we be heard. Let not the
woman of Canaan be more earnest with Christ militant, then we will be with the
same Christ triumpha^t. Let never the Queen of Sheba so willingly come to
Solomon, as we must willingly come unto Christ: he loves most, willing and
importunate suitors. Wherefore, as David said to Abner, never see my face,
unless thou bring Michal with thee; so I say unto you, never look God in the
face, unless you bring Prayer with you.

As I have declared to you the duty of prayer, so should I speak somewhat of
giving of thanks. Many can be content to pray in troubles: but few give
thanks for deliverance out of trouble. Multi petentes, pauci promittentes,
paucissimi reddentes, says an ancient Father: there are many Petitioners, few
Promisers, most few thankesgiuers. Are there not ten cleansed? where are the
nine? there is none returned to give thanks but this one, and he is a
Samaritan. If ever people under the cope of heaven had occasion to praise God,
we are they, especially for his Word and Gospel, and for many deliverances
showed to our Princes and people.

But because at the end of this Treatise, I have set down a form both of
prayer and thanksgiving, I refer you to the perusing of those two platformes.

I doubt not of your patience for the length of this Preface, because I desire
to leave it as an occular Sermon, instructing you continually how to call upon
God, and preparing you to the exposition of the Lords Prayer, which of many
through ignorance is as much profaned, as ever God was by saying the
Paternoster in Latin, or repeating other Rosaries in an unknown language.

Now having ended, as you see, these questions and answers, I make question
with my self, to whom I may commend them; and because for these ten years
immediately past, I have lived and preached amongst you, and that by the
assignement of your Reverend Pastor, M. Doctor Montfort.
I am bold in general to present them to you all. You have, I confess, known
my conversation, been acquainted with my ministry, countenanced me in my
calling, maintained me in health, comforted me in sickness, and afforded unto
me much more kindness, than can be requited by this paper present. And since
it pleases God to dispose of me still in such uncertain places, as that I
could never yet say, here must I rest: I bless God that ever I came unto you,
whose love and larges has bin, and is amongst many of you (for what lecturer
for ten years together can please al) such unto me, as makes me to say of my
late exile, Perijssem nisi perijssem, I had been undone, if others had not
sought to undo me.

Since I came unto you, I have preached painfully, lived honestly, and studied
carefully to do you service: with what conscience I know, with what danger you
know, and with what profit God knows. Surely this good I see done amongst you;
you have beautified the house of the living God; praise that worthy Knight,
whose love and labor was first in that work; you have enlarged that house
which is for the dying Saints; pray for that good King who gave you that piece
of ground; and your congregation is as the thousands of Israel. Bless God for
those trumpets of yours, who have ever called you to such holy assemblies.
Blessed be that God, who thus blesses you: blessed be you, who thus bless
God: and blessed and billeted up be they in heaven, who thus provide for the
living and the dead, and withal remember their painful Teachers.

Now though I cannot say to you, as Paul did to the Corinthians, I am yours to
live and die with you: (for no Minister can say it, who depends upon
voluntary contribution) yet this I will say, and say for ever, I am yours to
live, and pray for you, that you may so know God, as you may pray to him, so
pray to God that you may live before him, so live, that you may ever be fit to
receive his Sacrament, and so both fit to know, pray, live, and receive, that
after you have known him by Christ, prayed to him through Christ, lived before
him in Christ, and received his favor in the seals of Christ, you may in the
end die in his faith, as you have lived in his fear, and at the last day in
bodies and souls, be partakers of eternal glory. To the grace of this God I
commend you, to your grace I commend these Treatises, doubting not but many of
you will be as ready to read them, as you have been willing to hear them.
From your Parish of Saint Martin, in the fields.

June 10. 1613. Your servant in the Lord, so long as it shall please God and
you, ROBERT HILL.

SPECIAL QVESTIONS HANDLED IN CHRIST'S PRAYER EXPOVNDED.
1 WHy is it called the Lords prayer. Page 2 2 Why Christ taught it. Page 2. 3
3 Whether there be any virtue in the repetition of the words of this prayer.
Page 3 4 Whether it be ever necessary to repeat all those words at all
times, and how we must. Page 3. 4 5 Whether we pray to the Father only. Page 5
6 Whether we may pray to Christ. Page 8. 9 7 Why we say our Father. Page 8.9 8
Whether we may say my Father. Page 8. 9 9 Whether we must pray to God only.
Page 7 10 Why and how God is said to be in heaven. Page 10 11 Why we begin with
this name of Paternitie and say our Father. Page 12 12 What it is to Hallow
Gods name. Page 13 13 Whether bad men may do that which is good. Page 19 14
Questions of Gods kingdom. Page 19. 20. 21 15 What we must judge of wicked
persons. Page 26 16 mhether we may pray thus, My will be done. Page 26 17
What it is to do Gods will, and why we pray so Page 27. 18 Whether it be enough
to do Gods will. Page 30 19 Whether God co^ma^ds things impossible. Page 31 20
What it is that God wills. Page 31 21 Why we pray first for things corporal.
Page 35 22 Whether in the fourth petition we ask food spiritual. Page 37 23
Whether rich men may pray for daily bread. Page 39 24 Of praying to be rich.
Page 43 25 Of laying up for the time to come. Page 44 26 How to get riches.
Page 45 27 Whether one at the hour of death may pray for daily bread. Page 49
28 Of praying only to God for forgiveness of sins. Page 54 29 How sins are
discharged. Page 55 30 Whether we must confess our sins to men. Page 56 31 How
we must confess them. Page 56 32 What is required in confession. Page 56 33
Whether we must pray for forgiveness of sins, which we do believe. Page 58
34 Of praying for the wicked. Page 59 35 Of praying for such as sin against
the holy Ghost. Page 59 36 How that sin is known. Page 59 37 How sin is a
debt. Page 60 38 Why we are forgiven by Christ. Page 62. 39 Whether God does
both forgive and punish the same sin. Page 63 40 How sin is a debt to man.
Page 66 41 The good of pardoning offenses. Page 67 42 Whether we may forgive,
and yet sue at Law. Page 68 43 Rules for going to law. Page 68 44 Rules against
revenge. Page 69 45 Why the godly are led into temptation. Page 74 46 Whether
we may pray to be led out of temptation. Page 76 47 Whether we may say, Suffer
us not to be led into temptation. Page 77 48 What temptation is, how taken.
Page 77. 78 49 How God leads into temptation. Page 79 50 How Satan leads
into temptation. Page 79 51 Whether God be the author of sin. Page 80 52 How
God tempts man. Page 81 53 Why God does harden man's heart. Page 82 54 How God
tempts by prosperity. Page 83 55 How by our deliverance from gunpowder,
1605. Page 84 56 How by adversity. Page 85 57 Of temptation to popish
religion. Page 86 58 Of temptation to forsake the Church. Page 87 59 How Satan
is resisted. Page 88 60 In his temptation to covetousness. Page 89 61 To
pride. Page 90 62 To adultrie. Page 91 63 To drunkenness. Page 91 64 To envy.
Page 92 65 To idleness. Page 93 66 To impatience in afflictions. Page 94 70 To
despair of Gods mercies. Page 95 71 To presumption. Page 96 72 How many ways
God delivers from evil. Page 99 73 What we must do to be delivered from
evil, and from Satan. Page 99. 100 74 Whether we may pray for temptations. Page
102 75 From whence have Kings their authority. Page 107 76 Whether Gods power
can be communicated to any creature. Page 108 77 How all power is given to
Christ. Page 108 78 Of this word, Amen in diverse questions. Page 112 79 Of many
circumstances in prayer, and also of set prayer, and of the profitable and
lawful use of it. Page 117
SPECIAL QVESTIONS in a Communicant instructed.
1 OF diverse sorts of banquets. Page 1 2 Of the necessity of coming to the
Lords Table. Page 2 3 Of properties belonging to a fit guest. Page 6 4 Of
examination. Page 3. 4. 5. 6. 7 5 Why knowledge is necessary. Page 9 6 Why the
most are ignorant. Page 9 7 What knowledge a Communicant must have Page 10 8
Twenty reasons that the bread is not turned into Christ's body. Page 14 9
Whether it may be done by a miracle. Page 17 10 Why the bread is called
Christ's body. Page 17 11 That the bread may not be received alone. Page 18 12
Why Christ used bread and wine. Page 19 13 What the actions of the Ministers
signify. Page 20 14 What the actions of the receiver signify. Page 20 15
Why we must examine our faith. Page 21 16 Signs of faith. Page 22 17 Why we
must examine our repentance. Page 23 18 Why men must, and do not repent. Page
25 19 Signs of repentance. Page 25 20 Why we must examine our obedience. Page
26 21 Notes of true obedience. Page 26 22 Of reconciliation. Page 27 23 What
we must think of at the Communion. Page 136 24 How we must behave our selves
when we come to the Lords Table. Page 29 25 Of kneeling at the Communion. Page
30 26 What quantity of bread and wine is fit to be received. Page 33 27 Of
often receiving. Page 33 28 Of private receiving. Page 35 29 Of coming fasting
to the Communion. Page 38 30 What is required after the receiving of the Lords
Supper. Page 40 31 Zanchius of the Lords Supper. Page 42
SPECIAL QVESTIONS handled in a Christian directed.
1 WHhy we ought to watch. Page 65 2 What we must do in watching. Page 66 3 Of
buying out the time. Page 67 4 How we must watch over our thoughts. Page 68 5
How over our words. Page 70 6 How over our actions toward God. Page 71 7 How
over our actions toward our selves. Page 73 8 How over our actions toward
others. Page 74 9 Of what behavior we must be. Page 76 10 Of apparel. Page 77
11 Of diet. Page 78 12 Of recreation. Page 79 13 Of getting riches. Page 80 14
Of spending and frugalitie. Page 80. 81 15 Of sanctifying the Sabbath. Page 85
16 Of choosing a fit wife, or a fit husband. Page 86 17 The duties of the
husband. Page 87 18 Of the wife. Page 88 19 Of parents, natural, and legal.
Page 89. 90 20 Of children, natural, and legal. Page 91. 92 21 Of masters.
Page 94 22 Of servants. Page 95 23 Of Magistrates and subjects. Page 97 24 Of
the Ministers duty. Page 99 25 Of the peoples duty to their Ministers. Page
100
Of hearing Sermons.
26 What we must do before we hear. Page 101 27 What in hearing. Page 102 28
What after hearing. Page 103 29 How to know a good Sermon. Page 104 30 Why
many do sleep at Sermons. Page 105 31 Remedies against it. Page 107 32 How
hearing is better then reading. Page 107 33 Whether all are bounden to hear.
Page 108 34 Why we should not take Gods name in vain. Page 109
SPESIALL QVESTIONS in the Direction to die well.
1 WHat we must ever think on. Page 111 2 Why on death. Page 112. 3 That the
Art of dying well, is the Art of Arts. Page 113 4 Why few think of it. Page
113 5 How we ought to number our days. Page 114 6 That it is folly not to
think of death. Page 115 7 That our life is miserable. Page 115 8 How the
hour of death is better then the hour of life. Page 116 9 Whether we may
desire death. Page 117 10 What death is. Page 118 11 Whether Adam, if he had
continued in his innocence, should have died. Page 119 12 That we are better
in Christ then in Adam. Page 119 13 Three monitors of death. Page 120 14 How we
may die well. Page 120 15 When we must begin to serve God. Page 120 16 Of
deferring repentance. Page 121 17 Of the death of the wicked. Page 122 18 Of
the death of the godly. Page 122 19 Of unwillingness to die. Page 128 20 How
many ways may a man carry himhimselfe in death. Page 131 21 What we must do
when we are sick. Page 134 22 Why we must set our soul in order. Page 134 23
When and why we must send for the Minister. Page 135 24 Why we must take
physic. Page 136 25 How we must take it. Page 136 26 Whether we may use
superstitious, and ungodly Physicians. Page 137 27 Why the Physician for the
soul must be first sent for. Page 138 28 What we must do when the Minister
comes. Page 139 29 What the Minister must do to us. Page 140 30 Whether being
sick of the plague, we may send for the Minister. Page 140 31 Of them that
dream of a particular faith. Page 143 32 Against them that abuse Gods
providence. Page 143 33 The objection, that many escape, answered. Page 144 34
Who may visit persons infected. Page 145 35 Comforts against the pestilence.
Page 145 36 Object. that friends forsake, answered. Page 146 37 Object. that
want solemn burial, answered. Page 147 38 Of our reconciliation to man in
sickness. Page 147 39 Why we ought to have a will in readiness. Page 148 40
How we ought to make our will. Page 149 41 Whom we may make our executors. Page
149 42 Who is our best friend in our sickness. Page 150 43 What speeches we
must use to our friends that visit us. Page 151 44 Comforts against the fear
of death. Page 151 45 Comforts against the fear of Gods anger. Page 157 46
Comforts against the fear of desperation. Page 159 47 Comforts against the
fear of Satan. Page 162 48 Comforts against the commission of sin. Page 164
49 Comforts against the greatness of our sins. Page 167 50 Comforts against
the multitude of sins. Page 169 51 Comforts against our imperfect obedience.
Page 171 52 What thoughts we must have at the hour of death. Page 175 53 Of
speech at that time. Page 176 54 Of sudden death. Page 180 55 Whether we may
pray against it. Page 183 56 Why we must take thought for our bury all. Page
184 57 Of the place of buryall. Page 186 58 Of keeping clean Churchyards.
Page 187 58 Of Monuments. Page 187 60 Of mourning. Page 189 61 Of mourning
apparel. Page 191 62 Of Funeral Sermons. Page 192 63 That Christ's death is
often to be thought on. Page 194 64 What his passion is. Page 195 65 What moved
Christ to suffer. Page 196 66 When his suffering began. Page 196 67 What he
suffered before his apprehension. Page 197 68 Why was his soul troubled. Page
197 69 What it was that crucified Christ. Page 200 70 Why he was crucified at
Easter. Page 201 71 Why he died on the Cross. Page 202 72 Who have profit by
Christ's death. Page 203 73 How it is meritorious. Page 204 74 A meditation of
Christ's death. Page 205 75 Whether we must follow Christ in his Cross. Page
208 76 Of the virtue of Christ's resurrection. Page 209 77 Of the deceitfulness
of the world. Page 212 78 Of eternal glory. Page 215 79 What we shall enjoy
in heaven. Page 216 80 How we shall come unto heaven. Page 217 81 What the
object of life eternal is. Page 217 82 For whom it is prepared. Page 218 83
That our bodies shall rise. Page 219 84 The qualities of our bodies after the
resurrection. Page 223 85 How our bodies shall be spiritual. Page 224 86
Whether they shall be perfect without the least imperfection. Page 224 87 The
qualities of the soul after death. Page 225 88 Sweet meditations of the
Fathers concerning the joys of heaven. Page 226 89 Of the torments of hell.
Page 231 A consolatorie Epistle against all crosses. Page 239 An heavenly
meditation in Verse. Page 249 A prayer for morning or evening. Page 251 A
morning prayer. Page 266 An evening prayer. Page 277 A prayer to be said
alone, or with company, changing I, into we. Page 289 A thanksgiving for our
Gunne-powder deliverance. Page 335 A prayer for a sick man. Page 298 A
thanksgiving after deliverance from sickness Page 307 A prayer to be said by
a sick man. Page 313 A thanksgiving after the death of any. Page 319 A prayer
for a woman in travail. Page 323 A thanksgiving after her safe deliverance.
Page 326 A prayer before the Communion. Page 329 A thanksgiving after. Page
332 Graces. Page 341
FINIS.
CHRIST'S PRAYER EXPOVNDED.
The Speakers.
Euchedidascalus, A Teacher of Prayer. Phileuches, A Lover of Prayer.
Euch. PHileuches, amongst many Sermons which I have preached unto you, you
have heard me expound the Lords prayer: are you bound to give account of that
you have heard?


Phil. Sir, doubtless I am, for the Apostle Peter teaches me that I must be
always ready to give an answer to every one that asks me a reason of the
hope that is in me, with meekness and reverence. 1. Pet. 3.15



Euch. Repeat then the Lords Prayer.


Phil. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come:
thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.


Euch. Why is this prayer called the Lords Prayer?


Phil. 1 Because Christ Jesus our Lord set down the same Mat. 6.9.
.

2 Because we cannot pray unless Christ teach us Luc. 11.1 Romans 8.26
.

3 To make us esteem it, in that it was given by our Lord.

4 To distinguish it from the prayers of others.


Euch. Why did Christ teach his Church this prayer?


Phil. 1 To put us in mind of our misery, that unless God give it, we can
have no good thing Iam. 1.17
.

2 Of his mercy, who gives if we ask.

3 To comfort us, that we may be so bold as to ask.

4 To instruct us in what manner we should ask.

5 To assure us, that we coming to the Father in his Sons own words, he
will hear us for his Sons sake.

6 To teach us by this short sum, what we may lawfully ask at the hands of
God, and that other things we should not ask Matthew. 20
.

7 That Christ might not be inferior to John, who taught his disciples to pray.

8 To teach Ministers, Parents, Tutors, and Masters to do the like to their
children and people.

9 To show that God, is not like the great Monarchs of the earth, to whom we
may not come unless Ahashuerosh-like, he hold out his golden Scepter. Ester. 4.

10 That God vouchsafes all this his honor, that they may come unto him.


Euch. Is there any virtue in these very words of this prayer?


Phil. There is no such virtue, as that by the bare repetition of it, we can
bind God to grant our requests, or that we should never pray in other words;
but as the ten Commandments contain all things to be done of us, the Creed,
all things to be believed by us, so the Lords Prayer does comprehend all things
to be asked by us of Almighty God.


Euch. Is it necessary ever to repeat all this prayer?


Phil. It is surely a good conclusion for our ordinary course of praying, both
publicly and privately, because those things which we cannot at such times
crave, or give thanks for in particular, are all contained in this platform:
but that every petition should ever be used, it is not necessary.


Euch. How then may you repeat it with comfort?


Phil. Surely as Luther teaches me to repeat the ten Commandments, and the
Articles of my faith in my prayers.


Euch. How is that?


Phil. To observe the present necessity. As for example: Do I see the
profanation of Gods name, and contempt of his word? I must then say, O
heavenly father, maintain I pray thee, the glory of thine own name, and
suffer it not so irreverently and irreligiously to be abused. Am I assaulted by
Satan, or do Gods enemies prevail? I must then say, Help us O Lord, and
establish thy kingdom in an amongst us. Is it sickness, or adversity that
does molest us? It is then time to say, Thy will be done. In want I may call
for daily bread; in the sense of sin, for the forgiveness of sins; and in
the fear of temptation say, Lead me O Lord not into temptation, but at the
least deliver me from evil.


Euch. How many parts has this prayer?


Phil. Four: 1 A Preface. 2 Petitions. 3 A Reason. 4 A Seal.



Euch. Which is the Preface?


Phil. Our Father which art in Heaven. Our Father which art in in heaven.
Where God is described by two such properties, as we must have in our minds,
when we pray unto him: as 1 That he is our loving Father Esa. 63.16.
.

2 That he is our Almighty God in heaven Verse. 15.
.


Euch. Do you here pray to the Father only?


Phil. No, but to the whole Trinity: yet as the first person is the fountain
of the Deity, we pray to the Father, by the Son through the holy Ghost.


Euch. But Christ is called our Brother: how can he then be called our Father?


Phil. As he is God, he is our Father, and therefore called the Father of
eternity Isa. 9.6.
As he is Man, he is our Brother, and is not ashamed to call us his brethren
Heb. ^.11.
.


Euch. Yet once again, I pray you, resolve me: do we here pray to Christ,
for whose sake only we are heard in our prayers?


Phil. We do: for we pray unto him, as he is the second person; we have our
prayers heard through him, as he is our Mediator. If you distinguist Christ's
person from Christ's office, you may resolve your self.


Euch. What does this word Father teach you?


Phil. 1 That I must not call upon him as my Judge to condemn me, but my
Father to save me f. Luke 15.18


2 That in Christ I am his Son, as well as others are Gal 3.26 Ephesians. 1.5
.

3 That (more then any other Father) he cares for me, and will deny me
nothing convenient Mat. 7.7. Psalm. 103.13 Isai. 49.15.
.

4 That I may boldly come unto Psa 50.15. Isay. 64.6
him. For this is a name, a great name, under which none can despair, other
titles of Majesty terrify, this comforts even dust and ashes, to come to God.
For who (says Cypria^ durst pray unto God by the name of Father, if Christ our
Aduocat did not put these words into our mouths: he knows how God stands
affected toward us for all our unworthiness, and we may say with Saint
Austen, Lord take notice of the style of our Advocate thy Son.

5 That none can pray unto him but his children Ver. 16.
.

6 That I must ever behave my self (as Christ did) like Gods child Ephi 5.8
.

7 That I must pray only to God Mat. 4.10 Psalm. 50.14 15.
.

8 That I must come unto him by Christ Ioh 11.34.16 1. Isay. 63 16
.

9 To put me in mind of my natural, and spiritual birth by him. Mal. 2.10.
Deuteronomy. 32.6.

10 To teach me that as a good Father he provides for me, and all creatures.
Psalm. 68.6. Iam. 1.17.

11 That though we sin, yet he is ready to pardon; yea for a great offense a
small punishment is enough to this Father: he is a Father of mercy even to
prodigals, Luke. 15. and of compassion even to rebels, as David was, 2. Sam. 18.


Euch. May you pray to none other, but to God?


Phil. No surely, for, 1 Christ he teaches us to pray here to none other.

2 The things in this prayer are proper to God for to give.

3 It is his commandment so to do.

4 They are cursed that worship other Gods.

5 He alone knows our hearts.

6 He alone can hear our prayers, and help us.

7 We believe in him alone, and therefore must pray to him alone. Romans 10.14.

8 No holy person in all the Bible did ever forsake his Creator, and fly to
the creature.


Euch. Why do you say our Father, and not my Father?


Phil. To teach me, 1 That I must hold each member of the Church as my brethren
Genesis 13.8
.

2 That I must pray as well in charity for others as my self Iam. 5.16
, as upon necessity for my self.

3 That I must love all men as brethren 1. Ioh 4.21.
.

4 The dignity of each Christian, having God to his father 1. Sam. 118.23.
, which dignity he vouchsafed not either to the Patriarchs before the Law,
nor yet to the blessed Angels: they are called, only the servants of God, the
other Messengers of God, but seldom sons.

5 Gods love to me in making me his child 1. Ioh 3.1.
.

6 That in prayer, I must consider Christ and his Church as one body, and make
him my Father, who is the Father of Christ mine eldest brother, his by
generation, mine by regeneration; his by nature, mine by grace: and this will
cause in prayer most sweet consolation.

7 To assure me that he is also my Father, and will ever be so, even though I
offend him: for else I could not come willingly unto him; and Satan calls this
most of all into question, Matthew. 4.3.27.43.

8 To assure me, that as I pray for all Gods people; so every one of them
prays for me: and therefore I being a member of Christ, can never want
friends to solicit my cause effectually to God. In a word, the word Father
is a word of faith, and the word our is a word of charity: so that in these
two words is the sum of the Law and the Gospel.


Euch. You said this word Our teaches us to pray for others, what, even for
all men?


Phil. Yea verily: that God will give them grace to repent, and come out of the
snares of the Devil. 2. Tim. 2. and if they be our enemies, that God would
turn their hearts: Matthew. 5.44. Note here that we are bound to commend
particular persons, as our Governors, Children, Kindred, Charges, Friends, and
Benefactors unto God. Paul did so for others, and desired others would do it
for him.


Euch. But may I never call upon God as my Father?


Phil. Yes: I both may, and ought in my private Prayers: Jacob did so at
Bethel: David did so in his trouble: Christ did so on the Cross: and as God
says to me, I am thy Redeemer; so I may say thou art my Father. This faith
teaches me, when I apply him to my self: this, Religion teaches me, when I
pray for my self. Yet so must I call upon him as my God, that I also consider
him as the God of his Church.


Euch. Why say you, that God is in Heaven?


Phil. Because there he shows himself chiefly to the Saints, Eccle. 21 24.
and from thence he manifests himself to man Psa. 57.3
.


Euch. Is not God every where?


Phil. Yes: for his essence is every where Pro. 5.21
and he fills both Heaven and Earth Ephesians. 1.10
.


Euch. How many Heavens are there?


Phil. Three.

1 The Air, in which we breath Gene. 1.26.
.

2 The Sky, in which are the Stars Deuteronomy. 1.10.
.

3 The Heaven of Heavens, in which Christ, the Angels and Saints departed are
1. King. 8 27.
; called by Christ, his Fathers house, John 14.2. by Paul, Paradise, 2. Cor.
12.4. by Matthew. Chap. 5.34. the throne of God, and the City of the great King.


Euch. What learn you by this, that God is in Heaven?


Phil. 1 That he is therefore able to grant my requests 1. King. 8.30.
.

2 That I may pray with confidence unto him Psa. 123.1
.

3 That in Prayer my heart must be in Heaven 1. King. 8.48. Psalm 25.1.
This is that true worship. John 4.23.

4 That I must use al reverence in prayer Eccle. 5.1.2.
.

5 That I am here a Pilgrim, and that my conversation must be in Heaven Phil.
3.21 Heb. 13.14
.

6 That I must look for all graces and helps from Heaven Ier. 1.17 Psalm. 121.1
.

7 That by pilgrimages I need not seek to God Psalm. 145 18.
.

8 That he differs far from Earthly Parents, who would help, but cannot
oftentimes.

9 That no Creature can hurt me, Psalm. 2.4.5. Psalm. 118.6. Romans 8.30.

10 That I must prefer him before my Earthly Parents, Matthew. 8.22.10.37.
Deuteronomy. 33.9.

11 That therefore I must especially ask Heavenly things. Luke 11, 13.

12 That I also shall be with him in Heaven.


Euch. Do you then include God in Heaven as they, Job. 22.14. is he not in all
places?


Phil. Yea surely, as appears 1. Kings 8.27. Psalm. 139.6. Isay 66.1. Ier.
23.24. Prou. 15.3. and else where in many places of Scripture.


Euch. Why then is he said to be in Heaven?


Phil. 1. Because he manifests his power from hence, as Kings do theirs from
their Palaces: Psalm. 50.6. Romans 1.18. poor Cotages argue no great
Inhabitants, magnificent Palaces argue persons of account: man's baseness is
seen in that he dwells in houses of Clay Job. 4.19. Gods greatness in that
he dwells in Heaven. Ier. 23. Psalm. 123.1.

2 Because in view of the Heavens, we see more of Gods Majesty then in all
other Creatures: Psalm. 19.1.

3 That as we see Heaven in all places; so we know that God is in all places:
Psalm. 139.7. Job. 26.6. Hebr. 4.13.

4 That we may by this be persuaded both of his Omnipotency that he can do
all, Psalm. 19.6. and liberty that he will do what he pleases: Psalm. 115.3.
Yea and that seeing he is in the highest Heavens he is to be feared above all
Gods. O happy preface to this blessed Prayer.


Euch. Why does not this Prayer begin with some preface, of Gods Soueraignitie,
Omnipotency, Justice, etc. but with this of Paternitie?


Phil. His Soueraignitie would terrify us, because we have rebelled; his
Omnipotency amaze us, being but dust and ashes; his Justice afright us, being
guilty of our sins; his Paternitie does allure us, as prodigal Sons,
coming to a liberal and merciful Father: Luke 1.15.18.


Euch. How many petitions are there in the Lords prayer?


Phil. Six: whereof the first three concern God; the other concern our
selves: and of the last three, one only is for things corporal, the other two
are for things Spiritual: 1. Pet. 1.3.


Euch. What learn you out of this order?


Phil. I learn, 1. Gods great favor to me, who will admit me to ask for my
self 1. King. 3.11.
.

2 His great love, that he will hear my asking for others Genesis 19.21
.

3 My duty that I must desire especially Gods glory Exodus 32.32.
.

4 That I must oftener crave things Spiritual then Corporal Luke 17.5
.


Euch. Which is the first petition?


Phil. Hallowed be thy name. Hallowed be thy name



Euch. Why is this set in the first place?


Phil. 1. Because it is first in the intent of God, who made all for his own
glory Pro. 15.3.
.

2 Because it is first in the intent of the godly, who like good Children wish
and do all to Gods glory Ioh. 15.8. Exodus 32.32 Romans 9.3.
.


Euch. What is the use of this order?


Phil. That whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do else, we may do
all to the glory of God: 1. Cor. 10.31.


Euch. What mean you by these words, Hallowed be thy name?


Phil. By Gods name I understand his titles: as God, Christ, Lord, and such
like; his properties, as his Justice, Mercy, Providence, and such like; his
word, as the Scriptures read and preached; his Ministers, Sabbath, Sanctuary:
his Sacraments, as Baptism and the Lords Supper; his Works, as Creation,
Preservation, and the like. And by Hallowing, I mean, that God in all these
may have due reverence done unto him of all the people that belong unto him.


Euch. Tell me yet more plainly, what this word Hallowed means?


Phil. To Hallow, or sanctify, is (as you taught me) 1. To separate a thing
from a common, to an holy use: so we are commanded to sanctify the Sabbath,
Exodus 20.2. To preserve from pollution: so all people must be hallowed, Leuit.
20.7.2. Cor. 7.1.3. To esteem and celebrate as holy: and so God is said to be
hallowed, Leuit. 10.3. Ezech. 38.23.


Euch. How may you a polluted person, thus hallowe Gods name, which in it self
is most holy?


Phil. 1. By the consideration of his Justice againsts sinners.

2 His mercy toward his Children, in giving them faith, forgiving their
sins, and making them patient to endure troubles.

3 By being holy my self: bad men may account God great and glorious, none
Holy, but holy persons as Angels Isay 6.6. and men 1. Pet. 3.15. who must do it
in thought, word, and deed.


Euch. Why must you thus labor to hallow Gods name?


Phil. 1. Because it is an honor even due to him. Revel. 4.11.

2 It is a credit to me.

3 I testify how I esteem of God.

4 The contrary argues impiety: Exodus 5.2. Isay 36.20.

5 He has punished the profanation of his name: Exodus 14.28. 2. King. 19.37.
Isay 37 36.37. Act. 12.23.

6 He created me to this purpose: Proverbs 16.3.

7 As all men account of their names Eccles. 7.1. so God does highly of his.

8 All people have used all means to erect Altars to the honor of their Gods:
yea and the people who never saw their King honor him.

9 It is not only holy in it self, but gives holiness to all other things
that are holy.

10 Moses and Aaron entered not into Canaan, because they did not sanctify the
Word amongst the children of Israel. Deuteronomy. 32.51. and Leuit. 10.3. I will be
sanctified in them that come near me, and before all the people I will be
glorified.


Euch. What wants do you bewail in this petition?


Phil. First, I bewail mine own and others pride of heart, that we labor
more for our own credit, then Gods glory Luke 18.11.
.

2 Our hardness of heart that we cannot as we ought, see Gods glory in his
Creatures Mar 6.52.
.

3 Our unthankfulness, that we praise him not as we ought, for his many
favors toward Mankind above all Creatures Psalm. 51 15
.

4 Our impiety, that in our lives we dishonor God Psalm. 119.136.
.


Euch. What then do you pray for in this petition?


Phil. I pray, that God, by me and all men, whether Magistrates, Ministers, or
people, may in fear and dread be glorified, in the reverend speaking of his
name, holy meditation of his properties, diligent hearing of his word, often
receiving of the Sacrament, patient bearing of the cross, and daily admiring
of his works: And, in a word, that we may know in mind, acknowledge in
heart, love in truth, speak with tongue, do in our actions, both natural,
civil, and religious, all such things as God may be glorified by. All Nations
must praise God Psalm. 117. and all must pray that not only they but also all
others may thus praise him, at all times Psalm. 113. in all places, without
intermission, and that by their good works they may stir up others to
glorify God. Matthew. 5.2. 1. Pet. 2.12.


Euch. What do you pray against?


Phil. I pray against all ignorance, error, vanity of mind, Infidelity,
Profaneness, Atheism, Worldliness, Security, Pride and all blasphemous
speeches, false dealing, scoffing. Idolatry, Superstition, Sorcerie,
Sacrilege, Simonie, Perjury, Persecution, Impenitencie, Irreverent using of
Gods Word, Sacraments or works: and in a word, against all such disorder in
man's life, as may any way obscure the glory of God.


Euch. What do you here give God thanks for?


Phil. That it has pleased him to glorify his great Name in all the former,
and has given me, and many others grace, of his mere mercy to glorify his
Name in that which before I prayed for: as also yt he has bestowed upon us,
the benefit of sa^ctification by the word of truth Ioh. 17. and the perfection
of sanctification in the life to come Coloss. 1.12. If thus we desire to
honor God, we loose not by it, he in the end will honor us. 1. Sam. 2.30. 2 Thessalonians. 1.12.


Euch. Why do you use in this, and other petitions this order, First, to
bewail: Secondly, to pray for: Thirdly, to pray against: And lastly, to give
thanks?


Phil. Because confession, petition, deprecation, and thanksgiving, being the
special parts of Prayer, 1. Tim. 2.1. I must understand them all to be in
every Petition of this absolute form of Prayer.


Euch. Which is the second petition?


Phil. Thy Kingdom come
Thy Kingdom come.


Euch. Why does it next follow: Hallowed be thy name?


Phil. 1. Because it is the first means, by which Gods name is hallowed.

2 Because next to the hallowing of his Name, we ought chiefly to pray, that
Gods Kingdom may come Mat. 6.31
.


Euch. Why is it set before, Thy will be^ done?


Phil. Because no man can ever do Gods will in any thing, till such time as
Gods Kingdom be erected in his heart.


Euch. How prove you this?


Phil. By these reasons;

1 Because no man can do Gods will that is not Gods subject Ioh. 1.24.
.

2 No man can keep Gods Law, but by Gods grace Psalm. 119 32.
.

3 Because without faith we cannot please God Heb. 11.6
.

4 Because The end of the Commandment is Love out of a pure heart, good
conscience, and faith unfeigned 1. Tim. 1.5.
.


Euch. But may not a bad man do that which is good?


Phil. He may do that which is good in it self: but because he is out of
Christ, Ioh. 15.5
or being in Christ, does it to a bad end, it shall not be good to him 1. Cor.
13.3.
. So, to give alms is a good thing; but if our persons be not justified before
God, and this action be not to the glory of God, it will never prove good to
us.


Euch. Why do you pray that Gods Kingdom may come?


Phil. Because, if my Father reign, I his Son reign in him; and his
dignity is a dignity to me. And I pray for it as the first of the good
things which concern our selves, because in order and nature it is the first:
Matthew. 6.31. Philip. 3.9.


Euch. How many sorts of Kingdoms are there?


Phil. Three: The Kingdom of Satan; the Kingdoms of men; and the Kingdom of
God Ephesians. 6.12
.


Euch. What is ^he Kingdom of Satan?


Phil. It is that tyranicall regencie, by which, as the Prince of darkness,
he (by Gods just permission) rules in the Children of darkness, and rages
against the Children of light, 2. Cor. 4.4. Revel. 12.3. Erecting up two other
Kingdoms, the one of sin, Romans 6.12.5.21. the other of death. Romans 5.14. all
which are Enemies to this Kingdom we pray for, Satan ruling over all the
children of pride Job. 41.34. and teaching them to say we will not have this
man to rule over us, Luke 19.14.


Euch. What is the Kingdom of Man?


Phil. It is the humane government, by which one, or diverse, do by Gods
ordinance command their people.


Euch. What is the Kingdom of God?


Phil. It is that spiritual rule, which God through Christ does by grace begin
in us in this life, and by glory will accomplish in the life to come Dan. 2.37
Matthew. 25.37.6.31. Ro^. 14.17
.


Euch. Is the Kingdom of God manifold?


Phil. It is threefold. 1. The Kingdom of Power. Psalm. 99.1.2. The Kingdom of
Grace. Matthew. 3.2.3. The Kingdom of Glory Luke 23.42. By the first, he
rules Satan, and all his Enemies, Psalm 2.9.145 13. commands all Creatures,
and preserves his own people: By the second, he rules the godly, and reigns
in their hearts, by the Word and Spirit, Luke 17.20. By the third he crowns
the godly with celestial happiness. So then the first Kingdom is external:
the second internal: the third eternal: the first is a government of all: the
second of the elect, the third of the departed out of this life into Heaven.


Euch. How many things may we observe in this Kingdom?


Phil. Twelve.

1 That Christ is King Mat. 2.2.
.

2 The Subjects are Christians Psalm. 2.8.
.

3 The Laws are the Word Psalm. 119.105.
.

4 The Enemies are Satan, Sin, Death, Hell, Damnation, the Flesh, and the
Wicked Ephesians. 6.12 Romans 6.12. 1. Cor. 15.51. Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.17. Genesis 3.15.
.

5 The rewards are the good things of this life, and eternal happiness in
the life to come. Mar. 10.30.
.

6 The Chastisements are afflictions Heb. 12.6
.

7 The weapons are, Faith, Hope, Love, the Word, and Prayer Ephesians. 6.16
.

8 The time of it, is to the Worlds end Mat. 28.20.
.

9 The place, is this World, and the World to come Revel. 5.10. Mat. 25.34
.

10 The Officers are Preachers 2. Cor. 5.20.
.

11 The Vicegerents are Governors Esa. 49.25
.

12 It is exercised upon the conscience of man Romans 14 17.
.


Euch. How is the Kingdom of God said to come?


Phil. 1 When it is erected where it was not before Psalm. 28.
.

2 When it is increased where it was Ps. 99.2.
.

3 When it is repaired from former decaies Mat. 21.5
.

4 When it is perfected and fully accomplished Reu. 22.20.
. And this argues Gods great favor toward us, that though he will not give
his glory to another, Isay 42.8. yet he will communicate his Kingdom to us.


Euch. What must we do that this Kingdom may come?


Phil. Saint John the Baptist bids us repent Matthew. 3. and prepare a way for
the Lord. Christ says except a man be borne again he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God Ioh. 3. and as the Israelites did not reign in Canaan till
their Enemies were cast out, so Christ cannot reign in us till sin be cast
out. Ishmael and Izak must not abide in one house.


Euch. Who then may pray thus?


Phil. Only the godly, for they get good both by the Kingdom of grace, and of
glory: but as for the wicked, woe unto them Amos 5.18. Revel. 6.16.2. These.
1.8.


Euch. Yet me thinks we should rather come to it, then pray that it should
come to us?


Phil. True, yet such is our corruption that we love Egypt more then Canaan:
and their are so many stumbling blocks in our way that it must come to us, we
cannot naturally go to it, till God send his Angels to gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, Matthew. 13.41.


Euch. What are the wants you do here bewail?


Phil. 1 I bewail mine own, and others bondage unto sin; that the best of
us do but weakly yield to Christ's Scepter.

2 I bewail the want of the word, and Sacraments, by the which this Kingdom
is erected in men's hearts.

3 I bewail that there be so many hinderers of this Kingdom, as namely, the
flesh to infect, the World to allure, the Devil to seduce, Antichrist to
withdraw, the Turk to withstand, and the wicked to trouble men, that should
be Subjects of this Kindome.


Euch. What do you pray for in this petition?


Phil. 1 For godly Magistrates, that they may erect, establish, and repair
this Kingdom.

2 For godly Ministers, that by Life and Doctrine, they may bring many Subjects
to this Kingdom.

3 That both Magistrates and Ministers may be preserved for the good of this
Kingdom.

4 That by politic Laws, and powerful Preaching, abuses may be reformed;
and they without, converted to live in this Kingdom, consisting in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost Ro^. 14.17.
.

5 That in mine and many others hearts, this Kingdom may be erected, that we
may grow in grace, and in the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus.

6 That both by the hour of death, and by the coming of Christ to Judgment,
this Kingdom in me and all Gods chosen, may be accomplished. That Satan being
trodden under our feet, and the power of death destroyed, God may be all in
all. 1. Cor. 15.28.


Euch. What do you here pray against?


Phil. I pray against all things that do, or may hinder this Kingdom: as
want of Governors, bloody Laws, toleration of Idolatry, idle, idol and
evil Ministers, false and erroneous Doctrine, infidelity, impenitencie, all
reigning sins both in me and others; and lastly against all wicked, both men
and Angels, or whatsoever may hinder the Kingdom of Christ.


Euch. What do you give thanks for?


Phil. I give thanks for all godly Governors, good Laws, painful Preachers,
sound Doctrine, and that measure of grace, which is bestowed on me and many
others: and that God suffers not Satan to take away government, to enact
evil Laws, to set up evil Ministers; but that both I, and others living in
the Church, may yield obedience to Christ's Scepter, and do grow up in the
graces of Gods Spirit.


Euch. Which is the third Petition?


Phil. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.


Euch. Why does this follow, Thy Kingdom come?


Phil. To teach me first to try my self: and secondly to judge of others,
whether as yet we be in the state of grace or not, for as many as truly be
in Gods Kingdom, cannot but immediately do Gods will: for obedience to Gods
will is an effectual sign that the Kingdom of God is in us 1. Ioh. 1.3
. Again, as the felicity of worldly Kingdoms stands in obedience to
Princes: so does it in the Kingdom of God. Christ, Matthew. 6.31. bids us not
only to seek Gods Kingdom, but with all the righteousness of it. And not
every one that says Lord Lord shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but such
as do his will, Matthew. 7.21. It comes not by wishing but by doing, this is
the door to come into it.


Euch. But what if you see that men do not Gods will, may you say, that such
are not in the state of grace?


Phil. That such persons as yet are not in the state of grace, I may say: for
as fire is known by heat, the Sun by light, a tree by fruit; so is faith
known by works. Show me thy faith by thy works, says Saint James. Cap.
2.18.
Yet must I leave such to God, and pray for their conversion in their due time.


Euch. What must you judge of an hypocrite, who seems to do Gods will 1.
Chro^. 28.11.
?


Phil. I must judge of such a one, that he is in the state of grace, till such
time as he manifest his hypocrisy: for that sin being inward, except it be
by special revelation, is only known to God, and I must judge of each tree
by the fruits Mat. 7.20
.


Euch. May you not pray thus, My will be done?


Phil. In no case. For, 1. I must pray for things good for me; but alas, it
is not good for me to have my will.

2 I cannot by nature conceive, much less will that which is good: 1. Cor.
2.14. Genesis 6.5.8.21. Gal. 5.17.

3 In praying thus I might have that given me, which would be my destruction,
as Quails were to the children of Israel.

4 If I will any good thing, it is all from the good will of God: Philip. 2.13.

5 I may often, by the corruption of my will both desire that which God will
not, as Israel did to return into Egypt: and be unwilling to that which God
wills as the people were that Saul should be King.


Euch. What do you here mean by Gods will?


Phil. Gods will being simple of it self, in regard of us, is either secret,
or revealed Deuteronomy. 29.29.
: his secret will is known only to him self; as who are elect, who reprobates,
and when the day of judgment shall be: his revealed will is set down in the
Book of God, The same verse.
and in such works as daily God does discover to man.


Euch. What is it to do Gods will?


Phil. The revealed will of God is done by voluntary 1. These. 5.3.
obeying, or patient suffering that which God commands Mat. 26.39.
. The secret will is done of us by praying, that Christ Jesus may come to
judgment Revel. 22.20.
, that Antichrist may more and more be revealed, and that we may patiently
bear all future afflictions


Euch. Why do you pray, that this will of God may be done?


Phil. Because: 1. It is ever Just, Holy, Good, and Safe; yea the very rule of
all goodness.

2 It is most profitable to such as do it.

3 All calamities come from disobedience: Genesis 3. Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.

4 If I be regenerate, it will not be grievous unto me to do his will: Matthew.
11.30. 1. Ioh. 5.3.

5 Satan, the World, and mine own flesh hinder me.

6 I cannot do it, unless God assist me and direct me by his Holy Word, and
Spirit.


Euch. But must I pray ever to do Gods will?


Phil. You must: yet in regard of Gods secret will, you may with a good will,
without sin dissent from it: Samuels will was good when he wept for Saul whom
God would not have him to bewail 1. Sam. 26. and besides you may with the like
good will, will that which God will not: so a Child may be unwilling of his
Fathers death, whom notwithstanding Gods will is shall not recover: and so
Christ said Father, If it be possible let this cup pass from me but when
we once know the will of God, be it for us, or against us, we must then say
with David, Here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes: 2. Sam.
15.26. and with Hezechiah, The word of the Lord is good. Isay 39.8. and with
Paul. The will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14.


Euch. What mean you by Earth and Heaven in this petition?


Phil. I do not mean by Earth my body, and Heaven my soul, as Tertullian
thought; nor by Earth, Earthly men, and Heaven, Heavenly men, or by Heaven
Christ, and Earth his Church, as others thought: but in these words I pray,
that as the Angels in Heaven are ready to do Gods will, so men on Earth may
be ready to do it.


Euch. How do Angels the will of God?


Phil. They do it chearefully, without murmuring; speedily, without delaying;
generally, without omitting; sincerely, without dissembling; constantly,
without forbearing; and perfectly, without halting.


Euch. Are there none in Heaven which do Gods will besides Angels?


Phil. You may also if you will look unto Christ, the Saints, and all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth.


Euch. How? I pray you.


Phil. 1 Christ personal in Heaven has done Gods will, for he came not to
do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, John 6.38. Christ's
Mystical, that is the Church as his body. 1. Cor. 12.12. must do it: even as
Christ the head of that body has done it. 2. In Heaven is the Congregation of
the first borne Hebr. 12.23. that is the Saints departed, there did, and do
carefully perform Gods will: so must we 13. In the starrie Heaven the Sun
and Moon, in the Ayrie Heaven, the Frost Snow, Rain, etc. fulfill his Word so
must we.


Euch. Is it then enough to do Gods will?


Phil. No verily: but we must regard also how it should be done: we must not
only do (...) his pleasure, but (...) his good pleasure. When we serve God
we do his pleasure; when we serve him with our best endeauours, we do his
good pleasure.


Euch. But is it possible for man to do perfectly Gods will?


Phil. It will be possible in the life to come: it is impossible whilst we
live in this World; for, The good which we would do, we do not, and the
evil that we would not, that do we, Romans 7.19.


Euch. How many kinds then of perfections are there?


Phil. There is first a perfection of sincerity, which was in Hezekias
obedience Esa. 38.3
. Secondly, a perfection of all parts, which was in Zachary and Elizabeth's
obedience Luke 1.6
. Thirdly, a perfection of degrees, which was only in the first and second
Adam, and is now only in the Holy Angels who only can perfectly obey Gods will.


Euch. If this obedience be impossible to be performed, why then do we pray
for it?


Phil. Because I must with Paul strive for this perfection, Philip. 3.
and pray unto God, that I may come to this perfection 1. These. 5 25.
without whose will I shall never be able to do his will: Ioh. 15.5.


Euch. What then is it, that God wills?


Phil. He wills: 1. Our salvation by Christ, Act. 4.12. Ioh. 6.40.

2 The knowledge of his will, Ioh, 17.3.

3 Faith in Christ Jesus, Ioh. 6.40.

4 Obedience to his Commandments, both in doing and suffering: Psalm. 143. Romans
8.28. Matthew. 26.39. Act. 21.1.41. Sam. 3.18.

5 Holiness of life: Ephesians. 1.4. 1. These. 4.3.4. Romans 12.1.2.3.4.

6 Love to our brethren: Ioh. 13.34.15.

That we may do these things, we pray in this petition.


Euch. What then is required, that I may do Gods will?


Phil. 1 That you do lay aside your own will: which indeed is hard even to
the godly, the flesh lusting against the Spirit and the Law in their members
leading them unto the Law of Sin, and of Death.

2 You must be possessed with a base conceit of your own will: that we must
not lean upon it: but know that every man is a Beast in his own knowledge.

3 You must esteem highly of Gods will be it never so contrary to reason: so
Abraham did Genesis 22.3. Take to thee Gods will, be assured of Heaven: take away
thine own will, and fear not Hell.

4 You must pray, that God will give power to perform; and then let him
command, what he list.


Euch. What wants do you here bewail?


Phil. 1 I bewail mine own and others rebellious natures, in that we are as
prone to receive sin, as a match, or tinder is to receive fire.

2 I bewail the sins of the World, as Ignorance, Sorceries, Schisms,
Hypocrisy, Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Negligence in procuring others
good, with all contempt, and disobedience to the word of God: and that all
Creatures being so obedient to God, (Ier. 7, 8.) man only is most disobedient.

3 Our impatience, that when God lays any crosses upon us, we cannot (as we
ought) endure them patiently.

4 Our slack and imperfect obedience; yea privy pride, proud presumption,
deadness of Spirit, secret hypocrisy, and all other weakness, which breaks
either into, or out upon us, in our best service to our Heavenly Father.


Euch. What things do you pray for in this Petition?


Phil. 1 I pray that I and all people may in true humiliation, and hatred of
sin be converted to God, by putting off the old man, and putting on the new,
that we may obey his Commandments, in our general, and particular callings and
in all afflictions submit our selves to the will of God.

2 That with a speedy resolution, a willing mind, cheerful heart, and
constant purpose we may ever do that which we are commanded. Which we
cannot do, unless as by his preventing grace he gives us both will and
power: so with his following grace he accomplish his work begun in us.


Euch. What things do you pray against in this Petition?


Phil. I pray against all impiety toward God, unrighteousness toward man,
and disobedience in my self. In a word, against all rebellious withstanding
Gods revealed will, unfaithfulness in men's calling, all discontented murmuring
at Gods doings, and all either backwardness, or weariness in the Service of
God; and lastly against all hypocrisy, which is contrary to an honest and a
sincere heart.


Euch. What things do you here thank God for?


Phil. 1 Here I bless God for mine own and others conversion.

2 For our obedience to Gods will.

3 For our patience in all trials.

4 That with some cheerfulness we may serve God.

5 That our service is not full of hypocrisy: and that profaneness,
unrighteousness, disobedience, rebellion, unthankfulness, murmuring,
coffeehouse, backwardness, weariness, and Hypocrisy are so mortified in
us that in some weak measure we desire to please God.


Euch. Why are these three Petitions set in the first place?


Phil. Because when we do begin to advance Gods glory, set up Gods Kingdom,
and do Gods will, then our daily bread, the forgiveness of sins, and all
o-other blessings will be given unto us. As on the contrary, if we dishonor
God, hinder his Kingdom, and do our own wills, we cannot look for any
blessing of this, or a better life: for godliness only has a promise of this
life, and the life to come: 1. Tim. 6.6.


Euch. Having spoken thus much of the three first Petitions, we are now come to
the latter three. How do you divide those three last Petitions?


Phil. One of them is for things concerning man's body: the other two are
concerning his soul.


Euch. But why are you here taught to pray for things corporal, and after to
pray for things spiritual does not this cross that commandment of Christ?
Seek first the Kingdom of God. Matthew. 6.32.


Phil. No, it does not: but by this order I am taught, first to see the
corruption of man's nature, which ought in the first place to seek things
spiritual; but because we live rather by sense, then by faith, we do
principally desire things corporal.

Secondly, I am taught Christ's mercy unto man, in that, by this order, he
descends to our infirmity, who rather depend upon him for the pardon of our
sins, then we can trust him for our provision in this life: which argues
that we are of little faith. Mat. 9.5.

Thirdly, I am taught by this, to depend upon him for the forgiveness of my
sins: for when I see that he is here so careful for my body, he will
doubtless be more careful to provide for my soul. Romans 8.32.


Euch. What use can you make of this order?


Phil. 1 That I must principally seek the good of my soul, which will bring
all goodness and goods to my body Mar. 10. Psalm. 4.6.
.

2 That I must have care also of my body; for the preservation whereof God
has provided food, apparel, physic and other means 1. Tim 5.23.
.

3 That from the blessings on my body, I must ascend by degrees, to be
persuaded for my soul: that he who is so provident for the one will be much
more provident for the other Eccles. 11.30.31.
.

4 I must aknowledge mine own corruption, that I am so careful for Earthly
things Matthew. 6.


5 I see that I may use Gods Creatures, in that he will have me to pray for
them 1. Cor. 10.26.
.

6 I must acknowledge the mercy of God to me, in that he yields so much to
mine infirmity, as to permit me to ask these corporal things, before such
as are Spiritual, and of greatest good for the salvation of my soul Pro. 30.8.
.


Euch. Which is the fourth petition, and the first of the three latter?


Phil. Give us this day our daily bread. Give us this day our daily bread. Vide
Sixti Senensis Biblioth. and M. Finch his Theology.



Euch. Do you not by bread, here understand Christ Jesus the food of the
soul?


Phil. Indeed many ancient Fathers and some of our English Protestant writers,
have so understood this petition: and I am bound to pray, that God will ever
give me this Bread: John 6.34. But I am taught that this Bread is not meant
here.


Euch. But man consisting of body and soul, must we not pray, that both may
be fed with their daily bread?


Phil. We must, and do in this prayer; but not in this petition. When I pray
that Gods kingdom may come, then I pray for the food of my soul: here, when
I pray for daily bread, I pray for necessaries belonging to my body.


Euch. By what reasons are you taught the contrary?


Phil. 1 Because I pray for such things in the second petition going before.

2 Because temporal things being to be prayed for, they can have no fitter
place to be desired then in this.

3 Seeing this prayer is a rule of all our prayers, we must in some one
petition crave things temporal of God, even as Agur did, Prou. 30.8. and Jacob,
Genesis 28.20.

4 Many ancient, and the most new writers think so.


Euch What then do you mean by Bread?


Phil. I mean properly that kind of sustenance, which we call, Bakers bread;
but figuratively all things, which are, or may be for the good of my body, and
this natural life: as strength by nourishment, health by Physic, warmth by
apparel, sufficiency by labor, and the blessing of God in the use of all
these and such like: 2. King. 6.22. John 13.18.


Euch. Why do you ask all these things under the name of bread?


Phil. 1 Because bread is absolutely necessary for man's life Psa. 104.15.
.

2 To teach us frugality in using Gods creatures Ioh. 6.12
.

3 To make us content with whatsouer God sends Phi. 4.11
.

4 To make us thankful, if God give more then bread Psa. 23.5.
.

5 Because in ancient times, bread was man's most ordinary food, as appears,
Ge. 18.5. Psalm. 104.15. Mark. 8.4.


Euch. Why do you pray that God would give bread?


Phil. To teach me that all riches, whether of inheritance, or by gift, pains,
trades, office, service, wit, marriage, or any other means, are the gift of
God, who only gives man power to get riches. Deuteronomy 8.18.


Euch. What use make you of this, that riches are Gods gift?


Phil. These uses I ought to make:

1 To acknowledge that all that I have comes from God, and not by my self,
or any other Pro. 10.27.
.

2 That I must not be proud of them, because I have received them To. 11.20
.

3 To admire Gods favor, who has made me rich, and others poor 1. Chro.
29.16.
.

4 To use them to the glory of God, and the good both of my self, and others
1. Tim. 6.17.
.

5 If I want such things, to ask them of God Ge. 29.20
.

6 To teach me to get my substance with a good conscience; that so I may see
they come from God 1. Sa. 12.6
.

7 That I despise not my poor brethren, who have not such a largess of Gods
blessings as my self Pro. 17.5
.

8 To be content if God make me poor Job. 1.21
.


Euch. But what need have rich men to make this prayer? It seems this is the
poor man's Pater noster.


Phil. You told me that there is a twofold title to riches: Iure fori, and
iure poli.
the one civil in the Courts of men; the other, religious in the high Court of
God. Now rich men may have a civil title without praying: but they must pray
for a religious right to riches, and this is only as they are the sons of
God. Without this title, before God they are usurpers, and cannot say that
their riches are their own, 1. Cor. 3.2. Again, rich men are but stewards to
dispose, not Lords to command: and though they have bread, yet they may want
the staff of bread: though they have food, yet may the virtue which is in food
to nourish, be taken from them: Luke 1.53.12.15. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Isai. 3.1. Leuit.
26.26.


Euch. Why then, good rich men need not to pray thus, for they have a religious
title to riches.


Phil. It is true indeed; yet because it is one thing to have riches, and
another thing to have a blessing upon riches, they must pray, that as God has
given unto them riches, so those riches may in use be blessed, both to
themselves, and also to theirs. Eccles. 5.12.


Euch. What then do you pray for in this word, Give?


Phil. 1. I pray that God would give me a civil title to my riches Pro. 12.27.


2 That he would give me a religious title to them. Genesis 26.


3 That he would give me leave to use them. Eccl. 5.17.


4 That he would give me and mine comfort by them. Psa. 37.25.



Euch. What else may I observe out of this word, Give?


Phil. 1 Our own wants: for if we had as of our selves, we would not crave
any thing of God.

2 Gods glory, that all hold upon him and are his beggars, from the King to the
Cottager. Hos. 2.8. 2. Cor. 9.10.

3 Our duty not only to labor to have bread, but to have it as Gods gift.

4 That all our endeauours without Gods blessing are in vain, Psalm. 127.4.

5 That when we have received, we should say with David, 1. Chron. 29.
Whatsoever we have received, we have received it at thy hands, O Lord.


Euch. How does God give bread?


Phil. 1 By blessing the earth with increase by seasonable weather. Hos. 2.21.

2 By placing us in some honest calling. Psalm. 28.2.

3 By giving us the staff of bread, Leu. 26. that is, power to his creatures
to nourish us.

4 By making this bread not only wholesome, but also holy unto us, that by it
we may better serve him.


Euch. Why do you say, Give us, and not Give me? 1. Cor. 10.24.



Phil. To teach me, 1 To pray especially for the prosperity of the godly Ps.
122.6
.

2 To wish as well to others as my self 1. Ioh 4.21.


3 To pity and relieve with my goods the poor estate of my brethren Luke
10.33.
.

4 Not to repine at the estate of my betters Ma. 20.11


2. Cor. 8.14.
5 Not to contemn such as are in poverty Pro. 17.5
.

6 Not to appropriate that to my self, which God has given me for the good of
others: 1. Sam. 25.11. Eccles. 11.1.


Euch. But what if God give you not riches? what remedies were prescribed you
against the desire of them?


Phil. 1 That God, even in famine, does quicken and revive them which fear him
Ps. 33.18.
.

2 Godliness is great gain, if the mind of man be therewith contented 1.
Tim. 6.6.


3 We do look for eternal life; therefore we should not care too much for
this life To. 8.32.
.

4 We are servants in our fathers house: therefore he will bestow upon us
things convenient Psa. 23.1.
.

5 Many are set aloft, and afterward have the greater downfall Da^. 4.30.
.

6 Adam not contented with his own estate, brought himself and his posterity
to destruction Genesis 3.17
.

7 We brought nothing into this world: and it is certain we shall carry
nothing out 1. Tim. 6.7. This day.
.


Euch. What do you mean by This day?


Phil. By This day, I mean the present moment of time, in the which I do, or
shall live, and wherein especially I stand in need of things for this life, as
before time I have done.


Euch. Why do you not pray that God would give you bread for a week, or a
month, or a year, but for a day?


Phil. 1 Because each day we need both bread it self, and with it the blessing
of God upon bread Deu. 8.3
.

2 To teach me to be content with my present estate, and not to care too much
for the time to come Mat. 6.32 Psalm. 55.23
.

3 That each day I may see Gods singular providence Psa. 19.2
.

4 That I should think that each day may be my last day: Psalm. 39.5.90.12.


Euch Because you pray only for bread to day, tell me, Is it not lawful to
pray to be rich?


Phil. It is very inconvenient, if not utterly unlawful, to pray to be rich:
as you taught me in your Sermon upon this petition.


Euch. By what reason was this point proved?


Phil. 1 Because riches are snares to entrap men 1. Tim. 6.9.
.

2 Such a prayer argues discontentednesse Psa. 4.11 12.
.

3 Covetousness is a most grievous sin He. 13.5. 1. Tim. 6.10.
.

4 Jacob and Agur in the book of the Proverbs, prayed only for food and
raiment Pro. 31.7
.

5 In praying to be rich, it seems we are not content to depend upon God
Psa. 62.8.10.
.

6 It is a sign of exceeding pride that by riches we would be above our
brethren 1. Tim. 6.17.
.


Euch. What then must you do in this case?


Phil. I must pray neither for riches, nor poverty Pr. 31.7.
, but go on in my calling, with faithful diligence 1. Cor. 7.20.
and waiting for a blessing from the Lord Pr. 10.22.
, be thankful for whatsoever he shall send Job. 1.21
.


Euch. But because you must pray for this days bread, may you not lay up for
the time come?


Phil. Yes, I may. 1 Joseph did for seven years to come: Gen 41.48.
The Apostles did, when they heard of a famine by Agabus the Prophet: Act. 11.28
and Christ did, in that he had a pursbearer, John 13.29.
and commanded the broken meat to be kept Ioh. 6.12.
.

2 We are sent by Solomon to the pismire, who provides in summer against
winter Prou. 6.6.
.

3 He that provides not for his Family, is worse then an infidel 1. Tim. 5.6
.

4 We have precepts of frugalitie and thriftinesse 1. Tim. 6.18.
.

5 We must get to do good to others Pro. 3.2.
.

6 God has given man foresight and providence Deuteronomy. 8.11.
.

7 The good huswife is commended in the Proverbs, who by labor and industry
enricheth her family Pro. 31.13.
.


Euch. Yet Christ says, Lay not up treasure upon Earth Mat. 6.19
.


Phil. That is, we must not seek it chiefly, and so as to neglect to lay up
treasure in Heaven.


Euch. What rules must you observe in getting riches?


Phil. 1 That I get them by honest labor. Genesis 3.19


2 That I put no trust in my riches Pro. 11.28.
.

3 That I spare not, when I ought to spend them on others Eccl. 11.1
.

4 I must not be a niggard to mine own state and person Eccl. 6.2.
.

5 That they become not hurtful unto me Ecles. 5.12.
.

6 That they may be pledges to me of Heavenly riches Genesis 28.13.14.
.


Euch. What is the use of all this?


Phil. 1. It commends Christian care, and providence 1. Tim. 5.8.
.

2 It warranteth the possession of riches 1. Kin. 3.14.
.

3 It condemns niggardly Parsimonie Pro. 11.24.
.

4 It confuteth our swaggering Prodigals; who, with the prodigal son, so
consume their inheritance, that at last they are brought to a morsel of bread
Luk 15.13
.

5 That each day I must depend on God 1. Pet. 5.7 Daily Bread.
.


Euch. What do you mean by Daily bread?


Phil. I mean such bread as is fit to nourish the substance of my body, and
that I may be fed with food convenient.


Euch. Why do you pray for daily bread?


Phil. Because my body is daily decaying and so stands in need of daily
repayring, even as the lamp stands in need of oil 1. Tim. 5.23.
.

2 Because no meat can be added to my substance unless God daily give a
blessing unto it: which I may eat and not be satisfied, earne silver, and put
it into a bottomless bag Hag. 1.6.
.

3 To put me in mind that I must not tempt God by neglecting of means, Deuteronomy.
6.16.
as they do who labor not in an honest calling, Pro. 10.5.
and such as put an angelical perfection in fasting, or vowing to the Worlda
voluntary poverty.

4 To condemn such as make an Idol of means, and never crave a blessing from
God upon the means, Hab. 1.16
.

5 To distinguish it from that Heavenly food; which in the Kingdom of God we
shall once so taste on, that we need not either often to crave it, or daily anew
to receive it.

6 Because without it I may be hindered in the hallowing of Gods name, advancing
his Kingdom, and doing his will.

7 Because all Creatures by the instinct of nature do thus pray, Psalm. 104.21.


Euch. But may the want of this daily bread hinder us in Gods Service?


Phil. Why not? as well as it did Abraham whom famine drove into Egypt: Genesis
12.7. The Israelites whom want of water, caused to murmur against God. Exodus
16. And the Disciples, who forgetting to take bread with them, understood not
that warning which Christ gave them, to beware of the leaven of the Scribes and
Pharisees.


Euch. How is bread said to be our bread, Our daily Bread.
and how do we pray for it?


Phil. It is said to be ours: 1 As we are in Christ.

2 As we get it by honest labor and eat not the bread of violence Proverbs
14.17.20.17.

3 As it is fit for our place and calling.

4 As we have a proper title unto it.


Euch. Why call you that ours, which is Gods gift?


Phil. 1 To magnify Gods gracious bounty, who makes that ours, which is not
due unto us: 1. Tim. 6.7. Job 1.21.

2 Because God has ordained it for our use.

3 As Christ is ours for the good of our souls, 1. Cor. 1.30. so Gods
Creatures are ours for the good of our bodies.

4 It is ours, because we get it by our honest labor: Genesis 3, 19. Eccl. 11.6.
Hab. 2.6.

5 As it is sanctified unto us by the word and prayer: 1. Tim. 4.


Euch. What use make you of this?


Phil. 1 That I must labor to be in Christ 2. Cor. 13.5.
.

2 That I may so get riches, that I may say they are mine Genesis 33.11.
.

3 That I may labor to maintain my estate Genesis 30.30.
.

4 That community of goods is an Anabaptisticall fancy Ios. 13.7.
.

5 That God would not have all alike rich Pro. 22.2.
.

6 That I must impart my goods to the poor Pro. 19.17.
.


Euch. Do you think that a man being ready to die, needs to make this
prayer: For I have known some even at the place of Execution have refused to
say it?


Phil. It was their error not knowing the meaning of this petition. Even at the
hour of death we must pray thus.

1 In regard of our thankfulness to God, who has fed us all our life-long.

2 In regard of our present state, that God do not take from us the comfort
and strength of any of his creatures so long as we live.

3 That God would continue this blessing to the suruiuing generation.


Euch. What wants do you here bewail?


Phil. 1 I bewail men's great covetousness.

2 Their coffeehouse.

3 Their idleness.

4 Their unfaithfulness.

5 Their unmercifulness in getting and keeping of riches.

6 Mine own and others unthankfulness, for ye portion which God has allotted
unto us.


Euch. What things do you here pray for?


Phil. 1 I pray here for all means by which I and others may have our daily
bread; as seasonable weather for the fruits of the earth, sympathy of all
creatures, that the heavens may hear the earth, the earth the corn, and it
us. For godly Magistrates, for the maintenance of peace, and procuring of
plenty: For valiant soldiers to defend our land: for painful husbandmen, and
tradesmen in all callings: for prudent huswiues, faithful servants, and that
even our beasts may be strong to labor Ps. 1^4.14.
.

2 I pray for peace in all kingdoms, plenty in our borders, health in our
bodies, and that the staff of bread be not taken from us.

3 I pray for humility in acknowledging Gods good gifts, and blessings to me:
contentedness in our estates, diligence in our callings, faithfulness in our
dealings, providence to get, frugalitie to lay up, liberality to give out,
magnificence in doing great works, thankfulness for our goods, joy at the good
of others, and that God would give us all that which is fit for us.


Euch. What do you here p^ay against?


Phil. 1. I pray against unseasonable weather, disorder of creatures, ungodly
laws, cowardly soldiers, and unfit people for their places and callings.

2 I pray against unjust wars, cleannes of teeth, and that the staff of bread
may not be taken from us.

3 I pray against pride in abundance, discontent in want, negligence in men's
callings, unfaithfulness in dealing, improuidence in getting, parsimonie in
hoording, prodigality in spending, and unmercifulness in not giving to the
poor.

4 In a word, I pray against all unthankfulness for Gods creatures, our much
abusing of such good gifts of God: yea, against all such sickness as may hinder
us from getting our daily bread.


Euch. What do you here give thanks for?


Phil. I thank God here for seasonable times, godly Governors, abundance of
all things, and for all such things as before I prayed for. And by name, I
thank God that he has hitherto provided so bountifully for me and others, that
we have a sufficiency for our present estate, and do see his blessing in the
getting, having, and using of al his creatures: And that in the sweat of our
brows we do eat that bread, which by reason thereof, cannot be called the
bread of idleness.


Euch. Which are the two last petions?


Phil. Forgive us our trespasses, Forgive us etc. Lead us not, etc.
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation: but deliver us from evil.


Euch. What do you learn out of this order, that after our praying for daily
bread, we say, And forgive us our trespasses, and lead us not into temptation,
etc?


Phil. I do here learn these six lessons;

1 By having my daily bread, to lift up my mind for spiritual blessings to God
Luke 11.13.
.

2 To seek more earnestly for the pardon of my sins, then I do (though alas
I do not) for my daily bread Act. 2.39
.

3 That seeing I make these two petitions for my soul, therefore my care must
be double to do good for my soul 2. Pet. 1.10.
.

4 That it is nothing to have my daily bread, unless God give unto me the
pardon of my sins Wisd. 5.8
.

5 That if God give me my daily bread, I had most need to pray for the
forgiveness of my sins, because therein I am most subject to sin against God
2. Sam. 1.11.1.
.

6 That if I want my daily bread, sin is the cause that I want it, and all
blessings Psalm. 107.34. Lam. 3.44. Isai. 59.2.
.


Euch. What is contained in these two last petitions?


Phil. In the former of them I pray for grace, and in the latter for
perseverance in grace.


Euch. Forgive us our trespasses, etc.
How many things are contained in the fifth petition Forgive us our trespasses
etc?


Phil. Two things: 1. A prayer, in these words, Forgive us our trespasses.

2 A condition: as we forgive them that trespass against us.


Euch. What is the sum of this petition?


Phil. That it would please God, for his Sons sake, to be good to me, and all
his children, in the dashing out, and washing away al our sins, as we are
ready to forgive others Math. 6.14.15.
.


Euch. Why do you pray thus?


Phil. 1 To manifest Gods goodness, who tells me here that it is possible to
obtain forgiveness of sins.

2 To the end I might think of the nature of sin, which hinders us from al
good things here, Leuit. 26. and of Gods kingdom hereafter Psalm. 15.2.3.
Revel. 21.

3 To meditate of Gods mercy to man: to man I say, he spared not the Angels
that sinned 2. Pet. 2. he will spare us.

4 To assure me that though I by sin forget to perform the obedience of a
son, yet God still retains the compassion of a Father.


Euch. Unto whom do you pray for the forgiveness of sins?


Phil. Not unto any Angel, Saint, creature or man, but I pray only to my Lord
God Psalm. 51.1
.


Euch. Why do you pray thus only to him?


Phil. 1 Because he only can forgive sins Mat 9.2.
.

2 Because I am commanded so to pray Hos. 14.3
.

3 Because against him only I have sinned Psalm. 51.4
.

4 Because I must not give his honor to another Dan. 9.5
.

5 Because the Church uses so to pray Ps. 50.10
.

6 Because I believe only on him Ioh. 14.1
.


Euch. What does this teach you?


Phil. 1 That God alone is to be called upon Psa. 25.1
.

2 That Christ is very God, because of himself he forgiueth sins Mat. 9.2.
.


Euch. What use can you make of this doctrine?


Phil. 1 That when I have sinned, I must come to him for pardon 2. Sam. 14.10.
.

2 That their doctrine is an erroneous doctrine, which call upon Saints as well
as upon God Mat. 15.24.
: or dream of perfection in this life: Job. 9.3. Pro. 24.16. Romans 7.23.

3 That I must be thankful to my gracious God, who will pardon and forgive me
all my sins Ps. 103.3.
.

4 That I must take heed of sin, because I must ever crave pardon for it Romans
6.21.
.

5 I must labor to be in the number of those (us) who may sue for pardon.


Euch. What do you mean by this word, Forgive? Forgive.



Phil. That it would please God so to discharge, and cover all my sins, as
that they may never be imputed unto me, either to make me despair in this
life, or to be punished in the life to come Act. 7.60
.


Euch. How are sins said to be discharged?


Phil. 1 When they are discharged by the person that committed them: so the
devils and the damned discharge their debts by suffering Mat. 18.34.25.41.
.

2 When they are paid by another, and so are our sins discharged by Christ
Gal. 3.14.
.


Euch. In what respect may this second satisfaction be called forgiveness?


Phil. 1 In respect of us, who neither do, nor can confer any thing to this
satisfaction Luke 17.10.
.

2 In regard of Christ, who alone does forgive them Mat. 9.2.
, and we no way are able to requite him Ps. 103.1
.

3 In respect of God the Father, who in love gives his Son, and accepts
his obedience, as our satisfaction Io. 3.16.
.


Euch. What learn you by this?


Phil. 1 That as Benadad did to the King of Israel 1. King. 20.31.
, so I must humble my self to this King of Kings.

2 That I must confess my sins to him, because he is ready to forgive my
sins 1. Io. 1.7.
.

3 That there can be by man no satisfaction for sins Mat. 16.26.
: for Our merits, is Gods mercy, says a Father.


Euch. What sins must you confess to God?


Phil. Both known and unknown: known in particular 2. Sam. 12.
, unknown in general Ps. 19.14.
.


Euch. Ought you not to confess your sins to man?


Phil. Though auricular confession be a doctrine of devils, yet if sins be so
grievous unto my conscience, that I cannot be persuaded of the pardon of them,
neither can find comfort by confession to God, I am bound to confess sins,
troubling me, to man, especially to my godly Minister, or to such a Preacher
of Gods word, as is able to comfort me in regard of his knowledge, and fit to
comfort me in regard of his secrecy Act. 16.30.
.


Euch. How are you bound to confess your sins?


Phil. Even as a guilty prisoner must do at the bar Ios. 7.20.
.

1 I must bring my self before Gods Judgment seat Luke 15.18.
.

2 I must put up an indictment against my self Luke 15.19.
.

3 I must give sentence of condemnation against my self Iona. 1.12.
.

4 I must sue for pardon at the hands of my God Psalm. 51.1
.


Euch. How many things are required in true confession?


Phil. Five. 1 It must be voluntary, without constraint 2. Sam. 12.
.

2 Personal, without laying it upon others Genesis 3.12
.

3 Particular, without denial of the fact.

4 Impartial, by aggravating each circumstance 1. Sam. 24 1. Cor. 7.11.
.

5 Hearty, with all signs of sorrow t.


Euch. Why are you bound to ask God forgiveness?


Phil. 1 Because all men have sinned Romans 3.10.
.

2 Because God hears not sinners Ioh. 9.3.
.

3 Because sins sever man from God Esai. 59.2.
.

4 If I conceal these sores, they are hardly cured Psalm. 32.5
.

5 The more I like sin, the more with Iaels wife it will kill me Iud. 4.18.
.

6 Of all burdens, there is none like to the burden of sin Mat. 11.
.

7 If I confess, God is ready to forgive 1. Io. 1.7.
.

8 Gods servants have done the like 2. Sam. 12.
.

9 If I feel not sins forgiven in this life, it is to be feared, they will not
be forgiven in the life to come 2. Cor. 7.10.
.

10 There is neither comfort nor content in any worldly thing whatsoever,
unless I can be assured of this forgiveness Mat. 9.2. Psalm. 103.2 Forgive us.
.


Euch. Why do you say, Forgive us?


Phil. Because I must pray, that God would not only forgive me but that he
would also forgive all men in the world Dan. 9.19.
.


Euch. But you are bound to believe the forgiveness of sins: will you pray for
that which is had already?


Phil. I do not as mistrusting that God has not forgiven them Romans 3.38.
, but that I may feel in my heart, that God has forgiven them Ps. 51.10.
, and that I may apply that to my self which the Father has purposed, his
Son purchased, and the holy Ghost sealed.


Euch. Yet to pray thus for pardon, it seems to open a gap to sin freely?


Phil. Nay rather if I have grace, the more I pray that my sins may be
pardoned, the more will I hate and detest sin Ps. 51.14.
, and the more I am persuaded that God has forgiven me, the more I will labor
to live godly: Romans 12.1. 1. Ioh. 3.3. Tit. 2.11. Luke 1.74.


Euch. What use do you make of this, Forgive us?


Phil. 1 That as I sue for mine own pardon, so must I with the Saints sue for
others Exo. 38.32.
.

2 That I must be sorry when men do sin Psa. 119 136.
.

3 That I may not uncharitably discover men's sins Gal. 6.1.2. 1. Pet. 4.8.
.

4 That I must not cause any man to sin Pro. 7.18 Genesis 39.8.
.

5 That I must not delight in any sin Psalm. 119.104.
.

6 That I must forgive my brethren Genesis 50.21.
.


Euch. May you then pray for all men, even the wicked?


Phil. I may because the Lord alone knows who are his 2. Tim. 2.19.
: and in the judgment of charity I may pray for the conversion, or confusion
of the most wicked in the world To. 10.1. Psalm. 25.3.
.


Euch. What if a man sin against the holy Ghost: may you pray for such a man?


Phil. Few, or none, have now the spirit of discerning, to know when a man
sins against the holy Ghost, and therefore we must take heed how we censure
it.


Euch. Yet give me some notes to know this sin.


Phil. I will give you these.

1 It is against that illumination which man has by the holy Ghost: Hebr. 6.

2 It is a sin of malice against God, to deny him, when a man needs not.

3 It is against the person of Christ. Heb. 10.16.

4 It is in none but such as have had great knowledge and feeling: Hebr. 6, 6.

5 It is not a bare cogitation, but a malicious detestation of God.

6 It is not for a while, but continual.

7 Not every wicked man, yea, not every such a wicked man as knows the
Gospel, does commit this sin.

8 The elect cannot fall into it.

9 Christ can forgive this sin, but he will not, because such a sinner does
despise, and despair of grace.

10 Al sin, either of presumption, or malice, is a forerunner of this sin, if
such persons repent not.


Euch. Why are sins called debts?


Phil. Because by them we become bounden and indebted to God, either to
discharge them, or to be imprisoned for them: Math. 18.32. Luke 13.4.


Euch. How many kinds of debt are there in sin?


Phil. Three. 1 A debt of obedience which we owe to God, but have not paid it
through transgression Genesis 2.17. and 3.6.
.

2 A debt of punishment, because we have transgressed Romans 6.23.
.

3 A debt of purity, which we owe by reason of our coruption after our
transgression Rom 8.12.
. And against all these debts, I must seek that I may get my Quietus est, in
this life, that I be not tormented in the life to come 1. John 2.1.
.


Euch. Why are sins called ours?


Phil. Because they properly proceed from our selves, and we are not by God
compelled to sin Iam. 1.13 14.
.


Euch. What use make you of all this?


Phil. 1 That I must especially labor for pardon of mine own sin Psalm. 51.
.

2 That I must not accuse God as the author of sin Isa. 63.17.
.

3 That because I daily must ask forgiveness, therefore even the best men do
sin daily Pro. 24.16. 2. Chro. 6.36.
. Luke 5.8. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 1.9.

4 That as God is patient toward me, so must I be patient toward my brethren
1. These. 5.15.
.

5 I must have a fellow feeling of the sins of others.

6 That I must no less pray for the pardon of their sins than of mine own.

7 That of my self I am not able to discharge this debt, neither can say, have
patience with me and I will pay thee all. Mark. 18.


Euch. In whose name must you get this pardon?


Phil. In the name of Christ, applied to me, in the preaching of the Gospel by
a true faith: for he is the propiciation for our sins, and without him we
cannot appear in the fight of God Act. 4.12.10.43. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Hebr. 9.28
.


Euch. Why must you look for forgiveness from Christ?


Phil. 1 Because of my self I cannot appease Gods Wrath. Isai. 33.14. 2. Pet.
2.4. Iud. 6.

2 I am not able to satisfy his Justice, for he will not judge the sinner
innocent: Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 5.5.

3 He has taken upon him to be my surety.

4 He alone has purchased my pardon, being an innocent man, and eternal God:
Hebr. 2.16.7.26. 2. Cor. 5.19. Isai. 53.5.6. Dan. 9.24.26. Ier. 23.6. Ioh.
1.29. 1. Pet. 1.18. Psalm. 51.9. Zach. 13.1. Tit. 3.4.5. Colos. 2.1. 1. Tim.
2.5. 1. Ioh. 2.1.


Euch. But has Christ obtained for us such a plenarie remission, as that we
need not look for any other?


Phil. He has: for, 1 There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: Romans 8.1.

2 He has blotted out the handwriting against us, and nailed it to his
cross: Col. 2.14.

3 There is but one Mediator between God and man, the Man Jesus Christ: 1.
Timoth. 2.5.

4 He is the Propitiation for our sins: 1. John 2.2.


Euch. May you not discharge venial sins by your self?


Phil. No sin is venial, if we regard Gods infinite justice: Mat. 5.28. 1.
Ioh. 3.15. Numb. 6.23. Psalm. 130.5. All sins are venial, if we respect
Christ's All-sufficient merit: Romans 5.18. Psalm. 130.7. 1. Ioh. 2.1.


Euch. Does not God remit the fault, and yet retain the punishment for the
fault?


Phil. In no case. 1 He will not pardon the debt, and yet keep, me in prison
for the debt.

2 The fault and the punishment for the fault are Relatiues, as the cause, and
the effect; suppose the one, the other must be; take away the one, the other
also is taken away: Genes. 2.17.

3 Christ did not only take upon him the guilt of sin: but also the punishment
for sin: 1. Pet. 2.24.

4 It were against Gods justice, to punish that which he has pardoned.

5 What mercy were this to forgive a sin, and yet to punish the same sin?

6 Even in civil contracts: if the Obligation be cancelled, the debtor is
acquitted.

7 How shall he be blessed that has the pardon of his sin, if he be
punished after pardon of his sin? Psalm. 32.1.

8 Being instified by faith, I have peace with God: I could not have it, if I
might be punished.

9 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of the elect? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? says Paul, Romans 8.33.

10 This were to make Christ an imperfect Savior, which is against the word of
God.


Euch. Was not David's sin pardoned, and yet he punished after for it? 2. Sam.
12.13.14.


Phil. He was chastised by a Father, not punished by a Judge: for corrections
to Gods children, cannot properly be called punishments: Psalm. 103.10. 1. Cor.
11.32.


Euch. Why then was Nebuchadnetzar advised to redeem his sins by repentance,
and his iniquities by mercy to the poor? Dan. 4.24.


Phil. You taught me, that the Hebrew word translated by the Latin
Translator, Redeem, does not signify to buy out, but to break off: and this
will make nothing for satisfaction.


Euch. What use can you make of this?


Phil. That all Popish commutation of eternal punishments, into temporal
satisfactions is unlawful: as Pilgrimages, Fastings, Whippings, Pater-nosters,
Invocation of Saints, Alms, Bells, Purgatory, Pardons, Iubiles, Works of
Supererogation, and such like: all which devices are euerted by that one saying
of Saint John, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, does purge us from all our
sins, 1. John 1.7. this is proper to the elect, and is daily renewed to them
in the Word and Sacraments.


Euch. What is the condition of this petition?


Phil. As we forgive them that trespass aginst us.


Euch. Is our forgiving of men a reason why God should forgive us?


Phil. No, it is not. For, God for Christ's sake does forgive us Ephesians. 4.32.
: and if it were a cause then must the forgiveness of sin proceed from our
selves.


Euch. What then is it?


Phil. It is a Sign, assuring us that God has forgiven us; and a Comfort
cheering us, that God will forgive us; a Promise binding us to pardon our
brethren; and a Law teaching us, that if we will have God to forgive us, we
also must forgive others.


Euch. Why then is this condition added?


Phil. Not to teach God how he should forgive us but to teach us:

1 That he greatly delights in this work of mercy.

2 That he may else say unto us, Why do thou ask forgiveness of thy
Father, when as thou would not forgive thy brother.

3 That as we look for a plenarie pardon at the hands of God: so we should
give the like unto all men: Matthew. 6.15.7.2.

4 That if we would have God forgive us, so often as we offend him; we also
should forgive our brother, so often as he offends us: Luke 17.4. We would
give all the World for the pardon of sin, will we not pardon our brother,
that God may pardon us?


Euch. But because sin to man is here called debt, how becomes man thus a
debtor to man, and how is this sin called a debt?


Phil. Not as it is a sin against God, and his righteous Law, but as it is a
trespass done to man, either to his body by killing, or hurting it; to his
goods, by stealing them, credit, by slandering of him; or to his chastity, by
defiling his Neighbors bed.


Euch. Why is this sin called a debt to Man?


Phil. 1 Because we owe love, Romans 13.8.
which is now broken.

2 Because we owe punishment for doing wrong Judge. 1.8.
.

3 Because we owe satisfaction for the wrong done Leuit. 6.4
.


Euch. Is every debt to man to be remitted?


Phil. No, there is a debt of Charity, which we owe to our Neighbor, and this
debt we must ever owe: Romans 13.8.


Euch. How is man said to forgive man?


Phil. When he does pardon either the wrong done Genesis 50.21.
, or the punishment appointed for the wrong 2. Sam. 19 23.
, or the satisfaction which the offender is bound to make Luke 7.4.
, or all of them as occasion is offered: Matthew. 18.32.


Euch. What things were observed upon this?


Phil. Three.

1 That man may forgive man, and yet God will punish him Act. 7.
.

2 That though man will not forgive, yet God will, if the offender repent John
8.
.

3 That though God and man forgive, the party offending is to be punished Ios.
7.24.
.


Euch. What good comes by forgiving an offense?


Phil. By it: 1 I am like unto God: Psalm. 103.3. Genesis 50, 21.

2 I imitate good men: 2 Samuel 19.23. Yea the noblest Creatures, which are more
slow to wrath, then waspes and flies, and such base animals. It is the
property of a sick, and not a sound man to be testie, and fretfull

3 I have much comfort by it: 1. Sa^. 25.31.

4 I shall banish malice out of mine heart.

5 I may with assured comfort, sue unto God for mine own pardon. Mar. 18.6.14.

6 I shall cause mine enemy to love me.

7 Then God will avenge my cause: Prou. 25.21.

8 I shall be fitter for the Lords Supper: Mat. 5.25. Genesis 4.4.


Euch. May a man forgive him that has offended him, and yet sue him at the
law?


Phil. He may not only sue his adversary; but pursue him to death, and yet
forgive him; for, unless offenders be punished, Gods glory will be hindered
1. Sam. 15.9. Eccl. 8.11.
, Justice decayed Hos. 5.10. Pro. 11.14.
, the Commonweal ruined Pro. 29.4
, and all men wronged Iud. 17.6.
, and bad Judges punished Ier. 22.17 Pro. 24.24.
.


Euch. What rules must you observe in going to Law?


Phil. 1 I must do nothing with a revenging mind Romans 12.19.
.

2 I must take heed that I offend not the Church 1. Cor. 6.1.2.
.

3 I must do it for the maintenance of peace Act. 21.22.
.

4 I must labor by it to better mine adversary Iam. 5.19
.

5 I must not sue for each trifling matter 1. Cor. 6.7
.

6 I must use all other good means, and make law my last remedy Matthew.
18.29.31.
.


Euch. May the Magistrate punish a Malefactor, and yet be said to forgive him?


Phil. He may do it: for he is, 1 The Minister of God, to take vengeance of
him that does evil: Romans 13.4.

2 The offense which he does punish, is not against his person, but against the
Commonwealth.


Euch. But when the flesh will tell you, that you must be revenged, what
cautions were given you to stay your anger?


Phil. You gave me these cautions:

1 That I must consider, that it is Gods doing 2. Sam. 16.10.
.

2 That I have also wronged God and man Eccl. 7.24
.

3 That Christ has forgiven me more Mat. 17.32.
.

4 That forgiving is a duty of love Gal. 5.13 14.
.

5 That I must not destroy him for whom Christ died 1. Cor. 8.11.
.

6 If I do not forgive, I incur Gods wrath Mat. 6.15
.

7 That by forgiving, I am like unto God Ephesians. 4.31.32.
.

8 That it is my duty to do nothing through contention Phil. 2.3.



Euch. But if I must forgive mine enemies, why did David and others pray
against theirs? Psalm 54.7. Numb. 16.15. 2. Timoth. 4.14.


Phil. They did so not in malice, or desire of revenge: but, 1 Upon a zeal to
Gods glory.

2 By the spirit of revelation, knowing that such men were in truth case
awayes, and utter enemies to the truth of God.


Euch. What use do you make of this?


Phil. 1 That I am bound to forgive all persons, Collos. 3.12.
all sins, Prou. 10.
and at all times, Mat. 17.22.
when man offends me; and that fully,

2 That I must live in peace, 2. Cor. 13.11.
and labor to make peace: Mat. 5.9. Exodus 2.13
and show all tokens of love to mine adversary, that he may assure himself
that I have forgiven him, not by half, but altogether.

3 That if I forgive not, I curse my self Mat. 6.12
.

4 That they hurt themselves, who leave out this conditition in the Lords
Prayer, because they will not forgive.

5 That it is a sign of grace to forgive Matthew 17 32.


6 That no man living in malice can say the Lords Prayer as he ought to do
Mat. 5.24
.

7 That is it difficult to believe the forgiveness of sins, Mark 9.24.
because this petition has a condition to persuade us, annexed unto it.

8 That if they be commended who forgive their enemies, what shall become of
them who prosecute; and persecute the Saints of God, by whom they receive much
good? Prou. 11.11.


Euch. What do you here bewail?


Phil. 1 The corruption of my nature prone to sin.

2 The burden of my sin, which I my self can never bear.

3 That I feel not the want of Christ, who only can forgive sin.

4 That I am not so ready to forgive men, as God is ready to forgive me.


Euch. What things do you here pray for?


Phil. For three things.

1 For Humiliation.

2 For Justification.

3 For Reconciliation, and love to men.


Euch. In Humiliation what do you pray for?


Phil. 1 That I may see my sins.

2 That I may feel them.

3 That I may bewail them.

4 That I may most earnestly crave pardon for them, seeing the burden of sin
is a most heavy burden.


Euch. How do you pray for Justification?


Phil. That Christ's righteousness may be made mine, and my sins may be laid
upon Christ, for his mercies sake.


Euch. How do you pray for reconciliation?


Phil. That God would give me a heart to be reconciled to men, so as I may
pardon them, and they me.


Euch. What things do you pray against?


Phil. I pray against blindness of mind, heardnes of heart, continuance in
sin, and the least, opinion of mine own righteousness, that I should
lightly regard Christ. And lastly against al hatred, by which I am kept from
loving my brother.


Euch. What do you give thanks for?


Phil. I thank God that he has given me a sight and sense of sin, and
persuaded me of the pardon and forgiveness of them in his Son; and that
howsoever I sustain many wrongs at the hands of men, yet I can be contented
to forgive them, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven me.


Euch. Which is the sixth petition?


Phil. The sixth Petition.
And lead us not into temptation; but etc.


Euch. Why is it placed after the fourth petition, Give us etc?


Phil. To teach me that if God give me daily bread, I am subject to be tempted
with pride Psa. 30.6 Lead us not into temptation.
, and therefore must pray against it: and if he deny me daily bread, I am
subject to be tempted with despair Ps. 22.1.2
, and so must pray against it.


Euch. Why is it set after, Forgive us our debts?


Phil. That by this I may learn:

1 That forgiveness of sins and temptations are inseparable companions Luke
22.31.32. 2. Cor. 7.5.
, and that such as are not acquainted with temptations, are as yet in the power
of that strong man, who keeps the house of a secure soul Lu. 11.21
.

2 That as the former petition answers to the first part of the covenant of
grace, consisting in the remission of sins: so this is answerable to the
second part, which consists in the writing of Gods Law in our hearts, so as
we shall not finally be overcome in temptation.


Euch. Why is it coupled to the former petition by this word and?


Phil. 1 To teach us, that as we have prayed for pardon of sins past, so we
must labor to prevent sins to come. Psalm. 66.18, Pro. 28.13. 1. Pet. 4.3. It
is a comfort to hear this voice, Thy sins are forgiven thee: Math. 9.3. but
withal we must remember that John 5.14 Sin no more, etc.

2 To admonish me that I be not secure when I feel the forgiveness of sins,
for then am I in most danger to be assaulted by Satan, and overcome by my
weak flesh: Math. 12.43.26.40.


Euch. Why are the godly led into temptation?


Phil. 1 To keep them under, that they be not proud of Gods grace 2. Cor. 12.7.
.

2 To winnow the chafe of sin from Gods corn Lu. 22.31
.

3 That Gods power may appear in man's weakness 2. Cor. 12.9.
.

4 That his mercy may be seen in keeping them from a final fall Luc. 22 32
.

5 That they may be like Christ their head To. 8.17.
.

6 That they may acknowledge, that all strength is from God 2. Cor. 3.5.
.

7 That by this they may know themselves for Gods children, who alone are so
tempted, that they recover in temptation Ps. 37.24.
.


Euch. What else do you learn, that after prayer for pardon of sins, you
desire not to be led into temptation?


Phil. I am taught that if I have sinned and obtained pardon, I must take heed
of a relapse into an old sin, or any practice of new m.

2 That who so has this gracious pardon, he can and shall resist sin in the
end; though, with David and Peter, he be foiled in the beginning Tit. 2.11
Cant. 5.3. Iam. 4.7. 1. Cor. 10.3
.

3 That forgiveness of sins and grace are inseparable companions, and can
be no more severed, then light from the sun, or heat from fire Matt.
7.25.16.18. 1. Sam. 15.19.
.


Euch. Were you taught nothing else out of this order?


Phil. Yes, you taught me four other instructions: all which (as you said) did
arise out of this, that immediately upon the craving pardon for sins, we do
in the next place desire not to be led into temptation.


Euch. Which are they?


Phil. 1 That he that has grace can (in some sort) resist temptation, though
he be foiled sometime with the same 1. Cor. 10.13.
.

2 That forgiveness of sins, and perseverance in grace, are inseparably
united together To. 8.8.
.

3 That whosoever wants grace, cannot at any time resist temptation Romans 8.8
though he refrain from some sins, to which he is indisposed Mat. 6.20
. for resistance is the combat between the flesh and the spirit Gal. 5.26
.

4 That he that wants grace, if he be once foiled in temptation, cannot at
all recover himself 1. Sa 16.14.
; for though the righteous fall and rise again, yet the wicked (says Solomon)
shall fall into mischief Prou. 24.16.
.


Euch. But if we be persuaded of the pardon of our sins, why need we to pray,
Lead us not into temptation?


Phil. Sir, you taught me that it is needful for these reasons:

1 Because by nature man is prone to be tempted Genesis 3.1.
.

2 Because many are the allurements to tempt us 1. Ioh. 2.16.
.

3 Because sin is a deceitful tempter Heb. 3.13.
.

4 Because Satan is a subtle, cruel, and diligent tempter 1. Pet. 5.8 1. Chapter
21.1
.

5 Because it is only in the power of God, to give man power to resist
temptations Luke 10.19.
.


Euch. What is the sum of this petition?


Phil. That I may be delivered from two maine enemies of Godd grace, whereof
the one is temptation, the other is evil.


Euch. Do you make these words two petions or one?


Phil. 1 Such as do make seven petitions, do divide this petition into two:
but you divided it as the most do into a petition, Lead us not, etc. And an
explanation, But deliver us, etc. In the former whereof, we pray against evils
to come; in the latter against evils present.


Euch. May you not change these words, Lead us not, into, suffer us not, or let
us not be led into temptation?


Phil. No, I may not; for, as God is said to harden man's heart and not to
suffer it to be hardened, to blind man's eyes, and not to suffer them to be
blinded; so is he said to lead man into temptation, and not to suffer him to
be led.


Euch. Show this by some places of Scripture.


Phil. Exodus 7.3. God hardened Pharaohs heart.

2. Sam. 24.1. God moved David to number the people.

Esai. 19.14. God mingled among them the spirit of error.

Romans 1.16. God gave them up to vile affections.

2. Thessal. 2.11. God sent among them strong delusions.

In these and such like places, he is not said to suffer to be hardened, moved,
mingled, given, sent; but that he did harden, move, mingle, give up, and send.


Euch Tell me now what temptation is?


Phil. It is an enticement or trial of the mind, or heart to commit, or to
see whether men will or not commit sin, either by corruption of nature,
enticements of the world, the policies of Satan, the forgetfulness of Gods
mercies, present afflictions, or the just desertion of the Lord God.


Euch. How is temptation taken in the Scriptures?


Phil. It signifies these things:

1 Affliction, by which man is tempted to know what is in him Iam. 1.2.


2 Satan's trial which he makes of God Ma. 4.7.
.

3 Man's trial, which he makes of God Psa. 95.9.


4 Satan's trial, which he makes of man Ma. 4.4.
.

5 Man's trial, which he makes of man 1. Co. 7.5 1. Th. 3.5.
.

6 Gods trial, which he makes of man 1. King. 10.11. Mat. 22.18 Genesis 20.1.
.


Euch. How is man said to tempt God?


Phil. When he believes not his word, seeks after new miracles, trusts in
outward means, prescribes God a time and manner of deliverance, is impatient
at his corrections, murmureth at the prosperity of the wicked, casts himself
into needless dangers, or burdeneth the faithful with needless traditions:
Psalm. 78.19.20.21. Judith 8.11. Mal. 3.10.14. Matthew. 4.6. Act. 19.10.


Euch. In regard of God and Satan, how many kinds of temptations are there?


Phil. Two: the one of probation, and so God tempts us: the other of
seduction, and so Satan tempts us: Deuteronomy 8.2. Mat. 4.2. 2. Cor. 11.14.


Euch. What means does Satan use to tempt man?


Phil. He uses, or rather abuses:

1 The corruption of nature Iam. 1.14.
.

2 The enticements of the world 1. Ioh. 2.16.
.

3 The hope of Gods mercies Deu. 29.19.
.

4 The neglecting of Gods judgments Isa. 26.11
.

5 Examples of the wicked Psalm. 73.2.3.
.

6 Want in adversity Ma. 4.3.
: by all which he will subdue us in temptation, unless God in his mercy give
us power to resist.


Euch. Now tell me how God does lead man into temptation?


Phil. He does this: 1 By ceasing to support, not the nature of man, but his
grace in man Psa. 119.8.51.11.


2 By delivering him to his own lusts, when the first grace is not sufficient
to help him To. 1.24. Psalm. 107.
.

3 By giving him into the power of Satan, so as he may tempt him to commit
grievous sins 2. Sa. 24.
.

4 By blindfolding him, and hardening him in such sort, as that he shall make
no conscience of sin 2. Sa. 12.
.


Euch. Is God then the author of sin?


Phil. God forbid; for thou art a God that hate iniquity, says the Prophet
David Psalm. 5.
, and God tempts no man, to wit, unto sin, says the Apostle James Iam. 1.13
.


Euch. But how is God freed from being the author of sin, seeing he is an
Actor in sinning?


Phil. Well every way, if we can learn to distinguish, between the action it
self and the ataxie, or disorder that is in the action.


Euch. Is God the author of every action?


Phil. Yes verily, for, in him we live, we move and have our being Act. 17.
.


Euch And can he work in a sinful action, and not be the author of sin
in that action?


Phil. Doubtless he may: for the doing of a thing, it proceeds from the
Creator 2. Sam. 24.1.
, the evil doing it comes from the creature Ier. 13.23
.


Euch. Can you show this by some comparisons?


Phil. I remember you taught me this, by these which follow. The Sun beams
light upon a carrion: that it smells, the Sun is the cause: that it smells
ill, it self is the cause. A man spurreth forward a lame horse; that the horse
goes on, the Rider is the cause; that he limpeth on, himself is the cause. A
Musician plays upon an untuned or broken instrument; that it sounds, the
Musician is the cause; that it sounds ill, it self is the cause; and the
like may be said of many other things.


Euch. But why does GOD tempt some and they recover in temptation; and does
also tempt others, and leaves them in temptation?


Phil. Do you a man ask this of me, who am but a man? let us both learn the
answer, of the Apostle Paul: O man, Romans 9.20.
who art thou that disputest with God? He finds such evil, and leaves them so,
he is bounden to none to give him grace, his judgments are unsearchable, his
ways past finding out Romans 11.33.
, and we are all as clay in the hands of the Potter, he may make us of of
what fashion he will Isa. 45.9.
. The Sun does harden the Clay, and softens the Wax, and no man must ask a
reason thereof.


Euch. How may God be said to tempt man?


Phil. 1 By afflictions, as he did the Israelites Deuteronomy. 9.3 Judge 2.22.
.

2 By commandment, as he did Abraham Genesis 22.1
.

3 By prosperity, as he did David 2. Sam. 12
.

4 By offering objects as he did Euah Genesis 3.
. and as Masters use to try the fidelity of servants, by laying money in some
corner, to try them.


Euch. That this may be known the better, show me how you were taught, that
each man is said to harden himself, Satan is said to harden man, and God is
said to harden man?


Phil. Man hardens himself, when he refuses grace Psalm. 95.8
.

Satan hardens man to presume of grace 2. Cor. 4.4
.

God hardens man when he gives not grace, though he offer unto him all the
means of grace Deu. 2.30 Acts 28.26
.


Euch. Are not mercies and judgments able to bring man to God, without the
especial grace of God?


Phil. No they are not; but as the highway, the more it is trodden upon the
harder it is, till the rain moisten it; and the Stiddie, the more it is beaten
upon, the harder it is, till the fire soften it: so the heart of man, the more
it is trodden and beaten upon by mercies and judgments, the worse it is Isa.
26.10 Exo. 10.27
, til God by the dew of his grace moisten it, and the fire of his spirit soften
it Ezech. 11.19.
.


Euch. Show me some other reasons then you did before, Isa. 44.3. Mat. 3.11.
why God does thus tempt and harden man?


Phil. He does it to these ends:

1 To humble them, that they may see themselves Eccl. 3.10
.

2 To chastise them for former sins 1. King. 11.9.
.

3 That his grace in them may appear, as Gold in the fire 1. Pet. 1.7
.

4 That they may see their own weakness and impatience Luke 22.61.62.
.

5 That they may take more heed hereafter Psalm. 119 67.
.

6 That more earnestly they may pray to God for asistance 2. Cor. 12.8
.


Euch. What uses can you make of this Doctrine of temptation?


Phil. I learn first the incomprehensible purity of God, who can work in
sin, without sinning Ps. 145.17
.

2 That Satan can go no further in tempting, then God will give him leave Lu.
22.31
.

3 That I must not pray absolutely against temptations, but that I be not
overcome in temptation Mat. 26.39.8.31
.

4 That by nature we are all Satan's bondmen Ro^. 7.14
, till such time as God free us from temptation 1. Cor. 10 13.
.


Euch. Seeing God tempts many ways, tell me how he tempts by prosperity
and riches?


Phil. By this he tries man:

1 Whether he will consider how he comes by them Eccl. 6.2. Ezec. 28 4.
.

2 To whom the continuance of them is promised Psalm 112.3.
.

3 To what end they are given unto him Luke 16.9
.

4 Whether he will think of the mutabilitie of high places Dan. 4.30 1. Tim.
6.17.
.

5 Whether he will meditate of the fearful downe-falles of such, as have not
used Prosperity well Hest. 7.10 Luke 12.20.
.

And 6 that it is a part of great felicity, not to be overcome of felicity 1.
Tim. 6.9. Pro. 10.22. Ann. Dom. 1605. Nouem. 5.
.


Euch. How does God try us by that late deliverance from that unnatural
conspiracy against our King and Country by Gun powder?


Phil. 1 Whether we will acknowledge it Ps. 18.48
.

2 Whether we will be thankful for it Verse 49.
.

3 Whether we will keep a memorial of it Hest. 9.27
.

4 Whether we will pray more earnestly for our King, and Countries preservation
Psalm. 20.
.

5 Whether we will desire the conversion or confusion of those our enemies
Psalm. 58.6 7.8.9.10.
.

6 Whether we will be more obedient to God; than before, lest a worse thing
happen to us Ioh. 5.14
.

7 Whether we will detest that cruel Catholic Religion, which eats her
God, and kills her Governors, and thirsts after blood, especially the
blood of Princes Reu. 17.6
.

8 Whether we will love and embrace more earnestly our Christian Religion
which teaches obedience, and practices it, even to such Governors as are bad
Pro. 24.2 Ier. 27.9. Ro^. 13.1.2. 1. Pet. 2.13 14. Eccl. 10.20 D. Bilsons and
D. Mortons books of obedience.
though their Catholic Apology stander us with the contrary.


Euch. How does God tempt men by adversity?


Phil. Whether we will think, 1 That godly men have been so tempted Iam. 5.11
.

2 That it is Gods furnace to try our faith Ps. 66.10. Dan. 3.25.
.

3 That it is Gods medicine to purge our sins Ioh. 15.2
.

4 That we must not declame against God Ps. 38.13 Job. 3.2.
.

5 That we must more meditate of Heaven 2. Cor. 4.17.5.1.
.

6 That if we feel not the Sun rising of Gods grace, we must not think
that it is set for ever Ps. 31.14.77.7.8.9.
.

7 That we must endure all kinds of temptations, whether of body by
sickness, or soul by sorrow, or our person by imprisonment, or state by
pouerie or name by contempt, etc Iam. 1.12
.


Euch. But to come to man's temptations: What if man tempt you to Popish
Religion, how must you resist this temptation?


Phil. By considering, that that Religion can be no good Religion, 1 Where the
Scriptures are not known Mat. 22.29 John 5.39. Psalm. 1.1.119.9.20.4
.

2 Where Images are worshipped Exo. 32.8 Deu. 27.15
.

3 Where a piece of bread is adored 1. Cor. 11.24.
.

4 Where Saints are inuocated Isa. 63.16 Mat. 15.24.
.

5 Where ignorance is commended Pro. 19.2 John. 17.3.
.

6 Where Purgatory is maintained Mat 25.46
.

7 Where Christ's merit is mangled Heb. 13.8
.

8 Where subjects are so freed from allegiance to their Sovereign, that if he
be not a Romanist, it shall be as meritorious to kill that King, as to eat
their God. 1. Sa^. 24.6 2. Sam. 1.14.15.


9 Where such sovereign power is given to one man (the Pope) as that he may
determine the true sense of all Scripture Lu. 24.32
, define all causes of faith 2. Tim. 13.16.
, call Councels Act. 15.6
, excommunicate any person 1. Cor. 5.4.
, depose any King Pro. 8.15 Dan. 4.34.
, forgive sins properly Isa. 44.22 Psalm. 32.1 Matthew. 9.2.
, decide all causes brought to Rome by appeal Lu. 12.14
, and make such Laws as shall bind the conscience Iam. 4.12
, all which is given to the Bishop of Rome: but is derogatorie to the Kingly,
Prophetical, and Priestly Offices of Christ.


Euch. What if you be tempted to forsake the Church, because of some abuses
supposed in the Church? how must you resist that temptation.?


Phil. By considering, that a child is not to be forsaken because it is sick,
nor a body neglected, because it is diseased: and that Christ and his Apostles
did not depart from the Churches, As in the Church of Corinth. 14. several
errors: as appears in the first Epistle.
though there were amongst them many abuses, and the most of them greater then
be amongst us, who have the Word purely preached, and the Sacraments rightly
administered.

That you may never depart from us to them of the Shismaticall separation,
consider:

1 That before Brown, they can bring no one learned man that ever did write
of, or defend their opinion.

2 They can show none before that time, that ever did suffer for that opinion.

3 They of that separation will not live in any reformed Church in the World.

4 All reformed Churches condemn them as Shismatickes.

5 They are very troublesome to the Christian Magistrate wheresoever they live.

6 Observe how for matters of small moment, they excommunicate one another; the
father delivering the son, and the son the father, over unto Satan.

7 Note the variety of strange opinions amongst them, and you shall hardly
find one of their Ministers agree with another, but each of them are Broachers
of strange Doctrine.

8 If you observe but the spirit of these men, you shall truly see it is not an
humble, but a railing spirit.

9 Many of them stand more upon their outward discipline then that they may de
a discipline to themselves.

10 Suspect your own judgment, suspend your sentence, seek peace, be not
credulous, look as well upon good things, as those evils that are amongst us,
and I hope you will never depart from us.


Euch. To come again unto Satan's temptations, what must you do to resist
them?


Phil. I must labor, 1 Not to be ignorant of his enterprises.

2 To watch over my self continually Mat. 26.41
.

3 To resist him by the shield of faith Ephesians. 6.16
.

4 To subdue him by the sword of the Spirit Ephesians. 6.17
.

5 To be persuaded that he will never cease 1. Pet. 5.8
.

6 To think of my danger if I fall Reu. 2.5.
.

7 To consider how I may hurt others if I fall 2. Sam. 12.14.
.

8 That by falling I may deny my God Lu. 22.61
.

9 That I shall be rewarded if I continue Reu. 2.7.11.17. and chap. 3.5.12.21.
.

10 That by prayer I shall have power to resist him Ephesians. 6.19.
.


Euch. These rules indeed are general: but what if he tempt you to the sin
of covetousness, what remedies must you use?


Phil. I must meditate: 1 That God has taken upon him to be my careful
protector Ps. 23.1.
.

2 That this sin is the root of al evil Tim. 6.10.
.

3 That every covetous man is an Idolater Col. 3.5.
.

4 That my life stands not in abundance Lu. 12 16
.

5 That Christ and his disciples were poor Mat. 8.20.4.21.
.

6 That I shall carry nothing with me Job. 1.21 1. Tim. 6.7
.

7 That I must give an account of my getting Lu. 16.2.


8 That it will hinder me in the service of God Luke 14.18.19.
.

9 That rich men come hardly to heaven Lu. 18.24
.

10 That by riches I am most subject to be spoiled Ie. 52.26.
.

11 That they make a man unwilling to die Ec. 41.1
.

12 That they may be taken away from me Pr. 23.5.
.

13 That many woes are denounced against rich men Am. 6.1. Lu. 6.24. Ia.
5.1.2.3.
.


Euch. What remedies have you against the tempation of pride?


Phil. I must meditate: 1 That I must not be proud because I have all things
of gift 1. Cor. 4.7.
.

2 That God resists the proud 1. Pe. 5.5
.

3 That it hinders a greater largess of grace Lu. 18.24
.

4 That I am but dust and ashes Ge. 18.27
.

5 That pride cast Satan out of heaven 2. Pet. 2.4
.

6 That if it be in apparel, I have more occasion to be humbled for my
shameful nakedness Ge. 2.25.33.
.

7 That Christ left me an example of humility Mat. 11.29.
.

8 That by this I make others to contemn me Hest. 3.2.
.

9 That it argues a son of the Devil Humilitas signum electorum, superbia
reproboru^: Hieron.
.

01 That others, yea many unreasonable creatures, have more excellent gifts
then my self Praestat aranea tactu, etc.
.

11 That pride is the causer of contentions Pr. 13.10
.

12 That proud men are far from reformation: See thou (says Salamon) a man
wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of him Pro. 26.12.
: and a proud heart is a Palace for the Devil.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptations of Adultery?


Phil. I must meditate here, 1 That Gods sees me Pr. 5.21.
.

2 That God can punish me Ge. 20.3
.

3 That he will punish me 2. Sa. 12.11.12.
.

4 That I am a member of Christ 1. Cor. 6.15.
.

5 That Adulterers shall not inherit heaven 1. Cor. 6.9.
.

6 That such people seldom repent Prou. 7.26.27.
.

7 That such a thing should not be done in Israel Deuteronomy. 23.17.18.
.

8 That it made Solomon to commit Idolatry 1. Ki. 11.4
.

9 That for the whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread Pro. 6.26
.

10 That I do not as I would be done to Ma. 7.12
.

11 That I wrong the Church and commonwealth, by obtruding to both a bastardly
generation For neither can know their true children.
.

12 That as by this I endanger my soul, so must I needs decay my body, and
when I am dead, leave a blot behind me, which never can be wiped out Pro.
6.32.33.
.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptation of gluttony and
drunkenness?


Phil. Here I must meditate, 1 That Solomon commands me, at great tables to
put my knife to my throat Pro. 23.1
.

2 That by these, I make mortar of my body, by too much drink, and my stomach
but a strainer, by too much meat Lu. 21.34
.

3 That I abuse that which might do good to the poor Mar. 14.4.5.
.

4 That I abuse the good creatures of God Ephesians. 5.18
.

5 That all civil nations have detested these sins He. 1.10.
.

6 That by them I am unfit for Gods service 1. Cor. 10.7.
.

7 That I bring upon my body diseases Pr. 23.29
.

8 That I am unfit to keep any secret Secreta recludit.
, for drunken porters keep open gates, and when the wine is in, the wit is out.

9 That I am a scorn to the sober Ge. 9.22
.

10 That these sins are the maine instruments of other sins Pr. 23.33
.

11 That I must fall into the Physicians hands Eccl. 38.15.
.

12 That I may in them commit some such sin, as may cause me to fall into the
censure of God, and Governors Genesis 19.33.
: and since Christ tasted gall and vinegar for me, why should not I abstain
from surfeting, and drunkenness for him? He that desires Christ and feeds on
him, will not greatly regard of how dainty diet he makes such vile meat as
after must be cast into the draught.


Euch. What remedies have you against the temptation of envy?


Phil. I must meditate, 1 That mine eye must not be evil, because Gods eye is
good Mat. 20.15.
.

2 That God may dispose of his own as he list Mat. 20.15.
.

3 That envy is a note of a bad man Genesis 26.14.
.

4 I must be glad at the good of others Act. 11.18
.

5 Moses and Christ, and other good men, were glad when they heard of others
excellency Number. 11.29. Ma. 11.29.
.

6 God will not have all alike 1 Cor. 12.18.
.

7 It is a means to murder our brother 1. Ioh. 3.15.
.

8 It is a fruit of the flesh Iam. 3.14.15. Gal. 5.21.
.

9 It hinders us from doing good to others Ge. 37..4
.

10 It is the greatest torment to a man's self 1. Sam. 18.9.
.

11 Though our brother excel us in one thing, yet we do him in another 1.
Cor. 12.21.
.

12 God even hates, and curses the envious 2. Sam. 22.18.
.


Euch. What remedies have you against idleness in your calling?


Phil. I must meditate, 1 That God commands all men to labor Ge. 3.18
.

2 That Euah fell in paradise by idleness Ge. 3.19
.

3 That it was one of the sins of Sodom Eze. 16.49.
.

4 That it is a cushion for Satan to sleep on Otium puluinar diaboli.


5 That labor puts Satan's assaults away 2. Sa. 11.2
.

6 That idleness consumes the body Standing waters soon putrify.
.

7 That a slothful hand makes poor, as a diligent hand makes rich Pr. 10.5.
and 24.34.
.

8 Without diligence we cannot provide for a family, or the time to come Prou.
31.
.

9 All creatures, even to the Pismire, are diligent Pr. 6.6.
.

10 God our Father is ever working Ioh. 5.17
.

11 By it we may be able to do good to others Ep. 4.28.


12 All good men have labored in a calling. And why have people hands, and
wits, but to use them? and the more both are used, the better they are.


Euch. What remedies have you against impatience in afflictions?


Phil. I must meditate, 1 That naked I came into this world, and naked I must
return again Job. 1.21.
.

2 I must remember the afflictions of Job, and what end God made of them Ia.
5.11.
.

3 That the patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness Pro. 10.28.
.

4 That God has a stroke in afflictions 2 Sa. 16.10.
.

5 That they are nothing to the ioies of heaven 2. Cor. 4.17.
.

6 That I have deserved more Psa. 119.75.
.

7 That they will tend to my good Ps. 119.71.
.

8 That in this world we must have tribulations Ioh. 16.33.
.

9 That murmuring is a sign of a bad child Heb. 12.7.8.9.
.

10 Christ said not my will, but thine be done Mat. 26.39.
.

11 Many of Gods servants have endured more Heb. 11.37
.

12 That Gods children have been ready to suffer Act. 21.13.
.


Euch. But what remedies have you, if Satan tempt you to despair of Gods
mercy?


Phil. I will say unto him, avoid Satan and will enter into this meditation:

1 I was by Baptism received into the Church, and it has been to me the
Lauer of regeneration Tit. 3.5.
.

2 I once heard and believed his word, and therefore I shall stand ever by this
faith 2. Cor. 1.24
.

3 Mine election is in Gods keeping, and therefore Satan can never steal it
away Ephesians. 1.4.
.

4 The calling of God is without repentance: and, whom he loves, he loves to
the end Romans 11.29. Ioh. 13.1.
.

5 I know by my love of the brethen, that I am translated from death to life 1.
Ioh. 3.14.
.

6 I am sorry, that I can be no more sorry for my sins, and this to me is an
argument of faith 2. Cor. 7.10.
.

7 I desire to believe in Christ and to run the ways of his Commandments Mar.
9.24 2. Cor. 8.12. Psalm. 119.5.
.

8 Christ's merits are greater then my sins, and he is the propitiation for
my sins Ioh. 1.29 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
.

9 Though the righteous fall, he shall rise again, for God supporteth him with
his hand Ps. 37.24 Pr. 17.17.24.
.

10 The Spirit does, though very weakly, witness to my sprit that I am Gods
child To. 8.16.
.

11 I hate sin, with an unfeigned hatred 1. Ioh. 3.9.
.

12 I love all good things as well as one and hate all evil as well as one Ps.
119.6 104.
: and I can be contented to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and to say,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly Phi. 1.23. Reu. 22.21
.


Euch. If Satan will tempt you to presume of Gods mercies: what remedies must
you here use?


Phil. I must meditate against this sin:

1 That God bids me not be high minded Romans 11.20.
.

2 That security destroys more then any sin Luke 17.26.
.

3 That he is blessed, who fears always Pr. 28.14
.

4 That I must work out my salvation with fear and trembling Ph. 2.12.
.

5 That as God is a God of mercy, so is he also a God of Justice Deuteronomy. 9.20.2
.

6 That the more I presume, the more subject I am to fall Luke 22.33.34.
.

7 That it is Satan's maine weapon to vanquish me, God is merciful To. 6.15.
.

8 That even David prayed to be kept from sins of presumption Ps. 29.13.
.

9 That the longer I continue in sins, the more hardly I can leave them 2.
Sa. 3.16. Romans 2.1.
.

10 That if once God call me, I must undo all I have done before To. 6 21.
.

11 That then I must shed many a bitter tear for my sins Ps. 32. Lu. 22.62.
.

12 That by going on, I heap to my self wrath, against the day of wrath To.
2.5.
: and therefore have we need in this, and all the former assaults of God, men,
and devils, to pray, Lord lead us not into temptation.


Euch. Which is the explanation of this petition?


Phil. But deliver us from evil.


Euch. What do you pray for in these words? But deliver us from evil.



Phil. That I, and all Cristians may be freed from the power of Satan, sin,
the flesh and the world: so that being thus preserved, we neither shall, nor
may not fall: or so be delivered from evil, that we may not fall quite away
by any temptation.


Euch. Why say you deliver us?


Phil. Why? even because we are: 1. his servants: 2 his children: 3 his
workmanship: 4 his image: 5 the price of his sons blood: 6. vessels to carry
his name: 7 members of his body: 8 as sheep amongst wolves.


Euch. Do you not by evil, understand only the devil, who is called That
evil one Mat. 13.19.
?


Phil. No, I do not, though temptations come principally from him: but by evil
you said, I must understand all my spiritual enemies, according to that of the
Apostle John, The whole world lies in evil 1 Ioh. 5.19.
.


Euch. Tell me more plainly, what you here mean by Evil?


Phil. I understand by it: First, Satan, 1. Ioh. 2.14. Secondly, Sin, Romans
12.9. Thirdly, all Evils, which may any way hurt us, as War, Plague, Famine,
Offenses, Heresies, Schisms, Errors, Seditions, etc. Fourthly, evil persons,
be they Turks, Jews, Heretics, Schismatikes, Atheists, Seducers, etc.
Fifthly, eternal and everlasting Death, which is the most fearful evil of
all.


Euch. How many ways does God deliver us from evil?


Phil. Twelve ways: 1 By preserving us from committing sin Ge. 20.6
.

2 By freeing us from judgments due unto sin 2. Sa 12.13.
.

3 By keeping us from the hurt of sin and afflictions Ps. 91.13
.

4 By turning all those sins which we commit, and the afflictions which we
sustain, to our good Ps. 51.1.119.67.71.
.

5 By bridling Satan that he cannot subdue us Romans 16 20.
.

6 By giving us his holy Spirit, that by a lively faith, we overcome all evil
To. 8.2. 1. Ioh. 5.4. 1. Pet. 5.9.
.

7 By no means Mat. 4.2.
.

8 By small means 2. King. 4.3.
.

9 By ordinary means Ios. 5.12.
.

10 By extraordinary means 2. King. 6.16.
.

11 Contrary to all means Da. 3.25.
.

12 By Christ Jesus, who overcame the world, by obeying; the flesh, by
suffering; and the devil, by triumphing over him in his Cross: John 16.33.1.
Pet. 4.1. Col. 2.15. and this is the comfort of all Christians: Psalm. 91.1.


Euch. What means must you use to deliver your self from evil?


Phil. I must, 1 Avoid the company of evil persons: Prou. 1.10. Genes. 39.10.

2 Not live in places where evil is practiced, though I may gain much by it:
2. Cor. 6.17.

3 I must take heed of evil speeches, which may corrupt me and others: Ephesians.
4.29.

4 I must hide Gods word in mine heart, that I do not sin against him: Ps.
119.11.


Euch. Why are these words added as an explanation to this petition?


Phil. 1 To teach me, that when I am delivered from evil, I may be sure not to
be led into temptation, for evil is the cause of all temptations Iam. 1.13
: which being taken away, the effect cease.

2 That of my self I cannot resist evil.

3 That the least creatures shall be able to hurt me, unless God be my
deliverer. 2. King. 6.27. Act. 12.

4 That I shall never be fully delivered, till God for Christ's sake set me at
liberty. Psalm. 119.32. Ioh. 8.36.


Euch. What must we do to be delivered from the devil?


Phil. We must, 1 Put on the whole armor of God Ep. 6.11. 2. Cor. 10.4.
.

2 We must know how to use that armor Verse. 13.
.

3 We must walk warily, that he do not circumuent us, and be never out of our
calling Ep. 4.15. 2. Sa. 11.
.

4 We must ever seek to fear and serve God Ps. 2.11. Pro. 28.14.
.

5 We must know, that Christ is our Captain and deliverer Ioh. 16.33.
.

6 We must meditate of the miserable estate of such as are overcome by the
Devil Lu. 11.26.
.

7 We must take his weapons from him, which are our flesh: Gal. 5.17.1. Pet.
2.11. and the world: 1. Ioh. 2.15. Iam. 4.4. 1. Ioh. 5.19. 1. Cor. 7.31.

8 We must pray as Christ teaches us, Deliver us from evil, and as Paul did,
2. Cor. 12.9. and 2. Chro. 20.12.


Euch. What wants do you bewail in this petition?


Phil. 1 The rebellion of our wicked nature, by which we resist the Spirit of
God Romans 7.14. etc.
.

2 Our readiness in each little temptation, to yield up our selves to the
committing of sin Luke 22.45.46.
.

3 That we cannot enough mourn for the remnants of our bondage, by which we
are kept in the power of Satan To. 7.24.
.

4 That so many fall by Satan's temptation Psalm. 119.136.
.

5 That we cannot here get mastery over our own corruptions 2. Cor. 12.8.
.

6 That we love so this spiritual Sodom, in which we are subject to, and fall
by temptation Genesis 19.16.
.

7 The tyranny of Satan our adversary, going about each way to subdue us Mat.
9.12
.


Euch. What things do you here pray against?


Phil. I pray, 1 Against temptation, as it may be a means to draw men from God,
and cause them to commit sin 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
.

2 Against afflictions, as they are punishments of sin, curses from God,
motives to impatience, or means to make me to take Gods name in vain Pro.
30.9.
.

3 Against desertion, that God would not leave me; or if he do, that he
would not leave me over long, by withdrawing from his former, a second grace of
the Spirit Ps. 119.8.
.

4 Against all future relapse into sin, God hardening my heart, blinding of
my eyes: 1. Tim. 1.20.
backsliding from the truth, either in part or in whole: all sorts of
judgments, temporal, or eternal: and what hurt soever may befall me, either
by prosperity, or adversity.

5 In a word, I pray against the assaults of Satan, the enticements of the
world, the society of the wicked, and that corruption which may surprise me by
mine own flesh.


Euch. May not a man pray for temptations and afflictions?


Phil. Though both of them may be oftentimes good for us, yet because that good
is an accidental good, and we know not how we shall bear temptations if God
send them, therefore it is not meet to pray for them. Therefore, such as wish
to be poor that they might love heaven better; or blind, to meditate of
heaven better; or any way miserable, that they might not love this world to
well; they have no great warrant out of Gods word. To these we may add such as
pray for death, and will not wait Gods leisure, till he take them out of this
world.


Euch. What do you here pray for?


Phil. I pray for grace so resist, and perseverance, when I, or any of the
Church are tempted: and that to this purpose, we may put on the whole armor of
God, as the girdle of verity, in soundnes of doctrine; Ephesians. 6.16.
the breast plate of righteousness, in integrity of life; the shoes of
preparation of the Gospel of peace, which are to be worn by patience in
afflictions; the shield of faith, to resist Satan's assaults; the helmet of
salvation, which is the life of eternity; and the sword of the Spirit, which
is the word of God. I pray also here, that all our afflictions may be turned
to our good, that wisdom may be given us to prevent our persecutors, that I
and others may be patient in adversity, humble in prosperity, and that our
sins may turn to our good, by revealing our corruption in being ready to
fall, discovering our inability of our selves to stand, detesting our nature so
prone to impiety, renouncing all confidence in our own strength, and casting
our selves upon Gods power in temptation: yea that by them we may see satan's
malice in tempting us, and Gods great mercy in recovering us: and finally, that
being once recovered in temptation we may pity and comfort such as be tempted.


Euch. What things do you give thanks for?


Phil. That in the former things which I have prayed for, God has made me able
so to resist, and that neither Satan nor the world, nor my flesh, has so
subdued me, but that I am able to rise again.


Euch. Which is the third part of this prayer?


Phil. The third part of the Lords prayer.
For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Which
words are a reason of all the former, by which we are moved to crave all the
former blessings at the hands of our God.


Euch. Why does Luke leave out this clause?


Phil. Either because the Evangelists did not bind themselves to a precise
form of words, or because this prayer was uttered at two several times by
Christ in a several manner, Vide Bezam in cap. 11. Lucae.
leaving out not only this clause, but the third petition wholly, the
explanation of the sixth, and changing some words which are in Matthew. But we
have no warrant to do the like, as (the vulgar Latin translation and) the
Rhemists do even in the Gospel of Saint Matthew: being bold to mangle the Lords
Prayer, as they are to leave out the second Commandment.


Euch. Why is this conclusion added?


Phil. To teach, 1 To pray unto him who is able to hear us 1. Chro. 6.21.
Ephesians. 3.20
.

2 To pray in faith to him that will help us Iam. 1.6.
.

3 To pray in feruencie, as desirous to be helped Matthew. 15.22.
.

4 To pray in humility, because all is of God Psalm. 192.17. 1. Chron. 29.14.
.

5 To pray in thankfulness, because all is from God 1. Chron. 29.13.
.

6 That in every petition we must have this conclusion in our minds.


Euch. Why is it set after the last petition?


Phil. To confute Satan in his greatest temptations. He, that he might
withdraw us from the Kingdom of God will persuade us as he would Christ, that
all power is his Matthew. 4. but we, that we may not yield to this his assault,
are here taught that the Kingdom is Gods.


Euch. What do you mean by these words, thine is the Kingdom?


Phil. Even that which David meant when he said, 1. Chron. 29.12.
Thine, O Lord, is greatness, power, and victory and praise, and all that is
in Heaven and in Earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom, and thou excellest over
all.


Euch. Why is the Kingdom said to be Gods?


Phil. 1 Because he made all Genesis 1.1.
.

2 Because he possesses all Psa. 24.1.
.

3 Because he commands all Ps. 114.7.
.

4 Because he disposes all Dan. 4.31 32.
.


Euch. What do you learn out of this?


Phil. That I may with confidence pray unto him, because as Kings will provide
for the bodies and souls of al their subjects, so God my King will provide for
me.

2 That I must be governed by him as a subject must by his own Sovereign.

3 That no Superior power can do me hurt, unless he have commission from
above.

4 That al Princes must give account to this King; and therefore should not say
with the wicked in the 12. Psalm, Who is Lord over us?


Euch. But have not other Princes their Kingdoms?


Phil. Yes, they have, and in them do rule, and for conscience sake must ever
be obeyed; yet they rule by, and in, and through this King Pro. 1.15. Dan.
2.37. Revel. 10.
.


Euch. From whom have they this authority?


Phil. From Christ, as he is the second person in the Trinity, not as he is
Mediator betwixt God and Man: For so (his Kingdom being spiritual) he has no
Vicar upon Earth. And herein is the true difference betwixt the Supremacy of
Princes, and the Popes Supremacy.


Euch. How many properties are there of this Kingdom?


Phil. Three: it is a powerful Kingdom, Thine is power: a glorious Kingdom,
Thine is glory: and an everlasting Kingdom, it is For ever and ever.


Euch. Why are these three properties added?


Phil. That when we pray for, or against any thing in the former Petitions, we
may be strengthened in the hope of obtaining them, by the consideration of the
Power, Glory and Eternity of Gods Kingdom.


Euch. Why is power attributed to the Kingdom of God?


Phil. 1 To distinguish it from the Kingdoms of the World, in which many
Princes are heads of people, but have not power to subdue their enemies 2. Sam.
3.39.
.

2 To teach us to give all power unto God Ps. 39.1.
.

3 That we must submit our selves unto him 1. Pet. 5.6.
.

4 That he being a powerful King, we may in faith pray unto him 2. Chron.
20.12.
.


Euch. How great is the power of God?


Phil. See my book, life everlasting, of Gods providence.
It is not only of it own nature in it self, and of it self, but also in
respect of the object, upon which it can work, and effects which it can
produce, and of the action by which it can and does work, both infinite and
unmeasurable Da^. 4.31.
.


Euch. Can it be communicated to any creature?


Phil. No, not to the humanity of Christ: for whatsoever is omnipotent, is God.


Euch. Why does Christ say all power is given unto me Mat. 28.18.
?


Phil. 1 He speaks of that power which we call Authority, not of that which
is called Omnipotency.

2 He says not all power is given to my humanity, but to Me, God and Man.

3 If it be meant of the humanity by this power is to be understood, as much
as the Creature is capable of.

4 In that Word, the humanity may be said to be Omnipotent, as the Word is
said to suffer, not in it self, but in the flesh.


Euch. What do you mean by Thine is the glory?


Phil. 1 That God has made all things for his glory Pro. 16.4
.

2 Whatsoever we ask, they are means of thy glory Ioh. 12.28
.

3 The things which we ask shall be referred to thy glory 1. Cor. 10.31.
.

And therefore, O Lord grant these things unto us, because thy glory is most
dear to thy self, which will be also performed of us if we sanctify thy
name, advance thy Kingdom, do thy will, have our daily bread, the
forgiveness of our sins, and be able to resist all evil temptations.


Euch. What is the third property of Christ's Kingdom?


Phil. For ever and ever: Which is an excellent inducement to strengthen us in
praying.


Euch. Why is Gods Kingdom, Power, and glory, said to be everlasting?


Phil. 1 Because in themselves they are everlasting Psalm. 45.6.102.28.145.13.
.

2 Of us they should never be forgotten Psalm. 145 2.3.
.

3 To distinguish it from Earthly Dominions; all which have their periods both
in Government, and Governors: Psalm 119.96. Isay 40.6.

4 To show forth the dignity both of Gods Church, and Gods Children, who have
a Father, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and are such Sons as shall Reign
with their Father everlastingly.


Euch. To what purpose are all these arguments added here?


Phil. Not to persuade God, who knows our wants before we ask Mat. 6.32
, but to persuade us that he who is a King of such Power, Glory, and
Eternity, will hear our Prayers, and grant our requests.


Euch. Why is this word the added to Kingdom, Power, and glory?


Phil. To show, 1 the generality of them all in God, who is an universal King
Psalm. 47.2.

2 Gods superiority Psalm. 72.11. All Kings shall worship him: all Nations
shall serve him. He is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19.


Euch. Why is there made mention only of these three properties of God?


Phil. As (some think) to point out the three Persons, for the Kingdom is
Christ's 1. Co. 15.35. Power the Holy Ghosts Romans 15.13.19. and Glory the
Fathers Romans 6.4. that we setting our selves in Christ's Kingdom, that is his
Church by the power of the Holy Ghost, may be partakers of that glory which
God the Father has prepared for us.


Euch. What use do you make of this conclusion?


Phil. 1 That in our Prayers we ever debase our selves, and ascribe all glory
to this King of Kings Ps. 115.2
.

2 In our Prayers to be ever persuaded of the power of God, that he can help
us, and the promise of God that he will help us. 2. Cor. 1.20


3 That Prayer and giving of thanks must go together, because this is a
Doxologie given to God. 1 Pet. 5.10.11.

4 Whatsoever we ask, we must in purpose before, and practice after, refer
the same to Gods glory. For the Alpha of this Prayer is, Hallowed be thy
name, and the Omega is, Thine is the glory.

5 That all Governors must remember that they hold all in capite under this
head Pro. 8.15
.

6 That if we be able to do any thing, all that power comes from God Iam.
1.17
.


Euch. What is the last part of this Petition?


Phil. The fourth part of the LORDS Prayer.
The seal thereof in the Word, Amen.


Euch. Why is this word kept in all languages, untranslated?


Phil. 1 To teach that the Synagogue of the children of Israel, and all Nations
are but one mystical body, and the same we are taught by Abba, Father Romans
8.20. Galat. 4.7.

2 That we having the same prayer that the Jews had, why not then the same
seal? You shall find the first Petition Psalm. 57.6.67.2. the second Psalm.
106.4.5. the third Psalm. 143.10. the fourth Psalm. 145.15. the fifth Psalm. 65.3.
the sixth Psalm. 119.37.143.1. and Psalm. 25.20.


u^uch. How is this word Amen, taken in the Scriptures?


Phil. Three manner of ways: sometime as a Nowne signifying Christ himself
Revelation, 1. These things says Amen. Sometimes as an Aduerbe, as John 3.
Amen, Amen, that is, Verily, verily I say unto you. And sometimes as a Verb,
as in this place, signifying, So be it, or it shall be so.


Euch. How shall I find it placed in the Scriptures?

Before, and after a sentence: before, John 3.4.6.33.16.23. to express the
truth of that which follows it: and after Psalm. 87.50. to signify our desire
to obtain, or do that which we have prayed for. Upon his Amen John 16.23. we
ground ours.


Euch. What then does this word, Amen, import, at the end of this Petition, and
every Prayer?


Phil. More a great deal then many think; for it is as much as if we should
say thus, We have begged many things at thy hand, and we do desire thee to
hear, and are persuaded thou will hear all our requests.


Euch. What are we taught by this seal, Amen?


Phil. We are taught, 1 That we pray not in hypocrisy to God: but ^s
persuaded: that God is both faithful and true to grant our requests, being
able, and willing to do it. Esaias 49.7.8. Romans 4.21. 1. These. 5.24. able as our
King, willing as our Father, and faithful in all 1. John 1.9. to forgive
sins: 1. Cor. 10. to deliver from temptation: 2 Thessalonians. 3. to keep us from
all evil.

2 To desire earnestly, that we pray for.

3 To be persuaded that we shall receive it, though infidelity be mixed with our
faith.

4 Not to use this word, Amen, so unadvisedly as we do, but to know what it
is to which we say, Amen, least by ignorance we seal a curse to our selves and
others.

5 That Latin, Greek, and Hebrew words may be used, Many of like sort are
in Daniel and the Gospels, as Golgotha, (...), Eli, Eli, Lammasabachthani, etc.
when they grow so common, that other people of a Nation do understand them:
for here is the Hebrew word Amen, used in Greek, Latin, and English.

6 It calls to our mind that undoubted promise of our Savior Christ: John
16.23. confirmed by an oath, Verily, verily, or Amen, Amen, I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask my Father in my name shall be given unto you.

7 That by this seal of our consent we confess that whatsoever we can pray
for is contained in the former petitions.

8 That it is our earnest desire that God would give us all things which we
have prayed for. So that this word Amen is a seal both of our faith to believe
those things to be true, and love that we desire the accomplishment of them.


Euch. For people to say Amen, at the end of prayers, is it a practice of any
antiquity?


Phil. Yea verily, it was used of the Church before Christ, as appears, Deuteronomy.
27.15. Ezra 8.6. Nehem. 5.13. Psalm. 89.52. 1. Chron. 16.33. Psalm. 106.48. and
of the Church after Christ: 1. Cor. 14.16. For which cause it is the seal of
all the Epistles, and of the Book of the Revelation.


Euch. How may I say Amen with comfort?


Phil. 1 If you pray in the spirit with an earnest desire. Psalm. 62.8.42.1.63.1.

2 If you know the thing be true, you pray for, that is agreeable to Gods
will. 1. Cor. 14.25. John 4.23. But how can they know this who pray in an
unknown tongue: or know not the thing for which they pray Matthew. 20.22. or not
to a good end James 4.3.

3 If you have confidence to be heard Psalm. 145.18. James 1.6. if your suit be
either expedient, or that God will give you not your desire, yet that which
shall be best for you.

4 You must say Amen to every petition, as well to Hallowed be thy name as
thy Kingdom come.

5 You must say Amen to the conclusion of the Prayer, For thine is etc. that is
as well in your thanks giving for benefits received, as in your supplication
which you make to receive. God will not have Hosannah without Halleluiah. If we
thus say Amen to him, he will become Amen to us.


Euch. What now have you to say of all that has been taught you?


Phil. No more but this, that I and many others are bounden exceedingly to
Almighty God, that we live in such a Kingdom, where our children are so
taught in the trade of their ways, that when they are old they may follow it.
And thou, O Lord, to whom Kingdom, Power and Glory belongs, keep the
Scepter of thy Gospel long amongst us, that the children to be borne may fear
thy Name. Amen.


CERTAIN QVESTIONS AND ANSWERS CONCERNING some circumstances in praying,
wherein especially the lawfulness of set and read Prayer is proved; taken out
of part of a Treatise of prayer, written by M. H. H. a godly Preacher of this
City, and drawn into this form of a Dialogue by mutual conference.
Euch. I have now received instruction from you concerning the Lords Prayer,
but because I am bounden to Prayer always, what must I do to pray aright?


Phil. Look to your self, First, before, Secondly, in, Thirdly, after you
have done praying.


Euch What must I do before I pray.


Phil. You ought, First to repent Isay 1.15. John 9.31. 1. John 3.22. repent I
say even of your past and last sins committed against God. Daniel 9.56. Ezra.
9.6. etc.

2. Be reconciled to your Brother Matthew. 23. Mark 11.25.

3. You must be prepared as one that knows he is to speak to God.


Euch. Wherein does this preparation consist?


Phil. 1 In the emptying of the mind from Worldly thoughts.

2 In the consideration of things to be asked.

3 In lifting up of the heart to the Word, Psalm. 25.1.

4 In an hearty reverence of Gods Majesty. Eccles. 5.1. Isay 29.13.


Euch. What then must I do in praying?


Phil. Your Prayer must proceed: First from a sense of your wants.

2 From an earnest desire of grace which you want.

3 From a true faith.

4 It must be grounded upon Gods Word and promise.

5 It must be made to God alone.

6 In the name of Christ.

7 In it you must persevere.

8 To Prayer join ever giving of thanks.


Euch. And what must I do after Prayer is ended?


Phil. First believe that whatsoever you have asked, if it be fit for you, you
shall receive Mark. 11.24. Secondly, practice that which you have prayed for,
and use all lawful means to obtain it.


Euch. Which is thought the fittest gesture in praying?


Phil. In prayer both public, and private, use such a gesture, as may
express the inward humility of your heart, and your unfeigned reverence of
Gods Majesty. Not forgetting in public Prayer to conform your self to the
laudable custom of that Church in which you are. Remember that you speak unto
God, and you will carry your self with greater reverence, then if you were
before the greatest King.


Euch. But what shall we think of set and stinted Prayer, whether private in
Christian Families, or public, used in the Church of God?


Phil. You do well indeed to propound this question, for many are of opinion
that all such kind of praying is unlawful, and will neither practice it
themselves, nor be present where it is used.


Euch. Can the lawfulness hereof be proved?


Phil. Yes verily 1 from Gods ordinance.

2 Christ's.

3 From the prescript of the Prophets.

4 The iniunction of godly Kings and Magistrates.

5 From the practice of the Church and men endued with the spirit of God, yea
Christ's own practice.

6 From the inconveniences which will follow upon the disallowance of a set and
stinted Prayer.


Euch. How first from Gods ordinance?


Phil. Why? whether you consider Blessing of the people, or Confession, and
Prayer: or Thanks giving for mercies. God has for each of these set down a
prescript form.


Euch. Where for blessing the people?


Phil. It is commanded to the Priests: Number. 6.23. Thus shall ye bless the
Children of Israel and say unto them: The Lord bless thee and keep thee, The
Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee, the Lord lift
up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace:


Euch. Where for Confession and Prayer?


Phil. They are commanded to the people, in bringing the first fruits to the
Temple. Deuteronomy. 26. Verse 3.5.10.13.15. Read and regard them.


Euch. Where for thanks giving?


Phil. We read of thanks giving to be used at the coming of Christ Isay
12.1.2.4.5.6. verses.


Euch. In the second place, you said, set prayer may be proved from Christ's
ordinance, can it be so?


Phil. It may. Luke 11.2. Christ says, when you pray, (...), say, Our Father
etc. not (...) thus but simply and only say.


Euch. And have the Prophets prescribed any such form?


Phil. They have; as first, of Prayer, to the people upon their repentance:
Hos. 14.3.

Secondly, to the Priests upon the peoples conversion: Joel 2.17.

Thirdly, to the Church in the time of captivity, 1. King. 8.47. and practiced
afterward accordingly by Daniel in the same words, Dan. 9.5.2. Of
thanksgiving to be used of the people, after their return from captivity Ier.
33.11. which form was all one with the 136. Psalm. and was put in practice
accordingly, Ezra. 3.11.


Euch. You said that godly Kings and Magistrates have enioined set forms,
where did they so?


Phil. Read 2. Chronicles 29.30. after the Temple was repaired and sanctified,
and burnt offerings offered, Hezechiah and the Princes commanded the Leuits to
praise the Lord, with the words of David and Asaph the Se^r. Ezra. 3.10.
Zerubbabel, Iehosuah, etc. in laying the foundation of the second Temple,
appointed the Leuits to praise the Lord after the ordinance of David King of
Israel: and it follows, They gave praise and thanks unto the Lord, in what
words? even in those which are set down, Psa. 136. 2. Chron. 20.21. Iehosophat
for a great victory appoints the Priests to give thanks, in words, which are
the same with Psalm. 136. aforesaid.


Euch. Has this been also the practice of Gods Church, and men endued with
Gods spirit?


Phil. It has: By men both before and after Christ.


Euch. By whom before Christ?


Phil. To omit the Jews Liturgy, we find the 22. Psalm to contain in it
Confession, Praise, and Supplication, and was appointed to the Priests and
Leuits, to use every morning: as Tremelius enterprets it, and the Title
shows, A song for the morning. Psalm. 92. is entitled, A Psalm or song for
the Sabbath, 2. Chron 29.27.28. All the Congregation song a song, or
worshipped, singing the song of the Lord: surely this was not voluntary, but a
set song. Numb. 10. the two last verses. At the standing of the Arc, they
said, Let God return, etc. and when it went on, let God arise: which was used
by David, Psalm 68.1. 2. Chr. 6. the two last verses Solomon used, in the
dedication of the Temple, the very prayer of David, at the bringing in of the
Arc to his house. Psalm. 132.8.9.10. 2. Chron. 5.13. at the bringing in of the
Tabernacle, and holy vessels into the house of God, the Leuits used the words
of the 136. Psalm, verse 1. Dan. 9.5. uses the same form of confession in
the name of all the Church, which Solomon prescribed to be used at that time:
1. Kings 8.47. Ezr. 3.11. the Priests after their captivity, gave thanks in
the words of David: Psalm. 136. which were long before appointed by Jeremy, to
be used, Chap. 33.11.


Euch. By whom was it prescribed or used after Christ?


Phil. We will leave for a while the Apostles times, (yet even Paul concludes
almost all his Epistles with one form of prayer) and as for the succeeding
ages of the Church, it ever had an ordinary liturgy for several, both
Countries and special Churches in Countries, as may appear by Iustine martyr,
in the end of his second Apology, who cited about 170. years after Christ: and
Cyprian in his 22. section upon the word prayer: Augustine in his 59. Epistle
to Paulinus Quest. 55. ad Sermon. de Vigil. pasc: Ambrose lib. 5. de Sacra. cap.
4. Eusebius lib. 4. de vita Constant. records a form of prayer prescribed by
that great and godly Emperor, to his Soldiers: beginning, Te solum, etc. We
acknowledge thee only to be our God. etc. Hier. Zanchius in his treatise de
miscrecordia Dei, testifies that, that prayer used in our Church, O God whose
nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive etc. was of great
antiquity, and to come even to reformed Churches, the Church of Tigurine uses
by all her Ministers one set form of prayer ever before Preaching. They of
Geneuah, and Scotland have published public ordinary prayers for the Church:
and Master Dudley Fenner a man of no small note amongst them of their
reformation, has done the like.

And for Ministers to use a set form of prayer, before and after their
Sermons, and exercises, or people to do the like, morning and evening, not to
go far for examples abroad. Doctor Whitakers that great light of Cambridge,
used ever one prayer, before and after his Lectures. Master Doctor Chadderton
and. M. Perkins two worthies of that university used the like before and after
their Sermons, to omit many other excellent men in this City, and our whole
Country who practice the same: and for the practice of it in private families,
those exiled Divines in the days of Queen Mary set down at the end of the
Psalms, a form of prayer for morning and evening, which also is performed by
other worthy men, which they doubtless would never have done, had it not been
both for the glory of God, and great good of the Church. What think you of
Bradford, Lidley, Fox, Beza, Auenarius, etc. who pend such helps to devotion
as they did? But what need we instance further then in Christ's own practice?
Mark 14.39. and Mark 26.44. Three several times Christ prayed in the same
words. And when he said, Mark 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? He repeats the very words of David, Psalm. 22.


Euch Yet many disallow set and stinted Prayer, is it good, think you, that
they do so?


Phil. In no sort: for this opinion of theirs brings with it many
inconveniences.

As first, they hold it unlawful to use any of the Prophets prayers, allowed
notwithstanding, by the 2. Chronicles 29.30. Psalm. 68.1. compared with Numb.
10.33. and 2. Chron. 6.41.42. compared with Psalm 132.8.9.10. yea, or the
Apostles prayers, as that 2. Cor. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.
or Christ's prayer, as Our father, etc. which the Ancient Church has chosen
rather then any form, as may appear from Cyprian upon the Lords prayer,
Tertul. de fuga. August. 126. Sermon. de Temp. and in his 42. Epistle, he says,
In the Church, at the Lords Table, is daily said, the Lords prayer, and the
faithful hear it. And no marvel for Christ has taught us to say, Our
Father, etc.

Secondly, they must disallow the singing of David's Psalms, which would be
contrary to Gods appointment, Ier. 33.11. David's appointment, Psalm. 66.2.3. 2.
Chro. 16.7.8. and holy men's as Iehosaphat 2. Chr. 20.21. Zerubbabel, Iosuah,
etc. Ezra. 3.10 Hezechiah. 2. Chron. 29.30. and contrary to the practice of the
Leuits: 2. Chro. 5.13. Ezra. 3.11. and of the people, 2. Chron. 29.28. and of
the Jews after the Passover, singing as is supposed one of the Psalms,
betwixt the 112. and 119. Psalms: and contrary to the practice of Christ with
his Apostles, as Matthew. 26.30. Mark. 14.26. and that of the Apostle, 1. Cor.
14.15.26. Ephesians. 5. Colos. 3.16.

And lastly, as contrary to the judgment and practice of all reformed Churches
at this (...) day: so of the Primitive Church next ensuing the Apostles. For
Plinius Secundus, in his Epistle to Traianus the Emperor, says, that, The
Christians were wont to sing Psalms to their Christ in the morning before day
light. And Tertullian in his Apology says, that Christians after their often
meetings at Supper cheared their hearts with singing of Psalms. And Augustine
in his ninth book of Confession, says, that, In Ambrose his Church at
Myllaine, this singing of Psalms was used: and in the tenth book of his
Confession: Chapter 33. has these words of himself: Cum reminiscor, etc. When
I remember the tears which I spent whilst the Psalms were sung in the
Church, O Lord, at the beginning of my conversion, and now also am I affected,
I acknowledge great profit and benefit of this ordinance. To these we may add
Iustine Martyr, in his second Apology toward the end. The reason why these
Psalms were and are now song, is, because they contain many solemn prayers
and praises to God, and to that end were commanded to be song: Psa. 66.2.3. 1.
Chron. 16.7.8. compared with Psalm. 105. and 96. Psalms, and Ezra. 3.11.
compared with Psalm, 136.


Euch. But what reasons can you give why these kinds of set prayers are and may
be used?


Phil. 1 By set prayers is helped the knowledge and faculty of conceiving: and
by written prayer the memory, boldness, readiness etc. is helped: and by both
is helped the dull spirit, by ease of intention about the form of prayer, and
freedom to attend more about the manner, and the object which is God prayed
unto.

2 If we had a perfect measure of grace, or such assistance of the Spirit, as
many had in the Apostles days, more might be said for the contrary plea. But
alas, now we are weak in grace, and many an honest and conscionable heart may
want gifts to conceive a prayer, and sometimes utterance of that they have
conceived. Therefore as a weak man is helped by an artificial crouch: so a
Christian man is helped by a spiritual set prayer.

3 If this were not, what should become of many in the Church, especially the
common sort, wanting knowledge and conceit to frame a prayer? And also many
foolish prayers should be powered out in the Congregation by many Ministers,
especially them of meaner gifts in knowledge, and conceiving, and who lack
memory, utterance, boldness, readiness etc. which gifts are even in the best
more defective at one time then at an other.

4 In this age so far inferior to that of the Apostles, without set prayer,
there would be such distraction and diversity not only in the matter, but also
in the form of prayer, and such deformity and discordance in Leiturgie,
leaving it to the discretion of every private Minister, that whereas God is the
God of order and consent: 1. Cor. 14.33. we should be like the people of
confusion. Whereas uniformity of public liturgy by set and read prayer, as it
serves to maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: so to
increase the hope and comfort of the Church, and efficacy of our prayers with
God, when the Church in every congregation speaks one and the same thing, like
the Church triumphant in heaven, which is as the sound of many waters, but all
sing the same song.

5. Disallowe set prayer and contradict both the practice of the Church under
the Gospel, about 1500. years, and of the old Church under the Law, to whom
David committed his written Psalms, many of them being prayers to be song to
the Lord (as before we said) in the words of David. And how does not this only
cross the practice of Christ who communicated with the Jews, in their
prescript and read Leiturgy, frequenting the Temple early, John 8.2. and late,
Mark. 11.11.19. and daily, Luke 19.47. Mat. 14.49. and namely, at their solemn
feasts, Ioh. 5.1. And resorting to their Temple, or some of their Synagogues
every Sabbath day, Luke 4.16. But also the Apostles practice, who, as is
probable, and is held by diverse learned men writing upon that place, went up
to public prayer, Acts 3.1. Yea, and Paul entered into the Temple, and there
with others was purified, all customs being observed, Act. 21.26. and
ordinarily resorted to their Synagogues, Acts 14.1.13.5. even every Sabbath
day, Acts 18.4. yea, in the time of their common leiturgy, Act. 13.14.15.

6 If a national Church, could continually be like to some Parochial
congregation, furnished for the time with some able Minister, to conceive
prayer upon all occasions, then an ordinary Leiturgy would not be so
material: But such a national Church being impossible or not liable to our
hope, read and suited Prayer better serves for all regards.

7 I would wish these people that stand so much upon conce^^ed Prayer, to
think, that first for want of fitness many are often kept from praying at al:
secondly, they are much cooled in the time of Prayer for want of delight
therein: thirdly, they commit many follies and idle repeticions in praying both
to the dishonor of God, shame to themselves, and offense oftentimes to those
people with whom they pray: and then are to seek for words to God, which they
would not want when they come before the King. In a word, whether Prayer in
pouring of it out, be drawn out of intention as when it is first indicted, or
out of the memory, as when it is in a set form repeated, or out of the book,
as when written or printed prayer is read, It is not this that makes or marr^s
a prayer, but other things either essential or pertinent to prayer, as the
condition of the heart, quality of the matter, carriage of manner etc.


Euch. But for all this in the Apostles times, at the the first planting of the
Gospel, we read not of this stinted and set or written kind of Prayer, if it
had been fit, would not they have used it?


Phil. Why? because none is mentioned, are you sure none was used? Say none
was: the Jewish ancient Leiturgy continued in the Apostles times, to which they
resorted, as before is proved, yet it was to end in the Jews, and that at the
least, with the destruction of the Temple, called the Burial thereof. Now if
no set form came in place by and by, it might be because the Church was not
yet settled: and because extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost
yet continuing in the Church therefore Prayer immediately inspired and by divine
inspiration powered out, as God gave utterance to some special persons, whom he
extraordinarily raised up, might well serve for the gathering of the Church,
and be agreeable to all places, people of all Languages, and all occasions,
and most answerable to the state of the Church then being, when as utterance
both in Language, matter, and method, was to be expected from God, as he
pleased to give it, without ordinary means. But no sooner was the Church
settled, and the first gifts of the holy Ghost ceased, but then at the latest,
set and written forms of prayer came in. And though certain forms of
Leiturgy: fathered upon some of the Apostles, or Apostolical men, as those of
Saint Peter, Mark, James, etc. were not framed by them, as some do suggest,
yet Liturgies set and prescript came in then, or about that time, which since,
the Church of Rome have corrupted, as is proved before.


Euch. But does not this set form of prayer bind the spirit?


Phil. That is not material: but indeed they help the spirit, as is
aforesaid. And we bind the spirit thereby no more, then did holy men bind the
spirit by set and stinted prayer, which they in Scripture are recorded to have
used: yea no more then does the conclusion fo any prayer bind the Spirit, when
we break of prayer.


Euch. Yet me thinks that set prayer manifests only the memory, and written
prayer the faculty of reading, but the spirit they do not manifest?


Phil. Both may be manifested thereby, and that as well, as the spirit was
manifested in the set prayer of Christ, which he used as aforesaid, and in the
suited prayers of many others his Prophets and servants. And why may not a
written prayer manifest the spirit, as well as a text or lesson of holy
Scripture manifest the spirit, which endited the same, being read in the
Congregation? As is warranted Luke 4.17. Act. 13.15.17. and 15.21. And like as
the Scripture did not only manifest the spirit when it was first endited, but
does also when it is read: so prayer which manifested the spirit when it was
first endited, serves also to manifest the spirit, when it is repeated or read:
but when it is endited, it manifests the spirit enditing, and when it is
repeated or read it manifests the spirit which has endited. And when it is
endited, the^ is the faculty of conceiving or invention exercised, and where it
is repeted or read that faculty rests, but other faculties with the
affections may be exercised, if not more then when the invention is working.


Euch. Against this set form of prayer a maine objection is, that such prayer
is drawn not out of the heart but out of the book: this I find in the book
of differences of separated Churches Page 3. Chap. 4. Verse last.


Phil. Prayer may be drawn out of a Book and yet out of Gods Treasury; and
it was drawn out of the heart before it came in the Book, though not out of
thine heart: yet that which is drawn out of an others heart, may be
profitable unto thee; else why desire we the prayers one of another for us; And
albeit thou drawest it originally out of the book, yet thou drawest it into
thy heart (the Spirit where Prayer is read working there by the Book, that
which Prayer being endited works by the invention without the Book) and then
lo thou drawest it out of thine heart. Secondarily, and thou first offerst it
to God out of thine heart, drawing out originally out of thine heart in respect
of oblation, and so it may be acceptable, as the prepared Ram which Abraham
found in a Bush and offered it to the Lord. To conclude as we must judge the
Levites to have sung the Psalms of David (being many of them Prayers as
aforesaid) out of the Book set before their eyes, unless we will beyond
likelihood judge them to have had all the Psalms of David by heart, with the
Musical notes answering the Church instruments: so again Psalms gotten by
heart, are drawn out of the Book out of which they are gotten: whereby upon
disallowance of Prayer drawn out of a Book, must needs follow a disallowance
of singing those Psalms which are gotten by heart out of the Book, and so by
disallowance of read Psalms, and Psalms, gotten by heart both which are
drawn out of the Book, will follow disallowance of singing of Psalms at all,
and all this follows upon the disallowance of read Prayer, which to end, we
cannot altogether do, unless we disallow the saying of the Lords Prayer,
which also is drawn out of a Book.


Euch. And now I pray what think you of our Communion or Service Book, may I
lawfully be present at the Prayers of the same?


Phil. I will tell you what M. Deering writing against M. Harding speaks of
the Communion Book, he speaks to this effect, and why M. Harding do you
disgrace the Book of Common Prayer, since there is nothing in it contrary to
Gods Word. And Doctor Tailor that blessed Martyr, three nights before his
suffering gave and commended, to his wife a Book of the Church Service, which
in the time of his inprisonment he (as M. Fox writes) daily used: and the same
Author upon the year 1557. writes of another godly Martyr, who had a
company of Books thrown into the fire with him, and by event a common Prayer
Book fell between his hands, who received it joyfully and kissed it; and
prayed holding his hands up to Heaven, and the Book betwixt his Arms next his
heart, thanking God for sending him it, and professing his gladness to be
burned with such a Book: And thus condemning this holy Book, you condemn the
judgments of these, and many other holy men, who after they had painfully
penned the same, gave many of them their lives for the Gospel, amongst whom
M. Fox in his ninth Book of the acts and monuments, names that reverend
Bishop Cranmer, and says the rest were the best learned and discreet men.


Euch. Do you speak this to persuade only the use of set Prayer?


Phil. In no sort. For howsoever these things have been said to prove the
lawful use of set, stinted, and prescribed, or read Prayer, and namely of read
Prayer in the public assemblies of our Church (which is so neglected or
contemned of many, that at the public confession of sins, in great
Congregations scarce forty are present upon the Sabbath day) yet none hereby
may take occasion or be permitted so to rest wholly in such form of Prayer, as
always to keep idle the spirit within them, or grace given them for growth in
the power of Prayer, to dull, let, or bury, the gift or grace of the Spirit
tending to riper perfection. But every one ought to stir up, and whet the
Spirit, and exercise the grace, and power received, to be fitted not only to
repeat or read, but even to endite any good matter: and to be fitted by
readiness of invention suitable to all occasions, being as in the whole inward
man, so in the ripeness of invention and faculty of conceuing increased and
more and more perfected: not always to remain like Children or Weakelings,
needing to creep upon all four, or to walk with a staff, but able to go
without such helps; which any shall do through Gods assistance, by use and
frequent exercising themselves in Prayer, and observation and imitation of
other good Prayers heard or read, and by keeping a good method and order in
praying.


A brief Prayer upon the Lords PRAYER.
OUR Father: By the benefit of creation, through thine omnipotency; assistance
of preservation, through thy providence; gift of Adoption, through thy grace;
communication of eternity, through thy Christ. Which art in Heaven ever-
reigning, by thy power; enlightining, by Spirit; forgiving, by thy mercy;
ruling, by thy Majesty. Hallowed be thy name: of us, by an honest co^uers^tio^;
in us, by a clear conscience; from us, by an honest report; above us, by the
representation of Angels. Thy Kingdom come: in thy Holy Church, by the
sanctification of the Spirit; in thy faithful souls, by justification of
faith: in thine Holy Scriptures, by instruction of Ministers; in thy
celestial, P^radise, by assimilation to Angels. Thy will be done in Earth: in
singleness of heart, by humility; chastity of body, by abstinence;
holiness of will, by custom; truth of action, by discretion. As it is in
heaven: willingly without murmuring; speedily without delaying; constantly,
without ceasing; universally, without omitting. Give us this day our daily
bread: For humane necessity, to cover our shame; future pros^eritie, to
maintain our calling; present liberality, to do good to others; eternal
glory, to lay up in Heaven. And forgive us our trespasses: of omission, in
things commanded, commission, in things forbidden: of the first Table,
against thy self; and the second Table against our neighbor. As we forgive
them that trespass against us: Heartily, in purity; chearefully in courtesy;
continually, in Christianity; forgetfully, in not requiting like for like. And
lead us not into temptation: either importunate, which wearieth; or sudden,
which discourageth; or fradulent, which deceives; or violent, which
overcomes. But deliver us from all evils: of mundane adversity, which will
disquiet us: Satan's subtlety, which will destroy us; humane cruelty, which
will overthrow us; eternal misery, which may torment us. For thine is the
Kingdom: powerful in it self; comfortable to us; terrible to thine enemies;
eternal in Heaven. Power: great, in our creation; mighty, in our
preservation; merciful, in our justification; and wonderful in our
glorification. And glory: For which thou did make all things; to which we
refer all things: in which all things do remain on Earth; and by which
all thy Saints shall rejoice in Heaven. For ever and ever: in themselves, by
continuance; in thy Saints, by practice; in thy creatures, by proof; in the
wicked, by torment. Amen: so be it: by intention of the mind; serious
invocation of thy name; diligent execution of thy Commandments; continual
communication of all thy mercies prayed for.

Another of the like Argument.

O Our Father: high in Creation, sweet in love, rich in mercy. Which art in
Heaven: the glass of eternity, the crown of incunditie, the treasure of
felicity. Hallowed be thy name: that it may be honey to the mouth, music to
the ear, a fire in the heart. Thy Kingdom come: pleasant without mixture,
safe without annoyance, sure without loss. Thy will be done: that we may
fly that thou hate, love that thou love, and by thee do that thou
command. In earth as it is in Heaven: willingly, readily, faithfully. Give
us this day our daily bread; necessary for this life, not superfluous for our
delights, nor wanting to our necessities. And forgive us our debts: against
thee, our neighbor, and our self. As we forgive our debtors: who have
wronged us in our body, goods, name. And lead us not into temptation: of the
World, Flesh, Devil. But deliver us from evil: past, present, to come;
Spiritual, Corporal, Eternal. And this we ask, because thine is the
Kingdom: for thou rulest all: Power; for thou can do all; and Glory, for
thou give all: now, whilst we do live; and for ever, whilst we shall live.
Amen; neither doubt we, but that we shall certainly obtain these things;
because thou art loving as our Father, and powerful in Heaven. Thou say
Amen, by commanding; art Amen, by performing; we say Amen, by believing and
hoping: say but the word, and we shall be cured.

David tentatur, tentatus orat, orans
Liberatur, liberatus gratias agit. August.
David is tempted, being tempted he prays, praying is delivered, and being
delivered, he gives thanks.

This is the sum both of David's Psalms, and the Lords Prayer.

MATTHEW. 26.41. Watch and pray that you fall not into temptation.

A COMMVNICANT INSTRVCTED.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR


LONDON Printed for Edward Blunt and William Barret 1613.

To the right Honorable, the Lady FRANCIS, Daughter to the most honorable
the Countess of Darbie, and wife to the honorable Sir JOHN EGERTON Knight of
the BATHE.
ALbeit the houses of the poor are not at any time, as of the rich, alike
adorned with gorgeous furniture: yet the gardens of the poor, as well as the
rich, are, in the springtime, a-like covered with flowers furniture.

That great flower of the Sun, it is not indeed found but amongst the rich:
but the Marigold Heliotropiuim, which opens and sets with the Sun, (and
which is as profitable as the other is beautiful) this is (amongst other sweet
and wholesome herbs) ordinary in the poorest Orchard.

These kind of herbs sometime they use for meat and medicine; and often,
wanting things to present their betters with, of these they do offer a poesy
of flowers: As they have received so they give.

That spiritual Garden, which is committed to my keeping, has not at this
time any rare flowers in it, but such as being planted some few years past,
do now show themselves in a more Orient color, and in greater abundance. Out
of them, this springtime, I have gathered three several nose-gaies, and two
of them are presented to two, most honorable Counselors: this Third I am bold
to present to your Honor.

I hope there is no such Antipathie betwixt flowers and you, as there was
betwixt a worthy Lady and a Rose: The Lady Hennage.
especially such flowers as these; since Religion, which gives color and
smell to every flower in this poesy, is the fairest flower in your own Garden.

You have, I confess, great honor upon earth, being descended of a Royal
family, Allied to the greatest Peers of the Land, Espoused to an honorable
Knight, blessed with hopeful children, and graced (as I hear) with rare gifts
of nature: but, that Christ's Religion is so precious unto you, your greatest
honor is reserved in Heaven.

If it please you to entertain this poor present, which before now, I was
afraid to offer to any: I doubt not but as you shall receive comfort by it: so
it shall receive such favor by you, that this spiritual nose-gay, coming
from you into the hands of others, will not be used as other flowers are, this
morning in the bosom, the next to the beesome. But it will be often in the
hand, frequent in the sight, and comfortable to the sent of each sauourie soul.

The God of heaven who has planted you, as one of his fairest flowers, in his
Garden, the Church Militant, so water you with the dew of Heaven, and heavenly
Graces; that after you have long flourished here, you hereafter may, with your
Honorable two Sisters Elizabeth the virtuous Countess of Huntingdon, and Anne
that worthy Lady Chandoyes, be transplanted into that Garden of Eden, the
Church Triumphant, and for ever flourish in the Courts of your God. London St.
Martins in the fields, June the 16. Anno 1613.

At the service of your Honor. ROBERT HILL.

A PITHIE DISCOVRSE OF OUR COMMUNION WITH CHRIST.
THough the word of life, in it self causes peace, yet by the malice of Satan
it occasioneth war: and though the Sacrament of life show our commumunion
with Christ, yet by the corruption of man it is made an instrument of
combustion. The Vbiquiterian Lutheran is zealous on the one side for his
consubstantiation, and with the bread and wine he will chap up his savior: The
Artolatrian Romanist is as zealous on the other, for his transubstantiation,
and after the repetition of five Latin words will devour his creator. And if
varieties of opinion concerning the Lords Supper, should but here be repeated;
as a great ship would not hold the the Reliquian pieces which the Papists have
of Christ's cross: so a large volume would but hold the opinions which are
about Christ's Sacrament. Is it the falt of this blessed banquet that so many
are distracted about feeding upon it? no it is not.

It is reported that one in a lightsome house being stricken blind, complained
exceedingly of the darkness of the chamber, where as the salt was in the want
of his sight. When the eye is divine, it must not complain of the sun if it
see not: when stomach is corrupt, it must not complain of the meat if it
digest not: and when the fantastical wit of man is wedded to reason, no
marvel if it perceive not the things of God. The preaching of Christ's cross
was a scandale to the Jews: their own corrupt heart caused it to be
offensive: The administoation of Christ's Sacrament is a stumbling block to the
curious: their own carnal conceit makes them to fall. If we could in our
judgments subscribe unto the written word of God, and of spiritual things
conceit after a spiritual manner, our Capernaiticall adversaries would not
look here for a breaden God, and our carnal gospellers would look for more
here than common bread. It is, even to the wicked the bread of the Lord, and
to the godly, that bread which is the Lord.

By coming to the Lords table, (if we come as we should) we reap much
good: for here we may behold the love of Christ to us, who, as a loving
friend, by this remembrancer, desires ever to live in our minds, and memories:
and the providence of Christ for his beloved friends, that his benefits
bestowed might truly profit, and being kept in memory, might enjoy their end,
ever to show forth his death till he come. Yea by thus coming we testify our
spiritual nourishment by his body and blood: we seal to our selves the pardon
of our sins: Christ covenants with us to receive us graciously: we condition
with him to obey him principally, and if we desire either to testify our
desire of the first resurrection, out of the grave of sin, or our hope of the
second, out of the grave of death: we shall do both these, so often as we come
to the holy communion. In a word, it is a testimony of our profession, and
consent to Gods Religion: a token of our separation from all the tents of
Satan: an obligation of our constancy in the profession of the Gospel: a sinew
and conservation of public meetings: a caveat to take heed of relapse into
sin: a comforter in the midst of any Temptation: and a seal of that
communion which is betwixt Christ and Christians.

The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? and the bread which we break; i. Cor. 10.6.
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? as the preaching of the Gospel
is Gods powerful instrument to sign our salvation: so the sacrament of the
Lords Supper is an effectual instrument to seal this conjunction. Now that
we may more frequently communicate with Christians, I am bold to entreat of
our communion with Christ.

In the first Adams innocence, there was an act of assotiation betwixt God and
man: but with condition of man's loyalty to God. The condition is broken, man
is exiled from Gods presence, and becomes an enemy both to God and man. Gods
justice can not admit sinful man into favor: man's infidelity hinders him from
suing to God for favor. Christ our Savior, the (...).
divine Son of God, and humane Son of man, satisfies Gods Justice, acquaints
man with Gods mercy: and in the fullness of time, this seed of the woman
breaks the Serpents head.

But unless man have communion with Christ, his al sufficient satisfaction
will do him no good. What then may this communion be? it is a spiritual
society of mutual love betwixt Christ and his Church. A society, like unto
that of Adam and Heuah, when they twain became one flesh: spiritual, like
unto that of the soul and the body, where they by the spirits, become one
man: of mutual love, like a pair of Turtle Doves, who never know any other
but one mate: of Christ and his Church, like that of the head and the members,
when they, by certain iunctures, become one body.

Christ communicated with our nature in his incarnation, when he took unto
him the seed of Abraham: hence comes that union which we call Hypostaticall:
and he is become Flesh of our Flesh. We communicate with the person of Christ,
when we are incorporated into him: Hence comes that union, which we call
mystical, and we now become Flesh of his Flesh.

If we consider the things united together, this union is substantial and
essential: if the bond by which they are united, it is spiritual and secret.
And as we have feeling of Christ dwelling on our hearts, so the more shall we
have feeling of this blessed society: by which we have (...) an union, (...)
fellowship, and (...) participation with whole Christ and his merits, and meet
altogether in the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God, unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians.
4.13.5.30. But as in our separation from God, by the spirit of Satan, our
minds, heart, and wills were first severed and then followed the whole man: so
the first thing in this conjunction which must be joined with God by his
spirit, is the understanding by knowledge, the heart by affiance, the will by
obedience, after which will follow all the new man.

By the humanity of Christ we are conjoined to him: and by his Spirit he is
joined to us. Not, either by an actual falling of Christ's flesh into ours, or
a natural contiguitie or conexion of our persons, or essential comixtion of
his body with ours: but by a copulation and connection altogether spiritual,
felt by grace in this life, and seen by glory in the life to come, when
Christ and his Church, before Gods judgment seat, shall appear as one Christ.

But Christ is in heaven, and we upon earth. Send thy faith into heaven, and
he in heaven is joined to thee here upon earth. Thy sight in a moment can
visiblie touch the stars of heaven, much more may thy faith touch that
morning star, and sun of righteousness which is in heaven. Say that the
wife be in England, the husband in India: the head above the feet below: the
branches on the top the root in the ground: the spring in one place, the
rivers in an other: the foundation on the earth the building in the air, is
there not notwithstanding an union betwixt them? Surely there is. Christ is our
husband, the Church is his spouse: Christ is our head, each Christian is a
member: Christ is the root, the righteous are branches: Christ is the
fountain, the Religious are rivers: Christ is the foundation, belieuers are
Gods building. Be he never so high even in the highest heavens, we upon earth
are so joined unto him, that by virtue of this union, our souls do receive the
life of grace in this world, and our bodies shall receive the life of glory in
the world to come. Here, this conjunction appears in the unity of spirit:
for in it there is neither a commixtion of persons nor an union of substances,
but a confederation of our affections, and concatenation of our wills: there it
shall appear in the consociation of our persons. For we shall enjoy there, a
most holy, and comfortable conversation with Christ, see him as he is, confer
with him face to face, and as in this sacrament, (as by a marriage ring) we
are espoused to him here: so there we shall be solemnly married to him for
ever.

And all this comes unto us, because the word was made flesh: not because that
Flesh has any such virtue in it self (it is the spirit that quickneth the
flesh profits nothing) but in that it is caro verbi, flesh united to the
word, to that word, which is the fountain of life quickening all things, and
causing the death of that flesh to obtain for us eternal life. The flesh is
not quickening in it self, but in the word, Hypostatically united unto it,
says Cyrill.

This word by personal union, quickneth Christ's humanity, and gives it, for
our salvation, merit and efficacy: and by mystical union quickneth Christian
consciences, and joins them in love and life unto God: so that now there is a
mutual giving and receiving betwixt Christ and his Church.

From Christ we receive, first him self, which the Father, and their Spirit,
to become our portion. Secondly Adoption, to be actually made the children of
God. Thirdly a title and right to Christ's righteousness in his sufferings, and
with all to his fulfilling of the whole law. Lastly, a right to the Kingdom of
heaven, which now is made the inheritance of the Saints.

And what does he now receive from us? surely dross for gold, evil for good,
shame for glory, sorrow for solace, and a curse for this blessing. For he
receives ftom us, first, our sins, with the punishment thereof made his by
imputation and suertie-ship. Secondly our afflictions, which he accounts his
own, so long as we suffer for righteousness sake. And this is our communion
which we have with Christ.

But because we are all members of one body, and are all baptized into one
Spirit, and after do eat of one bread, there is also a communion with all
Christians, one with an other? Art thou a living saint upon earth? thou art in
regard of mind of one judgment in the grounds of piety, affection of one
heart alike affected to God, Christ Jesus, and every good Christian, though
thou wast never acquainted with them. And in regard of the gifts of the spirit,
like a good candle thou will spend them al to the good of others; and be ready
to serve thy brother in love; and both by example, admonition, exhortation,
consolation and prayer, to convey all graces in thee to an other; yea not to be
wanting to him in communicating thy goods. And for our communion with the dead
they in heaven do pray generally for all us, and we on earth do desire our
dissolution to be with them.

But, that we may enjoy this blessed society, we must walk in the light. For,
if we say that we have fellowship with him and yet walk in darkness, we lie:
but if we walk in the light as he is in the light, then have we fellowship
one with an other 1. Ioh. 1.7. (that is God with us, and we with God and godly
people) and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son purges us from all sin.

Thus then Christ in heaven, by his spirit, is so united to us, and we on
earth, by our faith are so united to him, that without him we can do nothing,
and with him we are able to do al things: Of his fullness we receive grace for
grace. And as by the power of the sun in the second heaven, all things are
made fruitful here upon earth: so by the power of Christ in the third heaven,
all men become sanctified in the Church; yet not by the alone inward operation
of his spirit, without the outward use of the word and sacraments. By the word
alone, when the sacraments are not administered: and both by word and sacraments
when they are joined together. Is the word preached? in it Christ speaks by
his spitit to us. Are the sacraments administered? by baptism we are received
in to the communion of Gods covenant, and by the Eucharist, we are more
confirmed in the same. By the word God enters by one gate into us, namely by
the ear: by the Eucharist he knocks at all the gates of our soul, and seeks
entrance by every sense. Are they both conjoined? our union becomes more
effectual unto us. By the word without the sacraments, Christ may come unto
us: by the sacraments without the word, he will not come unto us. Add the word
unto the element and it becomes a sacrament. This I write against such as
think, that Christ does after a far better sort communicate himself to us
in the sacraments than he does in the word, whereas the sacraments has all
their efficacy from the word, even the word of institution, delivered by
Christ, and understood of Christians. Yet note that in the sacraments Christ
communicates himself more particularly to us then in the word. The end of both
is to join us to him and himself to us: that we being thus one with him, might
grow up together with him, till that he at the last become all in all of us;
he (by this matrimonial conjunction) to love us as his spouse, we to
reverence him as our husband and both he and we together to be honored of God
the Father in the resurrection of the just with complete glory.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. June
16. 1613.

Thine in the Lord. ROBERT HILL.

A COMMVnicant prepared to the Lords Table.
Question.

MY good Auditor after all these instructions concerning prayer, are you not
desirous to receive the Lords Supper?

Answer. Yea sir, I am desirous with all mine heart, if you shall think me
fit for so holy a Banquet.

Quest. But since you call it a Banquet; tell me how many sorts of Banquets are
mentioned in Gods word?

Answ. Six.

1 The Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 22.3.

2 A Banquet for the fowls of the air. Zep. 1.8.

3 A Banquet of feasting. Genes. 21.8. and 43.34. 1 Samuel 25.36. Hester 1.3.
John 2.9. Luke 15.23.

4 A Banquet of the Word. Prou. 9.1.

5 The Banquet of a good conscience, Prou. 15.15.

6 The Banquet of his Supper: and to this I am bound to come as a guest.

Quest. Is it then a matter of necessity to come to the Lords Table?

Answ. Yea surely it is most necessary; whether I regard the commandment of
God, the necessity of eating the Paschall Lamb, the custom of ancient
Christians, the communion of the Saints, or the further confirmation of my
faith in Christ.

Quest. How many properties are there belonging to a fit guest?

Answ. Two: one inward, another outward.

Quest Which are the inward properties?

Answ. 1 He must be bidden. Luke 14.8.

2 He must be humble. Luke 14.9.

3 He must have knowledge of the person, to whose table he comes. Prou. 23.1.

4 He must bring an appetite to eat. Pr. 9.4

5 He must put on Christ, his wedding garment. Romans 13.14.

6 He must use banquetlike talk within himself, concerning the use of these
mysteries.

7 He must be sober in using them.

8 Cheerful in receiving them.

9 Loving to his fellow guests.

10 Thankful to the Master of the feast.

Quest. What is the outward property?

Answ. A reverent hearing of the Word, and the like receiving of the Sacrament
at that time.

Quest. What must you do to be a fit guest?

Ans. Samuel bids me to sanctify my self, David bids me to wash mine hands
in innocence, and Paul bids me to examine my self, and so to eat of that
bread, and after to drink of that cup.

Quest. By what rules must you make this trial?

Answ. 1 By the Spirit, whether I have it or not. 1. Ioh. 3.24.

2 By the word, whether or no I have obeyed it. Psalm. 119.59.

Quest. How do you prove this examination to be needful?

Ans. 1 If the Jews durst not eat the Paschall Lamb without it, I must not
eat of the Lambs Supper without it. 2. Chron. 35.6.

2 I must neither pray, nor hear Gods Word, before I see in what estate I am
Eccles. 4.17. Luke 8.18. and if I want this, I may as well be Judas as John at
the Lords Passover.

3 I come in the best sort I can to the feast, or presence of any great man in
this World. Prou. 23.1. Genesis 41.14.

4 He that came without his wedding garment, was examined how he came
thither. Matthew. 22.12.

If I eat and drink unworthily: I eat and drink mine own damnation 1. Cor.
11.29.

6 David must not eat the Show bread, 1. Sam. 21.4. nor the Levites bear the
Arc, Exodus 29. nor Moses stand before God. Exodus 3.4. nor so much as a Snuffer
be in Gods house, without sanctification. Exodus 25.38.

7 If Christ's dead body must be wrapped in a clean linen cloth, Ioh. 19.40.
and laid in a new Sepulcher, verse. 41. how must we be prepared to receive the
same body crucified, and blood powered out for us? And if they hasted so to the
Poole of Bethesdah, Ioh. 5.2. or the waters of Siloam, Ioh. 9.7. or Samaria,
Ioh. 4.13. why should not we do the like to this bread and liquor of life?

8 Will we not put our common meat and drink into unclean vessels, and dare we
put Christ's meat and drink into unsanctified souls?

9 Else we pollute the very body and blood of Christ. Hag. 2.13.14

10 By this holy Preparation I shall reap great profit, Christ's body shall
be meat unto me, and his blood drink unto me: for, if the touching of Christ's
garment, profited one woman, Matthew. 9.21. the feeding on his body must more
profit us.

Quest. What comfort shall you reap by this careful examination?

Answ. Much every way, for by it I am,

1 Assured of my communion with Christ.

2 That I desire this pledge of that communion.

3 That I reverence his holy Institution.

4 That I am no swine, to whom these pearls should be denied.

5 That I am a true member of Christ's Church.

6 That I need not fear to go out with Christ to mount Caluerie, because I
have prepared my self to feast with him in his Parlor at Jerusalem.

7 Then Christ will say unto me, as he did to his Spouse in the book of the
Canticles, Eat, O my friend, and make thee merry my beloved. Cant. 5.1.

8 As I address my self to feast with him: so will Christ come and sup with
me, Reu. 3.20. and as the Jewels given by Abraham's servant to Rebeccah, were
received as comfortable pledges of Isaaks love to her; so these Jewels offered
me by Gods servant, are as pledges of Christ's love, to be received cheerfully
by me: yea and when I find my self worst in mine own eyes, then (as you
taught me) I am best in the eyes of God.

Quest. What things are required of him that will come a fit guest to the
Lords Table?

Answ. Three things.

The first, what I must do before I come.

2 What I must do when I am come.

3 What I must do after I have been partaker of that holy Supper.

Quest. What things are required of you before you come?

Ans. Two things.

First, I am bound to examine my self, 1. Cor. 11.28.

2 I am bound to pray and meditate of diverse things.

Quest. What is examination?

Ans. It is a trial of my self, how I stand in the grace of God, 2. Cor. 13.5.

Quest. What learn you out of this, that a man must examine himself before he
come to this Table?

Ans. First, that children are not capable of this banquet, 1. Cor. 11.28.
though the Ancient Church administered it to them.

2 That ignorant persons must not approach to this Table. 1. Cor. 11.24.

3 That mad people are not to be admitted to this feast 1. Sam. 21.15.

4 That such as intend to live in their sins, must not dare to approach unto
this Communion. Cor. 11.27.

5 That such as do not try themselves cannot come.

6 That such as do try themselves must come after trial, and may come with
much comfort.

Quest. Do you think that a man may not come to the Lords Table, unless some
good time before, he examine himself?

Ans. There is a Primarie, and after it a Customarie receiving of the Lords
Supper: when I first receive it, it is most fit that I be prepared by my
Parents, Tutors or governors: that I be examined by my Minister, and advised
of my self, how I come to this holy banquet. But after that time, unless it
be after some special offense, I think this strict course is not of
necessity.

Quest. Why think you this course most necessary, at your first
communicating?

Ans. 1 Because it is a kind of confimation of my Baptism.

2 A second receiving of me into the Church.

3 My first admission of me, to the King of Kings Table.

4 A solemnization of my spiritual marriage with Christ.

5 I am but a nouice, and then must especially think what I do.

6 I may, by so doing, cause others to come reverently to this holy Table.

7 If I be once fitted and prepared by my Minister, he shall not need a second
trial of my knowledge and faith.

8 Lastly, I shall stop the mouths of mine adversaries, who say young folks
care not how they come to this feast.

Quest. When then is a man fit to receive?

Answ. When he is fit to pray.

2 When he is fit to hear.

3 When he is resolved to forgive.

4 When he means to be a new man: for all which duties, I think we should be
fitted at al times, especially when we come to this Sacrament.

Quest. Wherein stands that examination aforesaid?

Answ. In five things.

1 I must examine what knowledge I have. Prou. 19.2.

2 What faith I have. Act. 8.37.

3 What repentance I have. Exodus 12.8.

4 What obedience I have. Psalm. 26.6.

5 What love I bear to my brethren. Matthew. 5.23.24.

Quest. Why must you examine what knowledge you have?

Answ. Because, 1 By knowledge I bear the Image of God. Coloss. 3.10.

2 Without knowledge the mind is not good. Prou. 19.2. Nay, ignorance is hell,
says Mark the Hermit.

3 He that is ignorant, is worse then the devil: the one knows much, the
other nothing at all.

4 Without knowledge we cannot practice.

5 In this knowledge is eternal life: Ioh. 3.36.

6 He that is ignorant, is Salomons fool: A fool? nay, a beast amongst men.

7 Ignorance is a forerunner of destruction. Hos. 4.

8 Knowledge is the eye of the soul.

9 The Prophets pray and preach against ignorant persons, Ierem. 10. Hos. 4.2.3.

10 Knowledge is the mother of faith, repentance, and all graces: yea, the want
of it makes men most deceived in the doctrine of the Sacrament.

Quest. Wherefore then are the most people ignorant?

Ans. The reason is: 1 Their idleness, Prou. 2.

2 Their malice, Job. 21.14.

3 Their pride, Psalm. 25.

4 Their worldliness, Eccles. 38.25.

5 Their blindness by Satan, 2. Cor. 4.3

6 Natural coruption. 2. Cor. 2.14.

Quest. Wherein stands the examination of your knowledge?

Ans. In two things: 1 What general knowledge I have. 2 What knowledge I have
in particular.


Quest. Wherein consists general knowledge?

Ans. In three things: whereof the first is.

1 What knowledge I have of God.

2 What knowledge I have of my self.

3 What knowledge I have of the covenant of grace.

Quest. What knowledge must you have of God?

Ans. I must know him to be such an one as he has revealed himself in his
Word, to wit, one a invisible b and indivisible essence c, and three truly
distinct persons d, namely, the Father begetting e, the Son begotten f, and
the g holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son h Deutro. 6.4. i John
1.8. k Exodus 3.14. 1. Ioh. 5.7.8. e John 3.16.18. f Psalm. 2.7. g John. 15.26.

Quest. Must you know nothing else of God?

Answ. Yes, I must know that he is a Creator, and b governor of all things, c
a most wise understander and knower of all thoughts, most d holy, e just, and f
merciful to his creatures, that he is g eternal, without either beginning or
end, h and that he is present in all places. a Gen 1.1. b Mat. 10.10. c 1.
Chron. 28.9. d 1. Pet. 1.17. e Psa. 145.17. f Ps. 103.8. g Reu. 1.17. h Pro.
15.3.

Quest. How may you know whether you have this saving knowledge of God?

Answ. By my love to him, longing after him, desire to be with him, and zeal
to perform obedience unto him.

Quest. What must you know concerning your self?

Answ. That by nature I am stained wholly with a original sin: so that my b
mind is full of blindness, c will, of frowardness, d affections of
perverseness e my conscience, of guiltiness, so that thereby I am subject to
the f curse of God in life, in death, and after death. a Genesis 6.5. b Ephesians. 4.18.
c Romans 6.18. d Ephesians. 4.19. e Psalm. 51. f Deuteronomy. 27.26. Galat. 3.10.

Quest. What things are you subject to in life?

Answ. By reason of this sin, in my a soul I am a subject to madness b, in my
body to diseases c, in my goods to loss, and d in my name to reproach. a Deuteronomy.
28.61. b Deuteronomy. 28.60. Deuteronomy. 28.28.68. d Prou. 10.7.

Quest. What are you subject to in death?

Answ. To the separation of the a soul from the body, and in that separation,
to be either b comfortless, or c senseless. Genesis 2.17. b Matthew. 27.4.5. c 1.
Sam. 25.37.

Quest. What are you subject to after death?

Answ. To be a tormented for ever with the devil and his angels b, and to be
cast away from the presence of God. Matthew. 25.41. b Luc. 13.26.

Quest. What must you know concerning the covenant of grace?

Answ. That a Christ Jesus has delivered me from this misery: who being very
God b, became man c to die d for my sins, and rose again for my
iustificacion. a Luke 1.68. etc. b Ioh. 1.1. c Ioh. 1.14. d Romans 4.25.

Quest. What particular knowledge is required of you?

Answ. I must know the nature and use of this Sacrament. 1. Cor. 11.18.

Quest. What then is the Lords Supper?

Answ. It is a Sacrament, wherein by the use of Bread and Wine, those that are
ingrafted into Christ, are nourished to life.

Quest. What learn you out of this definition?

Answ. 1 That he cannot eat the Lords body, who is not of the Lords body.
August.

2 That a man must come with all cheerfulness to this banquet a, and not to
fear it, as a man would do poison. a Ezra. 6.16.

Quest. When, and where, was this Sacrament first celebrated?

Answ. The place was in an upper Parlor, to teach me that I should mount up in
mine affections to God, and not tarry here below upon earth: the time was,
immediately before Christ's departing out of this world, to admonish me, that
every day of my communicating, should be a new departing of mine heart out of
this world, to mine heavenly Father: for this loue-feast begun here upon
earth, shall not be finished till I come to heaven.

Quest. Tell me now what is the outward matter of this Sacrament?

Answ. Bread and wine, by which are signified Christ's body crucified, and his
blood powered out. a Luke 22.19.20.

Quest. How prove you this?

Answ. Christ says, Take, eat this my body; that is, as Tertullian expounds
it, figura corporis, the figure of my body.

2 Irenaeus says, The Eucharist consists of two things, the one
terrestrial, the other celestial.

3 Augustine says, A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace: and,
he doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.

4 Macarius calls the bread and wine, antitypa, exemplary types of Christ's
body and blood: yet must we know that to the true receiver, Christ is now
given, as well as these creatures.

5 Bernard says, It is called bread, per significationem, non proprietatem, by
signification, not by property.

Quest. Is not bread and wine turned into the body and blood of Christ?

Answ. No, for these reasons:

1 Christ instituted this Supper before he was crucified.

2 Then he must have given his dead body, with his living hands.

3 The bread after consecration is distr^buted into parts: but the whole body
of Christ is received of every several communicant.

4 The bread is the communion of Christ's body, and therefore not the very body.

5 This were to make the body of Christ of Bakers bread.

6 The bread and wine will corrupt being kept after consecration.

7 We see and taste only bread and wine.

8 Else the wicked should eat Christ's body, and so must have eternal life.
John 6.54.

9 This takes away the nature of a Sacrament, wherein there must be a sign,
and the thing signified.

10 It destroies the nature of Christ's body, making it alive and dead, in
heaven and upon earth, glorified and vilified, and in many places at one time.

11 It is a kind of enchantment to give power to the mumbling of five Latin
words, to change the substance of bread and wine.

12 The Apostle calls it bread and wine, before and after consecration, 1.
Cor. 10.16. 2. Cor. 11.26.27.

13 The kingdom of God is not corporal meat and drink, Romans 14.17.

14 Victor the third, Bishop of Rome, Note this.
was poisoned by his Subdeacon, when he took the cup: and Henry the seventh
Emperor of Luxelburge, was also poisoned in receiving the bread at the hands
of a Monk.

15 Christ's body and blood enter not into the stomach, but into the heart.

16 There comes no good to us by the corporal, but by the spiritual
presence of Christ. John. 6.54.

17 It derogateth from the dignity of the Sacrament of Baptism, in which there
is no such metamorphosis.

18 Then men need not to seek for Christ in heaven. Colos. 3.2.

19 It takes away the remembrance of Christ's death.

20 To say it is done, because Christ can do it, is no good argument; for we
must not reason from his omnipotency, to euert any Article of faith: but, we
believe that the body of Christ is in heaven, not on earth: and in a word, it
would seem to me a matter of impiety to devour, or digest Christ's blessed
body.

Quest. Draw me but one other reason into a Syllogism, which you think is
unanswerable.

Ans. I will and that shall be such a one as I learned out of the book of
Martyrs, from that blessed martyr, M. Frith, and it is this.

They who eat Christ in the Lords Supper, as the Fathers before his
incarnation, did eat him in Mannah, and the Paschall Lamb, they cannot eat
Christ corporally, (for at that time Christ was not borne.)

But the faithful eat Christ in the Lords Supper, as the Fathers before his
incarnation did eat him in Mannah, and the Paschall Lamb. 1. Cor. 20.3.4.

Therefore the faithful in the Lords Supher cannot eat Christ corporally.

Quest. But yet may not this be done by a Miracle?

Answ. Priests have no promise to work miracles now adays: and that it can be
no miracle, it may appear by these unanswerable reasons:

1 Every miracle is sensible: as when Moses rod was turned into a Serpent,
Exodus 7.10. and Christ turned Water into Wine, John. 2.10.

But this miracle is not sensible; for I see bread, and taste bread; I see
wine, and taste wine, even after consecration:

Therefore it is no miracle.

2 That which is ordinary, is no miracle: but this of the Priests is
ordinary: therefore no miracle.

Quest. Why then is bread called the Lords body, and wine his blood?

Answ. 1 That all the faithful may acknowledge the dignity of this Sacrament.

2 That we remain not in the outward bread and wine, but be intent upon the
thing signified.

3 That we may come with greater devotion to that Sacrament.

4 That we may be assured, that as outwardly we are pertakers of bread and
wine: so inwardly we are partakers of Christ and his benefits.

Quest. What rules must I then observe, that I may in the receiving of the
bread and wine, rightly discern the Lords body?

Answ. I will give you three.

1 Take every thing in it own nature and kind: do not with our adversaries
take the sign for the thing signified, nor the earthly thing for the heavenly.

2 Use every one of them in the manner appointed by Christ, and with such
reverence as is due unto them: do not as carnal professors do, who put no
difference betwixt this and common bread and wine: for no bread or wine in the
world, is in use like this.

3 Use them to their right ends, as First, for a commemoration of Christ's
death: Secondly, for thy further communion with Christ: do not either as some
adversaries do, by a conceited concomitancy, take away the memory of Christ's
passion: nor, as negligent Communicants, forget the comfort of their renewed
communion with their blessed Savior: for herein stands our greatest comfort
by communicating.

Qu. May you not receive the bread without the wine?

Answ. No, for these reasons:

1 This were to cross Christ's institution.

2 It does dispriuiledge Christ's people.

3 It makes Christ's feast a dry feast.

4 It takes away the remembrance of Christ's bloodshed.

5 The wine signifies not Christ's blood in his veins, but that blood which
was powered out.

Quest. Why did Christ institute this Sacrament in bread, not in flesh?

Answ. 1 Because bread is more fit to nourish than flesh.

2 As bread is made nourishment by fire: so Christ by the Cross.

3 As bread is corporal food: so Christ is spiritual food.

4 As bread takes away corporal hunger: so Christ spiritual.

5 As bread is given to the hungry, not to full bellies: so is Christ.

6 As bread distributed to many, is a token of love: so is Christ's body given
for many.

Quest. And why used he wine especially?

Answ. Because, 1 As wine is the most sweet liquor: so is Christ's blood.

2 As wine quenches corporal thirst: so Christ's blood does spiritual thirst.

3 As wine cheereth: so does Christ's blood.

4 As wine heateth: so does Christ's blood.

5 As wine is pressed out of the grape: so was Christ's blood out of his side.

6 As wine makes man secure, bold, eloquent, and of good color: so does
Christ's blood.

Quest. What is the form of this Sacrament?

Answ. The conjunction of the thing signified, with the sign, the action of
God, with the action of the Minister; and the action of faith, with the action
of the receiver.

Quest. What does the action of the Minister signify?

Answ. His taking bread and wine into his hands, does signify Gods sealing of
Christ, to bear the office of a Mediator, Ioh. 6.27. His blessing of the
bread, the sending of Christ to be a Mediator: His breaking of bread, and
pouring out of wine, the execrable passion of Christ, and effusion of his
blood: The giving of bread and wine to the receiver, the offering of Christ to
all, even Hypocrites; but the giving him only to true Christians.

Quest. What does the action of the receiver signify?

Answ. His taking of bread and wine into his hand, does signify his
apprehension of Jesus Christ by faith: his eating of bread and drinking of
wine, for the nourishment of his body, his applying of Christ unto himself,
that his true communion with him may be more increased.

Quest. What is the end of this Sacrament?

Answ. 1 The assurance of Gods favor.

2 The increasing of my faith.

3 Fellowship with Christ.

4 Communion with the Saints.

Quest. You said in the second place, that you must examine your faith: tell
me therefore what this faith is?

Answ. It is a miraculous work of God, wrought in the heart of a regenerate
man, by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby he does apprehend and apply to
himself particularly Christ Jesus with all his benefits, to the pardon and
forgiveness of all his sins.

Quest. Why must you examine whether you have faith?

Answ. Because, 1 Without faith I cannot please God. Hebr. 11.6.

2 By it I must live both in my particular and general calling. Hab. 2.4.

3 By it I am justified before God. Romans 5.1.

4 By it I put on Christ. Galath. 3, 27.

5 By it I feed on Christ. John 6.35.

6 By it alone I obey Gods word. Romans 14.23.

7 By it I am the child of God. Gal.. 3.2.

8 By it Christ dwells in mine heart. Ephesians. 3.17.

9 By it I procure Gods blessings upon my self and others. Matthew. 15.28.

10 By it I receive Christ in this Sacrament.

Quest. How may a man know whether he have this faith?

Answ. By these signs:

1 If we can from our hearts renounce our false supposed goodness, and can
wholly rely upon Christ in the matter of our salvation: this nature cannot do.

2 If we have peace of conscience arising from the apprehension of GODS love in
Christ, and our reconciliation with him.

Quest. Which are the wants of faith?

Answ. 1 Doubting and distrust of Gods mercy.

2 Presumption and vain confidence in our selves.

Quest. To come to the third part of our examination, tell me what repentance
is?

Answ. 1 It is a work of grace, arising of a godly sorrow, whereby a man
turns from all his sins to God, and brings forth fruit worthy amendment
of life.

Quest. Why must you examine whether you have this repentance?

Answ. Because, 1 Man's heart is deceitful and subtle, Ierm. 17.9.

2 Without it I cannot believe, Mark. 1.15.

3 Impenitency is a forerunner of judgment, Romans 2.5.

4 By repentance I am assured of my salvation, Acts 2.38.

5 Till then I can have no comfort, Psalm. 51.12.13.12.32.6.

6 If I want it, I can neither pray a, nor b hear, nor c reprehend sin in
others, d nor yet be a fit guest for the Lords Table: a Psa. 50.16. Prou. 28.9.
b Matthew. 3.7. c John 8.7. d 1. Sam. 16.6.

Quest. Give some reasons to move to repentance?

Answ. I will: we are moved to repent:

1 By Gods mercies, Romans 2.4.

2 By his patience, 2. Pet. 3.15.

3 By his judgments, Isai. 26.9.

4 By the word preached in the Law and Gospel, Jonah 2. Math. 3.

5 By the Sacraments, Mark 1.4.

6 By sin past, 1. Pet. 4.2.

7 By the shortness and uncertainty of this life, Psalm. 90.12.

8 By the certainty of death, Eccles. 12.13.

9 By the paucitie of such as shall be saved, Luke 13.25.

10 By thinking of the day of judgment, Acts 17.31.

11 For fear we go not to hell.

12 That we may be partakers of heaven.

13 That else we are not assured of our election.

14 Without it we cannot die comfortable.

15 It is difficult to perform on our deathbeds.

16 If we repent not, our score will increase.

17 Without it God will not hear us.

18 We else run into hardness of heart.

19 If we do not so, we bring Gods plagues upon others.

20 By repentance we honor God, and assure our consciences that God has
forgiven us: for, Sin discovered by trial, and cast out by repentance, will
never condemn us.

Quest. And why then do not men repent?

Answ. Because, 1 They have gotten a custom of sinning.

2 They escape unpunished here.

3 They ever think on mercy.

4 They fear not judgment.

5 They believe not Gods word.

6 They see that most do so.

7 They observe the life of bad Ministers.

8 They look upon great men that are bad.

9 They see not the vileness of sin.

10 They meditate not how God has plagued the impenitent.

Quest. How shall you know whether you have this repentance or not?

Answ. By these marks.

1 If I have a godly sorrow, whereby I am displeased with my self, because by
sin I have displeased God.

2 If there be in me a changing of the mind, and a purpose to forsake sin,
and ever after to please God.

3 If I do daily more and more break off my sins, and abstain from inward
practice, keeping under my corruptions, and ungodly thoughts.

4 If I can mourn for the present corruption of my nature.

5 If I have been grieved, and craved pardon for my late sins, even fithence
I was last partaker of the Lords Table.

Quest. You said that obedience was the fourth part of our examination: can you
tell me what obedience is?

Answ. It is a free, hearty, universal, evangelical, personal, and
perpetual keeping of Gods Commandments.

Quest. What reasons can you give why you must examine your obedience?

Answ. Amongst many I give these:

1 Disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft. 1. Sam. 15.23.

2 Obedience is better then sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22.

3 It is a fruit of faith. Romans 8.1.

4 By this examination I shall be moved to repent. Ierem. 31.19.

5 If I have done any thing that is good, I shall have cause to give God due
thanks.

6 Without it I cannot appear before God. Ierem. 7.9.

Quest. How many properties are there of this obedience?

Answ. Five: 1 It must be free, without constraint, Psalm. 110.3.

2 Sincere, without hypocrisy. 2. Tim. 1.5.

3 Universal, not to some, but to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Iam.
2.10.

4 Perpetual, till the hour of our death, Matthew. 24.13.

5 Personal, in regard of our personal calling, 1. Pet. 5.1.

Quest. Which is the last part of examination?

Answ. Our reconciling our selves unto our brethren, if we have made them any
offense. Matthew. 5.24.

Quest. Can you show me any reasons of this examination?

Answ. Yea surely: For, 1 If I love not my brother God loves not me, 1. Ioh.
3.14.

2 If I forgive not my brother, God forgiueth not me, Matthew. 6.15.

3 If I want love, I am none of Christ's disciples, Ioh. 13.35.

4 Without it I shall never do good to my brother, 1. Cor. 13.2.

Quest. By what signs may you know whether you are so reconciled, that you
love your brother?

Answ. By these:

1 If I be not overcome with evil, Romans 12.21.

2 If I overcome evil with goodness, Romans 12.21.

3 If I can pray for him, Acts 7.60.

4 If I can yield to him, Genesis 13.19.

5 If I can conceal my wrongs, and his infirmities. Prou. 11.12.13.

6 If I can converse friendly with him, Genes. 34.4.

7 If I can depart sometime from my right, Genesis 13.10.

8 If when I may, I avenge not my self, 2. Sam. 19.23.

Quest. When are we fit to receive the Sacrament, in regard of reconciliation?

Answ. Even then when we are fit to say in the Lords prayer, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And therefore many
endanger their own consciences in refusing to receive, lest they should leave
their sins, and be reconciled to men. Now the Lord grant, that I may after
this sort examine my self, that at all times (by putting off the old man, and
putting on the new) I may be fit to come to Gods Table.

Quest. I hope you are well instructed in examination. Tell me what
premeditation, the second part of preparation, is?

Answ. It is a consideration of those graces which we do receive by the death
of Christ, signified in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Quest. Which are those graces, that we must consider of?

Answ. Our redemption from hell, our deliverance from death, damnation, and the
curse of the Law.

2 The remission of our sins, whereby we receive freedom from sin, and
acceptance to life. Psalm 103.3.4.

3 Which is a fruit of the former reconciliation with God, when we are made
friends with him, Colos. 1.20.

4 Our communion and fellowship with Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.

5 Interest and title to eternal life by Christ, in whom we are sons. John
1.12. Romans 8.13.

Quest. What fruit arises out of these two?

Answ. A spiritual hunger after Christ and his benefits: for when a man has
examined his wants, and has considered the riches of Christ, his heart longs
after the same. Ioh. 7.37.

Quest. You have well said all that you have yet said: how must you be disposed
in the action of receiving?

Answ. I must seriously think of these five points.

1 When I see the Minister take bread and wine, I must consider the action of
God, whereby he sent Christ to work my redemption.

2 When I see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, I must consider,
first, The bitter passion of Christ for me in so suffering: secondly, Gods
infinite love to me, who sent Christ to redeem me his enemy: thirdly, Gods
wrath toward me, for my sin, which nothing could satisfy but the death of
Christ. Fourthly, I must detest those sins of mine, which caused Christ thus to
suffer.

3 When the minister distributeth bread and wine, I must consider, that as it
is truly offered unto me by man, so Christ is truly offered unto me by God.

4 In receiving bread and wine, I must apprehend Christ by faith,

5 In eating that bread, and drinking that wine, I must apply Christ
particularly to my self, and be persuaded, that as that bread and wine is made
the nourishment of my body, so Christ's body and blood is made the nourishment
of my soul. Yea, I must feel the power of Christ to mortify the corruption
of my nature by his death, to quicken me in newness of life by his
resurrection, and to give me power to fight against my deadly adversaries, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

Quest. When you are to receive these consecrated mysteries, may you receive
them kneeling upon your knees?

Answ. You taught me, that this gesture has been much abused: yet at the
commandment of the Church, it may be used without impiety.

1 Because kneeling is a thing indifferent, as is the uncovering of the head at
that time.

2 Because the Minister then prays to God as he gives them.

3 Because Christ is more particularly then offered then in the word.

4 That we may stop our adversaries mouths: who cry out against us, that we
regard not this Sacrament.

5 Because then especially God requires our humiliation.

6 That the better we may lift up our hearts to God.

7 Because in matters of indifferency, we are bound to keep the peace of the
Church.

8 Because we teach that this reverence is not done to the creatures, but to
our Creator.

9 Because by this gesture, we are moved to receive with greater reverence.

10 It is retained by the Church of Bohemia.

Quest. But this Ceremony sauoreth of adoring a breaden god.

Answ. To our adversaries it does; to us it does not, being taught the
contrary: therefore if it be not taken away, it may be used; if it were, the
fear of superstition were taken away with it. But, in things which may be well
used, let no man be contentious, we have no such custom, neither have the
Churches of God. Ambrose his counsel to (...) and his mother Monica, is good
counsel: When I am at Millaine, I fast not on Saturday, because there they
fast not; and when I come to Rome, I fast on Saturday, because there they then
fast. Thus must we do in things indifferent, that we may keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Quest. Yet were it not fit to follow the example of Christ, who did administer
it sitting at the table?

Answ. Mark what I say: And the Lord give you understanding in all things.

1 If we must precisely follow Christ's practice in this, then they who receive
standing, transgress in practice, as well as they who receive kneeling; which
I think you will not say.

2 The custom of the Jews at that time, was not to sit, but to lean one upon
another, would you have this custom to be retained?

3 It is uncertain with what gesture, and in what manner Christ did celebrate
his last Supper, whether standing, as was the use of the Passover, or sitting,
or leaning, as was the use at supper.

4 Mr. Calvin, a reverend man, leaves many rites indifferent, in the
administration of this Sacrament, Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 17. sect. 43.

In a word, but think seriously, how this Church of ours does detest al popish
adoration in this Sacrament, and you will not refuse to communicate with us,
because you are enjoined to kneel. If you do not take heed of such
singularity, it may be in you, as it has been in others, a forerunner,
either of schismatic separation, or supine contempt of this blessed banquet.

Quest. What quantity of Bread and wine must you receive?

Answ. Not a crumme of bread, or a drop of wine, nor to much of either, but so
much of each, as may give both nourishing and cheering to my body: I may not
make a banquet of this Sacrament, nor turn drinking into drunkenness.

Quest. But is it fit often to receive this Sacrament?

Answ. It is: (but always with reverence, and preparation) For, so often says
Christ and Paul, the first Christians did it day by day: and by it we renew
our covenant, are tied to obedience, united to our brethren, comforted against
death, and assured that Christ is all in all unto us.

Quest. Who offended against this rule?

Answ. 1 They who come not at al: these fail as much in not eating, as Adam,
did in eating of the forbidden fruit, Genes. 3. he obeyed the Serpent, they
will not obey Christ.

2 They who tie themselves to receive only at Easter, and no time else: they
make a Jewish Passover, of Christ's institution, and are more willing to follow
Moses, then Christ.

3 Such as pretend excuses, why they dare not come: and these also are like
unto those guests, who being invited to the marriage of the Kings son, gave
carnal reasons why they could not come. Matthew. 22.4.

Quest. What think you of such as come not often, because of the meandness of
the elements, in which this Sacrament is administered?

Answ. Surely as of Naaman the Assyrian, who thought the waters of Damacus
better then all the rivers of Samaria; or as of that woman of Samaria, who
ignorantly preferred the well of Iaakob, before the well of living waters, 2.
King. 5.10. John 4.12. These then, they may be good Christians, though seldom
Communicants; but they are deceived, not knowing that the means of salvation,
are offered to us in weak means. 1. Cor. 1.21.

Quest. But some again have this Sacrament in such reverence, that they dare
not come often; what is your opinion of them?

Answ. If Christ calls them, why should not such come? Are they not prepared?
it is their fault: or not in charity? They excuse one sin with another: shall
they sin against God, because man sins against them? Nay, better excuses
would not serve those. Matthew. 22.4.

Quest. You have given many good instructions, concerning this Sacrament: tell
me I pray you, is it lawful to receive it privately?

An. If persons excommunicate from the Church, did repent them of their sins,
and could not by sickness come to the Church; these, not to make receiving
necessary, but in regard of themselves, to testify their repentance, and in
regard of the Church, that it accepted their repentance, and for their comfort,
received them as members of Christ: the Sacrament was in former times delivered
privately to such. Yea, and the Council of Mentz decreed, That if any thief
gave tokens of repentance and desired the Sacrament, he should have it.

Quest. Did there any hurt come of this order?

Answ. Very much: First, that if any were deadly sick, the Eucharist must
needs be administered to him. Secondly, that in Popery, every Parish Priest must
bring to every one of years, ready to die, this breaden God in a box, with
Bell, Book and Cross; and if any departed without receiving this iournall, he
was not to be interred in Christian burial: if he did receive it, he must
needs go to heaven.

Quest. Do all reformed Churches use this order, privately to administer this
holy Communion?

Answ. Some do not, and that for these reasons:

1 Because Christ gave it to all his Disciples.

2 Paul will have the Corinthians not to eat at home, but to stay one for
another.

3 It is called Synaxis, a Communion, and Leitourgia, a public Ministry.

4 If in the Apostles times, it were administered in Families, it was, because
of persecution, and yet then many Christians met together at it.

5 The Word is not privately to be preached, and therefore the Sacraments are
not privately to be administered.

6 It caused public assemblies to be neglected.

7 It brought in a necessity of this Sacrament.

8 It caused some to neglect it in health, because they were sure to have it in
sickness.

9 Other means of comfort may be used, as well as this; as comfort from the
promises of the Gospel, and our ingrafting into Christ.

10 Many of the ancient Fathers disallowed such as deferred Baptism till they
were sick; and therefore, had better cause for not admitting this Sacrament to
the sick.

Quest. Do you well think, that a Minister may not administer this Sacrament
to a sick, or condemned man privately, if he desire it?

Answ. I dare not think it, and that for these reasons: 1 I dare not deprive a
man being in such a case, that he cannot come to the public assemblies, of the
confirmation of his faith and seal of his salvation, as this Sacrament is: No
more then I dare deprive him of the comfort of the Word, and my prayers for
him, in such a time, when Satan is most busy.

2 If in the ancient Church it were granted to persons excommunicate, testify
their repentance; why should it not be granted to good Christians, to confirm
their faith?

3 Such a private communion is a testimony of the receivers conjunction with
his whole Church, as a particular Communion in a Parish, is a testimony of her
communion with the whole Church.

Quest. Are there no caueats to be given about this doctrine?

Answ. Yes. 1. That it be sparingly used.

2 To such only as desire it.

3 That they be taught, that it is not of necessity.

4 That some words of exhortation go with it.

5 That no pomp be used in carrying the Communion.

6 That the Minister know, it is not desired in superstition.

7 That it be done to such as cannot come.

8 That the party have a convenient company with him.

9 That if it may be done, the party then receive it privately, when others do
so, in the Congregation.

10 That in the administration, the institution of Christ be observed, and all
be done in remembrance of Christ's death.

Quest. I had almost forgotten to ask you one necessary question: are you
bound to come fasting to this Sacrament?

Answ. It is not absolutely necessary:

1 Because the Paschal Lamb was not so eaten.

2 Because Christ did it after supper.

3 Because in the Primitive Church, many places observed Christ's time to
communicate, at the evening, especially at Easter, and Whitsontide, as
Cassander proves,

4 Because some are so weak that they cannot stay so long fasting.

5 Because many abstained in superstition, as thinking that they eat the very
body, and drink the very blood of Christ.

6 Because our preparation stands rather in the purifying of the heart, then
purging of the stomach.

Quest. What think you of the conuenience of it?

Answ. I think it fit to come rather fasting then feasting, to this banquet;
and if we cannot fast so long, to use as little refreshing as may be, and that
for these reasons:

1 Because we must do it for the better hearing of the Word.

2 That we may better meditate of Christ, and his benefits.

3 That we feeling some hunger for want of food, may better be put in mind to
hunger after Christ.

4 That feeling comfort by Bread and Wine, we may the more bethink our selves
of our comfort in Christ.

5 Because abstinence, and taming of the body, makes us more fit for all
spiritual exercises, belonging to Communicants.

9 Because, even Paul condemns the Corinthians, for abusing themselves at
their loue-feasts, with this Sacrament.

7 We must ever be sober in diet: and why not then at this time?

8 This was one end, why it has been for many years taken in the morning, as
Drachmarius testifies, who lived in the year, 800.

But in this abstinence, as we may do it for our better preparation, so must
we avoid the opinion of necessity (as though it were sin to eat, or drink)
and merit, as if thereby we should deserve at Gods hands. For the Council of
Constance admits some refreshing in case of necessity, to women with child,
aged and sick persons, and such as dwelt far from their Parish Churches.

Quest. Is there nothing to do for you, after you have received this holy
Sacrament?

Answ. Yes, I must observe these three things:

1 I must give God thanks for so great a benefit. 1. Cor. 11.26.

2 I must look to receive by it, increase of faith and repentance, to rise
from sin, and to receive power against the Devil.

3 If I feel this present comfort, to be thankful for it: if not, I must
know, that it is because I have not prepared my self, or because my faith is
weak, or because I live in some secret sin: wherefore I must go to God,
acknowledge my fault, and desire pardon and comfort for the same. Now the Lord
grant me this grace, so to be partaker of his Sacramental Table, that I may be
partaker of his heavenly Table, through Jesus Christ my Lord, and alone blessed
Savior. Amen.

THE CONFESSION of Master Zanchius in his Miscellenea, touching the Supper of
the LORD.
CHAP. I. Of those things which are given unto us in the Supper.
1 I Believe these three things to be offered unto all men in the Supper, and
to be received of the faithful. The signs, the bread, and the wine, being
joined with the words of Christ. For the word is not to be separated from the
signs, nor the signs from the word: or else the Sacraments were no
Sacraments. For the word is added to the element, and so the Sacrament is made.

2 The body and blood of the Lord, that is the Lord Jesus Christ himself. For
as in very truth the Divinity is not separated from the humanity, neither the
humanity from the Divinity: even so unto us the one is not offered without
the other. Wherefore neither are they to be separated of us even in thought:
but as whole Christ is offered, so whole Christ is also to be received.

3 The New Covenant or Testament, I mean that which is renewed and confirmed in
Christ. For this is that thing forwhose cause chiefly the Supper is
instituted, and administered, to wit, that we being incorporated more and more
into the person of Christ, might have the covenant more and more confirmed unto
us. Now the body and blood of Christ and the new Testament made in Christ are
that Spiritual, but the Elements of Bread and Wine are those Earthly things
whereof Irenaeus speaks.

CHAP. II. Of the use of these three things, and first of the use of the Word,
of the Bread, and of the Wine.
I Believe these three things to be offered and given for those certain and
proper uses whereunto among themselves they were ordained. The first Position.


And first I believe the Elements of Bread and Wine together with the Word to
be offered and given, that by this Word, and those Elements, as it were
instruments of Gods Spirit working in the hearts of the Elect, their faith
might be more and more stirred up and confirmed, by which faith we believe,
that the matter is so indeed, as the Word of Christ does sound in our ears,
and does represent the Elements to our eyes, and other senses: to wit, that the
Heavenly Bread, which is the Body of Christ, has been broken, that is killed
and died for us. And the Heavenly Wine, that is, the blood of Christ to have
been shed for us and for many more, even all the Elect for the remission of
their sins, and so the New Testament to have been confirmed in the body of
Christ, and sealed in his blood, and that this Heavenly Bread Christ with the
New Testament, and the Heavenly Wine with the remission of sins, to be offered
unto us by the Earthly bread, and by the Earthly Wine: yea further that we are
commanded to receive them in these words, Take, eat, I believe the Bread and
the Wine to be given unto us for this end. For this is the proper and
immediate use of all speech and of all signs, especially of those signs,
which are used for confirmation of our speech, not only simply to signify this
or that, but also that by signifying they may make belief, that is, may stir
up faith in the hearers and seers, whereby they are persuaded that the thing it
self is even so as the words of the speaker do signify unto the cares, and
as the signs do represent unto the eyes. Paul also in the tenth Chapter to
the Romans speaking of the Word of God and of the preaching of the Gospel,
says that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Therefore
the proper and immediate use of the Word is to beget faith in the hearer.
Signs also and Sacraments are visible words. I conclude then that Bread and
Wine together with the Word are given for this use and immediate end, that
faith may be more and more increased in us, whereby we believe that the thing
is so, as the Word signifies, and as the Elements do represent and in this
manner signifying do offer and represent unto us.

OF the use of Faith being wrought in us by the Word and Sacraments. The second
Position.


I believe this faith to be wrought in us of the holy Ghost, by the Word and
Sacraments that by this faith we might immediately receive and eat the body
of Christ which was delivered up for us, and receive and drink the blood of
Christ which was shed for us for remission of sins. And so we might more and
more be engraffed and immediately united unto the body of Christ as our
Mediator who died for us.

For even as the Bread and Wine being Earthly and Material Bodies cannot be
incorporated into our Earthly bodies, unless we receive them in at our mouth,
and eat them, and drink them. So we cannot be united and incorporated into
the body and blood of Christ, which Irenaeus calls an Heavenly thing,
unless by faith we take hold on Christ, eat him and drink him, that is,
apply him unto us.

The third Position.
OF the use, for which we eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood.

I believe that the body of Christ in the Supper is offered and exhibited unto
us to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk: and that faith by the Word and
Sacraments by the help of the Holy Ghost being wrought in our hearts, it is
eaten of us indeed: to the end that we being more nearly and effectually
incorporated into Christ, we may also be more thoroughly confirmed in the New
Covenant, which in Christ is communicated unto us.

For as Christ did therefore deliver his body unto death and shed his blood,
that by his death and blood our sins being purged, he might confirm and for
ever establish the covenant being renewed between God the Father and us: even
as the words of the Supper concerning the blood do teach us, and other books
of the Scripture, especially the Epistle to the Hebrews do confirm: even so
for this end also the body and blood of Christ is communicated unto us, that by
the participation of them, we in like manner being more and more incorporated
into Christ, might be more and more confirmed in the New Testament. Therefore
when Christ gave forth the cup, in plain words he named the New Testament
that the Apostles might understand, to what end the blood of the son of God,
was not only shed and powered out, but also was exhibited to be drunken of them.
Verily to this end that as by the shedding of his blood, their sins, and the
sins of all Gods Elect were purged, and being purged, the covenant between
them and God was for all eternity confirmed: So also by drinking of the same,
both they and all the Elect being more and more incorporated, may know
themselves to be confirmed and established in the everlasting Covenant. But yet
because the Covenant, and the flesh and blood of Christ are diverse objects, and
the one is ordinated unto the other, therefore for doctrine sake I distinguish
the one from the other, and show what is the proper use of either of them.

The fourth Position.
OF the benefit or use of the Covenant communicated unto us.

Lastly I believe the covenant it self being ratified and confirmed in the
body of Christ, and by the blood of Christ, to be more and more communicated
unto us, in the same body and blood of Christ: that by the bond thereof, we
may wholly whatsoever we are, be united more and more unto God the Father, the
Fountain as of the whole Divinity, so of all goodness and blessedness, by
Christ, the Mediator, the Spirit working and dwelling in us: and that we may
be so united that in mind we may daily more clearly acknowledge him by the
Holy Ghost, to be our true, and our best Father in Christ, and in our heart
love him more fervently in Jesus Christ through the Holy Ghost: yea with all
the powers of soul and body we may daily more sincerely honor him, and may
be made like unto him in Holiness and Justice, until at length sin being
utterly destroyed, and death abolished, and the perfect Image of God recovered,
we may so perfectly through Christ in the Spirit of God be united and coupled
after this life unto God the Father, that he may be all in all. Amen.

For this is the last end, unto which not only the Supper of the Lord, but also
Baptism, yea the whole Word of God, all his benefits, all his corrections,
lastly all the words and works of God do lead us unto.

CHAP. III. Of the duty of a Christian man in the Supper of the Lord.
WHerefore I think and believe, that these are the duties of a Christian man
in the Lords Supper.

First, that he set before his eyes the perfect Communion with God, which is
none at al without Christ, and is to be found only in him, and that he direct
all things unto it, as unto the last end.

Secondly, that he may come unto this end, he must make his beginning from
the means which do incur into our senses, as those things which are first
perceived by our understanding, and are better known by nature, as also he
must hear the word attentively, and come unto the Sacraments reverently and
diligently consider as well, what the word signifies as what the Sacraments
do represent, and what is offered unto us by the Ministry of them both,
which is this, that Christ has offered up his body unto death for us, and
shed his blood for remission of sins, and therefore he has by his blood
sealed and confirmed in himself being Mediator the New Testament of our
everlasting reconciliation and peace with God. And these things are so
signified by the Sacraments that they are also offered, and given unto us to be
received. Whereby it comes to pass that they are truly called Signs, not only
signifying, but also exhibiting and giving the things which they signify.

Thirdly, I believe, because the things signified and offered by the Signs
are to be received by faith, and faith is the gift of God: therefore God is to
be prayed unto, as he who offers the things by the Signs, and who commands
us to receive them by faith. He also can give and increase faith, whereby we
are able to receive them.

Fourthly, I believe, that faith being begotten in us by hearing of the Word,
and increased by the diligent consideration of the Sacraments through the Holy
Ghost, it is the duty of a Christian man, while he receives the External and
Visible Signs with his hand being also External and Visible, and eats them
with the mouth of his body, and drinks them hear upon Earth: together also
to receive with the hand and mouth of faith, and to eat and drink the
Heavenly and Invisible things, namely the flesh and blood of Christ with a
faithful heart, lifted up unto the Heavenly Table: that he being more and more
coupled unto Christ, and made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, may
live in Christ, and Christ in him. For I believe the faithful in the Supper
truly to receive and eat, but by the Spirit and by faith, the very true body
of Christ the which was crucified for us, and so far forth as it was
delivered up for us: and that they drink his blood which was shed for us for
the remission of sins: according as the words of Christ do manifestly,
testify. And that indeed the body is present and the blood is present, but
unto the Spirit, and unto the inward man. For unto the Spirit all things which
he receives by faith, are in truth present according to that, that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith. And no distance of place can effect, that the
things we receive by faith, should be absent from us: even as the Sun
cannot be said to be absent from the eyes, of which it is perceived.

Fifthly, I believe, because the new covenant in Christ is established by his
blood, and the Testament is confirmed by the death of the Testator: and because
by the blood of the eternal covenant, we are for ever joined unto God:
therefore a Christian man, who now by faith feels himself to be incorporated
into Jesus Christ, ought also to believe that he is confirmed in the covenant
with God the Father by a bond that cannot be broken: and therefore that all
his sins are forgiven him of God, and that he is destinated and assured to
be the Son of God and Heir of eternal life, without all fear to be
disherited. For these things which we on our part according to the condition
of the covenant owe unto God, namely Faith, Love, Obedience: we may firmly
believe, that all those things are fully by Christ the first begotten effected
for us, and imputed unto us. Further we ought to be certainly persuaded, that
by the assistance of Christ we shall never be forsaken, but that we may in
some part perform the same. And that because Christ himself has both
performed those things for us, and has promised us this assistance, that the
New Testament should remain sure and perpetual as on Gods part, so also on our
part: until at length we being received into the full possession of the
Heavenly Inheritance, do live in perfect happiness, with the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost our God.

For there are three principal heads of the covenant on Gods part. The
forgiveness of sins, Adoption which is joined with a promise of Gods
perpetual good will, grace, protection, and at last the full possession of
Heavenly Inheritance. There are also three things which on our part God does
require by covenant: faith in God, charity toward our Neighbor, and
holiness of life or perfect obedience. Christ by his perfect obedience even
unto death, and by his own blood and death has obtained for us, both those
things which God has promised, as also has performed those things which God
by covenant required at our hand. In testimony whereof he gives us faith
whereby we believe in God, and charity whereby we love our Neighbor, and
the Spirit of regeneration, whereby we endeavor unto holiness of life, and
true obedience is begun in us. So Christ brings to pass that not only the
covenant, on Gods part, but also on our part remains sure and perpetual. It
is therefore our duty that first by faith given unto us by Christ, as we do
eat his flesh and drink his blood, so also we believe our selves to be
confirmed in the covenant with God: and therefore both our sins to be
remitted, and God to be our Father, and that he will perpetually love and
protect us: and lastly that we shall be heirs of eternal life, and shall
arise to glory and life everlasting, and that through Christ with whose flesh
we are fed in the Supper, and we ought to be persuaded, that we our selves also
are nourished, to the end we may be partakers of a blessed resurrection. And
therefore we ought to give due thanks for so many and so great benefits: we
ought also to embrace in love our Neighbor, and especially our faithful
brethren. That as we are all one with Christ, so we may also grow up
together, in one body more and more with the Church. Even as the Apostle Paul
exhorts us by this argument that we are all one Body and one Bread, because
we are all partakers of the same Bread.

With the endeavor of an holy life and and true obedience, which is also the
gift of Christ, we ought always to glorify God, and declare indeed that we
are true and lively members of Christ, and therefore have intrest to that true
felicity, which consists in that most perfect vnio^ with God wherein he
shall be all in all. Thus I believe concerning the duty of a Christian man in
the Supper, wherein he may worthily and for his Salvation eat the Bread of
the Lord and drink of his cup.

CHAP. IIII. Of the words of the Supper.
SEeing all things are so as I have before showed, my opinion is, that the
words of the Lods Supper cannot be well understood and declared without some
trope: First for the cup it is manifest as well by the Evangelists as by the
Apostle Paul, Then for the Bread it is also manifest, because where as Christ
says: This, that is, the bread which I have broken is my body, the Apostle
expounding it says, The Bread which we break is the Communion of the body of
the Lord. Thirdly, according to the rule of Saint Austen in his third Book of
the institution of a Christian man, Cap. 16. Because when we are commanded to
eat the flesh of Christ it ye take the word of eating properly, it seems we
are commanded to do an heinous deed: therefore the speech of Christ
concerning the eating of his flesh is to be understood figuratively. Moreover,
because if you shall understand the words without a trope, tt will follow that
the Bread of Christ was indeed delivered up for us, and the blood shed for the
remission of our sins. Lastly, because Luther himself upon the sixth Chapter
of Esaias says that in the words of the Supper there is a Synecdoche, with whom
in this point Bucer does always agree. Therefore albeit each word in that
speech, This is my body, be taken in his proper signification, so that the
true and essential body of Christ is attributed to the Bread, as indeed it is
attributed, yet in the whole speech there must needs be some trope: Seeing that
the bread which is given for us, and was not crucified cannot properly be said
to be the body of Christ, which was delivered up for us. So then the
controversy is only concerning the kind of trope, by which the Bread is
called the body of Christ, I say that true body which was truly delivered up
for us. And I think this controversy not so great worth, that for it the
peace of the Church be troubled: and that he that says it is a Synecdoche
does condemn him that says it is a Metonymie. And contrariwise, he that says
it is a Metonymie condemns him which says it is a Synecdoche: so that both
part agree in this, that it is the true and natural body of Christ, as the
Evangelists, and the Apostle do plainly teach, that it is spoken of the true
bread, and so that the Articles of faith be kept on both sides in their plain
meaning, pure and vncorrupt. As that, the natural body of Christ, is one, is
finite, is humane, is in Heaven, does no more die, is not consumed, not broken.
And yet indeed, as the Scriptures teach is offered unto all, is communicated,
to all the faithful, but in a mystery and after a Spiritual manner: Even as
the faithful themselves do grow up into one body, and are incorporated with
their head Christ, and with the whole Catholic Church, not after a Carnal,
but after a Spiritual manner. And therefore as in the Sprituall and Mystical
fellowship with Christ and the Church, wicked Hypocrites have no part, seeing
they want faith, but are only in the outward and Visible society: so I believe
that those Hypocrites are Partakers not of the true and natural and truly
Heavenly flesh and blood of Christ, but only of the external and outward
signs, the which also are termed by the name of the flesh and blood of Christ,
even by Christ-himselfe. Wherefore whereas the Apostle says, They who eat
unworthily are guilty of the body of the Lord, if it be understood of the
wicked (which certainly and not without a cause Bucer denies) I interpret that
in this sense, wherein the same Apostle says unto the Hebrews, that some do
tread under foot the Son of God and account the blood of the Testament a
profane thing: to wit, not because they do truly eat the flesh of Christ,
and drink the blood, but because they do it unworthily: but rather because
rejecting by their ungodliness the body and blood; the Bread and Wine being
offered, they drink and eat the Bread and Wine unworthily.

This thing good Christian assure thy self of, that I am not so wicked as to
doubt of the truth of Christ's words in the Supper, as some too impudently do
accuse me of: neither that I dispute of the simple understanding of every word
in this proposition: This is my body. For by this Article, This, that the
Bread is declared, besides that the text does teach, Paul also does so
interpret it 1. Cor. 10. and 11. Neither this word, is, does signify any
other thing, as I think, then to be: and I take this word, body, for the
true body of Christ, as Christ himself does interpret who adds, which is
given for you. And therefore there is no controversy among us, whether in the
lawful use of the Supper, the Bread be truly the body of Christ, but we
dispute only of the manner, by which the Bread is the body of Christ. And
moreover, neither part call into question, that the bread is after that manner
the body of Christ, after which Christ would then have it, and will now have it
to be, for it must be according to his will.

And whereas in the words of the Supper, the will of Christ is not expressed
concerning the manner: I think it is to be gathered out of the like places, to
wit, Sacramental kind of speeches. Moreover this foundation being laid, that
Christ then would not, and now will not, that the bread should be his body,
after any of the manners of those men, who take away the truth of his true
humane body, or else do disagree from the analogy of faith, and ouerturne some
article of the faith, from his simple meaning. So the manner of Christ's being
in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation is excluded: both because neither in the
Sacrament of Baptism the substance of the water is changed, as also because
straight way, many bodies here upon earth should be feigned upon Christ,
besides that body, which he has in heaven: and lastly, because the substance
of bread, neither before, neither after the conversion was delivered to death
for us, I add moreover, that according to Saint Mark, the substance of wine
was in the belly of the Apostles, when he said, This is the blood. The manner
also of Consubstantiation is excluded both because neither in the water of
Baptism the blood of Christ is locally included, whereby we are washed from
our sins: as also, because this manner does take away the nature of the true
humane body, and does Diametrically repugne with the article of the ascension
into heaven, and of the sitting at the right hand. For, the same causes, that
manner also is to be taken away, which is not much unlike unto this, which is
imagined by a real and local adherency or conjunction: not to speak that, not
one word can be read for the proof of this, that after some of these three
manners, Christ would have the bread to be his body.

After what manner then is it probable that Christ would have the bread to be
his body? Verily after this manner, as all other Sacraments, are said to be
that thing, whereof they are Sacraments, to wit, by a Sacramental, and so a
Mystical union. For that, which we call a Sacrament, the Grecians call a
Mystery. Wherefore this speech is usual with the Fathers, that the bread is
the body of Christ, even the present body, and that it is eaten in a mystery.
Now a mystery is said to be, when visible things do lead us to the true
understanding and receiving of invisible things, and earthly things of heavenly
things, corporal things, of spiritual things. In which sense, the Apostle to
the Ephesians calls the carnal marriage of Adam and Eve a great mystery,
because of the spiritual marriage which is contracted between Christ and his
Church, and to which that other marriage does lead us. But carnal men
destitute of the spirit of God, and of faith, cannot be brought by earthly
things unto heavenly things, or by the participation of those earthly unto the
communion of these heavenly: seeing they cannot so much as understand them, as
the Apostle says. Which is the cause why I judge and believe that the flesh
and blood of Christ, being heavenly and spiritual things, cannot in deed and
truth be received of wicked men, no not by the mouth of their body, which also
was Bucers opinion. Therefore he said, that the body of Christ, was both
present, and eaten of us in the Supper, not after any worldly manner, but only
after a spiritual and heavenly manner. The which, what is it else then to say,
that it is eaten of us by the spirit of Christ? For by Christ heavenly things
are joined unto earthly things, and by him they are received of them.

And this is my belief and judgment, for the meaning of the words of the
Supper, which I will constantly hold till that a better, a truer, and more
agreeable to the Scriptures, shall by other men be offered and plainly
proved unto me.

Ille non edit corpus Christi, qui non est de corpore Christi. August.

He cannot eat the body of Christ, that is not of the body of Christ.

Accipe, panis est, non venenum: mala res non est, sed malus accipit. Idem.

Come, it is bread, not poison: the thing is not evil, but an evil person
receives it.

A DIRECTION TO LIVE WELL.

ISAIAH 30.21. This is the way, walk in it.

PHILIP. 1.27. Only let your conversation be, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

LONDON Printed for Edward Blunt, and William Barret. 1613.

A DIRECTION TO LIVE WELL.
Question.

I See that you remember much concerning praying, and communicating: what must
you observe in your Christian practice?

Answ. As I am bound to pray continually, so am I bound to watch continually,
that neither by Satan's subtilty, or the worlds vanity, or mine own security,
I be not surprised.

Quest. Why ought you thus to watch?

Answ. 1 Because I walk in the presence of God. Prou. 5.21.

2 Because I walk among many occasions of sin. 1. John 2.16.

3 Because of my self I am shiftlesse to avoid them, 2. Chron. 20.21.

4 Because I can go about no good things but either Satan, or my lusts will be
ready to molest me. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Zach. 3.2.

5 Because many excellent men have fallen very grievously, for want of
watchfulness. Genes. 9.21. and 19.32. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.1. King. 11.1.

6 If I can thus watch without ceasing, I shall get in each action the peace of
a good conscience, which is the greatest Jewel in the world. Acts 23.1.

7 I shall be ready for any temptation, espeeially for death and the day of
judgment. Genesis 39.10. Luke 2.29. and 21.36.

8 I shall be sure to do no such thing, whereof I cannot give an account to
God. Luke 19.15.16.

9 I shall stop the mouths of mine adversaries, when they call in question my
righteous dealing. 1. Sam. 26.21.

10 I shall cause my religion to be well spoken of, whilst others observe my
godly conversation Math. 16.

Quest. What must you do, that you may thus watch?

Ans. 1 I must ever walk in faith: and to each part of Gods service, it is my
duty to bring it with me. Romans 14.23.

2 I must have Gods warrant with me without which, faith is no faith. Ps.
119.105

3 I must see what calling I have to each thing, without which a good thing may
be sin. 1. Chron. 13.9.

4 I must redeem, or buy out the time, and present opportunity of doing good,
and avoiding evil. Ephesians. 5.15.

5 I must remember, that though Satan be indeed chained and cannot hurt me,
yet if I will not be bitten by him, I must walk aloof from the chain of
this Lion.

6 I must look to my thoughts, my words, mine actions, my gesture, mine
apparel, my diet, my recreations, my gettings, my spendings, and how I may
keep Holy the Sabbath day.

Quest. Because in the fourth rule, you have said that we must buy out the
time, out of whose hands must we buy it out?

Answ. There are ten sins, which like so many Monopolizing ingrossers, do
take up all the hours of man's life, we must redeem them out of all their
hands. The first is Reading of vain Books: the second Long labor, to deck
up our bodies: the third, Feasting and continuance in it: the fourth,
Recreations in excessive sort: the fifth, Gadding abroad, without business:
the sixth, Prattling and talking of things needless: the seventh, Immoderate
sleeping in our beds: the eighth, Idleness, and negligence in our callings:
the ninth, Vain thoughts, and cogitations of the mind: the tenth,
Worldliness, and greediness to get. Against these we must labor by
contrary practices: and if we will indeed redeem the time, we must buy out the
time past by Repentance: present, by Diligence: to come, by Providence.

Quest. What rules have you learned for your thoughts?

Answ. 1 That I be careful to keep a more narrow watch over my thoughts,
words, and deeds, then heretofore I have done, to do them more warily for
Gods glory, mine own comfort, and my Brethrens benefit. 1. Corinthians. 6.20. 1.
Peter 1.15. Prou. 4.23.

2 That I cleanse my heart from the very first motions of all sinful
thoughts, as of Lust, Anger, Pride, Covetousness, Malice, Stubbornenesse,
evil Suspicion, as knowing that the least sin deserves death, and does
deprive me of part of my comfort in my salvation. Ephesians. 4.23.31. Matthew.
15.18.19. Colos. 3.2.8.

3 That all my lawful affections be moderate, and without excess, and greater
always upon Heavenly, then earthly things. Colos. 3.1.2. Philip. 3.20.

4 That I fulfill not my mind in all things, for then I shall often sin: let
me consider therefore, whether that be lawful I desire, and for the glory of
God. Romans 14.23.

5 That I bestow no more care and thought upon the World, then I needs must for
the moderate maintaining of my self, and those that belong to me, lest my
thoughts be distracted too much from Heavenly things. 1. Tim. 6.8.9. Genes.
24.63.

6 That I suffer not my mind to be occupied with unprofitable, curious, and
vain meditations: for which I cannot give a sufficient reason to God and Man,
if I were asked: Prou. 6.14. Zach. 8.17.

7 That I think better of my Brethren, then of my self, and the more I excel
in any thing, be the more humble before God and Man. Romans 12.16. Philip. 2.3.

8 That I take sometime every day, to meditate upon, and to mourn for the
miseries, and iniquities of the age wherein I live, and pray to God, for
remedy. Psalm. 69.9.10. Ezech. 9.4.

9 That I think often of the vanity of my life, upon my departure hence daily
looking for my Savior in the clouds, and wishing rather a good life, then a
long. Psalm. 90.9.10.15.

10 That I carefully meditate, and remember every good thing I hear or learn,
that I may readily practice it when time and occasion serves: Acts 17.18.

Quest. What rules have you learned for your words?

Answ. 1 That I remember, such as my speech is, such is my heart; and that both
my heart and mouth go together, but in holy manner. Ephesians. 4.29. Colos. 4.6.

2 That my speeches be gracious to the edification, good, and benefit of them
with whom I speak, not to their evil and sinning. Colos. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29.
and 5.4.

3 That my speech be always more and more earnest, joyful, and comfortable,
when I speak of Heavenly than Earthly matters. Ephesians. 5.4. and 4.6. Psalm. 1.2.

4 That I remember I shall answer for every idle word, which passes out of my
mouth, to God, or to Man. Matthew. 12.36.

5 That multitude of words be often sinful: let me speak therefore as few
as I may, yea be rather silent then speak unprofitably. Prou. 17.27. and
10.19. Iam. 1.19.

6 That my words be no greater, or more then my matter deserves, nor bear a
show of vice in me, or any excessive affection. Psalm. 34.13. 1. Pet. 4.11.

7 That as I believe not all that is told me, so I tell not all I hear; but
tell the truth only, though not all nor always. Eccl. 3.7. Luke 2.19. 1. Sam.
10.1.6. and 16.1.2.5.

8 That I delight not to speak of others infirmities, especially behind their
backs; and speaking before them, speak with grief and wisdom. Psalm.
15.3.2. Tim. 3.3. Matthew. 18.15.

9 That I speak not of God, but with reverence knowing I am not worthy to
take his name in my mouth. Leuit. 19.12. Romans 9.5. Deuteronomy. 28.18.

10 That in praising, I be discreet; in saluting, courteous, in admonition,
brotherly. Prou. 27.2.1. Sam. 10.4. Romans 16.16.

Quest. What rules have you learned for your actions toward God?

Ans. 1 That I use daily prayer to God, every morning, and evening, that he
would guide me and mine affairs for his glory, and mine own comfort. Dan.
6.10. Psa. 55.17

2 That I register up all my sins committed against him in every matter, and
with grief bewail them at fit time craving pardon and strength against them
Psalm. 51.3.

3 That every day something of Gods Word be read, and meditated upon, that I
may increase in knowledge and in godliness. Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 6.6.

4 That whatsoever I take in hand, I first take counsel at Gods Word, whether
it be lawful or no, be it for my profit or pleasure, and then that I do it
with peace, at least in my heart. 1. Sam. 30.8.

5 That I give thanks to God for every benefit that I have received, and then
dedicate the same for the promoting of his glory, and the good of his Church.
1. Thessal. 5.10.

6 That I sanctify Gods Sabbath daily in using holy exercises of prayer,
preaching, meditating, and Sacraments at the time. Exodus 20.8.

7 That any means God has appointed for any matter, be not more relied upon,
then God himself, but he be first prayed unto, for the prosperous use of
them. 2. Chronicles 16.12.

8 That I stick to God as well in adversity, as in prosperity, knowing the
one to be as necessary for me as the other: yet let me pray for my
necessities, be humble when I have them, that I use them well, and that I lose
them not. Iam. 1.2.3.

9 That I mark my profiting in Religion, prepare my self to hear Gods word,
attend when I am there, confer, and meditate about it after. 1. Cor. 15.13.
and 11.28.

10 That I love all things for Gods sake, and God only for his own: that I
make God my friend, and nothing can be mine Enemy; and account all things
vain, to serve God sincerely. Philip. 3.8. Romans 8.31.

Quest. What rules have you learned for actions toward your self?

Ans. 1 That I refrain my ears from hearing, mine eyes from seeing, my hands
from doing, and every part of my soul, and body, from fulfilling any thing
vain or wicked. Job. 31.1. Psalm. 119.37.

2 That my meat, apparel, and recreations be lawful, needful, and moderate.
Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13.1. Tim. 2.9. and 5.23. Titus 2.3.1. Cor. 10.31.

3 That with all care I redeem the time, knowing I shall answer for every idle
hour. Ephesians. 5.16.1. Pet. 4.3.

4 That I be as sorrowful for the good deeds that I have omitted, as I am
joyful for the good deeds I have fulfilled. Romans 7.8.9.

5 That my special sins and corruptions be inquired into, thought upon with
grief, whether they are weakened in me, or remain in their old strength, and
that I resist them with all faithfulness every day more and more. 1. Cor.
11.28.

6 That I remember with humility, all the good motions and actions God works
in me, that they may be pledges of my salvation, spurs to godliness, and
comforts against temptations. 2. Cor. 6.4.5. Romans 7.15.

7 That I suffer not my self, to be pleased with mine unprofitableness, that
iswith unfitness, or unwillingness to serve God. Romans 12.11.

8 That I follow my lawful calling, so carefully for the good of Gods Church,
as feeling the trouble thereof, I be put in mind of my misery by Adam, and be
humbled thereby: Romans 12.7. Genes. 3.10. Ecclesiasticus 1.13.

9 That I take revenge of my self for my slipperie sinning, beating down my
body that I sin not again. 1. Cor. 9.27.

10 That I never make more show of outward holiness, then I have inward in my
heart. Esaias 58.5.6.

Quest. What rules do you learn for your actions toward other?

Answ. 1 That I remember that whatsoever I have that may be used toward
others, God has bestowed it on me for others benefit. Romans 12.6. and 1.11.

2 That I count it not sufficient, that my self serve God only, unless I
cause all within my charge by all means to do the same, Genesis 14.14. and
18.19. Psalm. 101.1.2.3 and Josh. 24.15. Ester. 4.15.

3 That I consider I am but Gods Steward, in all his benefits I have: let me
therefore employ them wisely to those that need, heartily and in time. 1. Pet.
4.10.

4 That I behave my self toward them, so sincerely, that I may win the
weak, comfort the strong, and make ashamed the wicked. 1. Cor. 10.32. Col. 4.5.

5 That as I receive good in company, so always I do them some good in my
power. Romans 1.12. and 14.19.

6 That when I know others to sin, I mourn for it, and amend it if I may, by
brotherly admonition. 1. Cor. 5.2. Matthew. 18.15. Leuit. 19.17.

7 That I rejoice and praise the Lord for any good thing the Lord sends unto
men, knowing that it is for mine and others godliness sake, that God vpholdeth
the work. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Rom, 12.15. Luke 15.8.

8 That I strive not whether other should do good to me, or I to them first;
but that I benefit even mine enemies, knowing my reward is with God. 1 Thessalonians.
5.15. Matt. 5.39. Romans 12.20.

9 That I be careful to use the good I can receive by any man, knowing that I
am but a member of the body, and stand in need of other. Rom 12.16. and 1.12.

10 That I carefully crave the prayers of other brethren, and their praises to
God for the gifts I have received: so I shall seal my fellowshippe in that
body more effectually. Romans 15.30. 2. Cor. 1, 11.

11 These holy exercises I must not make common for the time, or use them for
fashion sake, but use them daily.

Quest. Seeing you have precepts for your actions, what must you observe in
your gesture and behavior?

Answ. For my gesture I must take heed:

1 That mine eyes be not haughty. Psalm. 131.1.

2 That my countenance be not impudent. Prou. 7.13. Isai. 3.9.

3 That my face be neither laughing nor lowering. Eccles. 19.28.

4 That mine hands be neither spread out, nor closed in. Prou. 6, 13.

5 That I be not apish in imitation. Psa. 106, 35.

6 That my gate be not too slow, nor swift. Eccles. 19.28.

7 That I give place and reverence to my betters. Leuit. 19, 32.

8 That I sit not before I am placed, Luke 14.9, 10.

9 That I speak not before I am asked. Eccles. 21, 20.

10 That I be not solemn, when I ought to be cheerful, Eccl. 3.4.
nor cheerful when I should be sorrowful; but in all things behave my self as
the child of God. Ephesians. 5, 8.

Quest. What rules are you to observe in apparel?

Answ. 1 For the matter, it must not be too good, or too mean. Matthew. 11.8.

2 For the fashion, not too new, or too old. Romans 12, 3. Isai. 3, 16.

3 For the color, not too light, or too sad. Luke 16.19.

4 For the wearing, not too effeminate, Eccl. 19.28 1. Tim. 2.9 1. Pet. 3.3.4.5.
nor too sordid and in a word, my apparel must be such as argues sobriety and
holiness of mind, considering the ends of apparel, which are:

1 For necessity, that our bodies may be kept from the weather. Prou. 31.21.

2 For honesty, that our nakedness may be covered. Genesis 3.7.

3 For commodity that we may labor in our callings. John 14, 4.

4 For frugality, according to our state 2. Sam. 13, 18.

5 For distinction, both of men from women, young from old, Magistrates from
subjects, the Clergy from the Laity, and the rich from the poor. Deuteronomy. 22.5.
Genesis 37, 3. Hester 6, 9. Exodus 28, 4. Luke 7, 25. Zeph. 1, 8.

And in wearing of apparel, I must not look so much what I am able to do, as
what is fit for me to be done, to imitate the most grave and sober sort of my
rank, and to keep my self rather under, then above my degree; which if I do
not, I do but waste Gods benefits, wear a badge of a proud heart, give
testimony of idleness, procure suspicion of leuity by diverse fashions: labor to
confound degrees, and by the lightness of mine apparel, provoke many not
only to suspect me of evil, but also by it to commit evil, Ezech. 23.5.12.

Quest. What rules are you to observe in diet and at Table?

Answ. 1 That I sit not down before I pray. Psalm. 145.15. Matthew. 14.6. Luke
24.30. 1. Sam. 9.13.

2 That I rise not before I give thanks 1. Cor. 10.31. Romans 14.6. 1. Thessal.
5.18. Eccles. 32.14.

3 That I feed only to satisfy hunger. Ezech. 16.49. Luke 21.34.

4 That I cut not at the table of my betters before I am carved. Eccles. 31.18.

5 That I feed not on too many dishes. Eccles. 31.12, etc.

6 That I desire not too much dainty meats. Eccles. 37.29.

7 That my supper be ordinarily less then my dinner. Eccles. 31.19.20.21.

8 That I beware of too much strong drink. Eccles. 30.25. and 31.28. Pro. 20.1.

9 That I rise with an appetite. Eccles. 31.19.

10 That in eating I remember the poor, and that this body which I feed shall
be worms meat. Neh. 8.10. Amos 6.6.

Quest. What rules must you observe for recreation?

Answ. 1 That they be of good report, and of whose lawfulness there is least
question. Phil. 4.8.

2 That I make not an occupation of them. Prou. 21.17.

3 That I use them as recreations not to trouble my body or mind.

4 That I stay not long at them.

5 That I lose not much at any recreation.

6 That I use no such recreations, as I am ashamed that good people should see
me.

7 I must not give offense, by abusing my liberty to any man.

8 After exercise I must return to my calling.

9 I must use such exercises as are of little cost, least loss of time, and
fit for me to use.

10 I must not then play, when I should be at work, nor be merry in the time
of mourning.

Quest. What rules are you to remember forgetting riches?

Answ. 1 That my calling be such an honest calling, as that I be not ashamed of
the very name thereof: as usurers are to be called usurers. Genesis 47, 3.

2 That I get my wealth by honest labor. Pro. 3, 1. Psalm. 128.2, These. 3, 8.

3 That in buying and selling, I defraud no man. Genesis 23, 15. and 33, 19. 1,
These. 4, 6. Eccles. 27, 2.

4 That I enrich not my self by the labor of the poor. Amos 8, 4. James 5, 4.

5 That to get, I leave not Gods service. Isa. 58; 13. Neh. 13, 15. Amos 8 5.
Ier. 22, 13.

6 That I lie not, nor forswear my self. Leuit 19, 11.

7 That my weights, wares, and measures be good. Leuit. 19, 36. Prou. 11, 1.
and 16.13. and 20, 10.

8 That I consider, that it is hard to be rich and religious. Mat. 19, 23, 24.

9 That I do as I would be done to. Luke 6, 31.

10 That I commend not my servants for deceiving any. 2, King. 5, 26.

Quest. What rules must you observe in spending?

Answ. 1 That I spend not above mine estate. Prou. 27, 27. 1, Sam. 25.36. Psalm.
131, 1.1, Cor. 16, 1. Luke 14, 28.

2 That I spare not when I ought to spend, Prou. 11, 24. 1, Samuel 25.11.

3 That I buy not that which is needless for me. John 13, 29.

4 That especially I must give to the godly. Galat. 6, 10. Eccles. 12, 4.

5 That I have a regard to my kindred.

6 That I give not too much to the rich, and friends 1, Tim. 6, 8. 2, Sam. 9.1.

7 That I observe times, places, and persons, in giving and spending. Eccles.
12, 1.

8 That I give not to the poor with reproaching them Eccles. 4, 7, 8. Rom, 12,
8. 2, Cor. 9, 7.

9 That I boast not too much of my liberality. Prou. 20, 6.

10. That I be not liberal of another man's purse. Eccles. 11, 1. Luke 16, 6.

Quest. But since I can neither get riches to spend, nor spend riches with any
credit; unless I use a Christian frugality, what rules can you give me for
commendable frugality out of Gods word?

Answ. I will give you only three:

1 Be sure you have an honest and lawful calling to busy your self in. Genesis
3.19. Ephesians. 4.28.

2 Be ever following of that calling.

3 Avoid all things which are enemies to thriuing frugality.

Quest. What? must every man, even gallant and great ones have a calling?

Answ. Yes verily: for, first, so have all godly men had: secondly, they that
have none, or having any will not labor in it, are not worthy to eat: as for
such as live only upon other men's purses and pains, devouring the good
creatures of God, and living upon the spoil of others, you may truly say,
that they are a burden to the earth, the baue of the common wealth, and the
worst creatures in the world.

Quest. In what manner must this calling be followed?

Answ. 1 With diligence: Prou. 18.9.10.5. which will procure blessings. Prou.
10.4.12.11.14.23. and honor, Prou. 22.29. But he that trusts only to servants
can never practice this first rule Pro. 27.23.

2 With wisdom, which stands. First, in looking after things needful for
housekeeping, and not first to deck the house before necessaries be provided,
Prou. 24.27. Secondly, in asking counsel and advise, for two eyes are better
then one, and many see more into the affairs of others, then their own. Prou.
20.16.21.5.29.20.26.12. Thirdly, by making use of experience and examples, and
that is by marking things that fall out, the beginnings, proceedings, and
events of matters, and keep them in mind to stand thee in sted: for he that
never marketh any thing it is all one, as if he had never seen or heard them;
such an one must ever be running for counsel. Fourthly, by taking opportunity
for honest gain. Pro. 10.5. And lastly, by keeping thee with in compass, not
bearing an higher port, and countenance in the World, than a man's ability will
warrant Prou. 12.9. yet is it not good for a man to feign himself poor, when
he has abundance, as many do, who are ever whyning and complaining without
cause, and are neither good to others nor themselves. Wisdom thus ordered is
like to the skill of a workman, by which he is able to remove, or lift up that
weight, which a stronger than he cannot do.

3 Justice and upright dealing: for so, thou shall reap the like from others,
Prou. 21.21. Mark. 7.12. have a blessing on thy wealth: Prou. 21.6. and
purchase much credit by thy good dealing.

4 Mercifulness and friendly dealing with the poor, in buying of them their
commodities, selling to them their wares, and laboring for them to their good.
This is a good way to thrive, Pro. 16.3.28, 22. 1. Tim. 6.9.10.

5 Contentation with that portion, which God as a wise Father, measures out
unto thee, 1. Tim. 6.6. Philip. 4.11. Heb. 13.5.

6 Look to the choice of friends, for grace, and good nature: are thy friends
great? they will often procure to thee great expense, and loss of time, Prou.
23.1.2.3. are they affectionate, and full of passions? thou shall have much a
do to please them, and they are soon lost: Prou. 28.19.22.24.29 22.

Lastly, keep amity with thy neighbors, Romans 12.18. yet only so long as thou
may have God to friend also.

Quest. You said in the third place, I must avoid those things which are
enemies to frugalitie, which are they?

Answ. 1 Sloth: which is described to be a great wisher Pro. 13.4. excuser Pro.
15.19.22.13.26.14.15. ouer-wise Pro. 26.16. and the high way to beggary. Prou.
20.4.10.4.24.24.36.

2 Vain and idle company Prou. 28.19. these will drive you either to other
delights, or to loose your time or to let go occasions for your good; be you
never so good, bad company will hurt you, as the sweetest waters poured into the
sea become salt, and brackish.

3 Take heed of pastime: Prou. 21.17.

4 Of talking what you will do Pro. 14.23.

5 Of a sweet tooth, and a velvet mouth, which often procures double expenses:
first of diet, secondly of physic to cure diseases gotten by intemperance.
Prou. 21.17.23.21.29.

6 Good fellowship and company keeping, which is the loss of time, an hinderer
of thy calling, a drawer of much company to thine house and causes them often
to be like to them both in conditions and affection. Pro. 13.20.14.7.

7 Take heed of much borrowing, for he ye goes on borowing goes a sorowing,
Pr. 22.7. he yt is ever borrowing is never a freema^.

Quest. What rules are you to observe for the sanctifying of the Sabbath?

Answ. 1 I must rise early to sanctify my self, and all that belong to me, for
Gods service that day. Job. 1.5.

2 I must keep it from morning till evening. Leuit. 23.32.

3 I must frequent the exercises of religion, and be present with all reverence
at prayer and preaching. Psalm. 122.1.

4 I must not so go from Sermon to Sermon, that I confer not of Gods word which
I hear, especially with such as belong unto me. Acts 17.10.11.

5 I must meditate of all Gods mercies, especially of such as are given me in
Christ. Psalm. 92.1.

6 I must not make that day, a day of feasting, sporting, or visiting (as the
most do) of friends abroad. Isai. 58.13.14.

7 I must do no work upon that day, which might have been done the day
before, or may be done the day after. Exodus 20.10.

8 I must labor to be at Gods house with the first, that so I may be partaker
of the whole service. Math. 18.20. Hebr. 10.25. Psalm. 42.4.

9 I must visit such as are comfortless, if I know, or imagine they stand in
need of my help. James 1.27.

10 I must be careful to provide something, which I may distribute to the
necessity of the Saints. 1. Cor. 16.2.

These rules must I observe; lest it be truly said of me, which was falsely
said of Christ, This man is not of God, for he keeps not the Sabbath. John
9.16.

Quest. Now as you have learned these general rules of piety, come we even to
particulars: say that you intend to be married, what rules must you use in
choosing a wife?

Answ. I must look, 1 That she be of good religion. Genesis 26.2. and 27.46.

These rules must women use also in taking an husband.
2 Of honest parentage. Genes. 28.1.

3 Of good report. Prou. 22.1.

4 Of civil carriage. Prou. 7.10.11.12.

5 Of contenting personage. Genesis 24.16.

6 A lover of godly company. Acts 16.17.

7 Of provident circumspection. Prou. 19.1. and 31.16.

8 Of stayed years.

9 Of few words. Pro. 31.26. Eccl. 26.28.

10 Of an honest nature. Eccles. 25.18.

Quest. When you are married, what duties owe you to your wife?

Answ. I owe unto her:

1 Love to her person. Ephesians. 5.25.28. 1. Sam. 1.8.

2 Chastity to her bed. Prou. 5.15.16, 17.18. Gen 2.14.

3 Maintenance to her estate. Pro. 31.31.

4 Cohabitation to her content. Deuteronomy. 24.5. 1. Cor. 7.5. 1. Pet. 3.7.

5 Patient forbearing, and concealing of her infirmities, Colos. 3.19. Ephesians.
4.26. especially when I am newly married: for as, brickes newly laid are easily
severed, before the mortar be dried; so lovers newly married, are easily
divorced, before their hearts are by continuance united.

6 Admonition and commendation, rather then correction. Hebr. 10.25. Prou.
31.31.

7 Instruction in piety. 1. Cor. 7.15.

8 Due benevolence. 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.

9 Kindness to her kindred. Hester 8.2.3.

10 Cherishing in sickness. Prou. 12.10. And continuance of love to her, even
when she is old, wrinkled, and has lost her former beauty. Luke 1.6.

11 I must leave her a liberal portion, if she survive me. Prou. 31.31.

12 And both mourn truly for, and be kind to her children, if she die before
me Genesis 23.2.

Quest. And what duties must you look for from your wife?

Answ. These duties:

1 Reverence, as to her head. 1. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.33.

2 Chastity, as to a part of her body. Genes. 2.24. Prou. 5.19.

3 Providence in getting, sparing, and spending. Prou. 31.1. Sam. 25.

4 Nursing of her own children: for, this, God, nature, her breasts, her
health, all childrens love to such a mother, the dumb creatures, the fear of
changing her child, and the examples of holy women teach her, if she be able to
do it. Genesis 21.7.

5 Silence in keeping secrets, without declaiming against every domestical
unkindness. Galath. 6.2. Judge. 16.18.

6 Obedience to my lawful commandments. Ephesians. 5.22. Hester 1.21.22.

7 Cheerfulness of countenance, and speech. Eccles. 26.19.20.

8 Diligent staying at home in some honest calling. Prou. 7.11.12. Genesis 18.9.

9 Gravity in her domestical behavior. 1. Pet. 3.2.

10 Sobriety in her appare^ and gesture. Isai. 3.1. Tim. 2.9. 1. Pet. 3.4.

11 Observation of his nature, and diet. 1. Sam. 25.36.37. Genesis 27.9.

12 Abstinence from marriage for some convenient time after his death, that so
it may appear she truly loved him, Luke 2.37.

Quest. If God send you children, what duties owe you to them?

Answ. I am bound to perform these duties: 1 To bring them up in the fear of
the Lord, Genesis 18.19. Prou. 4.4. and 31.1. Psalm. 78.4. Ephesians. 6.4. 1. Chron.
28.9. and to love them best, who best love God, and me. Genesis 25.28. and 37.3.

2 To look that they may live in some calling. Genesis 4.2. Prou. 10.4.

3 To fit their callings according to their natures. Genesis 4.2.

4 To teach them such civil behavior, as sauors of piety. Prou. 4.24.25.26.

5 To give good example to them in each thing. Leuit. 11.44. 2. Kings 2.23.

6 To teach them at the least to read. Reuelat. 1.3.

7 To correct them doing amiss. Eccles. 30.1. Prou. 22.15. and 19.18. and
29.15. 1. King. 1.6.

8 To commend them when they do well. Ephesians. 6.4.

9 To apparel them rather comely then costly. Eccles. 11.4.

10 To deny them in many things their wills. Eccles. 30.9.10.11.

11 To leave them all some fit portion of my goods, and not to make one a
gentleman, and the rest beggars, Genesis 25.5.6. Deuteronomy. 21.17. Luke 15.12: but
Eccles. 33.18.19.20. he must not give them power over him whilst he lives.

12 In due time to look to their marriage. Eccles. 7.25.

13 And last of all, to pray for them, that they may fear God, obey governors,
grow in grace, and become citizens of heaven. Genes. 17.18. Psalm. 72.1. Job. 15.

Quest. What duties are your children to perform to you, and your wife?

Answ. They ought, 1 To obey us in things lawful. Ephesians. 6.1.2.

2 To reverence us, as the authors of their being. Eccles. 3.1.2.3.4. and
7.27.28. Tob. 4.3.4.

3 To acknowledge us, be we never so poor. Genesis 47.1.2. Prou. 19.26.

4 To endure our corrections patiently, Hebr. 12.9.10.11. and though we have
imperfections to bear with them. Genesis 9.22.23.

5 To be content with our provision for them. Luke 15.12. Philip. 4.11.

6 To seek al means by which they may please us. Luke 15.29. Genesis 26.25.

7 To behave themselves so as they may credit us. Prou. 10.1. Genesis 34.30. and
27.46.

8 To be sorry when we be disgraced, Eccles. 3.11.

9 To follow us as well in the practice of piety and godliness, as in the
inheritance of our goods and lands. Ephesians. 5.1.

10 Not to do, attempt, or enterprise any thing of weight or importance,
without our advice, consent, or approbation: but especially to stay till we
provide for them in marriage. Genesis 6.2. and 24.4. and 26.34. Now all these
duties they shall practice the better, if they will but consider the great care,
pains, and charges we have been at in their education, and bringing up which
they shall best know, when God sends them children of their own.

Quest. If you be parents in law to children, what duties must you perform to
them?

Answ. We must consider: 1 That they are his or her children, whom we have made
all one with our selves.

2 That God by his providence has committed them unto us.

3 That we shall not keep love each to other, unless we have care of such
children.

4 That all must pity the parentlesse, much more parents in law.

5 That they have lost their own parents, and therefore stand in need
especially of succor.

6 That our children may be in the like case, and we must do by others, as
we would have others do by ours.

7 We shall get credit and comfort, to our selves, by performing all duty to
them.

8 We shall take away that great scandal, which is given in the world by bad
parents in law, and therefore we must:

1 Bring them up in the fear of God.

2 We must rather take heed of severity toward them, then toward our own
children.

3 We must be careful to increase that portion, which is left unto them by
the will of their parents.

4 We must not for our private gain, or against their consent bestow them in
marriage.

Quest. What duties do children in law, owe to parents in Law?

Answ. They owe in truth many: but first they also must consider:

1 That they wanting their own parents, stand in need of some to govern them.

2 That God, and the consent of their suruiuing father or mother, has cast
them upon the tuition of such a parent.

3 That by obedience to parents in law, they show what they would have done to
natural parents.

4 That if they please them in all things, it may be they may inherit their
step-parents lands, or goods.

5 That by this they shall be a means to keep love betwixt an husband and his
wife.

6 They shall give good example to other such children to do the like.

7 That if they had such children, they would not willingly be so dealt withal.

8 That if such parents should use them ill, they themselves will complain of
them: why then should not good step-fathers complain of bad step-children? And
therefore they ought:

1 To reverence them as parents.

2 To depend upon them as governors.

3 To be advised by them as guardians.

4 To be careful not to marry themselves, till such time as they have their
approbation: which if they do, they dishonor God: grieve their parents:
scandalize themselves: make step-fathers negligent: step-children neglected:
cause other such children, and even natural children, against natural parents,
to do the like. If any yet say, I thrive after such a marriage; I answer, you
may in goods, perhaps not in goodness: if in both it is because you have
repented, or else doubtless you will not thrive long.

Quest. Now if to wife and children, God send you servants, what duties do you
owe to them?

Ans. For my servants I must be careful.

1 That they be fit to do such business as I keep them for. Genesis 41.38.
Exodus 31.2.

2 That I impose not too much upon them. Prou. 12.10. Exodus 1.14.

3 That they neither play nor work, nor go on errands on the Lords day. Exodus
20.

4 That they go and come with me to and from the Church. Josh. 24.15.

5 That I examine them of such things as were taught. Genesis 18.19. Psalm. 34.11.

6 That I be not too familiar with them. Prou. 29.21.

7 That I in discretion correct them for their faults. Eccles. 33.23. Genes.
16.6.1. Sam. 30.15.

Let Merchants note this.
8 That I teach them a trade, and occupation; and in teaching them, send them
not to such places of idolatry, as by being there, they may endanger their
souls, to procure my wealth. Prou. 12.10.

9 That I be not sorry when they set up, but help them. Eccles. 7.20.21. and
33.29. and 34.23.

10 That I teach them not to deal unjustly by mine example, or commend them if
they do so. Prou. 21.6. 2. Kings 5.26.

11 That their diet and apparel be convenient, and only such as I provide for
them. Prou. 31.21.27.

12 That I keep no more servants than I can well employ; least by their own
idleness they become bad, and by my proud prodigality, I die a beggar. To
feed many bellies, and build many houses is the next way to beggerie.

Quest. What duty do servants owe to masters?

Answ. Even these duties; They must be.

1 Conscionable to do their best service. Eccles. 6.5.6.7.8. Coloss. 3.23.

2 Diligent to do any service. Matthew. 8.9. Luke 17.7.8.

3 Careful to become masters of their trade. Prou. 27.18. and 22.29.

4 Faithful, even to a penie of their masters goods. Titus 2.10. Genes. 30.27.
and 35.5.

5 Circumspect for his best advantage; not only when he is present, but in his
absence. Titus 10.

6 Silent, not revealing his secrets. Pro. 11.13.

7 Willing to be directed and corrected by him. 1. Pet. 2.18. 1. Tim. 6.1.

8 Humble, and not answering again. Titus 2.9.

9 To give good words to such as they deal with. Coloss. 4.6.

10 To maintain their masters credit in all things. And lastly, they must live
in reverence to their governors, quiet with their fellows, helpful to such
as have too much work imposed on them, and give good example, even to children
in the family: to be short, I could never yet see him a good and thriuing
master, who was in his apprentiship a bad, and an unfaithful servant: which I
would wish all servants to observe.

Quest. How then may a good man-seruant be described?

Answ. You told me, that you have seen him thus described in print:

He must have, 1 The snowt of a swine, to be content with any fare.

2 A lock on his mouth, to keep his masters secrets.

3 The long ears of An Ass, to hearken to his masters commandments.

4 Good apparel on his back, for his masters credit.

5 A sword and buckler on his right arm, for his masters defense.

6 On his left arm a Curry-combe for his horse, a beesome for his chamber, and
a brush for his apparel, as one ready for any service.

7 The eyes of an Eagle, to see into that which may be for his masters good.

8 The feet of an Hind, to go with all speed about his masters business.

Quest. And what properties must a maid-seruant have?

Answ. She must be, 1 Careful. 2 Faithful. 3 Patient. 4 Neat. 5 Cheerful.
6 Cleanly. 7 Quick. 8 Honest. 9 Skillful. And last of all Dumb.

Quest. But since God has appointed civil government in the world, what are
the duties of a good Magistrate?

Answ. He is bounden:

1 In his own person, to fear and serve God. Psalm. 2.10.1 1. Ios. 24.15. 2.
Chron. 34.3.

2 To plant true religion in his dominions, and abolish all kinds of
superstition. Isai. 49.23. Judges 6.25. 1. Chron. 13.3. 2. Chron. 26.3.34.4.

3 To enact wholesome laws for the good ordering of his State and people. Dan.
3.29.

4 To see that Gods Commandments, and his own Edicts be duly observed. 2.
Chron. 19.5.6.7.

5 By those laws to hear, and judge both poor and rich. Deuteronomy. 1.16.17.

6 To make the safety of the people the most sovereign Law: and with
Augustus, rather to save one subject, then destroy a thousand enemies.

7 To keep his own laws in his own person. Prou. 16.12.

8 Not to look more to private gain, then the good of his people. Deuteronomy.
16.19. 1. Sam. 12.3.

9 To live so, as he may be both feared and loved, 1. Sam. 12.18.

10 To pray often for his State, and subjects. 2. Chron. 30.18.19. In a word,
he must have a Ladies hand, an Eagles eye, and a Lions heart.

Quest. And what are the duties of a good Subject?

Answ. He owes to his Governor.

1 Fear, as he is the minister of Justice. Romans 13.4.

2 Reverence, as he is the Father of his people. 1. Pet. 2.17.

3 Obedience, as he is under God upon earth. 1. Pet. 2.13.14.

4 Prayer, that under him he may live an honest, and godly life. 1. Tim. 2.1.

5 Protection of his person from danger, though it should be with the less of
his own life. 1. Chron. 11.18. 2. Sam. 18.3.

6 Maintenance in paying tribute unto him, under whom he enjoys all that he
has. Romans 13. Luke 2.4. Mat. 17.27.22.21.

7 Commendation of his virtues, for which especially he is to be admired. 1.
Sam. 12.4.

8 Concealment of his infirmities, and to take heed how he censure them. 2.
Sam. 16.7.8.

9 To take heed that he speak not evil of him, no not to curse him in his
heart. Eccles. 10.20. Acts 23.5.

10 If God take his governor away, he must keep an honorable memory of him
after he is dead: for it is the property of a currish Dog, to bark over a
dead Lion. Lament. 4.20.

Quest. Say that you have a Minister, what is his duty to you?

Answ. He is bound: 1 To pray in, and for the Congregation. Numb. 6.24. 1. Sam.
12.

2 To read the word of God. Nehem. 8.8. Acts 13.27.

3 To preach the Gospel of Christ. 1. Cor. 9.16. 2. Tim. 4.2. Pet. 5.2.3.

4 To Catechize such as are ignorant in his charge. Gal. 6.6.

5 To give good example by his life. Mat. 5.13.14.15.16.

6 To comfort the feeble minded. Job. 33. 23. Isay 61.1.1. These. 5.14.

7 To reprove sin and iniquity. Isay 58.1.

8 To visit such as are not infectiously sick, if he be sent for. James 5.15.

9 To see how the poor may be maintained. Gal. 2.10. 2. Cor. 9.2. Acts 11.30.

10 To be hospital, according to his ability. 1. Tim. 3.2.

Quest. And what duties owe you to him?

Answ. Iowe unto him, 1 Reverence as Gods Angel. Revelation 1.20. Galath.
4.14. 2. King. 13.14.

2 Audience as Gods Ambassador. 2. Cor. 5.20. Luke 4.20.

3 Obedience, as Gods shepherd. Ezec. 34.2. Heb. 13.17.

4 Maintenance, as Gods labourer. 1. Cor 3.9. and 9.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.

5 Countenance, as Gods Minister. 1. Tim. 5.17. Eccles. 38.1.

6 Confession as he is a Comforter. 1 Samuel 12.13. Acts 2.37.

7 Love, as he is mine instructor. Gal. 4.15

8 Fear, as he is my Father. 1. Cor. 4.15

9 Patience, as he is my correcter. Hebr. 13.22.

10 Prayer, as he is to break to me the bread of life. Ephesians. 6.6. Romans 15.30.

Quest. I know, by this, my Ministers duty, and my duty toward the
Minister: but be it that I come to hear a Sermon, what rules can you give me
for profitable hearing?

Answ. Surely these:

1 That you prepare for hearing. Genes. 35.2. Exodus 19.10. 1. Sam. 16.5. and
21.4.

2 That you be diligent in hearing: Ierem. 13.15.

3 That you be careful after hearing. Isay 42.23.

Quest. What rules must I observe before?

Answ. 1 That I leave all Worldly cares at home. Eccles. 4.17. Ruth. 3.3. Mark
7.3. Luke 8.14.

2 That I pray for the Preacher, people, and my self. Ephesians. 6.19. Psalm.
119.18. and 12.9.8.

3 That I make my self not unfit by banqueting. Isay 5.12.24. Hos. 4.11. Luke
21.31. Ephesians. 5.17.

4 That I read his text before I come, if he follow an ordinary course. This
was Chrysostomes advice to his Auditors: Homil. 10. in John.

5 That I come not with prejudice of the Minister. 1. King. 22.8. Acts 24.25.
Luke 23.8. 1. Cor. 1.11.

6 That as I come, I consider whither I go. Exodus 34.24. Zach. 8.21.

7 That I carry my Family with me. Exodus 20.10.

8 That I inuit others to come. Isay 2.3 Zach. 8.21. John 1.43.47. Luke 2.42.
Psalm 122.1. Genesis 11.4.

9 That I bring a mind desirous to hear. 1. Pet. 2.2.

10 That I so come, as I may hear the whole Service and Sermon: For, to
neglect Service, savors of Schism; and, to come short of the Sermon
ordinarily, argues Atheism.

Quest. What must you do in hearing the Word?

Answ. 1 I must settle my self to hear. Acts 10.33. Eccles. 6.33.

2 Mine eyes must be bent upon the Preacher only. Luke 4.20. and 5.1. Acts 3.5.
and 8.6. Nehem. 8.3.

3 I must not offend the Congregation, by coughing, or sleeping. Acts 21.9. and
21.40. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.

4 I must read nothing in the time of the Sermon, unless I turn to places
alleged; but, Hoc agere, do that which I am come to do.

5 I must take heed I talk not so with others, that I hear only by
peecemeale. 1. Corinthians 10.10. Psalm 26.12.

6 I must remember I come to learn. Isay 2.6.

7 If the Doctrine be good, neither voice, nor youth, nor gesture must offend
me. 2. Cor. 11.6.

8 I must rejoice most in mine own Teacher. John 10.4.

9 I must observe the Preachers method, whether he expound, teach, exhort,
confute, reprehend, or comfort.

10 I must note that which most concerns me, and then think that he speaks
to, and of me, Acts 2.38. James 1.25.

11 I must not be weary, if the Sermon be long. Acts 20 9. Ios. 8.34. Nehem.
8.3.

12 I must write the Sermon if I can.

Quest. What must you do when you have heard?

Answ. 1 I must not depart before all, even the blessing be ended, nor before
the administration of the Sacraments, if there be any.

2 As I go home, I must think what I have heard, and talk of it as I go.
Luke 24.14. Nicephorus says that Christians in their iourneying did sing
Psalms; and by such singing, a Jew was converted. Lib. 3. Eccles. Hist. Cap.
37.

3 When I am come home I must confer of the Sermon, The want of this, is the
maine cause of ignorance, and unprofitableness.
and see that each of my Family have learned somewhat. Deuteronomy. 6.4.20.

4 If I doubt of any thing, I must ask the Preacher or some other. Malach.
2.7. Acts 8.34.

5 I must not immediately after hearing, go about my private affairs.

6 If the Sermon be ended before dinner or supper, the best table-talke is of
the Sermon. Exodus 12.26.

7 I must not so much censure the Minister, as see what good things I have
learned. Act. 13.45.

8 It is not enough to say, it was a good Sermon, but I must know for what I
commend it. Ioh. 7.46.

9 If any of my people have been negligently forgetful, I must reprove them.
Mark 7.19. and 8.18.

10 I must labor to turn Gods Word into good works. Romans 2.13. Ioh. 13.17.

Quest. Now that you may be able to judge of Sermons: tell me which you do
think a good Sermon?

Answ. Surely that which shows:

1 The coherence of his Text, with that Scripture, which goes before, and
follows after it, if it have any.

2 Which expounds the true meaning.

3 Which delivers out of it the natural doctrines, with reasons, and proofs
of that docrine.

4 Which makes use of each doctrine.

5 Which instructs, exhorts, confuteth, comfort.

6 In which is manifest the power of Gods Spirit.

7 Which heapeth not up too many testimonies divine, or humane.

8 That which Auditors may best understand, and remember.

9 That which teaches me the way to Heaven.

10 That which speaks especially to my heart, wounds my conscience, moves
me to tears, draws from me a confession of my personal sins, causes me to
believe and makes me to turn from all, yea, even my beloved sins, to God.

Quest. But because you see many a sleep at Sermons, tell me what may be the
cause of such heaviness?

Answ. The causes are:

1 The malice of Satan, who rocks the cradle in which men so sleep.

2 The want of consideration of the Majesty of God, the presence of Angels,
the necessity of the Word, and the subtlety of our adversary, who by this
means deuoures us.

3 Overmuch laboring in our callings the day and night before, as may appear
by many tradesmen

4 Excess of diet upon the Sabbath day at dinner, which hinders not only our
servants from coming, but them and us from hearing when we are come.

5 Want of exhortation in the Minister, that men should awake.

6 Neglect of such as sit by us, who suffering us to sleep, communicate with
our sin.

7 The cares of this World.

8 Opinion that we have knowledge enough.

9 Want of attention to that which is spoken.

10 An occasion may be, because some Ministers preach without study, and so
bring not much worth the hearing: But that Sermon is a mean one, out of which
a man may not learn some good.

11 The heat of the Air, where many are together, may occasion the best to
fall asleep.

12 Some are brought asleep by sorrow, or too long Sermons. Matthew 26.43.
Acts 20.9.

Quest. What remedies must you use against this ordinary drowsinesse?

An. 1 I must meditate of Gods presence.

2 That by it I discourage the Minister.

3 That I give bad example to others.

4 That such as see me, will suspect my Religion.

5 That the devil lulles me asleep.

6 That I turn a festival, into a funeral Sermon.

7 That I would be offended if any slept, whilst I talked unto them.

8 That so I hinder my self of many profitable instructions.

9 That Eutychus fell dead in such a sleep.

10 I must use a spare diet.

11 I must not be offended that my pewfellowes awake me.

12 I must not sit only, but stand, that I may keep my self from drowsinesse.

Quest. And what needs all this direction for hearing, may I not as well stay
at home, and read a good Sermon privately?

An. I disallow not reading of Sermons, and other good books, for by them I may
be,

1 Instructed in things I know not.

2 Confirmed in things that I know.

3 I may meditate the better of things written.

4 I may spend my vacant time well.

5 If I have no Preacher, such Sermons may much edify me.

6 If I be sick, or the weather foul, or the way to Church over long, this
course may be a means to give me much comfort. But yet preaching to the ear
is especially to be regarded: For by it,

1 God has appointed ordinarily to save me. 1. Cor. 1.

2 Then are Common places handled, Articles of faith expounded, and one place
of Scripture explaned by another.

3 Then dark places are made plain, and repugnant Scriptures reconciled.

4 Objections against truth are answered.

5 General doctrine is applied to occasions of times, places, and persons, by
exhortation, admonition, reprehension, consolation, etc.

6 Experience teaches, that the lively voice is more effectual, then ocular
reading.

7 Public assembles have singular promises of Gods presence, grace, and
blessing.

8 As the Priests lips must preserve knowledge; so the people must require it
at his mouth.

9 It is an encouragement to a good Minister.

10 Good example to others.

Quest. But are all men bounden to hear Gods Word?

Ans. Yea verily: evil men must, that they may be converted: good men must,
that they be not corrupted: the ignorant must, that they may be instructed:
and the learned must, for these reasons:

1 To learn new points of piety, which they know not.

2 To recall such things as they do know.

3 To move them to practice duties known.

4 To encourage the Preacher by their presence.

5 To give example to others to do so.

6 To give testimony that they are members of the Church.

Qu. Thus I see how you shall not take Gods word in vain by hearing: tell me
how you may not take Gods name in vain by swearing?

Ans. Here I must observe:

1 Gods commandment, that I must not swear. Matthew. 5.34. James 5.12.

2 His curse upon such as have blasphemed. Zach. 5.3. Eccles. 23.9.

3 If I lie little, I shall swear less. Luc. 22.70.71.

4 I must refrain pety oaths. Matthew. 5.34.35.36.

5 I must labor to forbear for a time. 1. These. 5.22.

6 I must bind my self from it.

7 I must consider before I name God. Eccles. 5.1.

8 I must meditate of the Majesty, presence, goodness, and justice of God.

9 I must get some to admonish me.

10 I must not be greedy of gain.

11 I must know that the more I swear, the less I am believed in a truth.

12 I must avoid the company of swearers.

13 I may note that there is neither profit, nor pleasure in an oath.

14 It is an argument of an Atheist.

15 Men dare not abuse the name of a King.

16 I take it in ill part, when mine own name is disgraced.

17 I must take away all occasions of swearing.

18 I must look to the practices of the best men.

19 I must read, hear, meditate on Gods word. Psalm. 119.11.

20 I must give an account of every idle word. Math. 12.36.

A DIRECTION TO DIE WELL.

PHILIP. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

LONDON Printed for Edward Blunt, and William Barret. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, Earl of Exceter, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel:
Grace, and Peace.
RIght Honorable: Although it be appointed that all must die, yet the most put
far from them that evil day. It is certain, we must have an end: and the
remembrance of it keeps us from sin. The goodliest Cities have been
equalled with the ground, the stateliest buildings leuelled with the earth, the
greatest Empires brought to nothing, the Kings of the earth have been bound in
chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron: We all wax old as does a
garment, we dwell here as in houses of clay, our breath passes away, and we
are gone. Where is Methushelah, with all his years? Sampson with all his
strength? Absalom with all his beauty? Solomon with all his wisdom? David with
all his victories? or Croesus with all his wealth? Are we in our young age?
till thirty, we may be saluted with a good morrow: are we in our full age?
till fifty, we are saluted with a good day: are we in our old age? we must
take it patiently, that we are then saluted with, God send you good rest.

I have seen (says David) an end of all perfection: and happy are they that
have David's eyes. But all men have not this sight; the god of this world has
so blindfolded many, that if they be young, they cannot see death at their
backs: if old they will not see it before their eyes. We would mourn, if we
knew we should live but a month: we laugh, when, it may be, we shall not
live one day.

Heu! viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Alas! men live as though they should not die:
And as if hell were nothing but a lie.
Ambitiosus honos, and opes, and foeda voluptas,
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus amat.
Vain pomp, and wealth, and luxury,
The worldling makes his trinity.
To the end therefore that all men might think of their end, I have published
this Direction to die well. And though this small mite, be not worthy to come
into your rich Treasury, yet am I bold to cast it in: and because it is all I
can give at this time, I most humbly beseech you to give it entertainment.

You have gained much in this present world: but you have esteemed godliness
the greatest gain: and, with that blessed Apostle Saint Paul, You account all
things to be but dung, to the end you ^ight win Christ. And though it has
^leased God to give unto you great riches in this world, yet am I persuaded,
that the remembrance of death is not bitter unto you: Eccl. 41.1.
for as you are not ashamed to live, so you are not afraid to die. You wait
for it, because by her two Harbengers, Sickness, and Old age, it ever waits
upon you.

Here you sow liberally, that hereafter you may reap plentifully: you cast
your bread upon the waters, Eccl. 11.2.
after many days you are sure to find it. And if he has his reward for a
cup of cold water; you who deal your bread to the hungry, who bring the
wandering poor to your house, who see the naked and cover him, and hide not
your self from your own flesh Esai. 58.7.
: you, Right Honorable, shall not want your reward.

2. Chr. 30.22.
And seeing you (with good King Hezekiah) speak comfortably to every poor and
painful Leuite; how should they but speak honorably of you? The Lord grant
the that sheafe of your family, may ever be like unto Joseph's sheafe, and every
day grow to a greater increase of fruitfulness, Genesis 37.7.
till it be^fitted as a ricke of Corn for the Lord Barn: and he grant unto
you a long life, godly posterity, and a peaceable end; that here you may see
your Childrens Children in great prosperity: so as you may love yours, yours
may honor you, and both you and yours be honored of God: and that you who
are blessed in your honorable Predecessors, may ever be happy in your future
Successors,

I doubt not, but it will please you to pardon my boldness; and the rather
peruse this Direction to die well, because your whole life is, as it ought to
be, a meditation of death. And because it is but a little Manual, and may be
read over in a few hours, give me leave to commend unto you two other Books,
in which you may read, all the days of your life: The one is the book of
Gods mercies; the other is the book of Gods judgments. In the one, you may
see his goodness to you and yours; in the other, his justice against his and
the Churches enemies. This Book of mine has many leaves; these other have
only two: in the one, you may read of Mercy, in the other, you may read of
Judgment.

The Lord grant unto your Honor, with your most honorable Countess, the Lady
Francis, a second Dorothea, (given both as a gift to you that fear God) such a
life, that at the hour of death, when your glass shall be run, and the
Bridegroom call for you, you may both say, with that holy man; Vixi dum volui,
volui dum Christ volebas:
Sic nec vita mihi, mors nec acerba fuit.


London: From S. Martins in the fields. May 30. 1613. Your Honors, at command:
ROBERT HILL.

A DIRECTION TO DIE WELL.
Question.

I Doubt not, but you are now well instructed for the direction of your whole
life: but, because you have here no abiding city, what are you to think of,
that you may die well?

An. I am ever to meditae of five things:

1 Of mine own death; which is most certain that it will come, and uncertain
when it will come.

2 Of the death of Christ; which was bitter to him, but sweet to, and for, his.

3 Of the deceitfulness of this world, which is subtle to allure, and subject
to change.

4 Of the joys of heaven, which are com^ortable to think on, and glorious to
pos^esse.

5 Of the torments of hell, which are endless in themselves, and comfortless
to sinners.

Quest. And why ought you first to think oftentimes of death?

Answ. 1 Because it is appointed that al must die, Hebr. 9.27. Death spares
none: and therefore there was never sacrifice offered to her.

2 It is uncertain when, where, or how I may die; and therefore uncertain,
that I may ever think of it.

3 Many go merrily to the pit of perdition, for want of this meditation.

4 Death by this will be more welcome unto me; for, Dangers foreseen, are
less grievous.

5 I shall more easily contemn this world by often thinking that I am a
stranger in it.

6 It will keep me from many sins, which otherwise I would commit; and cause
me to repent of sins committed.

7 Christ my Lord, and good Christians, his servants, had ever such thoughts.

8 Many Philosophers have done the like, and of it have written many volumes.

9 As the day of death leaves me; so the day of judgment shall find me.

Psalm. 90.12
10 It was the prayer of Moses to God, that he would teach him so to number
his days, that he might apply his heart unto wisdom.

11 It is the end of all my hearing, and reading, and as it were the scope of a
Christian Divine.

12 It is the Art of all Arts, and Science of all Sciences, to learn to die.

Quest. How prove you this last?

Answ. Moses says, O that they were wise, and that they would consider their
latter end. Deuteronomy. 32.29.

The Wise man says, Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss. Eccles.
7.36.

An Emperor said, that, Fredricke the third.
The best knowledge was to know God, and to learn to die.

Augustine said, that in this our pilgrimage, we must think of nothing else,
but that we shall not be ever here; and yet here should we prepare for our
selves that place, from whence we shall never depart.

Gregory said, All the life of a wise man must be the meditation of death:
and, He is ever careful to do well, who is ever thinking of his last end.

Quest. Why then do so few think of death, and put this evil day far from
them?

Answ. The reasons are: 1 Their infidelity, they believe not either the
happiness of heaven, nor the horrors of hell.

2 Their impenitency and evil conscience, they would not break off their
sins, by drawing near to God.

3 Their ignorance of the souls immortality, the bodies resurrection, and the
good things prepared for them in heaven by Christ.

4 Their ambition, in desiring the honors and preferments of this world, and
being loath to leave them, when they have enioied them.

5 Their covetousness; by which, as Moles they would ever, by their good wills,
live upon earth.

6 Their delight in the pleasures of sin, from which they are taken at the day
of death.

7 Their want of Gods fear: for, He that fears God, fears not to dye.

8 Their unwillingness to leave this world; for, to die well, is to die
willingly.

Quest. It seems then we had need to pray, that God would teach us to
number our, not years, but days: and now tell me (you that have been taught
this Arithmeticke) how you ought to number your days?

An. I must number them after this sort:

1 I must abstract the time past; for that being irreuocable, will never come
again.

2 I may not add the time to come, for it may be, it will never come unto me.

3 I must set down only the time present, and know that it is only mine. Our
life is a point, and less then a point: a figure of one, to which we can add
no Cipher; it is but a moment, and yet if we use this moment well, we may get
eternity, which is of greatest moment.

Quest. Is it not then, think you, a great folly, that men are so unwilling to
think of death?

Answ. Questionless it is: we see the Mariner, with joy, thinks of the Haven.

The Labourer is glad to see the evening.

The Trauailer is merry when his journey is ended.

The Soldier is not sorry, when his warfare is accomplished: and shall we be
grieved when the days of sin are ended?

Quest. It seems by this which you have said, that this life of ours is very
troublesome: for we are Mariners, our haven is happiness: Travelers, our
journey is to Paradise: Laborers, our hire is Heaven: and Soldiers, our
conquest is at death: Is then our life both miserable and changeable?

Answ. Yea verily: for it is compared, to a pilgrimage, in which is
uncertainty: Genes. 47.9.

A Flower, in which is mutabilitie. Isay 40.7.

A smoke, in which is vanity. Psalm 102.3.

An House of Clay, in which is misery. Job. 4.19.

A Weauers shittle in which is volubilitie Job. 7.6.

A shepherds tent, in which is variety. Isay 38.12.

A Ship on the Sea, in which is celeritie. Wisd. 5.10.

A Mariner, who sitting, standing, sleeping, or waking, ever saileth on.

A shadow, which is nothing to the body. Job. 8.9.

To a thought, whereof we have thousands in one day.

To a dream, whereof we have millions in one night. Job. 20.8.

To vanity, which is nothing, in it self. Psalm. 39. 5.

And to nothing, which has no being in the World. Psalm. 39.5.

Quest. If all this be true, as it must needs be, because God has said it:
the hour of death is far better then the day of our birth: Is it so?

Ans. It is, and that for these reasons: by it.

1 We are freed from many present miseries. Revel. 14.13.

We are delivered from many future calamities. Isay 57.2.

3 Our souls are received into glory. Luke 23.43.

4 Our bodies are reserved to like glory. Philip. 3.20.

5 That wise man, Solomon, thought so. Eccles. 7.3.

6 That holy man, Paul, wished so. Philip. 1.23.

Quest. But because Paul desired to die, may we also desire to die?

Answ. Though the body and soul, be as man and wife conjoined together; yet
with some cautions, a man may desire the divorce of these twain:

1 If he resign his will to the will of God.

2 If he can tarry the good leisure of God.

3 If he do it that he may be with God.

4 That he may be disburdened of this body of sin: and thus Paul desired
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Philip. 1.23.

Quest. What think you of such as are in misery, and desire to die, to be
freed from misery?

Answ. I think their desires are not simply unlawful, especially if they
submit them to the will of God. I am vexed with a long and lingering disease, I
would be freed by death, if God would free me: I am detained in Prison I would
be delivered by death, if God would deliver me: I am exiled from my Country,
I would go to Heaven, if God would send for me. Do I sin in this? God
forbid: Elias did it, when he desired God to take away his life, 1. Kings
19.4. And Job did it, when he would have been contented to depart this life:
and many of Gods children have done the like.

Quest. Why then did Hezekiah mourn when he was to die? and why did David say,
Let my soul live? and Christ, Let this cup pass from me?

Answ. Hezekiah did so, because at this time he had not received a promised
issue to succeed him: Christ did so, because he was to die the death of the
cross: and David did so, both because he was in a grievous temptation; and, if
he had then died, his enemies would have triumphed over him.

Quest. But all this while you have not told me what death is.

Answ. It is nothing else but the privation of this natural life, or the
departure of the soul from the body: or as it were the deposition of an
heavy burden of troubles in this life, by which we are eased; especially if
we carry not with us such a burden of sins, as may weigh us down to the pit
of perdition.

Secundus the Philosopher being asked this question by Hadrian the Emperor,
said: Death is an eternal sleep, the dissolution of our bodies, the fear of
rich men, the desire of poor men, an inevitable event, an uncertain
Pilgrimage, a robber of Mankind, the Mother of sleep, the passage of life, the
departure of the living, and a dissolution of all.

Quest. Should Adam have tasted of this death, if he had stood in his
innocence?

Answ. He should not: for, the stipend and wages of sin is death, Romans
6.23. His body indeed was subject to mortality, but should not have died; as
our bodies now are subject to sickness, and yet we may die without sickness;
to wounding, and yet it may be they are never wounded: and as the garments of
the Children of Israel did not, by Gods providence, wear, by the space of
forty years, though they were subject to wearing, so we may say of Adams
body, it should not have died though it were subject to death.

Quest. Are we then any better in Christ then we were in Adam?

Answ. We are much: for, in Adam we might have died, and by him do die: In
Christ we cannot die, but change this life for a far better.

Quest. Are there any Monitors or Messengers of death?

Answ. There are three: casualtie, sickness and old age. Casualtie foretells
me my death is doubtful; Sickness, that death may be grievous; Old age, that
death is certain: Casualtie foretells me of death at my back; sickness that
she is at my heels; old age that she is before my face.

Quest. That I may give the better entertainment to death when she comes,
who has sent these three Harbengers before her; what can you advise me for to
do?

Answ. Surely, I would wish you, first, to believe in Christ, by whom the sting
of death is taken out: for, They only fear death, who doubt whether Christ
died for them.

2 To live well so long as you live: for, He can never fear death, who by a
good life has given entertainment to the fear of God.

Quest. What? even in my youth must I begin to live well? Will not God accept of
my service when I am old?

Answ. Will you wound your self, that you may go to the Chirurgian? and will
you sin in your youth, that you may sue for pardon in your old age? will you
lay all the burden upon a lame Horse, when you have many stronger in your
teame? shall the Devil have your Flowers, and God your weeds? the Devil your
wine, and God the lees? the Devil the fattest and fairest of your flock; and
God an halt, a lame and a lean Sacrifice? God forbid.

Quest. Yet if I have but time to say, Lord have mercy upon me, though I have
lived never so badly, God will have mercy upon me.

Ans. It is true indeed: That holy Thief did it upon the cross, and God had
mercy upon him: Marie Magdalen did it after her lewd life, and God had mercy
upon her. But (first) are you not worthy to want favor at your death, who
have refused it all your life?

Secondly, do you think that your repentance is unfeigned, which is but only
for a few days or hours?

Thirdly, do you not see that such repentance is often hypocritical, when men
that recover from sickness, fall again to sin, after such a kind of
repentance?

Fourthly, do not many fall into desperation at their death, because they have
not served God in their life?

Fifthly, is it not a folly to do that all day, which you must be enforced to
undo at night?

Sixthly, do you not see that God in his Justice does take sense, and reason
from many at their death, who have refused his mercy, all the days of their
life?

Quest. Yet you cannot deny, but many bad men have made a fair show at the
hour of death, have called upon God, and died like Lambs.

Ans. Like Lambs? why the most of them die like stones: they have lived a
sottish and a senseless life, and so they die. Nabal did so, but he died like
a fool: the rich glutton did so, but he died like a beast.

Quest. And you know also that many persons, who have lived a very strict life,
have died in despair, and blaspheming of God.

Ans. By the gates of hell they went into Heaven: by the extremity of their
disease, they might speak they knew not what: and by the sense of Gods
judgments they might say, My God why have thou forsaken me? But know this,
that he never dies ill, who has lived well; and he seldom dies well, who
has lived ill: We must judge men by their life, and not judge any by their
death.

Quest. Now then of all men that die in this World, whose death is most
miserable?

Ans. The death of sinners: for them we must mourn most, and their death is
most miserable Their birth is bad, their life is worse, their departure is
worst of all: their death is without death their end is without end, and their
want is without want. But precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints.

Quest. Can you give me any example to prove this?

Ans. I can: One, at the hour of his death, feeling already the torments of
hell, cried out after this sort; O lamentable destiny! O infinite calamity! O
death without death! O those continual cryings, which shall never be harkened
unto! Our eyes can see nothing, but sorrowful spectacles, and intolerable
torments. Our ears can hear nothing, but woe, woe without end woeful. O thou
earth, why do thou not swallow us? O ye mountains, why do you not cover
us from the presence of the Judge? How far do the torments of Hell exceed
all the tortures of this life? O you bewitching pleasures of this World, how
have you led us blindfold to the horrors of Hell? Woe, woe for ever unto us,
who without hope are cast from the favor of God. O that after ten thousand
years we might be delivered! O that in any time we might have an end? But, it
cannot be: our temporal pleasures have eternal pains: our mirth it is now
turned into mourning, and we are cast into eternal fire.

A King said, O that I had never been a King.

Quest. Show me also some examples of good men, who have uttered things
comfortable at their death.

Answ. Christ said, Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. Luke 23.46.

Steven said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Acts 7.59.

Simeon said, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy word.

Saint Augustine said, (as Hierom reports) Nature compels me to be dissolved:
I, according to the Scripture phrase, am to go the way of my forefathers. Now
Christ inuiteth me, now I desire to see celestial fights. O keep you the
faith: think you also that you are mortal men. Let this be your care, to
keep the commandments of God, that when you die, all the Saints may receive
you, as their familiars and friends, into the everlasting tabernacles. If you
regard me, or keep any remembrance of me your Father, think of these things,
savor these things, do these things.

Saint John said, My little children, love one another: my little children love
one another: and being demanded, why he did ingeminate so often this speech?
He said, My Lord and Master taught it us in his life, preached it before his
death, and if ye do this, it suffices.

Holy Effrem said, O Lord God, receive, preserve, save, and be merciful to us
by thy grace.

Tobiah said to his son, Keep thou the Law, and the Commandments, and show
thy self merciful, and just, that it may go well with thee. Chap. 14. 9.

Mauritius the Emperor said, when Phocas caused his children, and wife, to be
slain before his eyes, and lastly himself: The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works: Psalm. 145.

Antonius, surnamed Pius, that is, the godly King, said: Why do you mourn for
me, and not rather think of that common, both death and pestilence? And when
his friends were ready to leave him, he said: If you now leave me, fare ye
well: I but go before you. And being demanded to whom he would leave his son?
To God, says he, and you, if he deserve well.

Master Deering, a little before his death, being by his friends raised up in
his bed, seeing the Sun shine, and being desired to speak, said: There is
but one Sun that gives light to the world; there is but one righteousness;
there is but one communion of Saints. If I were the excellentest creature in
the world: If I were as righteous as Abraham, Isaac and Iakob (for they were
excellent men in the world) yet must we all confess, that we are great
sinners, and that there is no salvation, but in the righteousness of Christ
Jesus: and we have all need of the grace of God. And for my part, as
concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should have the
sentence of life on the one side, and the sentence of death on the other side,
I had rather choose a thousand times (seeing God has appointed the separation)
the sentence of death, than the sentence of life.

The Earl of Essex said: O God, Creator of all things, and Judge of all men,
thou have let me know by warrant out of thy word, that Satan is then most
busy, when our end is nearest, and that Satan being resisted, will fly. I
humbly beseech thee to assist me in this my last combat: and seeing thou
acceptest even of our desires, as of our acts; accept, I beseech thee, of my
desires to resist him, as of true resistance, and perfect by thy grace, what
thou see in my flesh to be frail and weak; give me patience to bear as
becomes me, this just punishment inflicted upon me, by so honorable a
trial. Grant me the inward comfort of thy Spirit: let thy Spirit seal unto
my soul, an assurance of thy mercies; lift my soul above all earthly
cogitations; and when my life and body shall part, send thy blessed Angels,
which may receive my soul, and convey it to the joys in heaven. Then
concluding his prayer for all estates of the Realm, he shut up all with the
Lords Prayer, reiterating this Petition, Lord Jesus forgive us our trespasses,
Lord Jesus receive my soul.

King Edward the sixth said, Lord God deliver me out of this miserable and
wretched life, and take me among thy chosen: Howbeit, not my will, but thy will
be done. Lord I commit my spirit to thee. O Lord, thou know how happy it
were for me to be with thee: yet for thy chosens sake, send me life and
health, that I may truly serve thee O my Lord God, bless thy people, and save
thine inheritance: O Lord save thy chosen people of England. O my Lord, defend
this Realm from Papistrie, and maintain thy true Religion, that I, and my
people, may p^aise thy holy Name, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake. I am faint,
Lord have mercy upon me, and take my spirit. And many of the like, you may
read in the book of Martyrs.

Quest. Are not they most happy that die in this sort, and sing these Cygnean
songs as funeral hymns?

Answ. O happy, and thrice happy are they, whose life is a continual praising
of God, and whose death is an incessant prayer to God.

Quest. Yet if it please God, I would not die in my youth, and the flower of
mine age.

Answ. Why? are you of so covetous a disposition, that you would measure all
things by the ell? Is nothing precious, but that which is durable? think you
the tallest person, the comliest person? the greatest picture, the best
picture? or the longest shadow, the goodliest shadow? Neither men, nor their
lives are measured by the ell: in a great and a small circle, the figure is all
one: and it is, has been, and will be fatal, even to great and glorious
personages, ordinarily not to live long. Take Solomon, Josiah, and Christ Jesus
for example.

Quest. O but I would not die in a strange country.

Answ. No? Abraham did, and died quietly: Joseph did, and he died honorably:
many Saints did, and they died gloriously. Are you slain in battle? you have
a tomb amongst the dead bodies of your enemies. Do you die in travail? you
are here a stranger, your country is in heaven. Death comes unto you masked,
in these and such like shapes, take off the mask, and it is the same death
wherewith women and children die. Every place is a like distant from heaven.

Quest. And when I have seen all the world, would you have me willing to leave
all the world?

Answ. Why? you ever have seen the same rising and setting of the Sun: the
same increasing and decreasing of nature: the like sins, that have been in
former times: and if you have seen all the world, consider but the vanity,
and mutabilitie of this world, and either you will say that this world is a
world of wickedness, or that now in his old age it is passing away, as a
threed-bare garment ouer-worne.

Quest. Is it easy now, think you, to leave wife and children, father and
mother, and all my friends?

Ans. Where you go you shall find more, and such as you never saw: and they
whom you leave behind, shall shortly follow after you.

Quest. But what shall become of my wife, children, friends, and kins-folkes,
who depend upon me?

Answ. All these belong more to God, than to you: he loves them best, and will
provide best for them; and such so left have often risen to high and great
place.

Quest. Yet if I died not alone, I might have more comfort.

Answ. Alone, why? how many thousand in the whole world die in the same moment
of time, which you die in, and yet (which God may grant to you) but a few of
them go to heaven?

Quest. Once again; would you have me not to fear death, which causes me to
lose life, look like a ghost, and which takes away from me all the ioies of
this world?

Answ. By losing a temporal life you find that life which is eternal: you
shall not be afraid when you look ghastly, and that ghastly body of yours shall
one day be clothed with glory, and be made like to the glorious body of your
most glorious Savior: and as for the petie, and peacocke ioies here, you
shall have ioies eternal, and unspeakable hereafter.

Quest. Seeing then I must needs die, what must I do to die well?

Answ. 1 Labor that your sins die in you, before you die in the world.

2 Be ever ready and prepared, either for death or judgment.

3 Endeavor that your death may be voluntary.

4 Consider what an excellent thing it is, to end your life before your death;
and in such sort, that at that hour you have nothing to do but to die: that
then you have no more need of any thing, not of time, not of your self, but
sweetly, and comfortably to depart this life; so that you may say in the
testimony of a good conscience, I was not ashamed to live, and I am not afraid
to die because I know my Redeemer lives.

Quest. How many ways may a man carry himself in death?

Answ. Five: 1 He may fear, and fly it as evil.

2 Attend it sweetly and patiently, as a thing natural, inevitable, and
reasonable.

3 Contemn it as a thing indifferent, and of no great importance.

4 Desire and seek after it, as the only haven of rest from all the troubles
and torments of this life, and so esteem it as great gain.

5 He may give it to himself by taking away his own life.

Quest. What think you of the first: because it is the opinion of the most?

Answ. 1 Because the most think so, therefore it is most remote from the truth.

2 Such seem to give little credit to Gods word, which teaches, that by it
we rest from our labors.

3 If death be evil, it is an evil only in opinion, and such an evil, as
never did hurt to a good man.

4 Why should a man fear that which in truth he knows not what it is, or what
good it will bring unto him, as Socrates once said unto his friends, when he
would not plead for his life before his Judges?

5 It argues faint-heartednesse, and folly, to fear that which cannot be
avoided.

6 If it be good, why should we fear it? if evil, why do we by sorrow add
evil unto evil?

7 He that once begins to fear death, can never, by reason of this fear, live
a good and a contented life. He is never a freeman, that fears death.

8 Consider that if nature had made men immortal, so that will they, nill
they, they should have lived ever, how many thousands in misery, would have
cursed nature? Surely if we had it not, in this vale of misery, we would desire
it more.

Quest. Give me your opinion of the second.

Answ. Surely me thinks they keep the golden mean: for they will neither
desire death, as knowing it to be against nature, nor fly from it,
considering that it is against justice, reason, and their duty to God: they
know right well, that the first day of their birth, sets them in their way
to death.

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet:
At birth begin we life to end:
This end does on that birth depend.
Why should we fear to go that way, which all the world has gone before us?
why to ariue at that haven, to which we have been sailing ever since we were
borne?

Quest. And do you think that the third sort of people do well, who contemn
death?

Answ. To contemn death, yea and life it self, for the glory of God, the
good of the Church, the manifestation of the truth, the salvation of our
souls, and the credit of our names, argues a courage, Christian, and
invincible; and has been practiced both by the Saints of God, and many famous
worthies even amongst the heathen. And surely, he that fears death too much,
shall never be fit for any honorable action: nay he shall never be a freeman:
neither can he truly say that he believes the immortality of the soul, or
his resurrection to eternal life by Christ.

Quest. Need I not to crave your opinion of the fourth and fifth sort, whereof
one desires to die, and the other in that desire, does take away his own life?

Ans. I have in this treatise answered concerning the fourth, and showed how a
man may desire death: you shall find it if you read on in this direction. But
for a man to take away his own life, though it may seem sometimes to proceed
from the greatness of a man's courage, yet it cannot but be a great sin. For,

1 It argues madness for a man to lay violent hands upon himself.

2 Impatience, that he cannot wait the leisure of God.

3 Cowardlinesse, that he will not endure that which might be inflicted upon him.

4 Unthankfulness, not to preserve this Jewel which is bestowed upon him. And
in a word, such a practice causes not only the actors, but their actions,
profession, posterity, and Country to be evil spoken of.

Quest. Well: say then, that I be cast upon my sick bed; what rules can you
give me to observe at that time?

Answ. You are first to set your soul in order, and see how you stand in the
favor of God.

Quest. And what are the reasons of this rule?

Answ. 1 Because the sickness of the body does proceed from the sin of the
soul. Lament. 3.39.

2 The cure of the soul procures often the health of the body. Matthew. 9.2.

3 If your sickness be a sickness to death, you shall die more quietly:
otherwise death is most fearful in sickness.

4 By this you shall take your sickness the more patiently.

5 You shall so give example to such as come to visit you, to do the like.

6 All your friends shall by this be persuaded, that you are the child of God.

Quest. Do you think in this case, it is fit whilst I am in good memory,
and it may be in some hope of recovery, to send for my godly Minister to
comfort me?

Answ. O it cannot, but be very fit: for he is, 1 The Lords messenger, to
declare unto man his reconciliation by Christ.

2 He is able to beat you down by the curses of the Law, and to raise you up
by the promises of the Gospel.

3 He has experience to speak a word in due season unto you.

4 He especially, as Gods Physician, has store of salues to cure your sick
soul.

5 You may boldly uncover your sores to him, who will not discover them to your
future shame.

6 He can see further into the nature of your heart, then oftentimes you your
self can.

7 He will boldly rip up your ulcers, that after he may the better cure them.

8 If he comfort, or correct you for sin, you may be persuaded, that both
come from God.

9 You shall, by this, much ease your own heart, by craving comfort from a
godly Preacher.

10 You shall cause others in the like visitation, to do as you have done; and
you your self he fitter to die.

Quest. When I have taken this course for my soul, what must I do in the next
place for my body?

An. You are then to use the help of a godly Physician, and that for these
reasons:

1 Your body is the souls house: if it be decaying, you must seek to repair
it by all good means you can.

2 God has given expert Physicians skill to restore many diseases of the body.

3 God has appointed many sovereign remedies, to recover man in his sick
estate.

4 You shall better satisfy your self if you die, in that you neglected not
lawful means.

6 For want of this duty, many do perish, who might recover.

Quest. Now in taking Physic, what must I do?

Answ. You must, 1 Commend it to Gods blessing by prayer.

2 Not rely only upon the means.

3 Know that it cannot prevent either old age or death.

4 Humble your soul, that God may heal your body.

5 Wait Gods leisure in blessing the means.

6 Be thankful to God if by it you recover.

Quest. What then may I think of seeking to ungodly, or superstitious
Physicians, though learned?

Answ. 1 If you cannot have any other, you may with good conscience use such.

2 If they have a peculiar gift to cure that disease which troubles you, you
may go unto them.

Quest. And may I not as well use them as Religious Physicians?

Answ. I think not: for, 1 They will make little conscience to cure you.

2 You cannot hope that they shall cure you.

3 You do, as much as in you lies, countenance them in their sin and
superstition.

4 You make them able to do much hurt.

5 It is an argument that you put more confidence in such means, then in God.

6 You discourage godly men in that calling.

7 You make the Gospel to be evil spoken of.

8 What do you know, whether it will one day be a corrosiue to your
conscience that you have used bad means, when as God offered you good?

Quest. It seems then, that to use the help of good Witches, or Cunning men,
or women, as they are called, is most unlawful.

Answ. To use their help is to go from the God of Israel, to Baalzebub God of
Eckron; from Samuel in Ramoth, to the Witch at Endor: from the Rivers of
Samaria, to the Waters of Damascus; from the Living, to the Dead and from God,
to the Devil: and yet this is the practice of most people.

Quest. And why now, I pray you, would you have me first to send for a
Physician for my soul, before I send for a Physician for my body? Surely this
is not the customary course, but rather the contrary.

Answ. It is so: first we have the Physician, and when he leaves us, then the
Minister is sent for; and when he once comes, we think all the World is gone
with us: but it is a preposterous course, for these reasons:

1 Never look for health in body, til you have a good soul.

2 You must desire God to bless the means he uses: which you truly cannot
do, till your conscience be persuaded of the pardon of your sins.

3 The memory of the torments for sin, may be a means to increase the
greatness of your disease.

4 You shall else make the World believe that you are persuaded, that you hope
still for life.

Quest. Well: say then, that I send for my Preacher (and why should I not send
for him, as well as for my Physician) what must I do when he is come unto me?

Answ. You are bound, 1 To acknowledge and confess all such sins, as do any
way so disquiet you, that you cannot be persuaded of the pardon of them.

2 You are to reveal those several temptations, by which Satan assaileth you
in your sickness.

3 You are to desire comfort from him, against the burden of your sins, and
those temptations of the Devil.

4 You must believe, that whatsoever he says to you, out of Gods word, is the
voice of God.

5 You must hide nothing from him, by which you, like hypocrites, desire to be
thought to be in a better estate then you are

6 You must desire him to pray for you, that God may either recover your
health, or receive your soul.

7 You must not be sorry if he say unto you, that your sickness may be a
sickness to death, and that therefore you had need to provide for another
World.

8 If you be ignorant in piety, and godliness, you must never leave him, till
you have gotten a saving and sure knowledge of God in Christ.

Quest. And what must he do then to me?

Answ. He must, 1 Examine your knowledge, faith, repentance, and reconciliation
to your Neighbor.

2 Comfort you against the fear of death.

3 Pray for your continuance in faith.

4 Advise you to dispose well of your goods, and as you are able to remember
the poor.

Quest. But, It may be, I am sick of the Pestilence: may I send then for my
Preacher to comfort me?

Answ. If you labor to get comfort by the Word and Sacraments in your health,
you will not so much desire his presence in this sickness: and this is the
just judgment of God, upon many at their death, that as they regarded not the
public means of comfort in their health: so he will not vouchsafe it unto
them being sick.

But, neither can he come, nor you send unto him in this visitation:

1 He may not come: for, if he do,

1 He cannot after come into the Church to preach unto them that are well.

2 He cannot resort to his own people.

3 He cannot visit any Christian friend.

4 If he fall sick, he may suspect that he is guilty of his own death.

5 If any in his Family fall sick, and die, he may be guilty of their death.

6 He is a public person and must do nothing that may hinder his Ministry.

7 It has troubled some Ministers at their death, in that they have been so
bold to adventure.

8 He has no warrant for such a service out of Gods Word.

9 There is now no extraordinary calling to such a service, as Isaiah had, to
visit Hezekiah.

10 Zanchius, with many other learned men, think it not fit, that Ministers
should visit such persons. Vide Zanch. in Epist. ad Philip. Cap. 2. Verse. 30.

11 You cannot send for him: for this is

1 To put confidence in the presence of a Minister, that he is able to forgive
sins: and this ordinary sending for Ministers, only at the last gasp,
savors much of Popish Superstition.

2 Say that he infect others, you are guilty of their death.

3 If he be infected, and die himself, you rob the Church of their painful
Pastor.

4 You disable him to do that public and private good, which he might else
do to such as are sound.

5 You do not as as you would do to others; for it may be you would not
visit them.

6 It argues little love, that you do not regard the life of your Minister.

Quest. But say that he knows me to be a good Christian, that I would not
send, but that Satan assaults me to desperation: my soul is in danger, shall
not I adventure his body, to save my soul?

Answ. This is not an usual thing: but if I, that am a Preacher, should know
of any such, whose knowledge was sound, faith good, life unblameable, and love
to me unfeigned, if I should understand, that such a man could find no comfort,
but by my presence, I will commend and commit my self unto God and using the
best preservatives, before and after, which I could, I would draw only so near
unto him, as he might receive comfort from me: and look for Gods blessing
upon my preservation.

Quest. And what needs all this, if you have a particular faith, that you shall
not die of the plague: may you visit any for all this?

Answ. A particular faith? nay rather a presumptuous faith: a particular faith
to be delivered from a present danger, is a miraculous faith: He that has such
a faith, may with Daniel live among Lions, the three children walk in the
fire, and the Apostle Paul shake off a mortiferous viper; God seldom gives
this faith now adays, the presumption of it consumes many presumptuous people.

Quest. Yet for all your saying, my days are numbered, my death is appointed:
If I shall die of that disease, I cannot fly it by not visiting; if I shall
not, I shall not die of it though I visit.

Ans. True it is: but that God who has appointed the end, has appointed the
means to the end; and you are bound to use those means: he has appointed
your salvation by the Gospel. Will you say, I shall be saved, though you
believe not the Gospel, nor frequent the ministry of the word of God?

Quest. Why, is it not true: If I shall be delivered, I shall be delivered; and
if not, I shall not?

Answ. I will answer you with a story, of the like argment. One Ludouicus, a
learned man of Italy, yet wanting the direction of Gods Spirit, and so never
considering advisedly of the means of our salvation; he grew at last to this
resolution, It boots not what I do, nor how I live; If I be saved, I am
saved. He grew at length desperately sick, sends for a Physician, and requires
his help. This Physician being acquainted with his assertion for his soul,
begins to apply it thus to his body: Why Sir, you need not my help. If your
time be not come, there is no need of Physic; if it be come, no Physic
will recover you. Ludouicus musing of the matter in his bed, and considering
advisedly the Physicians speech; finding by reason, that as means must be used
for the health of the body; so God also had ordained means for the salvation
of the soul: upon further conference (with shame and grief) he recanted his
former opinion, took Physic, and so was happily cured of body and soul at
one time. Apply this unto your conceit, and you shall find, that if you mean
to be freed from the plague, you must use means to keep your self from it.

Quest. Yet many escape, who visit their friends at such a time.

Answ. Be it so: it is either by Gods special providence, or the constitution
of their bodies, or the preservatives they use, or that they are reserved for
some other time, or that sick persons may not want some to comfort them: yet
many more do perish in this case, then can be preserved.

Quest. Why then shall none come to persons infected?

Answ. God forbid: they of a Family that are bound to come, ought to help one
another: they that will be hired to look to such persons, have a calling to
come unto them: and, such as Magistrates do appoint (as they ought to appoint
honest, and aged persons for that service) they also may come, and look for
Gods preservation in doing their duty.

Quest. But because you are to direct me to die well: say that I am sick, and
die of the Pestilence, what comforts can you give me against that kind of
death?

Ans. You had in truth then need of much comfort: therefore consider upon your
sick bed; that,

1 Every disease is Gods visitation, and therefore you must be content to
endure it.

2 The Pestilence is not such a disease, as is sent only for the sins of them
that die of it, but often for the sins of them that do live: and though it
be a plague indeed to the unbelievers, yet to us Christians it is but a trial,
and exercise of virtue, says Cyprian in his book of mortality.

3 That though it be a sharp sickness, yet is it also a short sickness, and
more tolerable then the Stone, Dropsy, Gout, Palsy, or the French disease.

4 That David desired it before either famine or war.

5 That very many who die of this disease, have their senses and memories till
the last hour.

6 That the tokens which come out upon you, are Gods tokens: so that before you
die, you have a good time to call upon God.

7 That many Noble Personages, Godly Preachers, Expert Physicians, Skillful
Lawyers, and most Christian people have died of it.

8 That by it, God takes you from many miseries of this life.

9 That Job was grieved, for many Months, with a more fearful disease.

10 That it hinders not the salvation of your soul, though you die of such a
sickness.

11 If you be sick of it, God may recover you.

12 If it please him to recover you again, you are like to be after far more
healthful.

Quest. O but my friends will not come at me.

Ans. O, but God will never forsake you: and (especially in Cities) you shall
have so many, as can do you any good: the fewer you have to gaze upon you,
the fitter you are to look up to God.

Quest. But alas, I shall want my solemn funeral.

Answ. What is that to the salvation of your soul, and resurrection of your
body? comfort your self in Christian not costly burial.

Quest. I see then, that as there is no antidote against death, so there is no
perfume against the plague; I may die of it: but, good Lord deliver me and
mine, and all good people from it. But now when I am sick of any disease, as I
must reconcile my self to God, so ought I not to reconcile my self to my
neighbor?

An. If you have wronged him in his body, by striking; soul, by seducing;
person, by imprisoning; goods, by stealing; name, by slandering; or any other
way have done him hurt, you must seek to be reconciled unto him. Math. 5.25.

Qu. What if I be so diseased, that he dares not come to me, or be so far
absent, that he cannot come to me; what am I now to do?

Answ. In this case.

1 God accepts the will for the deed.

2 You must testify your desire to friends present.

Quest. You said that a Minister must exhort sick persons to dispose their
goods: Is this necessary to be done?

Answ. Of goods, yea, and offices too: Magistrates must be careful of their
godly successors, and Ministers of their fellow laborers. Deuteronomy. 31.1. Josh. 23.

Quest. As for my goods, is it fit to make my will in sickness?

An. Nay, rather you should ever have it ready in your health; if you have not,
it is needful in sickness to make it for these reasons, (though many think
they must die, if their Will be made.)

1 In regard of your own credit, that others may think you a wise man.

2 Of your own conscience, that having set all in good order, you may more
freely depart in peace.

3 Of your loving wife, for whom you ought to provide.

4 Of your children, that each of them may have a convenient portion of your
goods.

5 Of your servants, that they may not depart empty away.

6 Of your friends, that some legacies may be allotted to them.

7 Of the Church, that you may, as you are able, remember it.

8 Of the Common wealth, that you may do good to such societies as you have
lived in.

9 Of the poor, that by giving to them, you may send that portion of wealth
before you to heaven.

10 Of your possessions and goods themselves, that they may know their owners
after you are gone.

Quest. How ought I to make my Will?

Ans. It must be made according to the Law, 1 Of Nature, by which you are
borne.

2 Of that Nation in which you live.

3 Of God, by whom you have lived, and to whom you die. And th^s you must do
in few, plain, and significant words.

Qu. Say that I have gotten my goods badlie: what must I do?

Ans. You must make restitution to the true owners, if you know them; if not,
the poor are the best inheritors of such goods.

Quest. Who is the fittest to be Executors of my Will?

Answ. That person whom thou have tried to be faithful to God, sincere in his
conversation, wise in his own business, and who is like to be loving to
thine, and trusty to accomplish the whole intent of thy Testament.

Qu. As I am about my Will, many friends will perhaps come and visit me: how
shall I know who are my best friends?

Ans. Surely they who give you good advice for your souls health, who have a
fellow-feeling of your sickness, and who wish rather your life to do good,
then your death to have goods: especially your best friend is a good
conscience: for that will never leave you nor forsake you.

Quest. Can you illustrate this by any story?

Answ. I have read of a man going to execution for Treason against his Prince:
He meets with three of his old friends, he desires them all to sue for his
pardon: the first says, I dare not; but here is money to buy you a Coffin and
a sheet: the second says. I may not; but I will bring you to your end, and
there leave you: the third says, O I will run, and sue upon my knees for you,
I will never leave you. To apply this: Our first friend is money, it can do no
more but perform our funerals: the second is our acquaintance, they will but
attend us to the grave, and so leave us: the last friend is a good conscience,
and it will never leave us, till we are assured that God has pardoned all our
sins.

Quest. But when my friends come to visit me, am I to perform no duty to them?

Answ. You are to will them.

1 To serve God heartily.

2 To obey Governors faithfully.

3 To continue in the truth zealously.

4 To be loving one to another.

5 To be kind to your suruiuing aliance.

6 To meditat of death by your example.

7 To pray that you may die Christ's faithful servant.

8 To comfort you against the fear of death.

9 Not to be over sorrowful at your dissolution.

10 To be careful that your goods be disposed according to the true intent
of your will.

And lastly, to speak such good words unto them, that they may have hope, that
you die in Gods favor.

Quest. I remember that you told me, that though death be masked in the time of
health, yet it will show it self ugly at the last ga^pe: what comforts can you
give me against the fear of death when it comes?

An. If I were a worldling, I would say unto you; never think of it till it
come: but that it may not affright you when it comes, but you may encounter
with it in its own den, I will give unto you certain comforts.

Quest. Which are they I pray you?

Answ. I remember many; and it is necessary you should know them. For the day
of death is the Master day, and Judge of all other days: it is the trial and
touchstone of our life: if you die a good death, it honoreth all your Actions:
if an evil, it defameth them all: it is the last act of the worlds Comedy,
and most difficult: wherefore I will show those consolations unto you, and will
repeat them in your health, that you may think of them better upon your sick
bed: wherefore against the fear of death, consider:

1 That we neither live nor die to our selves: but, whether we live, we live
to the Lord; and whether we die, we die to the Lord. Romans 14.8.

2 That Christ is to us in life, gain; and in death, advantage. Phil. 1.21.

3 That Christ is to us the resurrection and the life: and whosoever believes
in him though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11.25.

4 That God does both mitigate and abbreuiate the dolours of death to his
servants.

5 That our death being converted into a sweet sleep, is the complement of the
mortification of our flesh; so that he which is dead, is freed from sin.
Roman. 6.7.

6 That we Christians know, that when this earthly tabernacle of our house shall
be dissolved, we shall have a building even of God, that is an house made
without hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. Cor. 5.1.

7 That if we die in the Lord, we go to Christ, which is best of all for us.
Phil. 1.23.

8 That this way of all flesh, is sanctified to us by the death of Christ.

9 That if ever at other times the Spirit of Christ does cause us to bear
afflictions patiently; it does especially, by the comfort which it ministers
in death, inestimablie overcome the sorrows of death.

10 That the spirit indeed is ready, but the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. so
that the inward man does not fear death, but only the outward man.

Quest. Can you yet give any more of these most sweet consolations?

Answ. Meditate therefore again with me, that.

1 The desire you should have to behold the most bright eyes of God, and so to
be delivered from this body of sin, will extinguish and extenuate both the
grievous fear, and fearful grief of present death.

2 That though we can be content to live with the faithful that are alive,
and must die; yet we must as well desire to be with those Saints, who having
overcome death, are gone before us to the kingdom of heaven.

3 That we must not more esteem of this natural, then of the spiritual
life; but that the love of the one, must abolish the grief of the other.

4 That we are assured of the souls immortality, that it shall go by the
transportation of Angels, to the assembly and society of the first borne,
which are written in heaven, Luke 16.22. Heb. 11.23. and that our bodies do
rest in the earth: so that one does not unfitly call the grave, an Haven for
the body to arrive at.

5 That we believe the resurrection of the body, and everlasting life after
death: for, this is the faith of Christians only.

6 That we, seeing evidently Gods great mercy toward our young children at
their departure out of this life, ought at our last end to be the more
courageous; especially, since we know, that we have the seal and earnest of
Gods spirit in our hearts.

7 That, as in our whole life, so in the agony of death, God does not suffer us
his servants to be tempted, above that which we are able to bear, 1. Cor.
10.13. but gives an happy issue with, and out of that temptation. It is in
truth admirable which Gregory in his Morals says, That some do with laughter
entertain death: we may better say, that by courageous patience they do
overcome it.

8 That we ought not so much to think of a peaceable end, as of a godly life:
Augustine said well; Where a good life goes before, an evil death must not
be thought to follow. And, He cannot die ill, who lives well. And, He seldom
dies well, who has lived ill. And, Read, says he, and read over all the
monuments of learned men, and you shall find nothing more horrible, then that
person, who does live in such an estate, that he is afraid to die.

9 That death is never untimely, whether we respect the good, or the bad. They
die soon, that they may no longer be vexed by the wicked: these die soon,
that they may not ever persecute the godly, as the same Augustine said.

10 That this life is so full of miseries, that in comparison thereof, death
may be thought rather a remedy, then a punishment: as Ambrose thought.

Quest. Once again give me more comforts against the fear of death: for,
such is the corruption of my nature, that al is little enough.

Answ. I will: think therefore; but think you seriously:

1 That he only fears death extremely, who cannot be persuaded, that he shall
live after death, as Chysostome says.

2 That it is best, to offer that willingly to God, as a gift, which one day
we must else surrender as a debt, to wit, this spirit and life of ours, as
Chrysostom said.

3 That as death, to the evil, is evil, so is it good to the good; to whom
all things work for their good.

4 That death is the way to life, as Ambrose said very fitly. And another said,
This day, which so affrighteth thee as if it were the last day, is the birthday
of eternity.

5 That this death is but a repairing of our life.

6 That, as Bernard said, the death of the righteous is good, in regard of
rest: better, in regard of nouelty: best of all, in regard of security: and
that, as the same Father said, the death of the godly is good, better, and best
of al: Contrariwise, the death of the godless is bad, worse, and worst of al.

7 That death does not abolish, but establish life in a far better estate.

8 That then death frees us from death, life from error, grace from sin.

9 That (if Chrysostom say true) death is but a bare name.

10 That God does so temper death unto us, that it can be no cause of evil unto
us. And therefore if you be wise, remember the saying, even of an Heathen man:
Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes: Nether fear death when it comes, nor
desire it too much before it comes.

Quest. These are all of them sweet consolations indeed: yet because Satan and
my flesh may bring upon me many fears; as first, that God is angry with me, by
reason of my sins: how may I comfort my self against this temptation?

Quest. Say unto your soul, why should I fear the wrath of God? For, it is
written:

God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that by him
the world might be saved. Ioh. 3.

He that believes in him shall not see death. He that believes in him has
eternal life. He that believes in him shall never perish.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes requests for
us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or
anguish, or persecution, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? I am persuaded
that neither death, nor life, nor hell, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ
Jesus my Lord. Romans 8.

Say with Augustine, All my whole hope is in the death of my Lord: his death is
my merit, my refuge, my salvation, my life, my resurrection; my merit is Gods
mercy, I shall never want merit, so long as this God of mercy is not wanting to
me. And if Gods mercies are great, I also am great in merit.

Say with Ambrose, Christ was subject to the damnation of death, that he might
free us from the yoke of damnation: he took upon him the servitude of death,
that he might give us the liberty of eternal life.

Say with S. Paul, Christ has redeemed me from the curse of the Law, Gal.
3.13. the Judge is satisfied, he cannot be angry.

Say, that your Savior makes intercession for you: for God no sooner looks on
him, but he is forthwith well pleased with you.

Say, that his mercy endures for ever. I shall judge the world with him; why
then shall I fear to be judged?

He has made a Covenant with me, he will never break.

He has given me grace to believe and trust in him, he will not now leave me.

I confess my sins he is ready to forgive them.

I have had his Spirit, he will never take it from me.

My Savior shall judge me, he will not be angry with me, and for his sake
the Father will not be angry: for he is that well-beloved Son, in whom alone
he is well pleased.

Quest. O, but I may fear, that I am but a castaway, and that eternal death
is due unto me: if I fall into this pit, what hand can you give me to help me
out?

Answ. Will Satan now tell you that you must be damned? comfort your self with
these sayings:

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that who so
believes in him should never perish, but have life everlasting. John 3.16.

He that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal
life, and shall not come into condemnation. Ioh. 5.

I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live; and who so lives and believes in me, shall not die
eternally. Ioh. 11.

I give to my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, and none is
able to take them out of my hands. Ioh. 10.

As in Adam all men died, so in Christ shall all (that is, all the elect,
whereof I am one,) so, I say, in Christ shall all be made alive. 1. Cor. 15.

Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy victory! O hell, where
is thy sting! the sting of death is sin; the strength of sin is the law: but
thanks be unto God, who has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. 1.
Cor. 15.57.

We know, that when the tabernacle of this earthly house shall be dissolved
we shall have a building from God, even an habitation made without hands in
heaven. 2. Cor. 5.1.

Besides these sweet and sure promises, consider, that as the faithless can
never live, so the faithful can never die.

That the promise of God does quicken things that are dead, and calls things
that are not, as though they were.

You fear not the falling of heaven and earth, because they are supported by
the word of God: and why should you fear your own fall, you being supported
by the same word?

Do you not know, that God is present with you by his Spirit: and will you
fear cold when this fire burns?

Can you fear darkness, when this Sun shines?

Are you poor, that have this gold in your Chest?

And think you to die of thirst, when you are at this fountain of living
waters?

Are you not a member of Christ's body: Is there life in the head, and shall
there be death in the members?

Is your head above the water, and shall your body never come out of the water?

Does the root of a tree give life unto the branches, and cannot Christ (the
Root of Iesse) give life unto his branches?

Yea, rather say, My life is hid with God in Christ; when Christ which is my
life shall appear, then shall I also appear with him in glory. Coloss. 3.

By my first root Adam, I bring forth briers and thorns fit to be burned: by
my second root Christ, I am like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, which
shall give out her fruit in due season, and whatsoever I do, it shall prosper.

Why, my dear friend, you do believe the forgiveness of sins: can you then
fear eternal damnation?

You do believe the resurrection of your body, will you now doubt of the
resurrection of your body?

Have the Prophets and Apostles set down so much concerning salvation by
Christ, that you should say, I am not saved by Christ?

You were initiated by Baptism, confirmed by Catechism, strengthened by the
Lords Supper, and professed that religion which by Christ brings salvation, and
you have received many benefits as pledges of Gods love: and will not all this
persuade you, that you shall go to heaven?

Yea, Christ has overcome that Devil, that you might subdue him: subdued that
strong man, that you might conquer him: and descended down to hell, that you
might with him ascend unto heaven. Therefore be constant, my beloved, and
immovable always in the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. 1. Cor. 15.

Quest. Thus, I hope, at the hour of death I shall not fear the place of
darkness: but, alas, such is the weakness of my faith, that I fear the
Prince of darkness.

Ans. And why should you fear him? the Egyptians are drowned, they cannot
pursue you: Goliath is slain, he cannot revile you: the Philistims are
overcome; they cannot hurt you: Satan is chained, he cannot harm you. He
will seek to winnow you, but he can only seek; and if he do more, he shall
find you Gods wheat, and then you must needs be carried into Gods barn.

He is indeed Gods Executioner; but, why, should you fear the Hangman, when
you have the Kings pardon? or the Sergeant, when you have his protection? or
the Devil, when you have Christ's intercession? You are strong, the Word of God
dwells in you, you have overcome that Evil one: 1. John 2.14. You have faith:
your adversary would devour you, by it you are able to resist him, 1. Peter
5.8. You have put on the complete Armor of God, Ephesians 6.11. it is an
Armor of proof, the fiery darts of Satan can never enter. You have the
sword of the Spirit, it is sharper then the sword of Goliath: you have the sling
of David, it is more forcible then the spear of Goliath: you may walk upon
this Lion, and Aspe; this young devouring Lion and Dragon, you may tread under
your feet Psalm. 91.13.

What if he be wise? yet God is wiser. What if he be strong? yet Christ is
stronger What if skillful? yet the Lord is more skillful. What if he be
vigilant? yet the Alseeing is more watchful. If you can call to God for aid
against him, as Iehoshaphat did against the Aramite, and say, O my God, there
is no strength in me, to stand before this great multitude, that comes
against me, neither do I know what to do: but mine eyes are toward thee: 2.
Chron. 20.12. fear not, neither be afraid, go out against them, the Lord
will be with thee, and thou shall overcome.

Say that he overcame Adam by ambition, Saul by hypocrisy, and Judas by
avarice; yet by the grace of Christ he shall not overcome thee.

Thou dwell in the secret of the most High, and shall abide in the shadow of
the Almighty: He will deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter, and from the
noisome Pestilence: he will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be
sure under his feathers: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler: he will
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: they shall
bear thee up in their hands so that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone.

Quest. I confess that God is able to deliver me from Satan: but, O my
sins, my sins, me thinks, give me over to Satan: help me with comfort,
against this temptation: I have sinned, and may now die in my sins.

Ans. O consider with me what the word does say, Where sin abounded, grace
has superabounded. Romans 5. The blood of Jesus Christ has purged us from all
sin. 1. John 1.7. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. 1. John
2.1.2.

This is a true saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that Jesus
Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief. 1. Tim. 1.

Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World. John 1.

I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 1. Matthew. 11.

The Son of man came to seek, and save that which was lost. Matthew. 9.

Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. Matthew. 11.

He died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Romans 4.

He has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood. Revel. 1.6.

Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins: Matthew. 1.

He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself. Titus 1.2.

I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and will remember their
sins, and their iniquities no more. Hebr. 8.12.

Do you now believe these sayings? are you persuaded that you have faith in
Christ? If you have faith, you have justification; if you have justification,
you have no sin; I mean no such sin, as shall be able to condemn you in
the day of judgment: for it is God that justifies, who shall condemn?

Besides, you are a member of Christ's Church, and this Church is without spot
and wrinkle: which it could not be, if you were yet in your sins.

Again, if your iniquities were not forgiven in Christ; to what end, think
you, did he come into the World?

Furthermore, consider what your Baptism does signify; that as pollution from
your body is washed by water, so sin from your soul is washed by Christ.

Have you forgotten that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper seals unto you the
forgiveness of sins, by Christ's death?

Is the Earth full of the mercies of the Lord, and shall not this mercy be
greater to you: then all your miseries?

Do you acknowledge and confess your sins, and will not he be faithful and
just to forgive you your sins?

Do you ask, and shall you not have? do you seek, and shall you not find?
do you knock, and shall not the door of mercy be opened unto you?

I think you know, that Christ's is a Physician: and to what end, but to cure
the diseased? and what disease more dangerous then sin?

I hope you know the Gospel of Christ is called the word of reconciliation, of
grace, salvation, and of life: and that only because it offers all these to
sinners.

And tell me (you that doubt of the forgiveness of sins) what difference is
there betwixt the sons of God, and the sons of the Devil; but that they
have their sins forgiven, these not?

To conclude, look upon the calling of the Preachers of the Gospel; if they
have power to pronounce the pardon of sins to penitent sinners, Christ has
power to give pardon to the same sinners. Therefore be of good comfort, your
sins are forgiven you. Matthew. 9.2.

Quest. What even my great and grievous sins? mine infidelity in
mistrusting, impatience in murmuring, blasphemy in profaning the name of God?
Is the covetousness of money, the desire of revenge, the love of pleasure more
then the love of God, forgiven me?

Ans. If you believe in Christ, all things are possible to him that believes:
your sins past shall never hurt you, if sin present do not please you.

Though your sins were as red as Scarlet, God can make them as white as
Snow.

There is no cloud so thick, but this Sun will dispell it; no stain so foul,
but this Fullers soap will wash it out; no treason so horrible, but this King
may pardon it; and no sin so great, but God for Christ's sake will forgive it.

The infidelity of Adam, the Idolatry of Abraham, the incest of Lot, the
adultery of David, the Apostasy of Peter, the persecutions of Paul were
grievous sins; but God in Christ did remit them all. And whatsoever was
written before time, is written for your learning, that you through patience
and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope.

Apply them therefore to your self: If you owe to this creditor ten
thousand talents, if you can sue to him for mercy, he will forgive them all;
his Justice can punish any sin, and his mercy can pardon any sin.

When he lived upon Earth, he cured all sicknesses: now he is in Heaven, he
can purge all sins.

He has promised, as a Porter, to bear our iniquities: is there any iniquity
too heavy for him? Never say then (despairing of Gods mercy) my sins have
taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up; as an heavy burden
they lie upon me, I am not able to bear them.

Quest. I hope that I shall lay these comforts to mine heart, that the
greatness of my sins shall not cause me to despair: yet when I look upon
the multitude of those sins which I have committed against God, I feel my
self in a woeful estate: comfort me I pray you in this temptation.

Answ. Do the number of your sins now disquiet you? yet comfort your soul
with these meditations:

There is no man living which sins not.

The just man falls seven times a day.

Who can tell how often he offends? Psalm. 19.

The Apostle, and excellent man, cried out, I am Carnal, and sold under sin.
Romans 7.

The good that I would do, I do not, and the evil which I would not, that
do I.

The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the
flesh, Galathians 5.17. Yet for all this, he trusted in the mercies of God, as
others did, being persuaded, that his imperfections were not imputed to him,
but covered with the righteousness of Christ. And this, the same Paul
testifies, in that he says, Now there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.

And what is the reason that we daily pray, Forgive us our debts, but that we
sin daily?

Yea, though the blood of Christ were but once shed, yet by it is he an
eternal Mediator, satisfying the justice of God for sins past, present, and
to come.

He is not like unto many in this World, who having once remitted some
trespass, will remit no more; or paid a debt, will pay no more: but as Esaus
father had many blessings; so God our father has many mercies.

If we fall a thousand times, he will at our repentance recover us a thousand
times He does not forgive us till seven times, but till seventy times seven
times.

Larga Dei bonitas totum non dimidiabit:
Aut nihil, aut totum, te lachrymante, dabit.
The bounty large of God, will not divide the whole:
He either al, or nothing gives, unto the weeping soul.
Quest. Truth it is, as you say, that God will forgive my manifold sins: but
mine heart tells me, that Gods law requires perfect obedience: and this, alas, I
cannot perform: what comfort can you give me, now that mine obedience is
imperfect?

Answ. Why? the obedience of the best is both perfect and imperfect: perfect in
Christ, imperfect in us: imperfect in this life, perfect in the life to come:
perfect by imputation, imperfect by sanctification: perfect in parts, imperfect
in degree: that is, the whole body and soul of a Christian are in every part
sanctified: but yet both of them in all their parts and faculties grow up to a
greater measure of sanctification. A child so soon as it is borne is a perfect
man, because it has all the parts of a man; and this is a perfection of parts:
it is not perfect in regard of that growth it may have in strength and
understanding; and that is the perfection of degrees. We are babes in Christ,
and so perfect Christians at the beginning of sanctification: we must grow up
to be tall men, that we may be perfectly perfect in our glorification.

It is Gods mercy toward us, that we cannot come to perfection in this life;
the dregs of corruption will never whilst we live be drawn out: the tares of
ungodliness will never quite be pulled up: the chafe of iniquity will never be
clean removed from the wheat: and the rags of the old Adam will never clean
be put off; and that, as I take it, for these reasons:

1 That we might give al glory to God.

2 That we might ever depend upon God.

3 That knowing our own weakness, we should not presume too much on our own
strength.

4 That by recovering our selves aft^^ falling, we might have experience, and
patience, in Gods favor.

5 That we might work out our salvation with fear and trembling.

6 That with Paul we might learn that the grace of God is sufficient for us.

7 That we might be the more whetted on to an increase of faith, and
confidence in Christ.

8 That we might with greater earnestness call upon God in all our fears.

9 That with more contention we should run the race set before us.

10 That we should know, that it is grace, not nature, by which we stand.

11 That receiving many foyles our selves, we might better comfort and pity
others that fall.

12 That we might the rather with the Apostle desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ.

Know therefore, that it is good for you that you are not perfect; you would
be proud of it, if you were: the holiest men could never attain it: the most
holy God does not require it.

If you have truth in the inward parts, and desire to please God without
hypocrisy, and labor to grow in the graces of Gods spirit, God your father
will make more of you by reason of your imperfections; as a good mother does of
that child that is diseased, or lamed.

It is pride that makes men dream of perfection in this life: and they that
think to go to heaven this way, must go alone, for none can follow them.

Let us not glory of our perfection, but let us glory in our Redemption.

The Church is a company of sinners, saved by Christ; of sick persons, cured
by Christ; of Israelites, dwelling among the Cananites; of malefactors, crying
with that holy thief, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom;
and of Publicans, casting themselves down, and saying, Lord be merciful unto
me a sinner.

The Church is but the Moon, and some times so eclipsed, that she is but a
little lightened by the Sun.

God, indeed, as a good Physician, prescribes unto us a perfect diet; but we
like unto disordered Patients, taste of that, which causes a relapse, and then
we must come to the Physician again: and, like a skillful Physician, God out
of our falls, does make a preservative to keep us from falling.

Quest. By this that you have said, I shall, as I hope, receive much comfort,
if God cast me upon my sick bed; yet because after death comes judgment,
how shall I be able to persuade my self in death, that I may with joy look
upon my Judge?

Answ. Consider that you are in Christ, and there is no condemnation to them
that are in him: it is God that has justified you; who shall condemn you? it
is your Father that shall judge you, why do you fear him? be then of good
comfort: he will say unto you, Come thou blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for thee, before the foundations of the world were laid.

Quest. If I lay all these comforts to mine heart in health, what benefit shall
come to me at my death?

Answ. You shall show your self an excellent scholar in the school of
wisdom: and that you have not spent your time ill, who have thus learned to
die well. For he has last his whole time, who knows not how to end it. He
lives ill (says Seneca) who knows not to die well: neither is he borne in
vain, who deceaseth in peace. We must learn all our life to die; and this is
the principal office of life: To be brief, by this you shall purchase
liberty to your conscience, you shall fear nothing, you will live well,
contentedly, and peaceably; and without this knowledge, there is no more
pleasure in life, than in the fruition of that which a man fears always to
lose.

Quest. To draw to an end, and to come to my end, when the pangs of death come
upon me, and the worms of the earth wait for me, if God give me then mine
understanding, what, I pray you, may be my fittest meditation?

Answ. Say now inwardly to your sick soul; Now, my pilgrimage is ended, mine
harvest is inned, my journey is finished: my race is run, my glass is spent,
my candle is in the socket: many of the godly are gone before, and I am now to
follow them: now think, that you are come out of prison, gotten out of
Babylon, and are going to Jerusalem. Now think that the Angels stand at your
beds head, to carry your soul into Abraham's bosom; where you shall see God
the Father, behold God the Son, and enjoy God the holy Ghost: where you shall
enjoy the society of Angels, the company of the Saints, and the knowledge of
them whom you never knew here: where you shall live eternally, reign
triumphantly, and obey God perfectly. Meditate now, that you must not be loath
to leave this world, because you go to that which is to come; to leave your
house, because you are going to Gods house; to leave your temporal riches,
because you are going to eternal riches; to leave your earthly preferments,
because God will set a crown of pure gold upon your head; and to leave your
friends and acquaintance here, because you shall see them in glory hereafter.
These and such like must be your meditations.

Quest. Now it may be (and I pray God it may be) that I may have speech unto
the last gasp, what words are fit for me to utter?

Answ. If God give you that blessing, say now with David:

Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God
of truth.

With Simeon: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

With Paul: Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to all
them that love that appearing of his.

Say, How sweet is my Savior unto me? sweeter then the honey and the honey
comb.

Say, Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord: for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them.

Say, Lord I have sinned against thee. thou have promised to forgive me my
sins: I believe, Lord help mine unbelief.

Say with Steven, Lord into thine hands I commend my soul.

Say with the Saints, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Say, Lord, keep thy Church and people in thy truth and peace for evermore:
now Lord, dissolve in me the cursed works of the devil.

Say, I am sick, be thou my Physician: I am to die, Lord give me life eternal.

Say, Lord, be good unto my kinsfolks in the flesh, and my friends in the
Spirit, that they may live in thy fear, and die in thy favor.

Say with Ambrose, I have not so led my life, that I was ashamed to live:
neither do I fear death, because I have a good Lord.

Say to thy friends with S. Bernard, O ground the anchor of your faith and
hope, in the safe and sure port of Gods mercy.

Say with Oecolampadius, to all that come to thee, I will tell you news, I
shall shortly be with the Lord.

Say with Luther: I pray thee Lord Jesus receive my poor soul: my heavenly
Father, though I be taken from this life, and this body of mine is to be laid
down, yet I know certainly, that I shall remain with thee for ever, neither
shall any be able to pull me out of thine hands.

Say with Annas Burgius: Forsake me not, O Lord, lest I forsake thee.

Say with Melancthon: If it be the will of God, I am willing to die, and I
beseech him that he will grant me a joyful departure.

Say with M. Calvin: I held my tongue, because thou Lord have done it; I
mourned as a a dove, Lord thou grindest me to powder; but it suffices me,
because it was thine hand.

Say with Peter Martyr: My body is weak, but my mind is well. There is no
salvation, but only by Christ, who was given of the Father to be a Redeemer
of mankind: This is my faith in which I die, and God will destroy them that
teach otherwise. Farewell, my brethren and dear friends.

Say with Babylas, Martyr of Antioch: Return, O my soul, unto thy rest,
because the Lord has blessed thee. Because thou have delivered my soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my foot from falling; I shall walk before
thee in the land of the living.

Say, Blessed is God in all his ways, and holy in all his works: Naked I
came out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord. I know
that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth. And though
after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my flesh. Whom
I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall cehold, and none other for me,
though my reins are consumed within me.

Say, in a word, Lord I thank thee, that I am a Christian, that I lived in a
Christian Church, that I die amongst a Christian people, that I go to a
Christian society. Lord Jesus, son of David, have mercy upon me, and receive
my soul. Even so, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

Quest. If I have time, these are fit, both meditations, and speeches: but I
may die upon the sudden: what instructions can you give me against sudden death?

Answ. You may indeed die suddenly, either by fire in your house, or water in
your ship, or earth falling into some pit, or casualtie in your way, or
impostumation, and an apoplexi in your body, or by travel in childbirth, if you
be a woman, or the sword in war, if you be a man. Therefore think,

1 That death may come upon you unawares: wherefore as you would do for a
suspected enemy, wait so for it, that it may never surprise you.

2 Know that many worthy men have died suddenly: Julius Caesar, disputing the
night before of the good of sudden death, was the next day by Brutus and
Cassius slain suddenly in the Senate.

Ioannes Mathesius having preached a Sermon of the raising again of the widow
of Nains son (and therein handling the knowledge, that one friend should have
of another in heaven) within three hours after slept peaceably in the Lord.

Luther sitting at supper, and discoursing of the same argument, about midnight
after departed this life.

One Master Read, an Alderman of Norwich, having read in the morning the
chapter of Henockes taking up, in the Counsel chamber died suddenly at the
table amongst his brethren.

And that wise Counselor, the Lord of Buckhurst, Earl of Dorset died
suddenly, at the Counsel Table, in white Hall.

Mr. Flint a Preacher in London, a man of great learning, godly life and good
report, having procured the new building of his Church (at which he much
reioiced) fell down from a scaffold on the top of that Church and so died.

In the commentaries of John Holcot upon the book of wisdom, it is recorded of
one who reading the fourth Chapter of the book of Wisdom, was found dead in
his study with his finger pointing to the seventh verse of that chapter,
Though the righteous be prevented by death, yet shall he be at rest; First,
where you shall read these two verses.

Mors non est subita cui praecessit bona vita:
Nec minuit merita, si moriatur ita.
If godly life do go before,
Through sudden death our joy is more
3 Know, that if you live wickedly, sudden death is a fearful judgment, for
who then can be persuaded of Gods favor toward you? and this makes the
wicked of all kinds of death, to pray to be delivered from sudden death: they
would live like Nabal, but die like David: live like the rich glutton, and die
like Lazarus: they would die the death of the righteous, but they would not
live the life of the righteous. And therefore their Prayer is the prayer of
Balaam, Lord, let me die the death of the righteous, and that my last end may
be like unto his. Numb 23.

But if you live ever in the fear of God, it may be an argument of Gods
mercy to take you away upon a short warning: For so, 1 You die without any
great pain.

2 You go to God without any great trouble.

3 You are not in danger of blaspheming God at your death.

4 You will cause others to think well of your death, because you lived a
godly life.

5 Many by your example will labor to prepare against such a kind of death.

6 Your translation is like that of Henoch and Elias, and of them that shall be
alive at the day of judgment. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Quest. Is it lawful to pray against a sudden death?

Answ. The godly may, and the wicked must pray against it. The godly may:

1 That as they have honored God with their lips in their life, so (if it be
his good will) they may do it at their death.

2 That because upon the sudden, few men have their worldly estate fully
settled, they may have time to order it.

3 That they may not be a grief to their friends, that they are so soon taken
from them.

4 That they may escape the censure of the world, which for the most part,
judges hardly of this kind of death.

5 That they may not die in such sort as diverse wicked men in the Scriptures
have died.

6 Lest being overtaken in some strange place, they may so want the honor of
Christian burial, and their friends not know what is become of them.

2 The wicked must pray against it, left so dying without repentance here,
there be no place left for them hereafter to repent in. But I doubt whether
God will hear their prayers: For are not they worthy to want time of
humiliation at their death, who neglected salvation in their life? The
admonition of the wise man, Eccl. 18.18, is very good: Get thee righteousness
before thou come to judgment, and use Physic before thou be sick. Examine
thy self before thou be judged, and in the day of destruction thou shall
find mercy. Humble thy self before thou be sick, and whilst thou may
yet sin, show thy conversion.

Quest. Now since my soul must depart from my body, ought I to take any great
thought for my burial?

Ans. As the grave at your death is ready for you, Job. 17.1. so you also must
have care of it: and your suruiuing friends must have such respect to your dead
body, that it may be interred in a religious sort: for,

1 You are no Scythian, that your dead body should be eaten at some feast; nor
Sabean, that it should be cast on a dunghill; nor Hyrcanian, that it should be
devoured by dogs; nor Lothophagian, that it should be cast into the sea; nor
Indian, that it should be burned with fire; but a Christian, that it may be
buried in the earth.

2 Your dead body is a member of Christ.

3 It was, as well as the soul, the temple of the holy Ghost.

4 It was the ordinance of God, that earth should return to his earth, as the
soul does to him that gave it. Genesis 3. Eccles. 7.

5 That Christ, who redeemed your soul has also paid a ransom for your
body.

6 It has been an instrument used by God, to perform many services unto him.

7 It must rise again out of the grave, and in the day of judgment be made
like unto the glorious body of Christ. Phil. 5.21.

8 Religious and godly friends have had this care to bury their dead: so
Abraham had to bury Sarah, Joseph to bury Iaakob, Israel to bury Samuel,
Nichodemus to bury Christ, and the Disciples to bury John the Baptist, and
Steven the first Martyr that suffered after Christ.

9 It is one of Gods judgments to want burial. Iere. 22.19.

10 The Saints complain for the want of it, saying, Psalm. 79.3. The dead
bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of heaven,
and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Their blood have they
shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them.

11 Joseph gave commandment concerning his bones. Genesis 50. and Tobiah of his
body. Tob 14.

12 Many heathen people have been very careful of this duty. The Egyptians
embalmed, and so buried their dead: and the Hebrews made a law, that no enemy
should lie unburied.

Quest. What think you of the place of burial?

Answ. Abraham bought a field for the burial of his dead. Genesis 24.

Christ was buried in a garden, according to the custom of the Jews. Ioh. 20.

The Turks at this day bury none in their Cities: and it was one of the laws
of the 12. Tables, amongst the Romans, that none should be buried within the^
walls.

Amongst Christians, Churches and Church yards are appointed for the dead; and
to the end that the dead might not annoy the living, it were well if Governors
would be careful to provide larger places of burial: for this would be a
means,

1 To keep the City from contagion.

2 That our dead bodies should not be raked up again.

3 To show our care for the Saints departed.

4 To take away the fond conceit of many, who think it a great blessing to be
buried in a Church, especially if it be in the Chancell, near the Altar.

Quest. Ought there any care to be had to keep Churchyards in good sort

Answ. There ought: 1 They are the houses of Christians, and as it were
chambers, or beds to sleep in.

2 They are places to which we may resort, to be put in mind of our future
mortality.

3 It argues little charity to abuse those places where our friends lie buried.

4 The Romans had this Law, Let the place where the dead are buried be
accounted holy: and the Romanists have diverse good Canons against such as shall
any way abuse even Church yards: and it were to be wished, that it were looked
to amongst us.

Quest. What think you of making monuments for the dead?

Answ. I remember Tullie says, that the Romans had a law that no man should
build a more costly Sepulcher, then could be finished in three days. Lib. 2.
de Leg.

The Egyptians builded gorgeous Sepulchers, and mean houses, because the one
was to them but as an Inn; the other, as they thought, an eternal habitation.
Celius Rhodig.

Now that great, and good men should have monuments, as it is a thing
indifferent, so I think it not simply unlawful.

1 The Jews used such: as we may see in the Bible: David (says the
Scripture) is dead, and his Sepulcher is with us to this day. Act. 2.29.

2 By them we may be put in mind of that glorious habitation we shall have
in Heaven.

3 It is an argument that we loved such persons, whom we thus honor after
their death.

4 We keep a memory of their excellent virtues.

5 We are moved to follow them in good actions.

6 It distinguishes betwixt person and person: for though all die alike, yet
all must not be alike buried. But note that the best monument is to be set up
in the hearts of good people, for good works; and the next is to leave a
godly posterity: as for the monuments which the wicked leave, they argue.

1 Their pride, that they would leave a name upon earth.

2 Their infidelity, that they look not for the resurrection of the just.

3 Their covetousness, that they will carry that to the grave with them, which
better might have been spent upon the poor.

4 Their folly, to build such a sepulcher, as when men look upon it, shall
remember their bad and beastly life.

Quest. Are the dead, think you, to be mourned for?

Answ. Solon gave commandment, that the Commonwealth should mourn for him:
but Ennius would not be mourned for. But as for us Christians, though we must
not, with superstitious Nations, hire mourning Women to lament for us, yet it
is lawful to deplore the departure of the dead: for.

1 As the Egyptians mourned for Iaakob seventy days, so his children lamented
him seven days. Genesis 50.

2 Abraham mourned for Sarah, Israel for Josias and Samuel, the faithful for
Steven, the women for Dorcas, and David for his good friend Jonathan.

3 It was an argument of Gods wrath against Iekoniah, that no man should say
for him, Alas my brother: Ierem. 22.18.

4 We receive much good by the presence of our friends: and why should we not
bewail their absence?

5 If they were godly we must lament them:

1 Because they did much good in their callings. Acts. 9.39.

2 Because the World was blessed by them. Prou. 11.11.

3 Because we may fear some judgment after their departure. Isay 58.2.

4 Because oftentimes worse come in their stead.

5 Because the wicked will then be more ready to sin.

6 Because they were great ornaments in the Church, or Commonwealth, in which
they lived. Lament. 4.20.

And if they be godless, we must mourn for them, especially because we cannot
be persuaded, but that they are gone to the pit of perdition. 2 Samuel 18.33.

Yet we must remember that we keep a mean in mourning, and look that our
sorrow be not,

1 In self love, because we have lost some good by them.

2 In distrust, as though we had no hope that they should rise again. 1 Thessalonians. 4.

3 In hypocrisy, that we may seem only to men to mourn.

4 In excess, as though there were no comfort for us that are alive, because
God has taken away the comfort of our life. Cyprians speech is very good in
this thing: Why, says he, do thou take it impatiently, that he is taken
from thee, whom thou beleeuest that he shall return? He is but gone a journey,
whom thou think quite gone. He that goes before, is not to be lamented,
but rather desired. And this desire is to be tempered with patience. Why art
thou grieved that he is gone, whom thou must follow? We ought not to lament
them over much, who by the calling of God are freed from misery; they are not
for ever sent away, but for a while sent before. They are but gone a journey,
we must look for their return: sailed into a strange Country; they will, if
we wait, come again.

So also is that of the Wise man, Ecclus. 38.16. My son, power out tears
over the dead, and begin to mourn, as if thou had suffered some great harm
thy self; and then cover his body according to his appointment and neglect
not his burial. Make a grievous lamentation, and be earnest in mourning, and
use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, left thou be evil
spoken of, and then comfort thy self for thine heaviness, etc.

Quest. May mourning apparel be used at funerals?

Answ. If the heart mourn as well as the habit, I do not think it utterly
unlawful for:

1 By it we keep a memory of our friend.

2 We are drawn to some humiliation.

3 We are put in mind of our own mortality.

4 It argues his love that bestows it upon us.

5 By this means many poor are clothed.

6 It is but a Legacy of the dead to the living

Quest. And what think you of funeral Sermons? for many think it sin to
preach at that time.

Ans. I doubt not, but they may be preached: for,

1 We must preach in season and out of season.

2 Many come then to the house of God: and why should they depart empty away?

3 It is a fit time to teach that one day we must die.

4 Many accidents fall out in a man's sickness, which are fit to be published
at such a time.

5 Many worthy virtues have shined in some man's life, which for the imitation
in others, are not to be buried at his death.

6 Many corruptions have reigned in some, which then we may be exhorted to
avoid.

7 They are not for the bare commendation of the dead, but for the instruction
and consolation of them that are alive.

Quest. And do you think that any would be content to have his infirmities
laid out at his funeral?

Answ. Whether he will or not, if God may get honor, and the Church good;
there is no wrong to the dead, to admonish the living that they take heed of
such sins.

I will deliver unto you a rare example: I knew a Gentleman of good sort, who
seldom came to the Church in the time of his health; I was sent for to him in
the time of his sickness, and after many instructions delivered unto him, he
uttered unto me this speech: Sir, I am beholding to you for this pains, and
thank God for this comfort. But if God had now denied this favor unto me,
he should have dealt with me but according to justice; I have lived a good
time in this Parish, I have been invited by my friends, called by the Bell,
moved by the good report I heard of you and others, to come to this Church:
but I made many excuses, as of sickness, and going to other places, and did
not come. And though I have many sins which I must answer for, yet none at
this time grieueth me more, then that I have lived under a painful
Ministry, and yet was never partaker of it: so that you, and the whole Parish
may judge that I am either of no Religion, or of a contrary Religion to that
which is professed in this Kingdom: pray for me that this sin may be
pardoned: hear me make a confession of my faith, and that I die in the faith
of Christ, and am heartily sorry for this mine offense: I pray you therefore
make it known when I am dead.

An. This I did, and thus must we do, ye^ in discretion, that we may not be
thought biters of the dead: if either for crowns or gowns we do otherwise,
it is a sin.

Quest. You propounded in the beginning five things which I ought ever to
meditate on. The first is expounded to my great comfort: concerning the second,
which is Christ's passion and death, what ought I especially to think of?

Answ. It is necessary indeed you should think often of it: for nothing will
make you more willing to die, then to be persuaded that Christ by his death
has washed you from sins, and by his resurrection has given unto you
eternal life.

I remember that Hierome complaining much of the people of his time, that they
had little feeling of the passion of Christ, cries out after this sort: Every
Creature suffers together with Christ, at his suffering: the Sun is darkened:
the Earth is moved: the Rocks cleave a sunder: the Veil of the Temple is
divided: the graves are opened: only miserable man suffers not with Christ,
for whom alone Christ suffered.

And Saint Bernard complaining of himself, says: I went on securely knowing
nothing of that fearful judgment of God, which was in heaven denounced
against me: and behold, the Son of a Virgin, the Son of the most high God
is sent, and commanded to be slain, that by the precious balm of his blood
he might heal all my wounds. Consider, O man, how great are those wounds for
the curing of which the Lord Christ must needs be wounded. If these wounds had
not been deadly, yea and to eternal death, the Son of God would never have
dyed, that he might cure them.

And that Augustine, meditating on the passion of Christ, says, The Cross of
Christ it to us the cause of all happiness: it has delivered us from the
blindness of error: it has restored us from darkness to light: it has
conjoined us, being aliens, to God: we were far from him, it has brought us
to his presence: we were pilgrim Citizens, it showed us to him: his cross is
the cutting off of discord, the foundation of peace, abundance and largess of
all gifts.

Quest. What then is the passion of Christ?

Answ. It is that all-sufficient sacrifice of the Son of God, whereby he
offered himself to the Father, that he might merit for all that believe in
him, justification, by this obedience, sanctification, by his Spirit,
redemption, by his death, and eternal life, by his resurrection from the dead.

Quest. What moved Christ thus to suffer?

Answ. 1 The good will and pleasure of the Father.

2 The misery of mankind.

3 Gods infinite and unspeakable love.

4 The voluntary obedience of Christ himself.

Quest. Of what continuance was this passion of his?

An. From the day of his birth, till the hour of his resurrection.

Quest. Tell me what he suffered from his birth till his death?

Answ. He suffered in his body, circumcision, hunger, weeping, and weariness:
in his soul, temptation, and heaviness: in his estate, poverty, and
needinesse: in his name, ignominy, and contemptuousnesse: in person,
persecution, and weakness: and in his whole life, misery, and wretchedness:
and to this end only, that he, thus freeing us from deserved ignominy, might
bring us in the end unto eternal glory.

Quest. But because his greatest suffering was about, and at his death, show
me first what he suffered not long before he died?

Ans. When David considered by the spirit of prophecy, of this point, he
says, The sorrows of the grave have compassed me, the troubles of hell have
taken hold upon me. And when Jeremy did consider it by the same Spirit, he
cries out in the person of Christ, Lament. 1.12. Have you no regard, all ye
that pass by this way? Behold and (...) if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the
day of his fierce wrath: from above he has sent fire into my bones, which
prevails against them: he has spread a net for my feet, and turned me
back; he has made me desolate and daily in heaviness.

He was in a Garden where Adam transgressed, his soul was heavy unto death,
he sweat drops, or rather cloddes of blood, trickling down unto the ground,
and was constrained to cry, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from
me. There he was assaulted by Satan, betrayed by Judas, apprehended by
Soldiers, and forsaken of all his professed Disciples.

Quest. And why, think you, was his soul thus perplexed?

Ans. Not for the fear of a bodily death; for that, he might, if he would,
have avoided: But,

1 The meditation of sins tyranny, deaths victory, and Satan's malice, al
which had made havoc of mankind.

2 The consideration of those cursed contumelies, and that damnable death,
which he was to undergo in his blessed body.

3 The thoughts he had of man's ingratitude, who was not thankful nor mindeful
of so great salvation.

4 The sense and feeling of Gods wrath, which he sustained, and satisfied for
our sins.

Quest. When he was apprehended and brought unto Caiphas, surely the high
Priest would use him well.

Ans. Nay, he is by him arraigned as a thief, mocked as a fool, accused as
an incendiary, stricken as one contemptible, and spit upon, as an execrable
person; and all this to free us from that shameful execration.

Qu. Was he no better used when he came before Pilate?

Answ. Not a whit: for,

1 He was accused as a seducer of the people, a seditious person, a
conspiratour against the State, a subuerter of the Nation, an enemy to Caesar,
and that he said of himself, he was Christ the King. This he suffered, that so
he might derive, and take to himself that rebellion against Gods Majesty,
whereof we all were guilty in Adam; and, by this humiliation, make satisfaction
to God for us. If he had defended himself, we had been accused, or acquitted
himself, we had perished; but as a Lamb before the shearer; he opened not his
mouth, that we might have liberty to call upon God.

2 He is balanced with Barabbas, and thought lighter then a murderer: he is
condemned by a Judge in the name of the whole Empire: and being thus condemned
(though pronounced innocent) he is scorned by Soldiers, attired like a fool,
beaten with rods, spit upon with reproach; and only because he bare the
iniquities of us all. Isai. 53.

3 He is cast out of the City, to give us a City; he carried his Cross, to
carry our sins: he is brought to Golgatha, to suffer our reproach: he is
crucified on the Cross, to give us a crown, even a crown of glory, reserved
in heaven for us. 1. Pet. 1.

4 He was crucified with thieves, that he might glorify us with Angels: with
his hands spread abroad, that he might call all unto him: with his naked body,
that we might not be ashamed of our nakedness in heaven: with a feeling of
thirst, that he might show his desire of our salvation: with drinking of gall,
that he might satisfy for that deadly juice which Adam sucked out of the
forbidden fruit: with his side pierced through, that the Church might be washed
with the blood and water that came out: with crying in fear, that we might
cry in faith: and with the loss of his life, that he might save ours.

Quest. O cursed Caiphas, who thus arraigned him! O cursed Pilate, who thus
condemned! O thrice cursed both Jews and Romans, who thus did execute the
Son of God?

Answ. Nay, rather cursed be our sins, for which he was arraigned, condemned,
and executed. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5. He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid
upon him the iniquities of us all. Isai. 53.5.6. He has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: Gal. 3.14. And, we were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from our vain conversation, received
by the traditions of the Fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of
a Lamb undefiled, and without spot.

Quest. And at what time of the year did he suffer all this?

An. At Easter, at the feast of the Passover, when the Jews were commanded to
kill a lamb in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, to show that he
was that lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; yea, and that
Lamb, which in Gods counsel, and its own efficacy, was slain from the
beginning of the world.

Quest, You said before, that our Savior was crucified: to what end did he
undergo this punishment?

Ans. 1 That he might derive the curse of the Law from us unto himself. Gal.
3.14.

2 That the corruption of our nature, being crucified with him, our inherent
vitiositie might be abolished, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Romans
6.6.

3 That having paid our debt, he might bring in, and cancel that
handwriting, wherewith we were bounden, that so the memory of our sins
being blotted out, they might not appear before God, against us.

5 That his blood might be a lauer, to purge our souls from all their spots
of sin.

6 That we might so have just cause ever to acknowledge and magnify the love
of Christ toward us. Ephesians. 5.1.

Quest. I see by this why Christ was crucified: but why did he die upon the
Cross?

Answ. 1 That he might ratify the eternal covenant and testament of grace.
Heb. 9.15.

2 That he might abolish sin. Romans 6.10.

3 That he might take away the stipend of sin, which is death. Romans 6.20. 2.
Tim. 1.10.

4 That by death he might overcome him, who had the power of death, that is,
the devil. Heb. 2.14.

5 That he might take from us the fear of death. Heb. 2.15.

6 That we by it should die so unto sin, Romans 6.11. that it should no more
reign in our mortal bodies. Romans 6.13.

7 That we might belong properly to Christ. Romans 7.4.

8 That they which live, should no more live unto themselves, but unto Christ,
who died and rose again for us. 2. Cor. 5.15.

9 That we might know and acknowledge the great love of Christ toward us. 1.
Ioh. 3.16.

10 That we might live with Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 5.10.

11 That we might learn to die courageously, for his and our brethrens cause.
1. Ioh. 3.16.

12 That by this means, Gods mercy and justice might both be glorified, in
this redemption and salvation of mankind John 3.14.

Quest. Is this death of Christ profitable to every singular man in the world?

Ans. It was effectually profitable only to the elect: for,

1 He gave his life for his sheep. John 10.15.

2 He delivered his people from their sins Matthew. 21.

3 For them he sanctified himself. Ioh. 17.

He prayed only for them. Ioh. 17.

If he had died intentionally for all, and all had not been saved, he should
have missed of his purpose.

4 Else the sin of man were of ability to disanull the intent of Christ.

Quest. How is Christ's death thus meritorious?

Answ. 1 In that he was both God and man. Acts 20.

2 In that it was a voluntary death. Philip. 2.7.

Quest. Tell me now what benefit comes unto me by this death of Christ?

Answ. Great every way: for by it,

1 There is such a satisfaction made fully for your sins, that they shall
never rise up in judgment against you. 1. Ioh. 1.7.

2 God is pacified, and reconciled to man Romans 3.24.

3 Satan is overcome. Genesis 3.15.

4 Death is swallowed up in victory, and the fear thereof is so taken away,
that to the faithful, it is now nothing but a passage to eternal life. Hos.
13.14.

5 You are acquitted and justified from your sins. Romans 4.25. and 5.19.

6 The Partition Wall betwixt Jews and Gentiles is broken down. Ephesians. 2.14.

7 All the faithful, under both the Old and New Testament, are become subject
unto one Head, from which they were fallen, and are gathered into one body.
Ephesians. 1.10. Coloss. 1.21.

8 The prophecies are accomplished, the Truth is become agreeable to the
figure; of Sampson, killing more at his death, then in his life; the brazen
Serpent, which cured such as looked up unto it; and the sacrifices which were
offered before for sins.

9 By the death of Christ, you ever die to sin, and crucify the flesh, with
the affections and lusts. 1. Pet. 2.24. Ro^. 6.6. Gal. 5.24.

10 In a word, by it you have remission of sins, sanctification of spirit,
and everlasting life after death.

Quest. What must I here meditate of?

An. You must meditate: 1 Of the fearful wrath of God against sinners, which
could not be appeased by any other means.

2 Of Gods great mercy, who to save mankind, would have his Son killed.

3 Of Christ's great humility, who thus abased himself to exalt us.

4 Of the ugliness of sin, which could by no other means be purged.

5 Of the estate of the members of Christ, who in this world must be
conformable to his passion.

6 That we hate all sin and iniquity, for which Christ suffered, and by
which we crucify him again. Augustines meditation is fit to be thought on.
The life of Christ (says he) is to me a rule of my life; his death is my
redemption from death. That instructs my life: this has for me destroyed
death.

And again: Look upon his wounds, when he hanged on the tree, his blood when
he died, the price wherewith he redeemed us. He has his body so placed on the
cross, as if he bowed it down to kiss thee: his arms spread out ready to
embrace thee: and his whole body given to redeem thee: Consider how great
things these are, weigh them in the balance of thine heart, that he may be
wholly fastened in thine heart, who for thee wholly was fastened to the cross.

And again, meditate thus with that holy Father in his Soliloquies, and say, O
Christ, the salvation of my soul, I heartily thank thee for all thy benefits
bestowed upon me from my youth till this mine old age. I pray thee by thy
self, forsake me not. Thou did create me when I was nothing, thou did
redeem me, when I was worse then nothing; I was dead, and when I was dead thou
came down unto me, and tookest upon thee mortality for my sake. Thou a King
came to a subject to redeem a subject. Thou did die and overcome death,
that I might live. I was exalted by thee, when thou wast humbled for me: such
was thy love toward me, that thou gave thy blood to be shed for me. O my
Lord, thou did love me more then thy self, because thou would die for me.
By such a means, by so dear a price thou have restored me from exile,
redeemed me from thraldom, preserved me from punishment, called me by thy
name, signed me by thy blood, anointed me with that oil, wherewith thy self
wast anointed, that of thee, o Christ, I am named a Christian.

Thus thy mercy and grace has ever prevented me.

Thus thou, my Deliverer, have delivered me from many great and grievous
dangers. Did I wander? thou broughtest me again into the way. Was I ignorant?
thou instructedst me. Did I sin? thou correctedst me. Was I sorrowful?
thou comfortedst me. Did I despair? thou strengthnedst me. Did I fall? thou
did help me up. Did I go? thou did lead me. Did I come? thou did
receive me. Did I sleep? thou did watch over me. Did I cry? thou heardst the
voice of my complaints. Grant good Lord, that it may be ever pleasant unto me,
to think often of these thy benefits, to speak often of them, often to give
thee thanks for them, and to praise thee for ever and ever. Amen.

Quest. But because I cannot thus meditate of Christ's passion, unless I be
able to apply it to my self, how shall I make this application?

Answ. 1 By the word, 2. by faith, 3. by the Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper. By the word, Christ is offered as by the hand of God; by faith,
he is received as by the hand of man; and by the sacraments, he is sealed up
unto us as the Kings letters patents are by his Broad seal. For as by the word
of God his favor is signed unto us, so the same favor is by the sacraments as
a Broad seal ratified unto us, and by the spirit as a Privy seal confirmed
unto us.

Qu. Am I now bounden to follow Christ in his cross?

Answ. You are assuredly. For,

1 You are a member of his body, will you not be like to your head?

2 You are a branch of him that true vine, will you not follow the root?

3 You desire to have heaven, do you not know that by many tribulations you
must go thither?

4 You are one of Christ's grapes; Christ was pressed in Gods wine press: and
would you give out your sweet liquor without the like pressing which he
endured? Augustine said well: When thou beginnest to live godly in Christ, thou
art put into the wine press, prepare thy self that thy wine may be pressed
out.

5 It is an argument that God loves you not, if you endure no afflictions: you
are a bastard, and no son, Heb. 12.14. An Heathen man could say thus much: No
man is more miserable then he who endures no misery: it is a sign that he
is contemned of God as an idle and cowardly person. And if, says Augustine,
you will go to Canaan, Nihil infelicius felicitate peccantium.
you must go as it were by fire and water through the wilderness of this
world. No creature is more unhappy, then he that is happy in sinning.

6 You must follow him also in his death; and know that as he died, so you must
also be willing to die: especially, since nothing can free you from it. If
Wisdom could, Solomon had not died: if strength, Sampson had not died: if
Riches, Dives had not died: if beauty, Absalom had not died. Wheresoever we
go, if we carry with us not the ugly picture of death, as some Romanists
do, but the true picture of Christ's death in our hearts, we shall never be
too fearful of death.

Qu. I trust I shall thus meditate of Christ's death and passion: but is it not
my duty at all times, especially in sickness to think often of his
resurrection?

Answ. The Apostle Paul did account all things but loss and dung, for this
excellent knowledge of Christ's death, and the virtue of his resurrection. Phil.
3.10.

Quest. What is the virtue of his resurrection?

Ans. It is nothing else but the power of his Godhead, or the power of his
Spirit, whereby he raised himself mightily from the dead, and that on our
behalf.

For know this to your comfort, that he did rise again from the dead, not as a
private, but as a public person, so that all the elect have, and are, by his
resurrection raised out of the grave of sin, by regeneration in this life,
and shall one day by it be raised out of the grave of death, to eternal glory
in the life to come.

Qu. What use may I make of this.

Answ. By it:

1 You may be comforted against the fear of all your spiritual enemies, and
say thus to your sick soul; Christ is risen again from the dead, and so has
subdued all mine enemies under me, and will daily more and more subdue them in
me. I may have afflictions in this world: but Christ bids me to be of good
comfort, for he has overcome the world, Ioh. 16.33. and, This is the victory
that overcomes the world, even my faith, 1. Ioh. 5.4. I will say with David:
Why art thou disquieted, O my soul, and why art thou troubled within me? The
Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what either man, or misery, or sin, or
death, or hell, or the Devil can do against me. I have God to be my Father,
and Christ to be my elder brother; I will not fear in the evil day. I am not
alone, Christ is my companion. This shall be my study, to believe things
invisible, to hope for that which is deferred, and to love God to the end,
though he writes bitter things against me, and makes me to possess the
sins of my youth. Though he kill me, I will trust in him. I am in Christ
Jesus, and therefore freed by his bonds, healed by his stripes, crucified by
his death, raised by his resurrection, justified by his obedience, sanctified
by his spirit, and glorified by his glorious Ascension into Heaven. Now my
flesh, by the benefit of Christ, who rose again in my flesh, is not spe, but
re, not in hope, but indeed saved. For in him mine head, it is already both
risen and ascended up into Heaven. My flesh, being safe in this her head, shall
be also saved in her members. Let them securely triumph, their head will never
forsake them.

2 You must learn to rise from sin, to newness of life; to seek those
things that are above, and not those things which are beneath: to set your
affections on Heaven, and heavenly things. If you be partaker of the first
resurrection, the second death shall take no hold of you, Revel. 20.6. If you
do not this, Christ's death shall do you no good: For as he died and rose
again: so must you rise from sin to righteousness, and from death to life.
Therefore awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee life. Ephesians. 5.14.

Quest. If I can thus meditate of Christ's death and resurrection, I doubt not
but death will be better welcome: for if I wear his Crown of thorns, I
shall one day wear his Crown of glory: If I can pledge him in his Cup of
gall, I shall drink of his sweet wine: If I die with him in this World, I
shall live with him in that which is to come. But you told me that I must
meditate of the deceitfulness of this World: must I do so, that I may leave
it more willingly?

Answ. You must needs do it; the World is like Laban, it will give you Leah
for Rachel: it will change your wages: it will send you with Iaakob empty away.
It is a Siren; it will sing to you, to sink you. It is as Iael, Hebers wife,
it will offer you milk and cover you with a mantle, and in the end strike a
nail into the temples of your head. It will salute you as Ioab did Amasa, and
kill you as Amasa was by Ioab killed. With Judas it will kiss you, and with
Judas also it will betray you. For this cause,

Solomon cried, Vanity of vanities: all is but vanity.

John said, Love not this World nor the things of this World; he that loves
this World, the love of the Father is not in him. 1. Ioh. 2.16.

To this purpose, the Fathers have many notable Meditations. Augustine said;

This World is more dangerous fauning then fighting; and more to be avoided
when she inticeth to love, then when she compels to contempt.

Again: O ye lovers of this World, for what do you labor? have you here
any greater hope, then to become friends of this World? what is there which is
not frail and full of peril? and by how many perils do you come to a greater
peril? This life is miserable; death uncertain, it comes unawares: and after
all the punishment of our negligence is eternal punishment.

Again: The World passes away and the lusts thereof. What will thou do?
whether will thou love temporal things, and pass away with time, or love
Christ, and live for ever?

Again: Behold, the World is troublesome, and we like it: what would we do
if it were calm? how would we cleave unto beauty if we so affect
deformity? how fast would we gather the flowers, who fill our hands with the
thorns?

Again: This ruinous World is beloved of us: what would we do if the building
were fair?

Again: The Lords of this World have true asperitie, false iucunditie,
certain misery, and hopeless felicity.

Gregory said; Behold, this World which we love so much, passes away. These
Saints, at whose monuments we stand, did contemn the then flourishing World:
they had long life, continual health, rich estate, many children, long peace:
and yet when that World flourished in it self, it withered in their hearts.
Behold, now it withers in it self, and florisheth in our hearts. Every
where death, sorrow, desolation is at hand. We are beaten on all sides, filled
on all sides are we with bitterness and yet being blinded with carnal
concupiscence, we love the bitterness of this World: she flies, we pursue
her: she falls, we lean upon her: and because we cannot keep her from
falling, we fall with her, whom we hold falling.

Bernard said: He that begins to think Christ sweet, will esteem quickly the
world as bitter.

Again: This World is full of thorns: they are in the Earth: they stick in
thy flesh. To be amongst them, and not to be hurt by them, proceeds from Gods
power, not our own.

Again: The World cries, I will fail th^^ the flesh cries, I will infect
thee: the Devil cries, I will deceive thee: but Christ cries, I will refresh
thee.

Again: The danger of this World is seen in the paueitie of such as pass
well through it, and the multitude that perish in it. In the Massilian Sea, of
four Ships scant one is drowned: in the Sea of this World, of four souls
scant one is saved.

Chrysostom said, The World is a Sea, the Church a Ship, the Sail Repentance,
the Rudder the Cross, the Pilot Christ, and the Holy Ghost the Winds.

I would with you therefore to bid this vain World Adieu, and to say with the
blessed Apostle Saint Paul: God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing save
in the cross of Christ, whereby the World is crucified to me, and I unto the
World.

Quest. I shall do this the better, if you tell me what God has prepared for
me in Heaven: and of this I desire to be instructed from you.

Answ. The Apostle Paul, thinking upon this says: The Eye has not seen, the
Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive
the good things which God has prepared for them which love him.

The Eye, says Augustine, has not seen it, because it is not Color; the
Ear has not heard it, because it is not a Sound; the Heart cannot comprehend
it, because it must Comprehend the heart: and this we shall more fully
perceive, by how much we do more Faithfully, believe, Firmly expect, and
Ardently desire.

God (says the said Father) has prepared that for them that love him, which
cannot be Apprehended by faith, Attained to by hope, or obtained by charity:
it transcendeth our desires and wishes: it may be Obtained, it cannot be valued.

Quest. Yet that I may get such a glimpse of that glory, begin with mine
estate after I am dead; what shall I enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven?

Ans. You shall be carried to the Bosom of Abraham: the Celestial Paradise:
the House of your Father: the new Holy and durable Jerusalem: you shall then
enter into your Masters Joy: you shall have an Inheritance immortal, undefiled,
which withers not, reserved in the Heavens: you shall Rest from your labors,
have Peace from your Enemies, and behold the Glory of God in Christ Jesus: in
which place shall be such, and so many joys, as all the Arithmeticians in the
World are not able to number them: all the Geometricians are not able to weigh
them: all the Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Logicians are not able to express
them in fit terms. There shall be joy above us for the Vision of God, about
us for the vision of the Angels, beneath us for the vision of the Heavens, and
within us for the vision of Happiness. There Salomons wisdom shall be reputed
but folly: Absaloms beauty but deformity: Azaels swiftness but slownesse:
Sampsons strength but weakness: Methusalaes long age but infancy: and the
Kingdom of Augustus Caesar but beggerie.

Quest. By what means shall I obtain this happiness?

Answ. By Gods mercy that gives it: by Christ's Merit that bought it: by the
Gospel that offers it: by Faith that receives it: and by the Spirit that
seals it unto your soul.

Quest. What is the object of it?

Ans. The Vision, knowledge and comprehension of God in Christ. We shall indeed
behold the Angels, and enjoy their company: see the Saints and have their
society. But as the joy of a Courtier is in the presence of his Prince: so the
joy of a Christian shall be in the presence of his Christ. Blessed are the pure
in heart: for they shall see God: Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are they that dwell in
thine house, for they shall ever praise thee: Psalm. 8.4. We shall see him as he
is: 1. Ioh. 3.3.

The Angels do this in the Kingdom of Heaven: and we shall do it in the
same Kingdom. Here we live by faith there we shall live by sight.

Quest. Is this felicity prepared for all?

Answ. For all that believe it is prepared. The Elect have obtained it, the
rest are hardened, Romans 11.7. In every Nation, he that fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of him: Acts 10. There is neither Jew nor
Gentile, Grecian or Barbarian, Male or Female, Bond or Free; but we are all
one in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.27.

Quest. Shall my body only, or my soul only. or both body and soul enjoy
this felicity?

Answ. Both body and soul: your soul shall be sanctified throughout and your
body made like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.20.

Quest. Shall this very body of mine rise again to life after death?

Answ. It shall assuredly: for,

1 The Lord keeps all the bones of his Saints, that not one of them shall be
broken: Psalm. 34.21. and there shall not an hair of our head perish. Luke
21.18.

2 Every one shall receive in his body that which he has done, be it good or
evil. 2. Cor. 5.10.

3 God has consecrated this body of yours, to be a Temple for the holy Ghost
to dwell in. 1. Cor. 3.16.

4 This corruptible shall put on incorruption, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.
This says he, pointing as with the finger at the same substance; and could not
speak more expressly, unless he should have taken his own skin, with his
own hands, as Tertullian well observed.

5 Christ rose again in his own body: and you shall rise as he did.

6 In this body, you have suffered for Christ, lived for Christ, and in it you
shall reign with Christ.

7 You shall be happy: but how happy, if one part should perish: says
Tertullian, in his book of the Resurrection of the flesh?

8 I am sure, says Job, that my Redeemer lives, and though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self
shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins
are now consumed within me. Job. 19.25.

Quest. O that you could teach me this by some such comparisons, as might
confirm my faith concerning this doctrine: for there are many Sadduces in the
world at this day who deny the resurrection of the body.

Answ. Indeed I remember, that Gregory in his Morals has a like saying of
some in his time. There are, says he, a number of people, who (considering,
that the soul is dissolved from the body, that the body is turned into
rottenness, that rottenness returns to dust, and that this dust is resolved
into the first elements) cannot see how that by reason there should be any
resurrection; and, beholding dry and dead bones, mistrust that they shall not
again be clothed with their flesh, and so revive. Such men, though they
cannot by faith believe as they ought the bodies resurrection, yet let them be
persuaded by this natural reason; What, I pray, then does the whole world, but
imitate our resurrection daily in her elements? For we see daily, that trees
in winter want both leaves and fruit: and behold, suddenly in the spring time,
out of a dry tree, as it were by a new resurrection, leaves bud out, fruits
ripen, and the whole tree is apparelled with her revived beauty. Let them
behold the dead kernel set into the earth, how a tree sprouteth out of it: and
let them devise if they can, where that great tree was in so small a seed.
Where was the body? where the bark? where the branches? where the green
leaves? where that plenty of fruit? Do they not perceive that all these were
in the kernel, or seed, before it was cast into the ground? Why then should
they wonder, how a little dust, resolved into elements, should, when God will,
become a living body again? seeing that so small a seed, coming first out of
a tree, should by the power of God, become an huge tree again. For, as the
tree is in the kernel, so are our bodies in the glorified body of Christ.

In the man Christ (says Cassiodorus) is the flesh of every one of us; yea,
our very blood, and a portion of us. Therefore I believe, that where my portion
reigns, there shall I reign: where mine own blood rules, there do I
perceive that I shall rule: where my flesh is glorified, there know I that I
shall be glorious. And why then shall it seem strange unto you, that God is
able to raise your body again at the last day? A Tailor can rip a garment, and
set it together again, though it be in a thousand pieces: a Clockmaker can
take asunder every wheel of a watch, and join it together again: and shall not
God be able to do the like for your body? Why, my dear brother, did God
create you of nothing, and can he not restore you from something? does not he
hold all the elements in his hands? is not he more skilful, then that
Alchymist, who can extract the quintessence of any substance, or that
goldsmith, who though many metals be mingled together, yet can he sever each
one to his first substance? is not he the Lord God of all flesh? is there any
thing hard to him: Ierem. 32? Can the Phoenix rise out of her own ashes, and
shall not you arise out of your own dust? Can the trees revive again in the
spring, and cannot you revive again at the last day? You see that many birds
and flies are dead all winter, and revive in summer: you know that the corn
which at the seed time is cast into the ground, grows up in harvest. Shall
God (says Augustine) quicken the rotten and dead grains of seed, whereby thou
live in this world, and shall be not much more raise thee up, that thou
may live for ever? Know then, that as every night has his day, every
Sunsetting his Sunrising, every sleeping his awaking, every labor his rest,
and every winter his spring time: so, every death shall have his life. Say
then, even when you are to die, Post tenebras spero lucem: After darkness I
hope for light, Job. 17.12. For, if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal body, by his Spirit that dwells in you. Read, and
read often the 1. Cor. 15. chapter, and those two golden Chapters of the last
resurrection, and eternal life, in Bucanus his Institutions, and you shall be
much comforted and confirmed in this point.

Quest. I believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living: but when I see him, what shall be the qualities where with my body
shall be adorned?

Ans. It shall be, 1 Immortal: for, this mortal shall put on immortality. 1.
Cor. 15.

2 Incorruptible: for, this corruptible shall put on incorruption. 1. Cor. 15.

3 Spiritual: it is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body.
1. Cor. 15.

4 Strong: it is sown in weakness, it shall rise in strength. 1. Cor. 15.

5 Perfect: for, as Adam was in his first creation, and Christ after his
resurrection, so shall you be at the resurrection of the just.

6 Beautiful: it shall shine like the stars, be bright as the Sun, and
clear as Crystal. Dan. 12. Matthew. 22. 1. Cor. 15.
The glory of the heavenly bodies is one, and the glory of the earthly bodies
is another.

Quest. Why says the Apostle, that our bodies shall be spiritual bodies?

Answ. Not that the essence shall be changed, but the qualities of that
essence: they are called spiritual;

1 Because they shall give themselves wholly to be governed by the Spirit.

2 They shall be vpheld by the power of the Spirit: so that they shall need no
meat or drink: but, by the Spirit of Christ, shall be nourished to eternal
life.

Quest. And why say you they shall be perfect?

Answ. Because as there is no pollution in heaven, so shall there be no
imperfection. The young infant shall not rise in his infancy, nor the aged person
in his decrepite age, nor the blind person without his fight, nor he that is
borne lame or imperfect, with that imperfection: but seeing our resurrection is
a new creation, we shall then be as in our first creation: Aug. lib. 11. de
ciuit. Dei, cap. 13. And in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, he says: The bodies
of the Saints shall rise without any maime, without any deformity, without any
corruption, without difficulty, in which there shall be as great facility, as
there is felicity. Lyra ad Ephesians. cap. 4. ver. 13.

Look to the 1, Adam created a perfect man: the 2, Adam rising a perfect man:
and Gods promise Philip. 3.21. 1. Cor. 15. 49. to make our bodies like Christ's
body, and you will resolve w^ comfort of this truth.

Quest. As my body shall be thus renewed, so shall not my soul be renewed?

Answ. It shall: Then shall the glorious Image of God shine in it: for:

1 Your understanding shall be full of the knowledge of God, which he shall
immediately reveal unto you.

2 Your will shall perfectly obey God.

3 All your affections shall be so purified and well ordered, that there shall
be a sweet harmony betwixt all the faculties of your soul.

Quest. Can you show me this by any comparison?

Answ. Lactantius will do it for me. As a candle (says he) while it is in the
lantern, it gives a good light, and enlightneth the lantern it self: and if
it be taken out, although the lantern be left dark, yet the candle shines
more clearly, than it did before: so while the soul is in the body, it is the
light and governor thereof; and when it forsakes the body, although the body
be left dead, and insensible, yet then the soul enioyes her proper vigor and
brightness. Lib. 7. cap. 12. Divine. Iustit.

Quest. That I may the better think of this glorious e^tie, and eternal
glory, tell me what the ancient Fathers have thought of it?

Answ. They indeed (sequestring themselves from the mist and mudde of this
present world) saw more clearly than we, the happiness of Paradise, and
therefore they have many divine meditations of this matter. I will repeat
some: and read you to this purpose the two last Chapters of the Revelation.

Augustine said: Such is the beauty of eternal righteousness, such is the
joy of that eternal light, that if we might stay there but for one day, even
for that time alone, we should contemn the innumerable years of full
delights, and circumfluence of all happiness.

Again: We can more easily tell what there is not in that eternal life, then
what there is. There, there is no death, sorrow, l^ssitude, or infirmity:
There, there is no hunger, no thirst, no heat, no corruption, no want, no
mourning, no grief.

Again: Haste, haste to that place, where you shall live for ever: for, if you
so love this miserable and mutable life, where you live with such labor; and
for all your running, riding, sweating, and sighing, you can hardly provide
necessaries for your selves: how much more ought you to love eternal life?
where you shall not labor, but enjoy all security, all felicity, happy
liberty, and happy blessedness: where we shall be like Angels, the righteous
shine like stars: where God shall be all in all unto them, who shall be seen
without end, loved without weariness, praised without irksomenesse.

Again: This inheritance, I mean this of Christ, by which we become fellow
heirs with him, is not lessened by the multitude of possessors, nor straightened
by the number of heirs; but it is as great to many as to few; to every one, as
to all.

Again: Do we love riches? let us there keep them, where they cannot be
lost. Do we love honor? let us there have it, where honor is given to none but
the worthy. Do we desire dignity? let us there affect to get it, where being
once gotten, we may not fear to lose it. Do we love life? let us there seek
it, where it is not ended by death.

Again: Such shall be there the delight of beauty, that thou shall ever have
it, and never be glutted with it; yea rather thou shall ever be satisfied, and
never glutted. For if I say, thou shall not be satisfied, there shall be
hunger: if satisfied, thou may fear satietie there, where there is neither
fullness nor famine. I know not what to say: but God has what to give.

Again: Behold the Kingdom of heaven is set to sale: if thou will, thou
may buy it. Think not much of the greatness of the price: it is worth all
that thou have. Look not what thou have, but what an one thou art. It is worth
as much as thou art worth: give thy self, and thou shall have it. Thou will
say, I am evil, and perhaps he will not take me: by giving thy self to him,
thou shall become good.

Again: The poor widow bought as much for two mites, as either Peter did by
forsaking his nets, or Zacheus by giving half his goods to the poor.

Again: In the city of God, the King is verity; the Law, charity; the
dignity, equity; the peace, felicity; the life, eternity: but it is
contrary in the devils city: there the king, is falsitie; the law, cupiditie;
the dignity, iniquity; the happiness, contention; the life, temporalitie.

Again: Compare we this life temporal, with that which is eternal, and it is
but a death, rather than a life. For, this continual decaying of our corrupt
nature, what is it else but a prolixitie of death? But what tongue can
express, what mind can comprehend the joys of heaven? to be amongst the
quire of Angels, to be with the blessed spirits, to behold the presence of
God, to see that most clear light, to be affected with no grief, to rejoice
in the gift of perpetual incorruption.

Again: There shall we enjoy whatsoever shall be lovely: nay, can we desire
that which we shall not enjoy? There we shall rest, there we shall see, there
we shall know, there we shall love, there we shall praise; we shall praise
that Being, which shall be in the end, and without end. For what else is our
end, but to come to that kingdom which is without end?

Again: There this shall be the sole virtue, to see that thou love; and the
sovereign felicity, to love that thou see. There shall blessed life be
drunk, out of her own fountain, where the vision of verity shall be most
clearly opened.

Gregory said: Let us run and follow Christ: here are no true joys; but
there they are reposed, where there is true life.

Again: Because in the elect, in this life, there is a diversity of works,
there shall be without doubt, in the life to come, a distinction of dignities:
that wherein here one excels another, there he may surpass his fellow in
reward: yet though all have not the like dignity, yet all shall have one and
the same blessed life.

Bernard said: There are twelve stars in the Crown of Christians in heaven:
The first is memory, without forgetfulness: the second, reason, without
error: the third, will, without perturbation: the fourth, impassibilitie, in
which the body shall rise: the fifth, brightness, by which it shall be like
Christ's glorious body: the sixth, agilitie, to move according to the mobilitie
of our minds: the seventh, transparencie, that albeit it be solid and thick,
yet shall it be impenetrable: the eight, to love our neighbor as our self, in
truth: the ninth, to see clearly, that our neighbor loves us as himself: the
tenth, to love God perfectly, but more than our selves: the eleventh, to love
our selves, but for God: the twelfth, to see God loving us, more than he loved
himself.

Again: O that blessed Region of Paradise! O that blessed Region of delights,
for which I sigh, in this vallie of tears! where wisdom shall shine without
ignorance: memory without forgetfulness, understanding without error: and
reason without obscurity. Blessed are they that dwell there: they shall for
ever and ever praise God. The kingdom of God is granted, promised, showed,
received: Granted in predestination, promised in vocation, showed in
justification, received in glorification.

Prosper said: The life to come is that, whereby we believe that it is
blessedly sempiternall, and sempiternallie blessed: where there is certain
security; secure tranquillity; safe iucunditie; happy eternity; eternal
felicity; where there is perfect love, no fear; an everlasting day, swift
motion; and in all, one spirit,

To conclude, think you of the goodliest sights that ever could be seen; the
most melodions music, that ever could be heard; the most delicate diet, that
ever could be tasted; the greatest honor, that can be enjoyed; the best
company, that may be possessed; and all the comforts that you can have in this
life: and in comparison of the joys of the kingdom of heaven, they are but a
point, and less than a point: they are petie joys, peacocke joys, the joys
of prisoners and poor pilgrims.

Quest. I shall like the better of this life eternal, if you give me such a
taste here of eternal death, that I do not feel it in the life to come: Can
this eternal death be described?

Answ. It cannot any more, than eternal life: for as the heart cannot
comprehend that one: so the tongue cannot express this other.

Quest. But what says the scripture of it?

Ans. Very terrible and fearful things: as,

Deuteronomy. 32.22. Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn down to the bottom
of hell.

Psalm. 10.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and
stormy tempests: this is the portion of their cup.

Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels. These shall go into everlasting pain.

Reuelat. 20.10. The devil was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where
the Beast and the false prophet shall be tormented, even day and night for
evermore.

Chap. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and forcerers, and idolaters, and all liers, shall have their
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

2. Thessal. 1.7.8.9. The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know
God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be
punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

2. Pet. 4. God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into
hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be kept unto damnation.

Matthew. 22.13. Bind him hand and foot, take him away, cast him into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Esai. 30, 33. Tophet is prepared of old, it is even prepared for the king: he
has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the
breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone, does kindle it.

Chap. 34.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fear is come upon the
hypocrites. Who shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who shall dwell with the
consuming burnings?

Quest. And what say the Fathers of it?

Answ. Chrysostom wishes that men in tauernes and all places would dispute of
hell: for the remembrance of hell will not suffer a man to fall into hell.

Augustine says: From hell there is no redemption: for he, that is damned and
drowend there, shall never come out. From hell there is no redemption: because
there neither can the father help the son, nor the son his father.

There can be found no friend, or kinsman which can give a ransom of gold or
silver, which now like covetous persons they heap up, suffering the poor to
pine by poverty, and perish for hunger and cold. But these miserable men shall
be constrained to cry, What has our gold profited us? etc. Wisd. 5. From hell
there is no redemption: there is weeping and wailing, and none to pity them:
there is dolor, and horror, and crying out, and none to hear them.

Gregory says: After a most fearful sort, the wicked have a death without
death, an end without end, ceasing without ceasing; Because, that death, ever
lives: that end, ever begins: and that ceasing, knows not how to cease.

Again: In hell there is intolerable cold, unquenchable fire, the worm that
never dies: an intolerable savor, palpable darkness, and scourgings by
whippers: the most fearful vision of Devils, the confusion of sinners, and
desperation of any good. There shall be a double hell: the one of intolerable
heat, the other of surpassing cold.

Chrysostom says: Let a man imagine ten thousand hels, all is nothing to
this, Of being separated from Christ: to hear this, voice: Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity: to be accused, that thou have not fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, etc.

Bernard says: We have deserved hell, where there is no meat, no comfort,
none end: where the rich glutton begged but a cup of cold water, and could not
obtain it.

Quest. Are all, think you, tormented there alike?

Answ. The least torment shall be endless, comfortless and remediless: yea
Gregory says, That as the same Sun shines upon al, but yet heateth not al
alike: so the same fire of hell burns all the wicked, yet it does not burn
all alike. As heaven has many mansions of glory: so hell has many places of
horror. According unto the manner of the sin, is the manner of the punishment.

The which if it be true, ought to keep us from abominable sins, that at the
least there might be a mitigation of torments. For, mighty sinners shall be
mightily punished: and, he that knows his Masters will and does it not, be
shall be beaten with many stripes.

These are the lessons, my good Auditor, which I have shortly given you as a
direction to die: and the Lord so sanctify them unto your soul, that whether
you live you may live to him, or whether you die you may die to him: so that
whether you live or die you may be his. Amen.

(...) A CONSOLATORIE EPISTLE Against all Crosses.
CHristian Reader, as before I have armed thee against the fear of death, so
in the end of this book I would feign arm thee against the fear of all
dangers. I cannot do it better, then by recalling to thy mind the temptations
of Christ, set down in that Epistle, which once I presented to an Honorable
person in this Kingdom. The Lord Russell. Satan's sophistries. Master Perkins,
who had the use only of his left hand. Matthew. 3. Mat. 4.1.
And the rather, because I fear that a new Dedication of that book unto him,
will put out mine from that worthy man's works: who has done more good by his
one hand, in this Church, then the most have done by both theirs. For thy
comfort therefore understand with me, that as John the Baptist was in one
desert, so our Savior Christ he was in another: but as these two differed in
their being in the world: so did they not accord in their being in the
wilderness. John was with some men, Christ with none; John was with wild men,
Christ with wild beasts; John was preaching, Christ praying; John was
baptising, Christ fighting; John was feeding, Christ fasting; John was
encountering with Devils incarnate, Christ did encounter with the Prince of
those devils. From John preaching in the desert, learn we diligence in our
calling: from Christ tempted in the desert see we troubles in our calling: Ps.
34.19
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all.

If it please you but to read the story of the Gospel, amongst many other
things you shall see set down, that monomachy or single combat which was hand
to hand betwixt Christ and the Devil. And as for Christ Jesus, you shall see
him fasting, fighting, conquering. Fasting and an hungry, to show he was man:
fighting and encountering, to show he was Messiah; and conquering and
triumphing, to show he was God. And as for the Devil, you shall see him
obeiecting, answering, flying. Obiecting, that Mat. 4.3.
Christ might despair; Mat. 4.6.
answering, that he might presume; and flying, Mat. 4.11
when he could not overcome.

In Christ's temptations, we see the estate of the 1. Pet. 2.21.
Church; in Satan's assault, we see his malice to the 1. Pet. 5.8
Church. Is Christ tempted? think it not strange if we fall into Io. 15.20
temptations. For the grief of the head, is the grief of the 1. Cor. 12 26.
members: and the temptation of Christ, shows the temptations of Io. 15.20.
Christians. It is true of Christ, that Act. 14.21.
by many tribulations he did enter into the kingdom of God: that He. 2.1^.
our High Priest was consecrated by afflictions, that so he must suffer and
enter into his Luke 24.26.
glory.

He is no sooner borne into the world, but he is Mat 2.14
hunted by Herod; baptized at Jordan, Matthew. 3.16.4.1.
but Satan sets on him: a Preacher of repentance but the Ioh. 7.1.
Scribes proscribe him; to Lu. 11.15
work miracles, but the Pharisees slander him. He is no sooner to suffer, but
Io. 12.27
the Devil assaults him; apprehended, but the Io. 18.28.
Jews deliver him; delivered, but Luke 23.11.
Herod derides him; Mat 27.27.
derided, but Lu. 93.24
Pilate condemns him; condemned, but the Soldiers abuse him. Is he on the
Cross? the Mat 27.39.
people will not pity him; is he risen? the High priests will Mat. 28.15.
belle him. In a word, is he upon earth? he is tempted in his Luc. 11.16.
person is he in heaven? he is Act 9.4.
tempted in his members. Thus the life of Christ was a warfare upon earth, and
the life of Christians must be a warfare upon earth. We live here in a sea of
troubles: the sea is the world, the waves are calamities, the Church is the
ship, the anchor is hope, the sails are love, the Saints are passengers, the
haven is heaven, and Christ is our Pilot, When the sea can continue without
waves, the ship without tossings, and passengers not be sick upon the water,
thou shall the Church of God be without trials. We begin this voyage so soon
as we are borne, and we must sail on till our dying day.

We do read in Gods word of many kinds of temptations: God, Satan, Man, the
World, and the Flesh, are said to tempt. God tempts man to try his
obedience, Satan tempts man to make him disobedient: men do tempt men to try
what is in them: and man tempts God, to try what is in him. The world is a
tempter, to keep man from God: and the flesh is a tempter to bring man to the
Devil. So God tempted Genesis 22.
Abraham in the offering of his son: Satan Job. 1, 18
tempted Job in the loss of his goods: a 1. King. 10 1.
Queen tempted Solomon, in trying his wisdom: men Exo. 17.3
tempted God by distrust in the desert: the world tempted Demas, 1. Tim. 4.10.
when he forsook the apostles: and the flesh tempted David, 2. Sa. 11.4
when he fell by adultery. Does God tempt us? take heed of hypocrisy, does
Satan tempt us? take heed of his subtilty: does man ^empt man? take heed of
dissembling: does man tempt God? take heed of inquiring: does the world tempt
man? take heed of apostasy: does the flesh tempt man? take heed of carnality.
But do we so? are we wary of these tempters? No, we are not, and therefore
we fall. We fall on the right hand by temptation in prosperity, and we fall on
the left, by temptations in adversity. of the one it may be said, 1 Samuel 18.
it has slain thousands: of the other, that it has slain ten thousands.

When we come and see cities dispeopled, houses defaced, and walls pulled
down, we say the Soldier has been there: and when we see pride in the rich,
discontent in the poor, and sin in all, we may justly say, the tempter has
been there.

Now of all other temptations, it pleases God to suffer his Church to be
tempted with afflictions. It is never free either from the sword of Ishmael;
which is a Ge. 21.9.
reuiling tongue: or the sword of Esau, a Genesis 27.41.
persecuting hand. Neither was there yet ever Christian man found, who had not
his part in the cup of affliction. We must drink of the Mat. 20.23.
same cup our master did: Mat. 10.24.
the disciple is not above his master.

The reasons why God does visit us thus with afflictions, are: 1 To humble us.
Reasons why God does afflict his children.
2 To weane us. 3 To winow us. 4 To prevent us. 5 To teach us. 6 To enlighten
us. 7 To honor us. 8 To cure us. 9 To crown us. 10 To comfort us. 11 To
protect us. 12 To adopt us. And last of all, to teach and comfort others. To
Ecc. 3.10
humble us, that we be not proud: Psa. 119.67.
to weane us, that we love not this world: Luke 22.31.
to winnow us, that we be not chafe: Psa. 119.71.
to prevent us that we do not sin: Psa. 39.9.40.1.
to teach us that we be pacient in adversity: to Genesis 42.21.
enlighten us, that we see our errors: to Iam. 5.11
honor us, that our faith may be manifest: to cure us that we Deuteronomy. 32 15.
surfeit not of security: to 2 Ti. 4.7.
crown us, that we may live eternally: to Ioh. 6.33
comfort us, that he may send his spirit: to Act. 12.7
protect us, that he may guide us by his Angels: to Heb. 12.7.
adopt us that we may be his sons: 2. Pet. 2.5
and to teach others, that they seeing how sin is punished in us they may
take heed it be not found in them: that they 2 Cor. 1.6.
seeing our comforts in troubles, may not be discouraged in the like trials.

Thus a Christian man's diet is more sower then sweet: his physic is more aloes
then honey: his life is more a pilgrimage then a progress: and his death is
more despised then honored. This if men would think of before, afflictions
would be as welcome to the soul of man, as Ruth 2.8
afflicted Ruth was to the field of Boaz. But because we look not for them
before they come, think not on Gods doing when they are come, and do desire
to be happy both here, and hereafter: therefore we can away with the name
of Naomi, but in no case would we be called Ruth. 1.20.
Mara. We Jonah 1.15.
see the sea, not the whale: the Ex. 14 11
Egyptian, not the salvation: the Dan. 6.16.22.
Lions mouth, not him that stops the Lions mouth, If we could see God in
our troubles, as 2. Kings 6.16.
Elisha did in his, then would we say: There are more with us, than there are
against us. But because we do not, therefore at every assault of the
Assyrians, we say, as the servant to 2. Kings 6.15.
Elishah did: Alas master, what shall we do? and with the disciples: Mar. 4.38
Carest thou not master that we perish? Yet it is good for us to suffer
affliction. Ia^. 1.12. Job 5.17.
Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
It is Pro. 3.11.
commanded by God, Mat. 4.2.
practiced by Christ, 2 Timothy 3.12.
yielded to by the Saints, Psa. 119 71.
assigned by Gods providence, and good for us each way. We are Gods Psalm. 1.4.
trees we shall grow better by pruning: Gods pomander, smell better by rubbing:
Gods spice, be more profitable by bruising: and Gods conduits. we are the
better by running. Let us suffer afflictions, they are 2. Cor. 4.17.
momentarie i^ respect of time: Phil. 1.29
favors, if we respect Gods love, and a means to bring us to the Kingdom of
God. If they did consume us, we might wish them an end; but they do Acts
14.21. 1. Pet. 1.^.
purge us, let us be content. They are Gods fan, we are Gods wheat: they are
Gods boulter, we are Gods meal: they are Gods Exodus 5.
flame, we are Gods bush: they are Gods Genesis 23.9
cords, we are Gods sacrifice: they are Gods furnace, we are Gods gold. The
wheat will not be good without the fan, nor the meal without the boulter, nor
the bush without the flame, nor the sacrifice without the cords, nor the gold
without the furnace. They are trials not punishments, if we be sons:
punishments not trials if we be slaves. Let us thou bear them, they Ps. 37.37
will have an end: joy Ps. 126.5
will follow: they Isa 38.10
show us our weakness: Hos. 5.15
they move us to pray: they Luke 24.26
show we are in the pathway to Heaven: and Eccl. 1.2.
make us contemn this present world. By them 2. Sam. 24.17.
we learn to repent us of sin past, Genesis 39.9
to take heed of sin present, and to for see sin to come. By them we Act
2.2.
receive Gods spirit, Phil. 3.10
are like to Christ: are acquainted Da^. 3.17.
with Gods power: have Exodus 15.1
joy in deliverance: know benefit of prosperity: made more hardy to suffer:
and 1. Pet. 1.
have cause to practice many excellent virtues. They cause us (as one says) to
seek out Gods promise: the promise to seek faith: faith to seek prayer: and
prayer to find God. Mat. 7.7.
Seek, and ye shall find: Job. 22.27.
call and he will answer: Heb. 2.3.
wait and he will come. I am to write an Epistle, I must not be long. Jobs
Job. 2.
messengers came not so fast on him: but Jobs afflictions may come, as fast
upon us. Has David slain 1. Sam. 17.37.
a Bear? he shall encounter with a Lion: has he killed a Lion? 1. Sam. 18.27.
he must fight with Goliath: has he subdued Goliath? he must make a rode upon
the Philistims: are the Philistims conquered? 1. Sam. 21.
Saul will assault him. Remember David's troubles, and foresee what may be our
troubles. The more rigteous we are, the more manifold are our troubles: and the
better we are, the better we may endure them.

But as our troubles are many, so are our deliverances many: God will deliver
us out of all. He that delivered Genesis 7.
Noah from the flood, Genesis 19.
Lot from Sodom, Genesis 33.
Jacob from Esau, Genesis 41.54.
Joseph from Potiphar, Exodus 9.
Moses from Pharaoh, Exodus 12.
Israel from Egypt, 1. Sa^. 19.
David from Saul 1. Kin. 21
Eliah from Achab, 2. Kin. 6.
Elisha from the Syrians, 2. Kin. 5.
Naaman from his leprosy, Isay 38.
Hezechiah from the plague, Dan. 3.
the three Children from the fire, Dan. 6.
Daniel from the Lions, Mat. 6.
Joseph from Herod, the Apostles Acts 5.
from the Jews, Mat. 4.
and Christ from the Devil: he even he will either deliver us from trouble,
or comfort us in trouble, or mitigate troubles when they come upon us.

He, Ro^. 4.21.
he has promised, to do it, and he that has promised, is able to do it. And
this he does sometimes by no means, sometimes by small means, sometimes by
ordinary means, sometimes by extraordinary, sometimes contrary to all
means. By no Ioh. 5.9.
means he cured a Creeple at Bethesda: by Ioh. 6.12.
small means he fed five thousand in the Desert: by Mat. 4.7.
ordinary means, he was brought from the Pinnacle: by means extraordinary,
he was provided for in hunger Mat. 4.11.
: and contrary to all means, were the Dan. 5.
three Children preserved in the furnace of fire.

Let man therefore 1. Sam. 30.9.
comfort himself in the Lord: Hos. 6.2.
after two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up
again: Psa. 30.5.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning. Psalm.
58.11.
Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous: verily, Mic. 7.8.
God retains not his wrath for ever. Could he overcome the World, and can he
not overcome many troubles in the World? Yea let one plague follow another, as
one Quail sings to another: yet as the Act. 28.3
Viper leaped on Paul's hand, and forthwith leaped off again, so one trouble
shall leap upon the righteous and anon leap off again: Ps. 37.24.
though he fall, he shall rise again, the righteous shall not be forsaken for
ever.

If he has delivered us from the guilt of our sins, he will deliver us from
the punishment of our sins. Let us therefore be patient in trouble, constant
in hope, rooted in love: let us wait, and he will come, call and he will hear,
believe and he will perform, repent us of our evil committed against him, and
he will repent of his evils intended against us. He is over us by his
providence, about us by his Angels, in us by his spirit, with us by his word,
under us by his power, and upon us by his Son. In him is our help, from him is
our comfort, by him is our victory, and for him is our trouble. Psalm. 25.
In thee have I trusted, says a King: Job. 5.
who ever was confounded that trusted in the Lord, said a friend? and as
Elcanah was to 1. Sam. 1.18.
Hannah, in stead of many sons, so God is to his instead of many comforters. Of
other comforters, we may say as Job did of his friends: Job 16.2
Silly comforters are you al. They will leave us as mise do a ruinous house: but
the Lord, (like a Ruth 1.16
Ruth to Naomi) will never leave us nor forsake us. Especially in the hour of
death, Eccl. 41.1
which is in remembrance bitter to great men: in that hour of death he will be
with us, and command his Luke. 16.26.
Angels to take charge of our souls, the Isa. 57.2.
earth to be as a bed for our bodies: that so the one Luke 23.
may go into glory, the other reserved in hope of like glory, Phil. 3.20
and be made one day like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Thus
Christian Readers, you have seen the righteous in afflictions; as Psalm. 137.
Israel was in Babylon: and that the Lord like Zac. 4.6.
Zorababel, is ready to deliver them. Though in troubles Christ seems as in
the Mat. 8.40
ship to sleep, yet in deliverance he awakes as a man out of sleep, and as a
Giant refreshed with wine. He will rebuke the waves and winds of troubles and
persecution, and they shall fly before him, as Iud. 17.4.
Sisera did before Debora, and the 1 Sa. 14.
Philistims before Debora, and the Philistims before Jonathan and his servant.
And as Christ asking the woman of her accusers, she answered: John 8.
There was none: so in the end ask a Christian of his troubles, and he will
say; There are none. He is a buckler for our left hand, and a sword in our
right: he is an helmet on our head, and harness for our body. We shall look
upon troubles, as Exodus 14
Israel did upon the Egyptians, as the 1. Sam. 17.52.
Jews did on Goliath, and as the Grecians did on Hector, to triumph over them:
and as the Angel said to Joseph; Mat. 2.20
They are dead that sought the child's life; so the Spirit shall say to the
afflicted, They are dead that did seek your life. A day of deliverance, a
year of Iubile will come, and then Genesis 41.
Joseph shall be out of Prison Genesis 31.
Jacob out of servitude, and Job. 41.12
Job shall lie no more in the dust of the Earth. If our afflictions were
plagues, as to the Egyptians: curses, as to Cham: destruction, as to Sodom:
desolation, as to Israel: then had we cause to fly from them, as Moses did
from that miraculous Serpent. But since they are but the trials of faith,
corrections of a father, visitations from the Bishop of our souls; since they
are as Phlebotomie to a Pleurisy, and a purgation to a Plethora, they are to
be endured with all patience. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
Let us comfort our selves with these words.

Now to the end that all men may think of their end, and live well. I have
inserted here, in love to him, certain prophetical verses sound in the
pocket of a most Religious young Gentleman, one M. Henry Morris, Son to M.
Morris Attorney of the Court of Wards; who thinking ever of sudden death, died
suddenly in Milford Lane, September. 12. 1604. at the age of 23. years.

Twice twelve years not fully told, a wearied breath
I have exchanged for an happy death.
My course was short: the longer is my rest:
God takes them soonest, whom he loves best.
For he that is borne to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some days of rest, but months of sorrow.
Why fear we death, that cures all sicknesses,
Author of rest, and end of all distresses?
Other misfortunes often come to greiue us:
Death strikes but once, and that stroke does relieve us.
He that thus thought of death, in life's uncertainty,
Has doubtless now a life, that brings eternity.
Live, for to learn, that die thou must,
And after come to judgment just.
This Heavenly Meditation may well be placed here.
My God, I speak it with a full assurance,
Faith will auow claim by appropriation;
My God, who keep'st this debtor (Spirit) in durance,
Fettered with sin, and shakled with temptation:
Oh of thine endless mercy soon enlarge me,
Nor hell nor sin, nor ought beside shall charge me.
My soul may now be gone unto her maker,
Maker of her, but not of her Infection;
That is her own, when Gods help does forsake her:
Final forsaking is not in Election:
For where he once by grace has made his dwelling,
There may be striking but theirs no felling.
Earth what art thou? A point, A senseless center,
Friends what are ye? An Agie trustlesse trial,
Life what art thou? A daily doubtful venture:
Death what art thou? A better life's espiall:
Flesh what art thou? A loose untempered mortar;
And sickness what art thou? Heavens churlish porter.
Sweet Jesus, bid thy porter then admit me;
I hold this World and worlds delay in loathing:
If ought be on my back that does not fit me,
Strip me of all and give me brideall clothing:
So shall I be received by my liuerie
And prisoners soul shall Joy in jail delivery.
Veni Domine Jesus, veni cito.
The sum of this direction.
Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi gloria coeli,
Et dolor Inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Think often on death (thine own, and Christ's)
this Worlds deceitfulness,
The joys of Heaven, the pains of Hell,
in which is wretchedness.
Suprema cogita: cor sit in aethere:
Felix qui didicit mundum contemnere.
A godly prayer to be used at all times: especially of such as delight in this
exercise, without weariness.
MOst high and mighty God, and in thy Son Christ Jesus our merciful, loving,
and gracious Father, thou have commanded us to come unto thee, and upon the
knees of our hearts we do come unto thee, humbly entreating thee, before we
begin, to remove far from us, all such impediments, as usually Satan casts
upon this exercise; and so to quicken us up, by the Spirit of supplication,
that in fear, and reverence of thy great name, in faith and confidence of thy
gracious assistance, and in a feeling desire of the supply of our wants, we may
put up and power out our supplications unto thee: that as the messengers of our
souls, they may signify our wants, as the petitiouers of mercy they may sue
for our pardon, and as proclaimers of thy grace, they may declare our
thankfulness for all those mercies, which we have received, and all those
judgments which we have escaped.

O Lord our God, we do here in thy presence (and blessed are we that we may
come to thy presence) acknowledge and confess, that we are of our selves most
woeful, wicked and cursed creatures. The corruption of our natures, the
iniquities of our lives, do generally bear witness against us. But more
particularly we confess, that our hearts are full of infidelity: by reason
whereof, we do not (as we ought) either depend upon thy providence for the
things of this life, or believe thy promises for the life to come. Do thou
visit us? we are impatient: do thou deny us our desires in this world? we
are never contented with our estate. We are full of doubt for the life to come,
and full of distrust for the things of this life. We are glued too much to
this wicked world: and as though we said in our hearts, there is no God, our
minds are greatly estranged from thee. And alas miserable wretches that we
are, we delight in doing our own wills: it is not meat and drink to us to do
thy will. In the pride of our hearts, we exalt our selves above thee, and our
brethren, and boast our selves as though we had received nothing from thee. We
put away from us the evil day, and live as though we should never die. We
walk on in the hardness of our hearts, and by reason of the abundance of
vainglory, we rather seek praise of men then thy glory. Our souls are so
filled with love to our selves, that we prefer our own pleasure, peace, and
liberty, before thy Majesty, or the love of our brethren: yea hypocrisy is so
rooted in our souls, that we content our selves with a profession of piety,
and labor not for the power of godliness.

And as for our lives they abound with actual transgression against every one
of thy ten Commandments; having broken the same ten thousand tims. We Lord
have lived in contempt of thy providence, committing idolatry with thy
creatures, taking thy glorious name in vain, and profaning of thy most holy
Sabbaths. We, even we, who should have been upright, have not regarded our
betters, but envied our brethren, defiled our souls with unchaste desires,
labored to be rich by unlawful means, disgraced our neighbors, and longed
after that which was none of ours. We have heard thy word, O Lord; but we have
not believed it: we have known the word, but have not practiced it. We have
come to thine house without reverence, approached to thy Table without
repentance, and practiced many sins without remorse. Do we any good? we
please our selves too much: Do we any evil? we fear thee too little: we are
weary of praying, when we talk with thee: we are careless in hearing, when
thou speak to us. If we read thy Sacred and Holy Word, it is not sweet
unto us as the honey comb, but we delight more even in ungodly books. Yea O
Lord, the pampering of our bellies, the pride of our apparel, the negligence in
our calling, the mispending of our time, our vain conference at table, our
wandering eyes, our wanton lusts, our ambitious minds, our covetous desires our
ungodly speeches, our lascivious ears, our censuring of our brethren, our
sin in recreations, our unwillingness to labor, our unfaithfulness in
life, our forgetfulness of death, and our abuse of thy mercies, especially in
Christ, do testify against us, that we have sinned against Heaven and
against thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy children. Are we
ashamed at this, and reclaimed from it? no Lord, we are not ashamed, but
howsoever it has pleased thee to use many means, as partly by thy Word, and
partly by thy Spirit: and partly by thy mercies, and partly by thy judgments,
to the end we might be reclaimed from our crooked ways; yet we have contemned
thy Word, the Ministry of salvation, greiued thy spirit, the earnest of our
inheritance, abused thy mercies, the pledges of thy love, and forgotten thy
judgments, the messengers of thy wrath. Enter not into judgment with us thy
servants, O Lord, for then shall no flesh living be justified in thy sight. Be
merciful unto us in forgiving sins past, and be gracious unto us in
preventing sins to come. Correct us O Lord but with mercy, not in thy
judgment: for then shall we be consumed, and brought to naught. Open our blind
eyes, that we may come to a particular knowledge of our particular sins,
especially such as we are most given unto. Soften our hard and stony hearts,
that we may sigh and groan under the burden of them: make us, good God,
displeased with our selves, because by sin we have dishonored thy Majesty.
Stir up our dead and dull hearts, that we may hunger after Christ and his
righteousness, and after every drop of his precious blood. In that Son of
thine look on us thy servants: and for his merits and righteousness,
vouchsafe, good God, mercifully and freely to do away al our offenses. Wash
them away in his blood; and by the purity of his spirit, cleanse our hearts from
the pollution and impurity of them all: say unto our souls thou art our
salvation; let thy spirit in our hearts cry Abba Father. Teach us. O Lord, thy
way, and we shall walk in thy truth: O knit our hearts unto thee, that we may
fear thy Name. And because, through corruption in our hearts, and sin in our
lives, our faith is feeble, and our confidence small; we do humbly beseech
thee, to strengthen our faith, by the daily meditation and particular
application of thy merciful promises, made unto us in thy Son Christ, that
neither in the dangers of this world, nor in the troubles of conscience, nor in
the hour of death we may fall from thee. Gracious Father, expel out of our
hearts al carnal confidence, the underminer of our faith; and teach us in the
spirit of true humility, to deny our selves, and to rely only upon thee, and
the merit of Christ in the matter of our salvation. And because it is not
enough to come unto thee by prayer, and to sue unto thee for pardon, but all
that are in Christ must be new creatures: therefore we call upon thee, for the
spirit of regeneration: mortify thereby the corruptions of our flesh; and
quicken us thereby in the inner man. By the power of Christ's death let us die
unto sin; and by the power of his resurrection, let us rise to
righteousness, and newnes of life: let the one as a corrasiue eat up the dead
flesh of ungodliness; and the other as a spur, stir us up to holiness.
Illuminate our minds, that we may know thy will: give us spiritual
understanding to discern good and evil. Sanctify our memories to treasure up
good things: purify our consciences to have peace in thee: reform our wills
to do thy will, and let all our affections be ordered aright. Teach us to
fear thee continually wheresoever we are, to neglect all things in regard of
Christ, to love thee and our brethren for thy sake, to be zealous of thy
glory, to be grieved at our own, and others sins, and joyful when we can,
please thee. Let our bodies, the instruments of sin, be ever hereafter
cleansed by thy spirit, that they may be temples for that spirit to dwell in:
keep our eyes from beholding vanity, our ears from hearkening to variety,
our mouths from speaking blasphemy, our hands from committing of iniquity,
and our bodies from the action of adultery. Let our light so shine before men,
that they seeing our good works may glorify thee our heavenly Father. Make us
to remember, that as we are sons, we must depend upon thee; as we are
servants, we must obey thee; and as we are Christians, we ought to walk
worthy of our vocation and calling. And because we have all some particular
calling, either of rule or service, or trust, or favor, make us from the
highest to the lowest, faithful in our callings, and to remember that a day
will come in which we must give an account unto thee of all our actions done
in this flesh, whether they be good or evil. Take away from us all
opportunity of sinning, and make us ever thankful that we live so, as we
want allurements to many sins. Cause us to see, how deformed sin is in it
self, and to what confusion it is like to bring us: Lord make us to fly the
very occasions of sin, and to resist the beginnings of all temptatition: let
not a night pass over our heads in which we examine not how we have spent
the day: never let us come into any company, wherein we may not do or
receive some good. Keep us, that we fashion not our selves to this World; but
rather imitate the fashion of the most godly, in our callings. Let us never
count any sin to be a little one, because that our Savior died for the
least. And because we live in dangerous times, wherein many are withdrawn
from the profession of thy truth, Lord give us hearts never to entertain any
such doctrine, which cannot be warranted out of thy word: nor to admit of any
such Teachers, as go about to withdraw us from obedience to our Governors:
and if any one fall into any sin, let us restore such a one with the spirit
of meekness, considering our selves that we also may be tempted.

We further acknowledge, most gracious God, that our life is a warfare upon
earth, our enemies are sin, Satan and the world. Lord help us in this
spiritual combat. Are we weak? be thou strong: are we tempted? with the
temptation give an issue: may we be overcome? teach us to watch over our own
hearts and ways: is there any one sin which we are weak to resist? in the
act of temptation give us power to resist it: that by this means we may have
as just cause to praise thee in our conquests, as we have many reasons to
humble our selves in our foiles. We see also, most all-seeing God, that none
can live godly in this world, but they must suffer persecutions: either Ismael
will revile them with a reproachful tongue, or Esau will pursue them with a
bloody swor^; what now must we do in these days of trial? whither shall we
come for help but to thee? To thee therefore must we come. O Lord our God:
craving wisdom to foresee, providence to prevent, patience to bear and hearts
to be prepared for this fiery trial: that by the denial of our selves,
distasting the world, and liking of heaven and heavenly things, we may make a
good use even of the least affliction.

Confound in every one of us the cursed works of the devil: increase in us
daily the gifts of thy spirit. Fit us for such callings in which thou have, or
wilt place us; and make us to refer the strength of our bodies, the gifts of
our mind, our credit in this world, and whatsoever grace thou have already, or
wilt hereafter bestow upon us to the glory of thy name, the good of thy Church
and the eternal salvation of our own souls. And howsoever we live here in
this Babylon of the world, Lord let our conversation be ever in heaven; that
whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do else, we may hear always this
voice sounding in our ears. Arise you dead and come into judgment. Many other
things have we to beg for our selves, that our ignorance knows not to ask,
or forgetfulness remembers not to ask: hear us for them in thy beloved Son
And give us leave now, good God, to pray to thee for others. There are no
Christian people at any time assembled, but they are ready to pray for us, and
therefore it is our duty to pray for them. We therefore commend to thee thy
whole Church, and each member of the same: be good and gracious to these
Churches of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: give the Gospel a free
passage every where: and put on the means by which it may be published where
it is not, or maintained where it is. Divide not, O thou indivisible God,
divide not Ephraim against Manasses, nor Manasses against Ephraim, nor both of
them against Judah. The coat of thy Son was without seame: let the Church of
thy Son be without seame. Our adversaries got ground, and work upon our
division: knit us so together, that their work may be as the confusion of
Babel. Are there any means to hinder the current of thy Gospel? stop them in
the head, poison them in the stream, stay them in the river, and let their
labor be like his that would repair Jericho. To this end be good to the light
of our eyes, the breach of our nostrils, the procurer of our happiness, thy
Solomon, our King: preserve his body in health, his soul in soundness, his
heart in thy truth, his life in honor, his honor from underminers, and his
ears from flatterers, the bane of each kingdom. Keep him, that he may ever
maintain thy truth: Defend him against the insinuation of practicing Papists,
who will never wish well unto him, unless they see he do wish ill unto thee.
Let thy good Spirit be with Josiah our Prince: season his young years with the
knowledge of thy will; that as he grows in years, so he may grow in stature,
and favor, both with God and men. Be good unto them that have the tution of
him, and make them instruments of much good that may be done by him. Preserve,
with these, our gracious Queen: let us see her as a fruitful Vine about the
Kings house, and her children like to Olive plants, round about his table. And
because where many Councellers are, there is peace, O Lord, bless his
honorable Counsel: in all things let them take counsel at thy word, and in
every consultation aim at thy glory. The Peers of our land, the pillars of
our kingdom, we commend unto thee: make them contented with their present
honors, and to continue loyal to their undoubted Sovereign. And, because the
Preachers of thy word, are the pillars of thy Church, bless them all from the
highest to the lowest, that both by life and doctrine, they may set out thy
most holy word. Take from the Great, the spirit of ambition, and from the
mean, the spirit of contention; that both may labor as much as they may, to
oppose themselves against the common adversary, and not to advantage him by
intestine division. Bless the people of this land: such as are called,
confirm them; such as are not, convert them: and to that purpose send a
faithful Pastor into each Congregation, who may speak a word in due season
unto them. Touch al our hearts from the highest to the lowest, with true
repentance, that thy judgments present and imminent may be prevented and
removed, thy mercies still continued to us, and our posterity after us,
especially in the true ministry of the word and Sacraments, that such as
survive us may praise thy name. Be merciful to all thine afflicted ones, be
they sick in bed, distressed in conscience, pinched with poverty, disgraced
for thy truth, or kept in prison, and delivered to death: relieve them in their
necessity, strengthen them in their weakness, comfort them in their
distress, mitigate their sorrows, and turn all their troubles to thy glory
and their good. To this end, give thy servants comfort by thy word, sufficiency
of things needful for them, bless the fruits of the earth, disappoint both
Turk and Pope, from incroaching upon thine inheritance: let all such prosper
as fight thy battles: and let thy Gospel be preached from the one end of the
world unto the other, In thy good time let the Sun of thy Gospel shine upon
Jews, Turks, Infidels, Atheists, and Papists belonging to thee.

Be good to our kinsfolks in the flesh, our friends in the spirit, and them
to whom we are any wise bounden, or desired to be commended unto thee in these
our prayers and supplications. Have mercy upon us now calling upon thy name,
forgive our sins and manifold defects in this holy duty, accepting at our
hands this our obedience in Christ.

And because thou have been good unto us many ways, make us thankful unto
thee for all thy mercies: as our election in thy love, our redemption by thy
Son, our sanctification through thy spirit, our preferuation by thy
providence, our health in body, peace of conscience, our life in thy Church,
our gracious Governors, our painful Preachers, our Christian friends, our
desire to please thee, and that we have the m inistration of thy word and
Sacarments, and can show love even to our enemies. We thank thee, O Lord, for all graces of thy Spirit: as, faith in thy promises, hope of eternal life, fear
of thy Name, love of thy Majesty, zeal to thy glory, affection to our
brethren, patience under the cross, strength against our several temptations,
humility, gentleness, meekness, forbearing, with many other gifts and graces
of thy spirit: all which, we acknowledge, have proceeded from thy mere mercy.
O let us not be negligent in the use of al good means, by which thy grace may
daily grow up in us. We do also with all thankfulness remember all the
blessings of this life, our deliverance from our enemies in 88, our
preservation from the pestilence in 603, our protection from gunpowder in 605,
as all other favors which we do enjoy under the blessed government of our
gracious Prince, and for all thy goodness under our late noble Queen, Queen
Elizabeth, of happy memory. We thank thee that thou have sustained us in
great weakness, relieved us in much necessite, comforted us in much
distress, resolved us in many doubts, delivered us from many dangers,
preserved us from many fears, made us willing to desire to do thy will, and
bestowed upon us such a larges of thy good creatures, that we are more fit to
give then receive. Bless us now and ever hereafter, keep us and all ours and
all that are near about us from fire, water, pestilence, robbing, and all
dangers whatsoever: and grant us all such a portion of thy grace, that whether
we stay at home, or go abroad, watch or sleep, eat or drink, buy or sell, be
in labor or recreation, we may ever labor to glorify thy high and great
Name in the works of such callings, as thou shall call us unto, and fit us
for, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; in whose name, and in whose
words we further call upon thee, saying:

Our Father which art, etc.

O Lord bless us and keep us. O Lord make thy face shine upon us. O Lord
grant unto us thy sweet and everlasting peace, especially that peace of
conscience which the world cannot give, with the pardon and forgiveness of all
our sins, this day, at this time, and heretofore committed against thee;
with a blessing upon thy Church and children every where, as well as though we
had named them, through Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

A MORNING PRAYER FOR private families.
MOst glorious and gracious Lord God, giver of all good things, forgiuer of all
our sins, and the only comforter of such as fly to thee for succor; we
thine unprofitable, and unfaithful servants, do here present our selves
before thee this morning, to offer up a living sacrifice to thee, who did
offer up thy Son to death for us. Lord let this lifting up of our hands and
hearts unto thee, be as a morning sacrifice, acceptable in thy sight. All thy
mercies call upon us, that we should be thankful to thee for such mercies; and
all our miseries call upon us, that we should call upon thee for the
continuance of thy mercies. We have tasted of thy favor this night past; and
even since we awaked, we might have had a feeling of thy goodness: thou have
begun to serve us, before we begun to serve thee. And now that we begin to
offer thee this service, we must needs acknowledge and confess, that we
prostrate our selves before thee, before we know how to worship thee as we
ought: we consider not the excellency of thy Majesty, the multitude of thy
mercies the al-seeing eye of thy presence, nor that danger we are in by reason
of our sins. Why should thou be so careful for us, since that we are so
careless of thee? Surely O Lord, in that thou affordest health to our bodies,
wealth to our estate, liberty to our persons, and prosperity to this family
in which we live, we can give no reason, but because thou art merciful. And
if thou should take all these from us again, and leave us in as great
misery, as was the Prodigal son, we must needs acknowledge it a just
recompense for our sins. All which are so many in number, and so grievous in
transgression, that as we cannot reckon them, but only say, we have sinned; so
we cannot bear them, but only say, that we are not able to look up. And
whilst al other creatures serve thee in their nature, we men and women are
the sinners of the world.

Our liu^s are full of infidelity, eyes of vanity, ears of novelty, mouths
of subtlety, hands of iniquity: and though we desire that all our members
should by thee be glorified in heaven, yet by all them do we dishonor thee upon
earth. Thou have given us understanding to learn virtue, by it we apprehend
nothing but sin: thou have given us a will to affect righteousness, by it we
delight in nothing but wickedness. Thou have given us a memory to be a
shorehouse of thy word, we make it a warehouse to treasure up evil. In a word,
we confess against our selves, that in this flesh of ours there dwells no
good thing, it is a world of wickedness; and by reason of the manifold
corruptions that are in us, there is small difference between us and the
wicked; yea and many heathen people who have not known thee, go beyond us in
the practice of righteousness toward men. If we should go about to excuse
our selves the sins that we have done this week will testify against us,
that they are more then all the good we have doneal the days of our lives: we
have transgressed thy commandments by our selves alone, and have communicated
with the sins of others. In doing of good we have rejoiced but a little, in the
practice of evil we have gloried too much. We sue unto thee often for the
pardon of our sins, and when we have so done, we commit them again. And in
this very act of calling on thy name, our thoughts are so wandering, our
bodies wavering, our knees wearied in kneeling for a while, that even now when
we come to pray, we had need to desire thee to forgive us our prayers:
because we think not of thee, when we pray unto thee.

We have nothing to say for our selves O Lord, but that shame and confusion
belongs unto us, mercy and forgiveness belongs unto thee. Have mercy
therefore upon us most merciful Father, and according to the multitude of thy
mercies do away all our offenses. We confess indeed, that we are miserable
sinners, yet by thy Spirit thou have taught us that we be thine. And therefore
we beseech thee to separate our sins from us, which otherwise will separate
us from thee: If we remember our sins, thou will forget them: teach us
therefore to remember them in the bitterness of our souls. If we sorrow for
them in this life, we shall not sorrow for them in the life to come; make us
truly sorrowful, that we have offended thee our gracious Father. To this end
give unto us the comfort of thy Spirit, to assure us of thy favor by which we
may be as ready to every good work, as we are prone to all that is evil.
Thou have renewed in us O Lord, the image of thy Son, O let us not turn it
into the image of Satan; neither let thy enemy take us away from thee: we
desire, good God, to war against him, and his champions, the flesh and the
world: we cannot overcome without thee; we pray thee therefore, to arm us with
the shield of faith, and the sword of thy Spirit against all their assaults,
and to put upon us thy complete armor: and wherein we are most weak, there
make thou us most strong, that in the end we may be more than conquerers.

Keep us now and ever in the fear of thy Majesty. And because we go now
forth to sight against all the enemies of our salvation, the weakest whereof
are stronger than we^ therefore we come unto thee for the assistance of thy
Spirit, and do humbly entreat thee to aid us by thy providence, arm us by thy
power, guard us by thine Angels, instruct us by thy Word, and govern us by thy
Spirit in all our actions. Let thy blessing be upon us thy servants, in our
going out and coming in, and in every action we undertake from this time
forth, and for evermore. Let all our thoughts, words and works this day, tend
to the glory of thy name, the good of thy Church, and the everlasting
salvation of our souls.

Let us make conscience of all that we do; neither let us account any sin
little, because thy Son died for the least. Let us cast away the works of
darkness, and put upon us the armor of light. And howsoever heretofore, by
lying, and swearing, and sporting, and spending, and inordinate living, we have
offended thee, yet grant that we may leave them all lest they leave not us till
they have brought us to destruction.

Make us to discern betwixt right and wrong, good and evil, truth and error,
and to learn some good thing every day: make us skillful in the profession of
piety, that we may know how to serve thee; and let us not be ignorant in the
mysteries of our call^ngs, that we may learn how to live thereby. Settle our
affections in the love of thy Majesty, zeal of thy glory and unfeigned good
will one toward another; so as we may as much joy at the prosperity of
others, as in our own. Are we merry? let it be in thee: are we sorrowful?
let it be for our sins: have we peace? make it in us all the peace of a good
conscience: are we ^fraid? let it be of sin: that we with as great delight
may run the ways of thy Commandments, as ever we have ouerrun thee in the
ways of wickedness.

Thou have bin good unto us many ways, O Lord; as in our creation, when we
were nothing and in our redemption, when we were worse than nothing: in our
vocation, when we thought not of thee; and in our sanctification, when we were
defiled before thee. Thou, thou alone have preserved us by thy providence,
prevented us by thy goodness, instructed us by thy word, acquainted us with
thy Majesty, and delivered us from many dangers. And all to this end, that we
should go as far before others in thankfulness toward thee, as far as thou
go in mercy toward us before them. We do acknowledge, O Lord, this favor
of thine, and we desire from our hearts to acknowledge it more, taking all
that we have as a gift from thee. And in a thankful remembrance of these thy
mercies, we desire thee, O Lord, to settle every one of us in such a constant
course of obedience to thee, that we may serve thee from this hour, with all
those duties which the world, the flesh and the devil, would have us to
defer till the day of death. O let us think always of our last hour, yea
last judgment, the joys of heaven, the torments of hell, and what a bitter
death thy Son Jesus did suffer, to redeem our souls out of the hands of the
devil. Let us spend the rest of our uncertain life, in a renewed repentance
for our sins pa^^, and make us to leave the pleasures of this world, before
that they do leave us.

And now O Lord, albeit we are unworthy to ask any thing for our selves, yet
because thou have commanded us, we do entreat thee for others, not as Abraham
did for the Sodomites, but as Samuel did for the Israelites. Be favorable to
Sion, build up the walls of Jerusalem. Behold with the eye of pity and
compassion, the great ruins and desolations of the Church. Feed it as thy
flock, foster it as the family, dress it as thy vineyard, deck it as thy
spouse, and ever rule in it as in thine own kingdom. Many are the enemies
that cry, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. Abate their pride,
assuage their malice, confound their devices; and let their counsel in the
end, be as the council of Achitophel: so that peace may be within her walls,
and prosperity in all her palaces, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. To
this end give unto our Prince, the wisdom of Solomon: to his Counselors, the
providence of Hush^y: to our Judges, the conscience of Samuel: to our
Ministers, the diligence of Paul: and to our people, the obedience of those
subjects, who with one consent, cried out unto their Governor, Whatsoever God
shall command us by him, that will we do. Thus we O Lord, and our posterity
after us, shall enjoy a spiritual communion of Saints in this life, and a
blessed communion in the life to come.

Many of thy servants suffer for thy cause; let all such see the truth of their
cause, thy comfort in their calamity, and an happy deliverance if it be thy
will. Are any now lying in the anguish of their conscience? disburden them of
the fear of thy judgment, and refresh them right soon with the conduit of
thy comfort. And as thou have made them examples for us, so teach us to take
example by them: that we may look upon thy promises, to preserve us from
despair, and upon thy threatenings, that we do not presume. Bless them that
fight thy battles by land or sea, whether they encounter with Mahomet, or
Antichrist. And bless them, thou God of hosts, in such a sort, that the
H^athen in the end may be constrained to say; Doubtless there is a reward for
the righteous: verily there is a God that judges the earth.

And seeing only, we hear of rumors of wars, and live in such liberty as
never any nation has done so long: make us thankful unto thee, that we are in
such a case, that we are not led into captivity; neither is there complaining
in our streets. And teach us to build thy Church in our rest, as Solomon built
the Temple in his peace. We have, O Lord, been long in prosperity: be
merciful to this sinful nation, which has surfetted, and is sick of too too
much ease. Let not thy blessings rise up against us, but make us as rich in
goodness as in goods, in piety, as in plenty: that as we go before all
nations in prosperity, so we may labor to exceed them in sincerity.

Bless this family, from the greatest to the least, bless it O Lord with thy
grace and peace: so that superiors may rule it according to thy word, servants
may obey, as the servants of Christ, and that every one in the same may be
loved of thee.

Thou see O Lord how bold we are, we have called upon thee for our selves,
and others; but many other things should we have begged of thee, because we
want them, and thanked thee for, because we have received them. Our
understanding is shallow, our memory short, and we are unworthy to pray unto
thee, and most unworthy to receive the things which we have prayed for:
therefore we commend our persons, prayers, actions and endeavors, this day, to
thy most gracious and merciful protection, and that in the name of Christ thy
Son and our Savior: in whose name, and in whose words, we further call upon
thee, and thank thee, saying: Our Father, etc.

LEt thy mighty hand and outstretched arm, O Lord be still our defense: thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ, our salvation: thy true and holy
word, our instruction: thy grace and holy Spirit, our comfort and consolation
unto the end and in the end: and let all here present say, Amen.

AN EVENING PRAYER FOR PRIVATE families. O Lord prepare our hearts to prayer.
MOst High and Mighty God, father of eternity, and fountain of mercy; we
acknowledge and confess this favor of thine, that thou give unto us these
blessed opportunities, publicly in thy Temple to meet together, and privately
in our Families to meet together: especially we acknowledge now this work of
thy grace, that we dare not commit our bodies to rest, before we have commended
our selves to thee. Thou have not dealt so with every family, neither have the
wicked a desire to praise thee: we are now present before thee O Lord, be thou
president amongst us; and grant unto us all such a portion of thy Spirit, that
in fear of thy Majesty, reverence of thy name, a sense of our miseries, and an
assurance of thy mercy, we may come now before thee, as before that God, who
see our behavior, searchest our hearts, know our wants, and art able to
grant more then we can desire. We acknowledge and confess before thy great
Majesty, that in the loins of our first parents thou did make us to thine
image, but in them we fell away from that blessed estate, and are plunged into
a most woeful and desperate condition, being able to do nothing but displease
thee. Our forefathers have eaten sour grapes, and their childrens teeth are
set on edge. By the transgression of one, we all have sinned and are deprived
of thy glorious image: and as an hereditarie disease it has infected all the
powers of our souls and bodies. Our understandings are filled with blindness
and darkness, not sauouring the things of salvation: our consciences are
wounded, seared and defiled, and never soundly at peace in themselves: our
memories are fit to retain evil, and to forget every thing that is good: our
wills run headlong to all iniquity, but are auerse to all goodness: our
affections are with violence carried after the sway of our wills: our thoughts
are insatiable, and infinite in evil: our best actions are great abominations:
and our whole conversation is loathsome to God and man. By this means O Lord,
we are odious to thy Majesty, execrable to thine Angels, detestable to thy
Saints, slaves to Satan, and worthy to be accursed in this life, and for ever.
By this means our bodies are subject in each member to diseases; and our souls
are subject in each faculty to disorder: we by this means have lost thy
favor, are cast out of Paradise, have sold our birthright, and exchanged
heaven for the pit of hell. And herein we are most miserable, that we feel
not our misery, fear not thy wrath, desire not thy favor, and consider not
what we lost when we fell from thee. Yet thou art our Father, and we thy
children, thou art our God, and we thy people, thou art our shepherd, and we
the sheep of thy pasture. And when no creature in heaven or in earth, was able
to reconcile us unto thy Majesty, thou in thy love did send thy Son, to be
the propitiation for our sins. In him therefore we come unto thee, in whom
alone thou art well pleased with us: and since he is that Lamb that takes
away our sins, in him we beseech thee to look upon us. Let the purity of
his nature answer the impuritie of ours; the perfection of his obedience
satisfy for our imperfection: and the sufficiency of his sufferings free us
from all torments which we deserved to suffer for our sins. He has conquered
Satan, by his glorious resurrection from the dead, and by it has triumphed
over sin and death. And now we are restored into thy grace again, grant that
we may feel the fruits of that grace, especially such faith in thy promises,
peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, zeal to good works in this life
present, and assurance of happiness in the life to come, that we never
hereafter do fall from thee.

But because we cannot either stand, unless thou uphold us, nor walk, unless
thou lead us, nor live, unless thou quicken us, nor reign unless thou crown
us: therefore we entreat thee, to uphold us by thy hand, that we fall not,
direct us by thy word, that we err not, quicken us by thy Spirit, that we die
not, and crown us with glory, that we lose not our inheritance. Sanctify us
al in thy truth, thy word is that truth: Sanctify us by the Law, that by it we
may see our misery, feel the want of Christ, be sorrowful for our sins,
advise what to do, desire pardon, resolve to come to thee, confess our
iniquities, and renounce al things in the world to get salvation in thy Son.
Sanctify us by thy Gospel, that we may have spiritual contentation in the
possession of Christ, extraordinary sweetness in the fruits of thy Spirit, an
holy admiration of these works of mercy, tenderness of conscience in allour
actions, boldness to approach to the throne of grace, a mind estranged from
the love of this world, readiness and patience to endure the cross, and a
desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee.

We must one day, O Lord, leave this world: yet it is thy pleasure that we
should serve thee in it, so long as we live; and why should we not serve thee
all the days of our life? thou requirest it at our hands: we have thy Spirit
to that purpose: it was the practice of thy Saints: we were redeemed to this
end: and Christ prays that we may do it. Does Satan daily tempt us? we must
daily resist him. Is our life uncertain? we must ever be ready: are we
strangers in this world? we must each day set one foot forward toward our
country. O therefore grant unto us thy grace, that we may know we have no time
allotted to sin, but al must be spent in thy service: and this service of ours
ever to be hearty without hypocrisy: general without partiality: continual,
without uncertainty: conscionable, without indifferency: cheerful without
diffic^^ty: and spiritual without carnality: that by this way of obedience we
may be assured of our salvation, get the mastery of inconstancy, perform holy
duties more easily, have sweeter fellowship with thy Spirit, and prevent many
noisome lusts, which otherwise would fasten upon us. We confess, O Lord, that
unless we, as watchmen do look unto our selves, and seek to please thee in
all things; we cannot be freed from many temporal judgments: our score will
be the greater in the day of account: our couersation cannot be in heaven: we
cannot be armed against temptation: nor weaned from the love of this wrethed
world. We must ever be ready to meet our Savior; let us ever have this oil
in our lamps: we must see our insufficiency to serve thee; let us labor to
please thee, that we may see it: we must win others, to the knowledge of
thee; let our light of good life ever shine before them: we must grow forward
toward perfection; lead us forward in a constant course, that we may obtain
the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our souls.

Now because our best service must be sanctified by repentance; give us true
and unfeigned repentance for all our sins: make us to see them in the glass of
thy Law, to mourn for them in the clossets of our hearts, and to confess them
in the bitterness of our souls. We have, O Lord, we have sinned against thee;
yea, our forefathers did, our people have, and we all do transgress thy
commandments. We have omitted much good, and committed much evil, partly of
ignorance, partly of infirmity, and partly of knowledge: and if we did but know
our unknown sins, we would be ashamed of our selves. When we consider the
excellency our selves. When we consider the excellency of thy Majesty whom
we have offended, the vileness of our selves who durst offend: the danger we
are in by reason of our offense: and the greatness of the price which was paid
for our offenses: we begin, O Lord, to abhor our selves, for our
unthankfulness against the blood of thy covenant, that we have grieved thy
good Spirit, quenched thy graces, and done as much as we could, to make the
blood of Christ of none effect.

Give us, O Lord; what will thou give us? give us a true and a lively faith, to
apprehend and apply all the promises of salvation to our sinful souls: give
us hope of pardon by thy mercies in Christ: and an hungring and thirsting after
him and his merits: let us prise it above all treasure: joy in it above all
other comfort: sue for it, as our best acquittance: and take hold on it,
against the curse of the law.

And because that lively faith has her life in the heart, give unto us we
beseech thee a pure heart, which is the delight of thy Majesty, and the
fountain of all actions. Awaken it, O Lord, that it sleep not in death: so
that neither by ignorance of it self, neglect of the means, ceasing of thy
Spirit, committing of sin, or security in prosperity, and sin, or presumption
of thy mercies, or stupiditie after judgments, or spiritual blindness and
hardness thereof, it be at any time in a dead fleepe. Make us ever to watch
over it, that neither the terrors of conscience, nor loathing of holy duties,
nor love of any one sin, nor unwillingness to depart this life, do cast our
hearts into a spiritual slumber.

We do know, good God, and often times by woeful experience do know, that our
hearts lie open to all temptations, and many are our enemies who do assault
us: teach us therefore to put on thine appointed armor. Give unto us a rectified
judgment, to know soundly thy truth, not obstinate in error, but desirous to
be reformed in what it mistaketh. Sanctify our consciences, that they may
witness our adoption; check us for sin, approve our vprightnes, procure our
peace, make us ever content, cheerful in service, courageous in the truth,
victorious in troubles, and willing to die. Rectify our wills that they may
be cheerful in well doing, resisting of all the occasions of sin, yielding
to no sin without grief, and rising by repentance out of the same. Order in
such sort every one of our affections, that by the benefit thereof, we may
subdue our most unruly thoughts, be comforted and contented in our Christian
callings, more ready pressed to all good actions, delivered from many noisome
temptations, and better enabled for the conversion of our brethren.

And because thou have afforded us the benefit of speech, which thou have
denied to all other creatures, we desire that we may ever speak as in thy
presence; considering that we have no liberty given us for idle talk, but
that all our speech must be to edification: and that one day we must give an
account of our words. Are we to take thy name into our mouths? let it only be
upon weighty occasions, and in all reverence, and love to thy Majesty. Are
we to speak at any time of our neighbors good? make us to do it,
cheerfully without repining, wisely without dissembling, indifferently without
part-taking, constantly without recalling, truly without deluding, and
chartablie to the preserving of his good name. Is he fallen? let us restore
him: does he stand? let us comfort him: and make thou our speeches ever
gracious to others. We desire also to please thee in all our actions. O let
them ever proceed from a good ground, be performed in an holy manner, and
aim at the best end, which is the glory of thy great name. Principally let us
ai^ at the duties of the first table, and consequently at the duties of the
second: let us have a respect to all thy commandments, not so much in outward
conformity as in soundnes of heart. And when we have done thee the best
service we can, teach us to say in humility, We are unprofitable servants.

And seeing it is not sufficient to do good, but it is also our duty to avoid
evil, make us to abhor al appearance of evil, knowing out of thy word, that
it defiles the soul; may be committed in thought, is of omission, as well as
commission: and if we commit but the least sin, we offend the purity of
thine excellency, and are guilty of the whole law. Make us therefore ever to
remember that sin is filthy and loathsome, even in the greatest pleasure and
act thereof; that the end thereof is bitter and the inward parts most
abominable. Teach us (O thou Master of Israel) to keep a continual watch over
our inner, and outward man: to fear our selves even then, when thou art most
merciful to us: to walk always as in thy presence to meditate of thy
judgments inflicted upon thy dearest children for sin, and in faith, patience,
diligence, and humility to be ever laboring in our vocation. Make us to mourn
for our delight in sin: to know that we carry this traitor about us: and
that we can never subdue him, but by prayer to thee, and practicing virtues
contrary to his assaults. But because all is in vain without perseverance, we
entreat thee that we may continue in the practice of all holy duties to thee,
even unto our lives end. We thank thee O Lord for all thy benefits this day
past, and in our whole life: thou have given thy Son for a ransom, thy Spirit
for a pledge, thy word for a guide, and reseruest a kingdom for our perpetual
inheritance. Thou might have said before we were formed, let them be
monsters, let them be Infidels, or let them be beggars or cripples, or
bondslaues as long as they live. But thou have made us in the best likeness,
and nurced us in the best religion, and placed us in the best land, so that
thousands would think themselves happy, if they had but a piece of our
happiness. We want nothing but thankfulness to thee, make us more thankful
then ever we have been heretofore: and because we know not how long we shall
enjoy these blessings of thine, by reason of our sins, fit and prepare us for
harder times, that we may be contented with whatsoever thou shall send.

Bless thy Church and children this night and for ever, according to their
several necessities be merciful unto them. Bless this Land wherein we do
live, the government and Governors of the same, from the highest to ye lowest.
And because we are now to rest in our beds, watch over us in this rest of ours,
give unto us comfortable and sweet sleep, fit us for all services of the day
following: make our souls to watch for the coming of Christ; let our beds put
us in mind of our graves, and our rising from thence, of the last
resurrection: so that whether we wake or sleep, we being thine may wait for
thee. Forgive us the sins of this day past, this hour present, and our whole
life before, not for our merits, but for Christ's mercies, in whom alone thou
art well pleased, and in whose name and whose words we further call upon thee,
and thank thee, saying: Our father which art, etc.

NOw the very God of peace sanctify us throughout, and he grant that our
whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and the love of God the Father, the blessing of God the
Son, and the comfort of God the holy Ghost be with us, and all the servants
of Christ Jesus, to preserve our bodies from sickness, our souls from sin,
and our estates from ruin, this night and for ever more. Amen.

A PRAYER TO BE USED by a man's self, or with others changing the number.
O Lord my God, merciful, and loving to all thy servants, pitiful, and
patient to me thy child; I, with that poor Publican, cast my self down at
the footstool of thy Majesty: and with an unfeigned sorrow for all my sins,
do, as he did cry unto thee for favor, saying; Lord be merciful to me a
sinner. One deep calls to an other, the depth of misery to the depth of
mercy. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, according to thy great goodness, and in
the multitude of thy mercies do away al mine offenses.

Lord I acknowledge and confess my sins, and mine iniquities are not hid from
thee. By creation, I confess, thou did make me good, in righteousness and
true holiness I was like unto thee: and if my first Parents had not defaced
that image, I should have served thee in truth all the days of my life. But,
they falling from thee, I fell with them: and, they sinning against thee, I
sinned with them. And as when a great man is a traitor his blood is stained: so
by Adams transgression his posterity is tainted.

Thus, O Lord, I was conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity: and now
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing: yea, I
am by nature the child of wrath: if I have none other but my first birth, I may
curse the day that ever I was borne. I feel O Lord (but it is thy spirit that
gives me this feeling) that mine understanding is darkened, conscience seared
memory decayed, will bewitched, heart hardened, affections disordered,
conversation corrupted: my thoughts, desires, and best actions are abominable
sins in thy sight. Mine eyes cannot see thee in thy creatures; mine ears
cannot hear thee in thy word; my mouth cannot praise thee in thy works; mine
hands and feet cannot serve thee in my calling: destruction and calamity are
in all my ways, and the way of peace I have not known.

For these sins of mine, I am subject to the curse: for cursed are they that
err from thy statutes: Cursed is the earth, with briers and barrenness; and
cursed is the heaven with often droughts and moistness.

And for my self, what am I not subject to by reason of sin? My body is
subject to all diseases, my soul to all her sicknesses, my name to all
reproaches, mine estate to all casualties, and I deserve justly to be delivered
over to the illusions of Satan, allurements of the world, corruptions of my
flesh, hardness of heart, desperation of thy goodness, calamities in my
calling, and to eternal destruction after I am dead.

Unto whom now shall I come for comfort? unto whom now shall I sue for succor?
I am stung with a Serpent; I will look up to the brazen Serpent: I am sick of
sin; I will go to the Physician of my soul: I lie dead in the grave of
corruption; who shall raise me up but he that is the resurrection and the life?

O bountiful Jesus, O sweet Savior, O thou Lamb of God that take away the
sins of the world have mercy upon me. Lord give unto me a true and lively
faith, to apprehend and apply all the promises of salvation to my sinful
soul: and to this purpose, illuminate mine understanding, confirm my memory,
purify my conscience enlarge mine heart, rectify my will, order all the
members of my body, and so sanctify me throughout, that my whole body, soul,
and spirit, may be kept blameless till the glorious appearance of my Savior
Christ.

Grant me, I beseech thee, knowledge of thy truth, faith in thy promises, fear
of thy Majesty, zeal of thy glory, obedience to thy statutes, faithfulness
in my calling patience in troubles, hungring after righteousness, and a tender
affection toward all my brethren. Grant me, I beseech thee, the gift of
Regeneration to become thy child: of faith to believe thy promises: of
obedience to do thy will: of prayer to seek thy presence: of comfort to
endure thy trials: and of strength to continue thy servant to my lives end

Grant me again, and grant it I entreat thee, the saving knowledge of thy
word, let it be in my mind by understanding, memory by remembering, thought
by meditating, heart by affecting, tongue by speaking, and mine actions by
performing it to my dying day.

Mine heart O Lord is deceitful, let me watch over it: my will is unwilling
to all goodness, let it run the way to thy commandments: Many behold my life
and conversation, let it I beseech thee be ordered aright.

To this end, teach me to sanctify thy name, advance thy kingdom, do thy
will: Thou have placed me in a calling: make me painful in it, that thereby
from thee I may have my daily bread. If I have it, keep me from pride: if not,
keep me from despair. And forgive me the abuse of all thy good blessings.

And howsoever I must needs live in this world, yet let me use it, as though I
used it not: let my conversation be in heaven, mine eyes on thy presence, my
trust in thy providence, my delight in thy word, and the communion of Saints.
Make me think often of heaven that I may love it, of hell that I may fear it,
of death that I may exspect it, of judgment that I may escape it, and of the
vanity of this present world; that thereby I may learn to contemn it.

I live by thy providence a life of nature, I desire by thy spirit to live the
life of grace: put on this desire, O my God, by thy spirit, and draw me from
good desires, to delights, from delights to actions, from actions to
continuance in doing that which is good.

And because Satan, the adversary of thine elect, goes about as a roaring lion
seeking whom he may devour, let me not be ignorant of all his enterprises.
Make me wise to foresee his stratagems, vigilant to beware his pitfals,
circumspect to prevent his practices, courageous to resist his temptations, and
constant to overcome his suggestions. He is strong, be thou stronger in me: he
is wise, be thou wiser for me: he is watchful, be thou more watchful about
me: he is malicious, be thou merciful unto me. Let him never find me idle,
for then he will allure: nor careless, for then he will surprise: nor sinning,
for then he will subdue.

O Jesus, be thou Jesus unto me: save me O Lord from this enemy of mine, that
this Dragon never infect me with his poison, this Serpent never kill me with
his sting, this Lion never tear me with his teeth, and this adversary never
have power to overthrow me.

O Christ, be thou Christ unto me, and anoint me so with the oil of thy
Spirit, that of thy fullness I may be filled with grace, even that grace which
may further my salvation. By it I acknowledge my misery, by it let me feel
thy mercy: give me by it a broken heart, a contrite spirit, a sorrowful
soul, an humble mind, a lively faith, that by humbling my self, I may be
lifted up by thee; and by believing thy promises I may come unto thee: and that
as by the one I may mourn for my sins, so by the other I may believe they
are pardoned.

I durst not be so bold as crave this thy favor, but that I am encouraged by
confidence of thy mercy. Do the simple beg wisdom? thou give it: do the
afflicted beg deliverance? thou grantest it: does he that is troubled with his
sins come unto thee? thou see him a far off thou embracest him in thine
arms, receiuest him into thy grace again. Thou command, why should I not
obey? thou promisest, why should I not believe? thou hear, why should I not
speak? I speak unto thee in the language of Canaan, keep not silence at
these my prayers.

Thou O my Savior have died for my sins: let the power of thy death make me
die unto sin, especially to my beloved sins, and such as I can hardly get the
mastery of. Thou, O Lord Christ, art risen from the dead, let the power of thy
resurrection make me to rise unto newness of life. And that which is
impossible to flesh and blood, make it possible by the virtue of thy blood.

Thou have redeemed me, suffer me not to be in sins captivity: thou have
triumphed over Satan for me, suffer me not to be under his tyranny. Thou have
covered me with the robes of righteousness, teach me to cast off the rags of
iniquity. Thou have washed me, and I am clean: keep me that I return not
with the swine to my wallow. Thou have begun thy good work in me: perform the
work that thou have begun, and strengthen me in the works which I do, have
or shall take in hand.

Keep me good Lord in my old age, forsake me not when I am gray headed. And
when it shall please thee to cast me upon my sick bed (as what man lives who
shall not see death?) grant that I may take my sickness patiently: and at the
last gasp, let not either sin or Satan take such hold upon me, that I depart
this life with crying, and scrichings, and words of despair; but that
believing thy word, and yielding to thine ordinance, my last hour may be my
best hour, and I may say with the Psalmist; Lord into thine hands I commend my
spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.

Thus I still cry unto thee for mercy because my sins cry against me for
justice. Preserve me O Lord, for I trust in thee, and let me in all things see
that I am preserved by thee: let me see it in the health of my body, the peace
of my conscience, the gifts of my mind, the credit of my name, the works of my
calling, and upon all such as are near and dear unto me.

Thou have been good unto me in times past, O that I could depend upon thee
for the time to come. Thou have by thy mercy kept me from gross sins,
cleanse me, I pray thee, from my secret sins: especially such as put forth
their heads when I am but a little moved. Am I provoked? stay mine anger: is my
enemy adua^ced? ^sswage mine envy: have I abundance? temper mine intemperance:
am I in want? mitigate my fears: do thou exalt me? keep me from pride:
do thou humble me? keep me from impatience: do thou withdraw thy self
from me? let me ever say, Up Lord, why sleep thou? does Satan assault me,
because I am rich in grace? preserve me O Lord that I lose not thy grace. For
woe is me, if I fall from thee. I have promised that I will not fall, thou
have promised I shall not fall, lead me by thine hand that I do not fall.

Finally, because thou have been good unto me many ways, Lord make me thankful
for all thy favors. Thou have made me a man, not a beast; a Christian, not an
Heathen; a Protestant, not a Papist. Whilst many are ignorant, I have
knowledge: whilst many are profane, I have been obedient to thy will: whilst
many want the ordinary means of salvation, thou affordest me means for
salvation of my soul. Many are bound, I am free: in prison, I have liberty:
in want, I have sufficiency. They live in wars, I in peace: they in
persecution, I in free profession of the truth: they in sickness, I in health.
And although by my sins I deserve to be consumed, yet thou have spared me a
great while, and given me a long time of repentance. What shall I give unto
thee for all these mercies and favors of thine? I will take the cup of
salvation, and praise thy great and glorious name; and most humbly entreat
thee, that as thou never ceasest to be good unto me, so I may never cease to
be thankful unto thee. Pardon, good God, my loss of time, my abuse of thy
creatures my negligence in my calling, my unthankfulness for thy kindness:
and whatsoever is wanting in my person, practice, prayer, or thanksgiving, make
a supply of it in the merit of Christ Jesus: to whom, with thee, and thy
blessed spirit, be all praise, and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

A PRAYER TO BE SAID by a sick person, or for him, changing my unto us etc.
Almighty God, and in Jesus Christ my most merciful and all-sufficient
Savior, I thy sick and sinful servant, diseassed in my body, and distressed
in my soul, do fly unto thee, yea to thee alone for succor. I have lived
heretofore in the health of my body, I acknowledge that thou wast the author
of my health. I am cast down upon my sick bed, thou have by thy providence
sent this Herald to arrest me. It is O Lord the messenger of death, preaching
unto me that undoubted doctrine, which I have been learning ever since I was
borne namely, That it is appointed that all must die, and after death comes
judgment. My spirit is willing and would feign say, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; my flesh is frail, and in weakness does say, Father if it be
possible let this cup pass from me. And as in mine health I did nothing but
sin, when I was not assisted by thy good Spirit; so now in my sickness, I
shall do nothing but sorrow, unless I be comforted by the same Spirit. O
Lord comfort me in this agony of mine, and say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation. Thou art the Physician, heal me: thou art that Samaritan, pity me:
thou art the resurrection and the life, quicken me: and quicken me so in the
inner man, that neither the love of this world, nor the losse^ of this light,
nor the consideration of thy Justice, nor the fear of death, nor the terror of
hell, may make me unwilling to depart this life. Thou alone know the
sorrows of mine heart, take them away: thou beholdest my fear of death,
deliver me out of al my fears: cover my sores with the righteousness of thy
Son, heal them by the blood of thy Son: and though thou lance them with the
knife of the law, yet bind them up again with the bands of the Gospel. I know
that my Physician dwells in heaven, yet he sends his medicines down upon
the earth. Besides thee, none in heaven can help me, and there is none in
earth, in comparison of thee, to do me any good. I am weak, strengthen me: I
am sick, cure me: I am faint, comfort me: I must die, quicken me: I am
assaulted, defend me: I am full of fear, encourage me: I have desired to live
the life of the righteous, O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my
last hour be like unto his. Into thine hands do I commend my soul, for thou
have redeemed it, o Lord God of truth.

My conscience does tell me that I have sinned against thee, and whatsoever I
now suffer, it is for my sins: they are like an heavy burden upon my soul,
they press me down to the grave of death, and Satan does lay them now
especially before me, to make me despair of thy mercies in Christ. Lord assure
me of the pardon of them all, persuade my soul by the Spirit of my Savior,
that they are nailed to his cross washed in his blood, covered in his
righteousness, acquitted by his death, buried in his grave, and fully
discharged by his alone satisfaction. Now, now I stand in need of thy Spirit,
let it cry in mine heart, Abba, Father: I desire none Angel from heaven to
comfort me, I desire the Spirit of adoption to assure me: to assure me o Lord,
that thou art my Father, and I thy son; thou my shepherd, and I thy sheep;
thou my king, and I one of those subjects, who shall shortly wait upon thee in
the kingdom of heaven, to which I must pass by the gates of death. O though I
have now a sick body, yet grant me, I pray thee, a sound soul. In thy hands
are life and death: thou have the keys of the grave and death, thou bring
to the grave, and pullest back again: my mother bare me a mortal man, I came
into this world to leave it at thy pleasure: it pleases thee now to forewarne
me of mine end, which might have come upon me before this time: I might have
perished either in the womb, or in my cradle, or in my childhood, or before I
had known thee, or suddenly might I have been taken away; and I deserved to
die so soon as I was borne: I owe thee a death, as Christ Jesus died for me. I
have been salling to this haven ever since I was borne, be thou my Pilot, that
I sinck not in ye havens mouth, but that I may land at the port of paradise. I
have done, I confess, little service unto thee, and if thou should now take
me away, I should die before I have begun to live. Thou know what is best
for me: Convert me O Lord, and I shall be converted; O Lord, turn me, and in a
moment, I shall be turned unto thee. Therefore dear Father, give me that mind
which a sick man should have, faith in thy promises, hope of eternal life,
patience with my pain, a desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, and a
loathing of the vanities of this present evil world. Call to my remembrance
all those things which I have heard, or read, or felt, or meditated of, to
strengthen me in this hour of trial, that I who have been negligent in
teaching others by my life, may now teach them how to die, and to bear
patiently the like visitation. Lord grant that my last hour may be my best
hour; my last thoughts the best thoughts, and my last words the best words
that ever I did speak: so that with my sweet Savior I may then say, Father
into thine hands I commend my spirit: or with old Simeon say, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. Take away from me in
that hour all terror of conscience, all scriching and howling, all
sottishness, and senslesnesse, which does often accompany the wicked at their
ends; and since thou have lent me for a while my life, grant that I may
willingly restore it again, when thou call for it to heaven. Let not the
grave make me afraid, because it is perfumed by the burial of Christ, and made
as a bed for my body to rest in, against that day, in which thou shall clothe
me again with mine own flesh, and make it like to the glorious body of
Christ, when he will say unto me, Come thou blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom which was prepared for thee, before the foundations of the world were
laid.

Lord I thank thee for all thy mercies in the time of my health, and in this
of sickness; especially that thou have taught me out of thy word, which also
by thy Spirit I believe, that howsoever I am by nature mortal, yet by grace
thou have made me immortal; and that I am translated from death to life. I
thank thee O Lord for all the good means of health offered to me in this
visi^ation of mine, as my Christian friends, their holy prayers, and godly
comforts: for the means of Physic, and all other favors which I now taste
of in this sick bed of mine, which thou have denied unto many of thy servants
and dear children, who have deserved thy favor more then my self. I thank
thee also, that as I have lived in a Christian Church, so if I die I shall die
in thy Church, and be buried in the sepulchers of thy servants, who all wait
for the consolation of Israel, and the Redemption of their bodies in the
Resurrection of the just. Bless all good means unto me, so far sorth as it
may be for thy glory, and my good: and as I have ever prayed, Thy will be done:
so now let me not be offended that thy will is done. Teach me that all things,
even both sickness and death, turn to the best to them that love thee: teach
me to see my happiness through troubles: that every pain is a prevention to
the godly of the pains of hell: and that this light affliction which is but
for a moment causes unto us a far most excellent and eternal weight of
glory. Teach me again by thy holy Spirit that there is none hurt by going to
heaven: that I shall lose nothing but the sense of evil: and that anon I shall
have greater joys then I feel pain. O death, where is thy sting? O hell,
where is thy victory? I thank thee O Lord who have given me victory by Jesus
Christ: in the confidence of this conquest I come unto thee, and am assured
that if I live, I shall live unto thee, and if I die, I shall die unto thee. I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, for he unto me is both in life
and in death advantage. I shall by death put off corruption, and put on
incorruption, shake off sin, and be covered with righteousness, cast off
mortality, and be attired with immortality; I shall lose my life in earth,
and find it again in heaven. Thou my Father, Christ my brother, the Saints my
kindred, happiness mine inheritance, are in heaven already, why should I fear
to go thither, whither all the godly dead are gone before me, and all the
faithful living shall follow after me? Why art thou troubled O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within me? Lord I know I cannot escape death, why
should I fear it? my chiefest happiness is behind, and I cannot have, it
unless I go unto it. I could be content to go through hell to heaven, O make me
to go through death to heaven. My pains I confess O Lord are great, but since
I travel to bring forth eternity, make me patient to endure all pains. I see
my sins, make me now to see my Redeemer: I fear the Judge, persuade me that
his Son is become my intercessor. Satan would affright me, I hope thine
Angels pitch their tents about me: the grave will gape on me, out of thy word I
know, it was the bed of my Savior. What though I leave many alive behind me?
yet they shall all follow after; if I get mine inheritance before my brethren,
I must be more thankful to my father for it. Grant therefore most merciful
God that if I live, I may live to sacrifice, and if I die, I may die a
sacrifice: I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaiden, do with me what
thou will. Bless O Lord the suruiuing generation, make them wise to salvation,
to number their days a right, and to apply their hearts to wisdom. And
though thou kill me, yet let me now trust in thee. Grant this O Lord for thy
Sons sake, in whom alone thou art well pleased, for my comforts sake, which
by this means shall be increased, and for the beholders sakes, who shall see
mine end, that they all may say, Grant that we may die, as this our brother
did, so that our ends may be like unto his, and our so^les follow his. Amen.
Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of God the Father, and the comfort of the holy Ghost be with me now
and for ever more. Amen.

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.

Reuelat. 14. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive the good things which God has
prepared for them that love him. 1. Corinthians. 2.

We know that if this earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have
a building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
the Heavens. 2. Cor. 5.1.

Farewell my friends, but you shall follow: for it is appointed that all must
die.

A THANKS GIVING AFTER DELIVERANCE from any cross or sickness.
O Eternal God, almighty and most merciful Father, the life of them that
die, the health of them that are sick, and the only recouerer of them that are
cast down: I thy late sick and sorrowful servant, do with bended knees, and
a thankful heart, prostrate my self before thee at this time; and do
thankefully acknowledge all those benefits, which from my cradle thou have
heaped upon me till this present hour. When I was nothing I was created by
thee: when I was worse than nothing, I was redeemed by thee: When I was worthy
nothing, I was sanctified by thee: and when I shall return to nothing, I shall
be glorified by thee. And though I never knew thee as I ought, loved thee as I
should, obeyed thee as thou command, nor thanked thee as thou deseruest for
all thy favors, yet have thou loaded me so with thine abundant favors, as if
I had ever done thy will. Experience have I had of thy goodness many times,
but never more then in my late and last visitation. I acknowledge O Lord that
at that time, I chattered like a swallow, I mourned like a dove, I panted like
an heart, and all joy and gladness was parted from my soul. I looked upon my
friends, they could not reliue me; I sent to the Physicians, they could not
recover me; I used all means, no means would help me: I sought unto thee,
yea to thee alone in my trouble, and thou have delivered me from all my
distress. My mourning is turned into mirth, my sorrow into solace, my
sickness into health, and my death into life. O thou, that art the welspring
of life, the fountain of health, and the alone preserver of al mankind, what
shall I render unto thee for all those mercies that I have received, and for all
those judgments that I have escaped? ask of me, and I will give it: command
me, and I will perform it: tell me, and I will do it. A thankful heart is a
sacrifice to thee; a grateful mind is well pleasing unto thee; and therefore
in the sight of thy sacred Majesty, and in the eyes of all thy people, I will
take the cup of salvation, and magnify and praise thy holy name, that thou
have dealt so favorably with me.

The pangs of death had seized upon me, thou have restored me from death to
life; the sorrows of the grave had taken hold upon me, thou have delivered my
soul from the grave. Thou did hide the face of thy loving kindness from
me, now the light of thy countenance has shined upon me. And I who heard of
late this message with Hezechiah, Set thy soul in order, for thou shall die
and not live, do now see and feel this joyful promise, I have added to thy
life yet a number of days. Teach me so to number these my days aright, that
I may apply mine heart unto wisdom: and that howsoever I live here for a
while, yet that thou have appointed, that I shall once die. And because this
meditation ought to be the meditation of all Christians, and will teach us to
contemn this present evil world, grant me that I ever may think of mine end,
and that exact account, which I must give unto thee, of every action I do in
this flesh, whether it be good or evil. To this purpose grant me the
assistance of thy Spirit, that I may so live hereafter before thee in this
life, that I may live with thee eternally in the life to come. Teach me O Lord
thy way, and I will walk in thy truth: knit mine heart unto thee, that I may
fear thy name: teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, let thy good
Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness. Create in me a new heart,
renew a right spirit within me, and establish me with thy free Spirit. I asked
of thee life, and thou gave it me, I called for thy salvation, and thou
heardest me.

I will praise thee, O Lord, with all mine heart, and I will magnify thy name
for ever. For many are thy mercies toward me, and thou have delivered my
soul from the lowest grave. If thou desiredst burnt offerings, I would give it
thee; if all that I have, I would bestow it on thee; but a thankful heart, an
obedient life, a zealous profession, a godly conversation, is the only
sacrifice thou delightest in: make me therefore ever hereafter, to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and godly, and
righteously in this world: that others seeing my godly behavior, may glorify
thee in the day of visitation. Make me to repent of my sins the causes of my
sickness, to believe in Christ the author of my health, and to depend upon
thee the doer and giver of all good things. And now I am whole, give me thy
grace not to sin again, lest a worse thing happen unto me. To this end,
rectify my judgment, strengthen my memory, purify my conscience, whet on
mine affections, order my will, and put on all the faculties of my soul and
body, that I may love thee for thy mercies unfeignedly, fear thee for thy
judgments incessantly, praise thee for thy favors continually, pray unto thee
for thy goodness daily, and obey thee according to thy will, dutifully. Make
me to know thee as thou have revealed thy self in thy Word, to acknowledge
thee as thou have opened thy self in thy Son: to think on thee, as the
solace of my soul, to cleave unto thee, as the author of salvation, and to
speak of thee as thou art wonderful in all thy works. My soul praise thou
the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name: my soul praise thou
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thy sins, and
heals all thine infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and
crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness: which satisfies thy mouth with
good things, and renueth thy youth like the Eagles. Thou art full of compassion
and mercy, slow to anger, and great kindness. Thou will not always chide,
neither keep thou thine anger for ever. Thou have not dealt with me
according to my sins, nor rewarded me according to mine iniquities. For as
high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is thy mercy toward them that
fear thee. As far as the East is from the West, so far thou remouest my
sins from me. As a Father has compassion on his children: so have thou
compassion on them that fear thee. Thou know whereof we be made: thou
remembrest that we are but dust. I will praise thee O Lord among the people, I
will sing unto thoe in the congregation of the Saints. For thy mercy is great
above the heavens, and thy truth above the clouds. Let my soul live, and it
shall praise thee, and thy judgments shall help me: Help me they shall to
love thee more zealously, to fear thee more reverently, and to obey thee more
carefully all the days of my life. I confess, O Lord, that before I was
afflicted, I went astray: but now I have learned thy precepts. It is good for
me that I was afflicted, for I sought unto thee in my troubles: I was in mine
health an untamed heifer, it was thy goodness to lay thy yoke upon me, and to
give me courage to bear it patiently. Thou have taken it from me before I
shook it off, but it will come again: make me in prosperity to think on
adversity, in health to think on sickness, in sickness to think on death,
and at all times to think so on judgment, that whether I wake or sleep, eat
or drink, or whatsoever I do else, I may ever have this voice sounding in mine
ears, Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment. I will sing unto the Lord all
my life, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. O my
soul praise thou the Lord. Praise ye the Lord. Praised be the Lord God of
Israel from this time forth, and for evermore, and let all people say, Amen.

Are there not ten cleansed? where are the nine? there is none returned to give
thanks but this one, and he is a Samaritan. Luke 17.17.18.

Behold thou art now whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.

A PRAYER FOR A SICK person, man or woman, changing the sex.
O Almighty, everliving, and euer-louing God, and in Christ Jesus our most
gracious and merciful father: thou have taught us out of thine holy word, that
Man which is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery: his life is a shadow; his days are vanity; his years are nothing,
in comparison of thee, and in the end he fades as a flower of the field, and
never continues in one stay. Experience we have of the frailty of our life,
in beholding this diseased and distressed feruant of thine, whom thou have cast
down upon the bed of sickness: He was, as we thought, of late in good health,
and now we see him at the point of death. In him let us behold our frail
estate, and truly to consider that all flesh is grass. And because we are now
in this house of mourning, let us be admonished of our later end, and behold
what afterward shall become of us. Make us truly to mourn with them that
mourn, and to weep with them that weep. And grant unto us all the
forgiveness of our sins, ^he assistance of thy Spirit, assurance to be
heard, and a fellow feeling of our brothers miseries; that we may the better
call upon thy name, and pray to thee for him, who stands in need to be
prayed for.

Thou art, O Lord, the conduit of comfort, be a God of comfort and consolation
unto him: thou art the forgiuer of all our sins, blot all his sins out of
thy remembrance: thou art the Physician to cure all sores, look favorably
upon him in this sickness of his. And as thou art the God of patience,
mitigate his pains: of hope, assure his heart: of mercy, confirm his faith:
of justice, look upon thy Son: and as thou art the resurrection and the
life, be unto him both life and resurrection.

It is true, O Lord, that he has deserved a far greater punishment, and that
thou should scourge him with all thy rods: he feels his sin, he fears
thy justice, he is affrighted at death, he trembles at thy judgments, and
unless thy law were his delight, he should have perished in this his trouble.
He appealeth from thy justice unto thy mercy, and in consideration of thine
abundant goodness, does say unto thee in the bitterness of his soul; Lord
be merciful unto me a sinner. Have mercy upon him, O Lord, have mercy upon
him: and according to the multitude of thy mercies do away all his offenses.
Grant him thy grace, to bear willingly this cross, the cross of sickness,
to drink heartily of this cup, the cup of affliction, to endure patiently this
yoke, the yoke of tribulation, and to suffer meekely this rod, the rod of
correction. Naked he came out of his mothers womb, and naked shall he return
again: O Let him now say with thy servant Job; The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. He has received good
things of thee, make him to receive evil also: and as heretofore he rejoiced
in his health, so teach him now to rejoice in sickness: and as he was not
ashamed to live, so let him not be afraid to die, because his life is hid with
Christ in heaven.

Teach him, O Lord, by thy holy Spirit, that he cannot suffer more for thee,
than Christ his Savior suffered for him: and though thou have now powered into
the wounds of his corruption, the sharp wine of grievous tribulation, yet
after the example of the good Samaritan, instill also the suppling oil of
comfort; whereby he may be able to endure these troubles, which otherwise
would be intolerable unto him. As his pain increases, so increase his
patience: and as it decreaseth, so increase his thankfulness. Turn this
visitation to the good of his soul: lay no more upon him than he is able to
bear: and as he feels thy justice, in suffering for his sins; so let him
feel thy mercy, in correcting him for them: and as thou now triest when her he
will love thee or no, so make him now most to love thee when thou correctest
him as thy son. Let his heart be glad, his tongue rejoice and his flesh also
rest in hope because thou will not suffer his soul in the grave, nor his flesh
(through thine Holy one) to see corruption.

Remember not Lord his, or our iniquities, spare him good Lord, spare thy
servant, whom Christ has redeemed with his most precious blood, and be not
angry with us for ever. Lord save thy servant, which puts his trust in
thee: send him help from thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend him: let
the enemy have none advantage against him: nor the wicked approach near unto
him: be unto him a strong tower against the face of his enemy: O Lord hear
our prayers, and let our cry come unto thee. We cry and call unto thee alone
for him: visit him, as thou did visit Peter's wives mother: comfort him,
as thou did comfort the sick of the palsy, and cheer him, as thou did
cheer that godly man Simeon, that he now, seeing his Savior in heaven, may
joyfully say; Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. In the mean time strengthen him against all
temptations; defend him against all assaults; relieve him in all his
weakness; and deliver him from all his fears.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who for his and our sakes, came into the World, obeyedst
the law, sufferedst reproach, baredst our sins, and gave over for us thy
precious life to death; look thou upon this thy patient: let thy blood wash
away the spots of his sins: let thy righteousness cover his
unrighteousness: and let thy satisfaction be his merit.

O holy Ghost the comforter of all that want comfort, send down thy grace
into the heart of thy servant, call to his mind, whatsoever consolation he
has before learned cut of thy word; especially that by Christ he shall inherit
heaven: give him now such a portion of thy grace, that he neither waver in his
faith, nor stagger in his hope, nor faint in his patience, nor cool in his
love, nor sorrow at his dissolution, nor look back to the world, nor be
overmuch cast down with the dread of death.

Grant that when death shall have closed up the eyes of his body, the eyes of
his soul may be fixed upon thee: that when his speech shall be taken from him,
then his heart may cry unto thee, and say; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Hear
us good Lord, praying for him; hear him praying for himself; and hear us al
for Christ Jesus his sake, in whom alone thou art well pleased, and in whose
name, and in whose words we conclude our imperfect prayers, saying, Our Father,
etc.

LOrd bless us and keep us, Lord make the light of thy countenance thine upon
us, and grant us thy peace. O God the Father, look upon thy son; O God the
Son, look upon thy servant; O God the holy Ghost, enter into thy temple: O
holy Father, O righteous Son, O comforting holy Ghost, O blessed, and
glorious Trinity, one in essence, three in person, be with this thy servant;
comfort him with that comfort which we would desire in the like visitation: let
thine Angels pitch their tents about him: let his last hour be his best
hour: make his life victorious, his death precious, and his and our
resurrection glorious, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Lord Jesus be with
his spirit. Amen. Amen.

A THANKS GIVING FOR THE faithful departure of one after he or she is dead,
changing as before.
O Lord God, the only health of them that live, and the alone life of them
that die: according to thy commandment we called upon thee, and in desire of
thy goodness we cried unto thee, that thou would be gracious unto this
servant of thine, whose body lies dead before our eyes. We asked his life,
thou gave it not; because thou saw what was best for him: we desired his
patience to endure this cross; thou heardest our prayers, and have not denied
us the request of our lips, because that alone was fittest for him.

He died not as a fool dies, neither was his dissolution bitter unto him. He
is now, O Lord, a tree, planted in thine orchard: a stone, settled in thy
building: a Priest, sacrificing at thine altar: a star, fixed in thy heaven:
and an heir, reigning in thy kingdom. If he had died like Absalom, we might
have taken upon us David's lamentation: or like Saul, we might have taken upon
us Samuels lamentation: or as the malefactor on the left hand of Christ, we
might have lamented and mourned for him, as doubting that he died not the
death of the righteous. But precious in thy fight was this death of his: and
comfortable in our sight was this departure of his. He like a Lion triumphed
over death, and like a Lamb resigned up his life: he knew that this Redeemer
lived, and that Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. His faith was in thy
promises, his hope was in thy mercies, his love was on thy joys, his zeal was
on thy glory, and his desire was to be in heaven.

For this thy favor toward our Christian brother, we yield unto thy Majesty
all possible thanks, and that thou taking him out of this vale of misery,
have, by thine Angels, carried his soul to the throne of thy glory. We are, O
Lord, we confess, full of sorrow, in that we have lost the comfort of his
presence, and we could have been contented to have enjoyed him longer, if it
might have stood with the good pleasure of thy will. But we need not to mourn
as men without hope: because we are persuaded he so died in thy favor; that as
his soul is partaker of eternal glory, so in that great day of assise, and
general judgment, this body of his which shall return to dust, must be
raised up again to live for ever, and then be made like the glorious body of
Christ Jesus in heaven. He O Lord is gone before us, and we must one day follow
after him.

O how can we render unto thee sufficient thanks, for thy great favor to us
Christian people, above all the nations of the world, whom when thou call
out of this wretched life, thou vouchsafest to place us with thine Angels, in
thy kingdom! In the sight of the unwise they appear to die: but in the eyes
of the godly, they are translated from death to life. They are arrayed with
white, have crowns on their heads, and Palms in their hands: they shall not
die, but live, and do behold thy goodness in the land of the living. They
serve thee at thy table, eat in thy kingdom, sing of thy praises, are freed
from all miseries, and they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: and
enjoy such pleasures, as the eye has not seen, because they are not visible,
yet the heart does believe, because they are most comfortable.

We beseech thee, O Lord, that since we must for a while go on in our
pilgrimage, we may ever have our eyes bent toward our country: raise us out
of the grave of sin, renew in us the life of righteousness: estrange us from
the love of this world: possess us with a love of heaven: take from our feet
the fetters of pleasure, that we may run as fast to heaven, as the wicked do
to hell: take from our backs the burden of worldliness, that we may look as
steadfastly upon things that are above, as worldlings do upon things that are
below. Guide us ever so by the direction of thy Spirit, that both in sickness
and in health, in prosperity and adversity, in life and at death, we may so
behave our selves in this present world, that, whenever it shall please thee
to call us hence, we may by faith in thy promises, and hope of thy mercies,
commend our bodies and souls into thy merciful hands.

In the mean time hasten the coming of thy Son: shorten these days of
sin: confound the enemies of salvation: dissolve in every one of us the
cursed works of Satan: sanctify thy name: advance thy kingdom: accomplish
thy will: give us our daily bread: forgive us all our sins: give us not over
into any temptation: but deliver us from all evil, both of sin in this life,
and of punishment in the life to come; so that we with this our brother, and
all other departed in the faith of Christ, may have our perfect consummation
and bliss in thy eternal and everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, to whom with thee our Father, and the holy Ghost our Sanctifier, our
sanctifier in this life, and our glorifier in the life to come, be all praise,
power, Majesty, might and dominion, ascribed of us and thy whole Church, from
this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

A PRAYER FOR A WOman in travail.
O Lord, our Lord, Creator of all things, preserver of al mankind, comforter of
all thine afflicted, and the only deliverer of such as are in danger, we the
children of Eua by our in-borne transgression, yet the daughters of Sarah by
sanctification of thy Spirit, do seek and sue unto thee for a blessing at this
time. We are, O Lord, assembled for the comfort of this woman, who trauaileth
in pain, to be delivered of a child; her sin is great, her danger is not
small, her pains will be grievous, and the hour of life is now at hand. If
we were Heathens, we would call upon Juno: if Idolaters, we would call upon
the Virgin Marie: but seeing thou have vouchsafed us to become true Christians,
we call upon thee alone to help her. We therefore beseech thee O Lord our God,
to be good and gracious unto this servant of thine, and howsoever through the
transgression of our first mother, she cannot be delivered but with great
pain, (for thou have laid this curse upon us sinful women, that in much
sorrow shall we bring forth children) yet since thou have given her faith in thy
Son; mitigate we entreat thee this sorrow of hers: assure her of the
forgiveness of her sins: strengthen her with the comfort of thy Spirit:
confirm her in the faith of her Savior, and bless all good means here
present for her comfort.

Lay no more upon her then she is able to bear: make have to deliver her out
of her pains; and teach us all that are about her, to avoid at this time
effeminate speeches, wanton, behavior, and unseasonable mirth, which often
does accompany such meetings as this. Bless us in our comforts to her soul,
and labor for her deliverance: bless the work of the Midwife, whose help
she must use for her better deliverance: and though she be now in great pain,
bless her, O Lord, in such a sort, that anon she may forget her pain,
because a child is borne into the world. Yea and we pray unto thee for this
child in her womb; thou have enrolled it in thy book, thou have made it in thy
frame, the bones thereof are not hid from thee, all the members of it are
written in thy volume. Thou did visit it at the time of life, visit it
now at the hour of life.

Give unto this woman thy handmaid, neither a monstrous, a maimed, or a dead
birth: but as thou have blessed the conception of this infant, so let they
blessing be upon it, that eftsoone it may be brought with perfection into the
world.

Thou have appointed marriage for this purpose, thou have promised a blessing
to thine own ordinance, thou have performed thy promise to many in this case,
and according to thy commandment, we entreat alike performance of thy promise
at this time. Hear us O Lord, for Christ Jesus his sake. Visit thy servant,
as thou did Sarah, comfort her, as thou did Rebeccah, cheer her, as
thou did Leah, and if it be thy good pleasure, make her quickly a joyful
mother of a child. Let her say, O Lord help me, and deliver me right soon:
and let us say, be unto her a present help in this needful time of trouble.
O Lord hear our prayers, and let our cry come unto thee and that for Christ
Jesus his sake, in whose name we call upon thee, saying, Our Father which art
etc.

A THANKESGIVING after her deliverance.
MOst gracious God, and in Jesus Christ our most patient, pitiful, and
powerful Father, as thou have commanded us to call upon thee in troubles, and
have promised to hear us, and deliver us in our troubles: so thou have
enjoined us in thy holy word, that after our deliverance out of any of our
troubles, we should be thankful unto thee for the same. We therefore sinners
by nature, but thy children by grace, do cheerfully acknowledge thy goodness
to us, and thy special favor to this woman thy servant. We called upon thee,
and thou heardest us: we sued unto thee, and thine ears were opened to grant
our requests. We asked thy favor to thine handmaiden, thou gave it: we
begged a blessing for this child, thou have blessed it: and now thou have made
her a joyful mother.

Her soul may magnify thy name, and her spirit may rejoice in God her
Savior. Thou have given her her hearts desire, and have not denied her the
request of her lips. Thou have taken away her reproach, and thou have blessed
the undefiled bed. Thou have given her, and her husband this pledge of love,
and thou have made her an instrument to increase thy kingdom. Glory be to
thee in the highest heavens, in earth praise, and let all generations call thee
blessed. We bless thee, we praise thee, we adore thee, we give thanks unto
thee, O Lord God, for this blessing of thine, and desire to praise thee for
ever and ever.

Continue thy goodness to this thy servant, give her strength to recover her
weakness, joy to forget her late sorrow, and thankfulness that such a child
is come out of her leynes, as one day shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. And
as we do privately praise thee in this family, so will we do the like in the
public congregation, Bless this young infant with thy blessing from above,
Baptize it with water, and the holy Ghost, endue it with all heavenly graces,
defend it against all dangers, provide for it in this mortal life, and crown
it in the end with life everlasting. Make the father to delight in the love of
his wife, let her breasts satisfy him, and let him keep to her continually.
Make her a fruitful vine round about his house, and her children like to olive
plants round about his table.

Lord thou mightiest have dealt with this woman, as heretofore thou have dealt
with many in thy wrath. She might either have brought forth the wind, or been
delivered of a deformed or dead birth: she might either have died in travail
her self, or continued longer in those grievous pains. But thou have looked
upon her with the eyes of compassion, and have given this blessing to the fruit
of her womb. Continue thy favor to her, and hers: and let thy blessing be
upon all thy children, from this time forth, and for evermore. Hear us O Lord,
for Christ Jesus his sake, in whose name, and in whose words, we further call
upon thee, and thank thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

A PRAYER BEFORE THE receiving of the Communion.
MOst gracious Father, thou have called me now to thine holy Table, thou have
set out a part of consecrated bread and wine for me. I acknowledge mine
ignorance, that I must be instructed by so many means: and I acknowledge the
goodness, that thou vouchsafest to teach me by so many means. I do hear thy
word, and then is thy Son offered to mine ear: I receive this Sacrament, and
now he is offered unto mine eye. In the testimony of these two witnesses this
truth is established in mine heart, that my Savior suffered death for my
sins.

As it pleases thee thus to offer me thy favor, so give me grace to accept
this favor.

Am I thus invited to this blessed banquet? Give me grace to put on my wedding
garment, that the Bridegroom of this feast never say unto me; Frind how came
thou hither not having on thy wedding garment?

Have thou now commanded me to examine my self? let me now try and examine
mine heart, and look how I stand in thy sight: The Jews would not eat with
unwashed hands, dare I eat with an unwashed heart? they would not drink but
their vessels must be purified, and dare I now drink and my soul not
purified? Before the passover they sanctified themselves, and before this
sacrament shall not I now sanctify my self? I desire to do it, Lord help my
desire; lest eating and drinking unworthily, I eat and drink mine own
damnation. I therefore being now ready to come to thy Table, do acknowledge
and confess mine own unworthiness; I have sinned against thee many ways,
and that since I last received this Sacrament: I have not known thee in thy
word, beheld thee in thy works, apprehended thee in thy Son, served thee in
the spirit, applied thee by faith, feared thee for thy justice, nor admired
thee as I ought for thy great mercies. I have not frequented thine house, heard
thy word, laid it up in mine heart, nor practiced it in my life as I should. I,
even I, by the lusts of mine eyes, the lusts of my flesh, and the pride of
life, have dishonored thy great and glorious name. And when thou have forgiven
me ten thousand talents, I would not forgive my brother and hundred pence.

What shall I say unto my self? I have sinned: I will do so no more. I have
sinned, Lord forgive me all my sins: and grant that in the whole course of my
life hereafter, I may live to the honor of thy great name.

Give unto me now a broken heart, a contrite spirit, a sorrowful soul, and a
mind hungring and thirsting after Christ, and his righteousness. Give me now
grace to know thee the only true God, the Creator and preserver of mankind.
Give me grace now to feel the burden of my sins, and that I am eased of them
by the blood of Christ Jesus.

I do believe in him, help my unbelief. I am sorry for my sins, make me to
be heartily and unfeignedly sorrowful. I promise now to live nearer to thee
then ever I have done, give me power to perform my promise. I forgive all
that have wronged me even as thou for Christ's sake have forgiven me. Let this
forgiveness of mine be without dissimulation.

And because I am now to taste of bread and wine, make me to consider the use
of them. I know O Lord that this sacramental bread is not the body of thy Son:
this sacramental wine is not the blood of thy Son; but this I know out of
thy holy word, that they are seals of his body and blood.

Teach me therefore now, most gracious God, that I, seeing bread and wine on
the table, may behold Christ upon the cross; and observing the bread broken to
me, may consider of Christ's body crucified for me: and looking upon the wine
powered out of the vessel, may think how Christ's blood was powered out for my
sins. And as I receive this bread and wine into my stomach, for bodily
sustenance: so cause me to feed on the body and blood of our Savior Christ,
that it may be nourishment for my soul.

Grant, O Lord, that I may so now come to thy holy table, that hereafter I may
be partaker of thy heavenly Table, through Christ my Lord, and only Savior.
Amen.

Our Father which art, etc.

A THANKESGIVING after the Communion.
ALL glory, honor and praise be given to thee most glorious God, for all thy
mercies bestowed upon me: for mine election in thy love, my redemption by thy
Son, my sanctification by thy spirit in this life, and hope of glorification
in the life to come. I thank thee for thy word, in which I bear of thy
goodness: and I thank thee for this Sacrament, in which I behold thy favor.

I have now been partaker of bread and wine: Lord make me partaker of Christ's
body and blood. Those they will turn to the nourishment of my body: let these
turn to the nourishment of my soul. By those I feel some refreshing for a
while, by these let me feel refreshing for ever. O let not Christ's blood be
shed in vain for me, but by it cleanse me from all my sins.

I have now cast up all the poison of impiety: suffer me not hereafter to
lick it up again. I have now disgorged my self of revenge: let me never
return to my vomit again. I am now washed from all my pollution: make me to
remember that it is the part of a swine to wallow again in mud or mire. I have
promised now to live better than before: make the latter part of my life better
than the former.

I am a living stone in thy building, knit me fast to the corner stone. I am a
branch of the vine, set me fast in that root. I am a member of Christ's body,
keep me that I never be cut off. I have renewed this day my covenant with
thee, grant that I may keep it to my lives end. I have this day been put in
mind of the benefit by Christ's death: let me every day think often of his
death, that thereby I may learn to die unto sin. And grant that ever hereafter I
may so walk before thee, that all such as know that I have been at thy table,
may see that I am become a new creature.

As for the rest of this day, in which thou have thus showed thy self unto
me, grant that I may spend the same, not in surfeiting and drunkenness, not
in chambring and wantonness, not in sporting and idleness; but in hearing of
thy word, calling on thy name, meditation of thy mercies, and in holy
conference about heavenly things. Unto thee O Father my Creator and preserver,
unto thee O Christ my Redeemer and Iustifier, unto thee O Holy Ghost my
Sanctifier, and Instructor, be ascribed of me and thy whole Church, all
praise and power, might and Majesty, glory and dominion both now whilst we
do live, and for ever whilst we shall live. Amen. Our Father which art etc.

NOw the very God of peace sanctify me throughout: and, I pray God, that my
whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless unto the coming of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

A THANKESGIVING FOR our late Deliverance from that unnatural conspiracy
against our King and State.
Almighty Lord God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our most
gracious and merciful Father, many are thy mercies toward us: and that our
souls know right well. And as we cannot be ignorant of them, unless we be
senseless: so, we may not be forgetful unless we be thanklesse. By thee our
lot is fallen into a good soil; and by thee we have a goodly inheritance; by
thee are our bodies delivered from sickness, and by thee are our souls
delivered from sin; by thee our names are not a reproach unto our enemies; and
by thee our estates are not a prey unto the Idolatrous. Thou, even thou have
done great things in our land, and thy right hand amongst us has brought
mighty things to pass. What is it, O Lord, that thou have not done unto this
vine of thine English Israel? and what could thou do more for it then thou
have? Thou have planted it by thy hand, placed it in thy vineyard, hedged it by
thy providence, guarded it by thine Angels, watered it by thy Spirit, pruned it
by thy rods, supported it by thy power, committed it to thy husbandmen,
beautified it by thy mercies, and fructified it by thine abundance, not of
sour, but sweet grapes. The wild Boar of the woods can never root it up,
the beasts of the forest shall never devour it. Lord continue still to visit
this vine, which without thy visitation, must be fruitless and strengthlesse.
Thou have cast out the heathen, and planted us in: thou have subdued our
enemies, and made us the mirror of the whole world: Thou have given us thy
Son to be our Savior; thy word to be our instructor; thy Spirit, to be our
sanctifier; thy Preachers to be our monitors, thy Sacraments to be our seals,
and Kings to be our nursing Fathers, 1588. Q. Elizabeth. K. James. 1603.
and Queens to be our nursing Mothers. When our enemies came against us, thou
subduedst them; when our light was extinguished, thou did set up a greater;
when the Plague was amongst us, thou calmedst it; and when our Country was to
be betrayed, then wast our deliverer. What shall we render unto thee for all
these favors? or what can we render for all these mercies? O our souls praise
the Lord: and all that is within us, praise his holy Name. O our souls praise
the Lord; and let us never forget his benefits. We, Lord, had been blown up
with the powder of rebellion, had not the power of thy providence watched over
us. We therefore, our Princes, Nobles, Clergy, Commons, our Wives, Children,
Servants and all, are here before thy Majesty this day, and now render unto
thee (for more we cannot, and more thou desire not) the sacrifice of praise,
the calves of our lips, for this wonderful deliverance, showed unto our
gracious King and Country. Lord teach us thereby to be thankful unto thee,
obedient to our Governors, frequent in prayer, fervent in the spirit, and
zealous in good works, lest a worse thing hereafter happen unto us. Make us to
detest Popery, the poison of Authority; Jesuits, the bellows of sedition;
Papists, the plotters of rebellion, and to think better of our Christian
Brethren, and this, not new, but most ancient Religion of ours, by which we are
taught piety to God, loyalty to Governors, peace to the Church, reverence of
superiority, charity to our inferiors, amity to our equals, love to our
enemies, patience in tribulation, thankfulness in prosperity, faithfulness
in our calling, and honesty to all. And seeing of late thou have delivered our
backs from whipping, our liberty from serving, our souls from dying, our
country from consuming, and our King and State from a sudden blowing up; Lord,
we pray thee, that the meditation of this mercy may never depart out of our
minds, but that we may be thankful unto thee, for mercies received, and
fearful of thee, for judgments escaped. Teach us to pray unto thee alone, who
can hear and grant our requests, to keep our Country from invasion, our
Church from dissension, our houses from infection, our State from alteration,
and people from the cruel mercies of the Italian Popedom, whose faith is
fancy, whose force is fraud, whose trust is treason, whose obedience is
hypocrisy, whose laws are traditions, whose pardoners are Priests, whose
savior is the Pope, whose god is an idol, whose service is ceremonies, whose
glory is their shame, and whose end is damnation, except they repent. Let the
Sun of the Gospel be never eclipsed, the light of thine Israel never be
extinguished, the hope of our happiness never be subverted, nor the branches
of our vine ever cut off. Thus we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall
have just occasion to praise thy great Name, in the face of thy Congregation,
from this time forth for evermore. Lord keep in our King the spirit of
Majesty, in our Queen the spirit of Chastity, in our Prince the spirit of
Piety, in our Nobles the spirit of loyalty, in our Counselors the spirit of
Prudencie, in our Clergy the spirit of Vigilancie, and in us all, the spirit
of Fidelity. And as for such as wish evil to this Sion of ours, the Honor of
thy Name, the Palace of thy pleasure, the Place of thy protection, and the
wonder of the world, if they belong to thee, give them hearts to repent, and to
return to us: if not, or ever their pots be hot with thorns, let indignation
vex them, as a thing that is raw. Even so let all thine enemies perish, O
Lord. And, unless their Children be better than the Parents, as the Prophet
prays, deliver them up to famine, let them drop by the force of the sword,
let their wives be robbed of their children, and be widows, and let their
husbands be put to death: let their confederate young men be slain by the
sword, let them be overthrown in the day of thine anger, and let none be left
to make lamentation for them, and to say, O my brother, O my sister. Lord root
all Cananites out of this land of the living, that such as fear thee may dwell
safely. Blessed be the Lord God of our salvation, for ever and ever, and let
all the people say Amen Amen.

1. Sam. 12.24.25.

Now therefore fear ye the Lord, and serve him in the truth with all your
hearts, and consider how great things he has done for you.

But if ye do wickedly, ye shall perish, both ye and your King.

GRACES.
He that eats and drinks,
and lets Grace pass;
Sitteh down like an Ox,
and rises like an Ass.
Grace before meat.

WE acknowledge and confess this favor of thine, eternal God and gracious
Father, that it pleases thy Majesty to give unto us so many opportunities to
meet together, we beseech thee to bless us, and our meeting at this time, and
all thy good creatures provided for us; and grant that we may use them soberly
as in thy presence, and receive them thankful, as from thine hand, to the
glory of thy Name, the good of our bodies, and the future salvation of our
souls, through Christ our Lord, and alone blessed Savior. Amen.

Grace before meat.

Almighty Lord God, and our merciful Father, we beseech thy Majesty to be
good unto us, in the pardon and forgiveness of our sin past; and by the
assistance of thy good and holy Spirit, to prevent all them that are to come:
to watch over us as thou have done by thy special providence: to direct us
continually by thy holy word: to bless us in thy use of all thy good
creatures, that now we shall receive from thy bountiful hand, giving strength
to them to nourish us, and giving hearts unto us, to be thankful unto thee
for the same. And grant, that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do
else, we may do all to the glory of thy most holy Name, through Christ thy
Son, and our only Savior. Amen.

Grace after meat.

WE beseech thy Majesty, eternal God and gracious Father to make us truly and
unfeignedly thankful unto thee, for all those mercies that we have received,
and for all those judgments that we have escaped, both temporal, concerning
this life, and eternal, concerning that life to come: for thy gracious
providence this day past, for our comfortable, and peaceable, and cheerful
meeting together in thy fear at this time, and for all thy good creatures
bestowed upon us, for the comforting and refreshing of these feeble and weak
bodies of ours. Now we humbly entreat thee, that as thou have fed them with
that food, which is convenient and necessary for the same, so it would please
thee to feed our souls with that food which perishes not, but endures to
eternal and everlasting salvation; so as we may seek so to pass through these
things temporal, that finally we lose not things eternal.

Bless with us thine universal Church, our Kings and Queens Majesty, the
Prince, and their Realms: O Lord continue thy truth and peace amongst us with
the pardon and forgiveness of all our sins, this day, at this time, and
heretofore committed against thee, through Christ our Lord and blessed
Savior. Amen.

Another after meat.

O Lord of eternal glory, who have elected us in the love of a Father,
redeemed us by the obedience of thy Son, sanctified us by the operation of thy
Spirit, preserved us hitherto by thy gracious providence, instructed us many
times by thy good and holy word, and now at this present and often heretofore,
most graciously and bountifully refreshed and comforted us with thy good
creatures, and with the mutual, society and comfort one of another, and have
bestowed many other good blessings and benefits upon us, as health of body,
peace of conscience, and abundance of thy good creatures, which thou have
denied to many of thy servants and dear children, which deserve the same, as
well as our selves: thy Majesty's Name be blessed and praised of us and thy
whole Church both now and for euer-more. Amen.

FINIS.

