THE FIRST part of the Mirour for Magistrates, containing the falls of the
first unfortunate Princes of this land: From the coming of Brute to the
incarnation of our savior and redemer Jesus Christ.

Ad Romanos. 13.2. Quisquis se opponit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.

Anno. 1574.

Cum Priuilegio.

The contents of the Book.
1. ALbanact the youngest son of Brutus tells of the finding of this land,
his fathers life, and his own unfortunate fall. Fol. 4. 2. Humber the king of
Hunnes shows how he mindinge to conquer this land was drowned. etc. Fol. 15 3
Locrinus the eldest son of Brutus declares his slaughter to hauehappened for
his evil life. Fol. 17 4 Elstride the concubine of Locrinus miserably drowned
by Guendoline his wife declares her presumption, leude life, and unfortunate
fall. Fol. 21 5 Sabrine the base child of Locrinus tells how she was
pitifully drowned by his wife Guendoline in reueng of her fathers adulterye.
Fol. 28 6 Madan shows how for his evil life he was slain of wolves. Fol.
32. 7 Manlius declares how he minding to kill his brother for the kingdom was
by him slain. Fol. 34 8 Mempricius given all to lust, pleasure and the sin
of Sodomy: tells how he was devoured of wolves. Fol. 36 9 Bladud resiteth how
he practizing by curious arts to fly, fell and brake his neck Fol. 40 10
Cordila shows how by despair when she was in prison she slew her self. Fol.
47. 11 Morgan tells how he wadging war with his cousin Conidagus was slain
at the place yet called Glamorgan. Fol. 54. 12 Forrex declares how he
mindinge to kill his brother which ruled with him (that he might thereby reign
alone) was by him slain. Fol. 57. 13 Porrex recites how for the slaughter of
his brother he was slain by his own mother and her may dens as he lay
sleeping. Fol. 60. 14 Kimarus shows how for his evil life he was devoured by
wild beasts. Fol. 63. 15 Morindus a bastard declares how he was exalted to
the kingdom, waxed cruel, and at last was devoured by amonster. Fol. 65 16
Nennius a worthy Britain the very pattern of a valiant, noble, and faithful
subject, encountringe with Julius Caesar at his first coming into this
Islande was by him death wounded: yet nathelesse he gate Caesar's sword: put
him to flight: slew therewith Labienus a Tribune of the Romans: endured
fight till his countrymen wan the battle: dyed xv. days after. And now
encourages all good subjects to defend their country from the power of
foreign and usurping enemies. Fol. 68.
Love and live, TO THE NOBILITY and all other in office, God grant the
increase of wisdom, with all things necessary for preseruacion of their
estates, Amen.
AMongst the wise (right Honorable) whose sentences (for the most part) tend
either to teach the attaining of virtue, or eschuing of vice: Plotinus that
wonderful and excellent Philosopher, has these words: The property of
Temperaunce is to covet nothing Plotin'
which may he repented: not to exceade the bands of measure, and to keep
desire under the yooke of Reason. Which saying if it were so well known, as
is needful: so well embraced, as he wyshed, or so surely fixed in mind, as
it is printed in his works: then certis many Christians might by the
instruction of an Ethnicke Philosopher, shun great and dangerous perils. For
to covet without consideration: to pass the measure of his degree: and to
let will run at randon, is the only destruction of all estates. Else how
were it possible, so many learned, politic, wise, renoumed, valiauntand
victorious personages, might ever have come to such utter decay. Will you
that I rehearse Alexander the great, Caesar, Pompey, Cyrus, Hannibal. etc. Al
which (by desire of glory) felt the reward of their immoderate and
insatiable lusts, for if Alexander had been content Qu. Curtius.
with Macedonie, or not ben pufte up with pride after his triumphs: he had
never ben so miserably poisoned: If Caesar and Po^pey had been satisfied with
their victories, and had not fell to civil discention, ye one had not ben
slain in ye Senate with daggers, the other abroad, by his friends procurement.
If Cyrus (...) lib. 1.
had been pleased with all Persia, and Media, and not thirsted for blood, he had
never com to so infortunat a fall. If Hanniball had not so much delited in
glory Plutarchus. Liuius. Polybius.
of warfare, his country had neither fell in ruin, nor he ben miserably forced
to poison him self. But you will say, desire of fame, glory, renown, and
immortality (to which al me^ well nighe of nature are inclined especially those
which excel or have any singular gift of Fortune or of the body) moved them to
such dangerous, great and hardy enterprises, which I must ne des confess as
an infallible verity: but for so much as the above named virtue by Plotinus
his judgment has such excellent properties, it is so fit in a Magistrate,
that I surely deem those Princes above specified (considering their factes,
estates, fortunes, fame and exploytes) had never come to such end, but for
want of temperance. Yet sith there are three other Cardinal virtues which
are requisite in him that should be in authority: that is to say, Prudence,
Justice, and Fortitude, which so wonderfully adorn and beautify all estates,
(if Temperaunce be with them adjoined that they move the very enemies with
admi ration to praise the^) some peradventure as affection leads: will
commend one, some another. Yea, and though Aristotle prince of Philosophers
name Prudence, Aristot. Cicero. Prudence
The mother of virtues. And Cicero define her the knowledge of things which
ought to be desired and followed: and also of them which ought to be (...) and
eschewed, yet shall you find that for want of Temperaunce, those which were
counted the wisest that ever were, fell into wonderful reproach and Justice.
infamy. Yea and though Justice that incomparable virtue, as the ancient
Ciuilians define her, be a perpetual and constant will which gives to every
man his right. Yet if she be not constant, which is the gift of fortitude, nor
equal in discerning right from wrong, wherein is prudence: nor use proportion in
judgment and sentence which pertains to temperaunce, she can never be
called equity or justice, but fraud, deceate, in justice, and injury. And to
speak of (...) which Cicero definith, A consyderate undertaking Fortitude
Cicero.
of perils, and enduring of labors. If he whom we suppose stout, valiau^t,
and of good courage, want Prudence, Justice, or Temperaunce, he is not counted
bold, manly and constant, but made beastly and desperate. I will also since I
have gone so far with the virtues (and the place so urges) lastly set down
the difinition of Temperaunce, according to Cicero his opinion, Temperau^ce
(says he) is of reason in lust and Cicero. Temperaunce.
other evil assaults of ye mind, a sure and moderate dominion and rule. This
noble virtue has three parts, that is co^tinence, cleme^cie and modesty,
which well and wisely observed and kept (if grace be to the^ adjoined) it is
impossible for him that is endued with the above named virtues ever to fall
into the unfortunate snares of calamity or misfortune. But Ambition which is
an immoderate desire of honor, rule, dominion, and superiority. (the very
destruction of nobility, and commonweals: as among the Romans Silla,
Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Cateline, Pompey, and Caesar, are witnesses) has brought
great decay also to our country, and countrymen. which Master Baldwin has
so learnedly touched in his Epistle of the other volume of this book, that I
need not therewith deal any further. Only I would to God it were so often read
and regarded of all Magistrates as the matter requires. I have here (right
honorable) in this book (which I am so bold to dedicate to your honors) only
reproved folly in those which are heedelesse: injury in extortioners rashness in
venterers, and excess, in such as suppress not unruly affections. And I trust
you will so think of it (although the style deserve not like commendation) as
you thought of the other part: which if you shall, I doubt not but it may
pleasure some, if not, yet give occasion to others which can do far better,
either with eloquence to amend that is amiss in mine, or else when they see
these so rudely pende, to publishe their own. And thus wishing you Prudence to
discern what is meet for your callinges. Justice in the administrations of
your functio^s, Fortitude in the defense of your country: and Temperance in
moderation of all your affections, with increase of honors, and everlasting
felicity, I bid you in Christ Jesus fare well.

Your humble John Higgins.

I. Higgins to the Reader.
AMongst diverse and sundry Chronicles of many Nations, I think there are none
(gentle reader) so uncertain and brief in ye beginning as ours, at which I
cannot but marvel since at all times our Island had as learned writers (some
singular men excepted) as any Nation under yt Sun. Again those, which now
are our best Chroniclers as they report have great Antiquities, but what they
publish of late years may be enlarged in many places by Chronicles of other
Nations: whereby it is manifest they are either ignorant of the tongues, orels
not given to ye study of yt which they most profess for if they were, me
thincks it were easy for them with such Antiquities as they brag they have, to
fetch our Distories from the beginning, and make them as ample as the
Chronicles of any other Country or Nation. But they are feign in steed of
other stuff to talk of the Romans, Greeks, Persians, etc. and to fill our
Distoryes with their facts and fables. This I speak not to yt end I would have
ours quite separate from other without any mention of them, but I would have
them there only named where th'affayres of both countries by war, peace,
truce, marriage, trafique or some necessary cause or other is intermired. I have
seen no ancient antiquities in written hand but two, one was Galfridus of
Munmouth which I lost by misfortune, the other an old Chronicle in a kind of
English Verse, beginning at Brute and endinge at the death of Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, in the which and diverse other good Chronicles I find many things
not mentioned in that great tome engroced of late by Master Grafton and that
where he is most barraine and wantes matter. But as the greatest heads, the
grayest heirs, and best clerks have not most wit, so the greatest Books,
titles and Tomes contain not most matter. And this have I spoken because in
writing the Tragedies of the first unfortunate Princes of this (...), I was
often feign to use mine own simple invention (yet not swaruing from the
matter) because the Chronicles (although they went out under diverse men's
names) in some such places as I most needed their aid wrate one thing: and
that so brieflye that a whole Princes reign, life and death, was comprised in
three lines. Yea and sometimes mine old book above mentioned help me out
when the rest forsook me, as for Lanquet, Stowe, and Grafton were always
nighe of one opinion, but the Flower of Histories somewhat larger, some help
had I of an old Chronicle imprinted ye year 1515. But surely me thincks and
so do most which delight in historyes, it were worthily done if one Chronicle
were drawn from the beginning in such perfect sort, that all monuments of
virtuous men, (to yt eralting of Gods glory) and all punishments of vicious
persons (to yt terror of the wicked) might be registered in perpetual
remembrance. To which thing the right reverend father in God Matthew
Archbishop of Canterbury and Metropolitan of England has brought such aid
as well by printing as preseruinge the written Chronicles of this Realm that
by his Graces study and pains, the labor in time to come will be far more
easy to them shall take such travail in hand. But to leave with these and
declare the cause of my purpose. As I chanced to read the Mirour for
Magistrates and work by all men wonderfully commended, and full of fit
instructions for preservation of each estate: taking in hand ye Chranicles,
and minding to confer the times: me thought the lives of a number even at
the beginning the like unfortunate Princes, offered themselves unto me as
matter very meet for imitation the like admonition, miter and phrase, and
seeing Baldwine by these words moved me some what thereto: It were (says
he) a goodly and a notable matter to search and discourse our whole story from
the beginning of the inhabiting of this Isle, etc. I read the stories, I
considered of the Princes, I noted their lives, and therewith conferred their
deaths. On this I took pen in hand, mindinge nothing less then to
publishe them abroad: but only to try what I could do if need were or
time and leisure were given me to bestow in such wise. I wrote the two first
even as they now are, and because I would not keep secret my first labors in
this kind of study (though I might well have blushed at the baseness of my
style) I showed them to a freiude of mine, desiring his bufayned judgment in
this matter: which when he had read he never left entreating me to write
other, til I had ended all to the birth of CHRIST, and yet not so content: he
desired meet'accomplish the residue til I came to the Conquest, (which were
welnighe fiftye Cragedies) but wearied with those which I had written, I
desired him pause on this, till time and leisure were given me. Yet he making
relation to other his friends what I had done, left me not quiet till they
likewise had seen them. Whose persuasion, as it seemed without any suspicion
of assentation or flatery, so bath it made me bolder at this present then
before. For although (said they) your Tragedies be simple and not comparable to
those which the other before have written: yet when men consider that many
wrote those, but one these: that they are grave writers, you are but young: the
perfection of those stories, and th'imperfection of these. Finally the good
will you bear to your country, the commendation of virtue, the detestation of
vice, the fall of ambition, the horrible end of traitors, harlots, tyraunts,
adulters, enchaunters, murderers and such like. When men (said they) consider
these things they cannot (how simple soever your Verse be) but think well of
the matter. At length with these persuasions and such like: I was content
(good Reader) to publishe them for thy behoufe, and the public weal of my
country. At which if thou envy: I mind not therefore to envy my self and
stay my pen: but God willing thou shall as fast as I can prepare them, have
other Books from my hands which may please thee again, and thus with all my
heart I bid the hartelye farewell.

Thy freinde I. H.

The Authors induction.
AS Somer sweet with all her pleasures paste,
And leaves began, to leave both brau^che and tree,
While winter cold approatched nere full fast
Me thought the time, to sadness moved me
On drouping days, not half such mirth have we:
As when the time of year and wether-s fair,
So move our minds, as mocions move the air.
The weary nights, approatched on apace
With darkesom shades, which somewhat breeds care,
The Sun had take more nere the earth his race,
In Libra than, his greatest swinge he bare,
For pardy then, the days more colder are,
Then fades the green, fruit timely, herbs are don,
And winter gines to waste that summer won.
I deemde some book, of mourning theme was best
To read, were with instructions mingled so,
As might again, refreshe my wits oppreste
With tediousnes not drive me quyte therfro:
Wherefore I went the Printers straight unto,
To seek some work of price I surely mente,
That might herein my careful mind content.
At length by hap, I found a book so sad,
As time of year or winter could require,
The Mirroure namde, for Magistrates he had
So finely pende, as heart could well desire,
Which when I read, so set my heart on fire:
Eftsoon it me constraind to take the pain
Not leave with once, to read it once again.
And as again, I vewde this work with heed:
And marked plain each party tell his fall
Me thought in mind, I saw those men in deed:
Eke how they came, in order pleading all,
Declaring well, this life is but a thrall:
Sith those on whom, for Fortunes gifts we stare,
Often sooniste sink in greatest seas of care.
For some of these were kings of high estate:
And some were Dukes, and came of Regal race:
Some Princes, Lords and Judges great that sat
In council still, decreing every case:
Some other Knights, that vices did embrace:
Some Gentlemen: some poor that looked hie,
Yet every one had play de his tragoedye.
A Mirroure well it may be calde a glass,
More clear then any crystal under Sun,
In each respect, the Tragoedies so pass,
Their names shall live, that such a work begun:
For why with such Decorum is it don:
That Momus spite, which more then Argus eyes
Can never watch to keep it from the wise.
Examples there for all estates you find,
For judge (I say) what justice he should use;
The noble man to bear a noble mind,
And not him self ambiciously abuse:
The Gentleman ungentleness refuse:
The rich, and poor: and every one may see,
Which way to love and live in his degree.
Me thinks they might beware by others harm,
And eke eschew to clamer up so hye:
Yet cursed pride does all their wits becharme,
They think of naught, but proverbs true do try:
Who hewes aloft the chips may hurt his eye:
Who climes the tops of trees, where bows ar small,
Or hawty towers, may quickly catch a fall.
This thing full well does Phaetons fall declare,
And Icarus aloft would fly and soar:
Eke Bladud once of Britayne rule that bare,
Would clyme and fly, but each did fall therefore.
For Phaeton was with lightning all to tore:
And Icarus the mean that did not recke
Was drownde, by fall did Bladud break his neck.
The scriptures eake, of such bear witness can:
As Babylon for high presumption fell.
But let me end my tale that I began
When I had red these Tragoedies full well
And paste the night with labors long to tell:
One night at last I thought to leave my use,
And take some ease before I chaungde my muse.
Wherefore a way from reading I me gate:
My heavy head vvaxte dull for want of rest.
I laid me down the night was waxed late,
For lack of sleep mine eyes were sore oppreste,
Yet fansy still of all their deaths increaste:
Me thought nothing my mind from them could take
So long as Somnus suffered me to wake.
Then straight appeard in purple color black,
Sweet Somnus rest, which comfortes each alive,
By ease of mind that wears away all wrack,
That noisome night from weary wits does drive,
Of labors long the pleasures we atchiue,
VVherat I ioyde sith after pains were past,
I might receive by Somnus easeat last.
But he by whom I thought my self at rest,
Revived all my fancies fond before,
I more desirous humbly did request:
Him show the unhappy princes were of yore,
For well I wiste that he could tell me more,
Sithe unto diverse Somnus erste had told,
What things were done in elder times of old.
At length he forth his servant Morpheus calde,
And bad him show me from the first to the end,
Such persons as in Britayne Fortune thralde.
Which straight upon his calling did attend,
And thus he spoke with countenance of friend,
"Come on thy ways and thou shall see and here,
"The Britaynes and their doings what they were.
And as he led me through the darkes a while,
At length we came into a goodly hall,
At the end whereof there seemde a duskish I Will:
Out of the which he began the Britaynes call,
Such only as from Fortunes hap did fall:
Which when he called thryce, me seemde to hear,
The doors to crack from whence they should apeare.
And thryce I shrinkte a side, and shunde the sight:
And three times thrice I wishte my self away:
Eke thrice from thence there flew a flashe of light:
Three times I saw them coming make their stay:
At last they all approtchte in such array:
With sundry shows, appearing unto me,
A stranger sight then erste with eyes I see.
Men mighty big, in plain and strange atyre:
But some with wou^des and blood were so disguisde,
You scarcely could with reasons aid aspyre,
To know what war such cruel death deuysde.
But sith I have their forms beneath comprisde,
VVheras their stories severally I show:
Your self thereby their cause of death may know.
And eke their faces all and bodies were
Destainde with woade, and turkish berds they had,
On th'ouer lips moutchatoes long of heir:
And wild they feemde as men dispeyring mad.
Their looks did make my fearful heart full sad,
And yet I could not for my life eschew
Their presence: or their minds I likewise knew.
For Morpheus wild me by de, and bad them tell
Their names, and lives: their haps, and haples days:
And by what means from Fortunes globe they fell,
Which did them erste unto such honors raise.
VVherwith the first not making more delays,
A person tall wide wounds in breast that bare:
Drew nere to tell the cause of all his care.
And as to speak he wiste he might be bold,
Deep from his breast, he threw an vnked sound:
I was amasde his gestures to behold:
And blood that freshly trickled from his wound:
With Ecco so did half his words rebounde,
That scarce at first the sense might well appear:
But thus me thought he spoke as you shall hear.
Albanacte the youngest son of Brutus, tells of the finding of this land,
his fathers life, and his own unfortunate fall. He lived about the year
before Christ. 1074.
Sith flattering Fortune slyely could beguyle
Me first, of all the Princes of this land:
And yet at first on me did sweetly smyle:
Do mark me here that first in presence stand,
And when thou well my wounded corpse have scande
Then shall thou see, what tale I mind to frame,
In stories called Albanacte by name.
So if thou list to hear what I resite,
If thou intend to show my fatal fall:
I pray thee take the pains my tale to write,
As I in order here repeat it shall,
What nedste thou muse: thou nedst not fear at al:
Sithe those that later liude their tales have told.
Dur elder lives to write thou may be bold.
Lay dread aside, let nothing thee amase:
We have despair of so vncoutched ryme.
Leave of on me with fearful looks to gase:
Thy pen may serve for such a tale as mine.
First will I tell thee all my fathers Line:
Then hither ward why he with Troianes mande
His boyadge made and found this noble land.
And last I mind to tell the of my self,
My life and death, a Tragedye so true,
As may approve your world is all but pelse,
And pleasures sweet whom sorrows aye ensue:
Hereafter eke in order coms a crew,
Which can declare, of worldly pleasures vain,
The price we all have bought, with grievous pain.
Well now I see thou putst apart thy fright,
(And giuste an care to hear not heard before)
I will declare the slorye all so right,
Thou shall no whit have need t inquyre no more.
Do mark me well what I resite therefore,
And after write it and there with my name:
Let hardly me receive if ought be blame.
When Troy was sacked, and brent and could not stand,
A Eneas fled from thence Anchises son,
And came at length to king Latinus land,
He Turnus slew, Lauinia eke he won,
And reignde 3. years, Ascanius then his son
Reignde next to him, the Siluius was his heir,
Begat my father of a Lady fair.
But when as Brutus fiftene years was old,
(for so they calde my father by his name)
With Siluius then an hunting go he would,
And thinking for to strike in chare the game,
His father that by thaunce beyond it came
Receiude the glaunce, and through his tender side
With deadly dint, the shaft did swiftly slide.
So though by chance, my father Brutus stewe
My graundsyre Siluius, sore against his will:
Which came by chance as be his arow drew,
That thought the fearful heart, not him to kill:
Yet was he banished from Italia still:
Commanded never to return no more,
Except he would his life to leese therefore.
On this to Greece, from thence he took his way:
Where Trojans were by Grecians captives kept.
Helenus was by Pirrhus brought away,
From death of those, whose fall their friends bewept.
My father all this while no business slepte:
But by his facts, and feats obtainde such fame:
Seven Thousand captive Trojans to him came.
A saracus a noble Greecian eke,
Who by his mother came of Troiane race:
Because be saw my fathers power not weke,
Came unto him to aid him in this case:
For that his brother thought him to deface,
Which was a Greek by both his parents sides,
His Castles three my father Brutus guides.
Thus he, to be their captain was content:
And all the Trojans gathered to his band,
Hist post unto the Greecian king he sent,
For to entreat he might depart his laud.
Which when King Pandrasus did understand,
An army straight he did therefore address,
On purpose all the Trojans to suppress.
Then while king Pandrasus at Spartine town,
Thought them in deserts by, to circumuente:
My father with three thousand beat them down:
Such favor lo him lady Fortune (...).
By Mars his force, their rays I ranckes he rent:
And took Antigonus the brother of their king,
With others mo, as captives home to bring.
The taken town, from which the king was fled
My father with sire hundredth men did man:
Cache prisner was unto his keeper led,
To keep in town, the noble Troianes wan:
My father unto woods conueyde him than
Again with his, and kept him there by night,
To quayle the Greecians if they came to fight.
And when the king had calde to mind his foil:
His flighte, and brother by the Troianes take:
The town he lost, and Brutus had the spoil:
He thought not so, the field and fight forsake,
But of his men a muster new to make:
And so again for to vesiege the town,
In hope revenge, or win his lost renown.
By night my father that his purpose knew,
Came forth from woods whereas he waited by:
The Troianes all th'vnarmid Greecians slew,
Went through their (...), could non their force deny,
Unto the tente where Pandrasus did lie:
Whereas my father, took their king that night,
And saude his life as seemde a worthy wight.
Which victory when he had wisely won
The Troiane victoure did a counsel call,
To know what best were with the king be don:
Now tell (quod he) what ransom ask we shall:
On which when none agreed scarce of all,
At length Mempricius up from seat did rise,
And silence made, gave thus his counsel wise.
"I cannot Troianes but commend the fact,
"Of this our noble captain worthy praise:
"Which thought, as it was a wicked he yuous acts
"T'abridge the Grecian king of vital days,
"We rather ought by clemency to raise
"Our fame to sky, then by a savage guyse,
"Sith Gods and men, both cruelty despise.
"The cause we fought: was for the freedom all
"Of Troianes taken, we have freedom won.
"We have our purpose, and their king withal,
"To whom of rygour nothing ought be don:
"Though he the quarrel with us first began:
"And though we owe the fall of Troies requite:
"Yet let revenge thereof from Gods to light.
"His subjects all, do wayle their ill pretense,
"And weapons laid aside for mercy cry:
"They all confess their plagues to come from thence,
"Where first from faith of Gods they seemde to fly,
"Their nobles dare not come the case to try:
"But even for peace with all their hearts they sue,
"And meekly grauute whence all their mischiefs grew.
"The lady fair his daughter who surmountes,
"For virtues rare: for (...) brave, and grace:
"Both Heline fine, of whom they made accountes,
"And all the rest that come of Grecian race.
"She for her father sues bewayles his case,
"And by her wisdom, there and parents love:
"Does us, and Brutus both to pity move.
"Yet some will say, he should deprived be
"Of kingdom quite, and worthy Brutus should
"Receive the seepter, this misliketh me.
"To this (...) Brutus if we could
"Consent (I deem) agree he never would,
"So much him self ambitiously to abuse:
"Or else a king unkindly so to bse.
"For kingdoms sake a king at home to kill
"Were far to bad, within his native land:
"Though he by right or wrong directed still,
"His force gainste us, that did him so withstand:
"The king has therefore ay the sword in hand,
"If any kick against his points of law:
"To cut them of, or keep them under awe.
"It Is best O Brutus if thou like her take
"His daughter Innogen, unto thy wife:
"And let the king a dowry large her make:
"Gold, silver, ships, and corn for our relief:
"With other things whereof this land is ryfe:
"That we so fraughte may seek some deserte shore,
"Where we and ours, may reign for ever more.
This pleased both Brutus and the Troianes all
Who wild forth with that Pandrasus the king,
Should reverently be brought into the hall,
And present, when they told him of this thing,
Great grief and sorrow did his heart so sting,
we could not show by countenance or cheete,
That he it lykte, but spoke as you shall hear.
"Sith that the hateful Gods have yielded me
"And eke my brother captives to your hands,
"I am content to do as pleases ye,
"For fear I leese both life and goods and lands,
"I must be needs content as fortune stands
"I give my daughter, gold and silver fine
"With what for dowry else you crave is mine.
To make my tale the shorter if I may,
My father then (...) married by and by,
And all things else performed by a day:
The king restorde that did in prison lie:
The Troianes parted from the shores pardy
Did hoyse up sails: in two days and a night
Upon the (...) of Leogece they light.
And leausng of their ships at road, to land
They wandering went the country for to veme,
Lo there a deserte (...) old they fande:
And eke a temple (if report be true)
Wherein Diana to (...) credit grew:
That sacrifice the Troianes counsel gane
My father make, an answer for to have.
And he no whit mistyking their advice
Went forth: and bid before the alter hold
In his right hand, a cup to sacrifice
Efylde with wine, and white hyndes blood scarce cold:
And then before her stature straight he told
Devoutly all his whole peticion there,
In better sort then I repeat it here.
O Goddess great in groaues that putst, wyide boares in fearful fear:
"And may go all the compass paths, of every ayrie sphere.
"Eke of the infernal houses to, resolve the earthly rightes:
"And tell what country in to dwell thou gyuste us Troiane wightes.
"Issigne a certain seat where I, shall worship thee for aye:
"And where repleate with birgins, I erecte thy temples may.
When nine times he had spoken this, and went
Four times the alter round and stayde again:
He powrde the wine and blood in hand he hente
Into the fire, O witless cares of men!
Such folly mere, and blindness great was then:
But if religion now biddes toys farewell:
Embrace that's good, the vice of time I tell.
Me laid him then down by the alters side
Upon the white minds skin espred therefore:
It was the third (...) of the night a tide
Of sweetest sleep: he gave him self the more
Do rest and sleep: then seemed him before
Diana thaste the Goddess to appear,
And spoke to him these words that you shall hear.
"O Brute far under Phoebus fall, beyond of france that reign:
"An Island in the Ocean is, with sea it is compaste main.
"An Island in the Ocean is, where Giantes once did dwell:
"But now a deserte place that's fit, will serve thy people well.
"To this direct thy race, for there shall be thy seat for aye:
"And to thy sons there shall be builte, an other stately Troy.
"Here of thy progenye and stock, shall mighty kings descend:
"And unto them as subject, all the world shall bow and bend.
On this he woke, with joyful chere and told
The vision all: and answer that it gave.
So it reioyste their hearts a thousand fold
To ships they got, away the shores they drove:
And hoysing sails, for happy wyndes they crave:
In thirty days their voyage so they dight:
That on the coaste of Africa they light.
Then to Philaenes alters they ataynde,
For so men call two hills erectid ar
In Tunise land, two brethren ground that gainde
For Carthage once, and went it is said to far
On Cyren ground for bounds, there buried were:
Because they would not turn again but strive
With Cyren men, they buried them alive.
From thence they sailed unto Saliues lake:
Twene Azarae hills, and Ruscitadam
They paste, from thence to Maluae flood they gates
To Hercules his pillars sight they came:
And then to Tuscan seas whereas by fame
Not far from shore, like minded mates they find,
Four banishte races of the Trojan kind.
Companious of Antenor in his flighte,
But Corinaeus was their captain than,
For counsel calde a wise and worthy wighte:
In wars the praise for valiauntnes he wan.
My father did so frendely use this man,
He was content and all his men beside:
To try adventures by my fathers guide.
Then unto Guynein france they sailed thence,
And at the haven of Loire they did ariue:
To ve we the country was their whole pretense,
And vitayles for their men and them atchiue,
Eke Corinaeus lest the Galls should strive,
Led forth two hundredth of his warlike band,
To get provision to the ships from land.
But when the king Gofarius herd of this,
That Troianes were arrived on his shore:
With Fre^chemen and with Guines, their power and his
He came to take the pray they gat before,
And when they met they fought it both full sore:
Till Corinaeus rushte into their band,
And causde them fly, they durst no longer stand.
First might you there seen hearts of Fre^chme^ broke,
Two hundredth Troianes gave them all the foil:
At home with odds they durst not bide the stroke,
Few Troianes beat them in their native soil.
Eke Corinaeus followed in this broyle
So fast upon his foes before his men:
That they retournde and thought to spoil him then.
There he alone against them all, and they
Against him one, with all their force did fight,
At last by chance his sword was flowne away
By Fortune on an halberde then he light,
Which he did drive about him with such might,
That some their hands, and some their arms did leese,
Some legs, of some the head from shoulders flees.
As thus amongst them all be fought with force,
And fortune great in danger of his life,
My father had on him there with remorce:
Came with a troop of men to end the strife,
When Frenchmen same the Trojans force so rife,
They fled a may, unto their loss and pain,
In fight and flight nighe all their host was slain.
And in that broyle save Corinaeus none
Did fight so fearcely, as did Turnus then,
My fathers cousin with his sword alone,
Did sley that time welnighe sire hundredth men:
They found him dead as they retournd again,
Amongst the Frenchmen, wounded boide of breath.
Which pinche my fathers heart as pangs of death.
On this they bode a while revenge to yeilde
And to interre the dead, and Turnus slain,
They took a town not far from place of field,
And built it strong to here the Galls again:
The name they gave it still does yet remain,
Sith there they buried Turnus yet men call
It Tours, and name the folk Turones all.
Which town they left at last with Troianes mande
When as their ships were storde with what they need:
A board, they hoyste up sails and left the land,
By aybing winds they cut the seas with speed.
At length the shining Albion clyues did feed,
Their gasing eyes, by means whereof they fande,
Out Totnes haven, and took this promiste land.
The country seemed pleasant at the vewe,
And was by none inhabited as yet:
But certain Giauntes whom they did pursue,
Which straight to caves in mountains did the^ get,
So fine were woods, and floudes, and fountains set
My father had no cause but like it well,
And gave his soldiers places in to dwell.
And then this I Will that Albion had to name,
My father caused Britayne called be:
And eke the people Britaynes of the same:
As yet in ancient records is to see.
To Corinaeus gave he frank and free,
The land of Cornwall, for his service don,
And for because, from Giauntes he it won.
Then since our Troiane stock came first from Troy,
My father thought that duty did him bind,
Sith fortune thus had saude him from-anoye,
The ancient town again to call to mind.
He builte new Troy, and Trojan laws assignde,
Whereby his stock to his eternal fame:
Might keep of Troy the everlasting name.
And settled there, in perfect peace and rest,
Deuoyde of war, of labors, strife or pain:
Then eke my mother, all his joys encreaste,
A prince she bare and after other twain:
Was never king, of children erste so feign,
Three sons because of Innogen he gate:
Locrinus, Camber, last me Albanacto.
Thus having welthe and eke the world at will,
Nor wanting ought that might his mind content:
To Increase his power with wightes of warlike skill,
Was all his mind his purpose and intent.
Whereby if foes, invasion after meant,
The Britaynes might not fear of foraine lands:
But keep by fight, possessions in their hands.
Then when his people once perceaude his mind,
(As what the prince does often most embrace,
To that the subjects all are straight inclinde:
And reverence still, in each respect his grace)
They gat in war such knowledge in short space,
That after they their force to try begone:
They card for naught by wit or wight not won.
They got of Giantes mountains whence they came,
And woods from whence they often made wise they would
Destroy and kill, when voyage out they framde
Or she wde them selves, in banding over bold:
Then straight the Britaynes, gladder then of gold
Were ready still, to fight at every call:
Till time they had extiucte, the monsters all.
Whereby the king had cause to take delight,
And might be bold the less to fear his toes:
Perdye each Priuce may recke his enmyes spite,
Thereafter as his force in fight he knoes:
A Princely heart the liberal gifts disclose.
He gave to each such guerdons for their facts,
As might them only move to noble acts.
No labors great his subjects then refusot,
Nor travails that might like his regal miude,
But each of them such exercise well used,
Wherein was praise or glory great to find:
And to their leidge bare faithful hearts so kind,
That what he wild they all obeyde his best,
Naught else was current, but the kings request.
What Priuce alive might more rejoice then (...)
Had faithful men so baliaunt bold and stout,
What pleasure more on carty could lightly (...)
Then win an Isle and live deuoyde of doubt:
An Isle said (...) nay namde the world throughout
An other world, since Sea does it divide
From the earth, that wants not all ye world beside.
What subjects eke more happy were then these:
Had such a king of such a noble heart,
And such a land enioyde and liude at ease,
Whereof each man almost might chose his part:
No fear of foes, unknown was treasons art,
No fayning friends, no fawning Gnatoes skill:
No Thrasoes brags, but bearing each good will.
But as each Summer once receaues amend,
And as no state, can stable stand for aye:
As course of time does cause things home and bend,
As cuery pleasure, has hit ending day:
As will, can never pass the power of mayc:
Even so my father happy days that spente,
Perceaude he must by sickness last relente,
As both the shipman well forsee the storm,
And knows what danger lies in syrtes of sand:
Eke as the husband man prouides beforne,
When he perceaues the winter cold at hand:
Even so the wise that course of thiuges have scande,
Can well the end of sickness great presage,
When it is ioynde with years of stooping age.
His counsel all and we assembled were,
To bid us hie, or haste there was no need:
We went with them, this nemes us caused fear
Sith so he sent, he was not well in deed,
And when we all approtchte to him with speed:
To soon alas, his grace right sick we found,
And him saluted as our duty bound.
And casting of his doulfull eyes aside,
Not able well to move his painful head:
As silent we with tears his mind abide,
He wild him self be rearid in his bed:
Which done with sight of us his eyes he fed,
Eke pawsing so a while for breathe he stayde:
At length to them, and us thus myse be said.
"No marueyle fare though you, herewith be sad,
"You noble Britaynes, for your Brutus sake:
"Sith whilome me your captain stout you had,
"That nome my leave and last farewell must take:
"Thus nature wills me once an end to make:
"And leave you here behind, which after me:
"Shall come as I depart before you ice.
"You wot wherefore I with the Grecians fought,
"With dinte of sword I made their force to fly:
" Antenors friends on Tuscane shores I sought,
"And did you not my promiste land deny.
"By Martial power I made the Frenchmen fly,
"Where you to save I lost my faithful frense:
"For you, at Tours my Turnus took his end.
"I (...) not now, resite what love I bare,
"My friendship you I trust have found so well:
"That none emongste you all which present are,
"With tears does not record the tale I tell.
"Eke whom I found for virtues to excel,
"To them I gave the price thereof as de we:
"As they deserude, whose factes I found so true.
"Now must I prove, if pains were well (...),
"Or if I spente my grateful gifts in bayne:
"Or if these great good turns to you I owde,
"And might not ask your loyal loves again.
"Which if I wist what tongue could tell my pain,
"I mean if you ungrateful minds do bear:
"What means death, to let me linger here.
"For if you shall abuse your prince in this,
"The Gods on you for such an heinous fact:
"To take revenge be sure will never miss:
"And then to late you will repent the act,
"When all my realm and all your welthes are fact,
"But if you shall as you begone proceed:
"Of kingdoms fall or fces there is no dreede.
"And to avoid contention that may fall,
"Because I wish this realm the Britaynes still:
"Therefore I will declare before you all,
"Sith you are come, my whole intent and will.
"Which if you keep, and wreste it not to ill,
"There is no doubt, but evermore with fame:
"You shall enjoy the Britaynes realm and name.
"You see my somes, that after me must reign,
"Whom you or this have liekte and counsaylde well:
"You know what erst you wished they should refrain,
"Which way they might all vices vile expel:
"Which way they might in virtues great excel:
"Thus if you shall, when I am gone ensue,
"You shall discharge the trust reposde in you.
"Be you their fathers, with your counsel wise,
"And you my children take them even as me.
"Be you their guydes, in what you can devise:
"And let their good instructious teach you three,
"Be faithful all, as brethren ought agree:
"For concord kepes a real me, in stable stay:
"But discarde bringes all kingdoms to decape.
"Record to this mine cldest son I give,
"This middle part of realm to hold his own:
"And to his heirs that after him shall live,
"Also to Camber that his part be known,
"I give that laud that lies welnighe oregrowne:
"With woods Norwest and mountains mighty bie,
"Twene this and that, the Stutiae stream does lie.
"And unto the my youngest son that art,
"Mine Albanacte I give to thee likewise:
"As much to be for thee and thine a part,
"As North beyende the arm of sea there lies.
"Of which lo here, a map before your eyes,
"Lo here my sons my kingdom all you have:
"For which I naught, but this remember crave.
"First that you take these fathers grave for me,
"Embrace their counsel even as it were mine:
"Next that between your selves you will agree,
"And never one at others welthe repine:
"See that ye bide still bound with friendly line,
"And last my subjects, with such love retain:
"As long they may your subjects eke remain.
"Lo now I feel my breath begins to fail,
"My time is come, give each to me your hand,
"Farewell, farewell, to mourn will not prevail:
"I see with knife where Atropos does stand,
"Farewell my friends; my children and my land,
"And farewell all my subjects, farewell breathe,
"Farewell ten thousand times, and welcome death.
And even with that he turnde, himself a side,
And gasped thryse, and gave a way the ghost:
Then all at once with mourning voice they cryde.
And all his subjects cke, from lest to most
Lamenting filled with wayling tears each coast:
Perdy the Britaynes all, with one assent:
Did for their king, full doulfully lament.
But what auayles, to strive against the tide?
Or else to sail, against the stream and wind:
What booteth it against the clyues to ride:
Or else to work against the course of kind:
Since nature has the end of things assiude,
There is no nay, we must perforce depart:
Against dint of deaty, there is no ease by art.
As custom wild we funerals preparde,
And al with moutning clothes, and there did come:
To lay this king on Beer we had regard,
In Royal sort, as did his corpse become,
His Herce prepared, we brought him to his tomb,
At Troynouant, he built where he did dye,
Was he entombde: his Royal corpse does lie.
Thus raignd yt worthy king, that found this land
My father Brutus, of the Trojan blood:
And thus he dyed when he fulwell had mande,
This noble Realm with Britaynes fearce and good:
And so a while in stable state it stood,
Till (...) divided had, this realm in three,
And I to soon, receiude my part to me.
Then straight through all the world began fame to fly,
A monster swifter none is under son:
Increasing, as in waters we descrye,
The cyrcles small, of nothing that begone.
Which at the length, unto such breadth do come,
That of a drop which from the skies does fall:
The cyrcles spread, and hide the watersall.
So fame in flight increases more and more,
For at the first she is not scarcely known:
But by, and by, she (...) from shore to shore:
To clouds from the earth her stature straight is grown,
There what soever by her trompe is blown:
The sound that both by sea, and land out flies,
Reboundes again, and verberats the skies.
They say the earth, that first the giaunts bred,
For anger that the Gods did them dispatche,
Brought forth this sister, of those monsters dead:
Full light of foot swift wings the winds to catch:
Such monster erst did Nature never hatche:
As many plumes she has from top to toe,
So many eyes them under watch or more.
And tongues do speak, so many ears do hark,
By night twene heaven, she flies and earthly shade:
And shreaking takes no quiet steep by dark.
On houses rowfes, or to wres as keeper made
She sittes by day, and Cities threats t'inuade.
And as she tells, what things she sees by veme:
She rather shows that's fained false, then true.
This fame declarde, that even a people final,
Had landed here: and found this pleasant I Will,
And how that now it was divided all
Into three parts, and might within a while
Be won, by force, by treason, fraud or guile:
Wherefore she moves her friends, to make assay.
To win the price, and bear our pomp away.
A thousand things beside, she bruites and tells,
And makes the most of every thing she hears:
Long time of us she talks and nothing else,
Eke what she sees, abroad in have she bears.
With tatling toys and tickleth so their ears,
That needs they must to flattering Fame assent:
Though afterward they do therefore lament.
By East from hence, a country large does lie,
Vngaria eke of Hunnes it has to name,
And has Danubius flood on South it by,
Dividing quite from Austria the same:
From thence a king was named Humber came:
Du coasts of Albanie did he ariue,
In hope this land of Britain to achiue.
Which when by posts of subjects I did hear,
How enmies were arrived on my shore:
I gathered all my soldiers void of fear,
And back the Hunnes by force and might I bore.
But in this battle was I hurt so sore,
That in the field of mounds I had I did.
And left my men as flocks without a guide.
Such was my fate, to benture on so bold,
My rashue s was the cause of all my wot:
Such is of all our glory vain the hope,
So soon we pomp and pleasures all sorgoe:
So quickly are we rest our kingdoms froe:
And such is all the cast of Fortunes play,
When lest we think, to cut us quite away.
I demde my self an beauenly happy wight,
When once I had my part to reign within,
But see the chance what hap did after light:
Or I could scace t'enioy my glee begin:
A Hunne did (...), from me my realm to win:
And had his will O flatering Fortune fie,
What meanst thou thus to work with Princes (...).
You worthy wariours, learn by me beware,
Let wisdom work, lay rashness al apart:
When as with enmyes you encountered are,
You must endeavor, all your skillful art:
By witty wyles, with force to make your mart:
Wit naught auailes, late bought with care and cost,
If you repent when life and labors lost.
FINIS.
The Author.
With that the vvounded Prince departed quite,
From sight he slinckte, I savv his shade no more,
But Morpheus bade remember this to write,
And therevvithall presented me before,
A vvight wet dropping from the waters shore
In Princely vveede, but like a warlike man,
And thus me thought his story he began.
Humber the king of Hunnes shows how he minding to conquer this land was
drowned. etc. He lived about the year before Christ. 1074.
THough yet no foreign Princes in this place,
Have come to tell their hapless great mishap:
Yet give me leave a while to plead my case.
And show how I slipped out of Fortunes lap:
Perchance some others will eschew the trap
Wherein I fell, and both themselves be ware.
And also seek the less thy countries care.
I am that Humber king of Hunnes that came
To win this Islande, from the Britaynes fell:
UUas drownde in Humber where I left my name.
A just reward for him that liude so well
At home, and yet thought others to expel,
Both from their Realm and right: O filthy fie
On such ambition erst as used I.
But I must blame report, the chiefest cause
Of my decay: beware of rash report:
It Is wisdom first to take a while some pause,
Before to dint of dangers you resort:
Least when you come in have to scale the fort:
By rash assaule some engine, shaft, or fire
Dispatched you quite, or make you soon retire.
For unto me the rumors daily flewe,
That here a noble Hand might be won:
The king was dead: no wars the people knew,
And eke themselves to strive at home begone.
It were (quoth I) a noble act well don,
To win it then: and there withal did make
Provision good, this famous Ise to take.
A war like regal camp provided was,
And ships, and vitaile for my Hunnes and me:
By sea to Britain conquest for to pass,
If Gods there to and heavenly stars agree:
At length we came to shores of Albanie,
And there to fight with Britaynes pitched our field:
In hope to make them flinche, fly, fall or yield,
They met us, long we fearcely faught it out,
And doubtful was the victours part of twain,
Till with my Hunnes I rusht among the route,
And faught, till that king Albanact was stain.
Then they to yield and pardon crave were feign,
And I with (...) great receiude the pray:
And marched forward, flesh with such a fray.
I past an arm of Sea, that would to God
I never had bin half so bold at furst:
I made to beat my self withal a rod,
When so within their Realm I venture durst:
But mark my tale thou hearst not yet the worst.
As sure I thought the rest to circumuent:
By spies before, they knew my whole intent.
And or I wiste, when I was come to land:
Not far from shore, two Princes were preparde,
Their scoutes conueyde away my ships they fand,
And of my shipmens flesh they nothing sparde,
To rescue which, as back again I farde:
The armies twain were at my heels behind
So closde me in, I wist no way to wind.
On the east Locrinus with an army great:
By West was Camber with an other band:
By North an arm of Sea the shoores did beat,
Which compast me and mine within their land:
No way to escape was there, but water fande,
Which I must taste or else the swords of those,
Which were to me and mine full deadly foes.
So when I same the best of all mine boste,
Beat down with bats, shot, slain or forced to swim:
My self was feign likewise to fly the coast,
And with the rest the waters entered in.
A simple shift for Princes to begin:
Yet far I demde it better so to dye,
Then at mine enmyes foot an abiecte lie.
But when I thus had swam with hope to escape,
If I might wend the water waves to pass:
The Britaynes that before my ships had gate,
Can watch me, where amidst the surge I was:
Than with my boats they rowde to me alas,
And all they cryde keep Humber kept their king:
That to our Prince we may the craytour bring.
So with my boats beset poor Humber I
Wiste no refuge: my werye arms did ache:
My breath was short: I had no power to cry,
Or place to stand while I my plaint might make:
The water cold made all my joints to shake:
My heart did beat with sorrow, grief and pain:
And down my cheeks, salt tears they gusht amain.
O must thou pelde, and shall thy boats betraye
Thy self (quoth I) no mercy Britaynes have:
O would to God I might escape away:
I wot not yet if pardon I may crave:
Although my deeds deserve no life to have,
I will: I will: death: bondage beast am I
In matters thus, in foraine soil to dye.
With that I clapped my quauering hands abroad,
And held them up to heaven, and thus I said:
O Gods that know the pains that I have (...),
And just reuengment of my rashness paid,
And of the death of Albanacte betraide
By me and mine: I yield my life therefore,
Content to dye, and never grieve ye more.
Then straight not opening of my hands, I bowde
My self, and set my head my arms between:
And down I sprang, with all the force I cowde:
So duckte, that neither head nor foot were seen:
And never saw my foes again I ween,
There was I drounde the Britaynes to my fame:
Yet call that arm of Sea by Humbers name.
Take heed by me, let my presumption serve:
And let my folly, fall, and rashness be:
A glass wherein to see if thou do swerue,
Thou may thy self perceive somewhat by me.
Let neither trust, nor treason train forth thee:
But be content with thine estate, so shall
No wrath of God, procure thy hapless fall.
If thou be forrayne bide within thy soil:
That God has given to thee and thine to hold,
If thou oppression mean beware the foil:
Bear not thy self, of thee or thine to bold:
Or of the feats thy elders did of old,
For God is just, injustice will not thrive:
He plagues the proud, preserues the good alive.
FINIS.
The Authoure.
THen vanishte Humber, and no sooner gone
Was he but straight in place before me came.
A princely wight, had complet harnes on,
Though not so complet as they now do frame:
He seemde sometime t'aue been of worthy fame:
In breast a shafte with bleeding wound he bare,
And thus he told the cause of all his care.
Locrinus the eldest son of Brutus, declares his slaughter to have happened
for his evil life. He died the year before Christ. 1064.
IF ever any noble prince might rewe,
His factes are paste, long since the same may I:
That would to God it were not far to true,
Or that I justly could my faults deny:
The truth of things the end or time does try,
As well by me is seen: my hapless fall,
Declares whence came my great misfortunes all.
I am Locrinus, second Britayne king:
The (...) son of him that found this land:
Whose death to me my mischiefs all did bring,
And causde why first I took my death in band.
He chiefly wild me when he gave this land,
I should be ruled, by all his counsayles will:
And use their judgments in my dealings still.
But what do I accuse my fathers heste,
What mean I here th'unfauty for to blame?
All he commanded even was for the best:
Though in effect of best the worste became.
So things often times well mente unfitly frame:
So often times the counsel of your friend:
Apparent good, fawles faulty in the eude.
For as he wished I used his counsayles aid,
In each thing that I deemde was good for me:
I never ought that they desirde denayde:
But did to all their minds and hestes agree.
And Corinaeus saw my heart so free,
By diverse means, he sought this match to make:
That to my wife, I might his daughter take.
But I that wiste not then what marriage meant,
Did straight agree his Guendoline to have:
Yet afterward suspecting his intent,
My friends to me this point of counsel gave:
That who so does of Prince aliaunce crave,
He means thereby to work some point of ill,
Or else to frame the prince unto his will.
It may well be he mente no evil at all,
But wise men always use to dread the-worste:
And sith it was, the fountain of my fall:
From whence the spring of all my sorrows burste,
I may well think was some of us accurste,
For why the end, does always prove the fact:
By end weiudge the meaning of the act.
I made no haste, to wed my spoused wife:
I wiste I could as yet without her bide:
I had not tasted toys of trained life:
I dcemde them fools by Cupides darte that did:
I Venus vise and all her force defide:
And liude at rest, and ruled my land so well,
That men delighted of my factes to tell.
My brethren eke long weldid well their parts:
We feared no foes, we thought our state would stand.
We gave our selves to learned skillful arts:
Wherein we other fruit, or pleasur fand:
And we enioyde so fine a fruitful land,
That few in earth, might with our states compare,
We lyude so void of noisome carke, and care.
But see the chance when least we thought of ill,
When we esteamde our state to be most sure:
Than came a flawe to bridle all our will,
For strangers far, began us to war procure:
And even when first, they put their pranke in ure,
On Albane shores my brother there they slew:
Whose death we after made the Hunnes to rue.
When he was dead they hopte to win the rest,
And over Abi stream with haste did hie:
But I and eke my brother Camber dreste,
Our armies straight, and came their force to try:
We brake their rays, and forste their king to fly,
Into the arm of Sea they over came:
Where Humber brounde yt waters took his name.
We either slew or took them captives all,
Emongst the which O mischief great to tell!
The Gods to work mine overthrow and fall
Sent ladies three, whose beauties did excel:
Of which because I liked one so well,
I took her straight, nor she did ought deny:
But each thing granted so she might not dye.
Thus Humber we this hateful hungery king,
In Humber drenshte: and him depriude of pride:
And of his lofty ladies he did bring,
He lost the pray: and all his men beside.
And we the spoils of all his hoaste divide,
But I that thought, I had the greatest share:
Had caught the cause of all my woeful care.
They calde this lady Elstride whom I took,
Whose bewty brave did so my wits confound:
That for her sake my promise I for sooke,
Whereby I was to Gwendoline first bound.
Me thought no lady went on earthely ground
That might alure me, ever change my mind:
So was I caught by snares of Cupide blind.
Was never none before so likte mine eye,
(...) her more then I could love my life:
Her absence still me thought did cause me die.
I surely mente to take her to my wife.
But see how beauty breadeth deadly strife,
Lo here began my whole confusion here:
Sprang out ye shaft from which this wound I bear.
For Corinaeus had no sooner heard,
That I did mean his daughter to forsake:
But straight as one, that did naught else regard,
In haste his voyage toward me did take:
And come, declarde what promise I did make,
From which he said if once I sought to slioe:
It should by dinte of sword, and blood be tried.
But if I would her take, as erste I said,
And not this stranger choose against his mind:
His help he promiste at each time, and aid
To be so ready, as I wishte to find:
He further said my country did me bind,
To take such one as all my subjects knew:
Sith strangers to their foes are never true.
I wayde his words, and thought he wishte me well:
But yet because his stock should gain thereby,
I reckte them less: and yet the truth to tell,
I durst not dare my promise made deny:
For well I wiste, if once it came to try:
It would both weaken all this noble land,
And doubtful be, who should ha the upper hand.
Thus needs perforce I must his daughter take,
And must leave of, to love where I delighte:
I was constrainde contentio to forsake:
The form that most did captiuate my sight,
What luck had I on such a lote to light:
What meant you Gods that me such fortune gane,
To cast my mind on her I might not have.
To short my tale, his Guendoline I took,
I was content against my will: what then:
Nore quite for this, mine Elstride I forsook:
For why, I wrought by skill of cunning men,
A vaulte along under the ground a den:
Her company wherein I used still,
There we acco mplishte, our unhappy will.
There I begat my Sabrine sely child,
That virgin sinall, mine Elstride bare to me:
Thus I my wife full often did beguilde,
Which after ward did bear a son to me,
Namde Madan: yet we never could agree,
And he that was the cause, she was my bryde:
This while her father Corinaeus did.
Which when I heard, I had my hearts desire:
I craude no more, there was my end of grief.
At least I thought to quench Cupidoes fire,
And eke to work my lusting loves relief:
I mente no more to steal it like a thief:
But married Elstride, whom I loud as life,
And for her sake, I put away my wife.
Likewise I causde was Elstride queen proclaimde:
And took her as my lawful wife by right,
But Gwendoline that saw her self sisoainde,
Straight fled, and moude the Cornishe men to fight,
To them, when she declarde her pitious plighte:
In haste they (...) an army for to be,
Reueugers of my new made queen and me.
And I likewise an army did prepare,
I thought to (...), their courage all by force:
But to my cost I found to late beware,
There is no strength in armoure, man or horse,
Can veil, if love on wronged take remorce:
For he on whom the deadly darte does light,
Can never escape: by ransom, friend or flighte.
So when our armies met night Stura stream,
The trompettes (...) and I denide the peace:
I minded to erpell them all the realm,
Or else to make them ever after cease:
And they except I Elstride would releace,
(They said) and take my Gwendoline again:
They would revenge the wrong, or else be slain.
On this we met and valiauntly we fought,
On eather side, and nether part did yield:
So equaly they fell, it was great doubtr,
Which part should have the better of the field:
But I to boldr, rushte in with sword and sheelde
To break their rays, so hasty men get smarte:
An arrowe came, and stroke me to the heart.
Then was I brought to Troynouant and there,
My body was enterrid as you read:
When I had reigned all out twenty year,
Lothus I liuve, and thus became I dead:
Thus was my crown deprived from my head,
And all my pomp, my princely troop and train,
And I to earth, and duste resolude again.
Now warn estates, let this for wedlorke serve,
Beware of change it will not hold out long,
For who so minds from his make to swerue:
Shall sure at length, receive revenge for wrong:
It Is folly fight with God, h'is farte to strong:
For though ye color all, with coat of right:
Yet can no fained farde, deceive his sight.
Finis.
The Author.
WIth that this king, was vanished quite and gone:
And as a miste, dissolved into air:
And I was left, with Morpheu all alone:
Who represented straigt a Lady fair:
Of friends depriude, and left in deep despair,
As eke she spoke, all wet in cords fast bound:
Thus told she how, she was in waters drounde.
Elstride the concubine of Locrinus myserably drowned by Gwendoline his wife,
declares her presumption, lewd life and unfortunate fall. She suffered before
Christ. 1064.
ANd must I needs my self resite my fall
Poor woman I: must I declare my fate:
Must I the first save three amongste us all,
Show how I thrice, fell from my Princely (...)
And from the loftye seat on which I sat;
If needs I must, then well content I will:
Lest here my place in vain I seem to fill.
^ Locrinus loud,
(...) daughter came from Germans land:
(...) of beauty many Princes moude,
(...) for grace, and favor at my hand.
Which brute once blown abrond in every land,
One Humber king of Hunnes with all his train:
To come to me, a suitor was full feign.
What need I tell, the gifts to me he gave,
Or show his suite or promise he me plight,
Since well you know a Prince need nothing crave:
May nigh (...) each thing as twere his right.
For as the foul before the Eagles sight
Even so me fall, submit and yield us still,
At Prince his call, obeysaunt to his will.
And for that time the Hunnes full mighty were,
And did increase, by martial feats of war:
Therefore our German kings agaste did bear,
Them greater favor then was need by far,
My father durst not Humbers hest debar,
Nor I my self, I rather was content:
In hope of crown with Humber to consent.
Two Princely Dames with me came then away,
He bragde to wiune these country parts all three,
We Ladies rather was this Priuce his pray:
Because he promised that we Queens should be.
We came to cost these country coasts to see,
Since he on whom our hope did wholly stand:
Was drowned, namde Humber waters, lost the land.
For as you heard before when he (...),
He had won all because he won a part:
Straight way he was again thereof deposde,
Constrainde to fly, and swim for life poor (...)
Lo here the cause, of all my douleful smarte,
This noble king with whom I came to reign:
Was (...), and drownde unto my grievous pain.
Then were his soldiers taken, slain or spoilde,
And well were they, that could make suite for life:
Was never such an army sooner foilde:
O woeful war, that flowste in floudes of strife!
And carst not whom thou cutste with cruel knife!
Or had not Venus fraught my face with hew,
I had no longer liude, my form to rewe.
For as I came a captine with the rest,
My countenance did show as brave as Sun:
Each one that saw my native hew were priest,
To yield themselves by beams of beauty won:
My fame straight blown to gaze on me they ron,
And said I paste each worldly wight as far:
As Phoebus (...) the morning star.
Like as you see in darkes if light appear,
Straight way to thatech man directes his eye:
Even so amongst my captive mates that were:
When I did speak, or make my plaints with cry,
Theu all on me they stared by and by:
Bemoning of my fates, and fortune so.
As they had bin partakers of my woe.
My form did praise my plea, my sighs they suide,
My tears entiste their hearts some ruth to take:
My sobbes in sight, a seemly hew reneude:
My wringing hands, wan suitors shift to make:
My sober southes did cause them for my sake:
Me to commend, unto their noble king,
Who wild they should me into presence bring.
Which when I came in cords as captive bound,
O King (quoth I) whose power we feel to strong:
O worthy wighte, whose Fame to skies does sound:
Do pity me, that never wishte the wrong:
Release me one thy captives all among:
Which from my friends, by fraud am brought away,
A Prince his daughter, drounde in deep decay.
Now as thou art a Prince thy self of might,
And may do more then I do dare desire:
Let me (O King) find favor in thy sight,
Assuage somewhat thy deadly wrath and ire:
No part of manhood it is for to require:
A Ladies death thee never did offend,
Since that thy foe, has brought her to this end.
But let me rather safely be conuaide.
O gracious king, once home before I dye:
Or let me on thy Queen, be waiting maid.
If it may please thy royal majesty:
Or let me ransom pay, for liberty:
But if thou mind revenge of unwrought ill,
Why spare you Britaynes this my corpse to kill:
With that the king: good Lady fair what iste
Thou can desire or ask, but must obtain?
Eke would to God with all my heart I wiste,
Best way to ease thee of thy woeful pain:
But if thou will do here with me remain,
If not content, conductours shall thou have,
To bring thee home, and what thou else wilt crave.
As for my Queen, as yet I none possess,
Therefore thou rather maiste voutchsafe to take
That place thy self: then wait on her I guess,
Whose beautye with thy face no match can make:
The Gods deny that I thy heste forsake,
I save thy life, eke God forbid that I,
Should ever cause so fair a Lady dye.
O King (quoth I) the Gods preserve thy grace,
The heavens requite thy mercy shewde to me,
And all the stars, direct thy regal race
In happy course, long length of years to see:
The earth with fertile fruits inriche so thee:
That thou may still like Justice her dispose,
And ever more tread down thy deadly foes.
The noble king commanded to unbind,
Mine arms, and let me lewce, and free at will,
And afterward such favor did I find
That as his Queen I was (...) still:
And I enioyde all pleasures at my (...):
So that they quite had quenched out my thrall,
And I forgate my former fortunes all.
Thus lo by favor I obtainde my suite,
So had my beauty set his breast on fire,
That I could make Locrinus even as muite,
Or pleasant as my causes did require:
And when I knew he could no way retire:
I praide he would his favor so extend,
As I might not be blamed in the end.
For if (quoth I) you take me as your own,
And eke my love to you have constant been:
Then let your love like wise again be shown,
And wed me as you said your spouse and Queen:
If since in me misliking you have seen:
Then best depart betime before defame,
Begin to take from Elstride her good name.
No wavering heart (said he) Locrinus bears,
No sayned flatery shall thy faith deface:
Thy beauty, birth, fame, virtue, age and years
Constrain me both, thee and thy hestes embrace:
I must of force, give thy requests a place,
For as they do with reason good consent,
Even so I grant thee all thy whole inteut.
Then was the time appointed and the day,
In which I should be wedded to this king,
But in this case, his counsel causde a stay,
And sought out means at discord us to bring:
Eke Corinaeus claimde a former thing,
A precontract was made and full accord,
Between his daughter, and my sovereign Lord.
And yet the King did give me comfort still,
He said he could not so forsake my love,
Yet evermore would bear me all good will:
As both my beauty and deserts did move:
But still the end does who is fauty prove,
His counsel at the last did him constrain
To marry her, unto my (...) pain.
At which I could not but with hate repine,
It (...) me, his mate that should have been,
To live in bate, a prince his concubine
That ever had such hope to be his Queen.
The steps of state are full of woe and teene,
For when we think we have atainde the throne:
Then straight our po^pe and pride is quite orethrone.
Lotwise I fell from hope of Princely crown,
First when unhappy Humber lost his life,
And next I laid my peacockes pride adowne,
When as I could not be Locrinus wife:
But often they say the third does end the strife,
Which I have proud: therefore the sequel ve me
The third pays home, this proverb is to true.
This king could not refrain his former mind,
But used me still, and I my doubtful years
Did linger on, I knew no shift to find,
But past the time full often with mourning tears.
A concubine is never void of fears,
For if the wife her at advantage take:
In radge revenge with death she seeks to make.
Likewise I wiste if once I sought to fly,
Or to entreat the king depart I might,
Then would he straight be discontent with me,
Yea if I were pursued upon the flight,
Or came deflourde into my parents sight:
I should be taken, kept perforce, or slain:
Or in my country live in great disdain.
In such a plight, what might a woman do,
Was ever Lady fair, in such a (...)
O wretched wight bewrapt in webbes of woe!
That still in dread wast tossed from place to place,
And never foundest mean to end thy race:
But still in doubt of death, in carking care,
(...) live a life deuoyde of all welfare.
The king perceiving well my changed cheer,
To case my heart withal deuisde deceats,
By secret ways I came deuoyde of fear,
In baultes, by cunning Masons crafty feats:
Whereas we safely from the Queen her threats,
Perdy the King and I so used our art,
As after turnde us both to pain and smarte.
By him I had my Sabrine small my child,
And after that his wife her father lost,
I mean he dyed and she was straight exilde,
And I made Queen unto my care and cost:
For she went down to Cornevval straight in peste,
And caused all her fathers men to rise,
With all the force, and strength they might deuyse.
My king and hirs, with me, against her preparde
An army strong: but when they came to fight,
Dame Guendoline did war at length to hard:
And of our king us both deposed quite,
For from her camp an arrowe sharp did light
Upon his breast, and made him leave his breath:
Lo thus this king came by untimely death.
Then I to late, began in vain to fly,
And taken was presented to the queen,
Who me beheld with cruel tigres eye,
"O queen (quod she) that cause of wars haste been
"And deadly hate, the like was never seen:
"Come on for these my bands shall rid thy life,
"And take reuengement of our mortal strife.
"I longed long to bring thee to this baye,
"And thou likewise have sought to suck my blood.
"Now art thou taken, in my spoils a pray,
"That causde my life full long in danger stood:
"I will both teach thy self, and others good
"To break the bands of faithful wedlock plight,
"And give thee that which thou deseruidste right.
"O harlote whore, why should I stay my hands:
"O painted picture, shall thy looks thee save:
"Nay bind her fast both hand and foot in bands,
"And let her some strange kind of torments have.
"What stro^pet stues, thinkste for thou seemist brave?
"Dr for thy tears, or sighs, to escape my sight:
"My self will rather banquishe thee by fight.
"Thou rather shouldste my vital breath deprive,
"Then ever escape if none were here but we,
"But now I will not file my hands to strive,
"Dr else to touch so vile a drabe as she.
"Come on at once, and bring her after me,
"With hand and feet as I commanded bound:
"And let me see, her here as Humber drounde.
A thousand things beside, she spoke in rage,
While that a caytife did with cords me bind,
No tears, nor subbes, nor sighs might ought aswage
The gelous queen, or molifie her mind.
Occasions still her frantic head did find,
And when she spoke, her cyes did leame as fire:
She lookte as pale as chalk with wrathful Ire.
Ne stood she still but with her hands on side,
Walkte up and down, and often her palms she stroke.
"My husband now (quod she) had not thus did:
"If such an harlote, whore he had not took,
And there withal she gave me such a look,
"As made me quake, what lettes (quod she) my knife,
"To rid this whore my husbands second wife:
"His dead, I live, and shall I save her life?
O queen (quod I) if pity none remain,
But I be slain or brounde as Humber was:
Then take thy pleasure by my pinching pain,
And let me hence as thou appointistc pass:
But take some pity on my child alas,
Thou knowste the infant made no fault but he,
That's dead and I therefore revenge on me.
"No basterds here shall live to dispossess
"My son (she said) but sith thou soughtiste fame:
"I will provide for her a kingdom less,
"Which shall hereafter ever have her name.
"Thou knowste whereof the name of Humber came,
"Even so Sabrina, shall this stream be calde:
"Sith Sabrine me, as Humber Locrine thralde.
With that my child was Sabrine brought in sight,
And when she see me take in bands to lie,
Alas (she cryde) what means this pitious plight,
And down she fell before the queen with cry,
"O queen (quod she) let me more rather dye,
"Then she that's giltlesse should, for why thy king
"Did as his captive, her to lewdnes bring.
Which when I same the kindness of the child,
It burst my heart much more then dome of death:
Poor little lam be with countinance how mild
She pleaded still, and I for want of breathe,
With woeful tears, that lay her feet beneathe
Could not put forth a word, our lives to save,
Or if therefore I might a kingdom have.
Her pitious plaintes, did somewhat death withdraw
For as she long beheld the queen with tears:
"(quod she) let me bane rigor boyde of law,
"In whom the sign of all thy wrath appears,
"And let me die my fathers face that bears:
"Sith be is dead, and we are boyde of stay,
"Why should I thee, for life or mercy pray.
"My mother may to Germanye return,
"Where she was borne, and if it please thy grace,
"And I may well lie in my fathers tomb,
"If thou will grant his child so good a place.
"But if thou think my blood is far to bace,
"Although I came by both of princly line:
"Then let me have what shroude thou will asigne.
With that the queen replide with milder there,
And said the child was wonders wise and witty:
But yet she would not her revenge forbear,
"For why (quod she) the proverb says that pity,
"Has leudly lost full many a noble city.
"Then Elstride now prepare thy self therefore
"To die, take leave, but talk to me no more.
On this my leave I took, and thus I said,
Farewell my country, Germanye farewell,
Ade we the place from whence I was conueyde,
Farewell my father, and my friends there dwell:
My Humber drounde, as I shall be farewell:
Adieu Locrinus dead, for thee I die,
Would God my corpse might by thy coffine lie.
Adieu my pleasures paste, farewell, adieu,
Adieu the cares, and sorrows I have had,
Farewell my friends that erst for me did sue.
Adieu that were, to save my life full glad:
Farewell the fauning friends, I lately bad,
And thou my beauty cause of death farewell.
As often as heart can think, or tongue can tell.
A dew you heavens, my mortal eyes shall see
No more your lights, and Planetes all farewell,
And chiefly Venus fair that paintedste me,
When Mercury his tale to me did tell:
Eke afterward when Mars with us did dwell,
And now at last thou cruel Mars, adewe,
Whose darte my life, and love Locrinus sleme.
And must I needs depart from thee my child,
If needs I must ten thousand times fare well,
Poor little (...), thy friends are quite (...):
And much I fear thou shall not long do well,
But if they so with boiling rancoureswell:
As thee to slay, which never wroughtiste ill,
How can they stay, my haynid corpse to hill.
With that my Sabrines slender arms imbraiste
(...) round, and would not let me so depart,
"Let me (quod she) for her the waters taste,
"Or let us both together end our smarte:
"Yea rather rippe you forth my tender heart,
"What should I live? but they the child withdrew,
And me, into the raging stream they threm.
So in the waters as I striude to swim,
And kept my head above the waves for breath,
(...) thought I same my child, would venture in.
"Which cride a main, O let me take like death,
The waters straight had drawn me vnderne the,
Where striving up at length again came I,
And saw my child, and cryde farewell I die.
Then as my strength was wasted, down I went,
Eke so I plunged twice or thrice yet more:
My breath departed needs I must relent,
The waters perst my mouth and ears so sore,
And to the botome with such force me bore,
That life, and breath, and mind, and sonce was gone:
And I as dead, and cold as marble stone.
Lo thus you here the rare of all my life,
And how I paste the pikes of paynefull we,
How twice I thought to be a prince his wife:
And twice was quite depriude mine honor fro:
The third time queen, and felt foul ouerthro:
Then warn all ladies, that how much more die.
Then their degrees they clime: (...) dangers nigh.
Bid them beware, (...) bewty them abuse,
Beware of pride, for have a fall it must:
And will them fortunes flattery to refuse:
Her turning whelt, is boyde of stedy trust:
Who reckes no mean, but leanith all to lust,
Shall find my words, as true as I them tell:
Then did be ware, in time I wish them well.
FINIS.
The Authoure.
With that she flitted in the air abroad,
As twere a miste or smoke dissolved quite,
And or I long on this had made abode,
A virgin small, appearde before my sight,
For cold and wet eke scarsly move she might,
As from the waters drownde she didering came:
Thus wise, her talem order did she frame.
Sabrine the base child of Locrinus, tells how she was pitifully drowned by
his wife Guendoline, in revenge of her fathers adulterye. The year before
Christ, 1064.
Behold me Sabrine orphane (...) berefte,
Of all my friends by cruel case of war:
When as not one to treat for me was left,
But (...) did all their powers debar,
When as my father eke was plain in war:
And when my mother even before my sight,
Was (...) to death, O wretch in woeful plighte!
Trust who so will the (...) of hie estate,
And bring me word what stay thereby you have,
For why if Fortune once displeasure take:
She gives the foil, though looks be nere so brave.
It Is wisdom rather then to win to save,
For ofce who trustes to get a prince his train:
Would at the length, of beggars life be feign.
This might the Hunne erste Humber well have said,
And this my mother Elstride proufde to true,
When as his life by striving streams was stayde:
And when the tyrauntes her in waters threw.
What I may say, my self reports to you:
Which had more terror shewde, then twyce such twain:
Blue care, and judge if I abode no pain.
First when my fathers corps-was stricken down,
With deadly shafte, I came to mourn and see:
And as he lay with bleding breast in sown,
He cast aside his watring eyes on me.
"Fly fly (he said) thy stepdame seeks for thee,
"My woeful child: what flight maiste thou to take,
"My Sabrine poor, I must the needs forsake.
"See here (...) end, behold thy fathers fall,
"Fly, fly, thy gelous stepdame seeks thy life,
"Thy mother eke or this is wrapte in thrall:
"Farewell in woe you cannot escape her knyfe:
"Farewell my child, mine Elstride and my Wife
"Adieu (quod he) I may no longer hyde,
"And even with that, he gaspid thrice and dyede.
What bird can fly and sore, if forms do rage:
What ship can sail, if once the minds resist:
What wight is that, can force of wars aswage:
Or else what war can bridle Fortunes list:
What man is he, that dare an hoaste resist:
What woman only dare withstand a field:
If not? what child but must to enemies yield?
My fathers soldiers (...), away for fear:
As soon as once their Captains death they seande:
The Queen proclaimde a pardon every where:
To those would yield, and crave it at her hand,
Excepting such, as did her ay withstand:
For so the course always of pardons goes,
As saues the soldiers, and entrapps the foes.
Then wiste I flight could nothing me prevail,
I feared her pardon would not save my life:
The storm was such, I durst not bear a sail:
I durst not go t'lntreate my fathers wife,
Although I never was the cause of strife.
For gelozye, deuoyde of reasons rain:
With frensies fume, enragde her restles brain.
But see the chance, thus compast round with fear
In broils of blood, as in the field I stand.
I wishte to God my corpse were any where,
As out of life, or of this hateful land:
No sooner wished, but there was even at hand,
"A person vile, in have (quoth he) come on,
"Queen Elstride will before thou come be gone.
The rascal rude, the rooge, the clubfist gripe
My little arm, and plucte me on in haste:
And with my robes, the bloody ground he sweept,
As I drue back: he halde me on full fast,
Under his arm my sclender corpse he cast:
Since that (quoth he) thou putst me to this pain,
Thou shall thereby at length but little gain.
Thus through the (...) he bare me to my bane,
And shewde the soldiers what a spoil he had.
"Look here (quoth he) the little Princes taken,
And laughed, and ran as brutish butcher mad.
But my lamenting made the soldiers sad,
Yet naught preuailde, the caytife as his pray:
Without all pity bare me still away.
Till at the length we came where we descride,
A number huge, of folks about the Queen:
As when you see some wonder great beside,
Or else the place where some strau^g sight has been:
So might you there the people standing seen,
And gazed all when as they see me brought:
Then sure I demde, I was not come for naught.
And in the (...), some praisde my coinlye face,
Some said to Elstride she resembles right:
Some said I looked like my fathers grace,
Some other said it was a piteous sight
I should so dye: the Queen me pardon might,
Some said the thief me (...) did me abuse,
And not so rudely ought a Princes use.
But what did this redress my woeful care,
You wot the Commons use such proverbs still:
And yet the captives poor no better are,
It rather helps their pained hearts to kill:
To pity one in grief does work him ill,
Bemone his woe: and cannot ease his thrall:
It kills his heart, but comforts naught at all.
Thus past me throw the prease, at length we came,
Into the presence of the gelous Queen,
Who naught at all the rascal rudc did blame
That bare me so: but askte if I had seen
My father slame, that cause thereof had been,
O Queen (quoth I) God knows nice innocent:
To work my fathers death, I never meant.
With that I saw the people look aside,
To (...) a mourning voice I heard thereby,
It was my woeful mother by that cryde.
"Lo Sabrine hounde, at brinke of death I lie.
What pen or tongue, or tears with weeping eye,
Could tell my woes, that saw my mother bound,
On waters shore, wherein she should be drounde.
With that I fell before the Queen and praide
For mercy, but (...) fiery (...) she bent
Her brows on me: out vastar de bile (she sain)
"Thou worst not yet, wherefore for thee I sent,
"O Queen (quoth I) have pity be content,
And if thou mind, of mercy ought to show:
(...) me, and let my mother harmless go.
For why she was a Prince his daughter borne
In Germany, and thence was brought away
Perforce by Humber, who by mattes forlorn:
Thy king as captive took her for his pray,
Thou maiste full well her case with reason weye:
What could she do, what more then she or I,
Thy (...) now, thine own to line or dye?
Take pity then, on Princely race O Queen:
Take pity, if remorce may ought require:
Take pity, on a captive thrice has been:
Let pity pearce the rage of all thine ire:
But if thy breast burn with revenging fire:
Then let my death quench out that fuming flame,
Since of thy husbands blood, and hirs I came.
Much more I said, while tears out streaming went,
But naught of ease at all thereby I gainde,
My mother eke, did as she lay lamente:
Where with my heart a Thousand fold she painde,
And though the Queen my plaints to favor fainde:
Yet at the last she bade she should prepare,
Her self to dye, and end her course of care.
Than all her friends my mother Elstride namde,
And pleasures paste, and bade them all adue:
Eke as she thus her last farewell had framde,
With loss of him, from whom her sorrows grue:
At length to me (which made my heart to rue)
"She said farewell my child I fear thy fall:
"Ten thousand times, adewe my Sabrine small.
And as the cruel (...) came to take
(...) up, to cast and drown her in the sloud:
I fast mine arms about her clipped did make,
And cryde, O Queen let mercy meek thy mood:
Do rather reaue my heart of vitail blood,
Then thus I live: with that they slachte my hold.
And (...) my mother, in the waters cold.
For love to aid her, venture in would I,
That saw my mother strive aloft for wind,
"To land she lookte and said farewell Idye.
O let me go (quoth I) like fate to find,
"Said Guendoline come on likewise and bind
"This Sabrine hand and foot: at once let see
"Her here receive, her whole request of me.
"Eke as I wish to have in mind her fame,
"As Humbers is, which should her father been:
"So shall this flood of Sabrine have the name,
"That men thereby may say a righteous Queen,
"Here drownde her husbands child of concubine.
"Therefore leave Sabrine here thy name and life,
"Let Sabrine waters end our mortal strife.
"Dispatch (quoth she) with that they bound me fast,
My slender arms and feet which little need:
And sans all mercy me in waters cast,
Which drew me down, and cast me up with speed,
And down me drensht the Sabrine fish to feed,
Where I abode till now: from whence I came,
And there the waters hold as yet my name.
Lo thus this gelous Queen, in raging sort,
With bloody hate bereft her husbands health:
And eke my mother Elstrids life God wot,
Which never meant to hurt this common wealth:
And me Locrinus child begot by stealth:
Against all reason was it for to kill,
The child, for that her parents erst did ill.
By this you see, what time our pomp does bide:
Hereby you see th'unstedy trust in war:
Hereby you see, the stay of states etryde:
Hereby you see, our hope to make does mar:
Hereby you see, we fall from benche to bar:
From bench (quoth (...)) nay from the Princely seat,
You see how soon us Fortune down does beat.
And here you see, how lawless love does thrive:
Hereby you see, how gelous folks do fare:
Here may you see, with wisdom they that wiue,
Need never recke Cupidoes cursed snare:
Here may you see, deuorcemente breeds care:
Here may you see, the children seldom thee,
Which in unlawful wedlock gotten be.
Declare thou then our fall, and great mishap:
Declare the hap, and glory we were in:
Declare how soon we taken were in trap,
When we (...) we had most safest bin:
Declare what loss they have that hope to win:
Farewell, and tell when Fortune most does smile:
Then will she frown: she laughes but even a while.
Finis,
The Author.
WIth that the Lady Sabrine slinckt from sight,
I looked about, and then me thought again
Approached straight an other woeful vvight:
It seemde as though with dogs he had bin flaine,
The blood from all his members torneamaine
Ran down: his clothes were also torn and rent,
And from his bloody throat these plaints he sent.
Madan shows how for his evil life he was (...) of Wolves, the year before
Christ. 1009.
AMongste the rest, that sat in hauty seat,
And felt the fall I pray the pen for me:
A Tragedy may some such wisdom geate,
As they may learn, and somewhat wiser be.
For in my glass when as themselves they see,
They may be ware my fall from (...) lap,
Shall teach them how, t'eschew the like mishay.
I am that Madan once that Britain kings,
Was third that ever reigned in this land,
Mark well therefore my death: as strange a thing
As some would deem, could scarce with reason stand:
Yet when thou have my life well thoroughly scande:
Thou shall perceive, not half so strange as true:
All life: worse death, does after still ensue,
For when my mother Guendoline had raignde
In my nonage, full xv years she dyed:
And I but young not well in virtues trainde,
Was left this Realm of Britaynes for to guide:
Whereby when once, my mind was puffed with pride:
I past for naught, I used my lust for law:
Of right, or justice reckte I not a straw.
No mean I kept, but ruled all by rage:
No bounds of measure, could me compass in:
Durst none adventure anger mine t'aswage,
If once to freate and fume I did begin:
And I excelde in nothing else but sin:
So that welnighe all men did wish my end,
Save such to whom for vice I was a friend.
In pleasures pleasant was my whole repaste.
My youth me led deuoyde of compass quite,
And vices were so rooted in at last:
That to recure the evil it past my might.
For who so does with will and pleasure fight,
Though all his force do strive them to withstand,
Without good grace they have the upper hand.
What licoure first, the earthen pot does take:
It keeps still the savor of that same.
Full hard it is a cramocke straight to make:
Or crooked logges, with wainscot fine to frame:
It Is hard to make the cruel Tiger tame:
And so it fares with those have vices caught,
Naught once (they say) and ever after naught.
I speak not this as though it past all cure,
From bices vile, to bertue to retire:
But this I say if vice be once in ure,
The more you shall, to quite your self require,
The more you plunge your self in fulsome mire.
As he that strives in soakte quick sirtes of sand,
Still sinkes, scarce never comes again to land.
The gifts of grace may nature (...),
And God may grant both time and leave repeute:
Yet I did more in laps of lewdnes run,
And last my time in tyrauntes trade I spente.
But who so does, with bloody acts content
His mind, shall sure at last find like again:
And feel for pleasures, thousand panges of pain.
For in the midste of those untrusty toils,
When as I nothing fearde, but all was sure:
With all my train, I hunting rode for spoils
Of them, who after did my death procure:
Those lewd delights did boldly me alure,
To follow still and to pursue the chase:
At last I came into a deserte place.
Besette with hills, and monstrous rocks of stone,
My company behind, me lost, or stayde:
The place was eke with hauty trees oregrowne
So wiste, and wild it made me half afraid,
And straight I was with ravening wolves betrayed:
Came out of caves, and dens, and rocks a maint,
There was I rent in pieces, kilde and slain.
Alas that youth (in vain) so vyly spente,
Should ever cause a king to have such end:
Alas that ever I should here lament,
Or else should teach unto my cost my friend:
Alas that fortune such mishap should send:
But sith it is to late for me to cry,
I wish that others may take heed me by.
I might full well by wisdom shund this snare,
It Is said a wiseman all mishap withstandes.
For though by stars we borne to mischieues are:
Yet prudence bayles us quite from careful bands,
Each man (they say) his fate has in his hands,
And what he makes, or marres to lose, or save
Of good, or evil, is even self do, self have.
As here thou see by me, that led my days
In vicious sort, for greedy wolves a (...):
Warn others wisely, than to guide their ways
By mine example, well eschew they may,
Such vices as may work their own decay:
Which if they do, full well is spent the time
To warn, to write, and eke to read this time.
FINIS.
The Authoure.
When this was said, no more was Madan seen,
(If it were he) but sure I half suspecte
It was some other else, so serude had been,
For that all stories do not so detecte
His death, or else I did perhaps neglecte
His tale, because that diverse stories brought,
Such fancies of his death into my thought.
Therefore although it be not as some write
Here pende by me, and yet as others have:
Let it not griue thee read that I recite,
And take what counsel of good life he gave:
I trust (...) may that dream) some pardon crave,
For if the rest, no dreams but stories pen:
Can I for that they write be blamed then?
No sure, I think the readers will not give
Such captious dome, as Momus erste did use,
Though Zoilus impes as yet do carping live:
And all good willing writers much misuse.
Occasion biddes me some such beasts accuse,
Yet for their bawling hurtes me not I nill:
But with my purpose, on proceed I will.
Next after that, came one in princely raye
A worthy wight but young, yet felt the fall:
It seemde he had been at some warlike fraye,
His breast was woundid wide and bloody all:
And as to mind he musde his factes to call,
Deep sighs he fet, made all his limbs to shake:
At length these words, or like to me he spoke.
Manlius declares how he minding to kill his brother for the kingdom was by
him slain. The year before Christ. 1008.
IF Fortune were so firm as she is frail,
Or glosing glory, were still permanent:
If no mishap our doings did assail,
Or that our acts and factes were innocent,
If we in hope no hurt nor hatred meant:
Or dealing ay were don with duty dew,
We never could, our great misfortunes rewe.
If pomp were pain, and pride were not in price,
Or hawty seat had not the highest place,
If we could learn by others to be wise,
Or else eschew the dangers of our race:
If once we could the golden mean embrace,
Or banishe quite ambition from our breast:
We never need to recke, or reap vnreste.
But O we think, such sweetenes in renown,
We deem on earth, is all the greatest hap:
We nothing fear, the hurt of falling down:
Or little rome, in lady Fortunes lap,
We give no head, before we get the clap:
And then to late, we wish we had been wise:
When from the fall, we would and cannot rise.
As if two twins, or children at the teate
Of nurce, or mother both at once might be:
And both did strive, the better dugge to geate
Till one were down, and slipte beside her knee:
Even so it fares, by others and by me
In fortunes lap: we have so little hold,
She cannot stay, both striving if she would.
I am that Manlius, one of Madans sons,
Which thought to reign and rule this noble I Will,
And would so don: but see what chance there comes,
When brethren love, and friendship quite exile.
Who thinks another of his right beguyle,
Him self is soonest clean bereaude of all:
Insteade of rule, we reap the crop of thrall.
My elder brother then Mempricius hight,
Whose hauty mind, and mine did ever square:
We evermore as foes hight other spite,
And deadly Ire in hateful hearts we bare.
He sought always he might to work me care,
And each regarded others envy so:
As after turnid both to painful woe.
Because my father loud me well therefore,
My brother feared I should have his right:
Likewise on favor boldned I me bore,
And nether had in virtues ways delight:
What need I here our inward griefs recyte:
We not as brethren liude in hatrid still,
And sought occasion other each to kill.
I forbecause I might obtain the crown:
And he for that he fearde my favor bred,
Such friendship, as might always keep him down,
And both (...) him of his crown and head.
But when it chaunste, our father once was dead,
Then straight appeared all our envy plain:
And I could not from mine attempt (...)
See here, the occasion of my hapless hap,
See here, his chance that might have liude full well:
So baited sweet is every deadly trappe:
In brauiste bowres, does deepest danger dwell,
I thought mine elder from his right t'expell,
Though he both age, and custom forth did bring,
For title right: I said I would be king.
Some wishte we should, depart the realm in two,
And said my father eke was of that mind:
But nether of us both, that so would do,
We were not each to other half so kind,
And vile ambition made us both so blind:
We thought our reign, could not be sure and good,
Except the ground thereof were laid with blood.
Wherefore as each did watch convenient time,
For (...) commit this heinous bloody fact:
My self was taken not accusde of crime,
As if I had offendid any act.
But he as one that wit and reason lacte,
Said traitor vile thou art to me untrue:
And therewith all his bloody blade he drew.
Not like a king, but like a cutthrote fell:
Not like a brother, like a butcher brute:
Though twere no worse, then I deserved well:
He gave no time, to reason or dispute.
To late it was, to make for life my suite:
Take traitor here (quod he) thy whole deserte,
And therwithall he thrust me to the heart.
Thus was I by my brutishe brother slain:
Which likewise mente my brother for to kill,
This oftentimes, they use to get and gain,
Which do inuente another blood to spill.
Was never man pretendid such an ill,
But God to him like measure shortly sent:
As he to others (...) before had mente.
Uniustice ever thriues, as thieves do thie:
And bloudthirste cries for vengeance at his hand,
Which all our right and wrongs (...) daily see:
The good to aid, and graceless to withstand:
If either vice or (...) we abande:
We either are rewarded, as we serve:
Or else are plaged, as our deeds deserve.
Let this my warning then suffice each sort,
Bio them beware, example here they see:
It passes play, it is tragical disporte,
To clime a step above their own degree,
For though they think good fortune serude not me,
Yet did she use me, as she hsoe the resle:
And so I think, she seruith even the best.
FINIS.
The Author,
When Manlius had thus endid quite his tale,
He vanishte out of sight as did the rest:
And I perceived straight a person pale,
Whose throat was torn and blodied all his breast,
"Shall I (quod he) for audience make request,
"No sure it needs not, strange it semes to thee:
"What he that bears this rentid corpse should be.
"Wherefore I deem thou can not choose but by de,
"And here my tale as others erste before:
"Sithe by so strange a means thouseest I did,
"With rentid throat and breast, thou musiste more:
"Mark well (quod he) my rattling voice therefore,
And therwithall, this tale he began to tell,
Which Irecyte, though nothing nere so well.
Mempricius given all to lust, pleasure and the sin of Sodomye: tells how
he was devoured of wolves. The years before Christ. 989.
(...) often said a man should do likewise
To other, as he would to him they did:
Do as thou wouldste be don to says the wise,
And do as conscience, and as justice bid.
But he that minds for rule another ryd,
Must not his hands with cruel blood distayne:
For blood does always cry for blood again.
Eke Iustfull life that sleeps in sinkes of sin
Procures a plague, fie fie on Venus vile.
We little wot the mischief is therein,
When we with poisons sweet our selves beguile:
The pleasures pass, the joys endure but while,
And naught there by at all we get or gain:
But dreadful death, and everlasting pain.
Me thincks thou lookist for to baue my name,
And musist what I am that thus do com:
I would or this have told it but for shame,
Wherefore to give example yet to some:
I will no longer feign my self so dom,
But since I must as others tell their fall:
Take here my name, my life, my death and all.
I am Mempricius, Madans eldest son,
Once king of Britain that my brother slew:
Whereby the crown, and kingdom all I won,
And after norisht vices more that grew.
Not natures laws, nor Gods, nor man's I knew,
But liude in lust not recking any thing:
I demde was naught unlawful for a king.
For when I had, my brother brought on bear,
I thought in rest to keep this kingdom long
And I was boyde of doubt, I had no fear:
Was noue durst check me, did I right or wrong:
I liude at large, and thought my power so stronger
There could no man prevail against my will,
In steed of law that used rigor still.
So after that I fell to slothful ease,
A vice that breeds a number more beside:
I waxt so testie none durst me displease
And eke so puffed with glory vain and pride.
My senseless sense as ship without a guide,
Was tossed with every fancye of my brain:
Like Phoebus chariote, under Phaetons rain.
I deemde them foes that me good counsel gave,
And those my chiefest friends could gloss and lie:
I hated them that were so sage and grave,
And those I loud were lustye, lewd and slye:
I did the wisest wits as fools defye:
Such sots, knaves, ruffians, roisters I embrast:
As were unwise, dishonest, rude, unchaste.
I lusted eke as loathsome lechers use,
My subjects wives and daughters at my will
I did so often as me pleased abuse,
Perforce I kept them at my pleasure still.
Thus gat I queanes, and concubines at fill:
And for their sakes I put a way my wife:
Such was my lewdnes, lust, and lawless life.
But shame for bids me for to tell the rest,
It me abhorres to show what did ensue:
And yet because it moves in my breast,
Compunction still and was God wot to true:
I will declare whence my destruction grue:
To Sodomes sin alas I fell and than,
I was despised, both of God and man,
Could I long prosper thus, do you suppose?
Might ought of evil exceed these vices told:
Think you there is any wight on ground that goes.
Might escape revenge, of vice so manifold:
No sure, who is in sianefulnes so bold,
His vices fare like weeds, they sproute so fast:
They kill the corpse, as weeds the corn at last.
My great outrage, my heedelesse head, the life
I beastly led, could not continue so,
My brothers blood, my leaving of my wife:
And working of my friends and subjects woe,
Cride still to God for my foul ouerthrne:
Which hears yt wro^gd, he heedes their careful case,
And at the length does all their foes deface.
Yet I mistrusting no mishaps at hand,
(Though I were worthy twenty times to dye)
I lewdly liude, and did my wealth with stand:
I never thought my end was half so nigh.
For my disport I rode on hunting I,
In woods the fearful heart I chased fast:
Till quite I lost my company at last.
And or I wist, to cost I found my foes,
By chance I came, where as the wolves they bred.
Which in a moment did me round enclose:
And mounted at my horse his throat, and head.
Some on his hinder parts their paunches fed,
Yet fought I still to escape, if it might be:
Till they my fainted horse, pulde down with me.
Then was I hopeless to escape their jaws,
They fastened all their holders fast on me:
And on my royal robes they set their claws,
My Princely presence, nor my high degree,
Moude them no more obeysaunt for to be,
Nor of my corpse, to take no more remorce:
Then did the grievous groaning of my horse.
But rauenously they rent, my breast and throat,
Forsohe my steed, came all at once and tare
My tender corpse, from which they fleyde my coat.
And of my flesh they made at all no spare:
They never left me till my bones were bare.
Lo thus I sleme my brother, left my wife,
Liude vilely, and as vilely ended life.
Beware of bloudp broils, beware of wrong:
Embrace the counsel of the wise and sage.
Trust not to power, though it be nere so strong:
Beware of rashness rude and coisters rage.
Eschew vile Venus toys, she cuttes of age,
And learn this lesson of (and teach) thy friend:
By pocks, death sudden, (...), harlots enne.
Finis.
The Author.
ON this me thought he vanishte quite away,
And I was left with Morpheus all alone:
Whom I desyrde these gryzely ghostes to stay,
Till I had space to hear them one by one.
And even with that was Somnus servant gone,
Whereby I slept and took mine ease that night,
And in the morninge rose their tales to write,
Now (Reader) if you think I mistemy mark,
In any thing vvhilere but stories told:
You must consider that a simple clarke,
Has not such skill thesfect of things t'unfolde,
But may with ease of vviser be controlde:
Eke who so writes as much the like as this,
May hap be demde likewise as much to miss.
Wherefore if these may not content your mind,
As each man cannot favor all men's veins:
I pray you yet let me this friendship find,
Give your good will, I crave noughtels for pains.
Which if you grutch me, as to great a gains:
Then is my love to you, and labor lost,
And you may learn take heed, with greater cost.
But now me thinckes I hear the carpers tell,
Says one, the writer vvanted words to fill:
The next reproved the verse not couched well:
The third declares, where lackte a point of skill:
Some others say they like the myter ill.
But what of this? shall these dismay me quite?
No sure, I will not cease for such to write.
For with more ease, in other works they find
A fault, then take upon themselves to pen
So much, and eke content each readers mind:
How should my verse crave all their likings then:
Since sundry are the sects of diverse men,
I must endeavor only those to please:
Which like that comes, so it be for their ease.
The rest I recke as they blame worthy be,
For if the words I wrote for good intent:
Take other sense then they receiude of me,
Be turnde to worse, torn, reached, rackt or rent
Or hackt and hewde, not constred as I meant:
The blame is theirs, which with my works so mell:
Less faulty he that wished his country well.
If some be pleased and easde, I lease no toil,
At carpers gyrdle hanges not all the keys:
What price gains he, that gives him fall or foil,
Which never wan by vvrastling any praise,
I have not spent in poetrye my days,
Some other works in proase I printed have:
And more I write for which I ley sure save.
And for mineage not thirty years has past,
No style so ripe can younger years ataine.
For of them all, but only ten the last,
To learn the tongues, and write I took the pain,
If I thereby received any gain,
By French or Latin chiefly which I chose,
These five years past by writing I disclose.
Of which, the first two years I Grammar taught:
The other twain, I Huloets work enlargde:
The last translated Aldus phrases fraught
With eloquence, and took of Terence charge
At Printers hand, to add the flowers at large
Which wanted there, in Vdalles work before:
And vvrote this book with other diverse more.
Then pardon what is amiss, a while give ear,
So shall you hear the rest that I recite,
Describing next what Princes did apeare:
When I had ended these are past to write,
In slomber as I chaunst to lie one night,
Was Somnus pressed, whom I desyrde to send
His Morpheus ay de, these Tragedies to end.
Wherewith he granted my request and calde
For Morpheus straight: which knew whereto he came.
"I will (quoth he) the rest, whom Fortune thralde.
"Of Britaynes show: thy self to hear them frame,
And therewithal he fet forth one like Fame,
In feathers all with wings so finely dight:
As twere a bird, in humane shape of flight.
Yet it was not Fame that femme of painted plume,
He rather seemed Icarus deceaude,
(...) wings to fly nighe Phoebus did presume.
At length in deed I plainly well perceaude,
It was some king of vital breath bereaude,
From flight he fell presuming far to hye:
Give ear, take heed and learn not so to fly.
Bladud recyteth how he Practisinge by curious arts to fly, fell and brake
his neck. The year before Christ. 844:
SHall I rehearse, like wise my name:
And eke a place amongste them fill,
Which at their ends to mischief came:
Since Morpheus bids me so I will.
And that because I see the mind,
To write my storye fate and fall,
Such curious heads it read and find:
May fly, to flee, and shun my thrall.
If danger teach them live take heed:
If leesers harm, make lookers wise:
If warines, do safetye breed,
Or wrack make sailers shelues despise.
Then may my hurt, give sample sure:
My loss of life may lokers learn:
My warning may beware procure,
To such as danger scarce discern.
I am that Bladud Britain king,
Rudhudebras his eldest son,
Did learning first to England bring:
And other wonders more were done.
Now give me ear, and after write:
Mark well my life example take:
Cschue the evil that I recyre,
And of my death a myrrour make,
In youth I gave my mind to lore,
For I in learning took repaste:
No earthly pleasure likce me more,
I went to Athens at the last.
A town in Greece, whose fame, went forth
Through all the world her name was spread:
I counted knowledge so much worth,
Her only love to Greece me led.
There first of all the arts of seven,
Wherein before I had small skill:
I Grammar gate declares the stenen,
By rule to speak, and write at will.
Next after that in Rhetoric fine,
Which teaches how the talk to fyle:
I gate some knowledge in short time,
And could persuade within a while.
I thirdly learned Logic well,
An art that teaches to dispute:
To answer wisely or refell,
Distinguishe, prove, disprove, confute.
Then after that of number, I
The skillful art likwyse attainde:
Wherein of Mathematickes lie.
Full many points I after gainde.
And Music mild I lernde that teltes,
Tune, time, and measure of the song:
A science sweet the rest excelles,
For melody her notes among.
But sirtly I the dame of arts,
Geometry of great engine
Employde, with all her skillful parts:
Thereby some greater gifts to win.
So last I lernde Astronomy,
A lofty art that paste them all:
To know by motions of the sky,
And fired stars, what chance might fall.
This pleasant art alured me,
To many fond inventions then:
For judgments of Astrology,
Delites the minds of wisest men.
So does the art Phisiognomie,
Dependes on judgment of the face:
And that of Metoposcopie,
Which of the forehead tells the grace.
And Chiromancie by the hand,
Conjectures of the inward mind:
Eke Geomancie by the land,
Does diverse many farlies find.
Augurium eke was used of old
By hyrdes of future things presagde:
And many things thereby they told,
Were skillful, learned, wise and agds.
But Magic for it, seemid fweete,
And full of wonders made me muse:
For many feats I thought it meet,
And pleasant for a prince to use,
Three kinds there are, for natures skill,
The first they Natural do name:
In which by herbs and stones they will,
Work wonders things, are worthy fame.
The next is Mathematical,
Where Magic works by nature so:
That brazen heads make speak it shall,
Of wood birds, bodies fly, and go.
The third Veneficall by right,
Is named for by it they make:
The shapes of bodies cbaunge in sight,
And other forms on them to take.
What need I tell what Theurgie is,
Or Necromancie you despise:
A diuelishe art, the feenes by this,
Seem calde, and coniurde to arise.
Of these too much I learned then,
By those such secret arts profeste:
For of the wise and skillful men,
Whom Fame had praisde I gate the best.
They promiste for to teach me so,
The secrets of dame natures skill:
That I need never taste of woe,
But always might forsee it still.
Wherefore enflamed with their love,
I brought away the best I could:
From Greece to Britayne land to prove,
What feats for me devise they would.
Of which were four Philosophers,
For passing skill excelde the rest:
Physicians and Astronomers,
In Athens all they were the best.
My father hard of my return,
Of my success in learning there:
And how the Greecians did adourne,
My wits with arts that worthy were.
He herd likewise what store I brought,
Of learned Greeks from Aticke soil:
And of my labor learning sought,
With study, travail, pain and toil.
I likewise herd he builded here,
Three towns while absente thence was I:
By Southe he foundid Winchester,
By Cast he built Cantorbury.
By Weste full bigve he builte the last,
On hill from waters deep below:
Calde Shaftesbury on rocks full fast,
It stands and gives to Seas a show.
These causde we both might well rejoice
He for because I gate such same:
And I, for that by all men's boyce,
His factes deserude immortal name.
What needs much talk the peers, and all
The commons eke with one assence:
Extolde my name especial,
Which had my youth in learning spent.
I was receaude with triumphs great,
With pageauntes in each town I paste:
And at the court my princly seat.
Was by my fathers joined fast.
The nobles then desirde to have,
On me their children wait and tend:
And royal gifts with them me gave,
As might their powers thereto extend.
But here began my cause of care,
As all delights at length have end:
Bemixte with woes our pleasures are,
Amidste my joys, I lost a friend.
My father, nine and twenty years,
This time had raignde and held the crown:
As by your cronicles appears,
When fates, on us began to frown.
For even amidste his most of joy,
As youth, and strength and honors fade:
Sore sickness did him long anoye,
At last, of life an end it made.
Then was I chose king of this land,
And had the crown as had the rest:
I bare the scepter in my hand,
And sword that all our foes oppreste.
Eke for because the Greeks did bse,
Me well in Greece at Athens late:
I bad those four I brought to choose,
A place that I might dedicate.
To all the Muses and their arts,
To learnings use for evermore:
Which when they sought in diverse parts,
At last they found a place therefore.
Amidst the realm it lies melnfghe,
As they by art and skill did prove:
An healthful place not low nor bigve,
An wholesome soil for their behoue.
With water streams, and springes for melles:
And meadows sweet, and baleyes grene:
And woods, groaues, quaries, all things else
For students weal, or pleasure been.
When they reported this to me,
They prayde my grace that I would bussde,
Them there an bntuer sitle,
The fruits of learning for to yelne.
I buylte the schools, like Atikes then,
And gave them lands to maintain those:
Which were accounted learned men,
And could the grounds of arts disclose.
The town is called Stamforde yet,
There stand the walls until this day:
Foundations eke of schools I set,
Bide yet not maintainde in decay.
Whereby the land receauid store,
Of learned clerks long after that:
But now give ear I tell the more,
And then my fall, and great mishap.
Because that time Apollo was,
Surmisde the God that gave us wit:
I builte his temple brave did pass,
At Troynouant the place is yet.
Some say I made the batthes at Bathe:
And made therefore two tons of brass:
And other twain seven saltes that have
In them, but these be made of glass
With sulpher fylde, and other things,
Wyide fire, saltgem, salt peter eke:
Salt armoniake, salt (...),
Salt comune, and salt Arabecke.
Salt niter mirid with the rest,
In these four tons by portions right:
Four wells to lay them in were dreste,
Wherein they boil, both day and night.
The water springes them round about,
Does rise for ay and boyleth still:
The tons within and eke without,
Do all the wells with vapoures fill.
So that the heat and clensing power,
Of Sulpher and of salts and fire:
Does make the bathes each pointed hour,
To help the sickly health desire.
These bathes to soften sinews have,
Great virtue and to scour the skin:
From morphew white, and black to save,
The bodies faint, are bathde therein.
For leprye, scabs, and sores are old,
For scurfes, and botche, and humors fall:
The bathes have virtues many fold,
If God give grace to cure them all.
The joints are swelde, and hardened milte:
And hardened liver palseis pain,
The pox and itche, if work thou will,
By help of God it heales again.
Shall I renege I made them then:
Shall I deny my cunning (...)
By help I had of learned men,
Those worthy wells in grateful (...)
I will do so: for God gave grate,
Whereby I knew what nature wrought:
And lent me lore to find the place,
By wisdom where those wells I sought.
Which once confessed to here my harm,
Eschew the like if thou be wise:
Let never will thy wits becharme,
Or make the change of kind devise.
For if the fish would learn to go,
And leave to swim against his bre:
When he were quite the waters froe,
He could not swim you may be sure.
Or if the beast would learn to fly,
That had no plumes by nature lent:
And get him wings as erst did I,
Would not think you it him (...)
Though Magic Mathematical,
Make wooden birds to fly and sore:
Eke brazen heads that speak they shall,
And promise many marueiles more,
Yet since it swarues from Natures will,
As much as these that I recite:
Refuse the fondnes of such skill,
Does ay with death the proof requite.
I deemde I could more sooner frame,
My self to fly then birds of wood:
And meant to get eternal fame,
Which I esteemde the greatest good.
I decked my self with plumes and wings,
As here thou see in skillful wise:
And many equal poysing things,
To aid my flight, to fall or rise.
Thou thinckste an art that seldom bsde,
In hand I took, and so it was:
But we no danger then refusde,
So we might bring our feats to pass.
By practice at the length I could,
Against store of wind with ease arise:
And then which way to light I should,
And mount, and turn I did devise.
Which learned but not perfectly,
Before I had there of the slight:
I new aloft but down fell I,
For want of skill again to light.
Upon the temple erst I built,
To God Apollo, down I fell:
In fiters broisde for such a guilt,
A just revenge requited well.
For what should I presume so high,
Against the course of nature quite:
To take me wings and say to flpe,
A fool no foul in feathers dight.
As learning founds and cunning finds,
To such have wit the same to use:
So she confounds, and marres the minds,
Of those her secrets seem to abuse.
Well then deserts requirde my fall,
Presumption proud, depriude my breath:
Renown bereft my life and all,
Desire of praise, procurde my death:
Do let alureing arts alone,
They pleasant seem yet are they vain:
Amongst an hundredth scarce is one,
Does ought thereby but labor gain.
Their cunning castes are crafty cares,
Devices vain deuisde by men:
Such witched wiles are Satan's snares,
To train in fools, despise them then.
Their wisdom is but wily wit,
Their sagenes is but subtilty:
Dark dreams deuisde for fools are fit,
And such as practice pampestry.
Thou see my fall and eke the cause,
Unwisely I good gifts abusde:
Lo here the hurt of learned sawes,
If they be mrested or misuide.
Then write my story with the rest,
May pleasure when it comes to vewe:
Take heed of counsels all is best,
Beware, take heeds farewell adieu.
Farewell, will students keep in mind,
(...):
Else May they chance like fate to find,
For why, (...).
(...).
The Author.
WHen Bladud thus had ended quite his tale,
And told his life as you have heard before:
He took his flight and then a Lady pale,
A pearde in sight, beraide with bloody gore:
In hand a knife of sanguine dye she bore:
And in her breast a wound was pierced wide,
So freshly bledde, as if but than she did,
She staide a while, her color came and went,
And doubtful was that would have told her pain:
In woeful sort she seemed to lament,
And could not well her tongue from talk refrain,
For why her griefs unfold she would right feign,
Yet bashful was:at length an end to make,
Her Morpheus wild, and then thus wife she spoke,
Cordila shows how by despair when she was in prison she slew herself. the
year before Christ. 800.
If any woeful might have cause, to maile her more;
Or griefs are past do prick us Princes tell our fall:
By self likewise must needs constrained eke do so,
And show my like misfortunes and mishaps withal.
Should I keep close my beauy haps and (...)
Then did I wrong: I wrongde my self and thee,
Which of my facts, a witness true may be.
A woman yet must blushe when bashful is the case,
Though truth bid tell the tale and story as it fell:
But since that I mislike not audience time nor place
Therefore, I cannot still keep in my counsel well:
No greater case of heart then griefs to tell,
It daunteth all the dolours of our mind,
Our careful hearts thereby great comfort find.
For why to tell that may recounted be again,
And tell it as our cares may compass case:
That is the salve and medcine of our pain,
Which cures corsyes all and sores of our disease:
It does our pinching panges, and pains a pease:
It pleades the part of an assured friend,
And tells the trade, like vices to amend.
Therefore if I more willing be to tell my fall,
And show mishaps to ease my burdened breast and minder
That others happily may avoid and shun like thrall,
And thereby in distress more aid and comfort find.
They may keep measure where as I declinde,
And willing be to fly like brute and blame:
As I to tell, or thou to write the same.
For since I see the pressed to hear that wilt record,
What I Cordila tell to ease my inward sinart:
I will resite my storye tragical each word,
To the that giust an ear to hear and ready art,
And lest I set the horse behind the cart,
I mind to tell each thing in order so,
As thou maiste see and show whence sprang my woe.
My grandsyre Bladud hight that found the Bathes by skill,
A fethered king that practisde for to fly and soar:
Whereby he felt the fall God wot against his will,
And never went, roode, raignde nor spoke, nor flew no more,
Who dead his son my father Leire therefore,
Was chosen king, by right apparent heir,
Which after built the town of Leircestere.
We had three daughters, first and eldest hight Gonerell:
Next after bir, my sister Ragan was begote:
The third and last was, I the youngest namde Cordell,
And of us all, our father Leire in age did dote.
So minding her that loud him best to note,
Because he had no son t'enioye his land:
He thought to give, where favor most he fande.
What though I yougest were, yet men me iudgde more wise
Then either Gonorell, or Ragan had more age,
And fayrer far: wherefore my sisters did despise
My grace, and gifts, and sought my praise t'swage:
But yet though vice against virtue die with rage,
It cannot keep her underneath to drown,
But still she flittes above, and reapes renown.
Yet nathelesse, my father did me not mistike:
But age so simple is, and easy to subdue:
As childhode weak, that's void of wit and reason quite:
They think there is naught, you flater fainde, but all is true:
Once old and twice a child, it is said with you,
Which I affirm by proof, that was definde:
In age my father had a childishe mind.
He thought to wed us unto nobles three, or Peers:
And unto them and theirs, divide and part the land:
For both my sisters first he sent as first their years
Requirde their minds, and love, and favor t'understand.
(Quoth he) all doubts of duty to abande,
I must assaye and eke your frendships prove:
Now tell me each how much you do me love.
Which when they answered, they loud him well and more
Then they themselves did love, or any worldly wight:
He praised them and said he would again therefore,
The loving kindness they deserude in fine requite:
So found my sisters favor in his sight,
By flatery fair they won their fathers heart:
Which after turned, him and me to smart.
But not content with this he minded me to prove,
For why he wonted was to love me wonders well:
How much do thou (quod he) Cordile thy father love:
I will (said I) at once my love declare and tell:
I loud you ever as my father well,
No otherwise, if more to know you crave:
We love you chiefly for the goods you have.
Thus much I said, the more their flattery to detect,
But he me answered thereunto again with Ire,
Because thou do thy fathers aged years neglect,
That loud ye more of late then thy deserts require,
Thou never shall, to any part aspire
Of this my realm, among thy sisters twain,
But ever shall bndotid ay remain.
Then to the king of Albany for wife he gave
My sister Gonerell, the eldest of us all:
And eke my sister Ragan for Hinnine to have,
Which then was Prince of Camber and Cornwall:
These after him should have his kingdom all
Between them both, he gave it frank and free:
But naught at all, he gave of domry me.
At last it (...) yt king of France to here my fame,
My beutie brave, was blazed all abroad each where:
And eke my virtues praisoe me to my fathers blame
Did for my sisters flattery me (...) favor bear.
Which when this worthy king my wro^gs did hear,
He sent embassage likte me more then life,
T'intreate he might me have to be his wife.
My father was content withal his heart, and said,
He gladly should obtain his whole request at will
Concerning me, if nothing I herin denayde:
But yet he kept by their (...) hatred still,
(quod he) your prince his pleasure to fulfill,
I grant and give my daughter as you crave:
But naught of me for dowry can she have.
King Aganippus well agreed to take me so,
He deemde that virtue was of dowries all the best:
And I contentid was to France my father (...)
For to depart, and (...) t'enioye some greater rest.
I married was, and then my joys encreaste,
I gate more favor in this prince his fight,
Then ever princess of a princely wight.
But while yt I these toys euioyd, at home in France
My father Leire in Britayne wared aged old,
My sisters yet them selves the more aloft t'aduau^ce,
Thought well they might, be by his leave, or sans so bold:
To take the realm and rule it as they would.
They rose as rebels void of reason quite,
And they depriude him of his crown and right.
Then they agreed, it should be into parts (...)
Divided: and my father threscore knights and squires
Should always have, attending on him still at call.
But in sit months so much increased hateful Ires,
That Gonerell denyde all his desires,
So half his guard she and her husband refte:
And scarce alowde the other half they left.
Eke as in Scotland thus he lay lamenting fates,
When as his daughter so, sought all his utter spoil:
The meaner vpstarte gentiles, thought the^ selves his (...)
And betters eke, see here an aged prince his foil.
Then was he saine for succoure his, to toil.
With all his knights, to Cornwall there to lie:
In greatest need, his Raganes love to try.
And when he came to Cornwall, Ragan them with foye,
Received him and eke bit husband did the like:
There he abode a year and liude without a noy,
But then they took, all his retinue from him quite
Save only ten, and shewde (...) daily spite,
Which he bewailde (...) durst not strive,
Though in disoayne they last alowde but five.
On this he deemde him, self was far that tyine unwise,
When from his daughter Gonerell to Ragan he:
Departed erste yet each did him poor king despise,
Wherefore to Scotland once again with bit to be
And bide be went: but beastly cruel she,
Bereaude him of his servants all save one,
Bad him content him self with that or none.
Eke at what time he askte of each to have his guard,
To garoe his grace where so he walkte or went:
They calde him doting fool and all his hestes debarde,
Demanded if with life he could not be content,
(...) he to late his rigor did repent,
Against me and said, Cordila now (...):
I find the (...) thou (...) me to to true.
And to be short, to France he came alone to me,
And told me how my sisters him our father used:
Then I besought my king with tears upon my knee,
That he would aid my father thus by them misusde
Who naught at all my humble best refusde:
But sent to every cost of France for aid,
Wherewith my father home might be conueide.
The soldiers gathered from each quarter of ye land,
Came at ye length to know the king his mind and will:
Who did commit them to my fathers aged hand,
And I likewise of love and reverent mere goodwill
Desirde my king, he would not take it ill,
If I departed for a space withal:
To take a part, or ease my fathers thrall.
This had: I partid with my father from my fere,
We came to Britayne with our royal ca^pe to fight:
And manly fought so long our enmies ba^quisht were
By martial feats, and force by subjects sword and might.
The Britishe kings were feign to yield our right,
And so my father well this realm did guide,
Three years in peace and after that he did.
Then I at Leircester in Ianus temple made,
His tomb and buried there his kingly regal corse,
As sundry times in life before he often bade:
For of our fathers will we then did greatly force,
We had of conscience eke so much remorce,
That we supposde those childrens lives to ill:
Which brake their fathers testament, and will.
And I was queen the kingdom after still to hold,
Till five years paste I did this Island guide:
I had the Britaynes at what beck and bay I would,
Till that my loving king mine Aganippus did.
But then my seat it faltered on each side,
Two churlishe Impes began with me to Far,
And for my crown wadgde with me mortal war.
The one hight Morgan the elder son of Gonerell
My sister, and that other Conidagus hight
My sister Ragans son, that loud me never well:
Both nephews mine, yet would against me Cordel fight,
Because I loud always that seemed right:
Therefore they hated me, and did pursue,
Their aunte and queen as she had been a Jew.
This Morgane was that time ye prince of Albany,
And Comdagus king of Cornewale and of Wales:
Both which, at once prousded their artillery,
To work me woeful woe, and mine adherentes bales:
What need I fill thine ears with longer tales':
They did prevail by might and power so fast
That I was taken prisoner at last.
In spiteful sort, they used then my captive corse,
No favor shewde to me, ertincte was mine estate.
Of kindred, princess blood, or pere was no remorce,
But as an abiecte vile and worse they did me hate,
To lie in darksome dongeon was my fate:
As twere a thief mine aunswers to abide,
Against right and justice, under Iaylours guide.
For liberty at length I suid, to subjects were:
But they kept me in prison close deuoyde of trust,
If I might once escape, they were in dread and fear,
Their fawning friends with me would prove untrue and (...).
They told me take it patiently I must,
And be contented that I had my life:
Sith with their mothers I began the strife.
Whereby I saw might nothing me prevail to pray,
Or plead, or prove, defend, excuse or pardon crave.
They herd me not, despisde my plaintes, sought my decay,
I might no law, nor love, nor right, nor justice have:
No friends, no faith, nor pity could me save:
But I was from all hope of license barde,
Condemde my cause like never to be herd.
Was ever lady in such woeful wreckfull woe:
Depriude of princely power, berefte of liberty,
Depriud in all these worldly pompes, hit pleasures fro,
And brought from welthe, to need distress, and misery:
From palace proud, in prison poor to lie:
From kingdoms twain, to dungion one no more:
From Ladies waiting, unto vermin store.
From light to dark, from holsom air to lothsam smell:
From odewr sweet, to sweat: from ease, to grievous pain:
From sight of princely wights, to place where thieves do dwell:
From deinty beds of down, to be of straw full feign:
From dowes of beauenly hew, to dens of dayne:
From greatest haps, that worldly wightes atchieue:
To more distress then any wretch alive.
When first I left the crown of France, tid me eralte,
And eke my noble king, mine Aganippus true:
And came to England for their beynous factes, and fault:
Which from his right and kingdom quite our-father threw,
To take this realm, to reign and treason knew:
I think of all misfortunes was the worste,
Or else I deem, was some of us accurste.
For mark my hapless fall that draws at length to end,
As in this prison vile, on live I lingering lay:
When I had mourned long, but found no faithful friend
That could me help, or aid, or comfort any way,
Was serude at meat, as those their kings betraye,
With fare God wot was simple, bare and thin,
Could not sustain the corys it entered in.
And when the sighs, and tears, and plaintes nigh burst my heart,
And place, and stenche and fare night poysond every pore:
For lack of friends to tell my seas of giltlesse smarte,
And that mine eyes had sworn to take sweet stepe no more,
I was content siche cares oppreste me sore,
To leave my food, take mourning plaintes and cry,
And lay me down, let grief and nature try.
Thus as I pyning lay my carkas on couch of straw,
And felt that pain erste never creature earthly knew:
Me thought by night a gryzely ghost in darkes I same,
Eke nerer still to me with stealing steps she drew.
She was of color pale, a deadly hew:
Her clothes resembled thousand kinds of thrall,
And pictures plain, of hastened deaths withal.
I musing lay in pains and wondered what she was,
Mine eyne stood still, mine hair rose up for fear an end.
My flesh it shoke and trembled: yet I cryde alas,
What wight art thou, a foe or else what fawning (...)
If death thou art, I pray thee make an end:
But th'arte not death: art thou some fury (...)
My woeful corpse with pains to more (...)
With that she spoke I am (quod she) thy friend Despair
Which in distress eacue worldly wight with speed do aid:
I rid them from their foes, if I to them repair,
To long from thee by other caytiues was I stayde.
Now if thou art to die no whit affrayde,
Here shall thou choose of instruments, (...)
Shall rid thy restless life, of this be bold.
And therewith all she spread her garments lap aside,
Under the which a thousand things I saw with eyes:
Both knyues, sharp swords, poynadees all bedyde
With blood, and paysons pressed which she could well devise.
There is no hope (quod she) for thee to rise,
And get thy crown or liberty again:
But for to live, long lasting pining pain.
Lo here (quod she) the blade that Did' of Carthage highte,
Whereby she was from thousand panges of pain let passes:
With this she (...) hit self, after Aeneas flighte:
When he to sea from Tyrian shores departed was.
Do chouse of these thou see from woes to pass,
Or bid the end prolonge thy paynefull days,
And I am pleased from thee to get my ways.
With that was I ((...) wretch) content to take the knife,
But doubtful yet to dye, and fearful feign would bide:
So still I lay in study with my self at bate and strife.
What thing were best of both these deep extremes untried.
My hope all reasons of despair denide,
And the again replide to prove it best
To dye, for still in life my woes increast.
She calde to mind, the joys in France I whilom had:
She told me what a troop of Ladies was my train,
And how yt Lords of France and Britaynes both were glad,
Of late to wait on me and subjects all were feign.
She could I had bin Queen of kingdoms twain,
And how my nephews had my seat and crowue:
I could not rise, for ever fallen down.
A thousand things, beside resited then despair:
She could the woes in wars, that I had heapt of late:
Rehearst the prison bile, in steed of Pallas fair:
My lodging low and moldy meats my mouth did hate,
She shewde me all the dongeon where I sat,
The dankeishe (...), the (...) and had me smell:
And bide the sauourif I like it well.
Whereby I wretch (...) of comfort quite and hope,
And pleasures past comparde with present pains I had:
For fatal ^ my fearful hand did grope,
Despair in this to aid my (...) limbs was glad,
And gave the blade to end my woes she had.
I will (quoth I) but first with all my heart:
I Will pray the Gods, revenge my woeful smart.
If any wrong deserve the wrecke I pray you skies,
And stars of light, if you my woeful plight do rue:
O Phoebus clear I thee beseech and pray like wise,
Bear witness of my plaints well known to Gods are true.
You see from whence these injuries they grue,
Then let like vengeance hap and light on those:
Which undeserved were my deadly foes.
God grant a mortal strife between them both may fall,
That one the other may without remorse distroye:
That Conidagus may, his cousin Morgan thrall,
Because he first decreast my wealth, bereft my joy.
I pray you Gods he never be a Roy.
But caitife may be paid with such a friend:
As shortly may him bring, to sudden end.
Farewell my Realm of France, farewell Adieu:
Adieu mes nobles tous, and England now farewell:
Farewell Madames my Ladies, car ie suis pardu:
Il me fault aler, desespoir m'a done confeil
Demetuer, no more your Queen farewell.
My nephews me oppress with maine and might,
A captive poor, against justice all and right.
And therewithal the sight did fail my dazeling eyne,
I nothing same save sole Dispayrebad me dispatch,
Whom I (...), she caught the knife from me I ween,
And by her elbowe carian death for me did watch,
Come on (quoth I) thou have a goodly catch,
And therewithal Despair the stroke did strike:
Whereby I did, a damned creature like.
Which I alas lament, bid those alive beware,
Let not the loss of goods or honor them constrasne:
To play the fools, and take such careful carke and care,
Or to despair for any prison pine or pain.
If they be giltlesse let them so remain,
Far greater follye is it for to kill,
Themselves dispayring, then is any ill.
Since first thereby their enmyes have, that they desire:
By which they prone to deadly foes unawares a (...):
And next they cannot live, to former bliss t'aspyre
If God do bring their foes in time to sudden end:
They lastly as the damned wretches send,
Their souls to hell, when as they undertake
To kill a corpse: which God did lively make.
Finis,
The Author.
NOw, when this desperate Queen had ended thus
Her tale, and told what hapless grace she had:
As of her talk some points I did discuss,
In slomber fallen I waxed wondrous sad
Her nephews dealings were me thought to bad:
Which greude me much, but Morpheus bad let be,
And therewithal presented one to me.
Of stature tall a worthy princely wight,
In countenance he soemde yet mourning still:
His complet harness not so brauein sight,
Nor sure as ours, made now adays by skill:
But clampt together, joints but joined ill:
Unfit, unhandsome, heavy, houge and plain.
Unwieldy wearing, rattling like a chain.
VVherethroughe he had receiude a deadly stroke,
By sword, or other instrument of war,
And down his thighs the blood by sithes did soake
Which I perceived as he came a far.
"Now since (quoth he) to hear you present are:
"I will declare my name, life, factes and fall.
And therewith thus he began to tell it all,
Morgan tells how he wadgeing war with his cousin Conidagus was slain at the
place yet called Glamorgan, the year before Christ. 766.
I Wot not well what reasons I may use,
To quite my self from blame, blame worthy I:
Wherefore I must perforce my self accuse,
I am in fault I can it not deny.
Remorse of conscieuce, pricks my heart so nigh,
And me torments with panges of pinching pain:
I can no longer, me from speech refrain.
I am that Morgan son of Gonerell,
The Ungrateful daughter, of her father Leire:
Which from his kingdom did him once expel,
As by the Brytishe stories may appear.
Regan, and she conspirde both sisters were,
But were subdude again, and causde to yield
Their fathers crown, Cordila wan the field.
I need not here the stories all recyte,
It were to long but yet I briefly shall,
The cause Cordila ought her sisters spite,
Was they procurde her, and their fathers thrall:
Yet it was her chance at length t'out live them al,
Both sisters elder, and her father grave:
And eke at length the kingdom all to have.
That time was I of Albany the king,
Calde Scotland now and eke my cousin then
Of Cornwall and of Wales, whom I did bring
To war against Cordila and her men.
We said we would our title win again:
And that because our mothers had it yore,
We meant to get it ours again therefore.
I must confess I was the cause of war,
I was not pleased with that was looted me:
Even so our minds Ambitious often ar,
And blinded that we cannot reason see.
We think no men, but Gods on earth we be,
Yet worse are we the^ beasts, which know their kind:
For we have naught but mischief often in mind.
We think if so we may our wills attain:
By right, or wrong, by might or malice we
Could never live, like Fortune for to gain.
Or if on soes, we once revenged be:
If that our ennemies fall, we chance to see,
O then we joy we lift our selves to sky,
And on the poor, we crucifige cry.
I deemde if once, I might put her adowne:
The kingdoms all, were Conidags and mine,
And I could easly after win the crown:
If also I, his state might undermine.
I thought in deed to have it all in fine,
By force, or fraud I meant my purpose bring
To pass, I might be after Britain king.
To speak in few, we waged war so long,
Bainst her, at last we put her unto flight,
We nephews for our aunt were far to strong,
Pursude and coke, depriude her of her right.
We thought it ours what so we wanne by might,
Cke so play (...), traitors all do watch,
To get by spoil, and count their own they catch,
Not so contented were we with the pray,
But fearing lest she should recover aid:
I sent in have to prison her away,
And all recourse of messengers densyde.
Thus when she saw her Majesty decaide,
And that her griefs and sorrows daily grue:
In prison at the length her self she slew.
O caytife vile should I constrainde a Queen
That Justice meant, her kingdom to forsake,
Nay traitor I, as now by proof is seen
That would my self by bloodshed ruler make.
How could revenge on me but vengeance take,
Before the seat of God, her blood did call:
For vengeance, and at length procurde my fall.
Lo here Gods justice, see my treason see:
Behold, and see to reign was my delight,
And mark, and make a myrour here of me,
Which afterward was serude by justice right.
We wan the crown, between us both in fight:
And then because I was the elder son,
Of the elder Queen I claimed all we won.
So were my dealings naught, in peace and war.
But for my force, and fortunes used in fight:
I past that time the Britaynes all by far.
I was of person fortitude and might,
Both comely, tall, strong, seemly eke in sight,
Whereby I won men's favor, glory, wealth:
And puffed with pride, at length forgate my self.
I said it was my right, the crown to have,
But Conidagus stoutly it denide:
Wherefore I went to Wales my right to crave,
With all mine army and to have it tryde.
Where long we fought it stoutly on each side,
Till at the last unto my woeful pain:
I was depriude of kingdom quite, and slain.
And for to keep in memory for aye,
That there unfaithful Morgan lost his life,
The place is called Glamorgan to this day.
There was I perst to death with fatal knife,
There was the end of all my hateful strife:
So Morgan where he thought to win the crown,
Was at Glamorgan traitor stricken down.
Thus may thou tell, how proud ambition proves,
What hap have tyraunts, what we traitors have:
What end he has, that cruel dealing loves:
What subjects get the Diadem docraue,
It Is better then to win: thine own to save,
For so orethwartly trade of Fortune goes:
When win thou would, then art thou sure to lose.
Finis.
The Authoure.
With that Morganus quickly past away,
The night me thought likewise was far epast
VVherby it weried me so long to stay,
But Morpheus bad me by de and see the last,
"(quod he) the stories pass away as fast,
"As does the time, and sith thou art nigh the end:
"Thou nedste not grutche, so short a space to spend.
And turning then, him self from me aside:
He calde the next which therwithall in sight,
Appearde and all his breast with blood bedide,
What chance (quod I) has so thy corpse bedight,
Thou worthy prince, or what mishaps of fight?
"I will (quod he) with all my heart unfold
"My fatal fall, and therwithall he told.
Forrex declares how he mynding to kill his brother which ruled with him
(that he might thereby reign alone) was by him slain. About the year before
Christ. 491.
PRide moves the minds, of stately wightes
Such hauty hearts to have,
And causes us for glory hayne,
That is not ours to crave.
Pride pluckes out reason forth her place,
And planteth will instead:
She puffes our minds with vain desires,
Our fancies foude to feed.
Whereby we grow so obstinate,
And so ambitious ill:
That us at length our bravery bids,
In all things use our will.
Ambition thinks that lawefull is,
Which likes her fancy best:
And demes she ought to have her forth,
And swinge before the rest.
She loves no mates, controlement she
And warning does despise:
She demes her self in all her deeds,
And actions wonders wise.
She has desire of this and that,
To get by crouche or clawe:
By right or wrong she (...) not,
She uses will for law.
No kind, or country she regardes,
No mother, father she:
Nor wife, or husband, kithe or kin:
But enuies each degree.
For if thy heart Ambition have,
Thy greedy mind to fill:
Thou will not stick thy dearest friend,
or nerest kin to kill.
But as the proverb says that Pride,
Must needs at length have fall:
Though we suppose of strength and power,
We have the devil and all.
Even so I say Ambition makes,
Us often clyme so hie:
At leng th we fall, we come to naught,
And drownde in darkness lie.
This may I Forrex well (...),
By proof to true I find:
Wherefore I pray the with the rest,
Do put my faults in mind.
My father old hight Gorboduge,
Raignde three score years and three:
And at his death gave all his land,
Twene Porrex proud and me.
Five years we held, it so in peace,
In rest me ruled well:
But at the last by pride and wrath,
We foul at discord fell.
We each encrotchte on others parts,
For rule we liude at strife:
And each did seek occasion aye,
To reaue the others life.
I made this count I elder was,
By birthe the realm was mine:
By war, or wrong, or blood I mente,
To have it all in fine.
And he although he younger were,
Esteemde his state so sure
As mine: and thought it his, if he
My death might once procure,
My mother eke, that loud me more,
Although he younger was:
By diverse means did help me still,
To bring my feats to pass.
Whereby I thought my self so sure,
To have my purpose sped:
As I requirde if once I might,
Get of his crafty head.
See here what faith what friendship is,
What love what favor we:
Do show to any wight alive,
If once alofte me be
To fathers, we are faithless often:
To brothers, butchers vile:
Of sisters small accounte we make,
And wedded wives exile.
If any kithe, or (...), we have,
By whom we vantage may:
We care not by what cruel means,
Their lives we take away.
But for to get the seat alone,
And for to win the crown:
We care not whom, nor when, nor home:
So we may get them down.
O brutishe beasts! nay worse then those,
For they are still concente:
With that they have what ever them,
Has God or Nature sent.
But we do gape, and gaze for glore:
We prowle, and powle, and pill,
And swear, and stare, and strive, and fight,
And one another kill.
And all for pomp, and glory great,
For name, renown, estate:
Not caring of the commons cry,
Or Gods eternal hate.
If I had had, the gifts of grace,
I never would have sought:
By any means such worldly trashe.
With brothers blood to boughte.
But as I meant even so I sped,
So bloody butchers thye:
When most I deemde my purpose sure.
He was to good for me.
For as I thought his blood to shed,
I compaste was about,
So that for thousand kingdoms, I
Could not with life escape out.
He perste my heart, what skilles it sith,
My mind was even as bad:
For why what measure I him mente,
My self like measure had.
And so all such, as murder mean,
Intend, or treason use:
Shall at the length, like end attain,
Or worse they cannot choose.
FINIS.
The Author.
WHen as king Forrex thus had told his tale,
Me thought he stay de no whit but went his way.
Then came a mangled corpse as full of bale,
And or he nerer came made half a stay.
"(quod Morpheus) come for shame thou nedste not stay,
"As bad as thou have told their tales before,
"And so must thou and diverse other more.
Porrex recites how for the slaughter of his brother, he was slain by his
own mother and her maidens, as he lay sleeping. About the year before
Christ. 491.
FRom darkesome deunes, where cruel Cayne, Genes. 4.

And others like do lie:
Whose bloody blades were bathde in blood,
Poor caytiue thence come I.
Where Typhon is his brother slew, Annius.

Osiris in despite:
And where their sister Isis is,
Did him again requite.
Where Dardanus to rule alone, Virgil.

His brother made away:
Etheoclus, Polinicus, In culi.

At once did others sley.
Where Helenus king Priams son: Seruius. 3. Aeneid. Ovid in Iben.

His brother Theon kilde.
Medea eke in bloody wise:
Her brothers blood that spilde.
Where Tydeus is in hunting shote Statius

His brother through the side
Polytes eke his brothers heart
With sword that opened wide.
And where as that Cambyses is, Herodotus.

His sister once that slew.
And Polipontes king that made, Gel. lib. 4.

His brother treason rewe. cap. 3.

And cruel where Odores is,
Which mercy did deny:
To Mithridate his brother dear,
That did for pardon cry.
Eke where Learchus is that did, Herodotus,

His brother sick destroy:
With poison deadly hoping so,
To make him self a Roy.
And where that wretch Mamertes lies, Ouidin Iben.

His brothers sons that spilte.
And Sisapho tormenting him,
For such an heinous (...).
Where Rhesus and Caduidus are, Plutarch. Laert. Volater.

with shaftes their brethren slew,
And Philadelphus Ptolomae,
his brothers death did brewe.
Where Philopater Ptolome, Volater.

his father made away:
And after that his brother with
his dearist friends did slay.
And where Ardieus tyrant vile, Plato 10. de rep.

his aged father stroyde.
And after that his elder bro.
there kingdoms to enioyde.
Where Mithridatus beastly king, Caelius.

of Pontus feels anoye:
Which mother his and brother eke,
six children did destroy.
Where is Antiochus the great, Volat.

His brother brought to grave:
That he might only reign alone,
and all the kingdom have.
Where Romulus that Remus stew, Liuius. Lucan. Ovid.

of Romans first had fall:
Though (...) brother first he were,
presumde to scale the wall.
And where Mempricius lewd does lie, Flores Hist.

a Britain Prince that slew,
His brother Manlius fearing lest,
he were to him untrue.
Where Iugurth eke that basterde is,
his brethren brought to grave: Salust.

That after them Numidia,
he might for kingdom have.
And where a Thousand are beside,
which were to long to tell:
Their parents dear and brethren slew,
and now in darkness dwell.
From thence I came a Britain yore,
namde Porrex once a king
Again: to show what vices me,
To sudden death did bring.
Now list a while and then do write,
what I thee tell: that others may,
Themselves in such attempts as these,
from bloody acts, as brethren stay.
My brother Forrex five years space,
and I this kingdom held:
Between (...) both the common weal,
we scace did wisely welde.
At length we fondly fell at (...),
so Princes bide no mate,
Nor make, nor partners, with to reign
but bear their equals hate.
The heir because I youngest was,
thought his by right the crown:
But I esteemde the half was mine,
and all if he were down.
Whereby O brothell, butcher eke,
not brother I did stay:
My brother for to have it all,
and get his right away.
Such are the acts of delesse youths,
Such are their studies still:
Which care not what offense they make,
So they their fancies still.
But as it is injustice, and
an heinous act to use:
Such murder, slaughter, paricide
and Justice all refuse.
So Jove the just at length requites,
our deeds: and makes us rewe,
We ever were, to God, or man
or natures (...) untrue.
For when I deemde the crown was mine:
which had my brother slain.
O grief to tell my mother, and
her maidens wrought my pain.
Both for my fault, and for she loud,
my brother Forrex still:
With all her maids she came by night,
my sleeping corpse to kill.
And I that slombring sleeping lay,
though many dreams fortolde,
My hapless fall: could never wake,
the meaning to unfold,
But last supposing with my self,
I cruel Tigres saw,
With ravening fearcenes, rent their (...)
against dame Natures law.
She came on me to fill my dream,
before my eyes could wake,
And with a dagger reft my life:
for Forrex slaughters sake,
Much like Agaue and her mates, Virgil in (...).

she and her maidens got:
Them tools therefore, and hewde my corse,
as small as flesh to pot.
Or Progne Queen her children slew, Ovid. 6. metamor.

and he wde their members small:
In wrathful ite made Tereus feed,
and fill himself withal.
Or like Medea monster Queen, Virgil. 8. Aegl.

her Iasons sons that kilde:
Because she was forsaken when,
his purpose was fulfilde.
Like these was she nay worse for why,
this ended Brutus line:
Brought me to end and her to shame,
Though first the fault were mine.
Bid those beware that ween to win,
by bloody acts the crown:
Lest from the height they feel the fall,
of topsy turuye down.
For if when they suppose themselves,
aloft to touch the sky,
There chance a storm there is no hold,
to stay themselves so hye.
But faster far, more swiftly they,
and with more swinge descend:
Then ever erst they could with all,
their force to clime contend:
Do bid them then in all their deeds,
mark well the fineall end.
Finis,
The Author.
NExt after Porrex came another such,
Had all his body quite in pieces rent:
A desperate man, his life bewayling much.
Which for he seemed sorely to lament,
I was the rather him to hear content:
That I might also note his story here,
From like attempts of vices you to fear.
Kimarus shows how for his evil life he was devoured by wild beasts, the
year before Christ 321.
NO place commends the man, unworthy praise:
No title of estate; does stay up vices fall:
No wicked wight, to woe can make delays:
No loftye looks preserues the proud at all:
No bragges or beast, no stature high and tall:
No lofty youth, no swearing, staringe (...):
No bravery, banding, cogging, cutting out.
Then what auayles, to have a princely place:
A name of honor, or an high degree:
To come by kindred, of a noble race:
Except we princely, worthy, noble be:
The fruit declares the goodness of the tree.
Do brag no more, of birth or lineage than:
Since virtue, grace, and manners make the man.
My self might brag and first of all begin,
Mulmutius made and constituted laws:
And Belinus and Brenne his sons did win,
Such praise their names to be immortal cause.
Gurgunstus Redbearde with his sober sawes,
The son of Beline and my grandsyre grande:
Was fortunate what ere he took in hand.
His son my grandsyre Guintheline did pass,
For virtues praise, and Martia was his wife,
A noble Queen that wise and learned was,
And gave her self to study all her life,
Devising laws, discust the ends of strife,
Among the Britaynes, to her endless Fame:
Her statutes had of Martian laws the name.
My father eke was sober, sage and wise,
Cicilius hight king Guintheline his son,
Of noble Princes then my stock did rise:
And of a Prince of Cornwall first begone,
But what thereby of glory have I won:
Can this suffice to aunsweare eke for me,
I came by parents of an high degree:
Or shall I say Kimarus I was king:
Then might I live as lewdely as I lust:
No sure I cannot so (...) the stinge,
Of shame that pricks such Princes are bniuft:
We rather should unto our virtues trust,
For virtue of the ancient blood and kin,
Does only praise the parties she is within.
And nobles only borne, of this be sure,
Without the virtues of their noble race:
Do quite and clean themselves thereby obscure,
And their renown and dignities deface:
They do their birth, and lineage all abace:
For why in deed they ever ought so well,
In virtues grave: as titles brave ercell.
But often (God wot) they fare as erst did I,
They think if once they come of Princelye stock:
Then are they placed safe, and sure so hye
Above the rest as founded on a rock.
Of wise men's warnings all they make a mock:
Their counsayles grave, as abject reeds despise:
And count the brave, men gracious, worthy wise.
This kingdom came to me by due descent,
For why my father was before me king:
But I to pleasure all and lust was bent,
I never reckt of Justice any thing:
What purpose I did mean to pass to bring,
That same t'accomplishe I withal my might
Endeuorde ever, were it wrong or right,
I deemde the greatest joys, in earthly hap:
I thought my pleasures ever would abide:
I seemde to sit, in Lady Fortunes lap:
I reckt not all the world, me thought beside:
I did by lust my self, and others guide:
Where by the fates to work my bane withal,
And cut me of, thus wise procurde my fall.
As I was always bent to bunting still,
(Yet hunting was no vice to those I had)
When I three years had ruled this realm at (...),
In chase a chance did make my heart full sad:
Wild cruel beasts as desperate and mad,
Turnde back on me, as I them brought to baye:
And in their rage, my sinful corpse did sley.
A just reward, for so (...) a life,
No worse a death then I deserved yore.
Such wreckes in the end to wretches all are rife:
Who may and will not call for grace before.
My wilful deeds were naught, what will thou more:
My wanton wildness, witless, heedelesse toys:
By brutishe beasts bereaud me of my joys.
FINIS.
The Author.
ON this Kimarus left me all alone,
And so did Morpheus, then I thought to rest:
But yet again he came presenting one,
For audience likewise making his request,
A worthy prince, he ware a warlike creste:
A blade in hand, he bloody rusty bore,
Was all his harness from his shoulders tore.
His arms, and hands were all embrued in blood,
So was his breast, but all the rest beside,
Seemde rayde with matter vile, or slimy mud,
With red and yelow as it were bedide:
You scarcely could the sight thereof abide:
Yet sith he seemde some worthy wight to be,
It brought by far less squemishnes to me.
Morindus a bastard, declares how he was (...) to the kingdom, wared cruel,
and at last was devoured by a monster, the year before Christ. 303.
LEt me likewise declare my factes and fall:
And eke recite what means this slimye glere:
You need not feign so quaynte a look at all,
Although I seem so fulsome every where.
This blade in bloody hand perdy I bear,
And all this gore bemingled with this glue:
In wytnes I my deadly enmy (...).
Then mark my tale beware of rashness bile,
I am Morindus once was Britayne king:
On whom did swetely lady Fortune smyle,
Till she me to her top of towers did bring.
My fame both far and nere she made to ringe,
And eke my praise exalted so to sky:
In all my time, (...) famous none then I.
Some say I was by birthe, a (...) bace:
Be gotten of the prince his concubine.
But what I was, declared well my grace:
My fortitude, and stature princely mine:
My father (...) that came of princely line,
King Danius gave not so bace degree,
Nor yet the noble Britaynes unto me.
For (...) of arms, and warlike points I pass:
In courage stout, there lyude not then my pere:
I made them all, that knew my name agaste,
And heard how great my enterprises were,
To shrink, and slynke, and shifte aside for fear:
All which at length, did me such glory bring,
My father dead, the Britaynes made me king.
But see how blind we are, when Fortune smples,
How senceles we, when dignities increase:
We ever use our selves discretely whiles
We little have, and love to live in peace.
Small fauters factes, with mercy we release:
We use no rigor, rancoure, rapine such:
As after, when we have our wills to much.
For while that I, a subject was no king,
While I had nothing, but my factes alone:
I studied still, in every kind of thing
To serve my prince and vnderfange his fone:
To use his subjects friendly, euerichone:
And for them all, adventures such to take,
As might them all my person favor make.
But when I once, attained had the (...),
I waxed cruel, tyranous and fell:
I had no longer mind of my (...):
I used my self to ill, the truth to tell:
O bace degree in happy case fult well!
Which art not puste with pride, vainglory hate:
But art beneath, content to bide thy fate.
For I aloft, when once my heat was in:
Not raignd by reason, ruled all by might:
Ne prudence rekte, right, strength, or mean a (...):
But with my friends, in anger all would fight:
I (...), kilde, stewe who ever were in sight:
Without respect, remorce, reproufe, regard,
And like a mad man, in my fury farde.
I deemde my might, and fortitude was such:
That I was able thereby conquire all.
High kingdoms seat, encreaste my po^pe so much:
My pride me thought, impossible to fall.
But God confoundes our proud devices all,
And bringes that thing wherein we most do trust:
To our destruction, by his judgment just.
For when three years I ruled had this (...),
Without all rule, as was my rulesse life:
The rumor ran abroad within a while,
And chiefly in the Norweste country ryfe:
A monster came from (...) seas, brought grief,
To all my subjects in those coasts did dwell,
Devouring man, and (...) a monster fell.
Which when I knew for trought I straight preparde
In warlike wise my self to try the case:
My haste thereto a courage bold declarde,
For I alone would enter in the place.
At whom with spear on horse I fetchte my race.
But on his scales it enter could no more:
Then might a bulrushe on a brazen door.
Again I prousde, yet naught at all preuailde,
To break my spear, and not to pearce his side:
With that the roaring monster me assailde,
So terrifide my horse, I could not ride.
Wherewith I lighted and with sword I tryde,
By strokes and tbrustes to find some open in:
But of my fight he never past a pin.
And when I weried was, and spent with fight:
That kept my self with heed his danger fro,
At last almost ashamde I wanted might,
And skill to work the beastly monster woe
I gate me nerer with my sword him to,
And thought his fla^ckes or vnderpartes to wound:
If there from scales, might any place be found.
But frustrate of my purpose, finding none,
And eke within his danger entered quite:
The grizely beast, straight seasoned me upon,
And let his talentes, on my corpse to light,
He gripte my shoulders, not resist I might:
And roaring with a greedy ravening look,
At once in jaws, my body whole he took.
The way was large, and down he drew me in:
A monstrous paunche for rowmthe and wo^drous (...)
But for I feite more softer there the skin,
At once I drew, a dagger by my side;
I knew my life, no longer could abide:
For rammishe stenche, blood, poison, slymy glere:
That in his body, so aboundaunt were.
Wherefore I laboring to procure his death,
While first my dagger digde about his heart:
His force to cast me, welnie drew my brethe,
But as he felt within, his wounds to smarte:
I ioyde to feel the mighty monster starte.
That roarde, and belcht, and groande, and plungde and cride.
And cost me by and down, from side to side.
Long so in panges he plundgde, and panting lay
And drew his wind, so fast with such a power:
That quite and clean he drew my breath away,
We both were dead well nighe within an hour.
Lo thus one beastly monster did devour,
An other monster moodelesse to his pain:
At once the realm was rid, of monsters twain.
Here may thou see of fortitude the hap,
Where prudence, Justice, Te^peraunce has no place:
How suddenly we taken are in trap,
When we despise good virtues to embrace.
Intemperaunce does all our deeds deface,
And lettes us heedlesse headlong run so fast,
We seek out own destruction at the last.
For he that has of fortitude and might,
And thereto has a kingdom ioynde withal:
Except he also guide him self aright,
His power and strength prevails him but small,
He cannot escape at length an hapless fall,
Or Gods revenge, example take by me:
And let my death sufficient warning he.
FINIS.
The Author.
I Could not thus depart to take my rest,
For Morpheus bad me bide and hear the Iaste.
"(quod he) behind as yet, is one the best:
"Do stay a while, give ear till he be paste.
And therewithal approtched one full fast,
The worthiest wight I ever erste did see:
These words he spoke, or like it seemed me,
Nennius a worthy Britayne, the very pattern of a valiant, noble, and faithful
subject encountering with Julius Caesar at his first coming into this
Islande, was by him death wounded, yet nathelesse he gate Caesar's swoorde: put
him to flighte: slew therewith Labienus a Tribune of the Romans, endured
fight till his country men wan the battle, died fiftene days after. And
now encourages all good subjects to defend their country from the power of
foraine and usurping enemies. About the year before Christ. 50.
I May by right some later writers blame,
Of stories old, as rude or negligente:
Or else I may them well unlearned name,
Or heedelesse, in those things about they went:
Some time on me, as well they might have spente:
As on such traitors, tyrauntes harlottes those,
Which to their countries, were the deadliest foes.
Ne for my self, I would not this resite,
Although I have occasion good thereto,
But sure me thinks, it is to great dispite,
These men to others and their countries do.
For there are Britaynes nether one nor two,
Whose names in stories (...) once appear:
And yet their lives, examples worthy were.
It Is worthy praise (I grant) to write the ends
Of vicious men, and teach the like beware:
For what has of virtue that commends,
Such personrs lewd, as naught of virtues care:
But for to leave out those praise worthy are:
Is like, as if a man had not the skill,
To praise the good but discommend the ill.
I crave no praise, although my self deferude,
As great a laud as any Britain yore:
But I would have it told how well I serude,
My Prince and country, faith to both I bore:
All noble hearts, hereby with couradge more:
May both their foreign, foes in fight withstand,
And of their enmyes have the upper hand.
Again to show how valiant then we were,
(You Britaynes good) to move your hearts thereby,
All other Nations less in fight to fear,
And for your country rather so to dye
With valiant hauty couradge as did I:
Then live in bondage, service, slavery, thrall
Of foraine powers, which hate your manhood all.
Do give me leave to speak but even a while:
And mark, and write this story I the tell.
By North from London, more then fiftye mile:
There lies the Isle, of Ely known full well:
Wherein my father built a place to dwell,
And for because he liked well the same:
He gave the place he Ely hight, his name.
(...) namde the Isle of Ely yet perdy,
My father namde it so, yet writers miss.
Or if I may be bold to say: they lie
Of him, which tell that far vntruthlike is.
What truth (I pray you) seems to be in this:
"He Ely loud, a goodly place built there: Lanquet. Stowe. Grafton,

"Most it delited, raignde not full a year.
He reigned fourtye years as other tell, Flores Hist.

Which seems as it is a tale more true by far:
By justice guided he his subjects well,
And liude in peace without the broils of war.
His childrens noble acts in stories ar.
In vulgar tongue: but naught is said of me,
And yet I worthy was, the yongste of three.
His eldest son and heir was after king,
A noble Prince and he was named Lud:
Full polliticke and wise in every thing,
And one that wild his country always good.
Such uses, customs, statutes he withstoode,
As seemde to bring the public weals decay:
And them abolisht, brake, repealde away.
So he the walls of Troy the new renewde,
Enlargde them made, with forty towers about,
And at the West side of the wall be vewde
A place, for gates to keep the enmyes out:
There made he prisons for the poor bankrout,
(...) Ludgate yet for free men debtors, free
From hurt, till with their creditours they gree.
Some say the City also took the name
Of Lud my brother: for he it reparde,
And I must needs as true confess the same:
For why that time no cost on it he sparde.
He still encreast and peopled every ward:
And bad them aye Kaer lud the city call,
Or Ludstone, now you name it London all.
At length he dyed, his children under age.
The elder named was Androgeus,
Committing both (...) my brothers charge:
The younger of them hight Tennancius.
The Britaynes wanting aged rulers thus,
Those for that time Cassibellane their king,
My brother Justice meant in every thing.
The Roman then the mighty Caesar fought,
Against the Galls and conquerde them by might,
Which don: he stood on shores where see he might
The Ocean seas, and Britayne clieues full bright.
"(Quoth he) what Region lies there in my sight,
Me thinckes some Island in the seas I see:
"Not yet subdued, nor banquisht yet by mee':
With that they told him, we the Britaynes were:
A people stout, and fearce in feats of war.
"(Quoth he) the Romans never yet with fear,
"Of Nation rude, was daunted of so far:
"We therefore mind, to prove them what they are.
And there withal, the letters hither sent,
By those Embassage brought, and thus they went.
C. Julius Caesar Dict, of Rome to Cassibellane king of Britain sends
greetinge.
"Since that the Gods have gluen us all the (...),
"As subjects to our Roman Empire hie:
"By war, or as it seemed Jove the best,
"Of whom we Romans came and chiefly I.
"Therefore to you which in the Ocean dwell,
"As yet not underneath subjection due:
"We send our letters greeting, wete ye well,
"In warlike cases, thus we deal with you.
"First that you as the other Regions pay,
"Us tribute yearly, Romans we require:
"Then that you will with all the force you may,
"Withstand our foes, as yors with sword and fire.
"And thirdly that by these, you pledges send,
"T'assure the couenaunts once agreed by you.
"So with your danger less, our wars may end:
"Else bid we war, Cassibellane Adieu.
Caesar.

No sooner were these Caesar's letters seen,
But straight the king for all his nobles sent:
He showed them what their ancestors had been.
And praide them tell in this their whole intent.
He could them where about the Romans went,
And what subjection was, how servile they
Should be, if Caesar bare their pomp away.
And all the Britaynes even as set on fire,
(My self not least (...) was to fight)
Did humblye him in joyful wise require:
That he his letters would to Caesar write,
And tell him (...) wet paste not of his spite.
We past as little, of the Romans we,
And less: then they of us, if less might be.
Wherefore the joyful king again replide,
Through counsel wise of all the nobles had,
By letters he the Romans hestes denyde:
Which made the Britayns hauty hearts full glad,
No doubt the Romans more then half were mad,
To here his letters written, thus they went:
Which he again to mighty Caesar sent.
Cassibellane king of Brit. to C. Julius Caesar Dictat. sends answer.
"AS thou O Caesar writste, the Gods have given to thee.
The West: so I reply, they gave this I stand me.
Thou say you Romans and thy self of Gods discende:
And dare thou then, to spoil our Trojan blood pretend:
Again, though Gods have giune, thee all the world as thine:
That's parted from the world, thou getst no land of mine.
And since likewise of Gods we came, a Nation free:
"We owe (...) tribute, aid, or pledge to Rome or thee.
"Retract thy will, or wadge thy war, as likes thee (...):
"We are to fight, and rather then to friendship pressed.
"To save our country, from the force of foreign strife:
"Each Britain here, is well content to venture life.
"We fear not of the end, or dangers thou do tell:
"But use thy pleasure if thou may, thus fare thou well.
Cassib.

When Caesar had receaude his answer so,
It (...) him much: he fully straight decreed,
To wadge us war, and work us Britains woe:
Therefore he hasted hither ward with speed.
We Britaynes eke, prepared our selves with heed,
To meet the Romans all in warlike wise:
With all the force, and speed we might (...).
We Britaynes then far deemde it meeter much,
To meet him first at th'entry on this land:
Then for to give an entrye here to such,
Might with our victuals here our selves (...).
It Is better far thy enemy to abande,
Quite from thy borders to a stranger soil:
Then he at home, thee and thy country (...).
Wherefore we met him, at his entry in,
And pitche our camps directly in his way:
We minded sure to leese or else to win
The praise, before we paste from thence away.
So when that both the armies were in ray,
And trumpets blaste on every side was blown:
Our minds to either each, were quickly known.
We joined battle, fercely both we fought:
The Romans to enlarge their Empires same,
And we with all the force and might we might,
To save our country, and to keep our name,
O worthy Britaynes learn to do the same,
We brake the rays of all the Roman host:
And made the mighty Caesar leave his boast.
Yet he the worthiest Captain ever was,
Brought all in ray, and fought again a (...)
His skillful soldiers he could bring to pass,
At once for why his traynings all they knew.
No sooner I his noble corpse did vewe,
But in I (...) amongst the Captains band,
And there I fought with Caesar hand to hand.
O God thou might have given a Britain grace,
To Have (...) the Roman Caesar noble then:
Which sought his blood the Britaynes to deface,
And bring in bondage, valiant worthy men.
He never should have gone to Rome again,
To fight with Pompey, or his Peers to slaye,
Or else to bring his country in decay.
It ioyde my heart to strike on Caesar's crest,
O Caesar that there had bin none but we:
I often made my sword to try thy breast,
But Lady Fortune did not look on me.
I able was me thought with Caesar's three,
To try the case: I made thy heart to quake,
When on thy crest with mighty strokes I (...).
The strokes thou (...) me, hurt me naught at all:
For why thy strength was nothing in respect,
But thou had she bathde thy sword in poison all:
Which did my wound, not deadly else infect.
Yet was I or I parted thence bewrekte,
I gate thy sword from thee for all thy feme:
And made thee fly, for fear to eat the same.
For when thy sword was in my Target fast,
I made the fly, and quickly leave thy hold:
Thou never mast in all thy life so gast,
Nor durst again be ever half so bold.
I made a number Romans hatts full cold,
Fight, fight, you noble Britaynes now (quoth I)
We never all will vureuenged dye.
What Caesar though thy praise and mine be (...)
Perdy the stories scarce remember me:
Though Poets all of the do make a God,
Such simple fools in making Gods they be.
Yet if I might my case have tried myth thee,
Thou never had (...) to Rome again:
Nor of thy faithful friends, bin beastly (...).
A number Britaynes might thou there have seen,
Death wounded fight, and spoil their spiteful (...):
My self maynde, slew and mangled mo I ween,
When I was hurt then twenty more of those.
I made the Romans hearts to take their hose:
In all the camp no Roman (...) I spyde,
Durst half a combat against a Britain bide.
At length I met a noble man they calde
Him Labienus, one of Caesar's friends,
A Tribune erste had many Britaynes thralde:
Was one of Caesar's legates forth he sendes.
Well met (quod I) I mind to make the mendes,
For all thy friendship to our country crewe:
And so with Caesar's sword, his friend I slew.
What need I name you every Britayne here,
As first the king the nobles all beside:
Full stout and worthy wightes in war that were,
As ever erste the stately Romans tryde.
We fought so long they durst no longer bide,
Proud Caesar he for all his bragges and boste:
Flew back to ships, with half his scattered host.
If he had been a God as sottes him namde,
He could not of us Britaynes taken foil:
The Monarche Caesar might have been ashamde,
From such an Islande with his ships recoyle,
Or else to fly and leave behind the spoil:
But life is sweet, he thought it better fly,
Then bide amongst us Britaynes for to die.
I had his sword, was namde Crocea mors,
With which he gave me in the head a stroke,
The venime of the which had such a force,
It able was to perce the heart of oak:
No medcines might the poison out revoke,
Wherefore though scarce he perced had the skin:
In fiftene days my brains it ranckled in.
And then to soon (alas therefore) I did,
I would to God he had retournde again:
So that I might but once the dastard spyde,
Before he went I had the ferpent (...).
He playde the cowarde cutthrote all to plain,
A beastly serpents heart that beast detectes:
Which or he fight, his sword with bane infectes.
Well then my death, brought Caesar no renown:
For both I gate thereby, eternal fame,
And eke his sword to strike his friends a down:
I slew therewith his Labiene by name,
With prince, against my country foes I came:
Was wounded, yet did never fainte nor yield:
Till Caesar with his soldiers fled the field.
Who would not venture life in such a case:
Who would not fight, at countries whole request:
Who would not, meeting Caesar in the place,
Fight for life, prince and country with the best:
The greatest courage is by factes expreste.
Then for thy prince with fortitude as (...),
And realms (...): is praise, to live (...).
Now write my life when thou haste leisure and,
Will all thy country men to learn by me,
Both for their prince and for their native land:
As valiaunte, bold and fearelesse for to be.
A pattern plain of fortitude they see,
To which directly if them selves they frame:
They shall preserve, their country, faith and fame.
The Author.
WHen noble Nennius thus had ended talk,
He vanished with so sweet an heavenly smell:
Me seemde the graces all with him did walk,
And what I heard of Music did excel.
Like notes of Instruments no tongue can tell,
With harmonye, of such an heavenly noyes:
Me seemde they passed all our earthly joys.
Their tunes declarde the battle all so right,
As if the Britaynes and the Romans than,
Had presently in hearing and in sight:
A fresh the bloody battle all began.
Me thought I heard the virtues of the man,
By notes declarde, and Caesar's dangers told:
More plainly, then with eyes I might behold.
But when they came to tell of Caesar's flight,
I saw the Romans fall me thought full fast,
And all the Britains, chase them even till night:
Where with the sound of Britishe trompets blast.
Made me so mad and mazed at the last:
I looked about for sword or weapon I,
To run with Britaynes, cryde they fly they fly.
Their flight to ships, and foil the trompets sound,
And blewe the victours triumphs at return:
The noise welnighe my senses did confound,
And made my heart with all their loves to borne.
But when they began the wounded Britaynes mourn.
With doubled wayling shriekes, such cries they sent:
And sobbes and sighs, welnighe my heart they rent.
Eke chieflye they at noble Nennius stayde,
They seemde with doulefull tunes their notes to riue,
And suddenly his praise again they playde;
O worthy Nennius for thy facts alive,
The trumpe of Fame was straightly chargde revive,
And keep, maintain and celebrate his praise:
Which granted, all they vanished quite their ways.
Viuit post funera virtus.
Finis quod John Higgins.

