A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross the third of March, 1610.

By Theophilus Higgons.

In testimony of his hearty reunion with the Church of England, and humble
submission thereunto.

Published by Command.

MICAH 7.8. Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy: though I fall, I shall rise
again; when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

AT LONDON Imprinted by WILLIAM HALL, for William Aspley. 1611.

GEntle Reader, whereas in the former impression, by reason of importunate
haste of the Work, some few faults escaped, and especially, page 4. l. 22. in
this second thou shall find them corrected. Farewell.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS Cross, the third of March. 1610.
EPHESIANS. 2. verse. 4.5.6.7. 4 But God, who is rich in mercy, through his great
love, wherewith he loved us,

5 Even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by
whose grace you are saved,

6 And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in the heavenly
places, in Christ Jesus,

7 That he might show, in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace,
through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.


THere is a fourefold condition, or estate of Man. The first of Innocence: the
second, of Sin: the third, of Grace: the fourth, of Glory. The first, by
creation from God: the second, by propagation from our Parents: the third, by
regeneration from the Spirit: the fourth, by real possession of Heaven.

Now as the substance of my text leads me to entreat, peculiarly, of the
third condition, or estate (which is the state of Grace) so the very first
word, and entrance thereof [BVT: a discretiue particle] directs me unto a
consideration of our second estate; to wit, the state of Sin: which the
Apostle describes in this manner.

1. And you has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses, and sins.

2. Wherein, in times past, you walked according to the course of this world,
and after the Prince, that rules in the air, even the spirit, that now
works in the children of disobedience:

3. Among whom we also had our conversation, in times past, in the lusts of our
flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind, and were, by
nature, the children of wrath, as well as others. It follows, now, in my Text:
But God who is rich in mercy, etc.

This is the connection, and dependency of these words. Before, there was the
state of Sin, here is the state of Grace, the one opposed unto the other;
whereby the deformity of the first, and dignity of the second, does more
spectably appear. Where sin abounded there grace abounded much more: that, as
sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign, by righteousness, unto
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Romans 5 20.21.

Thus the state of sin, in time, and order, is before the state of Grace: as
the evening was before the morning (Genesis 1.5.) and the darkness before the
light. You were once darkness: but now you are light in the Lord. Ephesians. 5.8.

For some lived without the Law, as Gentiles: some under the Law, as Jews: now
both are under grace. But it is one thing to be in grace, another thing to be
under grace. Many live now under grace, but not in it: many lived heretofore in
grace, but not under it. For (properly) to live in grace, is opposed unto the
state of sin: to live under grace, is opposed unto the state of the Law. The
first is the state of persons, who have grace dwelling in them: the second is
the state of time, wherein grace is offered unto all.

Both are joined here together in my Text. The state of time; we are under
grace: the state of persons; we are in grace: so that we are delivered from
the power of the law, and of sin; from the condemnation of the first, and
from the dominion of the second. Sin prevails not to dominion: why? we are in
grace. The Law prevails not to condemnation: why? we are under grace. And
this is the scope of my Text.

Wherein there is such amplitude, and variety of matter, that plenty it self
has made me poor, it being hard to say, where, and whence I should take the
beginning of my discourse: as also it is hard to say, where I may conclude the
same. But since the time has power over my thoughts (at the least over my
words) and boundeth them within the limits of an hour, or two; I cannot speak
all of a little in my Text, as I would: therefore I will speak a little of all
therein, as I may; observing five general circumstances, as they present
themselves in order unto your view.

The first is, the Author of our salvation; God: or God in God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself. 2. Cor. 5.19.

The second is, the causes, which moved God unto this Mercy: v. 4. not bare
mercy, but with an addition, rich in mercy. Secondly, Love: and that not a
naked love, but with an addition, great love. Thirdly, Grace iv. 5. not simply
grace also, but with an addition, exceeding riches of his grace. v. 7. And
here, with this motive, or cause, I will join the effect also: by grace you
are saved.

The third is, the persons, or subject, upon which the benefits Us. Wherein you
may observe; First, the extension of the subject: to wit, Jews, and Gentiles,
both included therein. Secondly, the condition: dead in sin.

The fourth is, the benefits bestowed upon us: and they He has quickened us
together in Christ. verse. 5. Secondly, resurrection of soul, and body: He has
raised us up together: verse. 6. Thirdly, Session of both in heaven: He has
made us sit together in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus.

The Fifth, That he might show in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his
grace, through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.

First of the Author.
THe Author of our salvation is he, that is the author of our creation; GOD.
Non est qui reficiat, nisi qui fecit, says S. Bernard. None can make us good
of evil, but he that made us something of nothing. It is he that, in my
creation, dedit me mihi, gave me unto my self, by creating me after his own
image. It is he that, in my Redemption, dedit se mihi, gave himself unto me,
by redeeming me with his own blood.

But you must understand, that this sacred name of GOD, is taken sometimes
essentially, sometimes personally: and this is necessary to be known in the
explication of my text. Essentially it includes the three persons, subsisting
in one undivided nature: as Genesis 1.1. In the beginning, GOD created the heaven,
and the earth. Therefore the original has it thus, (...): creauit Dij: the
Gods created. The noune is plural, the verb singular; to show a trinity of
persons, in the unity of essence.

Sometimes this sacred name is taken personally; importing one person of the
divine nature: as John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with GOD: That is, the Son was with the Father. With him, because from him.
With him [Deus apud Deum] by eternal coexistencie: from him [Deus de Deo] by
personal procession. In which respect, precisely the Father is not with the
Son; the Father, and the Son are not with the holy Ghost; but the Son is
with the Father, and the holy Ghost is with them both.

For as God is the God of order in all his creatures, and external works; so
he is a God of order in himself also, and in his internal works. There is a
priority of order in the Father before the Son, and in them both before the
holy Ghost. So that the Father, being the fountain of the other, has a
prerogative of order in his person and consequently a prerogative of order
also, in this glorious name of GOD.

And thus it is in my Text: GOD, who is rich in mercy: that is, the Father. For
though it be true in faith, that every person is equally merciful, loving and
gracious; yet, in this place, it is proper to say that God the Father is rich
in mercy, and great in love, and exceeding in grace. For here is a necessary
relation of one person to the other: God quickened us in Christ: that is, the
Father in the Son.

Now to the matter it self. It is God that quickneth us, raises us, etc. not
Angels, not Man, not his own Works, not his own Will. Not Angels; they are
ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. not quickening, not raising spirits. Suggerunt
bonum, non ingerunt: hortantur ad bonum, non bonum creant, says S. Bernard:
They may exhort unto good, by their suggestion, they cannot power it into us,
by infusion: they may persuade it, they cannot create it in us. Not Man
himself: for the wandering sheep sought not the shepherd, but the careful
shepherd sought out the sheep, Matthew. 18.12. Not the Works of man: for can a
dead tree bring forth living fruit? or an evil tree good fruit? Matthew. 7.18.
Finally, not the Will of man: for we did not prevent God in desire, but it is
he, that works in us both the will, and the deed, of his own pleasure, Phil.
2.13. For though in actions natural, and civil, man has a liberty of will,
yet in actions spiritual, and supernatural, his will is dead, until it be
revived by GOD.

Thus, all other means excluded, God is the only Agent in this great, and
glorious work. Salvation is of the Lord, Jonah 2.9. Therefore says God unto
his people: I, even I, am he, that puts away thine iniquities, for my own
sake, and will not remember thy sins: Esaias 43.25. I, with an ingemination,
even I; excluding all other means: for mine own sake; excluding all other
motives.

And this point is excellently enforced by Moses, speaking thus unto the
children of Israel, lest they should attribute that unto themselves which was
due unto God alone; The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a precious people
unto himself, above all people, that are upon the earth. The Lord did not set
his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in number then any
people: for you were the fewest of all people But because he loved you, and
because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your Fathers, Deuteronomy.
7.6.7 8. No merit in them, but grace in him: that so they might truly say; Not
unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory, Psalm 115.1.

Now if the Jews could plead nothing, but the love of God, for his peculiar
favor, what can the Gentlies plead for themselves also, but the same love of
the same God? Therefore says our Apostle; God, who is rich in mercy, etc. he
has quickened us, etc. So that now we are come from the Author, which is GOD,
unto the Motives, which are, Mercy, Love, and Grace in him.

Secondly of the Motives.
IN these also there is an order, as well in the attributes of God, as formerly
in his name. Here is Mercy releeuing us, and caused by his Love. Here is love
embracing us, and caused by his Grace. Here is grace saving us, and caused by
his Goodness. For some learned Divines observe that these four properties,
Mercy, Love, Grace, and Goodness, as they are very like in their effect toward
us, so they are all one in God, but yet with a difference of order. Goodness
is the cause of all the rest, but immediately of Grace; Grace is the cause of
the other, but immediately of Love: Love is immediately the cause of mercy. So,
in God, his Goodness is a cause only, and his Mercy an effect only: the other
are causes and effect too. And this is a golden chain: the first link whereof
is Goodness in God: the last is Mercy, which reaches unto us.

First, then, of MERCY, as it is here first placed in my Text. rich in mercy.

That there is mercy in God, it shows the compassion of his nature; that he
is rich in mercy, it shows the abundance thereof. In both we have a singular
comfort. For be it, that he has mercy, that is a comfort: but our comfort is
greater, because dives est, he is rich in mercy; for with him there is
plentiful redemption: Psalm. 130.7. Or be it, that he is rich, it shows an
abundance, and sufficiency in himself. But where is our comfort? even this:
Dives est in misericordia, he is rich in mercy; the sweetest propriety of his
divine nature. So then: He is not simply rich, but in mercy: nor has he
simply mercy, but is also rich therein.

Which as it is abundantly discovered unto us by the effects thereof, so it is
testified unto us by his own mouth: and we know, that his testimony is true.
For when God descended from heaven (which descent was not by mutation of place,
but by exhibition of presence) and proclaimed his own name, see what a style
he gives himself: The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, gracious, slow to
anger, abundant in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands,
forgiving ininquitie, transgression, and sin, not making the wicked innocent,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon their children, unto the third, and
fourth generation: Exodus 34.6.7.

Consider here, first, the proprieties themselves: merciful, gracious, slow to
anger, abundant in goodness, reserving mercy, forgiving iniquity: unto all
these he opposes two other; the one, negative; he makes not the wicked
innocent: the other, affirmative: he visits iniquity. Consider, secondly,
the extent of the one, and other. His mercy extends unto thousands: his
judgment, unto three, or four generations.

Here is mercy, and riches of mercy. This therefore being so peculiarly
annexed unto the divine nature: the Church, for many hundred years, harh used
that excellent Collect; O God, whose nature, and property is ever to have
mercy, etc. And this brings unto my remembrance the saying of Tullie (so much
applauded by S. August. lib. 9. de Cruit. Dei) when he pleaded before Caesar,
for the life, and liberty of Ligarius, his friend: O Caesar (says he) none of
thy virtues is more admirable, or gracious then thy MERCY. Men come near unto
God in nothing so much, as in saving the afflicted. Thy fortune has nothing
greater, then that thou have power; thy nature nothing better, then that thou
have will, to show mercy, and to save others. So I may say: of all Gods
proprieties none is more admirable, and gracious, then his mercy. It is not his
power, it is not his knowledge, it is not his wisdom, but it is his Mercy,
wherein we chiefly rejoice. I should despair, if there were not mercy in him,
since there is so much iniquity in me. But, because of sinners, he shall be
called merciful: 2. Esdr. 8.31.

Thus his mercy has an advantage, by our sins, to declare, and to express
it self. For though, in him, there is an habit (if I may so speak) of mercy
always; yet the act of mercy requires sin precedent in us, which gives
matter, and occasion unto the same. There is a double matter of mercy: the
one, whence it proceeds: the other, where it is showed. The first is in God
only, the second in us. The heavens need not the mercy of God (says August.
in Psalm. 32.) because there is no misery in them: but the earth needs it; and
where the misery of man has abounded, there the mercy of God has abounded
much more.

If therefore, I have committed sin, then I have fit matter for the
declaration of his mercy. In this, o Lord, thy goodness shall be praised, if
thou be merciful unto us, who have not the substance of good works: 2. Esdr.
8.36. In truth, many have the shadow, not the substance of good works.

Now though it is an evil cause (says Seneca) which requires mercy, yet
there is no cause so evil, which can despair of mercy. For as I have the
matter of, or for mercy in me (to wit, my sins) so, if I have the means to
apprehend this mercy (which means is faith alone) the mercy of God shall be
commended through mine iniquity, and my own sin shall turn to my own
safety. All things work together for the best unto them, that love God, even
to them that are called of his purpose. Romans 8.28. Omnia cooperantur, says S.
Augustine, all things work: etiam peecata Domine, even our sins also, o Lord.
For by sin, we have experience of our infirmity; our infirmity draws us
unto humility; humility lifts us up unto God: in God every man has his
quietus est, perfect rest, and endless peace.

Thus it is true, that sin, which naturally, and of it self, works
damnation, may occasionally, and by accident, work salvation also: but by his
power, who brought light out of darkness, and works our good out of our own
evil.

I dare not, therefore, add this grievous sin unto my other sins, to
despair of mercy. For as to commit a sin, it is the death of the soul, so
to despair of mercy, it is to descend into hell. And some fear not to
affirm, that Judas sinned more, by despair of mercy, then by treason against
his Lord. For what is more sacrilegious (says Fulgentius) then to deny Gods
mercy in forgiving our sins? If he be a skillful physician, he can cure all our
infirmities; if a merciful God, he can forgive all our sins. Therefore
David (Psalm. 103.) exhorts his own soul to praise the Lord, and again to
praise the Lord. Why? He forgiueth all thy sin, and heals all thine
infirmities. If this be so, let no man despair of the physician, and remain
in his sickness; let no man extenuate Gods mercy, and pine away in his sins.
For Christ died for sinners: Romans 5.8. And Christ came into the world to save
sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15. If I were not a sinner, he were not a Savior.

Qualecumque fit ergopeccatum etc. Whatsoever then thy sin be, God can and
will pardon it, if thou, by despair, do not close up his hands, and shut up
the gate of indulgency against thy self. Finally, he concludes his exhortation
out of the prophet Esaias 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord: and he will have
mercy upon him: and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. Yea, multus ad
ignoscendum: as he renders it nearer unto the original text. In hoc multo
nihil deest, in quo est omnipotens misericordia, and omnipotentia misericors.
He can pardon: for his mercy is omnipotent: he will pardon; for his omnipotency
is merciful. Therefore let no man despair.

Thus through his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by
[or in] sins.

Here is love the cause of mercy. I have loved thee with an everlasting love,
therefore with mercy have I drawn thee: Ierem. 31.3. The river of mercy
issues from the fountain of love. But of this I have spoken Page 8.
before.

Now for the Text it self, you may observe: First: that this affection, or
attribute, is comfortable, because it is love; specially in God. Secondly, that
this love is commendable, because it is great. Thirdly, that this greatness is
admirable, because it is toward us.

Concerning the First, to wit, the affection, or attribute, love in God; the
beloved disciple teaches us, that God is love 1. Io. 4.8. And so love is
attributed unto him in the abstract, because it is in him, not as an accident,
and by participation, but by essence, as S. Bernard speaks divinely of this,
and other properties in God. He loves as charity, he knows as truth, he
fitteth as equity, he rules as majesty, he governs as the beginning, he
defends as health, he works as power, he reuealeth as light, he assisteth
as piety. All these things the Angels do, yea we also do, but yet in an
inferior manner: not by that good which we are, or have in our selves, but
which we participate of him. But it is otherwise in GOD: whatsoever is
attributed unto him, is God himself. For he is a simple, uncompounded being, in
whom all things are one. So that the variety of his attributes is not from a
diversity of affection in him, but of effects unto us. But J am confined unto
his Love, therefore I will speak particularly of it.

He has an immanent love dwelling in him: and so he loves himself, by the
necessity of his nature. He has a transient love proceeding from him: and so
he loves his creatures, some more, some less, by the liberty of his will.

He has a general love unto all: for all are his creatures, the works of his
own hands. He has a special love unto some, according as his Image, in
respect of their substance, is stamped in them; and as his likeness, in
respect of their qualities, is represented in them. For likeness is the cause
of love.

So then God loves us, as his creatures; but more as men. He loves us as men;
but more as elected. He loves us, as elected; but more as justified. And this
love, which he bears unto us, as actually justified by Christ, he declares
more in his work of our sanctification by the Spirit. Finally, the more holy
we are, the more he loves us. Whereupon S. Augustine does excellently
observe (tract in Ioh.) that God loves the Humanity of Christ, more then any
man, because it was full of grace, and truth. Ioh. 1.14.

If therefore, we will obtain and retain the love of God, we must be as he is;
conforming our wills unto the obedience of his will, and be like unto him in all
things: merciful, as he is merciful; loving, as he is loving; gracious, as he
is gracious; yea perfect as he is perfect: Math. 5 48. Not by adequation; that
is beyond our power: but by imitation, that is our duty. Be holy for I am
holy: Leuit. 11.44.

In the second place. As before, this love in God was a special, and not a
general love, so here it is not a little, but a great love. For he is a great
God, and a great King above all Gods. Psalm. 95.3. Likewise his love is great
above all loves. Therefore the vulgar reads it thus: propter nimiam
charitatem: for his over much love.

In truth it is over much; beyond our desert, and beyond our comprehensio^ too.
For what love shall I compare unto his love? The love of a WOMAN? It is great
indeed: but yet the love of Jonathan unto David was greater then it. Thy love
to me was wonderful, yea passing the love of women: 2. Sam. 1.26. The love of
a MOTHER? Here is a greater degree, then in the former: but yet this love is
not so certain, and infallible, as Gods love. Can a woman forget her child,
and not have compassion upon the son of her womb? If they should forget (as
some may be, yea some have been so unnatural) yet will not I forget thee,
says God unto his disconsolate, and afflicted Sion. Esaias 49.15.

Therefore, till you can find, whom you may compare with God, you shall find
no love, to be compared with his love.

But now, to come unto the third point. As the love of God was commended
before, from the quantity thereof, it being a great love; so it is yet further
commended from the object thereof; Us. Who? Jews and Gentiles. Of what
condition, or estate? Dead in sin. This was Page 5.
designed by me to be the third general circumstance of my Text, but I will
entreat of it here, because I am so happily invited thereunto. -- his great
love, wherewith he loved us, when we were dead by sins.

First, I will consider the Object it self, Us: which, in extension, does
include both Jew, and Gentile. Secondly, the quality thereof, dead in sin, or
by sins. And first of the Object; Us.

O blessed S. Paul! Quid tibi, and nobis? what have thou to do with us? It was
thy privilege, and not ours to say, They [the Iewes] are Hebrews, so am I:
they are Israelites, so am I: they are the seed of Abraham, so am I: 2. Cor.
11.22. But so were not we; the Gentiles. What is the reason, then, thou
should here include thy self in this extensiue particle; us?

The reasons are many, but specially three. The first is, the charity of S.
Paul. For the voice of Faith is, EGO, I; with an appropriation unto our selves.
Faith draws the circu^ference of Gods promises unto the center of our hearts.
But the voice of Charity is, Not, we; with a communication unto all. Therefore
it is one note of charity, assigned by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.5. (...), it seeks
not her own things.

Secondly, the special interest of S. Paul in the Gentiles; whose Apostle he
was by way of excellency, and prerogative, above all others. He is a chosen
vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles: Act. 9.15.

Thirdly, our communion in Christ. For, now, the stop of partition wall was
broken down: Ephesians. 2.14. Now there was one shephard, and one sheepfold: Ioh.
10.16 Now God had persuaded Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem: Genesis 9.27. So
that, now, there was no difference, no distinction; as our Apostle divinely
says: There is neither Jew, nor Grecian, there is neither bond, nor, free,
there is neither male, nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus: Galath.
3.28.

Why, then, should one nation despise another, or why should one man contemn
an other? For as we are all one, by nature, in the first Adam; so we are all
one, by grace, in the second. The nobility of stock, the antiquity of descent,
the abundance of wealth, the excellency of wit, the comeliness of body;
finally, no external glory of temporal things makes a difference, or an
acception of persons in the sight of God.

Now to proceed unto our own unworthiness, whereby the worth of Gods love is
amplified; be we Jews, or be we Gentiles, great was the love of God, which was
extended either to the one, or other.

As for the Jews; the whole course of the old Scriptures does so demonstrate
their ingratitude, and rebellion against God, that it must needs be a singular,
extraordinary love in him to vouchsafe them any grace, or favor at all. For
instance, I remit you unto the 78. Psalm, where the Prophet David does
illustrate the benignity of God, by the iniquity of this people: to wit, how
he brought them out of Egypt by a miraculous power, divided the sea for their
protection, brought water out of the stony rocks for their consolation, went
before them in a cloud for their direction; yet they sinned still against him,
and provoked the Highest in the wilderness, verse 17. Notwithstanding, he
rained down Manna upon them, he rained flesh also upon them, as dust; yet, for
all this, they sinned still, and believed not his wondrous works. verse. 32.
Notwithstanding, he forgave their iniquity, and restrained his anger from
them, upon their submission unto him: yet they returned, and tempted God, and
limited the holy one of Israel, verse. 41. Notwithstanding, he cast out the
Heathen before them, to receive them into their inheritance: yet they tempted,
and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies. verse. 56.

But as for us Gentiles, what could we plead? We were not the seed of Abraham:
we had not the seal of the covenant: the promises appertained not unto us: at
least, according to the letter. All which things the Jews might plead, as
peculiar unto themselves alone. Therefore S. Paul having demanded, What is the
preferment of the Jew? and what is the profit of circumcision? answers, Much
every manner of way, and chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles
of God: Romans 3.1.2.

But since we Gentiles were not privileged by any of these graces, but were
strangers from the covenant, and wholly inthralled into the captivity of sin
and Satan: herein the love of God is more spectable, and more commended in us,
then in them, because he quickened Us also, when we were dead in sin. So that
now we are succeeded into the state, nay more, into the very name of the Jews
themselves. For he is a Jew, who is one within: Romans 2.28. And we are the
circumcision, which worship God in the spirit. Philip. 3.3.

For it is true (my brethren) that God delights not in outward things,
without an inward affection; not in Ceremonies, not in Sacraments, not in
Sacrifice, not in his own People. Nay more: Christ acknowledges not the
blessed Virgin to be his Mother, if she hear not his word, and keep it, Luke
8.21. Whereby he did not reprove her, but instruct others, in this behalf.

It is not therefore, succession from worthy persons, it is not birth from
religious fathers, it is not the splendour, and dignity of a particular place,
upon which we may securely rest: yet these, these are things, and principal
things too, wherein the Church of Rome does so confidently repose. And as the
literal Babylon (Esaias 47.8.) so she, the mystical Babylon (Apocal. 18.7.)
glories in this manner, and says; I sit being Queen, and am no widow, and
shall see no mourning. Howbeit her destruction is ordained of old, the sentence
of condemnation is past, the writ of execution is gone forth; The Kings of the
earth shall hate the whore, [the sometimes Mother Church now become a whore]
and make her desolate and naked, and shall burn her with fire: Apoc. 17.16.

I come, now, from the Object, us, unto the quality thereof; dead in sins.

There is a spiritual death of the soul: a temporal of the body: an eternal
of both. I speak not of the two latter, they are deaths for sin, not in
sin: of which, alone, my text does here peculiarly entreat.

This spiritual death therefore of the soul in sin, is sometimes in Thought
only; when we yield not consent thereunto. For there is first, suggestion
(either externally from Satan, or internally from our concupiscence) then
delectation, and finally, consent which properly brings sin unto her birth.
Otherwise. S. Bernard asks, in the person of a regenerate man; An forte iam
non ago illa, sed patior? si vtique non consentio. Mea dixerim peccata, non
quia facio, sed quia sustineo: I am rather a patient, then an agent in my
sins, etc.

Sometimes this spiritual death is in Action; to wit, transient action; for
there was an immanent action before. For a sin may be actual in the mind,
though not acted in the body.

Sometimes this spiritual sin is in Habit, and custom; when sin is not
only inhabitant (for so it is in all, though not imputed unto all: it remains
in act, not in guilt) but regnant in our souls. Of which our Apostle speaks
in this manner: Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey
it in the lusts thereof; neither give you your members, as weapons of
unrighteousness, unto sin: Romans 6.12.

All these deaths of the soul are figured, and represented in certain
persons, whom our Savior raised up from the death of the body. The first, in
the Centurions daughter: Mark. 5.40. Her body lay yet in her fathers house; and
there she was raised up unto life. The second, in the widows son: Luke 7.12.
His body was carried forth into the City, and there he was raised up unto
life. The third, in Marthaes brother: John 11.39. His body was laid in the
grave, and there he was raised up unto life.

Now our spiritual death was of the last, and worst sort. We were dead in the
habit, and custom of sin; dead in all our faculties and powers. Dead in the
Will, which is the Queene-regent of the soul; dead in the Understanding, which
is her Counselor; dead in the Memory, which is her Secretary; dead in the
Affections, which are her messengers, and servants. So dead in all, that sin
reigned, and grace was extinguished in our souls.

And yet o Lord, did thou love us when we were dead men? Even thou also, who
art the God, not of the dead, but of the living?

He did so, Brethren: our great sins could not euacuate his good purpose. He
loved us in his election; then by manifestation: the first, before all time;
the second, in time. And thus he was not changed by having love now, which he
had not ever, but we were changed by receiving grace, which we had not before.

Wherefore God loved us, when we were spiritually dead: he loved us, I say, in
respect of his own purpose, not of our works.

And now as the Prophet Jeremy spoke literally of his own grief, but
typically of Christ's: Was there ever Dolor, sicut dolor meus, grief as my
grief? Lam. 1.12. So I may truly say of Gods love: O Lord, was there ever
Amor, sicut amor ^uus, love as thy love? No man has greater love then this,
that he lay down his life for his friend: John 15.13. It is true, no man has
greater: but thou, my Lord, had greater; for thou laidst down thy life for
thine enemies. Therefore says S. Paul; God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 5.8. While we
were yet sinners; dead in sin, and had no means to relieve our selves.

For, if in our restitution unto life, we had prevented God in desire, or
cooperated with him in act, his love had not bin so set forth, as now it is.
But the truth is, we were passive, not active, in this excellent work; and so
passive, that there was nothing in us, to concur with God. It was not a
slumber, and so we were awaked; it was not a wound, and so we were healed; but
it was death, and so we were raised up again: not by any virtue within us,
but by an external power. For what motion, or actiuity is there in a dead
body, to raise up it self? None. Therefore, as, in his creation, A dam was made
a living soul, when God breathed the breath of life into him: Genesis 2.7. so, in
his renouation (for he was an old Adam, as soon as he was a new) God inspired
grace into him, and Adam was quickened again from the death of the soul.

Whereby, as we learn, how much we owe unto God, and how little unto our
selves, in this work of our restitution unto the life of grace; so we may
behold, and hate the turpitude, and deformity of sin, from this one effect,
that it puts us in the state of dead men: as S. Paul speaks of the widow,
living in pleasure: she is dead even while she lives. A spiritual death in a
natural life. Thou have a name (says God unto the church of Sardis, Apocal.
3.1) that thou live, but thou art dead. And so J may say unto a sinful man:
it is but a name, a shadow of life, which thou have: for though thy body live by
thy soul, yet thy soul lives not by grace: and consequently, thou art
separated from GOD, the author and fountain of thy life.

Thus a sinner is far from God, and God is far from a sinner: the first in
grace, the second in mercy. But from whom God is far in mercy, he is near in
justice, for their destruction sleeps not. 2. Pet. 2.3.

So much of the second motive, or cause, to wit, the great

Now ensues the third, and last; namely GRACE; for so it follows -- by grace
you are saved. Whereof I will entreat as briefly as I can.

It may be a question; why Not, before is now turned into Vos? Before he said,
God loved us; to wit, Jews and Gentiles. Now he says, You are saved; to wit,
the Gentiles.

The answer is. Though Jews and Gentiles have a common right in Christ, yet
the right of the Jews was more singular then ours, and in order, at the least
before ours, by reason of their privileges; as I showed you before. Whence it
is, that our Savior himself testifies in this manner; I am not sent, save to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel: Math. 15.24. Likewise he gave his
commission unto his disciples; Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but go
rather unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel: Math. 10.5.6. Conformable
whereunto is the testimony of Saint Paul unto the ungrateful Jews; It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you; but
seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life,
lo we turn unto the Gentiles, etc. Whereupon, the Gentiles glorified God,
and received the Gospel with great alacrity of heart; that so it might be
verified which the Prophet declared long before; Rejoice o barren, that did
not bear: break forth into joy, and rejoice thou, that did not travail
with child; for the desolate has more children then the married wif^: Esaias
54.1. Specially therefore, the Gentiles were saved by grace.

But by what grace? There is the grace of God toward us: which respects us,
as the objects of it: there is the grace of God in us, which respects us, as
the subjects of it. So that we are in the first grace, the second grace is in
us. It is the first, therefore and not the second, by which we are saved. For
we are not saved by the grace of God, wrought within us by his Spirit, but
showed unto us in his Son. You are saved by grace; that is, by the free and
voluntary favor of God the Father, in Jesus Christ his Son.

For the grace, of which S. Paul does here speak, is referred unto God, even
the Father; howsoever our translation (supplying some words, which are not in
the original) seems to refer it unto the Son. But the matter is not great.
For this grace is, equally, in all the persons, but originally in the Father,
exhibitiuely in the Son: by whom, and in whom, the Father has declared his
mercy, love, and grace.

To proceed then. We are saved by grace. What? by grace only? We are saved by
Christ, by faith, by hope, by grace. By all these, but in a different manner.
By Christ's death, as the only meritorious cause: by Faith, as the proper
isntrumental means: by Hope, Romans 8.24. as sustaining our expectation of
things to come: by Grace, as moving God.

If therefore, the question be (as it is, properly, in this place) what was
the first motive of our salvation? The answer is, The grace of God. For as the
end of our salvation is his glory, so the beginning of it is his grace. Our
election to life is free: our vocation (inwardly by the spirit, outwardly by
the word) is free: our justification, by the blood of Christ, is free: our
sanctification, by the holy Ghost, is free: finally, our glorification, in
heaven, is free also; as Fulgentius observes very well: Datur, ex gratia, non
solum iustificatis vita hona, sed etiam glorificatis vita aeterna: Not only a
good life unto them, who are justified, but also eternal life unto them, who
are glorified, is given freely, and by the grace of God Not of works, lest any
man should boast himself: Ephesians. 2.9.

This is the argument, upon which S. Paul does spend a great part of his
Epistles: this is the thing, which he does every where enforce; to wit, the
grace of God in Jesus Christ.

O S. Paul. S. Paul! Vas misercoridiae and tuba gratiae, the vessel of mercy,
and the trumpet of grace. For, in none, was the mercy of God more expressed,
then in thee: and, in none was his grace more exalted, then by thee.

And this he does not to destroy actum operis, but opinionem meriti: not the
performance of good works, but the opinion of merit thereby: and specially the
merit of Condignity, which the Church of Rome defends precisely in this
sense; to wit, that, after the first justification, by Christ (the second being
by works, as they teach) a man, being in state of grace, may perform (and some
do perform) such good works, as, in their own worth, and proper value,
deserve eternal life. This they call merit of Condignity. But this is an
indignity to God, a disgrace to his grace, and blasphemy against his honor.
More truly says our Apostle; Non sunt condignae, etc. the afflictions of this
present life are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us: Romans
8.18 Neither our actions, nor our passions can deserve the same. And I pray you
mark the opposition in this behalf. SVNT: they are worthy; says the Church
of Rome. NON SVNT: they are not worthy; says S. Paul.

Away, away with merit; let us establish the grace of God, which is more
honorable unto him, and more comfortable unto us. But J leave the prosecution
hereof, and, after a brief reflection upon that, which is already past, I will
proceed unto the residue of my text.

First, then, concerning the Mercy of God; Trust in it, Trust in it only,
Trust in it ever. Trust in it, without diffidence; for, in the mercies of the
most High, you shall not miscarrie: Psalm 21.7. Trust in it only, without any
other plea. We do not present our supplications before thee for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies: Dan. 9.18. Trust in it ever
without weariness; for his compassions fail not: Lam. 3.22. As the oil did
not cease, till there wanted vessels to receive it; 2. King. 4.6. so there is
no end of Gods mercy toward us, till we want faith to apprehend the same.

Secondly, concerning the Love of God; what shall we render unto him for the
same? Love for love? That is most fit, since it is like for like. But though it
be like, yet it is less. For as he goes before us in time [ he loved us
first: 1. Ioh. 4 19.] so he excels us in degree. He loves us more, then
we do, or can love him. He loves us, as a Father; we love him, as Children.
Ours is an ascending, his a descending love. But though we cannot love him so
much as we ought, and as he loves us, yet let us love him above all things.
Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and, in earth, I have desired none, in
comparison of thee: Psalm. 73.25. Finally, let us love nothing but for him,
Minus te diligit, o Domine, qui, praeter te* aliquid diligit, quod, propter te,
non diligit: says Augustine: O Lord, he loves thee less then other things,
who loves any thing besides thee, which he loves not for thy sake.

Thirdly, concerning the Grace of God; it takes away all our rejoicing, but in
him alone: who voluntarily, without our desire, and freely, without our desert,
and entirely, without our cooperation, has saved us by his grace, even by his
loving favor toward us, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Therefore as I will not (nay I cannot) attribute any thing unto my self, but
weakness, and sin, which truly, and properly are my own, ( and if I must
needs rejoice, I will rejoice of mine infirmities: 2. Cor. 11.30.) so I will
not put my confidence in man: for none is so great, or so good, that I may rest
securely upon his grace. But contrariwise, let the foolish deride me, the
malicious deprave me, the insolent contemn me, the mighty oppress me, it is
enough for me that I am in the grace, and favor of my Lord. Sufficit mihi
gratia tua: O Lord thy grace is sufficient for me. I condlude therefore with S.
Paul: Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice: Phil. 4.4.

Thus I have discoursed briefly upon three circumstances of my text. The Author
of our salvation, GOD. The Motives in him, Mercy, Love, and Grace. The Persons,
upon which he has conferred his benefits and favors; Us, dead in sin.

Of the Benefits.
NOw, (...) the fourth place, ensue the Benefits themselves: Vivification in
the soul; He has quickened us together in Christ.

Here is spiritual life opposed unto spiritual death. It is comfortable
because Life, but more because Spiritual: for this does eleuate us above our
mortal condition, and is the pledge of our eternity in heaven.

This spiritual life we have partly in Christ, partly in our selves. In
Christ, by justification through his blood. In our selves, by regeneration from
the spirit.

First, by Justification, through the blood of Christ. For he, with all his
merits, is ours. Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and, in
that I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God: Gal. 2.20. I am grafted
into him, and so I live by the life of the root. His is the primitive, mine a
deriuatiue life.

Secondly, by regeneration from the Spirit, who sanctifies us, and renews us
by grace. For as before, we had imputed righteousness in Christ, so now we
have inherent righteousness in our selves: though we are not thereby justified
in the sight of God, nor dare in any confidence thereof, appear securely in
his presence. Tutior mihi iustitia data, quam innata, says Bernard: the
imputed righteousness of Christ is more safe for me, then inherent
righteousness from the spirit; that, which is on me, then in me. Jacob had not
obtained the blessing, but in the garments of Esau: Genesis 27.23. which was a
type and figure of our happiness in the sole righteousness of Jesus Christ
our Lord. Therefore S. Paul having esteemed all things as dung, that he might
win Christ, adds: That I might be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that, which is through the faith of
Christ: Phil. 3.9.

Here, then, is life, to live in him, who is life it self. I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life: John 14.6. I am the Way, without which you wander. I am
the Truth, without which you err. I am the Life, without which you die.

Let us not, therefore, by sinning any more, kill the Lord of life within us,
in whom, and by whom, we live; neither let us grieve the Spirit, by whom we
are sealed up unto the day of redemption. Let us not live after the flesh, and
extinguish the spirit: for the wisdom of the flesh is death: but the wisdom
of the spirit is life and peace, Romans 8.6.

It follows, -- he has quickened us together in Christ. Here is not only
life in us, but a community of life with others, by a mystical union in
Christ, and in our selves. For there is a double communion. The first, of the
members with Christ. For as we have a spiritual union jointly with all the
persons [ He that cleaves unto God, is one spirit, says S. Paul, 1. Cor.
6.17.] so we have a mystical union peculiarly with Christ, as being made Man
in nature, a Redeemer in office, and consequently our Head. The second, of the
members amongst themselves. For we, being many, are one body in Christ, and
every one, one another members: Romans 12.5. The members are not divided in the
body, nor the body from the head. The members are joined with Christ by lively
faith; in themselves by ardent love. So there is a common life in them all; a
mutual sense, and participation in all things. The honor of Christ, by any,
is our comfort: his dishonor, by any, is our grief. The good, and prosperity
of our brethren, is ours: their evil, and calamity also is ours. Who is weak
(says S. Paul) and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? 2. Cor.
11.29.

So much of the first benefit; to wit, vivification in the spirit. The second
is, Resurrection of soul and body; -- He has

There is the first and the second resurrection. The first (in respect of the
Subject) is of the soul, the 2. of the body. The first (in respect of Quality)
is by grace, the second to glory. The first (in respect of Time) is in this
life, the 2. in the end of the world. So that the first is a praecursor
(aforeru^ner) unto the second, and prepares a way thereunto. Finally; as there
is a death in sin, and a death for sin, so there is a double resurrection: the
first a culpa, from sin; the second a poenae, from the punishment, which
follows thereupon. Anima corrupta in culpa^ fecit quoque vt corpus
corrumperetur in poenam; says S. Bernard: The soul was corrupted by sin,
the body by the punishment thereof. So (says he) mors mortem operata est; one
death wrought, or brought forth another: Spiritualis corporalem, culpabilis
poenalem, voluntaria necessariam, etc. The spiritual a corporal, the culpable
a penal, the voluntary a necessary death.

But now we are raised up from the one, and other. FIRST; we are raised up
from the death of the soul, by the spirit of illumination, and the spirit of
sanctification [two works, but one, and the same spirit] enlightening the
darkness of our understanding, and cleansing the corruption of our hearts.

This is the resurrection, of which S. John speaks; Blessed, and holy is he,
that has part in the first resurrection: for, on such, death has no power:
Apocal. 20.6. For though death remain in act, yet it is destroyed in effect.
Death died in Christ, and by Christ. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the law. But thanks be unto God, who has given us the victory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: 1. Corinthians. 15.55.56.57. So that, Non est malum in morte, nisi
malum post mortem; There is no evil in the first death; all the evil, that
is, is in the second. Blessed then, indeed, and holy is he, whose first life
secureth him from the second death.

SECONDLY; how are we raised from the death of the body, who are not yet dead
therein? For the Apostle says not; God will raise us up: but, God has raised
us up: as though it were not to come, but past.

I answer first; that our corporal resurrection is already past, in the
preuision of God, to whom al things, which are to come, are actually present;
and in the purpose of God, which changes not. I am the Lord, and I change not,
Mal. 3.6. So the Prophets, in the Law, and the Apostles, in the Gospel, do
speak of things, which are yet to come, as if they were already past; Propter
certitudinem euentus: for the certainty of the event. Thus Esaias (the
Evangelical Prophet) says expressly of Christ; He has borne our
infirmities: He was wounded for our transgressions: He was afflicted, etc.
Esaias 53. These sufferings of Christ were already past, in the eternal
destination of the Father, but were yet to come, in the actual oblation of
himself.

J answer secondly; that we are risen in Christ, as in our Head; betwixt whom,
and us, there is an indissoluble connection, and an inseparable bond. For as
there is a natural union in Christ, of his body, and soul; an hypostaticall
union of the humane nature with his divine person; a sacramental union of the
bread with his body: so there is a mystical union with us: he being the Head,
and we the members.

Therefore, as in the ceremonial Law, the first fruits being blessed, all the
residue was blessed therein; so Christ (who was the first fruits of them, that
slept, 1. Cor. 15.20.) being raised from the dead, we are also raised up in him.

And this is a singular comfort against the fear of death; though it be the
most terrible of all terrible things. Why should we fear to die, who are
already raised from the dead? Our life is hid with God in Christ: Col. 3.3.
Will he not keep it safely, who bought it so dearly? Therefore I will lay me
down, and sleep in peace; for thou, Lord, only, make me to dwell in
safety. Psalm. 4.8. With which comfortable sentence, Gorgonia, the blessed
sister of Nazianzen, commended her soul into the hands of her Redeemer.

Thus much of the second benefit; to wit, Resurrection of soul, and body. The
third ensues; namely, the Session of both he has made us sit together in the
heavenly places, in Christ.

O happy life, to be so quickened! o happy resurrection, to be so raised! o
happy session, to be so placed! First, he has made us to sit. This is a
sign of our tranquillity, and rest above, after much trouble, and motion
here, both in body, and soul. We are Pilgrims upon this earth, as all our
fathers were. We are in via, in our way, to move; not in patria, in our
country, to sit down. We may not stand still; for that is reproved: Quid
statis hic otiosi? Why stand you here idle? Mat. 20.6. We can not sit; for that
is reserved unto an other, and better, life; when many shall come from the
East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven: Mat. 8.11.

SECONDLY then; he has made us sit together in heavenly places: that is to
say, in the heaven of blessed Angels, and Spirits; to whom God reuealeth
himself in the abundance of his glory. For though God fills the heaven and
earth, with his essence, presence, and power, yet he shows not the like
effects thereof in every place. He is peculiarly in his elect by grace;
peculiarly in heaven, by glory; which is the Chamber of presence, wherein we
shall see him, as he is, and behold him face to face. But what the qualities of
these heavenly places are, or what are the ioies therein (as also, how the
degrees of joy are unequal; since there are many mansions in heaven, Joh.
14.2. and that may be here implied by the plurality; places) I neither can
conceive them, as they are, nor yet express what I conceive thereof.

I will therefore conclude this point, with that excellent speech of S.
Augustine, concerning the joy of heaven; Profecto in me totum non intrabit, sed
ego in illud totus intrabo: truly it will not enter wholly into me, by
knowledge, that I may apprehend it, but I shall enter wholly into it, by
fruition, that I may enjoy it, for ever, and ever.

Now for the matter it self; We sit in the heavenly places. How? Not by
plenary possession, but by the right of inheritance. Not by personal fruition,
but by assurance of faith. Finally, not in our selves, but in Christ our Head.
So says my text; he has made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ.

For as Joseph dreamed (Genes. 37.9. and it was a true dream) that the Sun,
and the Moon (to wit, Jacob his father, and Rachel his mother) did reverence
unto him, which yet she never performed in her self (for Rachel died before,
Genes. 35.19.) but in the person of Jacob, her husband, when he came down into
the land of Egypt: so we are already seated in the heavenly places, not in our
selves, but in Christ our Head, who, as a Man, took our nature from his
mother, and, as a Redeemer, undertook our persons with his Father: and so, what
he has received for us, we enjoy in him. He being in heaven, we are in heaven
also: he being ascended, we are ascended thither with him. For though he
descended alone, yet he is ascended with us.

Therefore, whereas our Savior says; No man ascends into heaven, but he
that descended from heaven, the Son of man, who is in heaven: Joh. 3.13. S.
Bernard meditateth upon it, in this manner. Quid ergo nos? etc. What then shall
we do? shall we despair? No, but we will hope so much the more, and chiefly
for this cause. Why? Licet enim SOLVS, sed profecto TOTVS intrabit, and os non
comminuetur ex eo; for though he, alone, shall enter into heaven, yet he
shall enter whole, and entire, and a bone of him shall not be broken. We are
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. He is the Head, and we the members;
the one is not found in the kingdom, without the other.

And now my brethren, what do we upon this earth? we, who are already seated
in heaven? Why do many men (nay all men, for all men seek their own, and not
that, which is Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21.) so earnestly seek the first, and so
carelessely neglect the second? The voluptuous man places his felicity in
pleasures, the ambitious man in honor, the covetous man in riches. Their end is
damnation, their God is their belly, their glory is to their shame, they mind
earthly things, says S. Paul, Philip. 3.19. He adds; But our conversation is
in heaven, from whence, also, we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Here, then, is a contemplation for every soul. My Lord is ascended into
heaven; shall I neglect so good a place, as heaven, and so blessed company, as
my JESUS? O where can I be ill with him, or where can I be well without him?
As he has prepared a kingdom for me, so I will prepare my self for that
kingdom, where J may rejoice with him for ever, and no man shall take my joy
from me.

Thus (beloved in Christ) we must ascend, first in affection, as we shall
afterward in soul, and finally in body; that so, we may live in him by grace,
die in him with peace, and reign with him in glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

Of the Final Cause of Gods benefits bestowed upon us.
I Am now come unto the FIFTH, and last circumstance of my text: to wit, the
final cause, or end of Gods benefits, bestowed upon us, That he might show, in
the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace, through his kindness
toward us in Christ Jesus.

My method shall be this: First, I will make a brief suruay of each particular
in this verse. Secondly, J will reflect upon the general doctrine, contained
in the same.

The particulars may be reduced unto four. The FIRST is, the End itself, --
that he might show, in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace. The
SECOND is, the Tenderness of Gods affection, demonstrated in this end --
through his kindness. The THIRD is, the persons, or object, unto which this
kindness is extended -- unto us. The FOVRTH, and last is, the Means, by which
God does extend the same -- in Christ Jesus.

In the FIRST Manner, how it is expressed -- that he might show: the Time,
when -- in the ages to come: the Matter, which is expressed -- the exceeding
riches of his grace. Briefly of each.

1. The Manner; That he might show, (...) (says the original; and it is of
greater force, then our translation does retain) that he might show it forth
by demonstration, and evidence: that so the world might see, admire, and
applaud the bounty of his grace.

Now there are two manner of ways, by which God does show himself. First, by
his Word: which is full of majesty, and power. I mean not verbum Dominus, the
Word which is God, but verbum Domini, the word of God. And of this our Apostle
says: The word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, etc. Hebru. 4.12.
Secondly, by his Works. By the work of Creation; so the heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows the work of his hands: Psalm. 19.1. By
the work of Conservation, in the singular administration of all his creatures,
and admirable provision for the same. But specially in the work of Redemption:
in which God has showed his Justice, his Power, and his Love. His justice, in
the punishment of sin: his power, in conquering the forces of Satan: his love,
in redeeming captives.

2 The time -- in the ages to come For he has made his wonderful works to be
had in remembrance: Psalm. 111.4. He suffers them not to be obscured in
darkness, nor buried in oblivion. Therefore he shows them in the ages to
come; not for a day, nor a year, but for eternity; to be conueighed from one
generation unto another. We will not hide them from our children, but, to the
generation to come, we will show the praises of the Lord, his power also, and
his wonderful works, that he has done: Psalm. 78.4.

Our tongue must be the trumpet of his praise; our heart, the register of his
works: a faithful register, to preserve the^ for ever. Many men are moved at
the benefits of God, for a time; their motion is quick in the beginning, but
slow in the end: and yet it comes soon to an end also. So it was with the
people of Israel: They forgate his acts, and his wonderful works, that he had
showed them. Psalm. 78.11.

3. The Matter it self; -- the exceeding riches of his grace. What this grace
is, J told you Page 20.
before: to wit, the free, and voluntary favor of God, exhibited unto us, in
Jesus Christ, his Son.

Here it is accompanied with a pair of epithetes, expressing the nature, and
quality thereof. It is rich: yea, exceeding rich. A Sea of grace, which never
can be exhausted. An abyssus, a bottomless pit of grace, which never can be
sounded. Which as all men may admire, for the greatness thereof, so, specially, a
penitent sinner may apply unto himself, for his own comfort. How can I doubt
of remission, and forgiveness of my sins from him, who is so full of grace?

If you require examples, for your better assurance, they are not wanting in
this behalf. I have been an Idolater; so was Manasses. I have been lewd of my
body, so was David. I have been overtaken with wine, so was Noah. I have fled
from God, so did Jonah. I have denied my Lord, so did Peter. I have persecuted
him, in his members, so did Paul. I have despoiled men of their goods, so did
the penitent thief, who was converted upon the cross. Finally, I am full of
iniquity, so was Mary Magdalen: peccatrix, the sinful woman. All these obtained
pardon by the grace of God, which they apprehended by faith. He will not,
therefore, reject me, that embraced them. They could plead nothing but grace:
and this, also, I can plead as well as they.

Therefore, faint not under temptation: but take heed of the Devils false
glass, wherein he represents thy sins otherwise then they are indeed. For
he has two false glasses; the first he brings, when he tempts us to sin:
the second, when he tempts us to despair.

First, when he tempts us to sin, he brings his false glass, which
makes the sin, and the punishment too, appear little in our eyes (as Lot said
of Zoar; is it not a little one, and my soul shall live? Genesis 19.20.) yea,
perhaps, none at all. God said, by a direct affirmation, thou shall not eat
of the tree of knowledge; for, in the day, that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die the death: Genesis 2.17. The woman comes in with a mincing hesitation; lest
perhaps you die: Genes. 3.3. The Devil with a peremptory negation; you shall
not die at all. Such goodly creatures, as you, die for an apple, or some fruit
of little value? No, says he, you shall not die. But Gods word was the truer;
for Adam did die the death. The lesser the precept was, in respect of the
matter, and thing it self, the greater was the sin, in respect of the
disobedience, and contempt.

Secondly, when we have committed a sin, upon his suggestion, and our
consent, then he brings another false glass, wherein he makes our sin
appear so great, that God himself is not great enough to forgive the same. My
sin is greater (says desperate Cain, Genesis 4.13.) then that it can be
forgiven But here, Cain, I dare give thee the lie (or rather thy Devil, who is
the father of lies, Ioh. 8.44) for no sin is so great, but that God can (such
is his power) and will (such is his goodness) forgive the same. Js it not,
simply, the sin committed, but our impenitencie, added unto sin, which
makes it irremissible in event, that is, otherwise, remissible in it self.

In all such temptations, therefore, which do, or may, assault us, it is good
to have S. Peter's counsel (1. Pet. 5.9.) evermore set before our eyes;
Resistite, resist him. How must we resist him? Fortes, being strong and
steadfast. Wherein must we be strong, and steadfast? In fide, in faith; that it
may apprehend the grace of God. For if I sin, he has grace. If my sins be
great, there is the riches of his grace. If my sins be in number, as the sands
of the sea (and were every sand a millstone) there is the exceeding riches of
his grace. Exceeding, above all my sins.

For if it be true (and it is most true) that the mercy of God is over [or
aboue] all his works; Psalm 145.9. is it not over, and above all, my works also?
Howsoever his be good, and very good (Genes. 1.31.) mine evil, and very evil,
that is not the point: he will not have his grace, and mercy, to be exceeded
by my sins. Plus potest dimittere, quam ego committere; he can remit more
unto me, then I can commit against him. And so much of the first.

The SECOND particular is, the Tenderness of Gods affection -- through his
kindness. Sweet is the name, and Thy loving kindness is better, then life:
therefore my lips shall praise thee: Psalm. 63.3. Let me repeat it once
again; O that I might dwell, for ever, in the contemplation of this heavenly,
and divine sentence: Thy loving kindness is better, then life: therefore my
lips shall praise thee. O Lord thou art without passion, but not without
compassion. The Lord is merciful, and righteous, and our God is full of
compassion. Psalm. 116.5.

In regard whereof, it is, that, in the holy Scriptures, we find him
compared, sometimes to a Friend, sometimes to a Father, sometimes to a Mother,
sometimes to an Husband: that so, by these familiar speeches, we might aspire
unto some sense, and knowledge, of his indulgent, and compassionate nature.

But since, before, his other attributes were attended with certain epithetes,
to amplify the dignity thereof (as rich Mercy, great Love, exceeding Grace) is
there none here, for his Kindness, which is the spring, and fountain, whence
all the rest proceed? It needed not: the cause is sufficiently commended by the
effects. Howbeit, we may assume certain epithetes from some other passages of
Scripture, as in that place which I mentioned before: Thy loving kindness: and
Jonah. 42. Thou art of great kindness. Compound these simples, and you shall
have, great loving kindness in God.

This, this is it, which, above all other things, does win our hearts unto
God, if not in piety, yet in good nature. For what does more singularly affect
us, then the kindness, and sweet disposition of a Friend, or what can oblige
us more, in the straitest bonds of love? Woe is me (says David) for thee, my
brother Jonathan. Why? Very kind have thou been unto me: 2. Sam. 1.26. But the
kindness of God does as far surpass the kindness of man, as GOD excels MAN:
that is to say, infinitely, beyond all proportion, and without any measure. And
so much of the second.

The THIRD particular is, the Object of this kindness: Us -- his kindness
toward us. Not toward the good Angels; they were in the possibility, not in the
act of sin. So they needed not redemption from sin, but confirmation in
grace: and consequently, they needed not the kindness of God; at the least, not
in this sense, whereof I now entreat. Not toward the bad Angels: whom God left
justly unto obduration, in their pride against him, and malice against us. Not
toward unreasonable creatures: they were not capable thereof. But toward us.
Men, who needed it, and fell by the suggestion of others, and were capable of
this kindness: but had no means to redeem our selves from the power of Satan,
who held us in the captivity of sin and death.

Here, then, was a fit case, wherein the kindness of God might fully, and
excellently, declare it self. And truly God did thus declare his kindness,
but yet in justice also. S. Bernard describes it ingenuously, and brings in
the Son of God, speaking in this manner. Behold how, for my sake, my Father
does lose his creatures. The Angels affected my highness, but presently he
struck them with an incureable wound. Then, Man affected my knowledge: upon
him also my Father had no pity, neither did his eye spare him. Has be, then,
care of oxen? He made only two noble creatures, partakers of reason, and
capeable of felicity; to wit, Angels and Men: but lo, for me he has
destroyed all Men, and many Angels. Now, therefore, that men may know, how I
love the Father: recipiat per me* quos quodammodo, propter me, amisisse
videtur: Let him receive them again, by my means, whom he seems, in a
manner, to have lost for my sake.

So the Son of God restored us again unto his Father, by justice, paying the
just price, and full ransom of our sins. Thou have redeemed us unto God by thy
blood. Apocal. 5.9. By the expense of his temporal, he has purchased our
eternal life. That we might have it, as a gift, he has given himself for us.
Therefore well says the Apostle here in my text; that the kindness of God
toward us, was in Jesus Christ. And this

First, of the words: secondly, of the matter. In the words there are many
obseruable points (but I may not be copious therein) as namely, Jesus is a name
of salvation, Christ a name of unction. The first imports his Divinity: the
second, his Humanity. The first is taken from the Hebrews, to show, that he is
a Savior of the Jews: the second from the Greeks, to show, that he is a
Savior also of the Gentiles. For though he was sent only to the Jews, yet
he was not sent only for the Jews. He was sent to them only, pradicatione
verbi, to call them to repentance, by preaching the word of life: he was sent
for us all, solutione presij, to redeem us from sin, by paying the ransom
thereof, in the effusion of his blood. Both names are here joined together: for
as each people ( Jew and Gentile) has the same Savior, and are both united in
him, so each has right, equally, in the same benefits, which he has
purchased for both. And though obstinacy become to Israel, yet that is, until
the fullness of the Gentiles become in: and so all Israel shall be saved: Romans
11.25, 26. He [the Iew] that was first, shall be last: but yet he shall be called
in, and before, the end.

So much of the words; now to the matter. No man comes unto the Fahher but by
the Son: John 14.6. No blessing comes from the Father also, but by the
Son; and, whatsoever we ask of the Father, in his name, he will give it unto
us: Ioh. 15.16. He is the ladder of Jacob Genesis 28.12.) reaching, from the earth
[in his Humanity] to heaven [in his Diuinity] that so* by him, we may ascend
from our earthly habitations below, unto the heavenly places above. Therefore
says our Apostle: Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, in
Christ. As namely, the blessings of Election, Filiation, Redemption: in which
(as in the rest) the Father uses the Son; howbeit, not as an isntrumental
means, but a cooperatiue cause* Whatsoever things he Father does, the same
does the Son also: Ioh. 5.19. Yea the same does the holy Ghost also. For
though the internal actions of God be proper unto each person by himself, yet
the external are common unto them all.

To the point. The First blessing was, of Election. The Father chose us in his
Son He chose us in him, before the foundation of the world: Ephesians. 1.4. The
Second blessing was, of Filiation. The Father has adopted us in his Son: so
that he was a Son by nature, we by grace in him; he by generation, we by
adoption in him. The Father has many sons in one Son. He [the Father] has
predestined us to be adopted, through Jesus Christ, unto himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will: Ephesians. 1.5. The third blessing was, of
Redemption. God [the Father] was in Christ, recontiling the world unto
himself: 2. Cor. 5 19. Jn regard whereof, the Father spoke from heaven,
saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3.17. In him,
and with us. For if the sacrifice, offered up by Noah (which was but of birds,
and beasts) had such efficacic, and virtue, that God smelled a savor of rest
therein (Genesis 8 21.) much more did he smell a savor of rest in the bloody
sacrifice of his only begotten and dearly beloved Son. For behold, here is
a greater then Noah, and a greater sacrifice then his. His sacrifice yielded a
savor of rest unto God, by acceptance, this by desert: his by the mercy of
the Father, this by merit of the Son.

Now since the whole sum and parts of our salvation, are thus comprehended in
our Lord Jesus Christ, we must not derive any parcel thereof (directly, nor
indirectly; positiuely, nor consequently) unto any other (Man, or Angel) but
look always unto him, the author, and finisher of our faith: Heb. 12.2. If we
seek salvation, it is in his name: if any gifts of the spirit, they are in his
unction: if fortitude, it is in his dominion: if purity, it is in his
conception: if indulgence, it is in his nativity: if redemption, it is in his
passion: if absolution, it is in his condemnation: if remission of the curse,
it is in his cross: if satisfaction, it is in his sacrifice: if purgation, it
is in his blood: if mortificatio^, it is in his grave: if newness of life, it
is in his resurrection: if immortality, it is in his reviving: if inheritance
of heaven, it is in his entrance thither: if safety, it is in his kingdom: if
secure expectation of the judgment to come, it is in the power of judging,
which the Father has committed unto him. For the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment unto the Son: John 5.22, Why? Because all men
should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. Let us honor him therefore,
and the Father, ascribing praise, and honor, and glory, and power unto him,
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for evermore. Amen Apoc. 5.13.

Thus much of the four particulars, in the last verse of my texe. It remains
now, that (according to my Page 30.
design) I reflect upon the general doctrine, which is contained in the same:
and so, by it, I will make a transition unto my own particular case. The
consideration whereof has treated with me to make special choice of this
text, in regard of sundry markeable effects of Gods mercy, love, and grace,
toward me; which as I feel, comfortably, in my self, so I would impart,
willingly, unto you.

The general doctrine (streaming out of the premises) concerns the glory of
God, which he seeks and obtains in all his works. In our glory, he
aduanceth his own; as our Apostle says: He declares the riches of his glory,
upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Romans 9.22.

Here his glory is showed in his mercy, which, sometimes, he shows in his
justice also: but with different effect toward us. For then he is glorified in
us, not of us: he gets glory, we give it not: we are passive in the one,
active in the other.

First, he is glorified in us: that is to say, in our destruction, by his
justice. I will get me honor (says God) upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host.
Exodus 14.4. Glorificabor in Pharaoh (as the vulgar has it: and nearer unto the
original) I will be glorified in Pharaoh: that is, my honor, and glory shall
be declared, eminently, in his ruin, and fall. Fiet voluntas Dei, aut a nobis,
aut de nobis: the will of God shall be done upon us, if not by us; as here you
may see in the lamentable submersion, and subversion, of this puissant and
mighty King.

Secondly, he is glorified of us: that is to say, in our salvation by his
mercy. Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, so I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50.15. Here is a good harmony, and concord:
God delivers man: Man glorifieth God: God is honored, and man is saved.

Both these glorifications are joined together by Moses, after he had seen the
confusion of Pharaoh, and the deliverance of Israel. I will sing unto the Lord,
for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse, and him, that rode upon him, has
he overthrown in the sea. There is the First. Behold the Second. It
follows. The Lord is my strength, and my praise, and he is become my
salvation. He is my God, and I will prepare him a Tabernacle: he is my Fathers
God, and I will exalt him: Exodus 15.1.2.

This latter glorification is that, which here appertains unto us. GOD has
showed his glory, not in judgment, but in mercy, in love, and in grace: which
he has plentifully extended toward us, giving us life, when we were dead,
raising us up, when we were fallen, placing us in heaven, when we were at the
gates of hell.

Now, for as much as God does so highly honor us in this world, and will
honor us more in the world to come: what shall we do, but honor him also in
this world, whom we shall, likewise, honor in the next? The end of our
Creation requires it. All things were made for the use of man; man for the
service of God. The end of our Preservation requires it. We live by the
benefits of God: we must live also to his honor. The end of our redemption
requires it. For what prisoner will not exalt, and magnify a King, that
gives him his natural life, when he was ciuilly dead, and, by his mercy,
freeth him from the sword of justice? But as our estate was more miserable,
then the condition of any prisoner, so God has dealt more roially with us,
then that any mortal Prince is able to perform the like. He has freed us
from the infernal prison of hell, from the terrible jaws of Satan; he has
restored us unto the glorious liberty of the sons of God: yea more then this,
he has but one kingdom, and but one Son, yet, behold he has made us co
heirs with him therein: Romans 8.17. What, then, could he do for us, and he
has not done it?

And now finally, lest we should pretend a difficulty in this service, see the
facility thereof. God has showed his benefits, let us, also, show them: and
this is the service, which he requires at our hands.

Howbeit, there is a great disparity betwixt his, and our showing the same. He
shows his benefits by donation, we by declaration: his is real, ours
verbal. He shows his benefits; and we have an accession, or increase of our
happiness thereby. We show them; but the infinite sea of his happiness (which
depends not upon his creatures) is not increased by the rivers of praises,
which are poured forth of our lips. In a word, he shows, and it is his
voluntary liberality toward us; we show, and it is our necessary duty toward
him.

An easy, and a just service. Therefore says the Angel unto Tobit, and his
son: Praise God, and confess him, and give him the glory, and praise him for
the things that he has done unto you, before all them that live. It is good to
praise God, and to exalt his name, and to show forth his evident works with
honor: therefore be not weary to confess him. It is good to keep close the
secrets of a KING, but it is honorable to reveal the works of GOD: Tobit
12.6.7.

His benefits, then, that are private unto our selves, we must make public
unto others. He was an unfaithful, and an unwise servant also, who, receiving a
talent from his master, hid it in the earth (Mat. 25.25.) and did not employ it
to his advantage. Likewise he is an ungrateful person, who receives a blessing
from God, and concealeth it in his bosom.

Let every man, therefore, recount with himself the benefits which God has
bestowed upon him. Be they inward, or outward; spiritual, or temporal;
concerning this life, or the life to come: show them, declare them; first in
word, then in work, that men may glorify your Father which is in heaven.

ANd that I may induce you unto this acceptable service, not only by my
speech, but by my example also; Fathers, and Brethren, Right Honorable, right
Worshipful, and dearly beloved in Jesus Christ our Lord: I present my self
here this day, as 1. Cor. 4.9.
aspectacle unto the world, and to Angels, and to men; though with some regret,
and reluctation of the flesh, yet with great comfort, and exultation of the
spirit. Mark. 14.38.
The spirit, indeed, is ready, but the flesh is weak.

Come, therefore, and hearken all ye* that fear the Lord, and I will tell you,
what he has done to my soul. So does Psalm. 66.16.
David inuit his auditors, and so do I inuit mine. Come. Who? All ye that
fear the Lord. For they, that fear him not, are as unfit to hear this
service performed by an other, as they are unable to perform it themselves.
But your religious concourse unto this place, your diligent attention of my
speech, your reverent estimation of Gods word, your zealous profession of his
truth, all these assure me, that you are such indeed, as the Prophet David
speaks of in this place; you fear the Lord. Therefore come, and hearken al
you, and I will tell you, what he has done to my soul.

But, yet, before I tell you, what God has done unto me, I must tell you, what
I have done unto him; for this is the truest method to illustrate his gracious
favors. Vide, quid tibi debeatur (says S. Augustine) and quid tibi dederit,
qui gratis dedit; see, first, what is due unto thee: secondly, what God has
done for thee; then, how freely he has done the same.

First therefore, because we give glory unto God, by the humble confession of
our sins (so said Iosuah unto Achan; Ios. 7.19.
My son, I beseech thee give glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and show me now, what thou have done) I confess unto
almighty GOD, in the face of his CHVRCH, that, in part, I have denied my Lord
with Peter, and betrayed him with Judas, and crucified him with the Jews.

A grievous sin, and a great punishment too; malum culpae turned into malum
poenae, when one sin is made the punishment of another; the justice of God
shining in the injustice of man. Thus my ingratitude for his benefits, my
negligence in his service, my affectation of vain glory, my impatience at
calamities, and my other sins, were punished with the sin of Apostasy, and
defection from the truth, even from the sincerity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
So that I proceeded from one fall unto an other; first in my Will, and then in
my understanding; first, a bono, and then a vero; first in manners, and then in
faith.

Here now, peradventure, some will say unto me, as Michal unto David, when she
despised him in her heart; 2. Sam. 6.20.21.22.
Thou have uncovered thy self, as a fool this day. But unto them I answer,
as David unto Michal: It was before the Lord and I will, yet, be more vile then
thus, and will be low in mine own sight. Let the proud Pharisee boast; Luc.
8.11.13.
I am not, as other men. But I will pray, with the dejected Publican; O God be
merciful unto me, a sinner. Finally, I say with Confess. lib. 4. cap. 1.
S. Augustine; Irrideat me arrogantes, and nondum salubriter prostrats, and
elisi, a te, Deus meus; ego autem confitear tibi dedecora mea in laud tua: Let
them, who were never broken, and humbled under thy hand, let them, I say,
deride me: but, as for me, o Lord, let me confess my dishonor in thy praise,
my shame to thy glory.

To proceed, then, in that, which I have begun. My fall was great, and
dangerous, considering Vnde, and Quo, whence, and whither I fell: to wit, from
the simplicity of that truth, which is in Christ, into a sink of superstition,
idolatry, and error: even the confusion of the spiritual Babylon it self.

And yet there are two things, principally, above the rest, wherein my heart
never was, nor could be, farther established, then by an implicit, inuolued,
obscure faith of the Church. Those are JMAGES, and INDVLGENCES (affixed unto
dead statues, unto our Ladies slippers, and the like trumperie) with holy
grains, agnus De^s, and sundry like profanations, Babylonian See Apocal.
18.3.11.23.
merchandise, the dregs of the meretricious, enchanting cup, wherewith the
inhabitants of the earth have been drunken. Apocal. 17.2.

You see the Matter, wherein I fell, and how that does augment the enormity of
my fall. See now farther, how it was yet more capital, in respect of my
Person; I mean, in reference unto my function, and office, in the Church of
Christ; which, in it self, was very spectable, yea honorable also, howsoever
my deserts were greatly evil, or meanly good, therein. Fac opus Euangelistae,
ministerium tuum imple, says S. 2. Tim. 4.5.
Paul unto Timothy; Do the work of an evangelist, fulfill thy ministry; by
frequent labor, by sound doctrine, by innocent, and vnoffensiue life: not
fashioning thy self, in the leuity of thy deportment, in the service of thy
appetite, in unseemly, and prodigious apparel], according to this present
world. In which things as I cannot excuse my self, so I wish, that I, alone,
were to be accused in the same. These are vices, ignoble, scandalous vices,
unto which I denounce immortal war, as in all men so, principally, in those,
who are of my condition and place.

Lastly, you will enquire of the Manner, and occasion of my fall; which I will
relate unto you freely, and sincerely, in the candor, and simplicity of my
heart.

It is true, that, sometime before my fall, or any propension unto the Romish
Church, sundry difficulties did inco^passe me, on every side; degne pro
meritis, dure pro viribus; as S. Bernard speaks: justly for my deserts, o
Lord, but yet hardly for my strength. And though these evils did breed a
natural alteration in me (even in my spirits, and in my strength: so that I
said unadvisedly in my self: it is better for me to die, then to live: Jonah
4.8.) yet all this while, I suffered no moral alteration: these things did not
prevail in me unto any mutation of my faith, either by an inward, or by an
outward change.

Howbeit I deny not, but that (the inferior parts of my soul rebelling
against the superior) my earthly, dark affections might, and did, interpose
themselves to eclipse the light of my understanding; the edge whereof was now
so dulled, and so abated, that it gave place more easily unto error, then
perhaps, otherwise it would have done.

See, therefore, the event. I found, but sought not, an occasion of dispute
with some ingenious, and learned Papists, whose names, and qualities, I may
not, I will not express. Neither they, in particular, nor any other, amongst
them, shall ever say of me, justly, that I had so little wit, or so il nature,
as to procure them hurt, who in act, or at the least, in their intention, were
kind, and beneficial unto me.

In this dispute, then (which was, concerning Purgatory, and prayer for the
dead) it so fell out, by the force of objections, which they made unto me, and
I made unto my self, out of sundry authors, old, and new, of the one side, and
the other, that my understanding (upon some defect) was convinced, rather then
my conscience persuaded, in this point.

You Mat. 20.8.
All this was but the beginning of sorrows. You shall hear the progression,
and increase.

When I was thus heated in Purgatory, I began to wax cold in the affection of
my former faith; and the rather, because m^ate, I made it a beam; and, if I
found nothing, I made something: as Caesar spoke, sometimes, of his way, and
passage; Inueniam, aut faciam, I shall find one made to my hands, or else I
will make one my self: so it was with me, in that unfortunate, and disastrous
time; which I can not remember, without grief, nor recount without tears.

The THIRD Vocation, and Ecclesiastical function; which are See Doct. Field,
of the Church lib. 2. cap. 6.
essential unto the being of a Church, and inseparable from the same. Here,
then, many defects were pretended strongly, and with such probability (but by
misprision in them, and ignorance in me) that our Vocation, seemed profane, our
Function sacrilegious, in mine eyes.

The FOVRTH,

These were the four points, which (originally, and principally) did work
with my Understanding (and superior part of my soul) to overcome me, while my
traitorous Affections (the inferior part) solicited me to yield. For it is
true, that the affections of a man are, unto his Understanding, as Judge. 16.
Delilah was unto Sampson: first, alluring it to betray its own strength;
then, delivering it over unto falsehood, and error (as she, having beguiled
Sampson, delivered him into the hands of the Philistims) which, having gotten a
conquest, will make a triumph also. O beware of this Eve, which, lying in your
own bosom, will seduce you; take heed of your affections, which always
contriue some treasonable plot against your understanding. Let the affections
be a servant, as Hagar; your reason free, as Sarah: if they contend, Genesis 21.10.
cast out the bondwoman, and her son.

Thus I, (miserable, distressed J) like a 2. King. 6.
blind Aramite, was conducted into Idolatrous Samaria, and never thought my
self secure, til I was in my greatest danger. I fled my native country (
Senec. in Med.
Fugimus lason, fugimus; hoc non est nouum; it is no news to hear of such
flying; many fled before me: I wish that never any fly after me) to go into a
foreign land. But here I may demand of my self, as Eliah, sometime, demanded
of Ahaziahs servants; 2. King. 1.3.
Was it not, because there was no God in Israel [England] that I went to
enquire of Baalzebub, the God of Ekron [Rome] concerning my estate?

I spoke of Philistims before; but now I was in the hands of Philistims indeed:
for whom J had never ground (as Judge. 16.21.
Sampson did) unless I (as Ibid.
Sampson was) had been first deprived of mine eyes.

Now I began to be in travel with an unhappy birth, which I had conceived
before; I mean, that Purgatory-discourse, which, in the heat of my ignis
fatuus, and popish zeal, I sent back into my country; as you know: I wish you
knew not. But as it had no right to inherit in this kingdom, since it was
borne in transmarine, and foreign parts; so it was unfit to be naturalized
here, which came from so unnatural a Parent.

Howbeit, I measure not my fact by the event: my intentition was not the less
evil, because the effect was not more evil. No? I spared none: not the truth
of God; much less them, by whom it was maintained in this Land.

In which number there are two, whom I scandalized (as unjustly, so chiefly)
above the rest. The one is, the learned, and venerable Deane of Winchester; of
whose knowledge, and charity, I have had so much experience, that, whether he
be melior, or doctior, a better man, or a more learned Divine, I can not easily
resolve. Only I can resolve with Seneca; that, of these two commendations, o
virum doctum, and, o virum bonum, the latter does excel the first. The other
is, the like learned, and venerable Deane of Gloucester; of whom J may protest
unfeignedly; Hieron. ad Augustine. inter Epist. Aug. 14.
Coepi illum ante amare, quam nosse, I began to love him, before I began to
know him: in regard of that, which I have heard, and which I have seen with
mine eyes.

These I say, are the men, whom J scandalized (as unjustly, so chiefly) above
the rest. And so I fell, expressly, into Vide. epist. Aug. 13.
S. Hieromes censure; Puerilis est iactantia, accusando illustres viros, suo
nomini famam quaerere, it is a childish vaunt in any, by accusing illustrious
men, to seek his own existimation, and fame. But they have taken some amends
of me, according to their will; there are others, unto whom J would make
amends, according to my power. I will name one, in steed of all; the most
Reverend Archbishop of York; a fair jewel, a rich diamond of this Church.

Upon him this evil aspersion was long since cast by Edm. Campian, and lately
renewed by me; to wit, that his Grace being, sometime, familiarly demanded by
Campian in this manner; Whether he, that employed himself daily in perusing
the ancient Fathers, could, indeed, be of that opinion himself, which he
persuaded unto others; did answer thereupon: That truly he could not, if he
should read the Fathers and believe them alike. But why did I reinforce the
objection of the one, and conceal the defense of the other? made in so
renouned a place, and recorded by so venerable a person.

For though I might appeal unto the testimony of his Auditors, who remain
unto this present; yet I will go from the living to the dead, and inquire,
what is delivered, and commended, by Jn resp. ad Camp. page 656.657.
M. Doctor Humfrey, unto all posterity, in this behalf. But because it might
be tedious unto you, to recite the whole passage, I will select one parcel
thereof; to wit, that his Grace, having sundry ways refelled this calumnious
imputation, did finally swear, by invocation of the blessed Trinity, the
FATHER, the creator of all things, the SON, the judge of all the world, the
HOLY GHOST, the comforter of us all, that, so far as he could remember, or
possibly recall to mind, this pretended answer, concerning the ancient
Fathers, never fell from him in earnest, nor iniest. What can you require more,
for your satisfaction, in charity, or in reason? Varius dicit, Scaurus negat:
vtri creditis? when Varius accused Scaurus of treason, in a profuse, and
copious speech; Scaurus replied briefly: Varius says it, Scaurus denies it:
whom do you believe? Likewise; Edmund Campian, a Jesuit, has said thus, as
you hear: Tobias Matthew, a Christian, denies it: nay more, he swears by
the sacred name of God, in the holy assembly of his Church, that he is
injuriously charged. Whom, then, do you believe? This was his See Doct.
Humfrey page 657.
own defense: I have borrowed it from himself, howbeit a great part of its
efficacy, and force, is lost in this conueyance. Val. Max lib. 8. cap. 10. in
fine.
In Demosthene magna pars abest Demosthenis cum legitur, and non auditur. A
great part of him is wanting, when he speaks by an others tongue: though (as
Jbid.
one says of Demosthenes) his work, in it self also, is so full, and perfect,
that nothing can be added unto the same.

Well, All this while I have told you, what I have done to God: yea, that,
which I have done unto the least of his servants, I have done also unto
himself. It remains now, that J tell you, what God has done to me. I say,
what God has done. For though I acknowledge gratefully, that some persons of
quality, and worth, were instruments in that good which has succeeded unto
me, according to his wishes, rather then mine own; yet I acknowledge God, him
only to be the author of the same; and that He has done it, out of his Mercy,
Love, and Grace. Wherefore, Come, and hearken, all you that fear the Lord, and
I will tell you, what he has done unto my soul.

His first blessing unto me was, Reuocation into my native country; dear,
because a COUNTRY: more, Because SVCH a country: the sweetness, and felicity
whereof, is known better, carendo, then fruendo, by wanting it a while, then by
enjoying it always: and so it is in every temporal, or spiritual good.

Here now, some will imagine, that, either in my discessio^, or in my reuersion,
or in both, my ends were drawn, rather ab vtili, then ab honesto: that I served
my own turn, in this return: that I departed with the resolution of a
Caesar, protesting unto his mother, upon taking of his leave, Se, nisi
Pontificem, non reuersurum: so I, without a Benefice, or Dignity in the Church,
would never return into the Land.

But as the manner of my return (if it were fit to be exposed in this place)
might acquit me fully, from the suspicion of such an impious device: so they,
who had the best experience of my mind at that time, might then see, and will
yet confess, that, in all probability, I framed no such project in my
thoughts: but that I was a real, substantial Papist: howsoever some men (led
with an honest error) have seemed to conceive otherwise of my case.

If the testimonies of eminent persons, may be required; or admitted, in this
kind; I would make choice of one, singularly, above the rest; to acknowledge
whose kindness toward me, it is the least recompense that I owe him, and yet
the greatest, that I can make him for the same.

He then does know, that, upon my return, I did express a great auersion from
this Church: pardon me: it was more: even a detestation thereof. And when he
would seem to nourish some hope (above hope) of my reduction thereunto; I did
beseech, and request him, most affectionately, not to sow his favors upon the
conceit of such an harvest. For I was thoroughly acquainted with the nature, and
quality of mine own soil, too barren for such fruit.

Here, also, I may not forget, nor conceal, his answer unto me; for it was
full of comfort, and conscience: to wit, that I should not be allured, nor
pressed [by his majesty's royal favor and grace; of which he conceived good
hope] otherwise, then I had the secret testimony, and certain persuasion of
mine own heart.

Wherefore, out of his noble, and religious disposition, he persisted still in
his pious, and charitable work. J say pious, and charitable. For what other
advantage did he seek, or could he find, then that, which S. Augustine did
long since, in a like case? Quid quaero? Quo fructu quaero? says Co^. de
^gest. (...) E^ito.
he of a Donatist, in his time. What is it, which I seek? Or, with what
profit, do I seek it? He answers; Vt aliquando d^tur mihi: Frater tuus
mortuus erat, and reuixit; perierat, and inuentus est: that once it may be said
unto me, Luc. 15.31.
Thy Brother was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, but he is found.

To this end, and purpose, J was recommended by his special care (but against
my will: for I loved my own evil, and feared the remedy thereof) unto the
Reverend Deane of Paul's; a man so rarely qualified with Moral, and
Intellectual, virtues, that his worth does no less verify his name, then his
name does signify his worth. And this I esteem one of the greatest (if not
the greatest) blessings of God unto me, that, when I was as blind in the eyes
of my mind, as Act. 9.
S. Paul was in the eyes of his body (yea of mind also) I should be sent (or
rather brought) unto this worthy Ananiah [ nubes Domini, the cloud of the Lord;
so it is by interpretation] for the restitution of my sight, and be mollified
again, by the sweet showers of his learned, and judicious discourse.

Thus, after a long, unhappy flight, I returned, with Noah's Genesis 8.9.
Dove, into the Arc, which J once forsook, and fluttered upon the swelling
waters of Babylon, which can give no true rest (but a Lethargy) unto the
soul. Finally, after a long, and tedious motion, I found rest, and repose unto
my soul, in the same center, wherein I was seated from my tender, and more
happy, years. This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in mine eyes.
What ensued? Mutantur, suscipiuntur, says Vbi sup^a.
S. Augustine of the Donatists: They relinquish their opinion, the Church
receives them into her union again. So it was with me; such was the gracious
favor of God, such the great indulgencie of his Church.

You will, peradventure, demand now; Upon what intellectual motives I did
return, since I had some (in my wrong apprehension) to depart?

I will speak the truth in Christ, I will not lie; my conscience bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost. The only thing, wherein J did intend to conform my
self unto the desire of my friends, and will of my superiors, was, to take
the oath of Allegiance, as it is truly, and justly styled. For what else does
it contain, in the substance thereof, but a civil obedience, and faith, due,
from subjects, unto their Sovereign Lord, by laws divine, and humane, yea
founded in the very principles of Nature, and Reason? Wherein I did observe,
FIRST, how carefully the matter of State is here distinguished from
controversy of Religion. In which regard, it was the determinate pleasure of
his sacred See his Majesty's Premonition to all Christian Monarkes, etc. page 9.
Majesty, to ease the burden of the Papists; not requiring them to swear,
that the Pope has no authority to excommunicate his Highness, and to subject
him unto a spiritual censure, but that the power of such excommunication
cannot, by any means, extend it self unto the prejudice of his royal Life,
or Crown. SECONDLY then, I observed thereupon, that though there are some
circumstantiall points in this oath, upon which some Papists do principally
insist, for their refusal thereof, yet that they did, herein, but gloze with
his Majesty, and use a specious pretense to reject the substance of the Oath;
which, being abstracted from all circumstances, and accessaries therein, has
this principal issue: to wit, that the Pope has no power, directly, nor
indirectly, to depose his Majesty from the right of his Crown, nor to expose
his person unto the peril of his life. So that the refusal of this Oath (thus
sensed: and this is the true sense thereof) by any popish subject in this land,
does demonstrate evidently, and expressly, that he wants means, and not a
mind, to dethrone our most gracious Sovereign Lord, the KING (whom God
preserve, to his honor, and our comfort) yea (which I tremble to speak, but
he would not fear to do) to take away his precious life, with sacrilegious
hands, specially if such be the resolution of See this particular, handled by
D. Morton, in his encounter against Parsons, lib 2. cap. 2.. 6.
our Lord God, the POPE.

To show, therefore, my zealous, and hearty detestation of such impious, and
execrable doctrine (sent continually from Rome, sown plentifully in the hearts
of English subjects: and this seed will grow into an harvest of lamentable
combustion, if our just laws be not enliuened by a severe execution, in this
behalf) I took this Oath, upon such mature deliberation, and advice, that I
dare confidently pronounce: Whatsoever subject in this Land does pertinaciously
refuse to swear allegiance unto the King, according to the sense and substance
of this oath, he is a TRAITOR, in his heart, against the life and sovereignty
of his Prince.

But now, as, by this act, I gave testification of my loialty unto the State,
so, withal, I incurred the suspicion of heresy, and apostasy, with others.
Why? what was my offense? Oh a great, yea a double offense against his
Holiness; which every one, that takes this oath, must necessarily commit.
FIRST, he denies the infallibility of the Popes judgment: yea he admits
farther, that the Pope erreth, not only materially, but formally; not in fact,
but in faith: also, not as a private Doctor, but as public Pastor of the
Church. Finally, that this his error is execrable and damnable, according to
the tenor and purport of the oath.

Now if any man be desirous to know, how far the Pope was interessed in the
prohibition of this oath, let him consult the To the Catholics of England.
second Breue of Paulus 5. dated 10. Calends of September, 1607. Wherein he
says precisely: We have straightly commanded you, that, by no means* you
should take it: again, our Apostolic letters, concerning the prohibition of
the Oath, were written, not only upon our proper motion, and of our certain
knowledge, but also after long and weighty deliberation, used concerning all
those things which are contained in them [the said Letters] and that for this
cause, you are bound fully to observe them* rejecting all interpretation,
persuading to the contrary. And this is our mere, pure, and perfect will, etc.

SECONDLY, he denies the Popes power, either directly, or indirectly,
temporally, or spiritually, over our dread Sovereign Lord, the KING, to be
such, that he may, sententially, depose him from his Crown, absolve his
subjects from their allegiance (though due unto him by the bonds of Nature,
and pledged unto him, farther, by the obligation of an Oath) and enable them to
bear arms against him, or, by any means, to deprive him of his Regality, and
Life.

These, then, are the two offenses, which I have committed against the dignity
of the triple Crown. But why is that so capital with our English Catholics,
which the French do so freely and liberally maintain?

Not long before my departure out of France, I addressed myself unto a pair of
learned Messicurs, le Mastre, and le Marchand.
Dominicans in Roan, doctors of the Sorborn in Paris: of whom, as I desired
some exact instructions concerning this Oath, so I delivered his Majesty's
Apol^gia pr^ iuramento Fidelitatis, etc.
book into their hands, for their better information in this behalf. They
read it with expedition, applauding the great wisdom, and excellent knowledge
of his Highness; protesting also, that, as the Oath, for the matter, and
substance of it, was agreeable unto the Catholic faith, so, for the occasion
and inducement of the same, it was most expedient, and necessary, for the
preservation of his royal State They added farther, that this extension of the
Papal power over Christian Princes, was dogma Transalpinum, an Italian conceit
(for they observe a difference betwixt the Roman COURT, and the Roman CHVRCH)
which a true French Catholic heart does religiously abhor. And therefore they
advised me to take the said oath, as themselves also, and all French men,
would do in the like case, were it required at their hands.

But our English Catholics are (for the greater part) of an hotter
constitution, more affected unto the climats of Italy and Spain. Which I
speak with commiseration of my own Country; not to the disreputation of those
great and mighty Nations: the eyes whereof God will open, in his appointed time
to shake off this Babylonian yoke. For which, I have better evidence, then
Comment. in Genesis 15.16. in fine.
Pererius a Jesuit has for the calamity and vastation of England; pushing at
us like an 1. King. 21.11.
horned Zidkiiah: but with the like success (I hope) as his false brethren did
not long before, who prophesied thus unto the King of Spain: Ibid. 12.
Go and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver England into thy hands.

You have heard, now, the cause and beginning of my alienation from my
English-Romane friends. Was it not just and good? For what a desperate
connection is there betwixt these doctrines? FIRST, The Pope has an infallible
judgment (as Pope) to determine, what is heresy, obliging all men to rest,
securely, in his sentence. Yea Analys. fidei lib 8. cap 3. ad. object. 6.
Gregorius de Valentia himself is so deeply infatuated with this vanity, that
he fears not to affirm; The Pope, whether he use diligence, or not, in
defining, shall define infallibly, if he will define a controversy: and so, in
truth, he shall use the authority committed unto him by Christ.

The SECOND is, that, in case of heresy he may depose the King, absolve his
subjects from obedience, and give away his Crown; as Pius Quintus gave away
the Crown of England unto the late King of Spain: and this is one instance,
which Institut. Moral. pars 2. lib. 11. c. 5 q. 8.. Pius quoque.
Azorius the Jesuit, does allege, to prove the transcendencie of the Papal
power.

Now, if the Pope have infallibility of judgment, in himself, to determine,
what is heresy, and then a sovereignty of power also, to dethrone, and
murder any King for heresy: judge you how dangerous is the condition of our
King, who valiantly resists his tyrannical proceedings; and how miserable is
their thraldom, who are inslaued to the yoke of his power and will. Mean
while, 2 Thessalonians 2 ^.
He sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God: but yet,
therein, showing himself to be, as he is, ANTICHRIST: whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth.

The consideration of al which particulars (summoned up together) did treat
with me (as they may, and ought to do, with any man, in my case) to show
greater equanimity in the reuiew of other points, now controuersed, in
Religion; and namely in those FOUR, which I have mentioned Page 44.
before. Wherein, though I cannot acquaint you wholly how I did proceed, yet I
will give you some ouerture thereof, briefly as I pass.

The FIRST was, concerning Purgatory, which I utterly reject, and renounce, as
inglorious to the blood of Christ, and troublesome to the sweet comfortable
repose of our souls in him.

The SECOND was, concerning some errors in the writings of our chief Divines:
of which point, I have already given up a verdit against my self. I add now
farther, that such errors in them (if truly noted by me) should not reasonably,
remove a man from the integrity of his faith, which depends upon a more
certain principle and ground. Why should the error of any MAN prejudice the
eternal truth of GOD?

But beyond all this; is there more sincerity in the Romanists, that, in
respect hereof, I should subscribe more readily unto them? Truly such was mine
opinion: but the immediate testimony of mine eyes, and the deliberate judgment
of my reason, have taught me to believe otherwise herein.

For a copious testimony in this kind, I remit you unto the late Lib. 1. cap.
1. per totum.
Encounter of Master Doctor Morton against Master Parsons: and the rather,
because I have compared each particular, from point to point, with the Authors
themselves, whence he does produce the same: so that J am an ocular witness of
his fidelity therein, as also, throughout the whole course of that book. There
you shall find Suarez (a grand Jesuit) charged by Cumel (a learned Dominican)
in this manner. I am grieved to see how fraudulently they [Suarez Molina, etc.]
cite Driedo, urging that, which he spoke by way of argumentation, or objection,
for his own judgment whereas Driedo uses many arguments to confute that
opinion. Again; Zuarez cites a sentence of Soto, but leapeth over one part of
it, leaving that out, which makes against himself. Again, Suarez has
changed the word Praeordination ( in S. Thomas) into Subordination, and
expounds S. Thomas sinisterly. I cannot tell with what spirit he cites
Driedo, etc.

Hear further, how the great Cardinal Baronius is reproved by some famous
Divines of Venice, viz. When Baronius entreats of the immunity of the Clergy,
and wants other support, he disliketh all historians. When he admits any,
he singleth out the words, which make for him: but these which make against
him, he says, were inserted by others. There is a book entitled, The errors
of Baronius, wherein there are discovered more then twenty several errors,
which he has committed about one story, etc.

Finally, hear the like accusations, by them, against Bellarmine himself. He
expounds Thomas contrary to his meaning. He imputes a speech unto an Author,
who yet does affirm the contrary. He says, that Nauarr holds thus, and
thus, whereas he held the plain contrary. It is no rare thing for his
illustrious Lordshippe, to cite Authors for an opinion, whereas they affirm
the plain contrary. He abuses the testimony of Gerson. He falsely cites a
place of S. Hierome, who says the plain contrary. It greeueth me to see
things imputed by Bellarmine, unto the Fathers: the contrary whereof they
affirm, etc.

For conclusion, let me acquaint you with one (I say but one, to spare you, not
him) singular imposture of Bellarmine against Calvin, and so I will dismiss
this point. The Bellarm. de sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 1.. ^st igitur.
question is; Whether the souls of holy men (dissolved from the body, and
standing in need of no purgation) be admitted unto the fruition of
blessedness, which consists in the clear vision of God? It follows. Some
heretics (says Bellarmine) were of opinion, that the souls were reserved in
certain receptacles, unto the day of judgment, where they saw not God, nor
were blessed, otherwise, then in hope. What heretics? Tertullian; Vigilantius,
etc. Be it so. Who else? He adds, John Calvin also has the same error.
Where? Institut. 3. book, 20. chap.. 20 What are the words? Bellarm. ibid
E^ndem habet, etc.
Calvin does say, that Christ alone, is gone into the Sanctuary of heaven, and
that all others remain in the Court: expecting there, until the consummation
of the world. Let us make a trial now, whether Calvin be guilty of this
opinion, or Bellarmine calumnious in his assertion.

FIRST, then, for the opinion of Calvin in this matter, you shall find, that
he is singularly traduced therein. For amongst many passages in his works,
behold this one: Calvin. aduers. Libertin. cap. 22.
The souls of the faithful, as soon as they are departed from this body, do
live with God, and enjoy the happiness of that kingdom, which is in heaven.
Howbeit, says he (and he says it truly) God has reserved their perfect
[consummate] felicity, until the second coming of Christ.

SECONDLY, therefore, it may please you to consider with me, how unworthily,
and slanderously Bellarmine inforceth this error upon Calvin, out of the
assigned place. I find indeed, that Calvin does, there, expressly affirm;
Christus, sanctuarium coeli ingressus, ad consummationem vsque seculorum, solus
populi, eminus in atrio residentis, vota ad Deum defert: that is; Christ being
entered into the Sanctuary of heaven, unto the end of the world, does alone
carry (or present) the prayers of the people, remaining a far off in the
Court, unto God.

Now observe the fraud. Of whom is the question? Of the dead, or of the living?
Of the DEAD: to wit, concerning the souls of them, who are fallen asleep in
Christ. And of them Calvin is charged by Bellarmine, to say, that they are not
in heaven, etc. and, for a proof, he has alleged this place. But of whom
does Calvin there entreat? of the dead, or of the living? Of the LIVING: for so
does the Membrorum omnium, adhuc in terra laborantium, mutuae, pro se inuicem,
orationes ascendunt ad caput, quod praecessit in coelum, etc. The mutual
prayers of all the members, yet laboring here upon the earth, ascend unto the
Head, which is gone before us into heaven. Likewise, in the very place it
Calvin says, that Christ being in the Sanctuary, carries up, unto God, the
prayers of the people, remaining in the Court. What people? the living: for the
office of the Saints departed is not to pray, but to praise the Lord. Again,
immediately after, even in the very next words unto those, Bellarmine does so
fraudulently cite: Quantum ad Sanctos attinet, qui carne mortui, in Christo
viuunt, etc. As for the Saints, who, being dead in the flesh, live in [or with]
Christ, etc. Which words, as they do plainly show, that Calvin spoke before,
of the living, and not of the dead, so likewise they do fully convince the
falsity of this pretended crime. Wherein the collusion of Bellarmine is the
greater also, because Calvin does not say (as the Cardinal imputes unto him)
that Christ, alone, is gone into the Sanctuary of Heaven, he and none else: but
that he, being entered into it, does alone (he, and none else) present the
prayers of the Who are living in this world, and are not in the Sanctuary of
Heaven.
people unto God: so that, unto him, alone, the office of a Mediator does
peculiarly belong. And this is the subject of Caluins dispute.

But I leave this second point (wherein I have too much abused your patience)
and come unto the THIRD: which was, concerning Vocation unto sacred Ministry,
in this Church. Wherein I know, that the power of order is complete in all
respects. In respect of the persons calling; that they had sufficient ability
to confer it. In respect of the persons called; that they had actual
capacity to receive it. In respect of the vocation itself; that it had no
substantial defect, in Matter, nor in Form. As also, that the power of
Jurisdiction, here is entire: that it has not necessary deriuation from the
Pope, but flows from God, by the Church, by the Magistrate, by the people;
differently, but truly, as I am able and willing to prove, when good
opportunity shall serve, and just occasion shall require.

Concerning the FOVRTH, and last point: namely the Church; I know, and
acknowledge, that God had a Church alwaie; that it was D. Field. lib. 1. c. 10.
visible; that though many erred therein, yet not all: or, at the least, not
so, but that there remained a substance of faith, sufficient unto salvation.
Finally, that as a general Reformation was expedient, and necessary, so our
particular was orderly, good, and just.

In a word therefore, to acquaint you with my total conformity unto the
doctrine of this Church (contained in the 39. Articles of Religion) I have
submitted my self thereunto, by profession of mouth, by subscription of hand,
by consent of heart. In this faith J desire to spend, and end, the course of my
life; to the honor of GOD, the benefit of his CHVRCH, the comfort of my own
soul.

Now I may say joyfully with David; Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest, o my soul; for the Lord has been beneficial unto
thee. Or with Simeon; Luke 2.29.
Lord, now let rest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. I lost thee, but thou did not loose
me; I fled from thee, and thou did seek me; I erred, and thou did reduce
me; I was blind, and thou did illuminate me; I was hardened, and thou did
mollify me; so I returned (by thee unto thee) and thou have received me
again. Therefore I will exalt thy name for ever, and humble my self with
David, before thee, saying: Psalm. 86.11.12.13.
Teach me thy way, o Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy name. I will praise thee, o Lord my God, with all my
heart: yea, I will glorify thy name for ever. For great is thy mercy toward
me: and thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell.

Thus you see (Brethren) in part, what God has done unto my soul, as also
what I owe unto him for his mercy, love, and grace: and what I shall perform
unto him, for the same, by the assistance of his Spirit. Hereunto I will adioin
a brief remonstrance of my duty unto the CHVRCH, of my loialty unto the KING:
finally, I will conclude with a petition, and promise unto your selves.

The FIRST is, my duty unto the Church of God, in this flourishing Island, or
rather little world; the glory whereof I have labored to obscure, with my
unfortunate, and misaduised pen. But as See August. epist. 13.
Stefichorus lost his eyes, by dispraising the fair Helena of Greece, and
recovered them, by praising her again: so, to reobtaine my former sight, I will
expend all the faculties that I have, in advancing the dignity, and luster of
this incomparable Church: incomparable in many respects, but specially in two.
First, in the excellency of preaching the Gospel. For as God has given the
word, and great is the multitude of Preachers: so, in their gifts, matter, and
manner of preaching, singular also is the perfection of Preachers in this Land.
Secondly, in the Common prayer, and Liturgy, a jewel so precious, that it
cannot be valued at too high a rate.

The SECOND thing was, my loialty unto our gracious Sovereign Lord, and King,
whose mercy toward me, has been very great, in pardoning my offenses, which,
mediatly (at the least) did touch his royal Self. The Subjects, whom I
grieved, are under his dition: the Laws which I violated, are under his
administration: the Church which I scandalized, is under his protection: the
Faith, which I impugned, is under his DEFENSE, by common right, and special
title. So that all these, coniunctiuely, might plead for a revenge from his
princely hands, since Romans 13.4.
He bears not the sword in vain.

But, as J said before, his Highnesses mercy has bin very great unto me, in
making me an example of his clemency, which, in truth, is so natural unto Him,
that He (as sometimes Senec. de Clem lib. 1. cap. 10.
Augustus) may well be called Parens Patriae, the Father of his Country,
because (as Seneca testifies of Augustus) apparet illum dare poenas, cum
exigit: It appears that He does suffer punishment Himself, when (by
compulsion) He does take it of another.

It is my special obligation, therefore, beyond a common duty, to pray (yea I
pray now, and beseech you all to join your hearts with mine, lifting them up
unto GOD, for Him) that his Majesty may enjoy a peaceable reign, a prosperous
estate, and obtain a blessed end, after a long, and happy life; that He may be
translated, from an earthly, unto an heavenly kingdom, where the glorious
Lamb sits, Apoc. 19.16.
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords* that, as now, he reigns Prou. 8, 15.
by him; so there he may reign with him, in that happiness, which has no
misery, in that abundance, which has no want, in that security, which has no
fear, in that eternity, which has no end. Amen.

Now THIRDLY, and lastly, I turn my speech unto you, dear, and well-beloved
Countrymen, in whose audience, and with whose patience, I have made a full and
free confession of my error. I have not hid it (for thereby I should hide God
from me, not me from God) I have not hid it, I say, by Negation, nor by
Extenuation, nor by Justification thereof, remembering what was Februar. 10. by
Mr. Kitson of Peterhouse in Cambridge,
lately delivered here, in the prosecution of a Text, well chosen, and
excellently handled: Prou. 28.13.
He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses, and
forsakes them, shall have mercy.

As for your charity toward me, I cannot doubt, but that, at the least, you
will esteem of me, as S. Paul did sometimes judge of Onesimus, Philemons
servant: Philem. verse. 15.
It may be that he departed for a season, that thou should receive him for
ever.

As for me, I trust in God (by the gracious assistance of his holy spirit) so
to comport my self in the whole course of my studies, and actions, that, with
just application, you may call unto your remembrance that, which S. Paul said,
a little Ibid. verse. 12.
before, of that fugitive servant: He was unprofitable in times past, unto
thee, but now profitable both unto thee, and me.

Wherefore, I request you, Brethren, to praise God, with me, and for me, who
has thus extended his Mercy, Love, and Grace toward me, when I was dead in
sin. Pray him also, that I may use his blessings, to the honor of his name,
and benefit of his Church. Finally, I beseech him for you, and my self, that
we all may have, for the end of our actions, his glory* for the rule, his word;
for the fruit of our faith, the salvation of our souls through Jesus Christ
our Lord: to whom with the Father, and the blessed spirit of both, be ascribed
all majesty, power, and dominion, in heaven, and in earth, now, and for ever:
Amen.

FINIS.

