THE SCHOOL OF SKILL: Containing two Books: The first, of the Sphere, of
heaven, of the Stars, of their Orbs, and of the Earth, etc. The second, of
the Sphericall Elements, of the celestial Circles, and of their uses, etc.

Orderly set forth according to Art, with apt Figures and proportions in their
proper places, by Tho. Hill.



AT LONDON. Printed by T. Iudson, for W. Iaggard. 1599.

To the Reader.
Diverse have written of sundry matters in former Ages, to the intent to benefit
these our later times, wherein a man can name no kind of Art or Science,
liberal or mechanical, but there are as rare wits to be found as ever lived
since lerning flourished. The reason is good that it should be so. For first, we
have come to our hands, use and judgment, whatsoever either autique or
modern Authors have left behind. Secondly, the government (God be blessed)
has a long time (now these 40. years) bin so peaceable, that Students had
never more liberty to look into learning of any profession, for the enlarging
of their understanding. Lastly, the means otherwise, as well out of the
universities, as in them, have been and are so many and so good, to attain to
all knowledge, that I dare be bold to say, England may compare with any Nation
for number of learned men, and for variety in professions. Of late a man of good
merit, named Tho. Hill, painful with his pen whiles he lived, (as the world can
witness, being possessed of sundry his works in Print) now deceased, left this
Treatise Mathematical, entitled The Rudiments of the Sphere: which being found
by judgment of the learned in the like profession, worthy the publishing, I
have, not only for the memory of the Author, but also for the profit of alwel
affected Students, undertaken to set forth. Wherein whosoever bestows time
and labor to read, with a temperate and sober spirit, I doubt not but they
shall be satisfied in all such points, as this Mathematician pretends to
handle. His style is not to be plausible, considering the subject or matter
whereof he discourses, does restrain him, both to terms of Art, and phrases
consonant. But for his order and facility (such as a profession of this nature
will bear) better to be conceived, than some (none dispraised) that have
written of the like argument. It is not unlike, but he would (if God had spared
him longer life) have held on as he began, to set forth for the common good of
his and our Country diverse necessary works. This seeming his last, and whereof
there is use both on Sea and Land, printed according to his own copy, and the
Figures answe able to the patterns as they were dravne by pen, now newly stepped
into the world, receive and read friendly, find no faul; but accept the good
mind of the de^eased man, and thank them by whose means this book, which
otherwise night have been lost, is set on foot, and come abroad. April. 8.
1599.

Yours W. I.

THE FIRST PART OF THE RVDIMENTS OF THE SPHERE OF HEAVEN, of the Stars, of
the Orbs of the Stars, and the EARTH.
Seeing this little Book of the Sphere does entreat of that part of Astronomy,
which shows the diverse motions of the Celestial Orbs and stars, the
magnitudes and distances of their bodies from the Earth, with all the
diversities and neerenesse of appearaunces in the Planets, and fixed stars:
therefore does the Author write of the Principles of the same, in this Treatise
of the Sphere, to the great commodity of many young Students in the Art. For
this contains only the entreating of the Sphere: that is, of a perfect and
very round body, containing diverse Circles, which the learned do also call a
Material Sphere: of the Celestial appearances that it describes in the
Instrument, named of them the Material Sphere.

Now this teaches five definitions of the same: twoe of the Sphere, one of the
Center, one of the Exe tree, and one of the Poles of the World.

1. What a Sphere is.
EVCLIDE in his eleventh Book, thus defines a Sphere. A Sphere (which in
Latin is a Globe) says he, is a sound Figure, made by the turning of a half
Circle, the Diameter of which half Circle continuing so long steady, until it
be brought again unto the place, where that Figure began to be drawn. Or thus:
A Sphere is such a round and sound body, which is described by the drawing
about of the half Circle.

Theodosius teaches another definition of the same: That the Sphere is a
certain massy Body, or sound Figure, enclosed with an upper face or platform,
in whose middle is a Prick, from which all lines drawn from the Circumference
or platform are equally distant one from the other: and this Prick, of him
named the Center of the Sphere; and like of the Globe.





The half Sphere is contained in the half of the Globe, and greatest Circle
of the Sphere.

The Exe-tree of the Sphere is a right line, about which the Sphere fixed, does
the half Circle drawn about describe.

There are also two manner of Orbs, as the Solyde Orb, and hollow Orb: the
Solyde is named the Globe or Sphere, which only contains one round upper
face, and the same imbossed hollow outward: but the hollow Orb differs, in
that the same has two upper faces, the one imbossed outward, and the other
hollow within. Also the Orbs of all the fixed stars, and Planets, are like
hollow, and not Solyde.

A material Sphere, is that which is made of ringes, or Circles, in such a
manner framed, divided, and disposed, that the same in some manner may express
and show forth to the eye, both the standing and motion of the Circles in the
first moouer.

To the Sphere belong these differences, A Prick, a Line, Dyametre, Parallels,
an upper face, a Center, Exe-tree, and Poles.

A Prick or note is of no bigness, but the beginning of Magnitudes, which in
the order of nature goes before them, and not made as a part: in that a Line
is not made of Pricks, nor Pricks are the parts of a Line. For if an
infinite number of Pricks were heaped and joined together, yet would those
never make a Line: so that a Line is caused, through the drawing of a Prick
into length.

A Line, is a length without breadth and deepnesse, and ended with two pricks,
which cannot be comprehended, but by Imagination.

A Dyametre, is any right line drawn by the Center of a Circle, and middle of
a Figure: whether the same be plain, Solyde, round, or cornered: whose ends
reach and come from side to side of the Circle about, and deuideth the Circle
into two equal parts or just halfes.

The Parallels are two right Lines equally drawn, which extended on any
Platform unto an infinite length, do always keep one like distance, and
neither draw nearer, nor touch together.

An upper face, is a length and breadth without deepenesse, made by the drawing
of a Line into breadth: Of which, the plain upper face is that, which is
expressed with those straight Lines which it has: that neither the middle
rises up, or is raised at the ends, nor the same falls within. The
Sphericall upper face is distinguished, into an imbossed and hollow upper face.
The imbossed, is the outward compass about of the Sphere, or bodies round: but
the hollow upper face, is the inward compass about in the hollow Orb, or the
bodies hollow.

A Center, is the middle Prick in a Circle, from which all right Lines drawn
unto the compass about the same, are equal between the one and the other.
Also a Center of the Sphere, is a middle Prick in the Sphere, from which all
right lines drawn unto the imbossed upper face, we agree in length.



The Exe tree, is a right line drawn by the Center of ^e Sphere, and with both
his ends pearcing unto the ^des of the imbossed upper face, about which the
Sphere (...) turned.

The Poles, are the very ends of the Exe-tree, appeaing on each side, about
which heaven is turned. Also the ^oles of the turning, are named the ends and
tops, and named besides the ending points of the Exe-tree, drawn by the
Center of the Sphere: about which the Shere and Circles of the Sphere are
turned.

The Poles of the Sphere, and Circles described in the Sphere, are points
consisting in the upper face of the Sphere, from which all right lines drawn
unto the compass of the Circles are equal.



Although every greater Circle in the Sphere of the world has his Poles, yet
is oftener mention made of the Poles of the world, or Equinoctial of the
Zodiac, and Horyzont.

The Poles of the world or Equinoctial, are the two extreme points and both
endings of the Exe tree of the world, about which the Sphere is turned.

The one of the Poles, which elevated shows to us dwelling into the North,
and turns always about in our sight, is named the Boreall and North Pole, of
the little Bear near to it: which Pole is continualy seen and known by the
two stars near to it; of which the one is notable and clear, of the third
bigness, standing at the end or top of the tail of the little Bear, distant
from the very Pole 4. degrees, and 9. minutes. But the other dimmer, of the
fourth bigness, not far distant from the other star before, is come nearer,
and does scarcely differ now 50. minutes from the place of the true and very
Pole.

If any will know the Pole of the world or Pole star, let him turn his face
toward the North, the sky then being clear; leaving the East on the right
side, and west on the left side, and he shall see in the little Bear seven
stars, placed like to the form of the stars of the great Bear, which are
brighter. Of these stars three do fashion the tail, and that which is in the
top of the tail, is named the Pole star, which declineth in our time from the
Equatour 85 degrees, and 5^* minutes. So that being no further off by this
declination from 90 degrees, the distance of it from the very Pole shall
remain and be 4. degrees, and 7. minutes: and this star also in process of
time shall be joined with the Pole.

The other Pole, which through the swelling of the earth, is continually hid to
us of the North, is named the Meridionall or South Pole, right against as it
were the North Pole. Being evermore so low depressed, as the North Pole
raised, in any country to the North, above the Horizont.

The Poles of the Zodiac, are continually so far distant from the Poles of
the world, as is the greatest declination of the Sun, which in our time is
found and noted by observations to be of 23. degrees, 28. minutes, and 30.
seconds. But the Borcall or North Pole of the Zodiac, distant from the two
dim stars, in the tryangle of the Dragon (being stars of the sixth bigness)
which a right line by imagination drawn from the third star in the tail of
the little Bear, unto that constellation named Lyra, expresses the same, that
it is but a little further distance then two degrees.

The Poles of the Horizont, are the twoe extreme points or ends of the right
line, drawn out of the Center of the Earth, by the top over our head, unto the
opposite places of the Dyametre of the Merydyan: of which the one, directly over
our head, named the vertical point, and of the Arabians Zenith, the other
right against, named of them Nadir.

And the Poles of each of the greater Cyrcles, do differ from their Circles
90. degrees, or a quarter of an other great Circle of the Sphere. For by the
23. proposition of Theodosius of the Sphere, a right line drawn from the Pole
of his Circle unto the circumference, is equal to each of the four quarter
sides, descrybed within the same Circle, which four quarter sides, do divide
the Circle into four quarters.

Yet are each greater Circles of a Sphere, equal between the one and the
other. But seeing the equal right lines, do take away the equal compasses of
the equal Circles, therefore should a line drawn from the Pole unto the
circumference of his Circle, take away of the greater Circle, one quarter of
the other Circle drawn by the Pole, even like as the sides of a quarter
described within the Circle. By which appears, that the Poles of the greater
Circles, do differ or be distant by a quarter from their Circles, as is above
written.

What the World is, and into how many parts the same is divided, with the
motion of the celestial Orbs.
THe World after Orontius, is defined to be a perfitte and an entire
composition of all things: a divine work, but finite, and continually to be
merueled at: adorned with all kinds of forms and shapes of bodies that nature
could make, which in all parts are procreated and appear: and those first
created by God (so well in Earth as in Heaven) by his only wor^ of nothing, to
the end the same might be a proper mansio^ place for man, in which he might
daily behold, and make known.

Aristotle teaches two definitions of the world: the one, that it is an apt
frame wrought, consisting both of heaven and earth, and of the celestial and
inferior bodies aptly distributed, and of other natural things in them
contained.

The other definition is, that the world is a perfect body, and most perfect
round form, containing the ordinance and distribution of bodies, created by
God to tend unto a purpose, which by God, and through God is preserved.

The parts or Regions of the world, are two: as the Ethereall, and Elementary.

The Etheriall region is the higher and upper part of the world, which
encloseth the Elementary region, being wholly clear and the light perfitte, and
containing the Orbs of all the fixed stars and Planets, distinguished by a
certain order, free of all mixture and all strange qualities, nor harmed by
any alterations. In which the celestial bodies are drawn about by certain
and continual orders and times of the motions, that they may so cause the
diversities of times, days, years, and months: and as well in the Elementary
nature, by his motion and light, engender, mix, and temper together the first
qualities, and prepare also other effects.

The Elementary region, is the nether part of the world, which is contained
within the hollow upper face of the Moons Orb and Sphere, in which are all
corruptible bodies, and things harmed by diverse alterations, except the mind
of man: the causes of which, are the contrary actions of the first qualities.
Also the four Elements are simple bodies, which into parts of diverse forms
cannot be divided: yet through the mutual commixion of these, are diverse
kinds of bodies caused. Therefore, whatsoever bodies are in the Elementary
region, be either simple, myxt, or compound bodies: In that the mixed bodies,
are all those which may be divided into parts of diverse kinds.

To these of the four Elements, the next joining within the hollow upper face
of the Moons Orb, is the most thin Air (being the lightest of the
Elements) kindled, through the daily moving about of the celestial circles:
which for this congruency with the fire (named the elemental fire) that is
daily drawn about by the Orbs compassing it, which may appear by the Comettes,
and other fiery kinds, engendered in the same Element of a hot and dry vapoure,
that are likewise carried about.

The next within that does the air run, being a heavier Element then the
fire, yet lighter then the water: which also is drawn about by a like motion,
as may appear by the clouds, and other like impressions engendered in the same,
but to the nether region of the same, consist the laterall motions, as we
daily see by the blowing of the winds. Farther, Vitellio in his tenth book
and 60. chapter affirms, that the clouds are distant from the vpperface of
the earth 25000. paces, or 13. Germayne miles. But acording to same writers,
they are unequally distant from the earth: as somewhiles further off, and
somewhiles nearer to the earth. For when the clouds are furthest distant from
the earth, they are but 772000. paces, and being nearest the earth, are 288000.
paces distant. To conclude, this Elemente compasses and encloseth, both the
earth and water by his largeness.

The next Element to the Air which moves, is the water, for the same is
moved by a motion of flowing and ebbing which it makes after the motion of
the moon; in that it flows six hours, and ebbeth so many, until the moon
by the motion of the first moouer, has passed about all the quarters of
heaven. Also the water has a motion, and that downward into the earth, so that
these two joint ly annexed make as it were one body. Yet the earth being the
heauiest Elemente, has a motion attributed as it were simply downwarde unto
the middle: notwithstanding agreed of all men, that the same is immouable, and
the Center of the world.

These four: that is, the fire, air, water, and earth, are named to be the
four Elements, and both the simple, and Original matters, of which all mixed
bodies are compounded and made.

The proof that there is only four Elements, is this: that to each Element
the two first qualities agree, and the Combynations the like of the four
qualities: as of heat and dries, which consist in the fire: of moisture and
heat, which rest in the air: of coldness and moisture, which be in the water:
of dryness and coldness, which is found in the earth.

By these it is evident, that there are but four Elements: of which heat
exceeds in the fire, moisture in the air, coldness in the water, and
dryness in the earth. To conclude, it appears, that heat with cold, and
moisture with dries, cannot aptly be joined.

What the Stars are, and that, as to the motion of their Orbs, they are
carried about.
THe Ethereall region contains the Stars, which are the thicker parts of
their Orbs; perfect round, clear, most pure and simple, and free of any
mixture, except the Moor which is darker then the others, yea variable and
shadowed. And these fastened to their Orbs, by which in certain continual
and appointed times and orders, are drawn about, and perform their returns
in the determinate spaces of times, and those continually agreeing in
themselves, that they may so engender the differences and orders of times, and
in the inferior nature prepare and cause the first quallities, and other
effects.

The Sun the fountain of light, does not only give light and make shine
clear the inferior bodies, but the superior also, by the brightness and
light of his beams.

But the Stars seeing with a borrowed light they shine, which is far weaker
then the suns, therefore with that strange light which they take properly of
the sun do they shine, although unlike to the sun.

For into all the stars, which by nature are round about thynne, and
penetrable, is the suns light equally shed and pearceth, and so fills all,
that they are subject to no times of increasing and decreasing of light.

But the Moon, seeing it is an imperfect body, and that it has the parts some
where thynne, and somewhere thicker and better compact: therefore does it not
equally, nor round about receive the suns light. So that the thynner parts
take more of the suns light, and of the same do clearer shine. But the
lesser shadowed parts which also are seen, appear darker, as the spots in the
moon do show.

That the bodies of the stars are round, do the round forms in the Eclipses
of the sun and moon show: yea in what parts of the world those Eclipses
happen, do the bodies also of the stars at that time appear perfect round:
Although the bodies of the stars be known (by sundry reasons) to be round as
a bowl, yet by their great distance from the earth, appear to us as plain or
flat.

Nor the Stars are not moved by their own proper motions, but by the
Accydentary, as unto the motion of the Orbs, to which they hang, as parts unto
the motion of the whole. For to every round body do two proper motions only
belong, as a moning to and fro, and turning about. Therefore the Stars
(seeing they be round) are by some proper and principal motion carried round.
But the fixed Stars are not so moved round, in that they turned about, do not
altar the same face or body which they once turned and showed to us: but that
the same should of necessity happen like, being turned round in one place,
about their Exe-tree, with the others in the same motion being in the parts
far distant, and the others then set and hid under the earth. Nor are they
turned hither and thither, in that they never change the standing and place
which they have in their Orb, which to those carried hither and thither would
happen. Therefore, not by a proper and chief motion are they carried about, but
by an accidentary drawing about of their Orbs, which what the same is, shall
after appear.

That Heaven is drawn round.
THe Ethereal region, do the Philosophers also name quinta essentia, or as it
were a fifte body, constituted above the four Elements, being incorruptible
and divine, consisting of the noblest and purest part of the air. Which also
is placed above the holow upper face of the moons Orb, that reaches unto the
hollow upper face of the highest heaven, being most pure, perfitte round,
continually carried about, and bright appearing.

This part of the world being the Etheriall region, is named heaven, which
always drawn about by a marvelous swiftness, is divided into nine Orbs or
Spheres. Although sundry Astronomers, as Alphonsus, Johannes de monte regio,
Purbachius, and others, have added a tenth Sphere, through the third contrary
motion found in the eighth Sphere, named of Thebit benchore (the first
inuenter of the same ( Motus trepidationis, or the going and coming of the
eight Sphere.

The first and uppermost Orb, is named the first moouer. The second is that,
which is named the ninth Sphere or Christaline heaven, but of Ptholomy, named
the firmament or Orb of the fixed stars. And the third is that, which (of
them) named the eight Sphere, only added through that motion of the trembling,
or as it were a moving forth and return of that eight Sphere; which properly
is caused, in the two small Circles about the heads or beginnings of Aries and
Libra: through which diverse motion of the eight Sphere, do the Equinoctials
and Solstices come and begin sooner by certain days, and the suns greatest
declination deminished (and daily does) to that in Ptholomie and Hipparcus
time, which then was 23. degrees and 52. minutes, and 30. seconds. And for
these have Alphonsus and sundry others, attributed diverse motions to the eight
Sphere, adding a ninth and tenth Sphere to it.

That there are but eight celestial Orbs which may be seen.
ALthough Ptholomy affirms, that there are nine Orbs equally distant, yet are
there but eight which may perfectly be seen and decerned with the eye, both in
the standing, variety of motions, and differing in the periodes or courses.
Also they are in such order disposed, that no Orb hinders the motion of
another near to it. As the Sphere of the fixed stars, and the seven Orbs of
the Planets. And most certain it is, that some of the fixed stars are drawn by
a swifter motion, and others by a slower motion, and that the Apogea or
ascentions also of the Planets are changed, after the order of the signs.

The Orbs of the Planets thus contain and compass one an other, as first the
Sphere of Saturn being nighest the firmament (of which being compassed) does
like contain Jupiters sphere, and Jupiters, does in the same manner enclose
Marses sphere, and Marses in like order, the suns sphere, next the suns,
does contain Venus sphere, which like does compass, Mercuries sphere, and
Mercuries does contain the Moons sphere, being the lowest and smallest
sphere. And every of these spheres, has a star a piece, named eractical stars
or planets: which stars have every one their proper Orb several, his motion
several, and unlike in time one to another, in that they appear one whiles
near together, and another whiles are seen far distant asunder.

By which it agrees, that their equal motions, to appear to us unequal,
either through the Poles of the Circles, diverse from the Poles of the world
about which they be turned, as are the Poles of the Zodiac, under which the
eratical stars are continually drawn and move; rather for that the earth is not
the Center of those Orbs, by which the Planets are carried and moved about.

So that when we consider those mouings by the Center of the world, then is
caused, that they seem to us as they were increased in a greater bigness,
when as we behold and see them near hand, and that lesser in bigness, when
we see them placed far off. Even so in the equal circumferences of the Orbs,
through the diverse distance of sight, we like observe the unequal motions, by
the equal times.

Yet indeed neither of these happens, but that they are drawn about by
unchangeable spaces, being a like distant, and keeping one manner of bigness.
For if this were, then the sun, or any other star being in the middle of
heaven, should seem or appear bigger (which it does not) then being in the
East, or West part.

And the contrary we sundry times see, when as the sun or any other star,
appears bigger in the quarters of the East, and West; which is not caused by
reason of the shorter distance, but for that his beams in the vapors, which
do thick ascend (both in the winter time, and in raynie weather) that hang in
the air between our sight, and the body of the star, are then broken: which
breaking of them, does cause the star to appear far bigger to the eye, then in
deed the same is.

And that a readier and easier knowledge may be had (after the mind of
Ptholomie) of the first moouer, and celestial Orbs with the number of the
Circles and Elements enclosed within the first moouer, conceive this figure
here following most aptly drawn and set out for thy further instruction.

This Figure declares the number, disposition, and order of the celestial
Spheres, about the Globe of the Earth.


That there are two first motions of the celestial Orbs.
ALthough the celestial Orbs are severally drawn, by proper and unlike
motions: yet be there two first motions, that are manifest, both by
observation, and judgment of the eye. The one is of the first mouer, which
Ptholomy attributes to the ninth Sphere, that is only drawn about by an
equal swiftness, from the East into the west, and from thence again into the
East, upon the Poles of the world or Equatour, in the space of a natural day
or 24. hours. And this first mouer draws with it all the other Orbs, much
like a ship, which being at full sail, does draw and carry al her men, and
other living things which are in the Ship. So that by this motion of the
first moouer, the nether Orbs, which the first mouer compasses, are drawn
once every natural day, or in the space of a day and night, about the earth.
Also this first mouer, does not only describe and measure a natural day, but
causes times, and diversities of days and nights, with the proper motion of
the sun; and it daily brings up stars to be seen, and carries up to the
highest, and after hides them again, under our Horizont in the west. Besides
it is the common measure of all the other motions.

The other motion is proper to the eight Sphere, and to the Orbs of the seven
Planets, in the which they are contrarily carried to the first mouer, as from
the west into the east, in moving under the Zodiac, and about the Poles of
the same: and not in Parallels from the Equatour equally separated; but are
drawn much slower, yea and unlike. As by a like example; when a ship by a most
swift course is carried into the west, yet may the Mariners and others in the
ship walk forward in the mean time into the East: Even so is this second
motion of all the other Spheres under the Zodiac, upon the Poles of the
Eclipticke. Also by a swifter motion are they carried, and sooner perform their
courses, which are nearer to the earth* and contrariwise move by a slower
pace, and in longer t^^e compass and wander about the signs of the Zodiac,
which are further distant from the earth. Also in the middle of their courses
(as it were) each do often stacke or be slow, and often times stay as
immovable, and sometimes are retrograde, after again quicken their course,
and by their swiftnes recover that lost of the former tariance. So that they
never keep one manner of way, but one whiles from the middle journey of the
Zodiac do wander into the North, and another whiles into the South. To
conclude, they be ascended high from the earth, when they are named Apogei, and
descended again unto the earth, when they are named Perigei.



That there are two kinds of Stars, the fixed, and the Planets.
ALL the fixed stars that hang to the firmament (or as Ptholomie affirms) to
the eight Sphere, are named fixed: not for that they consist immovable, but
that they move so meruellous slow, that by judgment of the eye they cannot be
perceived to move: yet the practitioners have and do find both by reason and
observations, that they always separated by immovable spaces one from the
other, and are carried in parallels as it were in their Orb.

Ptholomie, Aristillus, Timochares, with the observations of Hipparchus, joined
unto those which he knew, noted that the fixed stars in a hundredth years moved
one degree. But Copernicus being of later years (as about the year of Christ
1525.) that examined the observations of the ancient men, and compared them
unto those noted of him, found that not so many as a hundredth years, but in
seauentie and two years, that the fixed had gone one degree: and that in every
Egiptian year (which contains 360. days) the fixed to have moved 50.
seconds, and in a day 8. thirdes, and ten fourths. And so performed their
whole course, in twentyfiue thousand, eight hundredth, and sixteen years,
25816.

Of these known and numbered of the ancient men, are 1022. which they have
divided into six differences of magnitudes; and to these have added certain
obscure, and certain cloudy stars.

The fixed stars of the first bigness, of which are numbered to be fifteen,
and that both in bigness and brightness exceed all the other stars, and in
body exceed the earth 107. that is, a hundredth seven times, with a eleven
threescore fourths.

The fixed stars of the second bigness, of which are accounted 45. do exceed
the earth in greatness almost eighty seven times.

The fixed stars of the third bigness, of which are numbered to be 208. do
ouerpasse or exceed the earth seauenty two times, with a third part almost.

The fixed stars of the fourth bigness, of which are reckoned to be 474. that
are fifty four times greater then the Earth, with a half or a little more of
the earth.

The fixed stars of the fifth bigness, of which are noted to be 216. that
exceed by their greatness the earth 31. times.

The fixed stars of the sixth bigness, of which are noted to be 50. do
exceed the earth eighteen times, and a little more.

The dark stars, are accounted 3. in number: and the clowdy stars, are
reckoned to be five.

The fixed stars do differ in brightness, standing, color, twinkling, and
especially in the configuration. Many of the fixed stars also with the effects
both in the bigness and brightness, being notable and near together, the
ancient men that divided them by a certain reason, have gathered, digested,
and fashioned them, into forty and eight images or similitudes. And unto them
through the congruence and similitude of the noted forms or figures, they gave
apt names: and for the same cause especially, that they might the easier and
sooner be discerned, known, and noted by their peculiar names. Also they
divided the stars, by the standing into the North and South, and the signs of
the Zodiac. The Northerly stars that decline from the Ecclipticke into the
North, are twenty and one in number. The Southerly, that decline from the
Ecclipticke into the South, are fifteen in number. The images that are named
the signs, are twelve in number, which consist in the Zodiac.

Of the celestial Images, and of their diverse names, being in number, 48.
Of the Northerly.
_1 THe little Bear has seven stars, and of those, that star which is in the
top of the tail, is named the Pole star. 2 The great Bear, has 27 stars, 8
without form. 3 The Draggon has 31. stars. 4 The image named Cephe us, has
12 stars. 5 The image Boots or Lauceator, has 22. stars. 6 The Boreall or
Northerly crown has 8. stars. 7 The image kneeling or Hercules, has 28.
stars. 8 The Harp or Griepe falling, has 10. among these the brightest is
that named the Harp. 9 The wild Swanne or Griepe flying, has 17. 10 The
image Cassiopia, has 13. stars. 11 The image Perseus carrying the head Algoll,
has 26. stars: of which, those which are on the left hand do make the head
Algoll or Gorgons, 3. without form. 12 The Cartare, has 14. stars, among
those, that which stands on the left shoulder, is the Goat: and the other
two are named the Kids. 13 The image Ophiulcus or Serpentarius, has 24. stars.
14 The Serpent, has 11. stars. 15 The figure named the Arrow, has 5. stars.
16 The Egle has 9. stars, 6. without form. 17 The Dolphin, has 10. stars. 18
The division of the Horse, has 4. stars. 19 The winged Horse or Pegasus, has
20. stars. 20 The image Andromeda, has 23. stars. 21 The Tryangle, has 4.
stars.
The Sum of all the Stars, are 360

The 12. Signs of the Zodiac.
_1 THe image named Aries has 13. stars. 2 The image Taurus has 23. of these
five in the forehead of Taurus, named Succulae or Hiades, and the greatest
star of Hiades in the Southerly eye, named Pallilicium, and Pleiades on the
back of* Taurus, 11. without form. 3 The images named Gemini, are 18. stars:
of which Castor or Appollo goes before, Pollux or Hercules, follows. 4 The
image Cancer has 9. stars, among these Presepe, and the cloudie star in the
Breast. 5 The image Leo has 27. stars: of these, that which is in the heart of
the Lion, named Regulus, 8. without form; among which is that constellation,
named Berenices bush of hair, between the tops or ends of the Lion and great
Bear. 6 The image Virgo has 26. stars: of these, that which is in the right
wing, especially Northerly, is named Vindenuator, but in her left hand a bright
star, named the ear^ of corn, 6. without form. 7 The image Libra, and klees
of the Scorpion, have 8. stars, and 9. without form. 8 The image named the
Scorpion, has 21. stars, the middle star (of the three stars) placed on the
Body, is named the heart of the Scorpion, and 3. without form. 9 The image
named Sagitarius, has 31, stars. 10 The image named Capricornus, has 28.
stars. 11 The image named Aquarius, has 24. stars, and 3. without form. 12
The images named Pisces, have 34. stars.
The Sum of all the Stars, except Berenices bush, are 364.

Of the Southerly.
_1 THe image named Coetus, has 22. stars. 2 The image named Orion, has 38.
stars. 3 The image named the river, or Eridanus, or Potamos, has 34. stars. 4
The image named the Hare, has 12. stars. 5 The image named the Dog, has 18.
stars, of which that in the mouth, is named Alhabor, 12. without form. 6 The
image named the little Dog, or Caniculare star, has 2. stars; of which the
brightest is that named Proion or the Dog-starre. 7 The image named the Ship,
has 45. stars, of which a bright star going before in temone. 8 The image
named the Water Serpent, has 25. stars and 2. without form. 9 The image named
the Bucket or great Cup, has 7. stars. 10 The Raven or Crow, has 7. stars.
11 The image named Centaurus, being one half like a man, and the other half
like a horse, has 37. stars. 12 The Beast which the Centaure does hold, being
a Wolf, has 19. stars. 13 The image named the Altar, has 7. stars. 14 The
Southetly Crown, has 13. stars. 15 The Southerly fish, has 11. stars, and 6.
without form.
The Sum of all the stars, are 316.

THe milkie way, which Ptholomie names Galaxian of the white and milkie
color, is a heap of most small stars, and dim to sight; of which is a
certain confused gathering together, and abundance as it were increased, that
no several light is decerned: and the same (in the manner of a girdle)
compasses and encloseth heaven about. The same also is unequal, and differs
in the standing, latitude, haunt of stars, and in the color very much. It is
somewhere decerned clefte, but the part going before, is neither whole, nor
makes a whole swathe or enclosure about, but lacks about the swan and
Altar. And the part following whole, being in no place broken off with a space,
and stretched thwartly in heaven: and from the parts of the Zodiac
Northerly, it passes by Gemini, and Sowtherly by Sagitarius, and Capricornus.

Of the Planets.
THe Planets, named otherwise the erring and wandering stars; not for that
they err by a wandering and uncertain motion, but in that they are carried
about by a diverse and unlike motion. For sometimes they go foreward, and
sometimes retrograde; sometimes are hidden and clean out of sight, after they
appear and show themselves. Again, they go before, and follow the Sun. They
are carried swift, and their motions again so stayed, that they are moved in a
manner nothing at all, but seem as they were stayed for a time. From the suns
way, one while carried into the South, and another while carried into the North,
and then unto the same way drawn back again: so that their iourneies being
passed and finished, they steadyly repeat their old courses by the like order.
Of these are seven, and each carried in their proper Orbs, and compass about
the Zodiac, in unlike spaces of time,

Saturn highest of the Planets, and most slow in course, being cold and dry,
pale to a leady color, and perfourmeth his course in 30. years, being ninty
times, with an eight part greater then the earth. And the highest ascension or
point of Saturnus Orb (which at this day is in the 29. degree of Sagitarius)
is from the earth 20072. semidiametres, with a fourth part almost, and 15.
minutes. But the lowest point of Saturns Orb, is distant from the earth,
14378. with a third part, and 20. minutes.

IVpiter being next unto Saturn, temperate, and so clear or bright, that he
gives in a manner a shadow (especially when he is Perigeus or lowest descended
to the earthward) and he compasses about the Zodiac in twelve years. But
Jupiter gives this proper shadow, when neither the lights be above the
earth, nor Venus near to him. He is greater then the earth, by ninty five
times, and a half part almost. And the highest ascension of Jupiters Orb,
which possesses the seventh degree of Libra, is from the earth 14369. with a
fourth part almost, and 15. minutes, but the lowest point of Jupiters Orb, is
from the earth distant 8853. semidiametres, with a ninth part and 45. minutes.

MArs being hot and dry, and shining with a fiery color, does go about the
Zodiac, in the space of two years. He is named the fiery Planet, of his
shining with a fiery color, or of the effect which follows by him, in that he
burns and dries up. He is one time greater then the earth, and a little more
then a third part. The highest ascension of Marses Orb, that obtains the
28. degree of Leo, is now distant (after Albategnius) from the earth 8022.
semidiametres: but the lowest point from the earth, is 1176. semidiametres.

THe Sun obtains the middle place between the Planets, wholly and thoroughly
bright, being the fountain and Author of light: which by his motion expresses
and deuideth the spaces of the Zodiac, and by his going about, have the
signs their names. He is greater then the earth (after Ptholomie) a hundredth
threescore and six times, with three eight parts. But after Capernicus, the
sun exceeds the earth, a hundredth threescore and two times, with eight parts
less. The highest ascension or point of the suns Sphere, which n^w possesses
the seventh degree of Cancer, is from the earth distant 1179. semidiametres,
but the lowest point of the suns Orb, is from the earth distant 1065.
semidiametres.

VEnus next to the Sun, being cold and moist, white in color, clearer and
brighter shining then Jupiter, and is carried about (like the Sun) in a years
space, and both goes before and follows the sun; nor is further distant in
the spring of the morning from him, then 46. degrees, and 47. minutes: but in
the evening, she is seen digrssed from him, unto 47. degrees, and 35* minutes.
When she goes in the morning before the sun, thee is named the day star: but
when she follows the sun in the evening, she is then named the evening star.
Lesser she is then the earth, but her true quantity is yet unknown: for that
some affirm her quantity to be the 28. part, and others the 37. part of the
earth. The highest ascension of Venus Sphere, that obtains the 18. degree,
and 20. minutes of Taurus, is from the earth after Albategnius 1070.
semidiametres, but the lowest point, is 166. semidiametres dista^t from the
earth.

Mercury being lower then Venus, is variable and apt to be changed, bright,
but not white in color; and is carried about the sun like to Venus, as one
whiles moving before, and an other whiles following the sun. Nor is he
further distant in the morning from him, then 29. degrees, and 37. minutes, and
at the evening westwarde, 27. degrees, and 37. minutes. He perfourmeth his
whole course, in the space of a year, as the sun does. Also he is judged to be
the seventh part of 2^. or 22000. part of the earth. Albategnius affirms,
the Star of Mercury, to be least of all the stars, and supposes or
accounts him to be as one part, of 19000. parts of the earth. The highest
ascension of Mercuries Sphere is from the earth* after Albategnius) distant
166. semidiametres, but the lowest point in the same Orb, is 56. semidiametres
distant from the earth.

THe Moon being lowest of all the Planets, does compass about the whole
Zodiac, in 27. days, 7. hours 43. minutes, and 7. seconds. She is lesser then
the earth (after the judgment of Ptholomie) by three hundredth nine times, and
a unity more then eight parts. For the triple proportion of the diametre of the
earth unto the moon, by dividing above the fifth parts, is even the like, as
27. unto 5. But lesser she is then the sun, by six thousand, five hundredth,
thirty and nine times. Copernicus (by his observations) found the earth
greater then the Moon, by forty three times: less then an eight part: and of
this, the sun also is found greater then the moon, by seven thousand
parts, lacking threescore seconds. And the greatest distance of the new and
full moon from the earth: after the mind of Ptholomie, is 64. semidiametres,
and 10. scruples: but after later observations, 65. semidiametres, and 30.
scruples. And the lowest to the earth, is 55. semidiametres, and 8. minutes.

THe Moon digressing from the Sun every month, and taking or receiving a new
light as it were, in that she (is changed, and takes a new light of the sun)
does after increase by little and little, conceiving daily a bigger form and
light, until she come in right line against the sun; at what time she
shines with full light: after returning again unto the sun, she waxes old
by loosing of her light by little and little: and in the contrary manner comes
unto the like forms of light, until she coming under the beams of the sun,
be quite out of sight. Also for that the moon has a body, partly thin,
partly thick, solyde, and shadowed; therefore is she not equally filled round
about with the beams of the sun, but that the same half of her Globe or body,
which turned again in heaven (that beholds the sun) is it which shines, and
the other half turned away from the suns light, is that which shines not, but
remains shadowed.

That Heaven has a round form and to be carried circularly.
FIrst, heaven is equally distant round about from the earth, and of this is
heaven perfect round, after the definition of the Sphere. Which reason is thus
proved; that if heaven should have any other form then perfect round, then of
necessity must the stars change their distances from the earth, what place
upon earth they should purchase, as somewhere more, and somewhere less they
should be distant; and the standing of them changed, should also alter their
apparent bigness, in that they should appear greater being seen near hand,
and lesser, being seen far off. Yet neither of these happens, but that they
continually keeping a sunder, are drawn about by unchangeable spaces, and
holding a like bigness and distance, to all places of the earth.

That the stars about the quarters of the East or West, appear sometimes
greater, is not caused by reason of the shorter distance, but for that their
beams in the vapors, which often times consist in the air between the
stars and our eye, are then broken; which breaking of them, causes the body
of the star seen, to appear much greater in the eye, then in deed it is.





That heaven is drawn circularly, is thus known; in that we always see all
the Stars, from the East into the West, to be drawn upward, and that the
hemisphere in our sight, is carried continually in distant cyrcles equidistant,
never changing the standing or distance, one from another, neither in bigness,
as far as the judgment of the eye can descerne, neither any whit lessoned. For
they being drawue from the nether place (as from the earth) are carried by
little and little. And after they be thus come unto the highest of their
journey (as unto the noon-steede) they decline again by little and little, till
they be brought down unto the west quarter, and there set and hidden, under the
earth: and these places and times, both of the risings and settings do they
repeat in certain order. Therefore by these it appears, that they are
drawn and carried by round.

By the second it is evident, that the Stars, which be near the Pole
Articke, are never hidden out of our sight, but are continually and uniformly
drawn round about the Pole as the Center: in such sort, that the stars near to
it make the lesser compasses, and the stars further off, do define greater
compasses. So that the stars fastened to their proper Orbs (as aforewritten)
are cyrcularly carried. By which two motions of the stars, as well tending unto
the West, as otherwise; it plainly appears that heaven is drawn about and
carried round.

A manifest demonstration appears of the former argument, by this figure here
following.



That the Water and Earth are round Bodies, and by a mutual embracing do make
one Body, and one hollovv vpperface.




THat the earth is round, is thus proved. Whereas in every upper face, the
length and breadth is considered. The length of the upper face of the earth, is
from the West, into the East, or contrariwise. The breadth is from the South,
into the North, or contrariwise. That the earth also to be round, appears
after length: in that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, do neither arise, nor set at
one instant time alike, to all persons dwelling in any part of the earth. But
do much sooner appear and shine to them dwelling unto the East, and within a
whiles after they show to them dwelling in the West.

By the second appears, that one and the like Eclipse of the moon in diverse
hours, is seen both in the East and West. For that which appears in the
first hour of the night to them in the West, is seen to them in the East
part, in the second, third, or fourth hour, even as they come nearer unto
the East: which would not be caused, if the night to both places should happen
and be at one moment, nor sooner would they appear to them in the East part.

Again, there be certain stars, which in their rising, do appear sooner to
them in the East parts, then to them in the West, as Pliny writes of Arbelis
(being a town in Asiria) where an Eclipse of the Moon was seen in the second
hour of the night, which in Sicily, was seen in the first hour of the night.
For the Assirians are more Easterly then the Sicilians, and therefore does the
sun set sooner with them, then with the Siciliaus. And when it was also the
second hour of the night in Assiria, the Sun first set in Sicilia, about the
first hour of the night. Moreover the Pole of the world (acording to the
diversity of places) is elevated and depressed. So that the cause of the
diversity of this appearance, is only the swelling of the earth.

To be brief, the beginnings and spaces of the days and nights, and that in
diverse places of the earth do vary, and yet following in a manner, one order.
But this variety could not happen, if the earth were not Sphericall, and all
about equally round, herein excluding both valleys, and the tops of hills,
which applied (unto the body of the earth) cause no inequality or diversity at
all. For the swelling of the earth causes, that the stars be not seen
together in all countries, but drawn about by little and little, by a certain
succession and order, that they so appear sooner to them in the East part,
then to them in the West, through the swelling as yet not above carried, which
swelling being high between both, is a let and cause of the later appearing of
them to the west: and by that means also keeps and hides the stars the
longer from their sight. So that by these it evidently appears, that the
only cause, is the swelling of the earth.



If the earth were fashioned with a deep hollownesse, and compassed round
about with a light enclosure, then should the stars risen, be soonest seen to
them in the West parts, and much later appear to them in the East. For that
the higher enclosure to the hollownesse, as a wall built about, should be a let
and hinderance to the sight of the beholders; in such sort, that those stars
arising, it should hinder their sight.

If the earth were formed with places standing in sharp pillar form, or in
right line up; then should the stars appear set, and be hidden alike to those
places, and no differences of days should be caused, but that they should
have one like day, and the sun also appearing to that fide, which they showed:
so that whiles the Sun runs and compasses about the back parts, they
should be without light of the sun, and should remain all the time in shadow
and darkness. And if it should have a Cubicke for me, then should they see the
sun six hours, and loose or be without light and sight of the sun, other
eighteen hours.

If in round piller-wise, as if the howndes were plain unto both the Poles,
and the hollow parts should decline unto the East and West, then should no
stars continually appear to them dwelling in the hollow: but that certain
stars should arise up and set in the West, and other certain stars near to
both the Poles, should always be hid.

To conclude, if the whole earth were framed with an equal playnesse
throughout, then should the stars appear at one moment to all countries; and
setting again, should hide the like out of sight: and by that means should
the days begin and end alike, and no differences should be observed. To all
such arguments, seeing experience only does repugne or contrary them: It is
therefore manifest, that the earth from the West toward the East, rises up
into an equal swelling.

If the earth also were plain from the East unto the West, then should the
stars arise so soon to them in the West, as to those of the East, which is a
manifest error. Also, if the earth weere plain, from the North unto the South;
and like from the South unto the North: then the stars which were to some of
a continual appearance, should always seen the fame and like, which way or
into what quarter soever a man goes, which also is untrue. But the cause which
makes the earth seen plain, is through the over great quantity, which
causes it so to appear to every man's sight.

But that the earth is round (according to latitude) the diverse eleuations of
the Pole and stars (either always in sight, or continually hidden) does
evidently declare.

For from the Equatour, in going forth easily toward the North, and that the
Pole Articke be higher raised, and the stars near to the Pole raised up; then
are the Stares right against like depressed, and as they were out of sight, and
so much the more as they go further from the Equatoure: nor the Northerly stars
never set, but continually drawn about (in sight) with heaven. But the
contrary happens, by going from the said Cyrcle or Equatoure, unto the
contrary part. So that there is no greater cause of this diversity, than the
swelling of the earth, which if the same should be plain, the stars
opposite or right against (according to latitude about the Poles) should offer
and appear together to all countries, which the swelling of the earth hinders
to be seen.

An instrument, by which the round nesse of the Earth (according to latitude)
may be proved, and all those may easily be showed which are taught of the days
Artificial.



That the Water has a like swelling, and runs round.
THis by two reasons is proved, the first is most certain, by a mark or marks
standing on the sea bank, like as a tower, steeple, or such like erected of
purpose, so that a ship sailing into the deep, and carried so far off, that
no more of the sides or bottom can be descerned, saving the top of the mast,
which only appears to the sight. Or thus, that a mark stood on the sea
bank, and a ship passing forth of the haven, sailing so far into the sea, that
the eye of the beholder being near the foot of the mast cannot decerne the
mark (the ship in the mean time staying or standing still) so that his eye
being in the top of the mast, shall perfectly see that mark: but the others
eye being near the foot of the mast, should rather better see the mark,
than he which is in the top of the mast, as may more evidently appear, by
lines drawn from either place unto the mark: so that the manifest cause of
this, appears to be none other, then the swelling of the water. But here are
all other impediments excluded that may otherwise hinder; as mists, foggs, and
such like vapors ascending. Also a like reason of the impediments of this
above written, is, for that the water arises into a swelling, which hinders
the sight of the bottom or sides of the ship (that being in a high place does
not hinder the sight of the same) as the top of the mast, which either
exceeds or is equal with the swelling of the water. For men sailing on the
main sea, see nothing round about but the Sky and the Sea: but coming nearer
the banks, do by little and little descry and see, either high hills or cliffes,
as if they were rising forth of the water. Also to those that dwell on a high
ground, the sun first arises, and last sets. And to this agrees, that out
of the higher places, both more and further may be seen into the sea, then in
valleys or lower places. By all these therefore it is evident that the upper
face of the water swells, as by the example following more plainly shall
appear: but an other example of the same shall be here rehearsed, by a
similitude of one part as the whole. The similitude of which matter conceive by
this example, that experience daily teaches us of the drops of water, which
although they be small, yet powered on dry woollen cloth, run into a round or
bunching form; which without doubt should not be caused, if the part followed
not the nature of the whole of his kind. Now the example above promised does
here appear, in which by the letter A. is the ship meant to come unto the
mark C. In which being in the point A. that is in the bothom of the ship,
cannot see the mark standing in C. through the swelling of the water. But he
which is in the top of the mast, as in the point B. without all impediment may
see the said mark. That the self same or like to it, may be on land, as from
the point D. none except he be foolish or starcke mad will affirm the like.



By the second it is manifest that the water by nature is carried and runs
downewarde, and stideth or falls from higher unto lower places, so long,
until it has filled and be even with the earth, through the staying of high
heaps of earth, hills or such like mighty and high banks enclosing it about
that it run no further, nor make no hollownes in the middle of the earth, as a
Center of the earth. Which therefore gathers between the empty places, so
long, until it has filled and be even with the earth; and that the whole
together, through the hollownesse thus made equal, does fashion and keep a
round form.

So that the earth, with the sea, and waters running about it, do make one
round body, and fill all the whole upper face: the earth also gaping and open
somewhere, receives water into those hollow places, but a part of the earth
appearing somewhere above it, staying and inclo^^ng it about with strong
enclosures and banks (wrought by divine miracle) that the bare places of the
earth, might be a commodious dwelling and feeding for all beasts, and other
living creatures.

And y^ this is true, shall be proved by other two reasons. The first, by
sundry perygrinations, in which many and most large parts of the earth are
found toward all the quarters of the world, which evidently witnesses, that
the earth is not as Pliny and others writes; which imagined that the earth is
compassed about with water, and appearing so out of the water, like an Aple or
Ball swimming above the water, whose one half shows out of the water, and
the other half hid in the water. Which reason Ptholomie does not allow, but
simply affirms, that the earth with the sea and waters, make one round body,
by filling of the empty places, and both to have one upper face. Also Vitruuius
in his ninth book writes, that the earth is placed in the middle of the
world, and is naturally joined together with the sea in the place of the
Center. But what the form of the earth is, above the waters, is yet not
thoroughly known, by reason of the sea which runs between it in diverse
parts, and breaks it into sundry parts, like to gobbets or pieces.

Ptholomie affirms the earth to be known, unto the longitude of the half
Cyrcle, that is 190. degrees, without any running between of the sea in that
space; for that the earth is wholly joining together. But into latitude, he
affirms the space to be much lesser, as 79. degrees, and of this opinion, is
both Strabo and Aristotle.

By the second it appears, that the water with the earth, does equally make
one hollow upper face, and the same to be perfect round; but whether is bigger,
is greatly to be doubted: although the learned Nouius, and sundry other late
writers, do affirm the face of the earth to be bigger then the water.

By the third (which is the Ecclipses) In that of necesity the earth must have
such a form with the waters running in it, as the shadow of the earth frames
and counterfeiteth in the Moons Ecclipses; in that the shadow shows and
expresses the form of the body shadowed. But the shadow of the earth to be
included round about with a round upper face, the wise both see and know.
Therefore the whole Globe, compounded of the earth and waters, is comprehended
with a round upper face. For it is manifest, that the moon before and after
the full, is seen horned, and the part shadowed of the whole cyrcle, is easily
to be descerned from that bright circumference. So that the moon entering into
shadow, or going out of the same, is likewise in the same manner horned: and the
part darkened, is always descerned from the clear circumference of the whole
Cyrcle imbossed. Therefore of necessity must the beginning of the shadow, which
seperateth the part lighted, from the shadowed, not be fully strait, nor
unequal, nor vallied or winding, but round: and for that cause appears the
upper face of the shadow not to be plain, but round.

By these is also manifest, as by the first, that there is no difference
between the Center of the earth, and Center of the water: but that the one, is
the Center of both the Elements, joining together into one round body, and
tending unto the one and the same Center of the earth. For the earth (seeing it
is the heavier) is opened, and receives the waters falling into those places.

By the second it is euidente, that the place of the water, which ought to run
over and cover the whole earth, is otherwise changed and appointed by the
Divine will, for the benefit of all living creatures.

By the third appears, that the opinion of certain Peripateticans is false;
which affirms the water to be ten times greater then the earth; and that to
one part of the earth, is ten portions of the water increased. But seven
times greater then the earth it cannot be, unless the earth round about were
wasted and impaired, by the Center of the gravity (as it were settling and
resting upon) should yield, and give place to the waters, as the heavier.
Seeing the Spheres are together in a triple reason of their measures, then if
the earth were an eight part, to seven parts of the water, the diameter of it
could not be the greater; as from the Center of the waters unto the
circumference of them: that is, by double so much unto the diameter of the
water, as by this figure here under drawn appears: where this letter A. is
the Center both of the earth and water, B. the Center both of the magnitude and
earth, G. A. D. the diametre of the waters, A. B. D. the diameter of the earth.
If the waters are seven times bigger then the earth, the diameter of them must
needs be double so much unto the diameter of the earth, as here from G. D.
unto A. D. By which example thus drawn, the whole earth receives the Center
of the weight, gyuing place to the waters, and all covered with waters; to
which general experience gainsayth and denies, muchlesse therefore can it be
greater ten times. By which is to be concluded, that the water is but little in
quantity, in respect of the earth, although it may seem very big, being up
to the edges of the upper face of the earth. And if the waters had been more
bigger then the earth, they had drowned or covered the whole earth, even of
late years.



That the earth employeth the middle place of the World, and is the Center of
the whole.
A Ristarchus Samius, which was 261 years, before the birth of Christ, took
the earth from the middle of the world, and placed it in a peculiar Orb,
included within Marses and Venus Sphere, and to be drawn about by peculiar
motions, about the Sun; which he feigned to stand in the myddle of the
world as immovable, after the manner of the fixed stars. The like argument
does that learned Copernicus, apply unto his demonstrations. But ouerpassing
such reasons, least by the newness of the arguments they may offend or trouble
young students in the Art: we therefore (by true knowledge of the wise) do
attribute the middle seat of the world to the earth, and appoynte it the
Center of the whole, by which the risings, and settinges of the stars, the
Equinoctials, the times of the increasing and decreasing of the days, the
shadows, and Ecclipses are declared.

The earth round about is equally distant from heaven: therefore, according to
the definition of the Center, the earth is the Center of the world.

That the stars have always one bigness, in what place soever any shall behold
them: therefore are they in an equal distance from the earth.

The roundnesse of the earthly globe, has a proportion unto the roundnesse of
heaven; that is, the certain and proportional parts in the earthly Globe, do
answer to certain proportional parts of heaven: therefore is the earth the
Center of the world.

In that sifteene German miles on earth, do answer to a degree of the
Meridian: and that in every hour do fifteen degrees arise of the
Equinoctial; which could not be, if the earth were not in the middle of the
world. For the unequal Arks, should otherwise appear in the equal times: and
the equal parts of the Meridian, should the unequal spaces on earth
answer: which experience daily witnesses unto the contrary. And hereof it
ensues, that the earth stands in the middle of the world.

In every Artificial day, do six signs appear, and six like set under the
earth: therefore is the earth in the middle of the world, and is also as a
prick, to which the half does regularly move daily. The like is in the
opposition of the Sun and Moon, when either light is in the Horizont: which
could not be, if the earth should approach or come nearer unto one part, then
unto the other.

If it were nearer to either of the Poles, then could not the universal
Equinoctials be: for that the one Arc always (either in the day and night
time) should be greater then the other. The Eccclipses also could not be in
the changes and full moons: For that there should then be uneven spaces from
the South unto the North, and from the East unto the West.

If the earth were not as the Center of the world, then of necessity should
these ensue, that the earth should approach, either nearer to the East, or
West, or South part: and when any of the stars (as well the fixed as Planets)
shall come unto that part, they shall appear nearer to us, then being in any
other part of heaven: and by that above said, they shall also appear greater:
which is altogether untrue, and we also see the contrary in that (as above
written) they always appear of one greatness, either being in the East, or in
the West. Also one half of heaven is always above the earth, and the other
half under the earth: and this is not only found and known in one quarter of
the earth, but the like in every place (as the Equinoctials do witness) then
which there can be no more evident trial.

A third reason may be alleged, if any imagined the earth upon the Center,
to be parted into two equal halfes, and that the eye is placed in the Center:
then shall the eye see no more then the half of heaven. By which appears,
that the swelling of the earth, from the Center unto his compass about, in
making a comparison unto heaven is as in a manner nothing.

And it is known to the learned in Astronomy, that any of the fixed stars,
is by many times greater then the earth: which if any behold them, they appear
as points in heaven. Now how much lesser would the earth appear, if a man
should behold it from his place.

Here learn by this demonstration following, that the earth standing without
the Center, in the point B. being to the Meridiane, as is the point A. nearer;
and when a star shall come unto that point, then shall it be nearer to the
earth, and in the opposite point, as is I. shall be from the same much
further, than in any other place, and shall even there lesser appear, which by
experience, is quite contrary. Further grant that C. D. be the thwart
Horrizont, yet the contrary, for the second reason, E. B. K. being the
Equatour, which from the said Horrizont is divided into two unequal parts, and
by this consequent also must the Zodiac be divided into two unequal parts,
from the said Horrizont: for that those two Cyrcles, (as hereafter shall be
taught) do cross one another into equal parts.



Therefore when the sun, by his proper motion, carried from the East into the
West, shall come unto the crossings of the Equatour and Zodiac, and that the
greater part of these Cyrcles shall be under the earth, it cannot be that the
Equinoctium or a like day and night, can be through out the earth, no not
under the right Sphere, much less can it be under the thwart Sphere.

IF this be impossible, it shall be also as impossible, that six signs may
always be above the earth, and the other six under the earth; but rather
that more of the signs shall be under the earth, and more of them above: even
as the earth is imagined to be divided from the Horrizont aforesaid, into two
equal parts; like as when it shall be in the Center of the whole, and that
from each Center of the greater Cyrcles, the earth is divided into two parts.
As all these (to any beholding the material Sphere) are forthwith known at
the first sight: so by a third reason is to be noted, that when any imagines,
by the line E. F. that the earth in the point G. standing as in the Center of
the whole, is divided by the middle, as well being in G. as H. for the
exceeding distance from the Cyrcumference, is impossible to see always the
half heaven.

If the Earth be not in the middle of the World, then of necessity shall it
possess some of these standings.


FIrst, the earth is placed without the Are tree of the world, yet in such
sort, that it is equally distant from either Pole: that is, that the
Equinoctial may be in the plain upper face, as in the letter D. appears.

Secondly, that it is standing on the Exe-tree of the world, yet without the
plain upper face of the Equinoctial; that is, that it be nearer to either of
the Poles, as in the point B. or G.

Thirdly, that it is neither standing in the Exe-tree of the world, nor in the
plain of the Equinoctial, as in the points, A. C. F. E.

The first standing being granted, these absurdities should then ensue,
through the diverse placing, in diverse and sundry places of the plain Equatoure.

1 In the right Sphere, should never the Equinoctium (or a like day and night)
be caused, in that the Horrizont should never cut or part the Equinoctial
into two equal halfes.

2 In the thwart Sphere, should no Equinoctial be, and somewhere again
should the Equinoctial be, but not in the middle Parallel, between the two
Tropickes; that is, it should not happen the sun being in the Equinoctial, but
in an other lesser Parallel Cyrcle, being nearer to either Tropicke point.

3 The time from the rising, unto the Noone tide, should not be equal to the
time from the Noone tide unto the setting of the sun.

4 The magnitudes and spaces between the fixed stars, both in the East and
West, should not be seen equal or a like.

In the second standing, if that the earth should be placed on the Exe-tree,
and not in the myddle of the world, then should these absurdities ensue.

In every Climate, the plain of the Horrizont should cut heaven into two
unequal halfes, except those places having the right Sphere: yea, and the
Zodiac should be divided into two unequal Arks, so that there should be
somewhere more, and somewhere less then six signs of the Zodiac seen
above the Horrizont, which is contrary to all experience.



2 The Equinoctial shadows, both of the rising and setting of the sun, should
not agree, in such sort that they might fall in right line. Neither the shadow
of the rising of the sun in the Solstitial or longest day, should make or
stretch in right line, with the shadow of the suns setting, in the Brumall or
shortest day, et econuerso

In the third standing, if neither it should be on the Exetree of the world
standing, nor in the plain of the Equatour; then should the same absurdities
ensue, which are uttered in the two former.

To conclude, wheresoever the earth is generally placed without the myddle of
the world, there is the reason of the days equal increasing and decreasing in
the thwart Sphere confounded, and there shall either no Equinoctials at all be
caused, when the sun occupies the myddle way between either Tropicke. Nor
the Moon always shadow the suns light, although she comes right against the
body of the sun. And the earth not standing in the myddle of the world, shall
not shed or stretch his shadow to the moon. So that all these absurdities and
vain arguments do grant, that the earth cannot be in any other place, then
standing in the middle of the world.

That the Earth abides fixed and immovable, in the myddle of the world.
THat neither the earth, in right nor Cyrculare motion is drawn about the Exe
tree of the world, nor about any other Exe-tree, but to rest and stay in the
myddle of the world; both holy scriptures confirm, and Physic reasons
prove. For the Psalm says, which stablished the earth upon his foundation,
that it shall never be moved. And Ecclesiastes in the first chapter says:
that the earth stands for ever, and the sun both rises, sets, and goes
about unto the place where he arose. Also that the sun is drawn about, the
Psalm does manifestly witness, where it is said: that for the sun, he has
placed a Tabernacle in them, and he, as a Bridegroom going forth of his
chamber, does rejoice as a Giant to run his course, which goes forth from
the uttermost bound of heaven, and returns about unto the end of it again.
Also it is known and numbered among miracles; that God would have the sun to
continue.

The Physic reasons are these.
THat of one simple body, is only one simple motion. That the earth is a
simple body: therefore thereunto agrees but one simple motion.

But of the simple motions, I have before taught, that the one is in right
manner, and the other in Cyrculare form. That the right motion seeks
downwards unto the myddle, whether being carried, they settle and rest.
Therefore is the motion of the earth not cyrculare about.

By the second appears, that every grave or heavy matter by nature, is
through his weight carried after a most strait line unto the Center, and both
fetleth, stays, and rests at the same; where it neither falls, or is
carried any further. So that all grave matters, as the parts of the earth, and
those which consist of the earth, are sent or carried by a most straight leading
unto the earth, and at his upper face shall stay and rest. And wear it not
that they are stayed through the fastness of the earth, they should so long be
carried downwardes, until they came unto the Center. Also the earth through his
fastness, receives and bears all things falling on it. Therefore does the
earth much more (being within the Center) stay and rest fixed and immovable,
bearing all other heavy things falling on it, seeing the earth is heauiest of
all others.

By the third it is evident, that if the earth should be moved or carried, it
should of necessity be either drawn in right, or cyrculare motion. If it
should be carried in a right manner (seeing it is the heauiest of all others) it
should by his swiftnes move and go before all other heavy things, and
should leave behind the living creatures, and other things fastened to it, and
should also leave them hanging behind in the Air.

If the earth should be drawn about by a cyrculare motion, and should in a
days turn (at the least) be carried about the Exe-tree, from the West into the
East, as either alone or with the first Orb: then every day, should many most
disordred things, and contrary to experience happen. For it should be a most
speedy motion, and swiftness inseparable, which should draw cyrcularly all the
whole earthly body round about in 24. hours. And therefore that the earth is
carried with so swifte motion, should not only overthrow buildinges, but high
hills, and greatly shake and harm all things fastened and growing on the
earth: yea all living beasts, and other creatures dwelling on the face of the
earth, should be likewise shaken and harmed. Also the clouds, fowls, and
whatsoever lives and hangs in the Air, should be carried and left behind
at the setting in the West. For by the swift turning about of the earth should
all things be over turned, and left behind by a great and long space; if by
such a swiftness, the earth should be turned about the Exe-tree of the world.
Or if by the motion of the earth, the air, and all things hanging in the air,
should be drawn with a like swiftness; then should they appear to stay, or
not to be moved at all. And further, if a stone or any weighty thing cast
upward should not light again down right on the same place: as may be seen in
a ship, at sailing. So that to all these, does evident experience deny, that
by no motion, the earth is any thing moved, dut continually stays and abides.

By the fourth it is manifest, that in the motion and turning about of the
Cyrcle, the Center abides immovable: which is the earth, placed in the myddle
of the world, and is as the Center of the world. Therefore is the Earth known
to be immovable.

That the Earth compared unto Heaven, is as a point.
ALthough to the unskillful in this Art, the magnitude and largenes of the
earth seems to be of an exceeding greatness, that no bond or end can be
decerned with the eye; nor any having travailed into far countries, could
hitherto find any bounds of the same: yet the greatness of the earth compared
unto the mighty largeness of heaven is accounted but a prick; as the
Geomitricall rules declare.

The earth also is a very small thing, in respect of heaven: yea so little in
comparison, as a pepper corn, or seed of Colliander, unto a Cyrcle of a
thowsande paces compass.

For if the earth compared to the firmament, were of any sensible greatness, a
man should not see the half of heaven, nor the half Cyrcle of the
Equinoctial or Zodiac. And how much greater the earth should be, by so
much the lesser should a man see the half of heaven. But the contrary is
known, in that on any plain of the earth or upper face of the sea, a man
always sees the half Sphere of heaven, the other half (in the mean time)
remaining hid: and of this the half dyameter of the earth is so small, unto
the distance of the firmament, that it may take away nothing in a manner of the
half Sphere, extant to the eye.

Besides these, if the earth should be imagined to be placed in any of the
Orbs of heaven, it would appear but small in respect of them: for being
imagined in the Moons Orb; the earth should appear thrice as great as the
moon is decerned from thence, and somewhat bigger. And from the suns Orb, the
earth should be decerned twice so large as Venus does here appear to us. And
if in Marses Sphere you would say that the earth is equal to a small star; But
from the firmament, Saturns Sphere, or Jupiters (if a man could decerne it) the
earth should appear so small, that a man would be abashed at the sight of it.

And here an ignorant man, might greatly wonder, that so small a body, yea
rather a prick (as it is accounted of the learned) should contain in it so
many Realms, Provinces, Cities, Towns, Floods, Mountains, Woods, Ualleyes,
Seas, Rivers, Lakes, and many other great matters, over long to be written.

That the earth also is as a Prick, is declared by sundry reasons following.

By the first, that round about the earth, the magnituds and distances of the
stars, in their times, are decerned and seen every where equal and alike.

By the second, that the Gnomons or dyall shadows, and the Centers of the
Sphericall borderes or Cyrcles, placed in any part of the earth, do so much
avail, and keep the considerations and guydings about of shadows, so
regularly, and agreeing to the rule and matter, as if those (in very deed)
should be placed in the myddle point of the earth.

By the third, that the Horizont does every where divide the whole heaven into
two equal halues. For that in every moment, do six signs of the Zodiac
appear above the Horizont, and in the night time being a fair sky are they to
be seen with the eye, and so many (at that in. stant) hid within the
Horizont: so that by a continual drawing about of heaven do six signs
appear, and as many right against those six, set under the earth. If the
magnitude of the earth should be of any light portion unto heaven, then so
much of the Center (the upper face drawn about) should part or divide
heaven into equal half Spheres.



The other Spheres reatching from any part of the upper face, should divide
the same into unequal portions. Neither half the Zodiac should always
appear, but a portion, much lesser than half the Zodiac should be seen above
the earth, so that the greater part of the earth, through the folydnesse
excluded and hidden, should not after be seen.

By the fourth, the Equinoctial shadows, both of the rising and setting of
the sun, do make a right line, even as if they should be streached out and lie
on the plain, carried by the Center of the earth. So that all these should not
be caused, if the magnitude of the earth in respect of heaven, should be of a
sensible, or of any portion to it. To conclude, Ptholomie uses always the
body of the earth for the Center of the world, not dividing the upper face
from that which is not in sight of the earth.

Certain affirm, that one degree of the greatest Cyrcle in heaven contains
57051. common German miles. Of which one degree of any earthly Cyrcle in the
upper face of the earth, does amount to 15. Germayne miles. And that one
minute of the celestial degree, expresses, 9509. Germayne miles, which (if
this be true) and certainly known, then is it not vainly thought and gessed,
that the earth is as a Prick, in respect of heaven.

To find the compass of the Earth, and by it the Dyameter.
THe whole compass of the earth, according to Ambrosius, Theodosius,
Macrobius, and Eratostenes, does contain 5400. German miles, and the
dyameter of the same, does contain 1718 4/22. Germayne miles.

But the authority of Eratostenes (after the mind of Pliny) is more to be
regarded, then the other three Philosophers, which proves by demonstration
and reasons, that the compass of the whole earth is, 252000. furlongs.

Yet Hipparchus finding fault at Eratostenes, does affirm the compass of
the earth, to be of 277000. furlongs. And a furlong is here (after the
agreement of the Geometricians) of a hundredth, twenty, and five paces.

And this sentence is not here mente, that there is any ambiguity or
uncertainty in this reason: but that the one affirmed lesser, and the other
more furlongs. For after Eratostenes, do 700. furlongs answer to one degree:
but after Hipparchus, 774. furlongs answer to a degree. So that there is no
other diversity in the matter, but only the number.

Ptholomie that was after Eratostenes, attributed seven hundred fifty furlongs
of the earthly merydiane, to one degree of the celestial meridiane. So that by
all these appears, that the magnitude of the earth is as yet vnfounde out,
through the difficulty of measuring. And this whole compass is not only meant
of the earth, but of the earth and water jointly together, both which are said
to make one Sphere.

Also Eratostenes gathers the compass of all the earthly Orb, by the
proportion of the particular, or the degree of the celestial Cyrcle, unto the
like space on earth. For he affirms, that to one degree of the celestial
Equatour, answer 700. furlongs, or 15. Germayne miles, but Ptolomie
attributes to a degree, 500. furlongs.

Which is thus to be understood, that a Cyrcle be imagined on earth, directly
under the Equinoctial or Merydian line, dividing the earth into twoe halfes:
and that this Cyrcle be likewise divided into 360. parts or degrees as the
celestial Cyrcles are.

And each of these parts does like unto the celestial parts, contain 700.
furlonges, or 15. German miles. This now being tried and found, what the
whole Sum either of the furlongs, or miles of the whole cyrcumference of the
earth, which contains 360. parts or degrees: you shall easily find and know
the same by this manner. Multiply the whole compass of the earth; that is, the
368. degrees, by the 700. furlongs, or fifteen Germayne miles, and the whole
compass shall either appear to be 252000. furlongs, or 5400. Germayne miles.

This whole compass of the earth, divide by 22. and the number coming
thereof, shall be the 22. part of the compass of it; that is, 11454 12/22.
furlongs, or 254 ^0/22. Germayne miles.

And abate this 22. part, from the whole Sum of the circumference, and the
number in furlongs shall remain and be 240545 10/22. and in GErmayne miles
5154 1^/22.

And if any of these sums be divided a part by 3. it shall be found in furlongs
to be 80181. a half, and a third part, or 3/2. 10/66. And in German miles
1718 4/22. that is; the dyameter of the earth, as well in the furlonges, as
Germayne miles.

And Archimedes by sundry labors, and witty inventions, and by Geometrical
practice, has found, that the like proportion is of the Circumference of the
whole Cyrcle un to the diameter of the same, as is 22. unto 7. that is, the
diameter thrice, with a seventh part and a half.

But whenever any man will (by the cyrcumference of the Cyrcle) gather and
find his diameter, work the numbers thus, as this example teaches. First,
set down 22. at the left hand, toward the right hand 7. and the cyrcumference
between those two numbers, 22. 5400. 7. After multiply the first by the second,
that is, 7. by 5400. the number increased, which is, 47800. divide by the
third, that is, 22. and you shall find in the quotient, 1718 4/22. Germayne
miles.

Or thus in furlongs, the number being set down alike 22. 252000. 7. then
multiply the first by the second, as 7. by 25200. and the increase shall be
1764000. after the increased number: divide by the third, as by 22. and the
diameter shall be, 80181 18/22.

If any covet to find the upper face of the earth, by the dyameter, and
cyrcumference known, work one into the other, and you shall have that you
seek. But if you desire to know the thickness of the earth, then join the
superficial solydenes of the Sphere, unto the sixth part of the diameter, and
you shall obtain your desire.



THE SECOND PART OF THE SPHERICALL Elements of the Celestial Circles, with the
uses of the same Circles.
What is the Sum of this Second Part.
WHereas in the first part, were only teh rudiments of the Sphere handeled and
taught (which are also written and contained in diverse Phy^^^e books) as of
the World, and the many parts thereof: that is, of the Ethereall and
Elementarie Region: And also of the parts, motion and forme^ of ^he Etheriall
Region: as Heaven, and the for^^^e, (...), and quantity of the Earth.

Here in this second part shall fully be ^et^^^ the and largely handled, the
manifold uses of the Cyrcle, of which the material Sphere is framed and made.
Further this second part is divided into three parts, the first teaches the
division of the Cyrcles (in that the ancient Astronomers, for a playner
instruction, divided heaven into sundry Cyrcles) and of these some in greater,
and other some in lesser Cyrcles. In the second part, are the definitions,
descriptions, and vtilities of all the Cyrcles taught. In the third and last
part, are the places of the Zones, learnedly described, and the vtilities of
them.

So that this second part does especially entreat of the Cyrcles (seeing the
principal point of the Sphere, is of the celestial appearances) which by
reason of the celestial Cyrcles, or of the first moouer are caused; as may
appear of the ascentions and descentions of the signs, by which the whole
knowledge as well of the natural as artificial day is learned.

Wherefore in that this instruction of the ascentions of the signs, consists
in the Cyrcles (which the ancient Astronomers imagined to be in the first
mouer) therefore is this second part of the celestial Cyrcles, aptely placed,
and necessarily before taught.

That the Sphere of the world, is either right, or thwart.
THe roundnesse of the earth, as is before taught, both alters the standing of
the Poles, and the whole Sphere of the world, in diverse parts of the earth.
For to them which dwell under the Equatour, either Pole falls to the
playnesse of the Horizo^t. But to others dwelling without the Equatoure, the
one Pole is raised, and the other depressed and hid: through which diversity
of the standinges of them, are these differences caused; that the risings and
settings of the signs are altered; the spaces between the days and nights
varied, whose causes ought diligently to be sought. Therefore is the right
Sphere, distinguished from the thwart Sphere of the world. In this manner, as
here you may be hold by these figures following.





That is called the right Sphere, in which either Pole rests and stands on
the plain of the Horizont and the Equatoure, which there does exactly
possess the middle place between the Poles, and does with the Horrizont make
a right sphericall angle: of which it is so named a right Sphere. For they have
such a standing upon the Sphere of the world, as that neither of the Poles is
elevated above the Horizont, to them which dwell under the Equatoure.

And to cut at right Angles, is none other, than so to cut a Cyrcle into a
Cyrcle, that the Angles which are cause^ on either side, are alike equal, as
this part of the Equinoctial, A. B. C. and this part of the horizont D. A. E.
which is crossed of the Equatoure in the point A. and the Angle B. A. D. is
equal to the Angle B. A. E. therefore shall B. A. cross into D. A. E.
sphericall wise perpendicularly, and the Angles D. A. B. and E. D. B. shall be
both right, by the definition of the right angle, as was before taught.

The thwart, declined, or bending Sphere, is that, in which either of the Poles
of the world elevated, is seen above the Horizont, and the other just so much
set and hid beneath the Horizont: and also that the Equatoure frames and
makes with the Horizont thwart and unequal angles. And that is called a
blunte angle, which sees the Pole elevated: and that a sharp angle, declining
unto the contrary.

They which dwell on this side, and beyond the Equatoure have such a Sphere.
But the same form and condition of the thwart Sphere, is not every where; nor
the positure of it, the same reason: but that the thwartnesse of the Sphere is
so much the more increased, as by how many degrees either of the Poles are
near to the earth: and being further distant from the Equatoure, is raised
and carried higher, which is the cause of many obscure differences: which that
they may the plainer be expressed and understood, the skillfull practisioners
have divided Cyrcles in the first mouer, by lines drawn unto certain stars or
pricks from the Center of the earth, and drawn about either by a continual or
daily motion, by which they imagined them to be described.

That the Circles of the Sphere, be some greater, some lesser, and the number
of the Circles.
HEre it is not to be omitted, that one Cyrcle is greater then another, by
four means. First, by reason of the magnitude of the celestial body in which
it is imagined to be. And of this is the Equinoctial Cyrcle of the first
mouer, greater then the Equinoctial Cyrcle of the eight spher, in that the
first mouer is greatest of all the bodies. And although the Equinoctial of the
eight Sphere, does divide it into two equal halfes, yet of the first mouer it
is named the greater, for that the same includes all other bodies.

By the second, it is evident that the Equinoctial Cyrcle is greater, by
reason of the appearaunce, in that the whole is seen above the Horizont. And
by the same reason the Northerly Cyrcle (which is named the Arcticke Cyrcle) is
the greater, for that it always appears to us, above the Horizont.

By the third, the Equinoctial is accounted greater then the other, in
regard of the influxiue virtue: and for this cause also is the Zodiac called
greater then the others, through his greater working into these inferior
bodies. For that under it, the sun and all other Planets are drawn. And
Happarchus writes, that this Cyrcle is the life of all things which are in
the world, etc. In that by the ascending of the sun to us, generation is
caused, and by his falling or going from us, diminishing, that is corruption
gets the upper hand.

By the fourth, is a Cyrcle called greater then the other, insomuch as it is
one Sphere, and thus the equinoctial, is greatest of all the Parallel Cyrcles,
in the first moouer: which is evidently demonstrated, by the diameter of the
Cyrcle. Therefore by the definitions and reasons above showed, the equinoctial
is the greater Cyrcle, described in the upper face of the first mouer,
according to each part, or the whole of it, being equally distant from either
Pole of the world.

And it is further to be considered, that all the Cyrcles of the Material
Sphere, are imagined to be in the first mouer, which also a material Sphere
does especially represent So that these Cyrcles, may also be imagined in the
other Spheres, as well as in the eight Sphere, etc.

And although a man may enter into conference between these Cyrcles and the
diameter, yet he shall be forced to confess that they be on such wise unto the
sphere, as the Cyrcle is unto the diameter. So that as the diameter deuideth
the Cyrcle into two equal parts (in that it passes by the Center of the
same) even so does every of the greatest Cyrcles divide the Sphere into two
equal parts, because the plain upper face of it passes by the Center. And by
this it may easily be perceived, that those which are named the lesser Cyrcles
(of which is a far greater number than is here set down) have diverse Centers
from the Center of the Sphere; and yet the plain upper face of them passes
not by the Center of the same Sphere. Of which ensues, that they cannot divide
the sphere into two equal halfes: no more then the line drawn without the
Center, into a Cyrcle; can divide the same into two equal halfes. And both the
greater and lesser of these is mente, according to the distance of his Center,
from the Center of the sphere.

The inward Cyrcles that be mouable, are those, which are descrybed in the
first moouer, and are drawn with it about: as is the equinoctial, the
Zodiac, the Colures, the Tropickes, the Polare Cyrcles, and others descrybed
from the points of the first moouer. But the outward Cyrcles, are they that
are as immovable, and not drawn about with the first mouer, but abide steady.
The number of which are these: the Meridiane, the Horizont, the hour Cyrcles,
the verticiall Cyrcles, and Cyrcles of the progressions.

Further it is to be noted, that many are the Celestial Cyrcles (as is above
declared) whose use partly unto Astronomy, and partly unto Astrology, is
necessary. As the verticiall Cyrcles, the Cyrcles of the altitudes, the Cyrcles
of the celestial houses. The Cyrcles with the which the material sphere is
descrybed: and to be brief, there are so many celestial Cyrcles, as there
may be points ymagined in the first mouer.

Yet are there but only ten Cyrcles, which are required unto this sphericall
treatise; whose names are the Equinoctial, the Zodiac, the two Colures, the
Meridian, the Horizont, the twoe Tropickes, and the twoe Polare Cyrcles.

The greater Cyrcles are those, which have the same or a like Center with the
earth, whose plain upper face does pass by the Center of the earth, so that
they divide the sphere, into two equal parts (and especially the equinoctial)
which for that it is a greater Cyrcle, does cut the spher into two equal
halfes; so that his plain upper face passes by the Center of the earth,
according to the definition of the greater Cyrcles. And by this consequent,
when the Sun is in the equinoctial, he falls into the Center of the earth;
that is, he is in the upper face which passes by the Center of the earth. And
the sun is never in such an upper face, but when he is in ye two equinoctial
points for other wise, he runs without that upper face. For the greater
Cyrcles are a like unto the Sphere, as the diameters unto the Cyrcle: in that
as the diameter cutteth the Cyrcle in two equal halfes (for that it does
pass by the Center of the same) even so does the greater Cyrcle divide the
Sphere into twoe equal halfes, in that the plain upper face of the same, does
pass by the Center of the sphere.

But the lesser Cyrcles are those, which have diverse Centers, from the Center
of the sphere, so that the plain upper face of them does not pass by the
Center of the sphere. For how much nearer the Center of the same is to the
Center of the sphere, and so much the greater is that Cyrcle, as the Tropicke.
But the further it is from the Center, even so much ^he lesser in sight is the
Cyrcle, as are the Polare circle.

And here none may suppose, that either these or other like cyrcles, to be
verily in the first moouer, but only to be understood or imagined. For the
cause of dividing heaven into certain spaces and regions, through the help of
which, the courses of the Planets are observed, and brought unto a rule.

Further the office of the celestial cyrcles; are these.

1 That they divide heaven, into certain spaces, or regions. 2 The courses of
the Planetes, the firmament, and first mouer, by the help of these cyrcles are
observed, and brought unto a rule. 3 They show the points of rising and
setting; the nearness and differences both of days and nights. 4 The times
and varieties of all the celestial appearances, may be observed and known of
the cyrcles by a certain reason.
The six greater cyrcles are numbered by names, standing, and use distinguished.

As the Equinoctial. Zodiac. Colure of the Equinoctials. Colure of the
Solstices. Meridiane. Horizont.


But there are many others, as the Cyrcles defined or descrybed by the Poles of
the Zodiac, and Centers of the stars, which are named the cyrcles of the
latitudes.



The Cyrcles drawn by the verticial points of diverse places, which may be
named the cyrcles of the distance, or space between places. For that the
tops do knit or join together by the nighest space of the differences of
places, and do show the distance of them.

The cyrcles by the Centers of the stars, and Poles of the world drawn, are
named the cyrcles of the declinations of the stars.

The six cyrcles of the positions (through which by the thirty parts of the
Equatoure, and the points, touched of the Horizont and meridian drawn over the
Equatoure) does Regiomontane part and divide the whole heaven into twelve
equal spaces, which he names the houses of heaven.

The six greater cyrcles (through which by the Poles of the Zodiac, and the
thirty parts of the same bended and wrythed) does Julius Firmicus divide the
Zodiac into twelve equal parts, but the Equatoure into as many unequal arks.

But that former distribution and disposing of the Cyrcles by Regiomontane,
both devised and demonstrated of him, does bring and cause a reason of the
framing of the figures of heaven, which they name Rational: in that the same
invented and taught by principles and demonstrations, is declared by certain
reasons. The other invented and exercised of others, does bring and cause
another reason of the forming and erecting of the figures of heaven, which of
the same they name the equal manner; in that it parts or deuideth the
Zodiac into equal arks. Many other cyrcles there are, which for breuity be
here ouerpassed: for that they belong not unto this determined treatise of the
principles.

The lesser cyrcles, although there are in a manner infinite of them, yet are
there four only recited and especially known, which also are named
Parallelles.

As the Tropicke of Cancer. Tropicke of Capricorn. The Articke or Northerly
Circle. The Antarticke.


Of the four greater cyrcles, before written, they both are moveable, and are
continually drawn about with the first mouer and never changed. But the two
nether cyrcles, as the Meridiane and horizont, do remain and abide fixed and
immovable, in the going about of heaven, and the standing always changed on
the earth, toward what quarter soever they are varied, as they may be and are
in a manner infinite in number.

The Astronomers divide, both the greater and lesser cyrcles, into 360.
degrees, which they so named through the suns passage or journey in the
Zodiac, measuring and defining by his daily course such like parts and
spaces. And of these parts or degrees of the greater cyrcles, it is found and
known, that each degree contains in the upper face of the earth, either
62500. paces, or 500. furlongs, or 15. Germayne miles. But each part of the
lesser cyrcles, do comprehend a lesser space by so much, as by how much more
from the magnitude of the Parallel, which is the middle and greatest, by
reason of the distance they lack or differ.

And each of the three hundredth threescore degrees, are also parted or divided
into three score minutes: and each minute, into three score seconds: and each
second into three score thirds: and so forth from thirds unto fourthes: and so
unto tenths, they distribute them.

The description, names, and vtilities, of the Equinoctial.
THe Equinoctial, which the Greeks name (...), is a greater cyrcle, placed in
the myddle place of the Sphere, between either Pole of the world, and
dividing both by equal spaces moveable, and crossing the Zodiac in two
points, which when the sun does come unto, he then causes a like day and
night throughout the earth: whereof this cyrcle first purchased that name; in
that the day is equal to the night, which happens twice in the year, as in
the beginning and entrance of the sun, both into Aries and Libra.

And a straight line drawn out by imagination does describe this cyrcle,
reaching out of the Center of the earth by the Center of the suns body on a
plain or flat, of the Equinoctial being unto the first moouer, or unto any of
the fixed stars to the Equatoure, fastened to the eight Sphere, as that either
of them, which with the third being somewhat lower and darcker do fashion the
gyrdle of Orione, and that by a daily and continual turning drawn about of
the first moouer, until the same be returned unto the place, from whence it
began.

And likewise the sun, or any other constellation placed or being in it, does
in every region describe the half of the Parallel above the Horizont, and the
other half, under the Horizont: which Ptholomie names the cyrcle of the
Equatoure of the day: and Alphraganus, the cyrcle of the Equinoctial, and
swathe or gyrdle of the first moouer, in that it compasses about the first
moouer (as Strabo writes) that it parts the Northerly half Sphere, from the
Southerly. For this greater cyrcle of the first moouer, is the first measurer,
both of time, and motion.



In that it causes the proportional cyrcumferences by the spaces of times:
and whiles it is once drawn about, a natural day is performed. And whiles the
compass also of the whole, have moved one four and twenteth part, an equal
or Equinoctial hour has passed: by which it does evidently appear, that
this cyrcle, belongs unto the first mouer.

This Worthy Circle has diverse names.
1 IT is named the Equinoctial, in that it causes a like night, to the
artificial day.

2 It is by the same reason na med the Equatoure; for that it makes equal the
night, to the day.

3 It is named the gyrdle of the first mouer (not improperly) for that as a
gyrdle does gyrde or divide our body into two equal halues; even so this
cyrcle deuideth the sphere or first mouer, by the middle.

4 It is named the line of the equality of the day, or the line of the equation
of the Orb of the day, or the just division of the day and night.

5 Of Pliny it is named the Center of the earth, and that not incongruently;
seeing all the Parallel cyrcles described from the Center of the sun by the
motion of the first mouer, have their Centers from the Center of the earth: and
that the Equatour only, which when the sun shall be in the Equinoctial point,
is then imagined to be drawn about with the motion of the first moouer, that
has the same Center with the earth at that time, by which the plain of the
Equatoure, is then noted to pass. So that this is the cause why Pliny gives
that name to it: seeing a like day and night is caused, the sun then running
under the Equatoure throughout the earth, as no man of skill makes doubt of.

It is named the cyrcle of the high solstice; but this comes to pass, by
reason of those which dwell under the equinoctial, and have four solstices;
as two on hie, and two below, having four shadows in the year: and the sun
passing twice a year by the Zenith, right over their heads (as when the sun
is in the beginning of Aries and Libra.) And to them also dwelling under the
Equinoctial are two summers and two winters: and the heat is mightiest and
strongest, when the sun draws from them into the North, or South; yet does
the sun always burn the earth right under it, causing a burning Zone, and not
parts far from their heads. So that their winters are not perfectly and
simply named winters, as with us which are cold seasons in deed; bnt rather
with them is a continual summer: yet for that the causes of heat with them,
are not vnformally, and in a like manner always, for that the sun does not
approach equally the Zenith of that part, as the same is known to many: whereof
the heat to them is not vnifourme and a like in burning. But sometimes hotter,
and sometimes slacker and meaner of heat. So that when the sun is in the
Zenith, as in the beginnings of Aries and Libra, and that they are in their
high solstices; then is the heat most vehement with them, yet not without the
sun, this heat can be called mighty. But when as the sun is gone from their
Zenith, which happens in the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn, where their
low solstices are, the heat is then slacker: that is, lesser burning. So that
the weaker heat happening in the low solstices, may in a manner be named
cold, in respect of the most burning heat, happening in the high solstices,
yet it has the nomination of winter, although no cold may be felt.

What the offices or vtilities of the Equinoctial are.
THe causes why the skillful practisioners took and used the Equinoctial,
with the offices which they attributed to it, and the mani fold uses that it
offers, is herein declared.

1 It measures the motion of the first and uppermost Orb, and shows the
same to be drawn about by a continual and equal swiftness. For that in
every equal hour, do fifteen of the three hundereth and three score degrees
of the same arise, and so many degrees right against, set and are hidden under
the Horizont: and that all the three hundredth and three score degrees, in 24.
hours, are turned about in the appointed times, and in their periods
continually agreeing. And as the Equatour from the Poles of the world (about
which the first mouer is drawn, and is of either side distant by equal
spaces) nor the Angle, which is comprehended and fashioneth with the Horizont
does never change: even so (by the same order and like motion) does the first
heaven or moouer evidently show it self to be carried about. For the
Equinoctial measures and determines the motion of the first mouer, in
declaring his revolution and year: which year of the first moouer, is the
time of 24. hours equal. But by what means the ancient astronomers first
found, that the Equinoctial is drawn about in so many hours: and it is
supposed they came to the knowledge thereof, by the office of some star,
either in the Equinoctial, or placed near it, they perceived the same: as
that the Equinoctial from some note marked of them, did return to it in such a
certain space, as before showed.

2 The diverse motions of the Zodiac (which happens to it through the twart
standing or lying*) as a cannon or rule, does dyrect and point out the
beginnings, bounds, and time, with the which each parts or degrees of the
Zodiac arise, or do set: and with which they touch these or those quarters
of the world. For all the arckes of the Equatoure, are drawn by a certain
and agreeable motion continually. The parts of the Zodiac drawn thwartly,
the Equatoure does not vary or is distant by like spaces from the Poles of
the world, nor turned about his, but the same Poles of the world, which do
differ by a long space from his, and drawn about by a most unlike motion and
nothing at all agreeing in it self: For that some parts or degrees are carried
up sooner or quicker, and others appear slower and later. So that these uses
a more space of time in the rising slower, and those other pass up by a
shorter and quicker space. But seeing that in the Zodiac the wandering stars or
Planets, do wander continually hither and thither, and from one side of it to
another: and that unto the middle cyrcle of it or ecclipticke line, the places
of all the fixed stars are referred and applied: therefore cannot the times of
the rising or setting of the stars, be known and noted, except they should
be guessed and attained, by the next arks of the equinoctial. It also
declares the equinoctialles, which are caused in those proper days, in which
the sun happens to come into the equinoctial cyrcle. For these are caused the
sun being in the first degrees of Aries and Libra, in that the Zodiac and
Equinoctial do cross each other in those places; whereof Manilius thus
writes.

That these signs Aries and Libra cause a right,
Throughout the earth, a like day and night.
3. It defines and measures the spaces, both of the natural and artificial
days. And although the sun (which drawn about with the motion of the first
moouer, and in the proper motion, carried forth in the mean time by force into
the contrary, when as he causes the times of the days and nights, so well as
the differences of the natural days) moved, and runs in the Zodiac; yet
of his motion, the day and night spaces cannot be gatherrd, through the
diversity and unlikeness of the ascending or arising of diverse parts or
degrees of the Zodiac. But seeing the same motion is of all the parts of the
Equatoure; therefore are the ascentions of the arcks of the Zodiac, carried up
with the ascending of the nighest parts of the Equatour, like arising. So that
both the days and hours, by the equal motion of these, are not found and
distinguished by the unlike and unequal motion of them, in that these
ascentions can be, of these two cyrcles.

The Greeks by no means like of the same, in that by a steadfast order, they
do mark the day and night times; therefore they part and divide them into
equal hours, which they named times, that from the degrees of the Zodiac
they might distinguish them. For every fifteen parts or degrees of the
Equatour in his motion and rising above the Horizont, do make an hour, and
every degree four minutes of an equal hour: so that the quarters or fifteen
minutes of each degree, do produce and cause one minute of an hour. Also they
observed the ascentions and descentions of the signs in this cyrcle, for that
in any region or country, a man may know the length of the artificial day
and night, by having a sphericall instrument, and the sun placed in the East
Horizont, let the note of the Equinoctial be moved, and after the sun being
turned into the West Horizont, let the note again of the Equinoctial be moved
into the East Horizont. So that the degrees of the Equinoctial numbered, marked
with these notes, do cause an artificial day, counting always fifteen
degrees of the Equinoctial, for an equal hour. To conclude the length of the
artificial day, known by subtracting the same from 24. hours, the quantity of
the night remaining shall appear how much it is. Last the sun being entered
into this cyrcle, does rise in the just East point, and sets full West: but
in the highest of summer being come to Cancer, he rises Northeast, and sets
Northwest: at what time the noone-tide is highest. But in the shortest time of
winter when the sun is come to Capricorn, he contrariwise rises Southeast,
and is in the noonetide lowest.

4 It distinguishes the Equinoctials and crosses the Zodiac thwartly
wrethed and bended to it, in two opposite points, which when the sun comes
and is in it, he causes like spaces of the day and night: and of the same,
those entraunces of the sun, are named the Equinoctial points.

And there are two Equinoctials caused in every year: as the one, the sun
entering the beginning of Aries, or the spring point of the crossing of the
Zodiac and Equinoctial, in the beginning of the spring, which the Latins
name the equinoctial spring, and the Greeks, Isemerian earinen. And the
celestial point of the same equinoctial, the Greeks name the point of our
equinoctial spring. The other equinoctial is caused, when the sun has his
beginning of Libra, in the entrance of harvest, called the equinoctial
harvest. And the celestial point in which the sun happens, they name the
point of our Equinoctial harvest.

These points remain not fixed in one place of heaven, but in the going before
do proceed or move forward under the eight Orb, and turn before the places
of the fixed stars. For the point of the equinoctial spring, that in the first
year of Olimpias followed the first star of Aries of the eight Sphere, 4.
degrees, and 52. minutes. And in the year of the death of Alexander, one
degree, and 58. minutes.

The same after the beginning of the years of Julius, Caesar, followed 4.
degrees, and 50, minutes. And in the year of Christ's birth, 5. degrees and
16. minutes. In Ptholomies time, 6. degrees, and 40. minutes, it went before
the same star: and in these years it went before that star, 27. degrees, and
35. minutes.

So that the yearly times of the Equinoctials are come back, from the
ancient time, and move before the marked days by a long space: For that the
Equinoctial spring which about the beginning of the years of Olimpias, happened
in the first or second of April. In the beginning of the years of Caesar, in
the 25. day of March. In the time of Christ our Sauiors birth, in the 23. or
24. day of March. In Ptholomies time, in the 22. or 23. day of March. But in
our time it happens, in the 11. or 12. day of March, and in this year 1570. it
happens in the 11. day of March, and in the 11. hour before noone, on
Saturday.

The Autumnall or harvest Equinoctial, which happened in Christ our Saviors
time, in the 23. or 24. day of september, is brought back and come in this our
time, unto the 13. or 14. day of September, and in this year 1570. shall
happen in the 13. day, and in the 10. hour, and 21. minutes after noone, on
Wednesday.

And through this variation of the fixed stars, and Equinoctials, is caused,
that the later practitioners have found an other quantity of the year,
contrary to the ancients. For Hipparchus and Ptholomie, have stablished in
their time the quantity of the Tropicke year, to be of 365. days, 5. hours,
55. minutes, and 12. seconds. The Alphonsines, of 365. days, 5. hours, 55.
minutes, and 12. seconds, Albategnius, 365. days, 5. hours, 46. minutes and
56. seconds. Cardanus, of 365. days, 5. hours, 48. minutes, 41. seconds, and
47. thirds. And Thebitius has stablished the starrie year to be of 365. days
6, hours, 9. minutes, and 32. seconds, which is the space of time, in which
the sun returns unto the same fixed star. But the Tropicke year, is the suns
return, after his measuring of the whole Zodiac, unto the Equinoctial or
soisticiall point. So that by the said points changed, either in the
increasing or coming sooner, as hitherto has been observed, is the quantity
of the year, found to be in diverse and sundry wise of the practisioners.

By it also is learned and known which stars and images celestial, are toward
the North or South from it. And by it is the starrieskie divided into two
equal halfes, of which the one half is toward the North, and the other
toward the South. So that the denomination, so well of the Planets, as fixed
stars, are there by learned; whether they be Southerly, or the Northerly. An
other author writes thus of it; that it deuideth heaven into two parts, of
which the one is named Northerly, of the seven stars in the great Bear; the
other Southerly, in that the sun about the South, seems always to abide with
us in that quarter. And if the same may be known, which stars are named
Northerly, and which Southerly: and when the Planets are named Northerly, and
when Southerly. So that by this reason, all the stars and images from it,
tending toward the North, to be Northerly: and from it tending toward the
South, to be Southerly.

The Northerly images, in respect of the Equinoctial, are these.
THe Bull named in latin Taurus, is adorned with 33. stars, although an other
writer mentions but of 32. Of these, 5. are in the face, and about the eyes,
and in the places where the horns are described to be, are one star a piece,
which make seven in number; named Hyades in Greek, and Succullae in Latin,
in that they stand like to the letter Y. These in the 10. 11. and 12* degrees
of Taurus, having their latitude Southerly: of which 4. are of the third
bigness, and one brighter then the rest in the Southerly eye, named properly
Aldebaran, of the first bigness, and of the nature of Marse. The seven stars on
the back of this sign, named Pleiades, and in Latin Virgiliae, but in English
the clustring stars; in that they stand so near together that they can
scarcely be numbered: yet these more regarded then any of the others, in that at
the appearance of them, Summer is signified; and at the setting of them, (which
is six months after) winter is then in entrance, like which is not showed in
the other signs. And in our time, they are in the 22. and 23. degree of
Taurus, the sun joins with them every year, in the third and fourth day of
May. So that after those days, through the suns departing from them, they are
known to arise Heliace before the sun, and then is summer entered: which in our
time happens about the 7. 8. 9. or 10. day of may. And when the sun is come (by
his course) unto the 22. and 23. degree of Scorpio, which happens in our time,
in the 5. and 6. day of November, then is the sun directly against Pleiades:
and the sun then arising in the morning, they do set: and about these days,
(as in the 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. day of November) winter is entered. These as
Ptholomie writes, are of the nature of Mars and the Moon: but all the others,
being some of the third and fourth, and some of the fist bigness, are of the
nature of Saturn, and a little of Mercury.

THe sign Gemini is placed in heaven, as that between them and Taurus, is that
constellation Orion standing Their headed deuideb from the rest of the body,
yet embracing one the other by bodies, and do dyrectly set with the feet, and
arise together bended, as they were lying. Of which those two be the notablest,
that stand in the heads: and that clear star in the head which goes before
(named Castor, and of some Appollo) having besides in either shoulder a clear
star, in the right elbowe one, in either knee one, and in either foot one
star. And the other which follows, being next to Cancer, has in the head a
star named Pollux, of others Hercules, on the left shoulder one, in the right
another, and in the other parts sundry other stars, to the number of 18.
known in both. There is an other star standing without the form of Gemini,
going before the foot of Gemini, and following after, called Propus: and is in
our time, in the 24. degree of Gemini. Of which two are of the second bigness,
as those in the heads, but the others are of the third, fourth, and fifte
bigness. And are all of the nature of Saturn, saving the head going before is
of the nature of Mercury: and that in the head following, of the nature of
Mars.

THe sign Leo looking unto the West, is placed on the body of Hydra, and not
in the head, by which Cancer is nigh unto the half of it, having the middle
divided by the summer cyrcle, in such sort, that under that Orb he has the
fore feet placed, setting and rising with the head. Also he has in the head
three stars, in the nape of the neck two, in the breast one, in the space
between the shoulders under the neck or behiude the neck three, in the
middle of the tail one, in the end of the tail another, and in the belly one
clear or bright star (named the heart of the Lion) which also is called aroyal
star, in that it is more about the Zodiac then the other great fixed stars;
and for this cause called a star of the first bigness, although in truth, it
is but a star of the second bigness, being of the nature of Jupiter and Mars.
All the stars which this sign has (as Ptolomie writes) are 27. Of which many
are of a great brightness, as the two in the nape of the neck, of the second
bigness: that on the heart, of the first bigness, another on the back, of
the second bigness: another in the end of the tail, of the first bigness:
and all the rest, of the third, fourth, and fifth bigness.

THe image named the Carter or dri^^^ of the Car, Ptolomie does deck with 14.
stairs, being all now in Gemini, and of the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6. bigness,
of the nature of Mars and Mercury. Also this image named the Carter, has a
clear star, named the Goat standing on his left shoulder, being a star of
the first bigness, and in our time in the 15. degree of Gemini: borowing
nature of Mars and Mercury. And that image or constellation named the Kiddes,
(being two small stars, standing on the left hand of the Carter) are in our
time, in the 12. degree of Gemini, of the fourth bigness, and of the nature of
Mars, and Mercury.

THe image named Perseus, has 26. stars which form two particular images: of
which that which is seen on his left side, is named Gorgon, or the head
Algoll. And hereof it comes that they are called the Gorgon stars. The other
seen on his right side, the ancient astronomers name the Cyrcle o^ sith. Also
Ptholomie in the description of Perseus, attributes to the head of Algoll
(that is Medusa) as to a particular image, four stars. And the brighter
stars of them (being in the head of Algoll is the 12. star) is in our time, in
the ^9 degree, and twenty minutes of Taurus. The following star (being of the
fourth bigness) is in our time in the 18. degree of Taurus. And Ptholomie
writes, that the head of Algoll being of the second bigness, is of the
nature of Saturn and Jupiter: and that on the right side of Perscus, of the
second bigness, is of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter, and is in our time in
24. and 28. minutes of Taurus.

ON the head of Aries (not far from the feet of Andromed^) stands a figure,
which the Greeks (for the likeness of the letter Delta) ^a^e Deltoton; and
the Latins, for the similitude of the form called a Tryangle. This figur^
has (...) equal sides, but the third not so perfect fashioned, yet easily to
be known; for that it shines brighter then many other stars about it: To
which the stars of Aries are a little Southerly. And to it Ptholomie
attributes four stars, although all other authors affirm only three stars,
except Alphonsus, which in our time are in Taurus, being of the third and
fourth bigness, and altogether of the nature of Mercury.

THe image of Andromeda (placed in heaven with the arms stretched abroad, and
each hand bound) Ptholomie declares it to have 23. stars, of the third,
fourth, and fifth bigness, and in our time are in Aries and Taurus, whose
nature resembles Venus.

This Cassiopia is figured like to a woman sitting in a chair, with the hands
lifted up after a wayling manner; and in the turning of the world about, she is
drawn with the head always upward. Ptholomie does number 13. stars in that
image, of the 3. 4. 5. and six bigness, which in our time, are in the signs
Aries and Taurus, and of the nature of Saturn and Venus.

Among the Astrologians only Ptholomie and Alphonsus do place twoe horses in
heaven: or (as I may more rightly speak) the two parts of horses: of which
the one is called the fore horse, or head of the horse, to which Ptholomie
attributes four dark stars, which in our time are in Aquarius.

The other figure named of the Arabians, Alpheratz, in English the second
horse, the half horse winged, or Pegasus, whose fore part is described unto
the navel: and of this, does the greater number of authors write. Ptholomie
decketh this image with 20. stars, being of the 2. 3. 4. and 5. bigness, which
in our time are in Aquaries, Pisces, and Aries, altogether having the quality
or nature of Jupiter and Mars.

THe celestial image of that fish named the Dolphine, the ancient men placed
in heaven among the starre^ (not far from that constellation named the Eagle.)
And many of the ancient astronomers, attributed but 9. stars, to this Dolphin,
which are of the third, fourth, and sixte magnitude, and in our time be in
Aquarius, retaining the nature of Saturn and Mars.

THe figure named the celestial Arrow, placed in heaven without a bow, to
which the Swanne flies, is near to the North. To this Arrow does Ptholomie
atribute five stars, which in our time are about the end of Capricornus, being
of the fourth, fifth, and sixth greatness, and having the quality of Mars, and
a little of Venus.

The figure named the Eagle (whereon Aquarius seems to fly) which many
affirm to be Ganimedes, Ptholomie does deck with nine stars, of the second,
third, fourth, and fifte bigness, that in his time were in Sagitarius and
Capricornus, and in our time are in Capricornus, which follow the qualities of
Mars and Jupiter.

Many ancient authors used for the celestial Harp, the Griepe falling,
which for that there is so little thereof mentioned, shall here be ouerpassed.
But Ptholomie gives to this celestial Harp, 10. stars, being all of the
first third, and fourth magnitude, and in his time were in Sagitarius (except
the fifth and sixte star) which then were in Capricornus, and have the
qualities of Venus and Mercury.

The image Hercules (named of Aratus and sundry others Eugonasis) is thus
placed in heaven, it makes the Dragon appear to have his head upright, and
Hercules with the right foot, the knee being bended or bowed, seems with
the left foot to thrust down the right side of his head, and in his right hand
holding up a great nail as it were to stricke, and covered on the left side
with a Lions skin, seems earnestly to fight and ^^ea the same unarmed. This
image does Ptholomie describe with 29. stars, and others only 28: which in
our time are all in Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitarius, and of the quality of
Mercury.

Where Aratos, Ptholomie and Alphonsus write of two manner of Crowns (as the
Northerly, and Sowtherly) therefore shall first be showed of the Northerly
Crown, and after of the Sowtherly in their proper place. This bright
constellation named the Northerly Crown, does Ptholomie declare to have 8.
stars, which in his time were all in Virgo, and at this day are in Scorpio. And
in the same constellation is a bright star, of the second bigness, by the name
of the whole image: of the Arabians named Alpheta of Virgill, Geor. Guofia.

The image named the Swan, the Foul, the Hen, and the Griepe flying, does
Ptholomie deck with 17. stars, of the second, third, fourth, and fifth
bigness, and in his time were in Capricornus and Aquarius, but in our time are
in Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, and be all of the nature of Venus and
Mercury.

The image named Arctipholax, or Boots, which in English may be named the
Heardman, or rather the keeper of the wagon, in that he seems to follow the
wagon: that is the Northerly stars. And Pliny writing of Boots, (which he
otherwise names Arcturus) does affirm, that this constellation in a manner
never rises, but a stormy hail ensues. Also Arcturus is a bright star not in
fashion of the first bigness, standing between the legs of Boots, as
Ptholomie writes: but Hyginus, Rufus, and others, do place that star in the
gyrdle of Boots. This Boots, (after Ptholomie) has 22. stars, which in his
time were in Virgo and Libra, and in our time are only four of the first in
Virgo and all the others in Libra. But as touching the natures of them,
Ptholomie does only write hf Arcturus, which he affirms to have the nature
of Jupiter and Mars.

The image named Cepheus, Ptholomie affirms to have twelve stars, of the
third, fourth, and fifth magnitude being in his time in Pisces and Aries: and
in our time in Pisces, Aries, and Taurus, and following the nature of Jupiter
and Saturn.

The image named the celestial Dragon, that other ancient men name the
Serpent, has (after Ptholomie) 13. stars placed over all: which in his time
were in Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, and in our time are in these; Scorpio
Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Geminini, Cancer,
Leo, Virgo, and Libra: being of the 3. 4. 5. and 6, bigness. Those that shine
brightest are eight, and of the third greatness, as that third star, which is
on the eye; the fifth star which is on the head called Rastaben; the 24. and
25. declining unto the North, the 29. which stands beyond the furthest
winding, the 30. which is nere the end of the tail, and the 31. which is at
the very end. And these brighter shining stars are of the nature of Saturn and
Mars.

The image named the greater celestial Bear, and of many (for the form of
the Stars standing together) Charles-Waine. All the seven stars, of which
two be alike, and are seen in one place, called of the ancient the two Oxen,
in that they seem equally to move, as yoaked Oxen. The other 5. stars they
imagined to fashion the wagon and the sign or image next to it, to be Boots,
or in English the wagon driuer, which seven stars (being the greater Bear)
are drawn once about the Pole of the world in 24. hours, and never set out
of sight: For one while it carries three unto the highest, and the other four
unto to the lowest: and an other while it draws the four unto the highest,
and brings the three to the lowest. This constellation named the greater
Bear, does Ptholomie declare to have 27. stars, which in his time were in
Gemini, Cancer, and Leo, and in our time in Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, having all
the quality of Mars. But here I ouerpasse all the stars of that constellation,
and only take those which form the wago^ (being 7. in number) of which four
in the order of the stars of the greater Bear, being the 16. 17. 18. and 19.
that go before the wagon, or the wheels of the same. The 16. 17. and 19. are
of the second greatness, but the 18, is of the third bigness. The 25. is of
the second sign (named Alioth) that is before the beam which contains the
yoke. The 26. and 27. that stand in stead of the places of the two Oxen. All
these are described, in a manner after the mind of Hyginius, but Caesar the
German attributes the three stars of the tail, to the beam of the wagon,
and the other Stars to the wheels of the wagon.

The figure named Cynosura, the little Bear, or lesser wagon, did the men of
Syria more diligently regard, supposing to sail the truer and surer by it:
and of this thought through their first finding of the same (to have it called
after them, Phenicen. This little Bear after Ptholomie, called the Northerly
stars, or lesser wagon (as above said) has seven stars, which in Ptholomies
time were in Gemini and Cancer, and in our time are in Cancer and Leo. Of these
the first star, which is on the end of the tail, is named the Pole star,
about which the first moouer is supposed to be drawn, and is of the third
bigness. The two following stars in the tail, and the two fore wheel stars,
are of the fourth bigness, and the two hinder wheel stars following, are of
the second greatness, and these stars have the quality of Saturn, and a
little of Venus, as Ptholomie in primo Quadri, writes.

The Southerly images, in respect of the Equinoctial, are these.

The sign Libra is a part of Scorpio, which through the magnitude of the
members is divided into two signs, of which the figure of the one they called
Libra. And that part was rightly named Libra, in that when the sun is entered
the beginning of that sign, the day and night is divided a like as by an
equal balance. For the Equinoctial harvest like happens, at the entrance of
the sun into Aries as the Equinoctial spring does. This sign has eight
stars (which are in form) of which one in the Southerly balance and another
in the Northerly balance, and of the second greatness. But the others which
either do follow or move before either balance, are of the fourth and fifte
bigness. Nine others there are which be not in form, placed within and
without the balances. Being all of the nature of Mars and Mercury.

The fore part of Scorpius is so hidden of the Equinoctial cyrcle, that it
appears to stay or hold the same up. It sets with the head inclined, and
arises right up. The sign Scorpio has in those (which are called the Klees)
in each of them two stars, of which the fore stars are the clearer, and have
the quallity of Mars, and a part of Saturn. It has also in the foreheade
three stars, of which the middle stars is the clearest, and of the third
bigness. In the space between the shoulders under the neck, three stars. In
the belly two. In the top of the tail five, with the which he is spposed to
strike, two stars. In the whole the sign has 24. stars. That one star which
is named Antares (or the heart of the Scorpion) is of the second greatness and
of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. And many stars (especially those which are
placed on the body) are of the 3. greatness, and have the quality of Jupiter
and Mars. The stars by the forehead, of the nature of Mars, and part of
Saturn. The stars on the legs and feet, are of the fourth and fifth bigness,
and have the quality of Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, Mercury, and part of Venus.

THe sign Sagitarius looks unto the West, and is figured with the body of a
Centaure, as it were shooting arowes, beginning from the feet, unto the
shoulders. It is so placed in the winter cyrcle, that his head only may seem
to appear without the same Cyrcle: whose half Bow is divided by the milky
cyrcle. And before his feet stands the Crown decked with certain stars: he
seteth headlong, and arises straight up. This sign has in the head two
stars, of the fourth bigness, of the nature of Mars and the Sun. In the right
elbow one, and in the forehead one. In the belly one, in the left shoulder one,
of the third bigness, and quality of Jupiter and Saturn. The stars of either
side the root of the tail, of the fifth bigness, and of the nature of Venus,
and part Saturn. In the fore knee, one star etc. This sign in the whole,
has 31. stars. Of which those on the Bow, on the North, South, and middle
part, are of the third bigness, and of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. And two
on the left foot, of the second bigness, the one on the right ankle, of the
third bigness: and that star in the right elbow, of the fourth bigness, and
having the quality of Jupiter and Saturn all the others are of the fourth or
fifth magnitude.

THe sign Capricornus looks unto the West, and is wholly figured in the
Zodiac cyrcle. The tail with the whole body, is divided by half (of the
Winter cyrcle) and reaches to the left hand of Aquarius, he sets headlong,
and arises right up: he has a star on the nose, and another going before the
two stars in the mouth, another following them, and another Southerly of the
three in the mouth: all of the sixth bigness, and of the nature of Saturn, and
part Mars, and Venus. A star going before the three, under the right eye of the
fifth bigness, and of the nature of Mars and Mercury. The Southerly of the
three following behind the horn, of the third bigness; the Northerly of the
three behind the horn, of the third bigness. The Northerlier, and Southerlier
of the stars in the neck, of the fifth and sixth bigness. In the neck between
the shoulders seven, on the breast two, on the belly and body seven of the
fifte bigness, and of the nature of Mars and Mercury. The stars on the tail,
of the third, fourth, and fifth bigness, and of the nature of Saturn and
Jupiter. In the whole he has 28. stars known, of which the two on the horns
are of the third bigness, but all the others be of the fourth, fifth, and sixth
bigness.

The ancient astronomers as Aratus, Hyginus, and others, do assign three
images in one constellation: as the Hydra or monstrous serpent, on whose tail
they describe the Raven to sit, and almost in the middle of the same figure,
they affirm the cup to stand. It is a sign in the South part, having the
head declining unto Cancer: the half of whose winding body is placed under
Leo, but he reaches the tail unto the Centaure, on which the Raven does sit.
To this Hydra or water serpent, does Ptholomie give 25. stars, being of the
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth bigness, his beginning in Ptholomies
time was in the fourteen de gree of Cancer, but the end almost in the
fourteen degree of Libra: and in our time the beginning is in the 4. degree of
Leo, and the end in the third degree of Scorpius, being of the nature of
Saturn and Venus.

The great water Cup or pitcher, does Ptholomie deck with seven stars, being
of the fourth bigness, which in his time were in Leo and Virgo, and in our time
in Virgo, and of the quality of Venus, and a little of Mercury.

The Raven (after Ptholomie) has seven stars, being of the third, fourth, and
fifth bigness, which in Ptholomies time were all in Virgo, and in our time are
in Libra, having the quality of Saturn and Mars.

The cellestiall figure named the Altar, does Aratus place in heaven, under
that beast called the Woolfe, near to the South, and standing under the tail
of Scorpius. To this figure does Ptholomie assign seven stars, that in his
time were in Scorpio, of the fourth and fifth magnitude: but in our time are in
Sagitarius, and have the quality of Venus, and a little of Mercury.

The image named the Centaur, is thus described of Aratus, that the parts of
this image likned to the man, do ly within the sign Scorpius; but the hinder
half likened to the Horse, lies or stands under the Klees. And is likened
to one having his right hand continually open, toward the round altar. And
as one offering sacrifice on the altar, which sacrifice the monster holding in
his right hand to offer on the altar, they call a wild beast. In that
monster or Centaur named of Hyginus, Chiron, does Ptholomie number 37. stars,
of the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth magnitude, which in his time were
all in Libra, but in our time in Libra and Scorpio. The stars standing
fashioned in the form of a man, have the quality of Venus and Mars, and those
which represent the form of a horse, are of the nature of Jupiter and Venus.

The image named the celestial Wolf, does the Centaur seem to hold: yet it
is a several constellation from the other. To which Ptholomie does assign 19.
stars, being of the third, fourth, and fifth magnitude, that in his time were
in Libra and Scorpio, and in our time are all in Scorpio.

The celestial figure named the River streached from Orion, do some name
Eridanus, which otherwise Padus, some Gyon or Nylus, and some Oceanus. To this
River Eridanus, that comes from the left foot of Orion, does Ptholomie give
34. stars, of the first, third, fourth, and fifte bigness: that in his time
were in Aries and Taurus, and in our time in Aries, Taurus, and Gemini. The
last star of the 34. in the row (of the first magnitude) has the quality of
Jupiter, and all the others, are of the nature of Saturn.

The long Ship (named Argo) not the whole form of it is described or seen
among the stars (in that it is divided from the fore part unto the mast) that
may signify to men little to despair, although the Ship happen to break.
Aratus writes, that the fore half of Argo, is turned about right with the
tail of the great Dog. But in a contrary order moved, in that the fore
half is seen, and the other half hid; much like a ship rising with the
swelling of the Sea, whose fore half is seen, and the other half hid,
through that hinder part darkened or hid, and without stars. To the ship Argo
does Ptholomie ascribe 45. stars of the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. magnituds. The
greater of these in order 44. of the first bigness, is that star (named of the
Arabians Rubail, of the Latins Canopus) which stands at the end of the
Rother steerer of the ship, that in Ptholomies time was in the 17. degree,
and 10. minutes of Gemini, having the Southerly latitude 75. degrees, and the
declination Southerly 51. degrees, and 41. minutes. And in our time is almost
in the 7. degree of Cancer, having his latitude Southerly 75. degrees, and
declination of 51. degrees, and 34. minutes. All the other stars are of the
quality of Saturn and Jupiter, and were by Ptholomies time, unto our time in
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.

The celestial Hare placed under the feet of Orion, is as he were running
before the hounds of Orion, being fained to be a hunter. To this celestial
figure does Ptholomie assign 12. stars, of the third, fourth, and fifth
magnitude, that in his time were in Taurus and Gemini, and in our time are all
in Gemini, and have the quality of Saturn and Mercury.

The image named Ingula, and also Orion, lies thwart under to the section of
Taurus, and has stars standing and shining before the feet of Tautus; named
Orion of the word Vrina: that is, of the floude of waters. For in the winter
time (when this image or constellation arises) he troubles both the Sea and
Land, with showers of rain, and tempests. The Romans also name him Ingula,
for that he appears armed, as girded with a sword, whose shape is terrible
and most clear to be seen in the shining of the stars. For if it shines
bright and clear, then does it portend fair weather to follow, if it appear
dim, then does it threaten a tempest to ensue. The head of this sign is
drawn by three stars, of which the two clear stars, are called the shoulders,
between which stars the neck is imagined to be, ane thereof named Ingular.
Pliny does often make mention of Orion, as of his rising and setting whole,
and in some places of part, as his gyrdle, or sword. Also he does number Orion
among the fearful stars, causing tempests. To this Orion does Ptholomie
assign 31. stars, which whiles he lived, were all in Taurus and Gemini, of
the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6. magnitude, and one cloudy. The second star is of the
first bigness, and the third is, of the sedond bigness, in the order of the
stars of Orion, which are in the shoulders, and have the quality of Mars, and
Mercury. The constellation named the Zone or gyrdle of Orion, has three stars
shining very bright, of the second greatness, in the order of the stars of
Orion, being the 26. 27. and 28. That figure named his sword has 6. stars of
the third and fourth bigness, decked in the order 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. and 34.
The figure named the Clubbe that Orion bare in his right hand, when he fought
with the dreadful Bull, that possesses four stars, of the fifte and sixth
bigness. In the order 9. 10. 11. and 12. of these the 9. and 10. are in the
right hand. Further the other stars, either of the first or second bigness, as
the 26, 27. and 28. be of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn. But the other
stars which are in the 3. 4. 5. and 6. and the cloudy star, do imitate the
quality of Saturn, the 35. which is on his left foot, is of the Arabians
named Rigel, of the first bigness, and referred to the nature of Jupiter; but
the others unto the quality of Jupiter and Saturn.

The ancient astronomers placed two Dogs in heaven, as they were following
the Hare running: of which the one they named Procion, and the other the Dag.
The image named Proceon (in English the fore-Dogge) has no other name with the
Romans, the^ the Caniculer: that is, the lesser Dog* And of Tully ( in
fragmentis Arati) he is named the fore-Dog. But the other does Aratus place
under the hinder feet of the fore-Dog. To this fore-Dog does Ptholomie
attribute only two stars, others do number three, that in Ptholomies time were
in Gemini, and in our time are in Cancer. Of which the fore star which is in
the addition of the same, does possess the magnitude. The scond star, which
stands on the leg shining bright, is Procion; of the first bigness, al are
of the nature of Mercutie, and a little of Mars.

The other Dog being the greater, is named of the Arabians Alhabor, which
properly is named the greater dog. And this understand, that the same star is
brightest shining, which stands on the mouth or tung of the Dog, being of
the first bigness, and named by authors the dog, in the name of the whole
image. The star named Syrius or the Dog, is placed in the middle Center of
heaven, unto which when the sun shall come, the heat is then doubled, and men's
bodies affected with faintness. Also they suppose that star to be called
Syrius, though the brightness of his fiery shining. The Latins name him, the
Caniculer or Dog Star. Of which the Caniculer or Dog days were named: in that
whiles the sun runs in that part, it is dangerous, and this through the
quality of the season then being, that disposes the time to health or
sicknesses. And hercos it is, that whiles for a time it arises, the season is
not always contagious. Ptholomie names that Star which is on the mouth of
the Dog; and assigns him to be of the first bigness, most clear and bright
in shining. And to that star which stands or is placed on the head, he gives
a small quantity: that is, to be a star of the fifth bigness. Auicen thus writing
of the Dog-daies, wills men to beware, and learn the time in which the
greater Dog arises, and the season in which the snow lies still on the high
hills or mountains, and the frosty or sharp cold time, for then is no apt
time of ministering medicine. But a medicine may safely be druncke, or
otherwise given, in the spring and harvest time. Hippocrates being of the same
mind, affirms that in the Dog-daies, and before them no purgation may safely
be ministered. The beginning of the Dog-daies varieth, according to the
diversity of Regions, Climates, and Latitudes. In our time the Doggedayes begin
at the suns entrance into the 10. 11. and 12. degree of Leo. That which above
was said, that the star Syrius is in the middle Center of heaven, is meant that
the star is in a celestial cyrcle, as the Solsticiall colure, whose Center is
the Center of heaven, in which that cyrcle is described. This understand, that
the sun is then joined with the star Syrius, when they both arise together in
the Horizont above the earth, and sets Heliace West with the sun, though it
cannot be seen rise in the morning, for the bright beams of the sun: but
after the suns daily moving from it, the star begins to arise and be seen
in the morning before the sun. To a man of knowledge this is not strange, that
the Dog Star arises once every natural day: yet the words of Auicen are thus
meant, that in what time the Dog Star ascends with the sun, and this at the
Horizontall meeting and joining together of them in the morning: which
pestilent Caniculare time do the phisicians determine to be of 40. days long.
But the malice of that season is many times overcome and changed through the
strong beams of the Planets happening in this time: as of Jupiter, Venus, and
sometimes of Saturn. Ptholomie does assign to this constellation named the
Dog Star, 18. stars, of the first, 3. 4. and 5. magnitude, that in his time
were all in Gemini, and in our time in Cancer (except the 17. star) which is in
the end of Gemini. And that which is brightest shining in the Dogs mouth, is
named Alhabor, having the quality of Jupiter, and a little of Mars, and all the
others applied to Venus.

Hyginus writing of this image, named the Southerly Crown (which of many is
named Vraniscus) as if the same appeared fashioned hollow from heaven. The same
does he thus describe, that before the fore feet of Sagitarius, are a few
stars, fashioned into a roundnesse, which form his Crown, that many have
imagined as cast from him in bondage manner. And many mean by this Greek word
Ouraniseos, the Palate, in that this crown appears fashioned like to the
Palate, which is a hollownesse above the tongue. To this celestial Crown,
fashioned like a little Palate, does Ptholomie assign 13. stars, of the
fourth, fifth, and sixth magnitude, that in his time were all in Sagitarius, and
in our time are in Sagitarius and Capricornus, of the nature of Saturn and
Mars.

This image do some name the monstrous Fish, the terible fish, the monstrous
sea beast, and sea Lion or Bear. This huge fish named the celestial Whale, is
placed under Aries, and both the fishes, lying a little above the starry River
in the Region of heaven. Ptholomie does assign to this celestial Whale 22.
stars, of the third, fourth, and fifth bigness, that in his time were all
placed in Pisces and Aries, and at this day are in Pisces, Aries, and Taurus,
and most of them are of the nature of Saturn and Venus, and some only of
Saturn.

This Meridiane fish (named the Southern or Southerly fish) and great, whose
Aliances are the fishes named, which are placed in the cyrcle of the Zodiac.
This sign or image is placed in the South part, and seems (as it were) with
the mouth to drink of the water coming from the sign Aquarius. Ptholomie
does number and give to this Southerly fish, 11. stars, being of the first,
fourth, and fifth magnitude, that in his time were all in Capricornus and
Aquarius, and in our time are all in Aquarius. The brghter star in his mouth,
has the quality of Venus and Mercury. But those stars placed on the body of
the same, are agreeable and a like to the nature of Saturn.

These hitherto for the images placed on the North and South side of the
Equatoure.

5 By the fifth, is the declination of the parts of the Ecclipticke from the
Equatoure, as at the bound from which it is known, and both the declinations
of the stars, and the latitudes of places learned. The declinations of the
stars are called the distances of them from the Equatour, toward either of the
Poles of the world. The latitudes of places, the spaces from the Equatoure
unto the highest of them raised in the Meridiane, as by the tops gathered and
learned, in the standing right over. Also by the Equatoure do we learn the
declinations of the Planets, as well Northerly, as Southerly moved, as more
evidently does appear, in the solyde Sphere or Globe. So that by the
declination of the stars known, a man may easily place them in proper
instruments, by which great vtility arises. And it is the measure of time,
in that the length of the natural day is known thereby.

6 By the sixth is learned, that in the same Cyrcle (as by the subject) is both
the length of the whole earth, and particular places standing in diverse parts
of the earth, considered and measured. For according to the exact doctrine of
the sphericall tryangles, the longitude or length of places, and the difference
of longitudes is always the Equinoctial Arc, and not any Parallel. By it
also the declination of any degree of the Zodiac is known, which being had
in any day at noone (the sun then shining clear forth) the Northerly latitude
or elevation of the Pole of any Town, may artificially be known. It is
besides the measure of time, in that a natural day is performed by one whole
return of the Equinoctial, with an adition or inerease to that part of the
Ecclipticke, which the sun in the mean whiles accomplisheth by his proper
motion, against the motion of the first mouer.

7 By the seventh, it much avails and helps the doctrine of astrology, in
that by the guide and leading of the same, are the beginnings of the twelve
houses of heaven found, when astrologiall figures are erected and fashioned to
prognosticate or judge by: which can never so perfectly be searched and found
without the Equatoure, and this through the unlike motion and ascension of the
parts or signs of the Zodiac. By it also are all Towns according to their
longitude and latitude, easily placed and found in the earthly Globe: so that
by it a man may readily know which Towns are Northerly, and which Southerly.
It has besides a most great use in Geography, unto finding the distances of
places, and unto placing of Cities in the earthly globe, in having the true
longitude and latitude of them.

8 The eight instruction, that by it a man may attain the knowledge of all the
celestial Parallel cyrcles, and the earthly Zones lying under them. As by
this example, the Parallel streached along by Rodes, cannot otherwise be
known, but by his distance from the Equinoctial as by his principal and fore
noted Parallel: which a man may learn and know to be from the Equatoure,
toward the North 36. degrees. The same knowledge may aptly be had, of all the
other Parallel cyrcles rightly known, so that none (otherwise) can be prompt
and saillfull in Geographicall matters. Cleonedes affirms (prima Meteor) that
it afterward behooves to know how to discribe each turning about of the fixed
stars with the first mouer, about his Center cyrcle, as that all the Parallel
cyrcles are known. Seeing among those cyrcles, the Equinoctial is greatest,
and those Parallel cyrcles least which are drawn about the Poles of the
world: even the like are those the greater cyrcles according to proportion
from them, which are described unto the Equinoctial.

9 The niuth shows, that no description of the earth, (although in
platefourme) can be expressed, neither by straight nor crooked lines, without
the knowledge of the Equatoure.

10 By the tenth appears, what commodity of the same has and serves in the
judging of genitures, is here by silence ouerpassed, seeing with breuity it
cannot be uttered.

The description, names, and offices of the Zodiac, and Ecclipticke line, or
way of the Sun.
AFter the ancient Astronomers had divided heaven into twoe equal halfes by
the Equinoctial, and diligently observed and noted the thwart drawing and
standing of the Zodiac, and a like form of a larger Zone, the diverse
courses, motions, and wanderings, both of the sun, moon, and other Planets
which being drawn about with the first moouer, kept no equal spaces in them
selves agreeing to the first moouer, nor a like distaunt in their motions from
the Equatoure: but that whiles they were daily drawn by a contrary motion of
the first moouer into the East, they in the mean time wandered one whiles into
the North, and anotherwhiles into the South, unto a certain elongation and
distiance, and so returned unto that cyrcle. They abserued also that the
Planets kept always one manner of journey and way, and that way cutting or
cressing heaven and the Equinoctial by a thwart manner, the same of these,
they named the Zodiac.



This cyrcle of the 12 signs, commonly called the Zodiac (which also is a
greater cyrcle, and thwart lying) having a latitude moveable unto the motion of
the sphere to which it fasteneth, and every where is a like, under which the
Planettes by a continual motion are drawn and run.

This cyrcle also do the Latins name thwart, through the thwart standing of
it: for the Equatour does compass the sphere of the world, by the just middle
space between either Pole: but the Zodiac is thwartly drawn both to the
sphere of the world, and to the Equatoure: so that in some parts it is nearer
to the Poles of the same, and in some parts further distance from it. It is
crossed also of the Equatoure into two eqnall half cyrcles; of which the one
is called the Boreall or Northerly half cyrcle, and the other the Meridionall
or Southerly half cyrcle: therefore by the continual turning of heaven drawn
about, unto any right and thwart Horizont, inclined according to the thwart
Angles, it does both change and vary those Angles by the continual motion
and turning about. For to certain Arks it figureth and forms righter, and to
certain others thwarter Angels, through that diverse inclination unto the
Horizont, which ensues after the standing of it. And the diversity of the
inclination of it unto the Horizont, does also cause a variety in the motion.
For those do slower arise, which make right Angles with the Horizont, and
those are sooner drawn up and appear, which do cause thwart Angles. In the
thwart Sphere, (with that thwartnesse of the Sphere and the Angles, which the
Horizont and Zodiac perform) is the thwartnesse increased.

What the names are of this Circle.
_1 THis Cyrcle is named the Zodiac, of this Greek word zoes; that is in
English Life: in that it is the path, or the coming and going of the sun,
which is called the author of life, and causer of generations (as Aristotle
writes.) Or of the Greek name zodion, which in English is the figures of
Beasts, with the which this cyrcle is imagined to be formed by the concourse
of stars.

2 This Cyrcle is named thwart or bowing, in that it crosses thwartly the
Equinoctial and first moouer, and does appear thwart in respect of the Poles
of the world, from which it is not equally distant. Or for that it makes not
right but thwart Angles, with the Equinoctial, and Colures, or Tropickes. Or
for that it does not regularly ascend and descend according to his parts
(like as the Equinoctial does) but that certain parts or signs of the same
do righter and slower; and certain thwarter and swifter arise in either
Sphere. But the Zodiac is not named thwart (compared unto the proper Poles)
seeing from them it is equidistant according to each part; as the Equinoctial
from the Poles of the world. Yet compared unto the Poles of the world (in that
the one half of it declineth unto the North, and the other unto the South) and
seeing upon these it is thwartly drawn by the daily motion, unto the moving of
the Orb in which it is: In this respect, is the circle named thwart.

3 This Cyrcle is also called Signifere, of the 12. signs carried in it, with
the which the Zodiac is described. Or for that this Cyrcle is divided into
twelve equal parts, (which are called signs) and each having a name of some
proper beast: or for the disposing of stars being in the sign, or for some
property common to the beast and sign (which Ptholomie names the Orb of the
signs) Pliny, Capella, and sundry Poets do name Signifere: but Aristotle
names a thwart cyrcle, in that it does thwartly cross the Equatour, as
witnesses Proclus.

What is the cause of the thwartnesse of the Zodiac.
1 THere are two causes, why the Zodiac is thwart: the one is, that the
nether Spheres upon the other Exe-tree, and Poles, may be carried contrary to
the motion of the first mouer.

2 The other is, that there may be diversities of times, and varieties of
qualities and tempearances: that the sun also may wander and go about diverse
parts of the earth, running in the thwart cyrcle; whereof Aristotle writes,
that it is necessary, that the proper motion in the Zodiac is unlike to the
motion of the first mouer, that it may thereby cause the variety of cresent or
growing things. For if there were only one motion, there should no variety of
growing things be caused.

3 A like reason to this, that of the same, one part of it does draw nigh to
the top and highest over our heads, and the other, that it is removed and
distant from us, does cause most commonly the diversity in effects, which
unto the life of things is requisite. As for example, when the sun is in the
Northerly half of this cyrcle, and near the Zenith and highest over our
heads, he does cause a strong and mighty heat on all things of the earth* as
by trial we find and see in the summer. If therefore the Zodiac were not
thwart, but should equally approach or draw nigh according to all the parts
of it, then should the sun be always a like near us. And when in a short time
of summer he should cause such a heat, that his heat undoubtedly should be so
mighty, that nothing should grow or be increased, but that those things
already grown up and dried should be consumed and burnt up: wherefore the
Zodiac is thwartly placed, that the sun moving into the further half, his
heat may thereby be slaked and weakened, in which he being carried departs
from our Zenith, and cold then taken place, as apeareth in the winter. And if
the sun should continually run in the South part of the Zodiac, then through
extremity of cold should all things be destroyed in the North part. And as
neither heat nor cold is continual, but successively, as those which be
engendered and caused by heat, and consumed by cold. So that the sun procures
(by coming nigh, and going from us) in the Zodiac, that it behooves the
Zodiac to be thwart. Also a diversity of the Planets in the Zodiac. To
conclude, we see that by the coming of the sun to us, generation is caused,
and by his departure from us, things wither and dry.

This cyrcle called the Zodiac (acording to longitude) is divided into twelve
parts or signs, and neither more nor fewer. And according to latitude or
breadth, into 12. degrees. This cyrcle divided into twelve signs, in that of
the ancients it has been noted, that in every revolution of the sun, the
moon is twelve time changed and new, and so many times has he full light. And
that so many changes and full moons do happen within the compass of one
year: by which it pleased them to divide the Zodiac into so many parts,
according to length. But the division of the breadth, has another cause; that
is, of the other Planets, (except the sun) diversely wandering from the same
cyrcle. To be brief, this whole cyrcle is divided into 360. degrees, for the
commodity of this number; in that the days of the year exceed this number by
certain parts: for the common year has 365. days, and 6. hours.

There is a latitude atributed to the Zodiac, by which it differs from the
other cyrcles, in that they are descrybed with one simple compass, that it
might by the larger space, contain the wandering of the Planettes, on either
side the Ecclipticke line, least they should exceed the bonds. Yet the sun
keeps one manner of way and journey continually in the middle of the Zodiac,
and never declineth from it, neither unto the right nor left side, but still
keeping his proper places immovable; both in the rising and setting in either
quarter, and is all alike in the winter and summer seasons. The declinations
also of the sun, do show and appear to be equal, being on either side the
Equator. So these do witness, that the sun continually (...) his yearly
motion, describes and keeps under that line named the Ecclipticke. But the
other Planets do neither keep continually the suns way, nor is drawn in a
right path like him, but digressing on either side the suns way, do wander the
Zodiac by a crooked or bending course; as one whiles moved into the North,
and an otherwhiles into the South: and from thence returning unto the suns
way, as the like knowledge may be had and descerned by the eye.

For this cause, the learned practisioners described the suns course in the
middle place of the Zodiac, and imagined from it a latitude to be attributed
to the Zodiac, which the ancient astronomers determined to be of either
side 6. degrees. But the late writers have increased the same, by adding twoe
degrees to either side, through the digressions of Mars and Venus from the
suns way; which has been observed and noted to digress and decline little
less then eight degrees. So that the latitude of the whole Zodiac (in our
time) is concluded and agreed to be of 16. degrees, and the latitude is
reached on either side, from the middle space of the suns cyrcle toward the
Poles of the Zodiac, eight degrees.

The beginning of the longitude of the Zodiac (although in the compass of
the circle, neither the beginning nor end can be assigned) which bends or is
drawn perfectly round into it self; and both closes and contains it self:
yet the practisioners have assigned by the principal and most ancient
doctrine of the godly fathers,, to be in the poiut of the Equinoctial spring,
which is by the suns coming unto the Equinoctial point: or truer by the
change of the moon that follows next the Equinoctial spring, is not to be
doubted that the year then begun. So that they began to reckon the Zodiac
from that point, where the motions and workings of the sun (the author and
shewer of the yearly space ensued) which after the day and night being alike,
the day increases, and he ascending to us ward, does after abate the cold on
the earth, and both slaketh and melts the frostes and ice, and the hidden
virtues again of the earth, he then begins to loose, open, chearish, and
stir up by his lively heat, and both loses and sheadeth forth the dew
moisture enclosed; and draws up and procures young plants to spring,
through his comfortable warmth daily showed upon the earth.

They divided the whole Zodiac according to length into twelve equal parts
(which they named signs) through the moon as guide and ruler of the same:
which passing yearly by the Zodiac 13. times, to the suns slower going twelve
times; and conjoined with him in twelve places of heaven. Those signs the
ancient Greeks name zodia, either by the figures of creatures, (which the fixed
stars in their standing show and express) or by some natural agreement, they
so assigned names to them. Or else they appointed the names of beasts to the
signs, through the congruent nature betwixt Stars and beasts. Also through
the effects which the sun has in those places. Besides these, the ancient
astronomers described the other stars without the Zodiac by images, that
placed into images, they might be the commodiouser taught and expressed in
heaven to the understanding of young students, and that their rising and setting
might also be the more readily demonstrated. Ptholomie named those
Dodekatemoria, that is, the twelve parts. The Latins called them signs, and
constellations. Also they named those parts signs, for that in those twelve
parts, all the seasons of the year are noted. Again they named the parts of
the signs degrees, of the daily journey of the sun in the Zodiac, for that in
iourneying by little and little, he passes through the whole Zodiac.

They also divided each sign into 30. parts or degrees, through the suns daily
iourneys gained of the first mouer, which in thirty days they declare by
experience, to have measured and gone almost a twelfe part of the Zodiac. Or
for that the space from one conjunction unto an other is of 30. days, which
space (of all writers) is named a month. Or else in that the sun by the same
number of days, has measured almost this Arc or space of the Zodiac.
Whereof they named the self same, the thirty part of a sign, through the suns
motion every 24. hours, which the later Latins call degrees, and the Greeks
Mere, that the ancient call parts. But the ten parts or degrees of every
sign, the Greeks name Dekatas, and the Latins Faces; of which each sign
does conteyne three.

The names and characters of the signs of the Zodiac, are these Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo. These in that they make the half cyrcle of
the Zodiac, declining into the North from the Equatoure, therefore do they
name them, the Boreall and Northerly signs.

The names and Characters of the other signs of the Zodiac, are these.
Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. These in that they
possess the opposite place, and the half cyrcle reaching into the South of
the Zodiac: therefore do they name them, the Meridionall and Southerly signs.

The sun also iourneyeth by these signs (as from the West into the East) by
a contrary order to the first moouer, as this figure plainly demonstrateth:
beginning nevertheless at Aries, and from Aries, passing into Taurus, and from
Taurus into Gemini, and so to the end of the signs.



They divided each sign, into 30. degrees of length, in that the whole
Zodiac (like as the other greater or lesser cyrcle) contains 363. parts, or
degrees. And as the Zodiac has in length 12. signs, even so it is requisite
the same should be so many degrees broad (as Capella writes. And as a degree
is in the sign the thirtieth part or length, the compass of the whole
Zodiac should be the like in breadth. Although Mars and Venus do sometimes
digress from those bonds, yet that excess is little, and very seldom: and
there can be no other reason of the same, then that such a latitude is
permitted or assigned to the Zodiac.

To this demand, why there are only twelve signs, and no more, does
Albumaser answer: affirming, that the first obseruers of the stars, noted 48.
images in the 8. heaven, placed and decked with the stars, that represent
sundry forms, and called by them, for the form, standing, or nature of the
stars, of which they appointed 12. for the suns way: and therefore so many,
are the signs of the Zodiac. But here may be demanded, where the
Circumference of the Zodiac is, to which is thus answered that all the
circumferences of the cyrcles imagined are in that hollow of the first heaven,
and likewise the signs are conceived there to be. And where the signs with
the images of the eight sphere are moveable, and the stars in them separated
after a time. Yet the number and names, both of the signs and images remain.
So that it is not material, if that the starrie Aries separate from the first
Aries of the zodiac, and the other signs the like from one another, by a
most slow course are carried, and separated.

The ancient men divided the parts or degrees of the signs into lesser
portions, for the better attaining the precise point in the suns place. So that
they appointed to each degree 60. minutes, to each minute 60. seconds, to each
second, 60. thirdes, etc. For the infinite commodity of the numbers in
calculating, by reason of multiplication and division.

They also divided the signs after two conditions, as in the standing, and
qualities. In the standing, they distinguished them into principal, fixed, and
common signs.

The principal and moveable signs, are those which nighest succeed the four
principal points of the zodiac: of which two possess the Equinoctial points
of the whole cyrcle (as Aries and Libra). The other twoe nighest to the
Solstitiall points, are named the Tropickes (as Cancer and Capricornus.) The
firm or fixed signs, next to the principal, are Taurus, Leo, Virgo, and
Aquarius. The common, or mean (or of two bodies, being the other four) which
placed (as in the middle between the principal and fixed signs) do so
obtain a common nature of both, as Gemini, Virgo, Sagitarius, and Pisces.

In the qualities, they assigned them into four Trients, which the Latins
name Tryangles, and three cornered the common writers names Triangularites, or
Tripli' cities. The first trient contains Aries, Leo, and Sagitarius, which
are by the space of four signs inclusiuely distant, or of 120. degrees: that
are hot and dry, fiery, choleric, and masculine.

The second Tyient comprehended Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus; which being
distaunt by the like space, are cold, and dry, earthly, melancholicke, and
feminine.

The third Trient has Libra, Gemini, and Aquarius, which being distaunt by
the space of four signs, are hot and moist, sanguine, aereall, and masculine.

The fourth Trigon or Trient, does contain Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, which
are distant by the space of four signs, and are in quality cold and moist,
waterie, flegmaticke, and feminine. All which signs, are agreeing to the four
Elements, in their qualities.

Of the Ecclipticke line, or way of the Sun.
HEre it is diligently to be considered and noted, that it behooves not only
to know and understand the places of the Planets in the Zodiac (according to
the longitude of the same) but also to learn and find their places (according
to latitude) wheather they be in that part of the zodiac which bends or
declineth into the North, or in that part which leans into the South: which
the better to understand and know, the ancient astronomers imagined a certain
line, going round about the zodiac, and dividing the same after length by
the middle, in such sort, that it parts and leaves eight degrees toward the
North, and as many toward the South. So that this line is a greater cyrcle,
dividing the latitude of the zodiac into twoe equal halfes, and has sundry
names: as the suns way, the suns ^yr^uite, the suns journey, the suns place,
the suns cyrcle, the Ecclipticke line, and the Ecclipticke place.

This line named the suns way, in that the sun keeps always the middle under
this line, not digressing to the one side nor other: but describes the same in
his yearly motion. But the other Planets do wander one whiles under it, and
an other whiles on either ^oe, which if a Planet tends in that part of the
latitude which is unto the North, wandering there, he is then named to have a
latitude Northerly, as to us dwelling Northward: but if on the other side they
have a latitude Southerly, then are they named discending and running low,

And by the like reason, the same line is named the suns journey. Also of
Cleomedes, called the suns cyrcle, in that under the same the sun continually
runs. And he alone being drawn by the middle of the zodiac, never
wandreth into the North nor South part from that line (as we have before
written) but continually iourneyeth about by the middle of it. So that of the
same, it is called the suns cyrcle.

It is named the suns place, in that under this cyrcle the sun continually
abides.

To conclude, it is named by the usual name the Ecclipticke line. For that no
Eclipse or abating of the suns or moons light happens, but when the sun and
moon are linally under that line (or near come unto the moon) as in the same
degree right against. For in the same degree, at the change, is the moon come
right between our sight, and the suns body; thereby abating his light. But the
Eclipse of the moon happens at the full, when as the sun is right against the
moon; and that the shadow of the earth falls between both, whereby the
moons light is darkened. So that the moons Eclipse is none other, then the
falling of the earths shadow between the sun and moon.

The measure of the large space of either side, occupied by the Planets,
limited and included by twoe lines, and the third drawn or described by the
middle, is named the Ecclipticke line, and suns place.



The Eccliptick line is a greater cyrcle consisting in the middle of the
Zodiac, and dividing it into twoe equal compasses, defined to be eight
degrees in breadth on either side, which the sun makes by a yearly motion,
going thwartly in one continual way, is divided by the four principal
points; as the two Equinoctials, and the Solstices, into four quarters. For as
the whole Zodiac, even so the Eccliptick to the Equatour, resting as it were
in two only points, but in the rest of the cyrcle it bends ^^om either point
toward the opposite Poles of the world declined by the one half cyrcle into
the North, and by the other half into the South.

The points that touch, are the Equinoctial (as we have above written) but
the other two, furthest distaunt from the Equatoure (which are as marks or
bounds for the suns departure) that when he comes to the one, he is carried
no further, but stays there, and from thence drawn unto the contrary bound:
through which turning back of the sun, they are named the Tropickes of the
Greeks, and of the Latins; the solsticiall points. Not for that the sun being
carried unto them, stays and remains any space, but never rests, nor
leaves of his courses: seeing within certain days the Meridiane or Noone
shadows are varied, the day and night spaces either lengthened and increased,
or decreased and shortened notably; as the like is yearly seen. Of these, that
which in the Northerly half cyrcle is furthest distant from the Equatoure
(named the point of the summer solstice) the other standing or being right
against that, the point of the winter solstice.

These points change their places two manner of ways, as well according to
length of the zodiac by creeping further in the fore going, as in going to
and coming short unto the Equatoure. First that the Equinoctial points, do
over go the places of the fixed stars, against the order and course of the
signs; and therefore do the days of the solstices begin and go before. For
the summer solstice about the beginning of Olimpias the first day of July,
which began the year with the Greeks at the morning rising of that
constellation Syrius, being notably known to many: but in the year of
Christ's birth, it happened in the 24. day of June, And in the year 1570. it
happens in the 12. day of June, about 11. of the clock before Noone. The
winter solstice in the first beginning of Olympias, happened the first day of
January, or there about. In the year of Christ's birth it happened the 15. day of
Decmber (in which day at the hour of 12. in the night, they affirm our
savior to be borne. The same winter solstice happens in the same year 1570.
on the 12. day of December, about 2. of the clock at after Noone.

In the second then happen unto the Equatoure by the Ecclipticke (as it were
winding) and removed again in the same departing. For the observations of many
times do witness, that the arcke of the Colure of the Solstices reached to
these points and Equatoure (which they name the suns greatest thwartnesse or
declinatio^) is deminished by little and little. For before Ptholomies time by
forty years Aristarchus, Samius, found the same to be of 23. degrees, 52.
minutes, and 20. seconds. And Ptholomie noted, that he found it to be just
as much.

Mahometes Aratensir which was after Ptholomie 749. years, found this
declination to be of 23. degrees, and 35. minutes.

Arzahell the Spaniard that was 190. years after Albategnius, found it to be
of 23. degrees, and 34. minutes.

Prophatius Iudius which was 230. years after Arzahell found this declination
to be of 23. degrees, and ^2. minutes.

Dominicus Maria being in the year of Christ 1491. found this declination to
be of 23. degrees, and 29. minutes.

Vueruerus being in the year of Christ 1514. found this declination to be of
23. degrees, and 28. minutes, and 30. seconds.

Copernicus being a later writer, as in the year of Christ 1525. found this
declination to be of 23. degrees, 28. minutes, and 2. fifts of a minute.

Of these (but by many notes considered) that the equalities have decreased by
the regulare motion, and yet shall decrease, until an extreme term of
diminishing ensues, which he affirms to be of 23. degrees, and 28.
minutes: the same Copernicus after gathered shall again increase; and that the
greatest thwartnesse which may be caused on the sun or Ecclipticke line, is
23. degrees, and 52. minutes: and the least declination to be of 23. degrees,
and 28. minutes. So that the stablished the difference of the greatest and
least to be of 24, minutes. But he defines the periode motion of the
increasing or diminishing to be in 1717. years: and that so many years, the
motion of the decrease and increase shall be, and that the whole restitution
also of the thwartnesse, to be in 3434. years. So that as the thwartnesse
failing or diminishing; even so the points of the greatest declination (which
are named the solstices) are yearly drawn and moved nearer unto the Equatoure
by 6. minutes, 27. seconds, 24. thirdes, and 9. fourthes: but daily by one
second, two thirds, and so many fourthes, carried near unto it. And the
thwartnesse increasing, may by the like order and condition, and in the same
motion be again abated.

As the Equinoctial points divide the Ecclipticke line into a Northerly and
Southerly half cyrcle, even so the solstitiall points part the same into a
half cyrcle (ascending and descending) as to us. The ascending begins from
the beginning of Capricornus, and ends at the last point of Gemini, and
contains Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries Taurus, and Gemini. And the
descending from the beginning of Cancer, reaches unto the end of Sagitarius,
and comprehends Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitarius. So that
the sun in that half cyrcle, ascends from the Southerly region unto us, in
that from us it is digressed into the South, and of the same they received
those names.

What the latitude of a Planet is, after two definitions.
FIrst, that the arc of the great cyrcle is crossed between the Ecclipticke,
and true place of the Planet, (and that is named the latitude of the Planet)
for that according to the same, the Planet into latitude, that is, into the
South or North, swarueth from the Eccliptick line: whereof the Planets are
named to have a latitude, one whiles into the North, and another whiles into
the South. But the degree expressed and showed by that great cyrcle in the
Eccliptick, is called the degree of the longitude of the star or planet, which
according to longitude from the beginning of Aries unto that place, is the
Planet moved.

The other instructs, and by demonstration shows, that from this line the
other five Planettes wander, one whiles into the North, and another whiles into
the South being not equally carried. This wandering from the said line, is
named the latitude of the Planets, and is the arc of the great cyrcle, passing
by the Poles of the Zodiac and true place of the Planet, comprehended
between the Ecclipticke, and Center of the star. According to this distance,
he is named a Planetary star (what star soever the same be) that to latitude
from the eclipticke, is carried either Northerly or southerly. So that it
cannot be said that a planet is without the Zodiac, seeing the ancient
obseruers of the stars (being moved) did attribute to this cyrcle a latitude.
As may be (the Ecclipticke line) noted with A. and B. and the letter C. the
Pole of the Northerly Ecclipticke, by which the Cyrcle noted with C. G. D. and
Q. is meant, being the shewer of the Latitudes, and when a star shall be in the
point G. he shall then be without or have no latitude, but if in the letter E.
he shall then have a latitude Northerly, whose quantity, the arc G. E. shows.
If so be a star shall be in the point D. then shall it be Meridional, unto the
quantity of the arc G. D. and L. D. K. the letters M. E. N. are the
Parallelles drawn about the said latitudes, on either side. So that this
demonstration evidently shows, what the latitude of a star is; that is, when
such a latitude is attributed to the Zodiac.

What the longitude of a Star is, and where he begins.
THe longitude of a star, is the arc of the Zodiac or ecclipticke line, from
the beginning of Aries, reckned even unto that point of the eccliptickes, which
is touched by the great cyrcle, drawn by the Poles of the Zodiac, and true
place and degree of the longitude of the stars. As may be conceived in the
figure above, where the point A. represents the beginning of Aries, the
letters A. G. the longitude of the star, if the same shall be in the
Ecclipticke, the letters C. G. D. the cyrcle ending the longitudes.

The difference between a declination and latitude: is this, that a latitude
is the distance of a star or Planet from the eccliptick, toward either of the
Poles: which distance is measured in the great cyrcle drawn by the body of a
star, and Poles of the Zodiac.

But the declination is a distance from the Equinoctial, when as the sun is
carried by a continual and daily course in the upper face of the Ecclipticke,
and has no latitude, but a declination only: yet the other six Planets, have
a latitude and declination. The declination of Planets, is the distance of them
(or a degree of the eccliptick) from the equinoctial. And this measured by the
cyrcle drawn by the body of a star, or degree of the ecclipticke, and by the
Poles of the world. The Planets also are said to ascend and descend, by reason
of the thwartnesse and bending of the Zodiac: for the sun does ascend in the
Northerly signs, but he descends in the Southerly. In the like manner do
all the other Planets, as well by the reason of the ascension, as also of the
place. For planets being in Northerly signs, have the arc of ascension
greater than in the Southerly. Besides, this part of the world which declineth
into the North, is supposed and judged as to us, to be raised higher, by reason
of the Horizont.

Further the definition of a sign shall here be declared, that the same is
meant sundry ways: one whiles to be a circumference, an other whiles an upper
face: and sometime to be a solyde body.

The Zodiac (as I have before declared) is one whiles a line all circumference
(which is named the Ecclipticke line) an other whiles a swathe, of eight
degrees in breadth of either side: Sometimes the zodiac is called the plain
upper face of that Ecclipticke: and in an other place the same called a solyde
body, which of the said swathe, and by the two imagined upper faces is
crossed; of which the tops or highest places over the head are joined together
in the Center of the earth, and the feet are those Parallels of the
Ecclipticke ending the swathe, which may worthily be called a solid zodiac.

The being in a sign is meant six ways, in that the circumference of the
ecclipticke (as I have before written) is divided into twelve equal arks, which
are called signs; and the signs meant in the first manner. Those then drawn and
imagined in length by the Poles of that ecclipticke line, and by the points of
the crossings, yet by great cyrcles, as that circumference of the ecclipticke:
and so the zodiac understood and described of those, in the other five
manners or ways, is divided into twelve equal portions, whose signs are taken
and meant so many ways. A sign therefore in the first manner, is mente the
lineall circumference; but in the second manner the square portion of the
superficial Sphere included with four arks: of which two are of the
Parallells of the ecclipticke, and two of the cyrcles dividing, and the one
ending again in the others. A sign in the third manner, is the deuider of the
circle taking here the cyrcumference, which sign is understood in the first
manner. A sign in the fourth manner is a certain square (pinnacle wise) having
the sharp end turned downwarde to the Center of the world, and included with
four deuiders, the foot or broader end reaching up to the sphericall upper
face; which is a sign meant in the second manner, as this figure more plainly
demonstrateth, where the letters A. B. do represent the Poles of the Zodiac,
the letters A. D. B. and A. E. B. the Cyrcles drawn by the Poles, the letters
E. and D. do represent the twelfe part of the ecclipticke; the letters G. and
K. or F. and H. express the latitude of the zodiac: the letters A. and E. do
show the sign in the first manner: the letters F. K. do represent the square
portion in the second manner: the letters C. D. E. witness the deuider in the
third manner: the sharp pinnacle (whose top or end is turned downewardes) and
the letter C. the foot of the squares: the letters F. K. do represent the
portions in the fourth manner: the letters A. D. B. do express a portion of
the Sphericall upper face, between the half cyrcles. The letters A. E. B. do
show the portion in the first manner: the solid deuider between those half
cyrcles is expressed in the sixth manner.

Further a sign in the fifte manner, is a portion of the sphericall upper face
(enclosed between two half cyrcles) ended at the Poles of the ecclipticke. To
conclude, a sign in the sixth manner is mente a solyde deuider of the Sphere,
contained in the said half Cyrcles and Sphericall upper face, which is a
sign understood in the fifth manner.

These diverse divisions serves (as they write) unto that end, whereby all
things might be enclosed within the signs. For if signs be described in the
first manner, then on such wise those stars only, and those points are said to
be in the signs, whatsoever shall be in that cyrcumference of the ecclipticke.
And in the first signification also is meant to be under the ecclipticke, which
agrees only to the sun, as at this day the sun is (being the 23. day of
August) in the 9. degree, and 9. minutes, of Virgo at Noone, which is meant to
be under that part of the eccliptick, that is named the 9. degree of Virgo.

If in the second manner planets shall be in signs, which do not exceed six
degrees of latitude; or thus in the second signification, to be under the
zodiac is monte, that here a sign is expressed, enclosed within a square
pinnacle portion. This signification agrees to the other planets (except the
sun) which decline from the ecclipticke, as Mars in this year 1599. is in the
15. degree of Virgo, which is under that part of the zodiac, that is said
to be the 15. of Virgo. Also he has a latitude Northerly of two degrees, and
28. minutes.

If in the third manner, the sun or any star shall be in signs (placed in
the plain of the eccliptick, or in the third signification to be in a sign)
signifies to be referred unto any sign of the zodiac. For the whole heaven
is divided into twelve Regions (in cyrcles passing by the beginnings of the
signs, and Poles of the Zodiac) of which Regions each is named a sign. And
this signification agrees to the stars, standing without the zodiac: as the
Northerly Crown, which in our time is in Scorpio, and referred unto the sign
of the zodiac that is called Scorpio; in that it is between those twoe half
cyrcles which pass by the beginning and end of Scorpio.

If in the fourth manner, the planets and stars also, not further distant then
six degrees from the ecclipticke. Or in the fourth signification, is meant or
referred unto any of the twelve Regio^s of heaven; into which, heaven by those
six Cyrcles which pass by the beginninges of the signs and Poles of the
zodiac (as is before written) is divided. This signification agrees to those
which are in the air, (as be the Comets.) As if I wrote that a Comet were in
Leo, here I mean the six cyrcles passing by the Poles of the zodiac, and
beginnings of the signs, dividing both heaven and the whole nether Region of
the world into twelve equal parts. So that a Comet is said to be in Leo,
seeing it is in that twelfe part which the twoe half cyrcles describe,
running or stretching by the beginning and end of Leo.

If in the fifth manner, all the stars and points meant in the upper face of the
sphere, be included in signs. If in the sixth manner, then whatsoever is in the
world (whether the same be in the Ethereall, or Elementarie region) is
accounted to be included within a sign.

Here is further to be noted, that the stars may otherwise be received into
signs, or enclosed within signs, besides these sundry deuisions. For the
division of the Ecclipticke, alone were sufficient, that a star or any point be
so brought unto his sign, that the same may be said to be in the sign. As by
a like example the preposition ( in) used for the word ( sub,) in English (
under.) So that if the sun were said to be in Aries, then is the same meant to
be and run under Aries. And for a more readier and easier conceiving of the
former lesson taught, use the examples before demonstrated.

Here conceive, where the cyrcumferences of the cyrcles are meant. And first
imagine the circumference of the Zodiac, and all the other cyrcles (as I have
before written) to be in the hollow upper face of the first mouer, and runs
as it were in the first (after the second condition of motions) and
demonstrateth alike distaunce and continuing of the cyrcles without impediment.

Although the Horizont, the Meridiane, the Uerticiall, and other cyrcles (in
respect of the habitation or dwelling place) remain immovable in that upper
face of the first moouer: yet does it nothing hinder (although heaven or the
first mouer be drawn about) that such cyrcles be imagined to be immovable.
For there is nothing more agreeable, then to imagine cyrcles fixed, and those
abiding in any upper face of the earth. So that it is necessary, that the
Zodiac, the Equatoure, and the other cyrcles be described moveable in the
hollow face of the first mouer, as the bound and enclosure of the whole world.
The Horizont and Meridiane, and the others, placed immovable in that hollow
and fixed upper face, in which the whole earth is placed, by this means the
fixed cyrcles should stay in the fixed upper face, and the mouable cyrcles
should be drawn about with the moveable. As in a material instrument, and
solid sphere a man may see, in which the zodiac, the Equatoure, and other
moveable cyrcles, are drawn about upon the Exe-tree, between the two Cyrcles
remaining steady, of which the one represents the Horizont, the other the
Meridian.

Whether the same may be described in the hollow, or in the imbossing of the
first moouer of the said cyrcumference, it is little or nothing regarded: yet
consider this, that all men may behold and see within the heaven or first
mouer, the hollow upper face of his enclosure, to describe and imagine the
cyrcles in the same.

The Cyrcles placed without the material instrument, must of necessity force a
man to describe the cyrcumferences of the Cyrcles in that outward face of the
Instrument.

To conclude, the Zodiac is meant and described according to his diffinition
(being a greater Cyrcle) whose cyrcumference in the hollow of the first moouer
described into signs, degrees, and minutes, (as was before written) is divided.
And seeing that Cyrcle described by the suns yearly motion, is imagined
straight drawn and defined or determined from the Center of the suns course by
the Center of the sun, which with the sun is drawn by a perfect revolution
toward the East.

For this line in that motion cutting the hollow upper face of the first
mouer, does describe the cyrcumference of the Zdiacke. So that if the plain
upper face of the suns course be extended, until it cutteth the foresaid
hollow upper face, which common section or cutting shall be the self same
cyrcumference of the Zodiac, unto which the place of the force and virtue of
any star is applied. Therefore by the same means that virtue of the moon, or
any of the planets, drawn in the same hollow of the upper heaven, shall be
like the same described.

cording to the diverse elevation of the Pole, whereof the Colures are called
imperfect cyrcles.

There are two manner of Colures, as the Colure of the solstices, and Colure of
the equinoctials. These two greater cyrcles are drawn by the Poles of the
world: of which the one goes by the Poles of the Zodiac, and the other by
the sections of the Zodiac and Equatoure. That which passes by the Poles of
the equatour and Zodiac, does divide in two parts each half cyrcle, as well
of the equatour, as the Zodiac. Therefore the one condition of the Colures
goes by the solsticiall points of the Zodiac (which are the beginnings of
Cancer and Capricorn, and the furthest points from the equatour) whereof it is
named the solsticiall Colure. The other is named the equinoctial Colure,
seeing it enters by the said equinoctial sections, which are the beginnings
of Aries and Libra; that is, the equinoctial points. So that these Colures
divide as well the equinoctial as the Zodiac into four quarters, in that
they go by the four principal points of them.

The Colures generally are called all the greater cyrcles drawn by the Poles of
the world, which take their name thereof, insomuch as they never are descerned
or seen whole in the turning about of the world, as the other cyrcles, but
imperfect and lacking. For both the arks right against one another about the
Poles, in the thwart sphere are not seen both at once.

For they are either continually in sight to us, and never drawn away or hid
like unto those which be near to the elevated Pole. Or else they never appear
in sight to us, but are continually hid from us, as those which be the
opposites.

But the reaching of the Colures fastneth in the two circles, extended and
passing by the four principal points of the ecclipticke, as the equinoctials
and solsticials, which touching one another in the Poles of the world, do in
their cyrcumferences make right angles, and part the Zodiac and equatoure into
four equal quarters. The Colure of the equinoctials, resting in the
equinoctial points. The other containing the solstiticiall points, is called
the Colure of the solstices*



The Colure of the equinoctials is a greater cyrcle, moveable, and every where
alike: drawn by the Poles of the world or equatour, and the equinoctial
points, as the beginnings of Aries and Libra, making with the equatour right
sphericall angles, with the Zodiac thwart angles. For oftentimes the greatest
cyrcles (by a mutual touching together) do make right angles in the sphere, as
they cut in two parts or into equal half cyrcles, and by the Poles one
another: and contrariwaise when they cut one another by the Poles, then do
they form and make right angles with their cyrcumferences, and part one the
other into equal parts (as writes Theodosius in his first Book de Sphera,
and in propositi, 18. 19. 20. and 21.)

Or thus, the Colure of the equinoctials (which is named the equinoctial
Colure) is a greater Cyrcle passing by the poles of the world, and the first
points of Aries and Libra; where the two Equinoctial points are said to be:
in that the sun causes a like day and night in every place; or for that
these points are in the Equator, whereof it is called the Colure distinguishing
the equinoctials: so that the two Colures cross one another on the Poles of
the world, at right spericall Angles.

It is called the Colure of the equinoctials, for that it passes by the
equinoctial points, as by the beginnings of Aries and Libra (which they call
the Equinoctial points) for that when the sun happens into either of them,
the day and night is of equal length throughout the Earth; which comes to
pass twice in the year (as in the Spring and Harvest) whereof the one is
called the Equinoctial spring (and at this day is about the eleventh of March)
which is the day before Gregory: the other, the Harvest Spring, and happens in
our time the 14. of September, that is, three days before Lambert, whereof
arises this ancient verse:

Lampert, Gregori, nox est aequata diei. The Colure of the Solstices is a
greater circle, moveable, and every where alike drawn by the solsticiall points
or the beginnings of Cancer and Capricornus, and the Poles of the Zodiac and
Equatoure, making right sphericall angles with both, for of both is the Poles
comprehended. And according to Theodosius propo. lib. 2. de Spera, that by any
twoe cyrcles crossing one the other (when a third deuideth the parts of both
equally and in two parts) the same is the greater cyrcle, and passes by the
poles of both. But that which passes by the Poles of the other Cyrcle, does
part it in two parts, and at right angles.

Here may be demanded, why the other twoe are called the solsticiall points,
seeing the Sun stays no where. Which is thus answered, that the sun
digressing from either equinoctial point by his proper motion, does daily
depart from the equinoctial cyrcle, till he come unto the solstitiall point,
where he is furthest distant from the equatoure. But immediately after he
begins to return and come again unto the equatour, till he come unto the
other equinoctial point. So that the point of the suns furthest distance
(which is the beginning of Cancer or Capricornus) and of the same called the
solstice, in that the sun stays there: that is, cease from his further
going or departure, and begins again to come to the Equatoure. For the sun
after his coming unto that point departs, and comes again to the
equatour: so that the end, the departure, and beginning of his coming, is the
solstice. Therefore not for that the sun stays there, are they called the
solstices, although about those points of the going and coming of the sun, it
is so small, that for four, sire, or more days after, he seems in judgment
as it were to stay in one declination: and therefore for that cause may be
named the solstitials. These of sundry (as of Campanus) are also called
Tropicke points, through the suns returning. And these may be called Uerticiall
or Cardinal cyrcles (seeing they go by those tops of the world) and express
or show the four quarters of the Zodiac. Moreover seeing certain parts of
these cyrcles being near the pole are hid, and the other right against them
nothing at all discerned at any time: therefore is it that they are called in
Greek Kolouroi, which is in English, maimed and imperfect, as Proclus,
Diadochus, Mocrobius and Capella, write. But this agrees not in the right
Horizont, seeing there is no part of heaven, which does always remain there
hid. But in the description of the astrolobie, how large soever the same be,
yet only these cyrcles appear continually imperfect.

Yet further, the Colure of the solstices, or the cyrcle distinguishing the
solstices, which also is called the solstitiall cyrcle, is a greater cyrcle
drawn and passing by the poles of the world, and Zodiac, and the greatest
declinations of the same: and by the beginnings of Cancer and Capricornus. It
is called the Colure of the solstices, in that it passes by the solsticiall
points (as by the beginnings of Cancer and Capricornus) which are named the
solsticiall points; for that in them the solstice is caused: that is, the suns
coming unto those points, departs not further from the Equinoctial, but
comes) again unto the Equinoctial, which is caused twice in the year, as
in summer and winter: whereof the one is called the summer solstice (which in
our time happens the 12. of June or thereabout) being the next day after S.
Barnabe the Apostle, where the longest day is holden to be. The other the
winter solstice, which in our time happens about the 11. or 12. day of December
(being a day or two before Lucie) where the day is accounted shortest: whereof
is this ancient verse extant.

Vitus est Lucia, dant tibi solstitia bina. Of the former also ensues, that
there is certain fixed and moveable Colures. For there is a fixed Colure of
the equi^octiale, which passes by the poles of the world, and section of the
equatoure and Ecclipticke of the first mouer. The fixed Colure of the solstices
does cut this at right angles in the poles of the world, and passes by the
middle of the suns greatest declination. Seeing neither the equinoctials nor
solstices, are caused according to the true meaning of the astronomers (as
before may appear) both in these points, as well as in others: Therefore a man
must conceive, that the Colures be moveable: of which the one goes by the true
equinoctial; that is, by the section of the suns way, and equatour, and by the
Poles of the world, and the other of the solstices, passes by the suns
greatest declination. These hitherto written, may more plainer appear, by this
demonstration here following.



In this figure, are the cyrcles, and parts of the cyrcles noted with their
names. In which the letter F. expresses the true and moveable equinoctial.
The letter E. is a note of the fixed Equinoctial. The letter D. points out
the head of Aries, of the eight sphere. The letter C. the center of the eight
Sphere. The letter A. of the ninth and tenth sphere. The letters K. N.
represent the suns greatest declination truly. The letters R. M. the suns
middle declination greatest. How much the Equinoctials are distant one from
another, the former large instruction of the equinoctials, may easily show at
any time, unto which a man must always resort.

The suns greatest declination, is the arc of the Colure of the solstices,
contained between the equatoure and either Tropicke: this of sundry
practisioners is diversely noted. For Ptholomie found the same in his time to
be of 23. degrees, 51. minutes, and 20. seconds: of which the whole cyrcle is
noted to be 360. degrees, but after Alnieon, of 23. degrees, and 33. minutes.
But the later practisioners have found the same to be 23. degrees, and 30.
minutes. Purbachius has found the same to be of 23. and 21. minutes: which
variation of the suns greatest declination is, through the coming and going of
the eight Sphere, (which is named the trembling motion.) But this is
demonstrated and taught more at large in the Theoricks.

If any desire to observe the suns greatest declination, let him take the
altitude of the sun about the winter solstice, in the shortest day at Noone:
which altitude being kept a part, work the like, the sun being about the
summer solstice, and the suns greatest altitude at Noone found by the rule of
the astrolobie; look that in the bordure of the same, and take the middle of
that arc, which is between the suns least and greatest elevation at Noone,
which possesses the myddle, and shall be the Suns greatest declination.

The knowledge of the suns declinations, with the other stars, is very
profitable; in that by the same, and the perfection of the elevation of the
pole, the true place of the sun (if the same be unknown) may be known, the
suns greatest declination presupposed, after this manner as follows. Marcke
and consider diligently (the sun being in the Noonestead cyrcle) carried up from
the Horizont: which found, if the sun run in the Northerly signs, abate from
the said elevation the complement of the elevation of the Pole. If the sun be
carried in the Southerly signs, then work contrary; for that which remains,
shall be the suns particular declination. As by a like example use this. The
sun being imagined to be elevated above the Horizont 63. degrees. 21.
minutes, and 4. seconds, the elevation of the Pole is 41. degrees, and 30.
minutes, and the comple^^nt of the same altitude of the Pole to be 48.
degrees, and 30. minutes; with the which subtract the suns altitude at Noone,
and the remaurer shall be the suns declination, which is 14. degrees, 51.
minutes, and 4. seconds. being the distance of the sun from the beginning of
Aries, abated for the suns running in the Northerly signs, at the time of the
observation before the summer solstice.

What the offices or vtilities of the Colures are.
_1 SHe common offices in general of the Colures are, to show the four
principal points of the zodiac, in which through the suns motion the
greatest chaunges and alterations of time is caused.

2 They serve to demonstrat the solstices and equinoctialles, and to divide the
Zodiac into four equal parts, to which the four seasons of the year do
answer.

3. The use of the one is to express and make manifest the points of the
equinoctials, and the other to show the points of the solstices.

4 They both cut the Zodiac and equatour, into two equal half Cyrcles, and
both divide either Cyrcle into four equal quarters.

5 But the Colure of the solsticis offers many other uses: for in the same is
the suns greatest declination or thwartnesse measured and numbered, in that
the suns greatest declination, is the Arc of the Colure of the colsticis
(enclosed between the beginning of Cancer and the Equatour) which arcke is
either increased or diminished, according to the winding in and out of the
eclipticke unto the Equatour, as is before mentioned.

6. They serve to distinguish the Equinectiall, the Zodiac, and all heaven
into four equal parts: the use of which matter shall appear in the place of
the ascentions of the signs.

7 Each Colure besides, has his private office or vtilities: as the Colure of
the solstices, which has four offices. The first demonstrateth the
solsticiall points. The second contains and measures, the suns greatest
declination. The third, that it stays up the poles of the Zodiac, and
shows their distance from the poles of world. The fourth, that it deuideth
the Zodiac into two halfes, as into the ascending and descending. Also the
same in the thwart Sphere, does separate the signs rightly arising, from the
signs thwartly rising.

8 The Colure of the equinoctials has twoe offices. The first, that it
demonstrateth the Equinoctial points. The second, that it deuideth the
Zodiac into two halfs; as into the Northerly and Southerly half,

9 To conclude, the Colure of the solstices does often supply and is used in
the stead of the Meridiane, when as in every daily revolution of the first
mouer, it does twice enter into the place of the meridiane, or is twice joined
in the plain of the same.

The descriptions, names, and offices of the Meridiane Circles, and Horizont.
THe four greater cyrcles which we have already described, that with the
motion of the sphere are drawn about, and every where are alike, which the
other twoe Cyrcles are contrary; as the meridiane and Horizont, that are not
turned in the drawing about of the Sphere, but remain as immovable and fixed;
neither are they alike in all places, but are continually changed, standing or
placed on the earth. In that all places have their proper meridians, and
Horizonts.

For both by a mutual touching and joining together do make right angles, and
they continually divide the whole heaven into four equal parts, and make the
four angles and quarters of heaven, unto which by a continual turning about
of heaven, both the one and the other stars (as it were by an orderly
succession drawn) work and send forth their virtues more effectuous, and
exercise their qualities in the Elements, then in any other places: especially
the sun being drawn unto those bonds, for he both begins and ends the
days and nights, and distinguishes them equally, as it were in the middle
parcels of time. The sun also come unto the meridian, does then more heat, dry
up and consume vapors.

The Meridiane of any place, is a greater cyrcle, which goes or reaches by
the poles of the world and height of any place: and for that it passes by the
poles of the equatour, Parallels, and the Horizont, through the same does it
make right angles with them. And of this it deuideth all the arks of the
Parallels as well in sight as not in sight into two equal halfes.

This circle has sundry names, for Varro names it the Meridian or midday
cyrcle of the noonesteed, in that when the sun is in the meridia^, or any other
star above the earth, then has it performed half the day arc, and is then at
the bound of the Noone time. But the other half of the night is caused, at
the instant point of midnight, the half then reaching from East and West. So
that of the same (this cyrcle of all writers in this science) named the
meridiane, but of Ptholomie the cyrcle of midday and middle heaven, by the same
reason.

The astrologians call this cyrcle the royal Cuspe, the regal quarter, the
beginning of the tenth house, and the middle of heaven: in that this place is
principal, and of worthier dignity then the other quarters, of which shall
further be written in his proper place.

Further it behooves by the addition (31. Primi Theodosij) that the Equat^ure
and Horizont, in the contrary manner, to pass by the poles of the meridian: and
of the same that those poles is none otherwise placed, than in the common
sections of the equatour and Horizont. By which sections, and by those poles of
the Horizont, is a certain third cyrcle greater drawn, which Johannes (a
Regio monte) names the verticial circle: so that by the foresaid Corolary or
addition ensues, that of these three cyrcles of each Exe-tree and Pole, are
they in that common section of the other two cyrcles. Like as of the
Equinoctial, and two colures by right may be concluded. So that a triple
division is caused by the three cyrcles, which appears on this wise: that as
the meridian tends by our top and height from the South into the North; even
so by the same top it behooves the other cyrcle to be drawn and pass from the
east into the west that both cutting one the other at right angle, should
express the four foresaid quarters of the world.

As the Horizont distinguishes the upper half sphere, from the nether, and
the meridiane from the East to the West; even so it falls out, that the
third cyrcle, as that verticiall, should separate the Northerly from the
Southerly half sphere. To these, while any stands upright toward the Welt,
on such manner, that y^ middle of his body is in the common Center of three
cyrcles; then does the Horizont divide his upper half from the nether, and
the Meridiane, the fore part from the hinder; and the vertical cyrcle the
right part from the left. The three common sections of these cyrcles, are their
Exe-trees (as is before written) do indicate or show the four principal
points of heaven (which are the fix poles of the cyrcles) placed in the
sections of the cyrcumferences, as the highest or lowest point (which are the
poles of the Horizont) the point also most Easterly and Westerly, which are the
Poles of the Meridiane: to conclude, the point most Northerly and Southerly,
which are the Poles of the verticiall cyrcle.

Those people that seem to have their feet against ours (in respect of the
roundnesse of the earth) that they dwell as it were under us have alike
horizont agreeable to ours, alike meridian, and alike verticial circle. But of
these two, the half cyrcles which be extant to us are hid or as it were under
them. Contrariwise, those which be hid to us, are to them extaunt. The point
also highest to us, is lowest to them: contrariwise the lowest to us, is
highest to them.



The figure before placed, does plainer express that before taught: where the
letters A. B. C. D. represent the Meridiane, the letters B. E. D. F. the
Horizont: the letters F. A. E. C. the vertical cyrcle: the letter G. the center
of the cyrcles and world: the letters A. C. the Exe-tree of the Horizont, the
letters B. D. the Exe-tree of the verticiall cyrcle: the letters E. F. the
Exe-tree of the Meridian.

To conclude, the point that to us is most Easterly, is to them most Westerly,
et e contrario. For the point most Northerly and Southerly, do not change the
surname, except you list to change or alter the names, like as of the Poles of
the world. For that which is to us apparent, is to them hid: and contrariwise
to us hid, to them manifest.

Here may be demanded whether that point of heaven most Northerly, be not the
Northerly Pole of the world, and that point most Southerly, the Southerly Pole
of the world. To which is thus answered, that if regard be had unto the
Equatoure and right Horizont, which passes by the Poles of the world, and has
the equatour for the verticiall, or in steed of the verticiall cyrcle. But we
which have not the Poles of the world in the Horizont (in whose cyrcumference
these four principal points of the East, West, North, and South, are
accustomed to be noted) are forced to call that Northerly section of the
Meridiane and Horizont, the most Northerly point, and that section right
against the most Southerly point. For in every place there are two sections
which the meridiane and verticiall cyrcle do make with the Horizont, which are
two right sections in the plain of that Horizont (cutting at right angles one
an other in the Center) that express and show those four quarters of the
world, from which the principal winds blow; as East, West, North, and
South. So that the foresaid right sections do part the Horizont, and
cyrcumference of the same into four quarters. The four principal winds (of
the common sort) are thus called, that which blows from the East, the Leuant
wind, and that right against it the Ponent: that from the North,
Transmontanus, and that right against it the Mer^dional. These four of later
years, they have divided into 32. winds, after the noted lines and points
drawn in the Sailors card, and other Mappes every where to be seen. Also the
Sailors compass does express so many winds, directed by the adamant or
lodestone, which how the same does direct and show the winds, needs not
here be showed, seeing the same is sufficiently known to every sayler, which by
the guide of their compass, direct their course in clowdy weather (either by
day or night) in marking diligently the points of the compass, how they coast.

To return unto the matter of the Meridiane: the diversity of Meridianes is
no otherwise caused, then the swelling of the earth, as in the first part I
have sufficiently written: the cause of which is, that one like part of heaven
cannot be the top or height of every place. Therefore one meridiane cannot
serve all places, but that in all places a proper Meridiane is caused over the
head. The meridiane also is that which when the sun comes unto the highest
over us, foresheweth by his working and heat the midday. This meridiane is a
greater cyrcle, passing by y^ poles of the world and Zenith, or a direct point
over the head, abiding immovable at the motion of the sphere.

This cyrcle is differing to every City and people, by reason of the East and
West, and is a proper meridiane caused over the head. For this is manifest,
that at the changing of the verticiall point, there is caused an other
Meridian, through the swelling and roundnesse of the earth. Also a man may of
one meridian line, describe many (as writes Johannes a regio monte) for in
that instant of the Noonetide, by letting down right a plum line, the shadow
of the line causes a new Meridiane line on the platform. Therefore these
with the verticiall line in the the Center to the Horizont (crossing one an
other at right angles) do indicate the four quarters of the world: as the
meridian line, the North and South, the verticial line, the East and West.

The Horizont forms the quarters of the east and west: of which the one is
called the East rising, or easterly quarter or end: the other called the West
setting, and quarter of the West.

The Meridiane defines the bounds of the lowest and highest of heaven, and
the quarters or middle motions of the day and night time: of which, that
consisting the upper half Sphere, is named the highest place and middle of
heaven, the other which contains the lowest place right against it, called
the bothom or lowest of heaven.

The Meridiane is a greater cyrcle, immovable, not one and the same every
where, but to every place peculiar and proper, drawn by the top of the place
and Poles of the world (unto which the sun carried by the motion of the first
moouer) does in the day time cause high Noone, and in the night time drawn
right against it causes midnight.

If this cyrcle were moveable like others, then at the motion of the sphere
would it depart from our Zenith, and so loose the name of the Meridiane:
neither would it divide in proper place under it, the artificial day into two
equal parts; seeing by that motion, the Meridiane should approach nearer to
one part of the Horizont, then to the other part. Nor should it stay the
Horizont at right angles, of which it is numbered and accounted amongst the
outward cyrcles of the sphere. The like affirms Proclus, writing that the
Meridiane is none of those cyrcles which is noted and decked with stars. For
the cyrcles of the sphere are distinguished by stars, whereby those cyrcles
may more easily be known in heaven.

The meridianes are changed by the continual changing of place in the
swelling or imbossing of the earth (according to longitude.) For by going
continually right forth toward the East and West, it does purchase new
Meridianes: as by going three miles forth, then is an other point of heaven,
differing from the first over a man's head and gone further by four minutes of
a degree.

Proclus affirms, that 300. furlongs cause no sensible alterations to happen
of the Meridian: and this is meant of those which are placed under diverse
Meridianes, and Parallelles. For those which are placed under one Parallel and
diverse Meridianes, perceive and see no alteration at all.

He which goes strait from the North into the South, or they which directly
journey toward either of the Poles of the world, do continually travail
under one Meridiane. In that all Merdianes do go from one Pole to another,
therefore no journey causes by this means an other meridiane.

There are as many meridians in number, as there be differences of verticiall
points (right over diverse parts of the earth) in going toward the East and
West. The half of the equinoctial has 180. degrees, whereof the
Cosmographers do assign and distinguish so many meridians, in such sort,
that each Meridiane does pass by the twoe opposite degrees of that
Equinoctial, and Poles of the world.

For a plainer understanding of the former, conceive this figure here under
drawn, where the letters A. C. do represent the Exe-tree of the world,
cutting the equatour and Horizont by the letter B. in the Center of the world;
in that the plain of the great cyrcles (when they cut one an other) that
section is made in the Centers. The letters E. B. F. is the equatoure, the
letters X. D. the Horizont, the letter C. the an^^rticke or South Pole of the
world, the letter A. the articke or North Pole of the cyrcle ending in the
twoe points, the letters C. and A. are the Meridiane cyrcles, of these the
outwarder is the meridiane fixed, as by example, passing by the fortunate
Islands, as after shall further be written in the proper place, from which the
others begin, of which are commonly drawn 180. in the Cosmographicall tables
or spheres. The longitude of places or cities is accounted: as for example, in
the Equatour, from the point E. Westward toward the point F. in that the
Cosmographers accounted the longitudes at the equatoure, and in it a degree
makes 700. furlongs on earth. That the Cosmographers begin to account the
longituds at the West, is for this reason; that the motions of the second
mouings (that is of the planets) are accounted properly from the West to the
East.

The longitude of a place is the arcke of the equinoctial cyrcle, or of any
Parallel contained between two Meridianes, of which the one lies over the
fortunate Isles, and the other streacheth over the top of the proper place
noted, where the same distance of place is gathered from the fortunate Isles at
the equinectiall, or at the Parallel of the place. The fortunate Isles are
situated and lying in the sea, called Oceanus Libicus beyond Mauritania
(between the Equatoure and the tropicke of Cancer) which in our time is called
the Isles of Canarie, and lie further into the North from the equatour, then
Ptholomie noted or acounted them. But the latitude, they accounted to be a
space of the earth lying between either pole, accounted in the Meridiane
drawn by the poles of the world, or a whole tract of the earth known and
streached beyond, and on this side the equatoure, toward either Pole of the
world. They stablished the beginning of the latitude in the equinoctial (as
in the middle cyrcle exquisitely between either pole) and common bound to both
the Southerly and Northerly places,

So that the latitude of a place, is the arc of the meridiane, between the
equinoctial and Parallel drawn by the top of the place: or it is the
distance of a place from the equinoctial. This always is accounted in that
meridian, which hangs directly over the top of the place, and to one degree
of the same, do 500. surlongs, or 15. German miles answer.

The arks of the latitudes do not differ from the eleuations of the pole, but
in the standing only. For the elevation of the pole is the arc of the
meridian, from the Horizont unto the Pole, raised on high from the plain of
the Horizont. The latitude of a place, is the arc of the same meridian, placed
between the equinoctial and verticiall point. To conclude, the latitude of a
place, and elevation of the pole do not differ in the magnitude or largenes,
but in standing only.

By the former figure appears, that the Arc of the longitude of places or
cities known, is forthwith offered at the first sight: as the arc E. P. or P.
O. or O. N. etc. And seeing the equatour (being in compass about 360. degrees)
does wholly ascend in 24. hours above the Horizont regularly: of this it
comes to pass (whiles in each hour 15. degrees of the equatour do ascend)
that through the longitude of cities, it is easily known the hourly distance
of one place unto an other, seeing the sun comes later to the meridian to
them which are nearer to the East then to them in the West, whereof if a city
shall be situated in L. and an other in K. the arc L. K. shall be of 30.
degrees: then shall the sun come sooner unto the Easterlier meridian K. by two
hours, then unto the Westerly. But if one city shall be in P. and the other
in Z. then (in latitude only) shall they differ, and shall be under one
meridian; which is declared in the last part of the description of the meridian.

What the offices and vtilities of the Meridiane are.
1 THe vtilities and uses of this circle are many, of which the first is, that
it distinguishes the days and nights into unequal spaces: it determines the
forenoone time or morning, and the after noone or evening time of the
artificial day: the like of the night into hours (which are before night) and
those which follow unto morning. Many of the astronomers account their
beginning of the natural day from this cyrcle. It does besides represent
(without the equin^^tiall) the Horizont of the right sphere, and in every
habitude of the sphere it does represent the right Horizont, and shows the
points of the midday, and midnight.

2 This cyrcle in the thwart sphere gives and suprlyeth the office of the
right Horizont: for to every thwart Horizont it leaves or stays at right
angles. So that the astronomer makes or accompteth not his day, from the
rising or setting of the sun through the thwartnesse of the Horizont, which
causes the variety and notable difference of the inclination of the Zodiac,
unto the horizont of the angles, and largeness of the rising. But they begin
to account from noone or midnight (the sun then occupying the Meridian) through
the Sun, which congruence all the meridianes have with the right horizont.
And that a lesser variety of the inclination of the Zodiac happens unto the
meridiane and angles, which it makes with the meridiane. Also in this cyrcle
is the Zenith or direct point noted, from which the distances of the stars, and
Parallel cyrcles are gathered.

3 The third vtility of this cyrcle is, that the meridian altitudes of the sun
and stars are gathered and noted in this cyrcle, but what vtility they offer,
shall sufficiently appear in one or two examples. For when you shall have the
meridiane altitude and this in any time, then thereof you shall easily know the
altitude or elevation of the pole, if you mind to prove and try the same (the
sun being under the meridiane of your place) take his altitude by some
Instrument; as either by an astrolaby, or quadrant, which altitude found, you
shall know the particular declination of the sun, by that before taught, which
shall be caused by the suns place, at the instant time known by y^
Ephemereredes. For if the sun shall be in Northerly signs, then abate the
declination of the instant from the suns ascension Southerly: but if the sun
shall be in Southerly signs, then that declination shall be added to the
ascension of the suns meridiane, and that which remains shall be the
elevation of the equatoure from the Horizont, or complement of the Latitude of
the place, which is always like to the elevation of the pole. This complemente
being abated from ninty degrees, you shall readily have that which you seek;
that is, the elevation of the pole. These by the figure here placed shall more
manifest appear, in which F. R. C. is the thwart Horizont R. B. F. the middle
part of the meridiane, passing by the Zenith of the place given or imagined, B.
the verticiall point or Zenith F. G. the elevation of the pole S. B. the
latitude of the same place R. T. the meridian elevation of the sun which was
sought, C. G. X. the Colure of the solstices, E. D. the greatest declination of
the sun, A. the beginning of Aries, T. the place of the sun, A. S. D. O. the
half of the equatoure, A. T. O. the half of the Zodiac (from the beginning
of Aries unto the end of Virgo) S. T. the suns particular declination of that
instant time, and G. the Northerly pole of the world. The meridiane begins
and ends the longitude of the earth, and particulare places on the earth, and
both contains and shows the differences of diverse longitudes. For the
longitude of every place from the meridiane (beginning at the fortunate Isles)
ends and rests at the meridian streaching over the top of the same. Also
it is a space included within two meridianes, of which the one rests at the
fortunate Isles, and the other over the top of the proper place.

4 In the meridianes (as in the subject) the distances of the stars from the
equatoure, the latitudes of places, and the eleuations of the Pole are
accounted. For the studious and skillfull practisioners, observe the latitudes
of places and the eleuations of the pole, not to differ in the quantity, but in
the standing only. For the elevation of the pole, is the arc of the meridiane
from the horizont, raised unto the pole. The latitude of the place, is the arc
of the same meridian, contained between the equatour and verticiall point: so
that it is manifest that these arks differing in the standing, do agree in
magnitude, whose verticiall points, one meridiane contains, but not one
Parallel, by an equal space from the west) be unequal distant from the
equatour, and are then said to differ in the latitude only. Contrariwise, to
whose tops one and the same Parallel, and not one meridian, but each place
proper; those by like spaces from the equatour, be distant by unlike spaces
from the fortunate Isles, and are said to differ in the longitude only. So that
in both they are said to differ; to whom the Parallel only serves, and they
to whom the proper meridiane serves: for they have their spaces unequal to
either bound. Therefore the difference of latitude is the arc of the meridiane,
contained between the Parallelles of the two places, distant from the
equatour. The quantity of the same is thus known; if from the half Equatour
toward either pole of the places standing, the lesser latitude of the nearer,
be abated from the greater latitude more further off: if from the half
equatour the places be divided under (that the one half leans into the North
and the other into the South) by the latitudes of both joined, whether one or
both ly under one meridian or diverse meridians. For it forces not in the
meridian of both, that the latitudes be joined together, seeing all meridians
are alike in the sphere.

The difference of the longitude, is the arc of the equinoctial or Parallel,
enclosed between the meridianes of the twoe places, distaunt from the
fortunate Isles, and in themselves: by which the longitude of one place
exceeds the longitude of another. The same longitude is the arcke of the
equinoctial, seeing the places be under the equatour. For in the only longitude
the places, the common Parallelles, and tops of both bended, do differ: in
that the Parallelles (from the equatour) toward the opposite quarters of the
equal Parallelles (as places to which they be right over) do likewise differ.
The meridians (as is before declared) are the greatest cyrcles of the sphere of
the world, bended by the verticiall points of all places, but drawn to the
equatoure (as by the Poles) of which they pass unto right angles, and by a
mutual consent, make angles in the Poles of the world, which the arks of the
equatour being placed between those meridians, are measured, that by so much
as a quarter of the cyrcle they be distant from them: even so the equatoure
from his Poles, is on either part distant by a quarter of the greatest cyrcle.
Those arks do contain the difference of longitude, by which one of the
meridianes is further distant into the East then the other; so that the angles
unto the Poles between the meridianes, are rightly named the angles of the
difference of longitude; and by the arks of the equatour, those also come into
knowledge: for there is a mutual relation between the angles and arkes each
one of them toward another, which do measure the angles. The latitude of
places, is the distance of the verticiall points from the equatour, gathered in
the meridian. If then from the whole quarters of the meridians (which to the
equatoure and Pole of the world, toward which the places decline the equal
arkes be stretched to the latitudes, then the seats of the places given, or
the verticiall points of them shall be found. And the other arks from these
points unto the Pole (which by a mutual section do make an angle) the
complements of the latitudes, be known by the degrees abated from 90. in the
degrees of the latitudes.

For a more plain understanding of the former, conceive this demonstration
here following: where the cyrcumference of the meridian is described by the
letters AB. and by the Pole of the world B. is the cyrcumference G. D. defined.
To the verticiall point A. or pole of the Horizont is the cyrcumference of the
Horizont E. F. drawn. Seeing that B. the pole of the equatour G. D. Therefore
the arc B. D. a quarter of the greatest cyrcle, by which from D. G. the
equatour B. the pole is distant. And as the letter A. is the verticiall point,
E. F. is the pole of the Horizont: even so the arc A. E. shall be a quarter
of the greatest cyrcle: and the quarters of one cyrcle are D. B. and A. E. for
that cause are they equal in themselves. If therefore the same common be
abated from both: that is, the middle ark between A. B. which remain, shall
be the equal arks. And the arc A. D. is equal to the arc E. B. But the arc
A. D. is from the verticiall point unto the equatour, which is called the
latitude of the place. That E. B. is the arc from the Horizont unto the pole,
which is called the elevation of the Pole. Therefore to the latitude of the
place is the elevation of the pole equal, as was before declared.

Further by the suns meridian had and found, you may easily conceive the
elevation of the pole, and habitude of the sphere. For the whole quarter is, of
90. degrees. Seeing the suns meridian altitude in the equinoctial, must be
subtracted from 90. degrees, the rest show the elevation of the Pole. As for
example, the suns meridian altitude of Viteberge in Germany, in the time of
the equinoctial, is of 38. degrees, and 10. minutes, the rest of the degrees
of the quarter shall appear to be 51. degrees, and 50. minutes, which
elevation of the pole near agrees to London. So that by so many degrees, is
the Pole there elevated above the Horizont. And as the quadrant is from the
pole unto the equinoctial: even so is the quadrant from the Zenith unto the
Horizont. If therefore in the time of the Equinoctial, the distance of the
Horizont unto the suns altitude be of 38. degrees, and 10. minutes; which is
not the half part of the quarter, the same yet being subtracted from the whole
quarter, does show that the rest shall be more then half part of the
quarter: that is, 51. degrees, and 51. minutes. For those spaces which are from
the pole unto the Equinoctial, and from the Zenith unto the Horizont, are
alike: what the distance of the Zenith is from the equinoctial, the same
likewise is the Horizont unto the Pole; that is, the latitude of the place, is
equal to the elevation of the pole.

To declare that the latitude of a place is equal to the elevation of the
pole, these four propositions are to be conceived. First, the quarters of one
and the same cyrcle, any where taken, are equal one to the other. Secondly,
the poles by the quarter; that is, 90. degrees be distant from their cyrcle.
Thirdly, the Zenith is the pole of the Horizont. Fourthly and last, the equals
abated from the equals the equals still remain. So that two quarters of the
meridian taken (as that which is from the equinoctial unto the pole, and that
which is from the Zenith unto the Horizont) which seeing they are quarters of
one and the same cyrcle, therefore are they likewise equal one to the other;
that is, either contains 90. degrees, when from these two quarters the common
arc is abated; which is between the Zenith and Pole of the world: and the
rest of the equals remain (as the arc which is from the equinoctial unto the
Zenith) and called the latitude of the place; and the arc (which is from the
Pole of the world unto the Horizont) also called the elevation of the Pole, as
may be understood of the former Viteberge, that is of 51. degrees, and 50.
minutes.

Yet that you may easilier find and know the elevation of the Pole of your
City or Town, you must first obtain and have the suns meridian altitude;
which workemanly may be had and observed by the shadow. As when the suns
altitude in the time of the equinoctial is precisely of 45. degrees, the
shadow then is like to the Gnomone, which is at Venice (as Pliny writes)
also of Milaine and Lions: for the sun to them is in the time of the
equinoctial, in the middle of the quarter. But when the suns altitude exceeds
45. degrees, then is the shadow caused lesser, as of Rome, where the suns
meridian altitude in the equinoctial is of 42. degrees, and 10. minutes: so
that the shadow is there shorter. Also Pliny writes of Rome, that the ninth
part of the Gnomon in the equinoctial, does lack of the noone shadow. But when
the suns altitude is lesser then 45. degrees, the shadow of the Gnomon is
caused longer. The like is with us through all winter and the time of the
equinoctial: for we see the shadows of men's bodies to be longer, for that the
suns altitude in that time is never 45. degrees. For how much the shadow is
longer then the half part of the quarter, so much the lesser is the suns
altitude then 45. degrees. As of Viteberge in the 10. day of September, the
suns meridian altitude is then of 39. degrees, and 21. minutes: but when the
sun is further distant by the 45 degree of the quarter (or by the half of the
quarter) then ensues, that the shadow is so much longer then the Gnomon, or
45, degrees. For the Noone shadow in the 10. day of September is the like unto
the Gnomon, as the 50. degrees, and 39. minutes, are unto 45. degrees.

Here you see how by the meridian shadow, you may find the suns altitude;
which obtained, you shall easily find the altitude or elevation of the Pole
(especially in the time of the equinoctial.) For the suns altitude then from
the whole quarter; that is, from 90. degrees, must be subtracted, and the
elevation of the pole shall remain and appear to be, as is above taught.

Here by the way shall be taught how to describe and find the meridian line,
whose use is great both for the Mathematician and Architecter, in making of
dials, and other necessary Instruments. To know and do this, have a plain body
well polished and smothe, standing even on every side, that the one side be no
higher or more leaning then the other; in the Center of which, how large so
ever the cyrcle about be drawn, set upright a steel, iron pin, or other
Gnomon, as here the letters A. F. do express: which pin must be very
straight, and not exceed the cyrcumference of the cyrcle, but his top to be
equal to it: then shall it be alike distant round about, when it shall be
alike distant from three points at the least of the cyrcumference. But the
height of the steel or Gnomon may not exceed a quarter of the diameter of the
cyrcumference, and that for the same cause, that the meridiane shadow (which
of the shadows is then most shor) tthat falls within the above said cyrcle
described. In this cyrcle thus drawn and prepared, appears a shadow by the
Gnomon of the suns shining in the forenoone, until it touch precisely the
cyrcumference of the cyrcle, like as the shadow A. C. demonstrateth; the point
touched is noted and expressed by the point C. In the same manner is the
afternoon shadow examined and found; whose point touched, is also noted by the
point E. So that both the shadows end within the cyrcumference, and at the
bounds also of the shadows, are the two points noted. The arc contained and
included by the points C. E. between these, is divided into twoe equal parts
in the point D, by which and the Center of the cyrcle A. is the right line B.
A. D. drawn, that shall be the meridian line, which is as the common section
of that Horizont and meridian. Thus is the way and rule of the meridian line
described. For so Vitruuius writes, and Johannes a regio monte in his
Capindarie, which as soon as that shadow of the Gnomon falls on his line, it
shall then be the point of noone, wheresoever the sun at that time is placed.
If another certain line shall cut this by the Center of the cyrcle (lately
described) at right angles, that shall be the common vertical section of the
cyrcle with the Horizont, which may be named the verticiall line.

Seeing it is somewhat hard to find the height of the Pole unto any day
prescribed, and that the same may more easily and surer be attained and found,
you shall use this table here following: by the help of which you may without
great labor, find and know the elevation of the pole. For to proceed and
work by this manner, seek first the suns meridian altitude at the day
offered, either by an astrolaby or quadrant; but rather by the instrument named
the quadrant, in whose bordure are 90. degrees drown or written, expressed by
reason of the Gnomon and shadow upward. After seek the degree of the
Ecclipticke by the Ephemerides, which the sun obtains at noone of the day
offered: next by the table following, take the declination of the degree found
(by mean of the equinoctial) if the sun then shall be in Northerly signs,
abate or subtract from the suns altitude before found: but if in Southerly
signs, then add unto the suns altitude. The produce or rest is the elevation
of the equinoctial, which abstracted or abated from the whole quarter; that
is, from 90. degrees, leaves and shows the elevation of the pole, as in the
10. day of September, the suns altitude in the twelfe hour (or at noone) is of
39. degrees, and 21. minutes. To find this elevation of the pole, I enter the
table following, where I find and see the 27. degree of Virgo, to have the
declination of one degree, and 11. minutes: which degree and minutes (seeing
they are in the Northerly part of the world) are to be subtracted from the
suns altitude that day, and the degrees which remain are 38. and 10. minutes.
The altitude of the equinoctial that day, which subtracted or abated from the
whole quarter; that is, from 90. degrees, the elevation of the pole which
remains, is 51. degrees, and 50. minutes.

This Table of the Suns declinations, contains the number of the degrees of
the Zodiac, increasing in descending on the left hand, and increasing by
ascending on the right hand, with the Signs decently placed: the Arks or roots
of the declinations follow those numbers: which roots are no other then the
arkes of the circle of the Latitude: that is, the circle passing by the Poles
of the Ecliptike, included between the Ecliptike and Equatour.
The general Table of the Declinations.
^ Arkes. Arkes. Arkes. ^ G ^r. m^ ^r. m^ ^r. m^ G 0 0 0 12 16 20 38 30 1 0 26
12 37 20 40 29 2 0 12 12 37 21 0 28 3 1 18 12 58 21 11 27 4 1 44 12 58 21 21 26
5 2 10 13 19 21 31 25 6 2 36 13 40 21 40 24 7 3 2 14 0 21 49 23 8 3 28 14 20 21
58 22 9 3 53 14 40 22 6 21 10 4 19 14 50 22 14 20 11 4 45 15 18 22 21 19 12 5
10 15 37 22 28 18 13 5 25 15 55 22 35 17 14 6 0 16 ^ 22 41 16 15 6 25 17 31 22
47 15 16 6 50 17 48 23 52 14 17 7 15 17 5 23 57 13 18 7 39 17 22 23 2 12 19 8 3
18 ^8 23 7 11 20 8 27 18 54 23 11 10 21 8 ^^ 18 0 23 15 9 22 9 15 18 25 23 18 8
23 9 39 19 40 23 21 7 24 10 2 10 55 23 23 6 25 10 25 19 9 23 25 5 26 10 48 19
23 23 27 4 27 11 10 20 36 23 28 3 28 11 32 20 49 23 29 2 29 11 54 20 36 23 30 1
30 12 16 20 30 23 30 0 Ecli^ Ecli^

THe meridianes with the Horizont, in any right or thwart, and in the other
four greater cyrcles, do distinguish all heaven into twelve spaces, which
they call the houses of heaven.

Of these four, which occupy the angles of heaven, are called the quarters:
the four next to these, are named the succedents: the last (included by the
succedentes and angles) are named the declining houses, and the cadent from the
angles.

The meridian also has a most great use in Cosmographie: for by it the
describers of the world measure the longitudes and latitudes of places and
cities: which being known, the distance of cities may easily be found. That
you may understand what the longitude and latitude of a place is, it behooves
you to know the distinction of the earth after the Geographers, which is on
this wise,

The Geographers do assign or imagine two points on the earth, right under
the poles of the world: after that they devise a cyrcle equally distant on
either side from these these two points (right under the equinoctial) which
deuideth the whole Globe of the earth and water into twoe equal halfes. This
cyrcle thus described on earth, they distribute into 360. parts or degrees, in
proceeding from the West into the East, by each degrees of this cyrcle; and by
the points right under the poles, they imagine and draw 180. cyrcles; which,
for that they are under the celestial meridians, they also call meridians, and
those they divide into three hundred and threescore parts or degrees; by which
parts they imagine and draw the Parallel or equidistant cyrcles to the
equinoctial, proceeding from the equinoctial on either side, toward the
points in the poles lying under these Parallels, and although they be not of
the same bigness or largeness (for how much nearer the poles they are, so
much the narrower and strayter they run together. Contrariwise, how far of
they be from the Poles, and nearer to the Equinoctial, so much the wider and
larger they run) yet do they divide as the Equinoctial, or any other great
cyrcle, into three hundredth and three score parts or degrees. How this
division of the earth being learned and understood, a man may the more easily
conceive what the longitude and latitude of places is.

The longitude of a place (as I have before written) is the arc of the
equinoctial cyrcle, or Parallel, passing by the Zenith of the place which is
sought after, included between the two meridians; as between the first
meridian (which by the Zenith of the Isles of Canarie (and further off) is
imagined to be drawn, and the Meridian of the place offered: that is, the
longitude of any place, is the distance thereof from that westerly point, from
which the beginning of lo^gitudes is accounted toward the East. They began to
account the longitude from the west, through the proper motions of the Planets,
which are carried unto the contrary quarter from the West: or rather for the
Moon, at whose Ecclipses it is well known that it more avails, then the
true finding out the longitudes of places, or as some rather think likelier,
that the places which end and stand furthest Westward inhabited, have been
sures and perfecter found. For through the nearenesse and opportunity of the
iourneyes (which they in ancient time were moved to f^aua^le and sail ^^^^)
as the twoe Isles (named Gades) which lie by the furthest parts of Spain beyond
Granade, and since through the passage by West Occean, men of later years have
sailed about the furthest parts without stop or impediment. But unto the
Eastward, they were stopped of their course by a great distance through the
difficulty and peril of the journey. And since beyond the half circle almost
threescore degrees, men have sailed to Scythia besides Imaus (which now is
named the great Tartaria) that reaches bordering to the upper India, where the
most large kingdom of Cathagia under the parallel of Thracia flourishes,
where Bebeid Cham was governor. And that is the part of Tartaria, which
begins from the river Tanais, so that the largeness of Schithia Asiatica
(from the West to the East) does almost take up 84. whole degrees. America in
the sea Atlanticus, is of such greatness, that the same is supposed to be a
fourth part of the world inhabited: the middle or half of it has the
longitude of 330. degrees, and the latitude of ten degrees Southward. The sea
Altanticus has many large Islands in it; among which, the most notable are
Spagnolla, Cuba, Parias (otherwise Chersouesus) by the straight that reaches
upward into the north. The middle of the same has the longitude of 285.
degrees: the latitude Northerly 44. degrees. For from 11. unto 50. almost, it
reacheih unto. America streacheth far into the South, beyond the tropic of
Capricorn, although his bound or furthest part Southerly be not yet found
or known. To the ancient it was no further known Southward, then 17. degrees
beyond the Equinoctial: and the furthest known to them Northwarde, exceeded
not three score and three degrees, which (as Ptholomie witnesses) was unto the
Island Thylen. So that the whole latitude found by them, appears to be 80.
degrees, both of the one and the other side of the equinoctial: and on earth
the same contains 40. thousand furlongs, to which 50. hundred paces answer,
but German miles two hundredth thousand agree. Also the Island Thilen or
Thulen, stands beyond Scotland, and the Isles Hebrides and Orchades, that be
into the North and East, which is distant from the furthest bound of Scotland,
but three days sailing, if prosperous winds be their help. At this day men
have found beyond Thylen (but somewhat into the East (and most large bounds
stretched and found beyond the articke or Northerly cyrcle, and these are whole
without breaking of any sea between; and contain Suetia, Norway, Iseland,
Grunland and Lapeland. The kingdom of Suetia appears most large, and
contains sundry nations and people; among which, they are of most account,
the East and West Gutland people, inhabiting near to Norway.

And under the King of Suetia are the Lapeland people, (as the Finelapons and
Dikilapons) where are a wild and fierce people, dwelling almost under the pole
articke (especially the Lapeland people) to whom the sun never sets in the
summer for 40. days space. Above these inhabit a people of a cubite long or
high, having small and crooked bodies (named of some Pigmalions) that live
under a very dark and bitter cold air or sky. And above Scania (near to the
West bounds of Suetia) does Norway stretch into the North, whose uttermost
limit extends unto the 71. degree almost of the Northerly latitude. Above
this is the country named Iseland, by reason of the frozen waters and sea:
where throughout the year it so bitterly freezeth, that through the ycie seas
there thick frozen, it permits no ships to come unto the^, except in the
three hottest months of the year. It abounds with brimstone, and burns in
many places through the sulphur and brimstone veins. Pliny writes, that the
Occean sea in North is very large, which in these our days is well known.
This also was learned of certain skillfull sailers (which inhabited and very
much had traualed this coast) that they knew not the limits or bounds of this
sea toward the North, but supposed that this sea did compass the whole earth.
By this sea dwell many and mighty people; as the Danes, the Swedens, Norwaies,
Gotelandes, Finelands, Russians, and Pruchenians: and under the pole artick the
Laplands. The reason why in these places such force of moisture abounds, is
for that a daily and continual cold of these places gathers and thickneth
the air, and by a continual working resolves into water. For when the air is
not thoroughly purged by the suns beams, then the weakness of them, and far
distance of the sun from these places, must of necessity be continually thick
and dark, which afterward yields and gives plentiful floodes by deawes
and raines. Albert mag. in his book de natura loci, and 8. chapter, assigns
a witty and laudable reason, why the Northerly be inhabitable. The cause he
sets down, in that sundry skillfull Mariners affirm (that have many times
sailed into the Northerly parts of the Ocean sea) that in those places is a
continual darkness, which when men saw they returned for fear, supposing
(nay rather doubting) that none could sail any further in that quarter of the
world, through the darkness, and thick mist, which hinders the direction of
their journey. So that the nature of those places cannot be sufficiently
known to us, seeing no man (as the learned report) has attempted thither,
through extremity of cold their bearing sway. And for that exceeding cold is
a mortifying quality, therefore a man may conjecture, that few living creatures
and beasts can there live etc. Yet the part of the Northerly Occean (unto the
Easterly side) is sufficiently known to many trauailers.

Although the uttermost bounds of the earth are not wholly known, yet the
nearest aprroaching to them shall here be applied, as the longitude of the
earth distaunt between Peru (the Realm of America) and Cathaya, to express
315. degrees: or if any mind to account the longitude from the fortunate Isles,
they may by a whole cyrcle contain them, even as the whole Orb about in a
manner does partly give place to the water, and are partly dwellings for men,
beasts, and other living creatures; although some places of the earth be more
inhabited then others. But as touching the latitude; if toward the North in
the country of Lapous, and the south (toward the utmost coast of America shall
end) seeing y^ utmost distance of the earth has very little been noted, of this
shall small error be caused.

If two places offered or given be placed under the Equatour, of which the
space is sought, then the arc of the difference of latitude, is the same with
the arc of the distance, neither does the verticiall cyrcle differ from the
Equatour. For the equatour of either place does contain the verticiall
points, as may appear in this tryangle, noted with A. B. C. Of which, if 15.
germain miles be wrought into parts of the difference of longitude, and any
scruples after remain, divide those by 4. For (by so many minutes of a degree,
does a Germain mile answer) that the distance shall make. As Ptholomie
writes, of the places under the Equatour.



The high land or mountain of the Satyrs, in the country of Syna, whose
longitude is of 175 degrees, and no minutes, nor has any latitude. Myrica an
I Will of Ethiope under Aegipt, whose longitude is of 85. degrees, the angle of
the difference of longitude between the meridians of these places, is straight
or right, and contains a whole quarter or 60. degrees. The like are these
places standing under the equatour. Colipolis a city of India beyond the river
Ganges, which has the longitude 194. degrees, and 20. minutes, and Essina the
great Mart-towne of Aethiope under Aegipt, whose longitude is of 70. degrees,
and 3. minutes. The angle of the difference of longitude (which the meridians
of these compass) is blunte, and contains 94. degrees, and 17. minutes.
Again the same or the like meridians contain and make a sharp angle of 43
degrees, as of the city Nubarta of Taprobane, which at this day is Sumatra,
and Colipolis of Inde beyond or above Ganges: for it is distant from the west
122. degrees, and 20. minutes, and this contains 164. degrees, and 20.
minutes.

If two places be given, the one standing under the Equatour, and the other
distant toward any other quarter from it. The first, that the angle of the
difference of longitude is straight to these here placed. In that if two places
given the one shall be under the equatoure, but the other distant from the same
toward some quarter, the^ must the angle of the difference of longitude be
considered. If the same shall be right, then shall the distance of either place
be the quadrant of the greatest cyrcle. As in this tryangle A. B. C. where the
letter A. represents the Pole of the equatour and the places given, that the
one be standing in the point B. under the equatour, and the arc A. B. be the
quadrant: and that the other consists in the letter C. the angle then of the
difference of longitude, being C. A. B. is right. By Regio a montano de
trangulis appears, that C. B. the ark of the distance of places which
reaches out right, is a quarter of the greatest cyrcle. Wherefore if the
degrees be multiplied by 15. and the minutes divided by 4. the distance then
shall be known. As for example, Nubarta of Taprobone has the longitude 121.
degrees, and 20. minutes, but no latitude: the city Pyse of the Tuscanes in
Italy, has the longitude 31. degrees, and 20. minutes almost, the latitude of
42. degrees, and 11. minutes: then the angle of the difference of longitude is
right, for the difference is of 90. degrees, or a whole quadrant. These then
multiplied by 15. do procreate or bring forth the distance to be of 13*50.
German miles.



Essina a Mart-towne or principal ^itty of Aethiope under the government of
Aegipt, has the longitude of 70. degrees, and 3. minutes, but it has no
latitude. The I Will of Tyrus has the longitude of 67. degrees, and no minutes
the latitude of 33. degrees, and 20. minutes. The difference of longitude,
between the one and the other, is of 3. degrees, and 3. minutes. The
complement of the difference of longitude, is of 86. degrees, and 57. minutes,
of the latitude of the place not standing under the equatour, the complement is
56. degrees, and 40. minutes.

The royal city Colipolis of Inde (above the river Ganges) has the longitude
of 164. degrees, and 20. minutes, but no latitude known. The longitude of
Tyrus is of 67. degrees, and no minutes, the latitude has 33 degrees, and 20.
minutes. The difference of longitude greater then the quadrant, is of 97.
degrees, and 20. minutes. The quadrant being abated, there remains 7.
degrees, and 20. minutes. The complement of the latitude of Tyrus, is of 56.
degrees, and 40. minutes. If of two places given, either stands without the
Equatoure toward some one of the opposite quarters; and the other under the
equatoure: then is the reason of the standing considered, and the angle of the
difference of longitude. For the one differs either by like spaces from each
bound, and is nearer to the Pole, the other to the Equatoure. The same
appears by the compared latitudes, which like tops of either place contain
the same Parallel, the unlike being distant, and the Parallel by a space
separated, toward each place, do argue peculiar and proper tops. But the angle
of the difference of longitude, either it is right, blunt, or sharp. This of
the placing and diversity of the angles, does much vary or alter the reason
and method of the searching of these.

If two places given have equal arks of the latitudes, and from the middle or
half of the equatoure be alike distant, and how much so ever the angle of the
difference of longitude be, as here under the difference of longitude is in the
first, of the example taught: yet are the arkes of the latitudes agreeing and
equally found, so that in this example appears no difference, but in the
only longitudes of the places offered. As for example.

The longitude of Danske is of 39. degrees, and twoe scruples or minutes: the
latitude of the same has 54, degrees, and 48. minutes. The longitude of
Lubecke is of 28. degrees, and 20. scruples, the latitude has 54. degrees, and
48. scruples. The difference of longitude consists, of 10. degrees, and 42.
minutes. The half difference is, of 5. degrees, and 21. scruples. The distance
on earth, between Danske and Lubecke, is of 92 German miles, and a half.

The great city Alexandria under the Turk (after Ptolomie) has the longitude
of 122. degrees, the latitude of the same, is of 41. degrees. That famous
Toletum or Toledo of Spain, has a longitude to the same, of 10. degrees, the
latitude of the same is, of 41. degrees. The difference of longitude between
the one and the other, is of 102. degrees. The half difference, has 51.
degrees. The complement of the equal latitudes of either, is of 49. degrees.
The whole distance between both appears to contain 1077. German miles and
a half.

If of two places given, the one be further distant from the equatour then the
other, and the greatness of the complements of either latitude differing (as
that the arkes of the latitudes be unequal) so that the diversity of the angle
included with the arks of the complements, shall vary the method or reason of
the search, for that the one gives and forms a right angle, another a
sharp, another a blunt angle: yet to these, the angle of the difference of
longitude is right. The example of two places differing alike (both in the
longitude and latitude) here appears. The city Tacola (which at this day is
called Malchaia or Magna) a place of much resort of Merchants. This from the
West has the longitude of 160. degrees, and 30. minutes, of latitude from the
equatour, it is 4. degrees, and 15. scruples distant. The other city and place
in the country of Pontus (named Trapezus) being a head city of Cappadocia and
was the ancient seat of the Emperors. This has the longitude of 70. degrees,
and 30. minutes, and the latitude of the same is of 43. degrees, and 5.
scruples. The difference of longitude between the one and the other, is of 90.
degrees. The arc of distance between both places is of 87. degrees, and 6.
minutes: to which 1306. and a half German miles answer.

If the unequal arkes of the latitudes, and angle of the difference of
longitude be lesser then the right, it canseth a diverse reason of the search,
by which the arc of the complement of the greater latitude does vary three
ways, as it is greater or lesser, and as with the arc by the second in
quisition surely known, and being joined, form either more or less a
quarter of the cyrcle. Or thus, that the angle which the unequal complements
of the unequal latitudes include, be sharp; that is, and if the arks of the
latitudes of either place be unequal, and the difference of longitude be
lesser then the quadrant. As in this example more plainer appears, of twoe
places being of sundry longitudes. That worthy city Trapezus of Cappadocia,
whose longitude is of 70. degrees, and 30. minutes, the latitude 43. degrees,
and 5. minutes. The longitude of that well known city of Rome, has 39.
degrees, and 8. scruples, the latitude 41. degrees, and 8. minutes. The
difference of longitude, between the one and the other, is of 33. degrees, and
22. minutes. Another example not unlike the former, and not much varying from
the former: as the longitude of Jerusalem, which is of 66. degrees, and no
minutes, the latitude, of 31. degrees, and 40. scruples. The longitude of
Viteberge, being of 30. degrees, and 30. minutes, the latitude 51. degrees, and
50. scruples. The difference between the one and the other of longitude is of
35. degrees, and 50. scruples.

If in places unequally distant from the equatoure, the angle of the difference
of longitude shall be blunt, by which the difference of longitude shall appear
greater than the quadrant. Or thus, that the angle of the difference of
longitude be blunt, seeing the places are further distant then a whole quarter,
and thereby causes a diverse reason and way of search from the former; which
semblably the diverse quantity of the complement of the greater latitude does
three manner of ways vary, as in the same arc (which perfectly known by the
second) is either greater or lesser. The example of this appears of these two
places: the noble city Antiochia in Syria, which was after caled Seleucia, has
the longitude of 106. degrees, and no minutes, the latitude is of 40. degrees,
and 40. scruples, The other of Toletum, whose longitude is of 7. degrees, and
4. scruples, the latitude has 37. degrees, and 50. minutes. The difference of
longitude is of 98. degrees, and 56. scruples, which deducted from the half
cyrcle (or 180. degrees) the difference that remains unto the half cyrcle,
is of 81. degrees, and 4. minutes. The like example not much varying from the
former of these two places: as the noble city of Portugale named Lysebone,
whose longitude is of 4. degrees, and 18. scruples, the latitude has 39.
degrees, and 38. scruples. The other named Calecute (although the latitude
differs) has the longitude of 112. degrees, and no minutes, the latitude is
of 5. degrees, and no minutes. The difference of longitude, contains 107.
degrees. and 42. scruples more then the quadrant. The same deducted from the
half cyrcle, does express the difference remaining unto the half cyrcle to
be of 72. degrees, and 18. minutes. The complement of the greater latitude, is
of 50. degrees, and 22. scruples. The complement of the lesser latitude, is of
85. degrees, and no scruples.

Another example of two places distant from the Equatour, of which the one is
distant from the middle of the Equatour into the North, and the other into the
South, as this example further instructs; the one being the I Will of Thilen
(which in Ptholomies ^^me was the uttermost bond of the earth known,
Northward) that has the longitude of 33. degrees, the latitude Northerly, of
63. degrees. The other called the I Will of S. Thomas, has the longitude of 27
degrees, and 20. minutes, the latitude Southerly, of 16. degrees. The
difference of longitude, is of 5^ degrees, and 40. minutes. The complement of
the latitude Northerly, is of 26. degrees.

A third example of the difference of other two places, as Bas^a of Taprobane,
which Ptholomie affirms to be in longitude 126. degrees, and in latitude
toward the South 6. degrees, and 30. scruples. The other named Stocholma, in
the Realm of Suecia, has the longitude of 42. degrees, and 38. scruples, and
the latitude of 60. degrees, and 30. scruples. The complement of the latitude
Boreal, is 29. degrees, and 30. minutes.

The common way of measuring of places, with their spaces, by the rules of
longitudes and latitudes.
HEre before I have somewhat written of sundry habitable places on the earth,
whose sundry points differ between the one and the other; either in the only
longitude, or in the only latitude, or in the longitude and latitude both
together. Those places which do differ in the only longitude, be distant by
equal spaces from the equatoure, toward either of the Poles of the world: the
verticiall points of those places ended by the same Parallel joining next the
same space between: yet each have their own proper meridians, being not
distant by a like space from the Westerly bound. The distance of these is
always gathered and noted in the same Parallel, which commonly belongs to
either place standing or hanging right over the tops of them.

Those places which do differ in the only latitude, are standing ^^der the
same meridiane, but they have diverse Parallels* ^^d each proper; and those
continually distant unequally, either toward one pole from the middle of the
Equatour (if either place declineth unto one and the same quarter) or otherwise
from the middle of the equatoure severed and distant into the contrary
quarters, by equal or unequal spaces. If that one of the places look into
the South, and the other into the North, the distance of these is always
accounted in the common meridian.

Those places which do differ both in the longitude and latitude together, or
both decline toward one Pole of the world, or separated and distant from the
midst of the equatoure toward the opposite Poles (as the one looking into y^
North, and the other into the south) or else by equal Parallels distant from the
equatour; of which two only are in the Sphere. If they be reduced and applied
unto one great cyrcle (per 3. secundi Theodosij) or else be under by unequal
Parallels, and by an unequal space. The difference of the longitude of those
(which either be toward them, or toward the Poles equally distant) is always
gathered in the middle Parallel between either of the bonds by arithmeticall
proportion, as before taught. But in those places which have equal Parallels,
and equally dastant unto the opposite quarters, the difference of longitude is
imagined and noted in eith^^ of the equal Parallels. Therefore the arc has
the distance of the places standing, by the next space drawn overthwart by the
points of those places, which with the arks of the difference of either (both
of the longitude and latitude) does form and make a sphericall tryangle right
cornered, always in the upper face of the Globe. If that two meridianes meet
and end at the poles of the world, and being cut by the overthwart
cyrcumferences of the Parallels, do make with the included arkes of them right
cornered tryangles, through the four right lesser angles: but the angles
being not right, the arc of the distance of the places does divide them into
two right cornered tryangles. One of those tryangles is used in the common
account for the right cornered; because in places not far distant from the
equatoure, the angles contained between the mutual sections of the meridians
and Parallelles, do not so much vary from the right angles: but in places far
distant from the equatour, they vary very much. Now the rules for the diverse
standing of places shall be taught in an easy and common manner.

If places do differ in the only longitude.
TO the searching and knowing of this, like as in the former, are the
longitudes and latitudes of places given required; by which they being found
(seeing in the latitude there is no diversity) the difference of longitude is
only to be considered, by deducting the lesser longitude out of the greater,
and then howemany miles by proportion of the Parallel, under which the places
stand or lie to the equatoure, answer to one degree of the same. The same does
that rule (set forth in the form of a table here following) declare, being
drawn and made unto this use by the learned; in which, the miles that answer
to one degree of each Parallel, are there found and noted unto one degree of
the distance of the Parallel from the equatour. If to the whole degrees of the
distance of the Parallels do minutes depend, then from the difference of the
two next numbers to one degree, may the proportional part be deducted or
drawn: which from the number of the miles expressed unto a whole degree is
abated, that the Parallels succeeding, may be little and little be caused to
streach and appear narower. To be brief, the miles with the scruples or
quarters (if any be adjoined) let them be reduced into the whole arc of the
difference of longitude, which then shall manifestly show and express, the
measured space by the German miles.

Ptholomie when he had learned the longitudes and latitudes of certain notable
places, he could extract and gather by them the other unknown places, by the
distances truly learned from trauailers. For by the longitudes and latitudes
known of two cyrcles, and the distance also of them from any third place,
there is then offered and given to know, as well the longitude, as the latitude
of the third place. Further, in any two places lying and being in the upper
face of the earth, are five notes commonly learned. The distance of them,
converted into degrees: the latitude of the one, and the latitude of the other:
the difference of longitudes: the angle under the circumferencial distance: and
the meridians contained by the other. Of the which five, if three only be
known, it is certain that the other two may easily come to knowledge by the
practice and skill of the sphericall tryangles.

An example of these former words (as touching the difference of longitude of
two places) the latitudes being alike. As the city Byzantium now called
Constantinople, whose longitude is 55. degrees, and no minutes, the latitude
has 43. degrees, and 5. minutes. The other city Trapezus has the longitude of
70. degrees, and 50. minutes, the latitude of 43. degrees, and 5. minutes. The
difference of longitude is of 15. degrees, and 50. minutes to one degree of the
common Parallel, and to each place, do 10. German miles with 29/30. answer
or agree. These now brought into the difference of longitude, do cause and
make 174. German miles almost. The like example to the former, is Arbela of
Assiria, which has the longitude of 80 and no minutes, the latitude of 37. and
15. minutes. The other Athens, whose longitude is of 52. degrees, and 15.
minutes, the latitude 37. degrees, and 15. minutes. The difference is of 27.
degrees, and 45. minutes.

Other brief examples.
Lon. Lati. Areca in Comagena being a part of Syria. 70. 10. 37. 15. Megara the
country of Euclide. 52. 0. 37. 15.

The difference is of 18. 10.

Lon. Lat. Philippi a city in Thracia or country of Alexandria. 50. 45. 41. 50.
The royal city of Room. 36. 20. 41. 50.

The difference is of 14. 25. longitude.

Lipsia, 29. 58. 51. 24. The difference of long. is 9. degr. and 42. min. The
difference of long. is 6. degrees, and 4. min. Antwarpe, 20. 16. 51. 28.
Vratislauia, 34. 34 51. 10. Erphordia, 28. 30. 51. 10.

If places do differ in the only latitude, or that both be placed toward one
pole, or either distant from the middle of the equatour, so that in the onele
latitude the places differ, when the longitudes be like, the standing of the
places is to be considered toward either Pole, whether either place declineth
toward one Pole, or that the one be Southerly, and the other Northerly. If they
decline unto one place and quarter, then deduct the lesser latitude, out of the
more, and the difference of latitude shall appear. If either be distant from
the middle of the equatoure, the latitudes joined do show the difference. The
degrees, of the difference wrought by 15. and the scruples divided by 4. shall
offer and give the estimate distance in German miles. As in this example, the
city of Noriberge has 28. degrees, and 20. minutes of lo^gitude, the latitude
is of 49. degrees, and 24. minutes. The other is Mylayne, whose longitude is of
28. degrees, and 20. minutes, the latitude has 45. degrees, and 6. minutes.
The difference of latitude, is of 4. degrees, and 18. minutes: the space
between, is 64. miles and a half. Like examples are these.

Trapezus, 70. 15. 43. 5. The difference of latit. is 5. degrees, and 45. min.
The difference of latit. is 6. degrees, and 44. min. Antioch, 70. 15. 37. 20.
Padua, 31. 50. 51. 0. Budissina, 31. 50. 44. 16.

If two differ together in the longitude and latitude, and that either
declineth toward one Pole, then in either toward the places differing, as in
the longitude and latitude are the differences of the spaces from either bound
of the latitude and longitude gathered. The half difference of the latitude
added to the lesser altitude shall show the Parallel in which the difference
of longitude is accounted. With that Parallel by this rule are the miles
gathered and known, which answer or agree to one degree. These found, reduce
into the whole difference of the longitude, and that which proceeds
(agreeably) of the same; that is, multiplied in it self or arising of the
multiplication keep. After the degrees of the difference of longitude reduce
into 15. and the minutes annexed (if any such be) distribute or divide by
four, that which arises of either working, reduce jointly one to the other,
and add to the number kept before. For of the whole gathered may the square
root be attained, which shows the distaunce of places. As by a like example,
the city of Witeberge has the longitude of 30. degrees, and 30. minutes: the
latitude of 51. degrees, and 50. minutes. The other being Jerusalem has 66.
degrees of longitude, and no minutes: the latitude is of 31. degrees, and 55.
minutes. The difference of longitude is of 35. degrees, and 30. minutes: the
difference of latitude is of 19. degrees, and 55. minutes. The middle Parallel
in which the difference of longitude is accounted, does differ or is distant
from the equatour 41 degrees, and 52. minutes: to one degree of the same do
11. miles, and 10. scruples of a German mile answer, which reduced into the
difference of longitude, do procreate or bring forth 396. German miles:
these wrought together make 156816. The degrees of the difference of latitude
being wrought by 15. and the scruples divided by four, do make 266. German
miles; which multiplied one in the other, do perform and make 89401. Either of
these square numbers joined, and the root extracted, the distance shall
appear to be 4^5. miles.

The finding of the distances of places or cities, in a more easier manner.
THat you may know how by the longitudes and latitudes of twoe places or
cities, the distaunce of them may be found: thus do, when two cities be
offered (whose largeness is to you unknown) see^ the longitude and latitude
of both by the Cosmographie of Apian, or Pto lomies Geography; which being
found, write down the longitude of the one under the longitude of the other,
and the latitude of the one under the latitude of the other (as the former
examples show) in such sort, that the degrees of the other, and likewise the
minutes under the minutes. After seek the difference as well of the longitudes
and latitudes, in this manner: subtract the lesser longitude from the greater,
the remainer is called the difference of the longitudes. After deduct the
lesser latitude out of the more, and the difference of the latitudes shall
remain. By the differences of the longitudes and latitudes, shall the distance
of cities given be gathered. But in that there is three manner difference of
places, as that there be certain places which differ in the only latitude;
that is, under one meridiane, and yet lie under diverse Parallels: and certain
that differ in the only longitude; that is, under one Parallel: yet are
diverse meridians: and certain that do differ both in the longitude and
latitude; that is, they lie under diverse meridians, and Parallels, three rules
also of the searching of distances, between two places, are taught of the
Geographers.

The first rule.
WHen two cities having one longitude are offered (but having sundry latitudes)
deducte the lesser out of the more: the rest of degrees, in that they be the
degrees of the great cyrcle, multiply by 15. (for that 15. German miles
answer to one degree of the great cyrcle) and then shall you have the distance
of the cities.

But if minutes depend to the degrees of difference, the^ divide them by four,
the quotient add to the fore number of the miles. For seeing one degree or 60.
minutes do make 15. German miles; it ensues, that four minutes make one
German mile, etc.

An Example.
MAdeburge and Egra agree only in longitude; that is, they be equally distant
from the West or from the meridian, which is drawn or stretched by the
fortunate Isles. For the longitude of either town is of 29. degrees, the
latitude of Madeburge is of 52. and 20. minutes: the latitude of Egra is of 50.
degrees, and 5. minutes: therefore is Egra more Southerly then Madeburge. The
difference of the latitudes, is 2. degrees, and 15. minutes; that is, 33.
German miles, stith a half and a quarter of a Germain mile.

Another.
TThe longitude of Trydent is of 30. degrees, and 30. minutes. The longitude of
Viteberge is as much. The latitude of Trydent is of 45. degrees, and 14.
minutes. The latitude of Viteberge is of 51. degrees, and 50. minutes. These
now differ in the only latitude, which difference of the latitude is of 6.
degrees, and 36. minutes; that is, 99. German miles. So much is the distance
almost between Trydent and Viteberge.

Another.
THe longitude of Thunis is of ^6. degrees, and 50. minutes: the longitude of
Salerne in a manner the same. The latitude of Thunis is of 32. degrees, and 30.
minutes. The latitude of Salerne is of 40. degrees, and 30. minutes. The
difference of latitude is of* (...) degrees, and (...) minutes, that is, 120.
miles. And so much is the distance between Thunis and Salerne.

Another.
THe City of York, and the Town of Barwicke, agree in longitude, for the
longitude of either place, is of 17. degrees, and no minutes. But they differ
in latitude, in that the latitude of York is of 54. degrees, and no minutes,
the latitude of Barwicke, is of 56. degrees, and 50. minutes. The difference of
the latitude is of 2. degrees, and 50. minutes: that is, 210. English miles. So
much in a manner is the distaunce, between the City of York, and Barwicke.

Another.
THe City of London and Northampton, in a manner is of like longitude. For the
longitude of London is of 16. degrees, and 30. minutes approved. But they
differ in latitude, in that London has the latitude of 51. degrees and 34.
minutes, the latitude of Northampton is of 52. degrees, and 50. minutes. The
difference of the latitude, is of 1. degree, and 16. minutes; that is, 7^.
English miles. So much in a manner is the distance between London and
Northampton.

Another.
THis example differs both in the longitude and latitude somewhat. For the
longitude of Colchester, is 18. degrees, and 30. minutes, the longitude of
Oxeforde has 15. degrees, and no minutes. The difference of longitude between
the one and the other, is of 3. degrees, 38 minutes, that is, 109. English
miles. The latitude of Colchester has 51. degrees, and 59. minutes. The
difference of latitude, is no degrees, and 16. minutes. So that 16. English
miles, is the distaunce between the one and the other, after their standing
Northward.

Another.
CYgnea and Ratisbone, agree in longitude, for either is of 29. degrees, and
51. minutes: but they differ in latitude, in that the latitude of Cygnea has
50. degrees, and 46. minutes, the latitude of Ratisbone, of 48. degrees, and
56. minutes. The difference of latitude between the one and the other, is 1.
degree, and 50. minutes, which make 27. and a half German miles.

The second rule.
BEfore the second rule be here taught, it behooves that you know how many
German miles answer to each degree of the parallel (passing by the Zenith
of Cities offered.) Here conceive that not as in the former rule, to every
degree of each parallel, but to each degrees only of the parallel Cyrcle,
which streacheth and is under the Equinoctial, and as principal of all the
parallels, deuideth the whole earth into twoe equal halues, to which are 15.
German miles attributed, as to a degree of it. Where the other cyrcles (as
before written) be not of the same bigness, but how much nearer they be to the
poles, so much the lesser they are: and how further of they be from the ^n^^s,
so much the greater they are. Whereof it is manife^e mile* as well the greater
as the less Cyrcle of the parallels, ^^tes, stributed or divided into 360.
degrees, and that those degrees (according to the distance of those parallels
from the poles) be greater or lesser.

For the same cause shall you here find in the table following, how many
German miles answer in each eleuations, to the degrees of the parallels.

A Table, containing the degrees of the differences of each Paralels, from the
Equator unto the proper Pole, by whole degrees of the Latitudes converted into
Miles.
Degrees. Miles. Scruples. Degrees. Miles. Scruples. Degrees. Miles. Scruples.
Degrees. Miles. Scruples. Degrees. Miles. Scruples. 1 14 59 19 14 11 37 11 59
55 8 30 73 4 23 2 14 59 20 14 6 38 11 49 56 8 23 74 4 8 3 14 58 21 14 0 39 11
39 57 8 10 75 3 53 4 14 58 22 13 54 40 11 29 58 7 57 76 3 38 5 14 56 23 13 48
41 11 19 59 7 43 77 3 22 6 14 55 24 13 42 42 11 9 60 7 30 78 3 7 7 14 53 25 13
36 43 10 58 61 7 16 79 2 52 8 14 51 26 13 29 44 10 47 62 7 2 80 2 36 9 14 48 27
13 22 45 10 36 63 6 48 81 2 21 10 14 46 28 13 15 46 10 25 64 6 34 82 2 5 11 14
43 29 13 7 47 10 14 65 6 20 83 1 50 12 14 ^^ ^0 12 59 48 10 2 66 6 6 84 1 34 13
^^ ^^ 31 12 51 40 9 50 67 5 52 85 1 18 14 ^4 33 32 12 43 50 9 38 68 5 37 86 1 3
15 14 29 33 12 35 51 9 26 69 5 23 87 0 47 16 14 25 34 12 26 52 9 ^4 70 5 8 88 0
31 17 14 21 35 12 17 53 9 12 71 4 53 89 0 16 18 14 26 36 12 8 54 8 49 72 4 38
90 0 0

An Example for the use of this Table.
LVneburgum and Stetinum, have the elevation of the Pole precisely of 54.
degrees, to know how many German miles answer to one degree of the
Parallel, passing by the Zenith of either City, enter your Table, and there
diligently looking, you shall find by the degree of that latitude 54. noted
eight miles, and 49. scruples of a mile. For so many miles in that Parallel
answer to a degree; that is, eight, a half, and the third part almost of a
German mile. And this is easily found, if the elevation does only consist in
whole degrees. For in each elevation are certain miles, and the scruples of a
mile, answering to each degree assigned. But if the place or city have minutes
depending to the latitude as Viteberge whose latitude is of 51. degrees, and
50. minutes: then seek in this table how many miles and scruples of a mile,
are atributed to the whole degrees, and you shall find by the degree of the
latitude of 51. noted 9. miles and 26. scruples of a German mile. After seek
the miles and minutes that next join to the elevation following, being 52.
and you shall find right against 9. miles, and 14. scruples of a mile: which so
set down or placed, y^ the miles be under the miles, and the minutes under the
minutes, after this manner.

miles minutes 9. 26. 9. 14.

Subtract the lesser number out of the more and upper written, and there will
remain 12. minutes, of this rest; that is, of the 12. minutes, seek the
number proportional, according to the proportion of one degree or 60. minutes,
unto the minutes depending to the latitude offered, as of the latitude of
Viteberge to the whole degrees, do 50. scruples depend. Of which so place the
numbers by the Rule of three, working and saying on this wise, 12 Z 50 60 10
that if one degree or 60. minutes of the degree do give 28. minutes of a mile,
how many scruples of a German mile, do 12. minutes of a degree give. To know
this, multiply the first by the second, that is, 12. by 50. and the increase
shall be 600. this product divide by the third number which is 60. and the part
proportional shall be 10. This proportional part found, substract out of the
miles, and minutes of the former elevation; that is, from the 9. miles, and 26.
minutes: deduct the 10. and there will remain 9. miles, and 16. scruples,
precisely answering to one degree of the Parallel passing by Viteberge. Here
the second rule follows, which is easy to conceive, if you work according
to the former taught.

The second Rule.
IF two Cities be offered, which differ in the only longitude, first seek by
the instruction above taught, ye miles, and minutes of a mile answering to one
degree of the Parallel, passing by the Zenith of those Cities. After, seek
the difference of longitudes in the degrees and minutes: then multiply the
difference of longitudes, with ye miles and scruples of the miles, and the
distance shall appear of the Cities given.

An Example.
VIteberge and Westphalia agree in latitude: that is, they be both standing
under one Parallel. For the latitude of Viteberge is 51. degrees, and 50.
scruples, and exceeds the latitude of Westphalia by certain minutes, which
here we pass, but they differ in longitude, in that Westphalia lies more to
the West. The longitude of Vite berge is 30. degrees, and 30. scruples: the
longitudes of Westphalia is 24. degrees. and no min. To find the distance, see how
many miles answer to one degree of longitude in y^ parallel, passing by the
Zenith of the Cities given. Before was taught, that in the Parallel of
Viteberge 9. miles and 16. scruples do answer to one degree: wherefore seek
the difference of longitudes of the two Cities, and deduct the lesser number
out of the more; that is, let the 24. degrees and no minutes be deducted from
the 30. degrees, and 30. scruples, and the difference resting, shall be of 6.
degrees, and 30. scruples. Last, multiply the 6. miles and 16. scruples, with
the difference of longitude; that is, with 6. degrees, and 30. minutes, and you
shall have the distance of the twoe Cities. But here observe and note
diligently in the multiplicatio^ of the degrees, miles, and minutes, what
proceeds and comes of the same. For the miles multiplied by the degrees,
do bring forth the miles: and the miles multiplied by the minutes of the
degrees, do bring forth the scruples of the miles. The minutes of the miles
multiplied by the degrees, do produce or bring forth the minutes of the
miles. And last, the minutes of the miles multiplied by the minutes of the
degrees, do produce the seconds of the miles.

But that this may the readier be conceived, use this example, the former
Westphalia and Viteberge: where the 9 miles and 16. scruples, are to be
multiplied by the 6. degrees, and 30. minutes on this wise. Multiply the 9.
whole miles, by the 6. whole degrees, thus: as six time 6. brings out 54.
miles. Multiply after that, the whole miles by the minutes of the degrees;
thus, that 9. times 30. do make 270. minutes of miles. After multiply the
minutes of the miles by the whole degrees, and by the minutes of the degrees:
as the 16. minutes of the miles multiplied by the 6. degrees, do make 99.
minutes of miles. After this the 16. minutes of the miles multiplied by 30.
minutes of the degrees, do make 480. secondes of miles; which minutes and
seconds gather into whole miles, in this manner. First divide the 480. seconds
by 60. and the quotient shall be 8. minutes. (For that one minute contains
60. seconds, as one degree does co^taine 60. minutes. These 8. minutes, add to
the minutes proceeded of the former or upper working; that is, the 270. and the
96. and you shall have 374. scruples of miles, which divided by 60. the
quotient will be 6. whole miles, and 14. scruples; that is, almost the fourth
part of a German mile. These miles gathered of the seconds and minutes of the
miles, add to the 54. miles gathered before by the multiplication of the
degrees and miles, and you shall have the true distaunce between Viteberge and
the Monastery of Vestphalia; that is, 60. German miles, and almost a quarter.

This manner of working in searching the distance of places (which differ in the
only longitude) observe in the other examples following: in which you shall
find their distance, by having their longitudes and latitudes.

Here following shall be sundry examples, in which the young students and
practisers may exercise them according to rule.

An Example.
COleine and Marburge do differ in the only longitude: for the longitude of
Coleyne is of 23. degrees, and 28. scruples, the longitude of Margburge has
25. degrees, and 45. minutes. The latitude of either (which agree) is of 51.
degrees, and no minutes. The difference of longitudes is of 2. degrees, and 17.
minutes. The miles answering to one degree (drawn in that Parallel by the
Zenith of the Cities given) are 9. miles, and 26. scruples, as may appear in
the former table. But seeing no minutes depend to the latitude, the 9. miles,
and 26. minutes are to be multiplied by the difference of the longitudes: that
is, the 2. degrees, and 17. minutes, in this manner: saying twice 9. do make
18. miles, twice 29. are 52. minutes of miles, nine times 28. do make 152.
minutes of miles, and seauenteene times 26. are 442. secondes of miles: which
secondes and minutes divided by 60. do make three miles, 32. minutes and 22.
seconds. These added unto the 18. miles, declare the distance of Coleyne and
Margburge, to be of 21. German miles, and a half.

Another.
THe longitude of Franckeforde is of 25. degrees, and 38. minutes. Hasforde is
of longitude 37. degrees, and 52. scruples. The latitude of either, is of 50.
degrees, and 12. minutes. Now they differ in the only longitude, for that the
difference of the longitudes is, of 2. degrees, and 14. scruples; that is,
Franckeforde by twoe degrees, and 14. minutes, is more toward the West, than
Hasforde. The miles according to latitude 50. are 9. and 38. minutes, and the
miles according to the latitude following, as 51. are 9. and 26. minutes. The
difference of these twoe manner of miles and minutes, is 12. minutes: the part
proportional subtracted, is twoe. The miles answering to one degree, in the
Parallel drawn by the Zenith of Franckeforde and Hasphorde, are 9. and 36.
minutes. Now as above these miles and minutes (with the difference of the
longitude) that is, twoe degrees, and fourteen minutes multiplied, you shall
have the distance in German miles; that is, twenty and two, and almost a
half.

Another.
The longitude of Gawnt (the native town of Charles the first Emperor) of 19.
degrees, and 8. minutes. The longitude of Lipsia of 29. degrees, and 28.
minutes. The latitude of either is of 51. degrees, and 24. minutes. The
difference of longitudes is of 10. degrees, and 50. minutes. The miles
according to the elevation 51. are 9. and 26, minutes: the miles ensuing the
elevation assigned, are 9. and 14. minutes. The difference of these two manner
of miles and minutes, is 12 minutes: the part proportional subtracted, is 4.
minutes. The miles answering to one degree in the Parallel (to Gaunt or
Lipsia) are 9. and 22. minutes. These miles and minutes multiplied with the
difference of the longitudes, do offer and show the distance between Gawnt and
Lipsia; that is, 101. German miles, and almost a half.

Another.
THe longitude of Straseborow is of 24. degrees, and 30. minutes, the longitude
of Landunum of Bauier is of 30. degrees, and 25. minutes. The latitude of
either is of 48. degrees, and 45. minutes. The difference of longitude, is 5.
degrees, and 55. minutes, etc.

Another.
THe longitude of Direpsa is of 130. degrees, and no minutes; the longitude of
Danaba of 104. degrees, and no minutes neither. The latitude of either is of
45. degrees, and no minutes. The difference of longitude, is 26. degrees, and
no minutes.

An easier working.
IF this curi^sity in observing minutes trouble you, you may then with lesser
pain and error leave them, especially in places being not far distant a
sunder, where the minutes omitted do little force or hinder, how near soever
you find the true distance. And by this means the second rule, is of no
difficulty: for that every painful labor does especially consist in the
multiplying of the diffeence of longitudes, with the whole miles offered by the
former Table, acording to the degree of latitude, of the Cities given.

An Example.
AMsterdame and Brandenburge (which as unto whole degrees appartaineth) agree
in latitude: for the latitude of either place in whole degrees, is 52. degrees.
But they differ in longitude, in that the longitude of Amsterdame is 21.
degrees, and 4. minutes, the longitude of Bradenburge of 30. degrees, and 35.
minutes. They differ in longitude 9. degrees; that is, Amsterdame is nearer to
the West then Bradenburge by 9. degrees, as the former table teaches in the
Parallel of the latitude 52. which contains 9. miles. Now by so many miles
is Bradenburge distant from Amsterdame.

Another.
NOrdlinga and Nicostadium, agree in latitude, for the elevation of the Pole,
or latitude of either is of 48. degrees. But they agree not in longitude, in
that the longitude of Nordlinga is of 27. degrees, and 54. minutes, the
longitude of Nicostadium of 29. degrees, and 32. minutes: so that they differ
2. degrees, which make 20. German miles, as may appear by the fourmer table,
where 10. miles are assigned to the latitude 48. Now you shall understand that
the distance of Nordlinga and Nicostadium, is of 20. German miles almost.

Another.
THe longitude of the City of Venice is of 32. degrees, and 30. minutes, the
longitude, of Spoletum is of 36. degrees, and 30. minutes. The latitude of
either, is of 44. degrees. The difference of the longitude is of 4. degrees.
And 10. miles do answer to one degree in the Parallel of the latitude 44. The
miles being multiplied by the difference of the longitudes; that is, by four
degrees, do declare the distaunce of Venice and Spol^tum, to be of forty
miles.

If of two places, the one being Southerly, and the other Northerly.
IF of twoe places given, the one has a latitude Northerly, and the other a
latitude Southerly: seek the difference of either space of the longitude; after
subtract the lesser longitude out of the greater (but of the latitude Northerly
and Southerly) according to the latitudes joined of either place. In the second
place the standing must be considered, whether they be situated under equal
Parallelles, and both distaunt by a like space from the Equatoure, or else
otherwise separated by unequal Parallelles, and by an unlike space. For if the
Paralles of the places given shall be equal, then must the difference of
longitude be accounted in either alike: but if unequal (and that both shall
be distant by an unlike space) then the half of the greater latitude applied
to the lesser latitude, shall demonstrate and show the Parallel apt and
meet to this instruction: with the same Parallel are the degrees answering to
each degree, declared by the former rule, and the other is taught and showed,
as in the precedent place is declared.

Meroe a Region of Aethiopia under Egypt, has the longitude of 91. degrees,
and 30. minutes, the latitude of 16. degrees Northerly.

The I Will of S. Thomas in the bordure of Aphrica has the longitude of 27.
degrees, and 20. minutes, the latitude Southerly is 16. degrees. The difference
of longitude is 34. degrees, and 10. scruples. The difference of latitude which
the conjoined latitudes do make) is of 32. degrees. And seeing both by an
equal space be distant toward the opposite poles from the equatour, it
therefore forces not, that the difference of longitude be gathered in either
Parallel Northerly or Southerly, in that they be equal. For to one degree of
the Parallel (which is of 16. degrees, distant from the equatour) do 14.
miles, and 25. scruples, answer or agree: which reduced into the difference of
longitude, do bring forth 492. German miles; which multiplied together, do
bring forth 241064. The difference of latitude wrought or multiplied by 15. do
bring forth 480. German miles, which again wrought together do cause
230400. And by either quadrant conjoined, the square root drawn out of the
same, does then declare and show the distance to be of 686. German miles.

The I Will of Thylen has the longitude of 33. degrees, the latitude is. of 63.
degrees Northerly. The I Will of S. Thomas has the longitude of 27. degrees, and
20. scruples,, the latitude Southerly, of 16. degrees. The difference of
longitude, has 5. degrees, and 40. scruples, the difference of latitude, is of
79. degrees.

The half difference of the greater latitude, applied to the Southerly
latitude, brings forth that the Parallel is distaunt from the equatoure 47.
degrees, and 30. scruples: in which the difference of longitude, must be
accounted. And to one degree of it in the rule, do 10. German miles, and 7.
scruples answer; which wrought into the difference of longitude, do bring
forth 57. Germain miles almost. Those multiplied, do make the increase to be
3239. By the difference also of the latitude, those multiplied, do bring forth
1404225. Of the quadrants joined, the root has 1189. German miles almost;
that is, the distances sought of the places.

That the studious and diligent practioners may easter perceive and perfecter
understand these differences of the standing of places, let them often
accustom themselves therein, that when the longitudes and latitudes of sundry
places be offered, they then consider whether they differ in the only
longitude, or latitude only, or in both, and what the latitude is of either,
and into which part from the Equatour: and besides that, they learn to
express the standing of them by proper lines drawn, and the places noted.

If the numbers of the latitudes be alike, and the numbers of the longitudes be
unlike, then do the places only differ in the longitude. Therefore by two
meridians found and defined, lying cross to them in one Parallel, imagine and
set the place of the greater longitude in the point of the crossing further
off, that the other in the nearer may be placed unto the West. For the place
always (whose longitude is lesser then the other) is nearer found to the
West, and the other is further distant into the East. The arc also of the
Parallel included between either meridian, does demonstrate the difference of
longitude.

If the numbers of the longitudes shall be alike, and the numbers of the
latitudes unlike, then is the diversity of the places in the only latitude.
Therefore two Parallels drawn cross, of which the one being higher and the
other lower and crossing them by one meridian, they do set the place of the
greater latitude in the uppermost point of the crossing, and the other in the
lowest point.

If the latitudes be alike, as the one Southerly, and the other Northerly: then
the middle arcke of the Merydian being between, is equally crossed by the
Parallels of the places drawn thwartly by the Arc of the Equatour, in such
sort, that the Equatour is by an equal space distant from either.

If both the numbers of the longitudes and latitudes shall be unequal, and
either place distant into the North from the Equatour, therefore in both is
there a diversity. Therefore two Meridians being imagined, the one Oriental
dextre, and the other Occidentall synistre, and that by so marry Parallels
drawn thwartly, which cross the Meridians, the one Southerly, the other
Northerly: and that the place whose greater longitude is touched in the lowest
and furthest point, and the other to be noted right against; that is, in the
upper and nearest point. Or thus contrariwise: If one place shall exceed the
other, both in longitude and latitude, and be further standing in the higher
point of the crossing, and thereby more farther distant, and the other noted
to stand right against, and the seats also of the places unequally touch,
which declares and contains the nighest distance of such places. In the same
manner is the standing of places descending unto diverse parts from the Equatour
expressed; being observed in such order, that if the places of either be alike
distaunte from the Equatour, the Equatour then is exquisitly standing in the
middle of both: but if the places happen to be unequal, then is the Equatour
by an unequal distance, placed farther off.

A third rule.
IF twoe Cities offered do differ both in the longitude and latitude, seek
first the difference as well of the longitude, as latitude. After half of the
difference of latitudes add unto the lesser latitude, and with the produce
enter the table which in the former examples has been taught and practiced:
searching there the miles and minutes aunswering properly to one degree. The
miles and minutes found, multiply with the degrees of the difference of
longitude, and the produce multiply in it self, and you shall obtain and have
the first quadrate. Thirdly, multiply the difference of latitude by the 15.
German miles, and this produce also multiply in it self, and you shall have
the second quadrate. Last, join or add together these tw^^ quadrate numbers
(and of that produced or increased) search out the quadrate root. The quadrate
or square root^, is the distance of Cities offered.

An Example of the third rule.
VVischegarda and Verona, do differ both in the longitude and latitude, in that
the longitude of Vuischegarda is of 41. degrees, and 17. minutes, the latitude
is of 52. degrees, and 4. minutes. The lo^gitude of Verona has 31. degrees,
and 18. minutes, the latitude is of 44. degrees, and 49. minutes. The
difference of the longitudes is of 9. degrees and 59. minutes. The difference
of the latitudes is of 7. degrees and 15. minutes. The half of the difference
of the latitudes, is 3. degrees, and 37. minutes, which half added to the
lesser latitude; that is, to Verona, which is of 44. degrees, add 49. minutes,
does then produce or bring forth 48. degrees, and 26. minutes. This produce or
increase is named the middle latitude, in that it is distant by equal degrees
and minutes from either latitude of Vuischegarda and Verona; that is, it
exceeds the latitude of Verona by 3. degrees, and 37. minutes, and Verona
does exceed Vuischegarda by so many degrees, and minutes. With this product
or middle latitude; that is, with 48. degrees, and 26. minutes. I enter the
former table, and according to the instruction before taught in the second rule,
I find in the parallel which is drawn by the middle latitude, to answer to
one degree right against 10. Germain wiles, and 2. minutes. It was also taught
in the second rule, y^ if minutes depended to the latitude, that those should
be sought in the former table, and by the next elevation following, the
proportional part to be sought. As in this example. The latitude 52. are 9.
miles, and 14. scruples noted, and in that 3. degrees, and 37. scruples depend
to a middle latitude, I seek in the table how many miles and scruples are
noted next to the latitude following, 55. and there I find 8. miles, and 36.
scruples. The difference between the miles and scruples of the eleuations of
52. and 55. is 1. degree, and 22. minutes. By the proportion of this
difference, is the proportional part gathered and found, according to the
manner before taught in the second rule.

Another example of this third rule for thy further instructing of Viteberge
and Lipsia, which differ in the longitude and latitude: for the longitude of
Viteberge is of 30. degrees, and 30. minutes, the latitude has 51. degrees,
and 50. minutes. The longitude of Lipsia is of 29. degrees, and 58. minutes,
the latitude has 51. degrees, and 24. minutes. The difference of the
longitudes is of thirty twoe minutes, the difference of the latitudes is of
twenty six minutes. The half of the difference of the latitudes is of
thirteen minutes, which half added to the lesser latitude (as to Lipsia)
which is of 51. degrees, and 24. minutes, does produce ^1. degrees, and 37.
minutes. The product is caled the middle latitude, in that by equal minutes it
is distant from either latitude of Viteberge and Lipsia; that is, it exceeds
the latitude of Lipsia, 13. minutes, and by so many minutes is it exceeded of
Viteberge. With this product or middle latitude; that is 51. degrees and 37.
minutes, I enter the former Table, and by the Instruction before uttered in the
second rule, I find in the Parallel which is drawn by the middle latitude,
that 9. miles, and 19. scruples do answer there to one degree. And in the
second rule before is taught, that if minutes depend to the latitude, which is
sought in the former Lable, then by the next elevation must the part
proportional be sought. As in this example to the latitude, 51. degrees, are 9.
miles and 26. scruples noted. And in that 37. minutes depend to the middle
latitude, I therefore seek in the table how many miles and scruples are
assigned to the latitude next following; that is, 52. degrees: right against
which I find noted 9. miles, and 14. scruples. The difference between the
miles and scruples of the eleuations of 51. and 52. is of 12. minutes: so that
by the proportion of this difference unto the whole degree, or 60. minutes, is
the proportional part drawn or gathered, according to the manner before
taught in the second rule. As thus, that as 69. minutes yield 12, even so do
37. give 7. minutes, which is the part proportional. The same minutes
subtracted from the miles and scruples assigned to the latitude 51. that is,
from the 9. miles, and 26. scruples, there remain 9. miles, and 19. scruples.
And so many miles and scruples in the Parallel of the middle latitude does
answer unto one degree. Which being found and known, these nine miles and
the scruples, with the differences of longitude, which is of thirty two
minutes, I then multiply, and they show and bring forth 298. minutes: which
multiplied again in it self, do bring forth the first quadrate to be 88804.
minutes. And this is ye first part of the working of these. Now follows the
other part.

I multiply first the difference of latitude, as the 26. minutes by 15.
German miles, and they bring forth 390. minutes, which multiplied again in
it self do yield 151200. minutes, as the second quadrant is. Now these two
numbers quadrate added, do bring forth and make 240904. minutes, of which the
quadrate or square root is of 494. minutes of miles. These for that they are
the minutes of miles, ought to be divided by 60. and then they bring forth 8.
whole miles, and 14. scruples; that is, a fourth part almost of a Germaiue
mile. So that so much is the distance, between Viteberge and Lipsia.

Another.
THe longitude of Buda is of 37. degrees, and 44. minutes, the latitude has
47. degrees, and no minutes. The longitude of Aquisgranum is of 22. degrees,
and 24. minutes, the latitude has 51. degrees, and 6. minutes. The difference
of the longitudes, is of 15. degrees, and 20. minutes. The difference of the
latitudes is of 4. degrees, and 6. minutes. The half of the difference of the
latitudes, is of 2. degrees, and 3. minutes. The middle latitude is of the
degrees, and three minutes: here (in that 3. minutes do only depend to the
middle latitude) are omitted, seeing the leaving of them bring or cause small
error. Then must you take the miles assigned to the latitude 49. that are 9.
miles, and 50. scruples, which with the difference of the longitude; that is,
15. degrees, and 20. minutes are to be multiplied, and they shall bring forth
150. miles, and 46. scruples: which miles contain as a quadrate; that is, one
part in it self with the minutes, that may be multiplied and resolved also
into minutes in the multiplication by 60. it shall then bring forth 9000.
minutes* to these add the 46. minutes, and the number then shall be of 9046.
minutes. These minutes again multiplied in it self do bring forth and offer
the first quadrate, that is 81830116. The difference of the latitude, as the 4.
degrees, and 6. minutes, multiplied by 15. does produce or bring forth 61.
miles and 30. scruples: which as they may be wrought and multiplied again in
themselves, they may be resolved into minutes, and you shall have 3660.
minutes. These further wrought in themselves do bring forth and show the
second quadrate, which contains 13395600. The two quadrate numbers also
conjoined, do make 95225716. minutes. The root of this; that is, 9758.
divided by 60. declares the space between Buda and Aquisgranum, to be 162.
Germain miles and a half.

Another.
THe longitude of Room is of 36. degrees, and 20. minutes, the latitude has
41. degrees, and 50. minutes. The longitude of Jerusalem has 66. degrees, and
no minutes, the latitude is of 31. degrees, and 40 minutes. The difference of
the longitudes is of 29. degrees, and 40. minutes. The difference of the
latitudes is of 10. degrees, and 10. minutes. The half of the difference of
the latitudes, is of 5. degrees, and 5. minutes. The middle latitude, is of 36.
degrees, and 45. minutes. The miles answering to one degree in the Parallel of
the latitude next following, are 11. and 59. minutes. These subtracted from
the miles and minutes of the former elevation, there do 9. minutes remain.
These thus found and known seek the proportional part to be subtracted, in
saying, if one degree or 60. minutes in this Parallel do yield 9. minutes of a
German mile, how many minutes of a mile do 45. minutes yield or make,
which depend to the degrees of the middle latitude. To know this, multiply 45.
by 9. and the product divide by 60. then will 9. minutes remain in the
quotient. The part proportional must also be subtracted, which deducted from
the miles and minutes assigned to the latitude 36, as from the 12. miles, and
8. minutes, do 12. miles, and 2. minutes remain. By which appears, that so
many miles and minutes, do answer to one degree in the Parallel of the middle
latitude. This now is as a preparation and entrance, unto the second working.

To have therefore the distance of the fore said cities, multiply first the
12. miles, and minutes, with the difference of the longitudes 29. degrees, and
40. minutes, and they shall bring forth 356. German miles, and ^9. minutes,
which 356. miles, that may be wrought together with the minutes 59, are to be
resolved into minutes, the same is performed, if they be multiplied by 60. To
the same product being 21369. add the 59. minutes, and they make 21419. These
minutes again multiplied in themselves, do offer the first quadrate, that is,
458773561. Thus you have the understanding and knowledge of the working of the
first place.

After this multiply the 10. degrees of the difference of the latitude by 15.
and you shall readily have the miles 150. to which ad for the 10. minutes
depending, 2 miles, and a half of a German mile, and you shall have in this
second part of the working 152. miles, and a half or 30. scruples of a
German mile. Which miles, as they may with the minutes be multiplied
together in themselves, so are they to be resolved by that 60. multiplied into
minutes, which then bring forth 9120. to which add the half or 30. miles,
and you shall then have the whole to be 9150. minutes: which again multiplied
in themselves do make the later quadrate to be 8372^500. Now unto the last,
conioyne these two quadrates, and the whole sum shall be 542496061. minutes.
The root of this number; that is, 23299. seeing it represents the minutes of
miles, divided by 50. does then show the space which is between Icrusalem and
Room, in German miles, to be 388. with a third part almost of a mile.

Another.
THe longitude of Hamburge is of 37. degrees only, the latitude has 45.
degrees, and 24. minutes. The longitude of Magdeburge has 29. degrees, and 38.
minutes the latitude is of 52. degrees, and 20. minutes. The difference of the
longitudes is of 2. degrees, and 38. minutes. The difference of the latitudes
is of 2. degrees, and 4. minutes. The half of the difference of the latitudes,
is one degree, and 2. minutes. The middle latitude is of 53. degrees, and 22.
minutes. The miles assigned to the elevation 53. are 9. and 2. minutes. The
miles assigned to the degrees of the elevation following, being 54. are 8. and
49. minutes. The difference now of these two manner of miles and minutes, has
13. minutes. The proportional part subtracted is of 4. minutes; which
minutes, let four be deducted out of the 9. miles, and 2. minutes assigned to
the elevation 53. there will then remain 8. miles, and 58. minutes. Therefore
so many miles and minutes, do answer to one degree in the Parallel of the
middle latitude. These miles and minutes now found, multiplied with the
difference of the longitudes, do bring forth 23. miles, and 36. scruples. And
these 23. miles, wrought together with the minutes; that is, multipled in it
self, and that resolved into minutes, to the producte also add the minutes
36. and the whole then shall appear 1416. minutes. This number again wrought
into it self, does offer the first quadrate, which is 2005056, minutes. After
multiply the difference of the latitudes, by 15. miles, and the increase shall
be 31. miles. These miles again resolved do yield or give 1860. minutes,
which multiplied again in themselves, do offer the later quadrante, which
contains 3459600. minutes. The whole sum, that is, the numbers increased of
these two quadrats, are 5464656. The root of the minutes, which is of 2337.
minutes, divided by 60. does declare the distance which is between Hamburge
and Magdeburge, to be 39. German miles almost.

An easier working. and less curious.
THis great labor perhaps after the kind, may fear some from the practice of
these, and the rather in that this curious or diligent multiplication of the
minutes, needs not in all or at all times, especially if the space of the two
cities does not contain many miles, or that the cities offered be but alitle
space distant one from the other. For where the distance is great, as of
Viteberge and Frankforde, Noriberge and Room etc. The minutes then neglected,
do cause great error. But if the space be small between the cities given,
without the acompt also of the minutes (for that seldom in the only minutes,
as are the near places together, do they only differ) the distaunce then by
the only degrees and miles whole, cannot be found. But if any be minded not so
curiously to search the distances of places, then let him or them omit the
minutes depending as well to the degrees of the longitudes and latitudes, as the
miles, and according to the instruction of the third rule, the minutes being
neglected or omitted, you shall then find without any difficulty the distance
of places given.

An Example.
THe longitude of Franckeforde is of 25. degrees, the latitude is of 53.
degrees. The longitude of Viteberge, is of 30. degrees, the latitude has 51,
degrees. The difference of the longitudes, is of 5. degrees. The difference of
the latitudes, is 1. degree. The half of the difference of the latitudes in
whole degrees is nothing, wherefore the middle latitude, is the like nothing.
The miles assigned to the lesser latitude, as to the 51. degrees, are 9,
multiply now these 9. miles with the difference of the longitudes, with 5.
degrees, and the increase shall be 46. which multiplied in it self, do offer
the first quadrate; that is, 2025. After multiply the difference of the
latitudes, that is, one degree with 15. miles, which 15 miles multiplied again
in it self, do produce or bring forth 225. which is the later quadrate. These
two quadrates conioyne, and of the increase seek the root, which then declares
the distance between Franckforde and Viteberge, to be of German miles about
74.

Another.
THe longitude of Brunsweeke is of 28. degrees, the latitude of 52. degrees.
The longitude of Viteberge is 30. degrees, the latitude of 51. degrees. The
difference of the longitudes, is of 2. degrees. The difference of the
latitudes, is 1. degree. The miles assigned to the lesser latitude, are 9. The
difference of the longitude multiplied by 9. miles, does produce 18. miles,
which multiplied again in it self do produce 324. that is the first
quadrate. The difference of the latitude, being one degree does make and
contain 15. miles, which also wrought again in themselves do offer the later
quadrate, which contains 225. Now of these two quadrates conjoined, the root
is of 23. which number is almost the distance of Viteberge, in german miles,
from Brunsweeke.

Another.
THe longitude of Danske has 39. degrees, the latitude of 62. degrees. The
longitude of Noriberge, has 28. degrees, the latitude is of 49. degrees. The
difference of the longitudes is of 11. degrees. The difference of the
latitudes, is of 5. degrees. The middle latitude, is of 51. degrees. The miles
answering to one degree in latitude, are 9. The difference of the longitudes,
that is multiplied with the 9. does yield 99. miles, which again multiplied in
themselves, do produce the first quadrate which contains 9801.

The difference of the latitudes (being 5. degrees) multiplied by the 15. does
then produce 75. miles, which wrought again in themselves do offer the later
quadrate which contains 5625. The increase now of the two quadrates,
comprehends 15426. The root contains 124. And so many are the miles almost,
between Danske and Noriberge.

Another.
THe longitude of Jerusalem has 66. degrees, the latitude is of 31. degrees.
The longitude of Nazareth has 67. degrees, the latitude is of 32. degrees. The
difference of the longitudes is 1. degree. The difference of the latitudes, is
the like one degree. The miles assigned to 1. degree in the Parallel of the
lesser latitude, are 12. The first quadrate does contain 144. The miles
answering to one degree of the difference of the latitude, are 15. The later
quadrate, comprehends 225. The increase of the quadrates, contains 369. The
root contains 16. miles. Now the distance in a manner is so much, between
Jerusalem and Nazareth. And thus by other examples, may young practisioners
exercise, without labor, tediousnes, and pain, to find the spaces of places
given, by the degrees of the longitudes, and latitudes.

A demonstration of the third rule.


THe demonstration of this working or instruction, is taken out of the last
proposition of the first book of Euclide, where he does teach and
demonstrate, that in the tryangle right cornered, the quadrate which by the
line or side drawn and stretching to, makes a right angle, that is equal in
the two squares, which are caused by the sides containing the right angle.
Which that you may easier conceive and understand, in the page going before is
placed an apt figure to this matter, by which, a reason not only of the
third, but also of the rules of the first and second may be practiced and
declared.

Also there is repeated those things, which before were declared of the
Theoricke of the longitudes and latitudes, that the younger practisers may the
readier and easier conceive the rules hereafter taught. The line E. F. does
represent the Equinoctial on earth, lying under the celestial Equinoctial
cyrcle. The line B. C. does represent the Parallel; that is, the cyrcle
equ^ich ^unt to the Equinoctial cyrcle, drawn over the head or Zenith of the
city C. The line A. D. does represent the Parallel, yea equidistant to that
Equinoctial, drawn by the Zenith of the cities, A. and D. The line A. B. E.
does represent the meridian, of the proper city or place A. The line D. CF.
does represent the meridian, of the cities C. and D.

The declaration of the first rule.
THe two Cities C. and D. agree in longitude, in that they are under one
meridian; that is, they be distant by like spaces from the West. But they have
not alike latitude, for that the City C. is nearer to the Equinoctial than the
City D. by three degrees. To have therefore the distance, or that space
between, you shall easily find the same by the degrees of the meridian.

The declaration of the second rule.
THe two Cities A. and D. agree in the latitude, or they have one like
elevation of the Pole, in that they are under one Parallel, and the Zenith of
both is by five degrees distant from the Equinoctial. But the longitude of
them is not alike; that is, they be not equally distant from the West: for the
city A. is more Westerly then the city D. by four degrees. So that the
distance is to be gathered and learned by those degrees between, in that
Parallel.

The declaration of the third rule.
THe two Cities A. an^ ^. be distant by unlike spaces, as well from the (...)
from the Equinoctial. For they be under diverse meridians and Parallels. The
city A. is nearer to the West than the city C. by four degrees, and it is
further distant from the Equinoctial than C, by three degrees. Wherefore by
those degrees in which it is nearer to the West and furthest distaunt from the
Equinoctial, must the distance of the two cities A. and C. be sought. For that
the space between the meridiane A. B. passing by the Zenith of the City A. and
meridiane C. D. stretching by the Zenith of the city C. contains four
degrees: yet those degrees are not in the great cyrcle, in that those two
Parallels do not divide the earth into two just halues, but into unequal
halues: so that of necessity it must follow, that the degrees of diverse
Parallels have unequal spaces. Wherefore in the third rule are not the miles
answering to the degrees of the lesser elevation taken, except the difference
of the latitudes be small: nor the miles taken, answering to the degrees of
the greater elevation: but the miles are taken answering to the degrees of the
middle latitude: for that it lacks in one part, may be restored in the other.
Of the same may the distance in miles be sought, according to the longitude.
After this, in that the space between the Parallel A. C. passing by the Zenith
of the city A. and the parallel B. C. reaching by the zenith of the city C.
contains three degrees, and these are the degrees of the meridian; that is,
of the great Cyrcle, where to one degree do always and every where fifteen
German miles answer. So that the distance of those Cities are easily found,
according to their latitude.

And in the same by that multiplication of the miles and degrees, the adding of
the product, by the increase and extraction of the root, that the distance of
the Cities may necessarily and surely be gathered, is thus demonstrated. That
in every tryangle right cornered, the square which is made by the side, is
drawn against a right angle, and is equal to the two squares which are made
by the sides containing a right angle. As the quadrate which is made by the
drawing of the line A. C. into it self, that is equal to the squares, which
are caused by the drawing of the line A. B. into it self, and B. C. into it
self: which by Arithmeticall practice may more readier and better be
understood of young students and practisioners in this manner. First the side A.
B. contains three spaces, which multiplied, do bring forthus. The line B. C.
comprehends 4. distances, which multiplied, do produce or bring for 16.
which two squares conjoined, do make 25: and the square which proceeds of
the 5. multiplied (which the line A. C. contains) do they equate. Even so in
the instruction of finding the distances of places according to the third rule,
the difference of the longitudes is represented by the line B. C. but the
difference of the latitudes by the line A. B. Therefore as by the quantities
known of the lines A. B. and B C. is the quantity of the line A C. attained.
Also by the differences of the longitudes and the latitudes of places known,
and those before taught being multiplied and increased, the distance of them is
easily known, which by the line A C. is represented. And in the Triangle and
quadrate, is the side (but in the number) named the root. These hitherto, for
the knowledge of finding the distances of places shall suffice.

The definition, appellations, division, and offices or vtilities of the
Horizont.
THe Horizont called the ender and Cyrcle of the half Sphere, is the edge
between the light part, that stands for the same we see, and the dark
half that we cannot see of the sky.

The Horizont (as Proclus writes) is a greater cyrcle, immovable or fixed,
not one and the same every where, but to each place proper from the verticiall
point, and round about equally distant, and dividing the whole sphere of the
world into two equal half spheres; of which, the one half appears in sight
to us, and the other half hid under the earth.

The description of the Horizont does Macrobius teach; where he writes, that
the Horizont is after two conditions: the one, extends on every side unto the
firmament and serves peculiarly as it were for the division of heaven, in
dividing justly the sky into two halues: of which the one appears in sight
to us above the proper Horizont and the other hid under that Horizont from us.
Which Horizont has his name of the sky, and of the same called the celestial
Horizont: whose diameter (after Macrobius) is as large as the diameter of the
eight sphere, which (as he affirms) is the furthest and highest part of the
sky, that men can readily see and discern with the eye. But the earthly
Horizont, in that the same serves for the sightes only of the earth and
water, and not stretching unto the firmament; nor that his half diameter (as
Macrobius writes) does exceed 180. furlongs, which contains 22. miles,
and. So that the whole diameter after his account, is but 45. miles in length.
Which if any man stand upon an even or plain ground (orels on the sea) may see
round about him 22. miles and a half every ways. Which round compass of the
whole Horizont (after Macrobius) does contain 141. miles, and 3/7. parts.

A comparison, that as the meridian is an immovable cyrcle, even so is the
Horizone: for if the same were moveable, it would not cross the meridian at
right angles: and unto these should be imagined, that if it were moveable, in
each day the same would move with the meridian cyrcle.

The appellations and diverse names of the Horizont.
1 THis circle is called the Horizon, as it were the cyrcle dividing the half
spheres, or of the greek word Orizomai, which in English signifies to define,
determine, and set out, in that the same defines the part of the world
seen. Or of Oros or Orion, that is the bound or ender.

2 It is named also the gyrdle, or the cyrcle of rising.

3 Macrobius calls the Horizone that bound of heaven that is seen above the
earth ( lib. 1. cap. 15.) In that it is the end or bound seperating the nether
half Sphere from the upper. And of him also called the edge of the half
sphere. And Alfragnus called it the cyrcle of the half sphere.

4 The Horizone also is so defined of his office, in that his office is to
divide that part of the world in sight, from that hid under the earth.
Whereof it is not unworthily called the ender, seeing it permits nor
suffers any to see but the half sphere at one time, and therefore is called
of some, the cyrcle of the half sphere, as before taught. This cyrcle is always
understood to be described by the verticiall point, in that as the vertical
point is changed, even so likewise is the Horizone.

The Horizone is divided after twoe sorts; first into a right and thwart:
secondly, into a sensible and rational Horizone.

The Horizone of the right sphere is called right or right cornered, above
which neither of the Poles of the world is elevated, which they have whose
Zenith is under the Equinoctial, or dwell under the Equinoctial. Their
Horizone is the cyrcle drawn by the Poles of the world, which deuideth as well
the meridian as the Equatoure at right angle, through which rightnesse it
obtains that name, that it is called the right Horizone.

The thwart Horizone as of the thwart Sphere, from whose plain the Poles of
the world be distant, the one is then raised above the Horizone, and the other
depressed and hid under the Horizone. Or thus, the Horizone is called thwart or
declined, when either of the Poles of the world is elevated, which they have
which dwell without the Equinoctial, whether they dwell Northerly or
Southerly. And their Horizone crosses the Equinoctial at uneven and thwart
angles. And attaineth also the name of a thwart Horizone, through the thwart
angles, which it forms or makes with the Equatoure. There is also one right
Horizone, as there is one simple and right sphere, but the thwart Horizone is
many ways changed toward the Poles of the world, through the standing and
place changed on the earth. For the standing is so much the thwarter, as the
sphere of the world is caused declining, and by how much either of the poles
of the world, is drawn and raised higher. So that to it (by the obseruers of
the stars) is the name given whereby it is called thwart. And note this that
the zenith or point over the head, is always the Pole of the Horizone: which
Pole is here not taken for the celestial point, upon which the celestial
mouer or any other cyrcle is drawn, in that the Horizone is immovable, as was
before taught: bu taken for the point raised, which is the Center of any
fyrcle, as here by this figure do all the notes appear unto the eye, in which
F. H. R. represent the meridian cyrcle, F. R. the half of the equatour H. N.
B. the right Horizone, crossing as well the Couatour in the point N. as the
meridian in the points H. B. at right angles, F. is the verticiall point of the
dwelling under the Equatour, in the point S. The letters K. O. Q. doc represent
the earthly Globe; and he which dwells without the Equatour in the point K.
has his top the point D. in the meridian, and G. N. A. the thwart Horizone,
but dwelling in the earthly Globe, in the point L. has the verticiall point E.
and the Horizone thwart I. N. C. But if any understand or mean that L. K. Q. is
the Orb of the earth whose Center is N. and shall soon see by the Horizonts
or ends that that Orb is divided into two equal parts, as into that seen,
and that not seen: and by the right Horizont H. B. the Equatour R. F. in the
point N. at right angles, whereof it is called the right horizone to be
divided, and the others at thwart angles, whereof they are named thwart. Of
this division has been sufficiently entreated, in his proper place. This also
is to be noted, that the horizone is two ways changed and varied. First, that
the Cities and other places are situated or standing either toward the East, or
toward the West, under one Parallel. The second, that the horizone is either
varied toward the South or toward the North, and are situated under one
meridian, and diverse Parallels. These of themselves for the right understanding
the longitudes and latitudes of places, are manifest.

Further that the elevation of the Pole (that is the arc which is between the
Pole of the world and the horizon, is equal to the distance of the verticiall
point or Zenith from the Equatour, shall appear and be made manifest in this
manner. As first that EBVX. is the meridian cyrcle BAX. the Equatoure, NV. the
thwart horizone, the Pole of the world raised above the horizone, E. the
Zenith, A. the Center of the world, R. the Pole antarticke so much deprssed,
the arc RNC. the elevation of the Pole from the horizone NV. given, EX. the
latitude of the region or place being the distance of the top point E. from
the Equatour BX. And that this is equal to the arc NO. as to the elevation of
the Pole C. from the horixon NV. given, which shall be demonstrated in this
manner. That C. the Pole of the world, is distant from the equatour; BX. by a
quarter of the meridian, and the like the vertical point E, is distant from
NV. the horizon, by a quarter. But the quarters of the equal cyrcles are alike
equal, for XC. and NE be the quarters of the equal cyrcles: therefore in that
they be alike equal, is CE. the common arc. If now by the common conceiving
and imagination of mind, that from the equals they be equal, etc. then from
either quarters XC. and NE. the common Arcke CE. is to be deducted, and the
remainer shall be equal; that is, XE. which to that NC. ought to be. And
seeing the latitude of a place is no other, as by the former words appears,
the^ the distance of his Zenith from the equatoure, that readily having the
elevation of the Pole, the latitude or distance of the place from the Equatour
shall soon be attained. By which the elevation of the Equatoure above the
Horizone in the meridian cyrcle, as the arc VX. is, shows no other then the
complement of the latitude or elevation of the pole is readily atained, if you
deduct that complement out of 90. degrees.

The sensible Horizone is a space of the earth defined by a compass round
about, which the sight of the eye attayneth and comprehends in a plain and
even field. Or thus, the sensible Horizone is that which the eye ^^^fectly
sees, and describes according to the ^ounde of ^ight, and called of some the
artificial Horizon, and that fo, the s^^^ cause, that which is contained by
sight, is by a certain similitude agreeing with the artificial day. And as
the artificial day is so named, for that artificers do especially work in
it, even so the like is the horizone named artificial, in that towers,
foretresses, and castles in time past, were built like the horizone.

The diameter of this horizone (after Macrobius) which nearer agrees to a
truth (then either Proclus or Albertus) as before was taught, is of 36.
furlongs, to which almost four German miles answer, and 22. English miles:
and so far on a plain and even ground not hindered by hills or thick mists, may
a man fully see. And in the same space the imbossed rounds of the earth, being
without hills, is increased, and grows to 250. feel, or 125. cubits: so that
this horizone is not suddenly changed, nor in a short space. Therefore of
necessity must ensue, that those which are distaunt by a lesser space then 360.
furlongs, to see always some part of the earth common to both. But those which
are distant by many spaces, do comprehend diverse compasses by sight of the eye
and diverse horizones.

The rational horizone is that which before was described, that the same is a
greater cyrcle, lying by the edge of the earth, and reaching round about unto
the sky, and dividing the celestial Orbs into two equal half Spheres, as
the one half in sight, and the other hid to us. Although the plain upper face
of the horizone passes not by the center of the earth, yet by the edge of the
same, through which we see and observe the celestial bodies, that rise above
and set under it: so that they evidently show, that the same deuideth heaven
into two equal half spheres, as above remembered. For in every moment, do
six signs of the Zodiac appear above the earth, as in the night to the eye
may be numbered and noted, that six signs set under the earth, and be gone out
of sight. This is also called rational, seeing the eye cannot descerne unto
the highest heaven, nor aptly frame this division of heaven into two equal
halues: yet the mind by examining, gathers and concludes, as by a
perseverance passing before, and in the showing of the stars that rise and
set, and in considering the tarriances of them in either half sphere. This
besides is called the artificial horizone, in that by the benefit of the
astronomicall art, it was invented.

Or thus not much agreeing to the former, the rational horizone (which of some
is named natural) and according to the mind of Ptholomie, Cleomedes, and
Proclus, belongs unto the Sphere of the fixed stars, and reaches even unto
the same Sphere, and deuideth heaven into equal half Spheres, the one half
appearing above the same circle, and the other half not appearing, hid under
it. Such a manner of imagining is not in vain, nor without cause determined and
devised, seeing that men in the night and in a clear season, standing on an
even ground, may see stars arise unto sight in the East, which a little before
appeared not to the sight: and those after drawn by the first moouer unto the
West horizone, that began to go down be set, and do not after appear. By
which they concluded that there is a cyrcle in heaven, dividing and ending
matters in sight from those not seen. So that they nothing doubted to call this
cyrcle the rational horizon (which together with the upper face by the center
of the earth stretched round about unto heaven) and by the four quarters of
the world, as East, West, North, and South, divided things seen, from those
not seen. And a great help it gives unto this imagination that the earth is
perfect round and imbossed, in that of a Globe through his imbossing can be
seen but the half at a time.

This also yields a help to reason, by the appearances in the celestial
bodies, although our sight cannot attain unto the starrie sky, nor fully
descerne heaven, although a man earnestly look up and behold it: yet do we
see stars, whose light extend unto our eye. As by this example may evidently
appear, of that royal star named the heart of the Lion, which in our time is
in the 22. degree almost of Leo. And the star standing on the left buttocke of
Aquarius in the 22. degree almost of the same signe^ that is diametraly or
right against one the other situated. Which do on this wise, that as the one
appears above the horizone, the other is hidden under it, et e contra. So
that as the one rises, the other sets, and on this manner do they
continually. Of which reason it is concluded, that a certain cyrcle deuideth
heaven into twoe equal halues, and do part (as before taught) the things seen,
from those not seen. Although the tariance be but small, in that this star
appears a very small while above the earth, through the same, that this star
of Aquarius is Southerly from the ecclipticke line, it greatly forces not. The
like examples may be applied of the superior planets, when they be situated or
appear opposite in heaven, as they also may be evidently seen, in the
opposition of the sun and moon, when they be seen near to the East and West
horizone, and where the moon is near the suns way.

The diameter of the rational horizone, although the same cannot be found nor
comprehended, through his exceeding distaunce by exterior sense and judgment:
yet reason it self judges, that the same may extend unto the starry sky,
whose sight from that not seen it does describe and the same is of 32655932.
German miles, and 20. minutes, which distance by the outward senses, is
judged as infinite.

The Pole of the rational horizon, is the vertical point. for it is distant by
a quarter of the greatest cyrcle, that is, 90. degrees, from the compass round
about of the horizon, yet not to all places serves one horizon, for that as a
man changes place and country, even so arises a new horizon, whether so ever
he trauaileth. And new horizons also appear and happen, if a man either
travail toward either of the poles of the world, or in right line toward the
East and West, and the like unto diverse quarters, as into the North, the East,
or West, or contrariwise iourneying by the opposite course, the Horizones vary
and change.

And if the places be either situated partly toward the East or West, and
partly toward the South or North, the horizones there decline and vary them
partly toward the East or West, and partly toward the south or North: which
happens, by reason that the City is not under one Parallel.

And Cities or countries situated under one meridiane do vary their horizons
directly; either toward the South or North.

There be as many horizons, as there be meridia^s. And for so much as that of
all places cannot be one manner of Zenith, therefore cannot one Meridiane
serve for all places. And seeing the Pole of the Horizone is the Zenith of it,
which is in the Meridiane, and that to each place belongs a proper Zenith,
and a proper Meridian, it follows that to each place belongs a proper
Horizone.

Toward the Poles by the changing of places are the horizons changed, and the
diverse eleuations of the Pole by a certain occasion caused: also they
evidently declare a like alteration to be caused in the respect of the
opposite quarters of the East and West, and do procure and cause diverse
beginnings of the days and nights, insomuch that the stars generally
appearing and seen, do by order of times and in sundry places, arise and set
in the West and hide them under the Horizon. For the same manner of Eclipse,
which is seen at Arbela (after Pliny) in the fifte hour of the night, to
them of Carthage it appears in the second hour: so that the sun sooner
sets to them of Arbela by three hours, then to them of Carthage. Therefore
the horizon of Arbela is much further distant into the East then the horizon of
Carthage.

The same rational horizon (as it were on the plainness of the earth) drawn
and streached unto the sky, does the meridian extend to it downward, and
divide the same into twoe half cyrcles: of which the one declineth unto the
East, and thereof called the East quarter, and the other unto the West, and of
that named the West quarter.

And the diverse places of the suns rising and setting, do sundry wise divide
either half cyrcle. For the Equinoctial rising, and the Equinoctial setting,
(which are points of the horizon, that the sun in the equatoure placed, by
rising and setting passes) do part and divide either half cyrcle into
equal quarters. And with these points do the Poles of the meridian join.

And either quarters do the other two (as the rising and setting) divide into
two unequal arks. For of the twoe Northerly quarters, the same which tends
and looks unto the East, is the solsticial rising, and the other the
solsticiall setting. But of the twoe Southerly, the Easterly does the winter
rising divide, and the Westerly does the winter setting part. But by what
space these risings and settings may differ and be distant from the former
middle in every horizon, and in the largeness of rising does Ptholomie
instruct in that elevation of 40. degrees, and fifteen scruples.

Of the shadows which the sun arising and setting in these points of the
horizon causes, is worthy to be considered and noted, in that the
Equinoctial shadows (which through the suns rising and setting in the
Equinoctial points are caused) do fall and extend in straight manner. But the
other shadows not in the same condition or not in straight line do fall, but
that the solsticiall shadows in the rising, with the winter shadows in the
setting, and contrariwise the winter shadows in the rising, with the
Solsticiall in the setting do form and make right shadows.

The offices or vtilities of the Horizon.
_1 THis circle (like as all the others) so that nothing in heaven is frivolous
and of a vain imagination has many vtilities. First it deuideth the whole
heaven into two equal half spheres.

2 It declares which stars be of continual appearance, and which continually
hid under the horizon: which do set, and which do arise above the horizon. So
that it appears, that the stars consist in a triple defference, as that
certain do arise and set, certain never appear above the horizone, and
certain continue and be always above the horizon.

3 The horizon therefore is caused of the habitude, as well of the right, as
the thwart sphere.

4 The rising and setting of the stars are applied unto the horizon, by which
settings and risings, the discriptions of times are changed, and it also
declares the degree of the Zodiac, with the which each star rises and
sets.

5 The horizone shows the rising and setting of the signs of the Zodiac,
the exaltations, or eleuations of the pole and the equatoure, the latitudes of
places, to the largeness of rising, which is the arc of the horizon to the
stars or points of the ecclipticke and equatour, arising together, included
with the beginnings of the twelve houses of heaven.

6 By the office of the horizone, at any time we may learn and know the
quantity of the artificial day and night: and likewise procures or shows
the just cause of the inequality of the artificial days, it does also
declare the rising and setting of the sun. For as the horizons, according to
the elevation or depression of the pole, are varied: even so are the verticiall
days in themselves caused unequal, yea in those points of the Zodiac.

7 By the benifit of the horizon (the sun shining) we attain and come each day
unto the knowledge of the unequal hour of the day.

8 It shows to us the elongation of the stars from the rising and setting,
which the astronomers call the largeness of the rising and setting, or the
Zenith of the rising and setting.

9 By this cyrcle we learn how much the rising as well of the stars, as the
other points of heaven, is distant from the true and the Equinoctial rising:
that is, in the same are the latitudes of the stars accounted from the
equinoctial, and also their risings and settings.

10 It manifests the degree of the Zodiac, with the which the purposed star
rises and sets.

11 It iudicateth the stars, or the celestial images that be continually in
sight, or always hid.

12 It makes manifest the risings and settings of the signs of the Zodiac.
It does likewise make distinction, between the Sun and Moons Ecclipses, seen
as well above the horizon, as not in sight.

13 It helps and furthereth much unto the finding of the latitude of a
purposed place, whereof (through the benifite of this cyrcle and the meridian)
may the distaunces of places be certainly found.

Of the vertical Circles.
BEsides the former cyrcles at large mentioned, are there other cyrcles which
shall here be uttered and taught, as in an apt place agreeing to that
aforesaid, which be^ these: the vertical cyrcles; the cyrcles of the
positions, and of the 12. houses. Of these in order shall here be written (as
the necessary matter offers) seeing a special part of astronomy depends
of them, and the whole composition of the celestial instruments seems
likewise one of them.

First the verticals, be cyrcles which from the top of any place given, are
drawn unto each part of the horizon, and divide the upper half Sphere in
sight into so many parts, as the Horizone is divided; and all concur and
meet above in each vertical point or Pole of the Horizon. To the number of
these, is the meridian adjoined. These cyrcles, are likewise understood and
noted immouable, as the meridian and Horizone; that is, they are not drawn
about with the first mouer, as the Zodiac, the Equatoure, the Colures, and
the other cyrcles in^ixed to the first mouer.

But for a more evident declaration of the former words, use this Figure here
described: whereas a e g d. represent the Meridiane; e d b g. the twart
Horizon: a f. the Poles of the same. And from the vertical point or pole of
the horizon, unto e g d. the half of the horizon, which is divided into equal
parts: and the quarters of the Circles drawn to it (which are the parts of
the vertical circle) which if they be wholly described, do concur and meet
in the opposite pole of the Horizon f. To these Circles (as is before mentioned)
is the Meridian added. Further, the letter e. does signify the North, d. the
South, b. the East, and g. the West. By which appears, that the horizon from
the Meridian Circle a e f d. and a c f. (by which line the Circle is
represented, passing by the vertical point and the true or Equinoctial
rising) is divided into four quarters, b c, b d. as the two quarters
oriental, g e, g d, the occidentall. In the oriental half of the Horizone e
b d, is ^ b. called the Northerly quarter, and b d. the Southerly. And in the
Westerly half e g d. of which e g. is the Northerly quarter, and g d. called
the Southerly.

The Circles of the Altitude.
THe Cyrcles of the altitudes be^ those, which are equidistantly described
about the top of places. As the vertical cyrcles do divide each of these
cyrcles into 360. degrees, even so do these divide a quarter of each vertical
cyrcle into 90. degrees. So that none of the altitude cyrcles is greater then
the horizone, nor lesser than that which is imagined and understood to be
described about the verticiall point. The especial office of these cyrcles
is, that as well the altitudes of the fixed stars as the Planets, may be
measured and known, as the fixed stars above the horizone: by which altitude
or elevation, the times; that is, the hours are known, and the places of the
stars, as may appear in tables made for that only purpose. Seeing then it
cannot be (and that through the roundnesse of heaven) but that any star given
or supposed unto the motion of the whole, is imagined by his altitude to be
distinguished in some Parallel: therefore is the altitude of the star or of any
other celestial point, the arc of the verticiall cyrcle, drawn by the Center
of the star, contained between the horizon and the star given, which (as before
written) is distinguished of the said parallel. The meeting and joining
together of these cyrcles with the verticals, is not moved, but at the motion
of the vertical point; which is none other, then the pole of the horizon, from
which all the parallels of the altitudes, are imagined to be described by
equal distaunces. But this (in mine opinion) is not to be ouerpassed; that
is, that any star, when it shall be equally distant from the meridian, either
has or may have the same altitude from the horizon, as to the eye is offered
in this figure following.

Where a b d c. is the Meridian: b e c. the greatest half of the Paralels of
the horizon: f g. the least: b. the North, and c. the South: a. the point of
the top: o. or q. the place of the star given, by which a o k. or a q n, the
vertical Circle passes, and the like does the Parallel p l k. The Arc k o.
or n q. is affirmed to be the altitude or elevation of the star from the
horizon, that ends at the parallel p o l r. and p o. is the distance of the
star from the noonestead a p d c. Now when the star (by the motion of the
principal) is drawn unto the point q. in which when the same shall be, it will
be equally distant from the Meridian Circle: wherefore through the equal
distance of the parallels, of which they be named, shall the Arc o k. be
equal to the Arc n q. Of this proceeds and is caused that in the hours
equidistant from the noonestead, as is the seventh hour before noone, and the
fifte hour after noone: likewise the eight and the fourth, the ninth and the
third, the tenth and second, and so of the rest. The sun obtains equal
eleuations above the horizon. This much avails in the composition or making
of dials, and gives great light and breuity to the same practice, as may
appear elsewhere: but the vertical Circles in the solyde Spheres and Globes,
by one quarter of the Circle, depending of the vertical point unto the horizon
(divided into 90. degrees) is declared.

The hour Circles.
IN that the whole work of dialles depends upon the knowledge of the hour
cyrcles; it is therefore requisite and necessary to entreat fully of the
cyrcles distinguishers of the hours, or at the least utter a brief instruction
of this. First you shall understand, that the Equatoure only, which (as before
taught) the sun being either in the beginning of Aries or Libra, is
regularly moved, as well in the right, as thwart Horizone; and thereof is always
the one half above the horizon, and the other half hid under the Horizon.
Through this his equal motion or regulare motions, is it judged worthy and
laudable: seeing by it the equal hours (as well by day as night) are attained
and had. And this conceive, that there are twelve greater cyrcles understood,
which cross the Equatoure at right angles, and pass by both the poles of the
first mouer, from which the said equatour, is distinguished into 24. equal
parts, which are called the distances or spaces of the hours, in that each be
distant from other by 15. degrees. For they divide the vertical, the Zodiac,
and the horizone into 24. parts, but unequally: at which Poles the nearer
parts to them are narower then those which be and draw nearer to the equatour.
And that these may clearer and perfecter be understood, imagine your self to
be under the equatoure; that is, in the right Sphere: in such a standing shall
the half meridian Cyrcle be the line of the twelfe hour, and the half
horizontal circle, the line of the sixth hour before noon: and the other half
of it, the line of the sixth hour at after noone. By which imagination firmly
conceived, may a man imagine between the half horizontall cyrcle, and the
half meridian cyrcle, to be other five half cyrcles firm and immovable,
which are not moved but as the vertical point is moved, being distant each
from other by an equal distance, as by 15. degrees of the equatour. The first
after the horizon, is applied to the seventh hour, and so forth of the rest.
And in like manner between the meridian half cyrcle, and the occidentall
horizone are other five cyrcles understood (according to the fourmer division)
and that which follows the meridian, shall be applied to the first hour,
that which next follows to the second hour, and so forth of the others.
Besides, imagine the sun to ascend from the horizon, and when he shall be come
unto the first half cyrcle from the horizon, then shall he shed a shadow
furthest westward, and being drawn up unto the second, shall make a shorter
shadow, and the shadow shall always (until the sun be come unto the half
noonesteede cyrcle, where he sheddeth or sends a shadow) plum down right to
the earth: but descending from the Noonsteede unto the West, the Sun causes
then the like shadows contrary.

Further conceive, that the Exe-tree of the world, in whose poles (as is before
taught) all the hour cyrcles meet together in one, does perform and express
the same, which the foresaid cyrcles taught: as by the sun dials the like is
readily understood and known.

Which this Figure further explaineth, where a b d e. represent the Meridian, a
i d. the right horizon, b i e. the Euatoure, d. the Northerly pole, and a. the
Southerly pole. In these two poles do all the hour Circles meet, as the same
here appears unto the eye, and the letter b. is the vertical point. The
distinguishers of ye hours by the numbers added are manifest. For a b d. is
the half Meridian circle, as already said: the letters a i d. do represent
as well the half Oriental as the Occidental circle of the horizon: a b d i. is
the half of the World above the Earth a e d the other half hidden. The eye of
the beholder, imagine to stand in the point i. and each of the hour Circles
above the horizon understood and taken or used twice together. To conclude this
sphere does offer and teach clearly and plainly all the former. So that the
pole articke with the rest of the cyrcles must be raised above the horizon, and
the half cyrcles of either sixth hour, severed or divided from the horizon. Of
this ensues, that the equatoure leaves the vertical point, and how much the
Northerly pole is raised above the horizon, so much does the equatour depart
from the vertical point (as before in the proper place is aptly demonstrated)
and how much one quarter of the half cyrcle of the sixth hour is raised
together with the Pols, so much the other quarter with the opposite pole is
depressed and stands under the horizon. Of this proceeds, that they cross
one the other in the East part, and that in one and the same point, the
Equinoctial, the horizontall cyrcle, and the half Cyrcle of the sixth hour of
the morning. These thoroughly learned and understood, and the sphere applied to
the material with any hour cyrcle, by which the harder or more curious
matters are made manifest and plain; you shall then readily see, that the sun
whiles he runs in the Northerly signs, does sooner come in the morning
unto the horizontal circle, then unto the half cyrcle of the sixth hour in the
morning: but the sun running in Southerly signs, he then causes the contrary;
that is, he attaineth or comes sooner unto the half cyrcle of the sixth hour
of the morning, than unto the horizon. And of this ensues, that the nights
here are longer, but the days there be the longer. The arc furthermore
contained in the Parallel cyrcle to the Equatoure, and passing by the suns
place (between the horizon and the half cyrcle of the sixth hour) is the
difference between the equinoctial day, and purposed day, whatsoever or how
much the same be, which is worthily to be noted. Besides these, it greatly
avails to understand in these three cyrcles, the equinoctial, the horizon,
and vertical cyrcle, that the upper faces ending at those cyrcles, the
equinoctial truly by the same receives and causes a division that the upper
face also is supplied and placed under, and receives and makes the like; that
is, equal. But the upper face which is placed and standing under the horizone,
does receive and make an unequal division, even the same that the horizone
is, which of the hour cyrcles is unequally divided. And the like also may be
gathered and judged of the division of the upper face of the verticiall cyrcle,
which (even as his cyrcle) is unequally divided. But that these (for breuity)
may readier and plainer appear, conceive this figure following demonstrated,
which without long circumstance of words, does evidently set forth that which
is set down before. The letters b h f. represent the Meridian Circle. g n c.
the Equatour, h n d. the twart Horison, b n f. the vertical circle: a. the
northerly Pole, e. the Southerlie pole, h a. the elevation of the pole above
the horizon, d ^. the submersion or standing under of the pole, right against
the point n. is the point in which (as before taught) the thwart horison h n d.
and the equatour c n g. and the half cyrcle of the sixth hour of the morning a
n e. together with the verticial cyrcle b f. do cross one the other in the
East. If you consider the deuisions of the half cyrcle hours in the Horizone
h n d. you shall see them to be together unequal, as nearer to the East point
n. but larger to the point h; that is, narower to the meridian cyrcle. And even
the same happens in the vertical cyrcle b n f. that is, that the half hour
cyrcles toward the Equinoctial Horizon from the Noonesteede by their largeness
increase, and from the Horizone toward the Noonst^ede in the same vertical
circle do decrease: and how much the more the Northerly Pole is elevated
above the Horizone, and the opposite depressed, so much the narower do the
aforesaid deuisions always go or come together. The now being thoroughly
learned and known, does bring and yield a great commodity in the making as well
of the horizontall as murall or wall dials: even as those dials which are made
on walls looking into the South, wheather they hang directly or thwarly,
according to their distinctions, from the division of the vertical cyrcle by
the half hour cyrcles: but the Horizontals are, from the divisions in the
horizon by those half cyrcles. These hitherto briefly touched for the
understanding and knowledge of the hour cyrcles shall at this time suffice.

The Circles dividing the twelve houses of Heaven.
NOw rests to entreat of the cyrcles distinguishers of the houses, and the
cyrcle of the positions: but first I will write of the distinguishers of the
houses. As there are six cyrcles that are imagined of the astronomers, by
which heaven is divided into twelve parts; among which are the Horizone and
meridian, whereby the whole is divided into four equal parts: and those
twelve parts, are (of the astronomers) called mansions or houses. But as
touching the constitution and forming of the celestial houses, there are sundry
old and late opinions, but whether opinion is the worthier, or to be the rather
allowed, is not here mente to be stood upon, nor aptely belongs to the
matter I entreat of, so well as in the proper place is agreeing: yet certain,
and especially the ancient, which were Campanus, a singular mathematician and
astronmer, divided the houses by the five cyrcles of heaven, meeting an^
joining at the Poles of the world; from which they divided the whole heaven
(together with the meridiane) into twelve equal houses. But for a better and
readier instruction, they formed and drew them in this manner. After the four
principal quarters or angles of heaven were drawn, and that the right
ascension of the middle of heaven was had, then were the parts of the Zodiac
diligently considered (that occupy as well the Easterly as the Westerly
Horizone) and then were the right ascentions sought of those parts: which
being done, the constitution and making of the two houses in the Easterly part
of heaven, was the right ascension of the mid heaven, deducted from the right
ascension of the Horizone: and the remayner, was distributed into three equal
parts. In the bound of the first part (in accompting from the Noonsteed toward
the East) was there imagined a cyrcle for the beginning of the eleventh house:
but in the bound of the second part (from the Noonesteede) was the beginning
of the twelfe house placed. After in the bound of the third part, from the
Noonsteed, was the beginning of the first house drawn: and the like was wrought
and done in searching for the 2. Westerly houses, as the ninth and the eight
house. For they deducted and subtracted the right ascension of ye west part,
from the right ascension of the mid heaven or noonestead, and the remainer or
rest (as before taught) was distributed into three equal parts. After that in
the end of the first portion (from the noonstead toward the West) the
ancients constituted or placed the bound of the ninth house, with the circle
coming from the poles of ye world: and in the bound of the second portion, was
the beginning of the eight house formed. These attained, the degrees and parts
of the degrees of the Zodiac answering to each arkes of the Equatoure, were
sought in the Tables of the right sphere: but the houses standing under, were
defined and made like to their opposites. And seeing this manner of forming the
houses is imperfect, therefore shall here no further be taught of the same.

But the other Astronomers, as Campanus and Gazulus, do otherwise handle this
matter, which with the 4. circles in the sections of the Horison and Meridian
meeting and ioining, divided (together with the Meridiane and Horison) the
whole heaven into twelve equal parts: which equality in the circle passing by
the Zenith, was the equinoctial rising considered, as the same may more
plainer and evidently appear in this figure here demonstrated.

In which a e. is the vertical circle, crossing a d e c. at right angles: f g
b. the equatour: d g c. the horison, d. and c. be the points in which the
distinguishers of the houses concur and meet; which also do make equal
distinctio^s in the vertical circle, and thereby be the houses noted and
divided.



But the later Astronomers, moved by the authority of the incomparable
Mathematician Regiomontanus, inur^ted and devised another order of the houses,
more agreeing to reason than the former. For they divided the quarters of the
equatour, comprehended between the horison and noonstead, into three equal
spaces, and by each section they imagined great circles, joining in the
sections of the Meridian and horison, as the former, Although all these are
plainer and more evidently taught and known in the material Sphere, yet we
thought good to speak somewhat (as our possibility serves) in plain form.

Wherefore grant that a f c. is the Meridian, a. the Top, n. the Northerly
pole: k. the Southerly pole, b. and c. the points of the sections of the
horison and Meridian, where the distinguishers of the houses concur and meet,
which also are imagined by the equal distinctions of the equatour e i l. as to
the eye sufficiently appears, that b i c. is the horison circle, d. the
easterly point or rising of the equatour, from which the first house takes his
beginning.

The Circle of position.
AL these Circles being set down, the Astronomers notwithstanding do write of
another Circle, whose use and office serves to great purpose, for the Art of
directing and searching other more secret matters in Astronomy, and is thereof
called the circle of Position, which passes at al times by the former sections
of the meridian and Horizone, and by the Center of the star, or of any other
purposed point in heaven, like to the soresaid cyrcles, whether that star be
above the earth, or under the earth. That this may clearly appear, mark and
consider this figure here expressed, where the letter c. represents the top
point, d. the Northerly Pole, e. the opposite pole, a g b f. the cyrcle of the
position passing by the sections of the horizon and meridian, b c d e. the
meridian a b. the Horizone, g f. the Centers of the stars (of which the one is
in g. above the earth, and the other under the earth in the point f.) And many
other cyrcles besides all these, which hitherto have been described, may be
invented and imagined in the sphere, for the necessity of the workings.

The difinitions, names, and offices of the four lesser Circles.
THe Parallels are lesser cyrcles, which from either of the greater circles
drawn thwartly on the sphere, do equally difand be distant from the Equatoure
or Zodiac toward their poles: so y^ they do not divide the Sphere into
equal half Spheres, but into unequal portions. For seeing the sphere from
the middle streacheth or draws by little and little straighter and narower
toward the furthest and highest tops: even so must the parallels which are
distant from the middle and greatest, and that by equal spaces on each side
agreeing, draw of necessity narrower, and so much the narower, as they nearer
approach unto the poles. As writes Theodosius in the sixte proposition of his
first Book of the sphere. And the same Author in the 14. proposition of his
first Book of the sphere, and in the sixth, of his second Book writes, that
all the parallels have the same poles agreeing with the greater cyrcles unto
which the parallels are.

And certain of the Paralels are applied unto the plain of the Equatoure,
others unto the plain of the eccliptick. These do as well the fixed stars,
as the planets placed without the ecclipticke, and drawn about the Exe-tree
stretched b^ the poles of the ecclipticke and Center of the world discribe:
yet do all their centers consist in the Exetree of the Zodiac, and the middle
cyrcle of them, and the greatest is the ecclipticke. These also do the same
stars, and the verticiall or top points of each places, or any other applied
unto the plain of the equatour, drawn as it were by the first mouer about the
Exetree and poles of the world define. And the Centers of these be in the
Exetree of the world or equatoure, but the middle and greatest of these, is
the equatour.

It is manifest by that before taught, that the sun in every day does gain
toward the East (against the daily motion) one degree of the Zodiac: and of
this happens, that he in each day through the thwartnesse of the Zodiac
describes a certain new cyrcle in heaven, and in the next day another, and
so forth by order, as the like may be compared by a small cord, winded close
about a Nun or top, beginning from the foot upward, even so the sun beginning
to turn again at the first degree of Capricorn, does every day after change
a new Parallel, until he become back unto the first degree of Cancer, and by
and by after returned from Cancer, he in the like order goes unto the
Capricorn: so that in the next day following, the Sun rises not with the same
Parallel above the Horizone that he did in the morning before, nor shall not
run the next morrow in that Parallel that he did in this day. And each of
these Parallelles (even as the greater cyrcles) contain 360. degrees, which
be so much lesser, then the degrees of the greater cyrcles, and occupy or
comprehend so much the lesser space in heaven, as answers to the upper face of
the earth, as by how much the more from the compass and largeness of the
greatest cyrcle they lack, by reason of the distance. And although they yield
and be less in the quantity, yet unto the degrees of the greatest cyrcles be
they agreeable and like, as (writes Theodosius) in the 14. proposition of his
second book of the sphere.

These lesser cyrcles, do offer and teach sundry vtilities. First the
Parallels, of which on this side and beyond the Equatour, are 182, that the sun
yearly by his daily motion describes: and do express the causes of the
continual equallity of the days in the right Sphere, and of the vnequalnesse
in the thwart or bowing sphere, and where the day spaces are increased and
lengthened, there the night spaces be lessened and decreased: and being
otherwise they show the contrary.

In the second, the Parallels (which the verticial points form) when they
express the bounds of the latitudes of places, then are they standing under,
by which their longitudes or distances from the West are accounted.

In the third, the Parallels (which either the Planets or the fixed stars
describe) referred unto the Equatour, do express the bounds of their drawings
or motions from the equatour. The others or rest, which applied unto the
ecclipticke described, do show the bounds of the latitudes* and that for how
long time they tarry above the earth, or otherwise hid within the earth, and
under the Horizone, does either show.

In the fourth, the greatest and chiefest vtilities of the Parallels are, that
which on the habitable earth the practisioners sever by such distances, as by
how much ye greatest artificial days are by a quarter of an hour longer
increased and extended. For they distinguish the habitable earth (and that by
observation) into certain necessary spaces, and do iudicate the regular
increasings of the days, and what is common to each dwelling under those
parallels, in as much as the quantities, the increasings and deminishings of the
days and nights, the risings and settings of the stars, the Noonsteede
shadows, and the nature of the Winter and Summer but those which are contrary,
as that there is a difference and diversity of the dwelling places being under
diverse Parallelles, they indeed be necessary unto the distribution and
description of the clymate.

Although the number of these cyrcles be so infinite, as is the infinite
variety of the stars and vertical points: yet are there four usually
rehearsed in these Elements or introduction, that be especially noted and
described by peculiar names: and for the same cause (as seems to me) in that
they divide the whole Globe of heaven and earth into five Zones, and these
applied unto the plain or flat of the equatour.

The tropicke of Cancer, or summer tropicke.
The tropicke of Capricorn, or winter tropicke.
The articke or Northerly Pole.
The antarticke, or Southerly Pole.
Which Circles are called the Tropickes.
THe Sun (according to the former words) through the motion of the first mouer
is in 24 hours, drawn once about: and for that he is carried in the thwart
Cyrcle, and in the same by his proper motion cha^geth daily unto other places
of the Zodiac, it must needs ensue, that he describes in each day a new
parallel. And those does the sun repeat in the parts of the Zodiac, which be
equidistant from the solsticiall points; in such wise, that they be in the
whole 182. cyrcles. And these do they call the cyrcles of the natural days, of
which the uttermost and furthest that include the suns way, are named the
Tropicks, which is (in English) the sun bounds, in that the sun never passes
them, neither toward the North nor toward the South: but after his touching of
each, he returns again. The one of these called the tropicke of Cancer, and
the other the tropicke of Capricorn.

Why these are called the Tropickes.
THey are named the Tropicks, of the Greek word Tropikoi, which is in English,
the turnings again; in that when the Sun is digressed from the Equatoure and
come unto those, he turns back again. Also the Tropicke cyrcles touch the
Zodiac, at the beginnings of Cancer and Capricorn, of which the one is called
the Tropicke of Cancer, and the other of Capricorn, the one being Northerly,
and the other Southerly. And as to our dwelling, the one is called the summer
Circle, and the other the Winter. So that when the sun touches any of these,
he turns again, and is carried toward the other. As by this example further
appears, where all that season and time (from the twelfth day of December
unto the eleventh day of June) a man may perceive the Sun every day arising
higher and higher: and when he is at the highest over our heads, that day does
he by his course describe the summer Tropicke: from which again turning, the
sun every day after draws lower and lower from our vertical point, until
he be come again unto the lowest. In which twelfe day of December (not going
any further toward the South, but being come unto the beginning of Capricorn)
he describes the winter Tropicke.

The Tropicke of Cancer is a lesser Circle, which the sun describes at the
entering into the beginning thereof, and is drawn by the daily motion, whose
plain or flat passes not by the center of the earth: and it is one of the
natural Circles which is outermost, described of the sun toward the North, and
drawn by the beginning of Cancer. And it has also his name of the standing,
in that the same is the bound of the suns journey or course toward the North,
and the nighest coming unto us: unto which being brought, he turns back,
and directs his course into the South; of which that place is called Trope.
It is continually distant from the Equatour, by the quantity of the suns
greatest declination, which at this day is of 23. degrees, 28. minutes, and two
fifts almost: and it encloseth also the suns way, and does besides, with the
other 3. Parallels, divide the Zones of heaven and earth. Further, this is
named the cyrcle of the summer solstice, by the same reason, in that it is
drawn by the point of the summer solstice. And the Northerly Tropicke in that
it is the Northerly part of the world. And the summer cyrcle, for that the Sun
in the summer falls into this cyrcle. Also this cyrcle in all the Northerly
tract is on this wise, that the greater part or portion is above the Horizone,
and the lesser part (as to us) under the Horizon: so that the sun running in
that cyrcle, causes the longest day of summer. And whiles the sun describes
these cyrcles, the days be longer then the nights. For the longest day
increases from minute to minute, from hour to hour, and from the latitude of
one degree, unto the latitude of 66. degrees, and 30. minutes. In which the day
artificial is of 24. hours, and is thereof called a whole day. For in the
latitudes following, and beyond, he increases into many whole days.

A like definition has Proelus, where he writes that the summer Tropicke, is
the furthest cyrcle Northwarde that the sun describes: into which when the sun
is come, he then makes his summer turn, and causes also at that time the
longest day and shortest night of the year: from which turning back, he goes
again toward the contrary coast of the world: so that of the same Proclus it
is called a Tropicke (which is in English) a returning cyrcle. For it is
evident to all men, that after the sun begins to turn, he may in short
time after, or at the least within 5. days, but especially at Noone in every
week, be well perceived to descend and go lower and lower, until he become
unto the Tropicke of Capricorn or the winter cyrcle: where he turns again,
as you may plainly learn and understand by the former description of that
cyrcle.

The Tropicke of Capricorn is a lesser cyrcle, and one of the natural
cyrcles, which is by the like space distaunt from the Equatoure into the South,
and described of the sun in the beginning of Capricorn, as being uttermost
toward the South (which is the bound of the suns greatest departure from us,
and of his longest digression unto the South) that he defines and makes. This
cyrcle also is called the winter Solstice, and winter Tropicke; in that when
the sun comes into this cyrcle, it is presently winter: that is, the shortest
day of the year. Also the less^^ portion of this cyrcle is to us above the
horizone, and the greater beneath or under the Horizon. Besides the suns
journey ends at the south, and crosses or deuideth both the burning and
temperate Southerly Zone.



The Brumall or winter tropicke (as writes Proclus) that is furthest toward
the South, of all those which the sun describes by his drawing about of the
first moouer: into which when the sun falls, he causes his winterly
return: so that the longest night of the year and shortest day, is at that
time procured. From which he goes no further toward the South, but returns
unto the contrary quarter of the world: and hereof this Circle is called a
Tropicke, or circle of return. Now these three are principally noted: the
equatour, and the two Tropickes, for the course of the sun. That the
instructions of the two Tropicks before spoken of, may more perfectly be
understood, conceive this Figure here demonstrated: In which a h b e. is the
meridian, a d b. the right Horizone d. the Center of the principal a. the
Northerly Pole, b. the Southerly Pole, g d c. the cyrcle of the Zodiac, h d
e. the Equatour, which here is meant to be abatingly described, when the sun
shall be in the center of the earth, or in the true section of the Equatoure
and Zodiac, as in the letter d. from which point when the sun returns toward
the Northerly pole a. under the cyrcle g d c. he then describes in each day by
the motion of the first mouer each Parallels, until he be come in the
Meridiane unto the point g, from which he can not further ascend toward our
Zenith in the meridian. Of which in the same day, the sun describes g f. the
parallel to the equatour, which is called the Tropicke of Cancer, in that the
sun begins from this place to approach or draw nearer to the Equatoure; unto
which when the sun shall come, he then descends unto the nether half
sphere, in the half cyrcle d c. He being come again unto the point c, does
from his center by the motion of the principal or first mouer in the Poles of
the world, describe the Parallel c i. that is, the tropicke of Capricorn.

The Polare cyrcles, are two of the lesser cyrcles near to the Poles of the
world, being alike equal distant to the equatour which upon the Poles of the
equatour described are drawn by the Poles of the Zodiac. And these are named
the Polare Cyrcles, in that they be near to the Poles: of which, that near
to the Pole articke, is called the arcticke cyrcle, of the greater or lesser
Bear drawn in it, or for that this cyrcle is described about the pole
articke: the other that is right against* is named the antarticke Cyrcle, in
that it is drawn about the Antarticke Pole.

Or thus, the arcticke is a lesser cyrcle, which the Northerly pole of the
Zodiac is so far distant from the Pole articke of the world, as is the suns
greatest declination: or as Proclus writes, that the fore foot of the greater
Bear by the daily motion forms. The same cyrcle (after the mind of the
learned) is distant from the equatour 66. degrees, and 30. minutes almost. To
whom this altitude is higher by 23. degrees, and almost 29. minutes. To those
parts of the earth is the pole arcticke extaunt in sight, and continually
appears. It also secludeth and parts the intemperate Northerly Zone, from
the next temperate Zone: where the Solsticiall Tropicke is made the Northerly
cyrcle, and in that place under this altitude of the pole 66. degrees, and 31.
minutes: there all the stars and images contained from the solsticiall Tropicke
unto the Pole are seen: as both the Bears, the Dragon, Cepheus, Cassiopia,
Perseus, Auriga or the Carter, whole Boots (except from the knees downward)
the crown Hercules (except the head and right arm) the Harp, the Swan, the
great Horse Andromeda (except the left Cubit) the half of the Northerly Fish
almost, Deltoton, a part of the back of Taurus, the neck and Northerly Horn,
a great part of Gemini, and the head and neck of Leo.

And not unlike to the former, does Proclus describe them: where he writes,
that the Northerly cyrcle is the same, which of al those that to us continually
be seen or appear, is for truth the greatest; and that also touches the
Horizone at one only point, being wholly described above the earth. And the
stars that are enclosed within this cyrcle, do neither rise nor set, but are
continually seen all the night drawn about the Pole.

The South or antarticke cyrcle, is thus defined of him, that the same is equal
and equidistant to the Northerly or articke cyrcle, and touches the Horizon at
one point. The whole of this cyrcle is hidden under our Horizone, so that all
the stars placed and drawn in it, abide ever out of sight to us.

The like description that the antarticke Parallel is a lesser Cyrcle, which
the Southerly Pole of the Zodiac draws about as it were by the daily
motion, does describe about the Southerly top of the world, and is by a like
space distaunt from the Equatoure and the antarticke pole of the world, as the
articke is from his opposite. And does separate or divide the intemperate
Southerly Zone from the next temperate Zone.

Further it is manifest, that the distance of the Poles of the ecclipticke from
the poles of the world, do agree with the greatest bowing or declination of
the ecclipticke or the sun: In that the poles from their cyrcles, be always
distant a quarter of the cyrcle, and the colure of the solstices, is here taken
for that which comprehends either Pole. And when the quarters standing
between the poles, and the cyrcles of the poles, be in themselves, or between
one the other equal, as the arc of the same cyrcle, then the middle arc
common to both, which (as exempted) goes between the poles of the world and
the ecclipticke, and so parts and leaves them equal. For the one half of
the other equal arks, is from the poles of the ecclipticke unto the poles of
the world, and the other, is from the furthest point of the ecclipticke unto
the equatour. By which it appears, that so much is the distance of the poles
of the Ecclipticke from the poles of the world, as is the suns greatest
declination, being 23. degrees, and 28. minutes, and two fiftes almost. Or
thus, that the pole of the Zodiac is far distant from the pole of the world,
as is the greatest declination af the sun from the Equinoctial cyrcle: and by
the equidistance also on each side of the arctick cyrcle from the Pole of the
world, that that part of the Colure comprehended between the first point of
Cancer and the articke cyrcle, is almost double so much unto the greatest
declination of the sun.

And if cyrcumspectly you consider the manner of the motions, you shall readily
perceive that those cyrcles which ever more be of like largeness, increase and
decrease together with the twoe Tropicke cyrcles, according to the increase or
decrease of the suns declination. As appears by the letter n. in the foresaid
figure, that represents the Northerly pole of the ecclipticke or Zodiac,
moved from the letter n. into o. by the motion of the first moouer, and
returning again into the point n, shall be moved the cyrcle describing n o.
being distant from the Northerly pole a. as much as is the suns greatest
declination h g. as hereafter by demonstration shall plainer appear. And this
cyrcle named the arcticke, in that it is described by the arcticke of the
Zodiac. The like is described from the point r. being the pole antarcticke,
by the motion from r. unto s. and returning again unto r. so that the
antarcticke cyrcle r s. is equal to his opposite, and equidistaunt to the
Equatoure.

This probation, that the distaunce of the Poles of the world and Zodiac, is
equal to the suns greatest declination, does require before hand, these three
propositions. The first that the quarters of each cyrcle any where taken be in
themselves or between one another equal. The second, that the poles by a
quarter; that is, by 90. degrees, be distant from their proper cyrcle. The
third, that the equals deducted from their equalles, then do the equalles rest.

As for example, if you borowe two fourthes in one and the same Colure cyrcle,
that is the Solsticiall of the same part, where it passes by the beginning of
Capricorn, and is the like from the pole of the world unto the Equinoctial,
and that other, is that which is from the Pole of the Zodiac unto the Zodiac
or ecclipticke: and of this I thus reason, that when the equals be deducted or
abated from the equals, the remainer shall be equal. Therefore are the
foresaid quarters equal, in that they be in the same cyrcle, and that from
either is the equal or common arc deducted; that is, the same which is
contained between the Equinoctial and the pole of the Zodiac, which arc
does contain 66. degrees, and 31. minutes almost. So that the arks, resting
or remaining of these quarters be equal; that is, the distance of the poles of
the Zodiac, and the Equinoctial, is equal to the suns greatest declination.
For if 66. degrees, and 31. minutes be deducted from either quarter, the
remainer then shall be 23 degrees, and 31 minutes: which is the distance between
the foresaid poles and the greatest declination of the sun.

This other example demonstrateth, that the suns greatest declination and the
distance of the poles of the zodiac or ecclipticke from the poles of the
world, is equal and of like largenes, and that what soever happens to the
distances of the said Poles. For as this increases or decreaseth, the like
does that decrease or increase. Of this it is manifest, that the two foresaid
articke cyrcles, is now in our time lesser through the decreasing of the suns
greatest declination, and that the Tropickes are greater then they were in
Ptholomies time.

The example here follows, where i f. represents the Exe tree of the world,
e a k. the Exe-tree of the Zodiac, c l m n. the Meridian or Colure of the
Solsticis, c m. the Equatour, b l. the Tropicke of Cancer, d n. the Tropicke of
Capricorn, I. the Pole articke, F. the Antarticke and opposite pole to it, k.
the pole of the Zodiac, and e. his opposite, b c. the greatest declination of
the Sun, which in our time the practisioners have found to be of 23.
degrees, 28. minutes, and 30. seconds: which in Ptholomies time was of 23.
degrees, 51. minutes, and 20. secondes. The letters e g. and h k. be the two
articke cyrcles. The arc b c. is equal to the arc i k. in such wise, that it
may plainly appear that b h k. and c i k. be the two quarters of one and the
same cyrcle, f c k m. All the quarters of the cyrcle be a like equal one to
the other, c b i. and b i k. be the two quarters, in one and the same
solsticial Colure cyrcle. So that c b i. is equal to that b i k. and the ark b
i. is to both the quarters equal or common. If then the equalles be from the
equals deducted, the remainer shall be equal, as above taught. For from the
said equal quarters, c b i. and b i k. deduct the equal, that is b h i. or
the common. And the remaining arks, of the said equal quarters, shall be in
themselves equal, that is, c b. shall be equal to the arc i k. as agrees
to be wrought.

The offices or vtilities of the four lesser Cyrcles.
1 THe office of the Solsticiall Tropicke: (after the Greeks) is to define the
longest summer day: and the winter Tropicke, to determine the shortest winter
day and longest night. For Proclus to find the longest day, did divide the
summer solstice into 8. equal parts: of which so divided, he affirmed three
parts to be continually hid under the horizon, and five above. The truth of
which is known, if the Sphere be rectified for the latitude of 41. degrees,
where by this division the longest day contains 15 hours and the night but 9.
hours.

2 Many and notable offices do the Tropicke cyrcles offer, as well unto the
composition of dialles, as unto the preparing many other Instruments in
Astronomy.

3 They declare the places of the Ecclipticke, in which the suns solstices are
caused: whereof the longest or shortest days by them are known. Or thus, they
declare in every standing of the sphere, the longest and shortest day, with
their quantity.

4 They include the Suns way, in that they be as the bounds including the
Region in heaven, in which the sun is continually moved.

5 They declare the suns greatest declination, as before has been often taught.

6 They separate in heaven, the burning Zone, from the two temperate Zones.

But of the Polare cyrcles, these be the chiefest and especialest vtilities.

1 They iudicate or show the Poles* of the Zodiac, and how far they be
distaunt from the Poles of the world.

2 They enclose those stars which ever appear above our Horizone, and those in
like manner right against being always hid unto us. But for that every several
Climate (has disagreeing from other Climates these cyrcles) their distance
therefore cannot be certain from the other Parallel cyrcles, saving for one
Region certain, as neither their quantities, nor their order. For in that
place, where the altitude of the pole is lesser then 66. degrees and a half,
these cyrcles there are lesser then the Tropicks, and in order are between
them and the poles, and is from the pole continually distant by so many
degrees, as the pole in that country is raised above the Horizon. So that in
the same place, the Pole raised more then 66. degrees and a half. The Tropicke
then is above the horizone, as the like may be understood by that place called
Wardehouse. So that in the same Climate, the arcticke cyrcle is greater then
the Tropicke of Cancer, as witnesses the learned Stoeflerus, Iustingensis.

3 They distinguish (after the mind of the Greeks) the cold Zones, from the
temperate. Which Ferio denies, affirming that the arctick and antarcticke
cyrcles, keeping no uniformity to all countries and being uncertain and
variable bounds, can limit any certain place. For the temperate Zones are
places certain, the arcticke and antarcticke cyrcles be changeable limits,
therefore cannot they be as bounds of the temperate Zones: yet does he better
allow and agree unto that, that the Tropickes be bounds of the temperate
zones. So that changeable limits (by this argument) cannot be appointed as
bounds to unchangeable places.

4 They divide together with the Tropicks, all heaven into five parts or
Regions, which they call zones.

The descriptions, names, qualities, and vtilities of the Zones.
THe four lesser cyrcles called Parallels (that were before described, do
divide the whole heaven toward the Poles into five spaces: which that heaven
might be compassed about with these larger swathes, the astronomers of the
same called them Zones, or otherwise of the Latins Gerdils. The Cosmographers
by the same imagination applied, do also dispose and distribute the whole
Globe of the earth into five rooms or spaces, lying directly under, and
agreeable in proportion to them in heaven.

Wherefore a zone (after the mind of the Greeks) is a portion, tract, or
space of heaven, or earth, between the two Parallels or lesser cyrcles, being
nighest equidistant, or contained between the room equidistaunt and Pole of
the world, and gyrdeth or compasses as it were the heaven or earth. Or thus, a
zone is a space of earth like to the two Parallels or lesser cyrcles above,
which the astronomers imagine to run on the upper face of the sphere. And as
the whole portion included by the two Tropicks called the burning zone, does
compass heaven as a gyrdle: even so imagine the room of the earth, lying
right under the Tropicks.

The zones have sundry names, for of the Greeks they be called zone, and of
the Latins by a borrowed word Zona, as may appear by Julius Firmicus,
Macrobius, Virgilius, Ouide, and other Latins. That heaven or earth is
imagined to be gyrded about with these. Martianus names them swathes, Tully
and Macrobius names them by the like reason gyrdles. Ouide names them
plagues; that is, rooms or spaces.

And how many zones they be, may easily appear, in that the astrologians,
Geographers, Physicians and Poets, do divide as well the heaven as earth into
sieve rooms or spaces, by the four Parallels or lesser cyrcles: of which there
be two manner of zones: the celestial and the earthly.

The celestial, are the cause of the earthly, in that the earthly lie directly
under them. And of the zones, the celestial be they which the astronomers by
imagination describe and distribute in the hollow of heaven: the earthly, be
they which lie perpendicularly under. And both also be temperate, and
intemperate zones.

The celestial zones, in that they have nothing of the elementary qualities,
therefore do they not by heat burn and scorch, nor by cold make stiff: nor
cause a temperate mixture of qualities or temperatnesse, yet are they noted and
descerned by the names of the qualities; as the earthly zones, which being the
author of the sun, and fountain both of light and heat, and running
continually in the middle zone of heaven is diversely felt, according to the
manner of the distance.

Or thus, there are no qualities formally attributed to the celestial zones,
but to them only vertually, which is on this wise to be understood, as that
the celestial zones of themselves be neither cold, hot, nor temperate, but are
so called through the suns declination from the equatour, as well into the
North, as into the South quarter of the world: In the which declination, is the
like matter felt, as well in the suns right sending down of beams, as in the
thwart proiection of the^ on the upper face of the earth, which diversely
changes the heat (...).

The scorching or intemperate middle Zone (which through the heat and burning
beams, the sun there causes, when he is over the head or in the Noonesteed
place) is contained between the bounds of the suns journey which the two
Tropicks make, and includes 47. degrees of heaven. For the two Tropicks are on
either side the equatoure, so that it uses the middle room in the burning
zone, from which the sun toward the North and South, never declineth above 23.
degrees, and 29. minutes. By which appears, that it is there as hot in the
middle of winter, as it is in Spain in the middle of summer: and therefore not
disagreeing to that which the ancient Cosmographers wrote, that the countries
lying under this space, or rather under the equatour, is uninhabited through the
burning heat: and of them for this cause, named the burning or scorching zone.
But of later years it is found contrary, in that at Molucca, Good-hope,
Calicute, and Samatra, rich drugges, and other fine spices have been there
gotten by the Spantards and Portingals, and yearly haunted by them, as at this
day the same is thoroughly known to many: which also confess that the places
under the Equinoctial, and the rich City Calecute, being by the sea coast of
Inde, standing between the equatour and our Tropicke of Cancer, and unto the
other Tropicke South under the Burning zone, that the places is habitable and
peopled, although very cumbersome with extremity of heat. Also that space on
earth contains 685. German miles, or 23500. furlongs.

Ptholomie and Auicen affirm, that the places between the equatour and summer
Tropicke is habitable, and that many Cities be there, although the sun in
those places through his direct beams (and especially under the equatour) does
by the over much heat and continual heat, burn and mightily scorch. The like
do sundry others affirm, which write, that those places is convenient for the
life of creatures, in that under the equatour there be many waters, which
although resolved and run through the heat, yet do they breath and send
upward cold vapors, which the sun continually maintains in drawing up
through his vehement heat, and sending down mighty showers of rain: which
vapors in the night (through the suns furthest distance under the earth, and
especially at midnight) cause a mighty cold and chilling air: which the sun
after his rising, until he be somewhat ascended above the earth cannot
suddenly overcome and put away that cold impression of the air. So that the
people there inhabiting, be monstrous of form, and have rude wits, wondrous
wild and terible conditions, like to wild and furious beasts.

The countries which lie under the Southerly Parallels, as those which are
described by the Equinoctial line, unto the summer Tropicke, where the sun is
drawn and runs over the tops of them: there through the abundance of
vapors, rain, and night cold, is the suns heat repressed, mitigated, and
dulled; so that the heads of the Ethiopians or Moors be little, having but
little and withered brains, their bodies short, having thick crisped hair on
their heads, gross and dull of senses, black scorched or burned bodies,
withred or wrinckled faces, crooked of stature, being in a manner hot by nature,
and cruel conditions, through the mightiness of heat in those places. And the
constitution also of the air is there such, that al living and cresent things
on that earth, are found and known to agree with them. Further it is to be
noted and understood, that any there travailing from the Northerly places, the
further they go toward the South, so much the stronger heat or burning they
shall be annoyed with.

The two temperate zones be next adioining to the burning zone, the one on the
Northerly, and the other on the Southerly side of it. And the beginnings of
either be the hotter, the ends colder, the middle of them exquisitly
temperate: in the other parts does the heat either so much the more exceed, or
the bitter cold overcomes and rules, as how much the nearer they approach
or come unto the burning Zone, or otherwise unto either of the extreme Zones,
which continually cause a bitter and an extreme cold.

The cause of this diversity, is through the suns beams, for the sun
continually moving in the middle journey of heaven (described between the two
Tropicks) and digressing or going beyond the prefixed bounds of nature, does
not show his beams unto diverse parts of the earth in one manner, but unto the
places right under, and in the burning zone the tractes or countries contained
under them, does he send down right beams, which stretches to the upper face
of the earth at right angles. And unto the countries of either temperate zone,
does the sun send down thwart or slope beams. And unto the places under
either cold zone, does he streach long beams on the plain of the earth, even
the like as being near to the Horizone, which neither reach unto the upper
face of the earth, nor cause angles, but keep an equal distance unto it, do
streach forth infinitely.

But those beams of the sun do neither give light, nor heat, but turn
backward: in that the property of the reflection which of the beam against a
solider resistance, prohibiting or letting the penetration, is a certain
repercussion and reuerberation) that increases and doubleth the force of the
direct beam, and by the reflexed beam to it adjoined, or at the least by his
virtue applied and communicated.

Seeing this reflection is the especiallest cause of the heat and that the
angles of the reflections falling do continually make or be equal in the
angles: for that cause do they much unlike increase the force of the direct
beams, and their effects do notably vary. So that in the burning zone, the
reflection stretches unto right angles, seeing the straight or right beams are
carried and led into themselves, in such sort that as direct and re^lexen, they
meet and be mixed, and in this, doubling as it were the virtue and force of
the direct beams, is on such wise increased, that it kindles, burns, and
consumes.

And in either temperate zone, is the reflection caused at right angles in that
the sun beams do thwartly reach to the upper face of the earth, and are
turned and extended backward unto thwart angles, which how much the nearer and
liker they be to the right, so much the nearer do they join either beams
together: by which they proceed and come into the nearer parts of the burning
zone. But so much the blunter as they streach, so much the longer do they
separate either beams, as how much the more they are extended unto the
extreme or outmost bounds. And for this cause do they more heat then the fore
parts of the temperate zone, whose heat is a little gentler or milder then the
heat of the burning zone, and the beams a little further of: whose cold
notwithstanding differs somewhat from the extreme or outmost intemperate
zones.

And those which streach and fall into the middle region of either temperate
zone, do cause a mean between the right and very sharp angles, and yet not
directly matched or joined, nor do they by so near a space communicate their
virtue, as in the beginning of it* neither by so large a distance as in the
end, but in the middle in a manner: So that they cause and increase a temperate
heat in the same zone.

But in the extreme or cold Zones, is no reflection of beams caused, for
those beams equally distant from the earth are streached forth infinitely: and
for that cause do those neither give light nor move or procure heat, neither
do those zones at any time warm, either perfectly clear, or appear bright:
but that they continually be foggy, misty, dark, and bitter or extreme cold,
through the continual mists, which more and more increase, especially toward
the northerly pole. And yet many affirm, a reasonable dwelling in those
places, yea and under the Northerly pole, but far colder and bitterer dwelling,
through the far being from the way of the sun, and beholding of the
comfortabler stars. For the Sun through his over far distance, cannot by
his presence above the earth comfort and heat.

This now is the perfect cause of the diverse and universal coustitutions of
the air and chief qualities in each zones: so that of the particular
constitutions be other causes. But to return unto the temperate Zones, the
latitude of either temperate Zone is of 43. degrees almost, of German miles
645. and of furlongs 21500. So that the Boreallor Northerly zone beginning from
the Tropic of Cancer, ends at the arcticke cyrcle, or at the degree of
latitude 66. and 31. minutes. And the Southerly from the Tropicke of
Capricorn, is extended or reaches unto the antarcticke cyrcle, or the degree
of the Southerly latitude 66. and 32. minutes.

The intemperate cold zones that reach from either temperate unto the poles of
the world, do move continual cold and frosts. So that the beams of the
sun, although they pearse and enter through, yet seeing they extend not
backward, nor through the reflection or streaching backward be strengthened and
sharpened, therefore can they not so heat, that by the thawing they dissolve
the earth and yse, nor put away or void the mist. Now the intemperate
Northerly zone, beginning from the 66. degree and 31. minutes of the Northerly
latitude, ends at the Pole arcticke: and the intemperate southerly zone,
begun from the same bound of the Southerly latitude, extends and ends at
the pole antarcticke.

Those people which dwell under the burning zone, be named of the Greeks
Amphiskioi Amphiscij, in that the Noone shadows, at diverse times of the year,
go or be cast to them twoe ways, as toward the South or North. And twice also
in the year runs the sun right over their heads (as is demonstrated in the
second Theorme of Euclide) so that at Noone it comes to pass, that they have
almost no shadow: for the sun being direct or in right line over their heads
at Noone, he then sends down right Beams, which are cast or streached to
the plain of the earth at right angles: so that their shadow falls and is
right under the feet, and not on any side of them. So that the sun in any
other time of the year being without the vertical points, the shadows at
Noone are one whiles cast into the South, and another whiles into the North
unto them: even as the sun digressing from their tops or Noonsteed is either
carried into the North, or otherwise declineth into the South.

This sort of people which be under either temperate zone, are called of the
Greek Cosmographers Eteroskioi, Heteroscij, in that they have a single
shadow. For with them the Nooneshadowes continually run or go toward one
quarter only. So that to them dwelling Northward the Noon shadow streacheth
towarth the arcticke or Northerly quarter. By which it appears that the sun
never ascends over their heads, but continually casts or streacheth his
beams thwartly into those contries, which always form their thwart angles
with the plain of the earth, or else fall a-slope upon the earth.

Those people which possess, and dwell under either intemperate or cold zones,
are named of the Greek writers Periskioi, Periscij: for that their shadows in
one artificial day are carried and run round, as it were about them on the
plain of the earth: so that the sun unto those places casts or sends not
straight, thwart, or sloape, but long beams running on the horizone, which as
they streach along infinitely; even so the shadows going and lying on the flat
of the earth, and extended along, do increase infinitely. And these zones also
under the poles, extend to that proper place, where the Tropicke cyrcles, and
the Arctick cyrcles be all one. Strabo likewise writes, that the cold zone
reaches to that place, where the Tropic is the arcticke cyrcle; that is,
where this first Zone ends, and the temperate begins: the Pole being 66.
degrees, and a half above the horizon: so that this pole must be from the
top of their heads in that place 23. degrees, and a half.

Further, these people that have their shadows running round about them,
dwell within the Polare cyrcles: In that all people whose Zenith is within 23.
degrees and a half of any of both the Poles, have their shadows compassing
about them, but those people (as before written) dwelling nearer under the
Pole, the longer is their day, and by that reason do the shadows run the
oftener about them. For where the day is of 24. hours long, the shadow does run
but once about, yet where the day is of half a year long, the shadows do
run 183. times about.

Here conceive that there be five zones on earth, answering to the five
celestial zones, both in the heat, temperatnesse, and cold: which for a
plainer understanding, use this figure here following demonstrated. Where the
Orb or cyrcle described on the plain of the earth, is distributed by the two
unknown diameters into four equal parts: as to the outward points of the one
diameter, note the letters a b. To the points of the other diameter, add the
letters c d. The letter c. the Northerly Pole, and the letter d. representing
the Southerly pole. The arc of the Orb a c. divide after the common manner
into 90. parts or degrees, the number (as the use is) noted by 5. 10. 15. 20.
25. etc. And beginning to reckon at the letter a. in ascending by the number 5.
unto the letter c. being the Northerly pole.

Further from the a. toward c. which demonstrateth the suns greatest
declination, that contains in our time 23. degrees, and 28. scruples, to the
end of the supputation add the letter e. And by the office or use of the
compass, comprehend the arc a e. And by the foot also staying on a. reach
with the other foot of the compass opened toward d. the Southerly Pole, to
which add the letter g. After set (the compass not yet varied) one foot on
the point b. and with the other make a note or prick toward c. to which join
f. and drawing the compass again make another point toward d. which between
note the letter h. Again from the letter e. draw a straight line unto f. which
represents the Tropicke of Cancer. And from g. likewise draw a line vnta h.
representing the Tropicke of Capricorn.

Again set one foot of the compass unchanged on the letter c. representing
the Northerly Pole, and with the other opened, make a point of the one side,
and after on the other side, in drawing a line besides from point to point,
and the ends of that line note with the letters ^ k. that declare the arcticke
cyrcle. And likewise set one foot of the compass on the note d. iudicating
the Southerly pole, and after the marking with points on either side, draw a
right line; at the ends of which, note these letters l m. that represent the
antarcticke cyrcle.

These so finished, you shall then see on that plain or flat the five earthly
zones rightly described. For the space here represented of the earth by the
Tropicke lines e f. and g h. included, does demonstrate the burning zone. In
that the suns heat by his direct beams over it, does continually strongly heat
and burn that space of the earth: wherefore you may rightly draw a straight
line from the letter g. unto f. representing the suns journey.

And the space of the earth included of the line i k. the articke cyrcle, and
the arc answering to the Northerly line i k, does iudiacate the cold and
frozen zone Northerly. And that other Region or space contained right against,
representing the antarcticke cyrcle, does demonstrate the cold Southerly zone.
And the tract or space of the earth included within the lines i k. and E F.
does iudicate our temperate zone Northward, and that reasonably habitable: and
the other portion of the earth contained within the lines g h. and l m. does
manifestly show the temperate southerly zone.

Where Ptholomie and other ancient Cosmographers write, that the burning zone
is uninhabited, or as a desert, Aristotle, Pliny, and John de sacro bosco (in
his treatise of the Sphere) write the contrary: Besides these, it is well
known at this day, yea by experience understood of those that have yearly
gone and come from the countries lying under that zone; that is, between the
two Tropicks to be inhabited. Further this burnt zone is inhabited and well
replenished with people that there dwell, as the same is thoroughly known to
many that have passed to and frothe Indies: so that it may evidently appear,
that the heat there is not extreme, nor so distemperate, seeing the time of
the heat that they suffer, continues not long, nor the heat sharply works
or causes his uttermost effect. For the sun but a small time tarieth above the
Horizone in the burnt Region or Zone (as certain astronomers write) as the
space of twelve hours only: so that the heat there is much qualified and
suppressed, through the cold rising in the night time; whereof it is manifest,
that he causes not his extreme hotnesse there, although he streacheth his
beams perpendicularly on the earth. Therefore may many marvel, that sundry
ancient men affirm these parts to be uninhabitable, seeing they knew of Arabia,
Foelix, Aethiopia, Taprobana, and diverse other contries lying under the burnt
zone: yea besides these, are Guinea, Calicute, Muluca and Gatigara, well known
to lie or be under the burning Zone: and many of the people in those countries
live long: and the same Region also is inhabited and replenished well with
people. A like affirmation has Albertus and Auicen (as before written) that the
middle zone is habitable, for they agree co^^rary to the old writers, that in
the same Region of the world, which the ancient Cosmographers named to be the
burnt Zone, that it is a far temperater dwelling, than under the Tropicks it
can be in any wise. And that people dwell under the Tropickes, the ancient
never doubted. Wherefore if so reasonable dwelling be under the Tropicks, it
cannot be otherwise (as affirms Petrus de apono) that under the Equatoure,
(notwithstanding the suns sharp heat) but that men may dwell there for all
the vntemperatnesse of heat. To be brief, all the writers of later years
agree, that the middle zone is not only habitable, but found and known by many
reasons, and by experience, that the same is most temperate, and the earth
under it rich, both of gold and rich drugges, and reasonable well furnished of
all things needful for man's life. So that in the same middle Region of the
earth under the Equatour, it appears, that through the coldness of the
night, it does there temper sufficiently the burning heat of the day. Besides
these, after the mind of Hiero. Cardane, in that Saturn, Mercury, and the
moon (which properly are cold and moist planets) have a great force in the
Regions under this zone, but especially the moon, that works her most force
there in the night time, more then the other twoe: and of this cause more
temperatnesse in the day time. Besides these, it is well known that those
people have two summers, and two winters in the year. For in the year of our
Lord 1530. at the will and charge of Charles the fifth Emperor, a part of
America westward was discovered, where Peru among the rest, was found richest
both of Gold and other rich things and costly drugges, which is situated in
longitude, of 290. degrees from the West toward the East, and is distant 5.
degrees from the Equatoure toward the South. But what substance of Gold and
other rich things has yearly been brought from this isle, needs not here any
further rehersall. And the like is to be considered and noted of the other two
zones, contained between the Polare cyrcles, and Poles of the world. Although
Albertus Mag. denies, a commodious dwelling for men in those places, and
confirms the same by probable reasons, yet experience reclaimeth and denies
those opinions of his, and other ancient writers. In that it is well known
that Gothland, Norway, Russia, Lapeland, Groueland, and diverse other countries
toward the North pole, is inhabited and well peopled. And Galeottus Naruiensis
proves, that men dwell under the North pole, affirming the same not to be
true, that the cause of the cold there is only the far distaunce of the sun,
as not of the heat by nearenesse of his coming. In that the sun by reason of
the sign in which he is, either increases or diminishes them with us.
Besides he affirms, that the cold is not so dispersed round about, as that
it compasses round after the form of a cyrcle, nor that the heat in like
sort does run round about the whole body of the earth. Further Cardane
writes, that under the poles, there is no such coldness as some suppose, in
that the Moon, Venus, and Mars* have the greatest latitudes, in respect of the
sun, and the others besides. For the moon has five degrees to the North, Venus
and Mars exceed unto eight degrees Northward, but Saturn which is the author
of cold, scarcely performs three degrees Northward. Besides these, the Moon
more avails Northward and Southward near to the poles, then the sun, in
that she nearer approaches those parts. For the Moon (as above said) has
five degrees of latitude: as well to the North, as South: so that when she
shall be in the first degree of Cancer, with her greatest latitude Northward;
that is, in the head of the Dragon, she shall then be nearer by five degrees to
the Northerly pole, then the sun. And in like manner, when she shall be in the
tail of the Dragon (at the entrance and beginning of Capricorn) she shall be
nearer the pole antarcticke by five degrees than the sun. Although in the
winter the moon should be in the beginning of Capricorn with the Southerly
latitude of four or five degrees, yet may she work and cause more in the
change of weather, and shall cause more in Scotland than the sun, in that her
power and virtue there is such. But in Brasilia and under the antarcticke pole
for two causes, the one, in that she is there of such power, and the other for
that in her working she is nearer.

What the longitudes and latitudes of the celestial Zones are.
THe longitude of Zones begins from the West, and is extended by the
Noonesteede into the East, and from the East again by the midnight point into
the West. The motions of the sun in the zodiac, and Poles of the zodiac,
do describe the latitude of the zones. For the suns motion or the zodiac do
describe the burnt zone, seeing the sun on the one part of the zodiac goes
toward the North unto the elongation of 23. degrees, 28. minutes, and being by
his daily motion in the beginning of Cancer, does describe the Tropic of
Cancer, which is the bound of the two zones, the burnt zone, and Northerly
temperate Zone. And on the other part of the zodiac does the sun go into
the South unto the same elongation, and being in the beginning of Capricorn,
does likewise describe the Tropicke of Capricorn, which is the bound of the
other twoe zones: in that it distinguishes the burnt from the southerly
temporate zone. And the space also included in these two cyrcles, using the
middle place, is called the burnt zone, and thus the burnt zone, does employ
46. degrees, and 57. minutes.

The Poles of the Zodiac (which are daily about the Poles of the world) from
which they differ 23. degrees, and 28. minutes, and are drawn by the motion of
the first mouer, do describe two cyrcles in the diverse parts of heaven as the
Polare cyrcles, which also be the bounds of the zones, that distinguish the
twoe temperate from the cold zones. So that the latitude of either cold zone,
unto the poles of the world, is of 23. degrees, and 28. minutes. The other
degrees of the semicyrcle are atributed to the temperate zones; so that either
zone contains 43. degrees, and 3. minutes.

What is the Longitude and Latitude of the earthly Zones.
THe longitude of the earthly zones, is like to the longitude of the
celestial, as from the West by the noon steed into the East, and from thence
by the midnight point again into the West. And the latitude of them is like
to the latitude of the celestial zones: for as the manner of the latitude of the
celestial burnt Zone is unto the whole cyrcumference; even so is the manner of
the earthly burnt zone, unto the compass about of the earthly Globe; that is,
as 47. degrees is unto 360. and so likewise conceive of the others. And that
this may plainer appear, use the figure following, in which a l h e. is the
meridian, or Colure of the solstices, e x l. the Equatoure, a x h. the
meridian, s u p. the earthly Globe, s n. the earthly Tropicke of Cancer, k o.
the Tropicke of Capricorn t u. and q p. the arcticke cyrcles. To these answer
f r o k b b. and d s m c c. also c ff b a g e e i. the celestial cyrcles. And
what the proportion f d. is, unto the whole compass d a k g f the same is (as
above written) the proportion r s. unto the whole cyrcumference of the earthly
Globe: and on this wise conceive of the other cyrcles. The letters f d. be the
latitude of the celestial burnt zone, and r s. of the earthly, d c. and f g.
be the latitudes of the temperate zones in heaven, and s t a c r q. of them on
earth. The twoe outward zones, to these here drawn, be by themselves noted,
as well in heaven, as on earth.

Now that we have declared with the five cyrcles, the latitudes either of the
celestial or terestriall zones are defined, it shall therefore be necessary to
write here of the latitudes of the earthly zones in miles. And that you may
readily find the latitude in miles, multiply the degrees by 15. (in that so
many German miles, answer to one degree of the great cyrcle in heaven) as
the 43. degrees of the burnt zone, being the suns greatest declination,
multiplied by the 15. miles, do produce 705. Germain miles, which is the
latitude of the burning zone. The latitude of either temperate zones,
contains 646. Germain miles almost. And from either Tropicke, unto the
points right under the poles, does the space or distaunce contain 352.
German miles.

Where is the beginning and end of every Zone, according to latitude, and
which places are in which Zones.
THe middle of the burning zone is under the Equinoctial line, where either
pole is in the Horizon. And both be his bounds (where the elevation of the
pole, as well Southerly as Northerly is) of 13. degrees, and 28. minutes. For
either temperate zone does there begin, and streacheth unto the same place,
where the elevation of the pole is, of 66. degrees, and 30. minutes: which
place, is the beginning of the cold zones. By these now may a man easily
conceive, which places are in which zone: for if the elevation of the Pole
Northerly, be lesser then 23. degrees, and 28. minutes, this place then is in
the burning zone, as the inner Libia, Aethiopia, a part of Arabia Felix, and
India. But if the elevation contains precisely so many degrees and minutes,
the place then is in the bound of the burnt and temperate zone; as is Siene a
city of Egypt. Further if the elevation of the Northerly Pole be greater then
23. degrees, and 28. minutes, yet lesser then 66. degrees, and 30. minutes,
this place the^ is in the temperate zone, as Greece, Italy, Spain, Germany,
France, England etc. But if the latitude be precisely of 66 degrees, and 30.
minutes, the place is in the bound of the temperate and cold zone, as is almost
Lagenla^us of Suetia. Last, if the elevation of the pole exceeds 66. degrees,
and 30. minutes, the place is in the cold zone beyond which degrees has
Nicolaus Douis a German added a table of Noreway, Gothland, Iseland,
Greenland, Fineland, and Lapeland etc.

How the Zones and Climats do differ.
THe Zone is a space or room of the earth, from the West into the East, and
from thence by the midnight point again into the West. But the Clymate is a
space of the earth, whose beginning is constituted in the west and end in the
East. A Zone also is the space of earth, between two cyrcles equidistant, but
a Climate is the only space or room of the habitable earth, contained between
two lines equidistant.

What the qualities of the Zones are.
TO the celestial Zones are qualities attributed, not formally, but only
vertually; that is, the celestial zones are neither cold, hot, nor temperate,
but of this named cold, burning, and temperate, through the sun, which one
whiles coming into this, and another whiles declining into that part of the
world, do^th send down his beams to the earth in sundry manner: as one whiles
plum down right, when the sun runs under the equinoctial, and another
whiles by a thwart manner, as in the thwart sphere: which beams (besides how
right angles they make on earth) so much the greater heat they cause, and how
thwarter angles they make, so much the weaker heat they procure. So that under
the Equinoctial the beams most rightly and down right falling, do make
right angles on the upper face of the earth, which through the same causes a
most great heat. Also the beams faling toward either poles, do cause thwarter
angles, and they make the angles more uneven or thwarter, and thereof the same
heat is the lesser. And in the temperate zone (especially in the summer) the
beams do make almost angles falling unto a rightnes, but in the winter unto a
thwartnes; so that in the same Region is a commodious dwelling. But in the
cold zones the angles are caused unlike or uneven, and thwartest or slopest,
as in the burnt Zone they are rightest and most downward: in so much that the
cold zones even (as the burnt) are commodious to dwell under. For the beams
falling and reflexed, how much nearer they fall and be together, so much the
stronger and mightier they move and cause the heat: as we daily see that the
sun in the noonsteed being (as in the summer) to cast or streach down almost
perpendicular or down right beams: which beams also are almost reflected into
themselves, of which the greatest heat of the day then is caused. And
contrariwise, the sun being in the East or west, where ye beams streaching
downward and reflexed, are scatred and run abroad; the effects be lesser, and
the heat much abated and feebled. Even so the beams in the burnt zone be
perpendicular or plum downright, which reflexed into themselves do cause a most
great heat. In the temperate zone do the beams bylitle and little fall sloper
and sloper, of which they cause there a temperate heat. But in the cold zones
the beams furthest decline or fall slopest, through which they procure no
effect, and of the co^sequent cause there a very weak heat.

What the vtilities of the Zones be.
_1 THe ancient considerers of the stars, have thus instituted the
distribution of the zones for two causes. The one is, that by this reason they
might show to us which places of the earth be reasonably habitable, and most
commodious to dwell under.

2 The other is (as we learn by experience) that the wits of men, and nature
of places by them appear and are known, in that the air compassing us, is a
certain cause of the temperatnes. For the manners and conditions of men (as
writes Galen) do for the most part ensue the temperame^ts of the bodies: yea
the nature of trees, plants, herbs, and beasts do like ensue the temperament
of air. Of which that we might be the surer and certainer of the natures of
the foresaid matter, it pleased the ancient to divide them into five zones. Of
which (it is well known) that the bodies of men or people dwelling under the
burning zone (as the Moors) be shorter of stature, the^ those people dwelling
under the temperate zones, wilder, and crueler. Also they be crafty and
subtle of nature, having besides wrinkled faces, thick crisped hear on the
head, and black scorched bodies, and crooked of stature. Also all living and
cresent things, are found to agree according to the quality of the air in that
Region. Further the people dwelling under the Northerly Parallels or Polare
cyrcles (where the places bound of cold and moisture) be white of body, having
long hear on the head, tall and comely of stature and personage, cold of
quality, yet in manners or conditions wild and cruel, through the force of
the cold in those places, and agreeing with these is the greatness of the
winter, and the greatness of fierce and cruel beasts, and other living things
there breeding, with a furious people inhabiting, called generally the
Scythians. Last, those dwelling under the temperate zones, be a gentler and
ciuiler people being some tawnie (especially toward the South) and others
toward the North reasonable white of skin and body, being mean of stature,
and temperate in nature and quality, and of the same like in conditions and
behauiuor, etc. And thus much, for the second part of this Treatise.

FINIS.
The Table of all the special and several points handled in this Book.
OF the Rudiments of the Sphere, of Heaven, of the Stars, of the Orbs of the
Stars, and of the Earth. Folio 1 What a Sphere is. 2 What the world is, and
into how many parts the same is divided, with the motion of the celestial
Orbs. 8 What the Stars are, and that as to the motion of their Orbs, they are
carried about. 11 That Heaven is drawn round. 13 That there are but eight
celestial Orbs, that may be seen. 14 A general figure declaring the number,
disposition, and order of the Celestial Spheres about the Globe of the earth.
16 That there are two first motions of the celestial Orbs. 17 That there are
two kinds of Stars, the fixed and the Planets. 19 Of the celestial images,
and of their diverse names, being in number 48. 21 The 12. signs of the
Zodiac. 22 Of the Southerly. 23 Of the Planets. 25 That Heaven has a round
form, and is carried circularly. 29 That the water and earth are round
bodies, and by a mutual embracing do make one body and one hollow upper
face. 31 An Instrument, by which the roundnesse of the earth (according to
latitude) may be proved* and all those may easily be showed which are taught
of the days Artificial. 33 That the water has a like swelling, and runs
round. 36 That the earth emploieth the middle place of the world, and is the
Center of the whole. 42 If the earth be not in the middle of the world, then of
necessity it must possess some of the standings described in the figure there
demonstrated, 46 That the earth abides fixed and immovable in the middle of
the world. 49 The physic reasons. 50 That the earth compared unto heaven is
as a point. 52 To find the compass of the earth, and by it the Dyameter. 55
The second Part.
What the sum of the second part is. 59 That the Sphere of the world is
either right or thwart. 90 That the Circles of the Sphere, be some greater,
some less, with the number of the Circles. 92 The description, names, and
vtilities of the Equinoctial. 62 That this worthy Circle has diverse names. 71
What are the offices of the Equinoctial. 73 What are the Northerly images in
respect of the Equinoctial. 78 The description, names, and offices of the
Zodiac, and Ecclipticke line, or way of the Sun. 98 What are the names of
this Circle. 100 What is the cause of the thwartnesse of the Zodiac. 109 Of
the Ecclipticke line, or way of the Sun. 113 What the latitude of a Planet is,
after two destinctions. 115 What is the longitude of a Star, and where he
begins. 116 What are the uses and vtilities of the Zodiac and Ecclipticke.
124 The description, names, and offices of the Colures. 125 What the offices
and vtilities of the Colures are. 133 The description, names, and offices of
the meridian Circles, and Horizon. 135 What are the offices and vtilities of
the meridian. 144 A Table of the Suns declarations, etc. 155 The common way of
measuring of places with their spaces, by the rules of longitude and latitude.
167 What is to be done if places differ in the longitudes. 169 Other brief
examples. 171 The finding of the distances of places or Cities, in a more
easier manner. 173 The first rule. 174 An Example. 175 Another. Ibid Another.
Ibid Another. 179 Another. Ibid Another. Ibid Another. 177 The second Rule.
Ibid Another excellent Table, etc. 178 An example of the use of this Table. 179
The second Rule. 180 An Example. Ibid Another. 183 Another. Ibid Another. 184
Another. Ibid An easier working. Ibid An Example. 185 Another. Ibid Another.
186 If of two places etc. Ibid. A third rule. 190 An example of the third rule.
Ibid. Another. 193 Another. 124 Another. 196 An easier working and less
curious. 197 An Example. 198 Another. Ibid Another. 199 Another. Ibid A
demonstration of the third rule. 200 The declaration of the first rule. 201 The
declaration of the second rule. Ibid. The declaration of the third rule. 202
The definition, appellations, division, and offices or vtilities of the
Horizon. 204 The appellations and diverse names of the Horizon. 205 The offices
or vtilities of the Horizon. 215 Of the vertical Circles. 217 The Circles of
the Altitude. 219 The hour Circles. 221 The Circles dividing the twelve houses
of heaven. 226 The Circle of position. 230 The definitions, names, and
vtilities of the four lesser Circles. 231 Which Circles are called the
Tropicks. 235 Why they are called Tropicks. Ibid. The offices or vtilities of
the four lesser Circles. 245 The descriptions, names, qualities etc. 247 What
the longitude and latitude of the celestial zones are. 261 What is the
longitude and latitude of the earthly Zones. 263 Where the beginning and end of
every Zone, according to latitude, and which places are in which Zones. 264 How
the Zones and Clymates do differ. 267 What are the qualities of the Zones.
Ibid What be the vtilities of the Zones. 268
FINIS.

