THE MUSES THRENODIE, OR, Mirthfull Mournings, on the death of Master Gall.

Containing variety of pleasant Poetical descriptions, moral instructions,
historical narrations, and divine observations, with the most remarkable
antiquities of Scotland, especially at Perth.

By Mr. H. ADAMSON.

Horat. in Art. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.

Printed at Edinburgh in King James College, by George Anderson. 1638.

TO HIS NATIVE TOWN OF PERTH: THE LORD PROVEST, BAILLIES, AND COUNSEL THEREOF,
HIS WORTHY PATRONS,
Wishing them all happiness here, and hence, dedicateth these his recreations
their devoted Servant

Mr. HEN. ADAMSON; Student in Divine, and Humane Learning.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,

IT is not amiss thou be a little informed concerning the Poet, and the
persons of the defunct and mourner.

The Poet wrote this for his own exercise, and the recreation of his friends;
and this piece, although accomplished to the great contentment of many that
read and heard it, yet could not the Author be induced to let it thole the
press, till the importunity of many learned men urged him unto it: And the
last brash was made by a Letter of the prime Poet of our kingdom, whereof this
is the just copy.

To my worthy Friend, Mr. HEN. ADAMSON.
Sir,

THese papers of your mournings on Master Gall appear unto me as Alcibiadis
Sileni, which ridiculously look, with the faces of Sphinges, Chimeraes,
Centaures on their outsides, but inwardly contain rare artifice, and rich
jewels of al^ sorts, for the delight and well of Man. They may deservedly
bear the word, Non intus ut extra. Your two Champions, noble Zannies, discover
to us many of the Antiquities of this Country more of your ancient town of
Perth, setting down her situation, founders, her hudge colosse, or bridge,
walls, fousies, aqueducts, fortifications, temples, monasteries, and many other
singularities. Happy has Perth been in such a Citizen: not so other towns
of this kingdom, by want of so diligent a searcher and preserver of their fame
from oblivion. Some Muses neither to themselves, nor to others do good; nor
delighting, nor instructing; yours perform both: And longer to conceal them,
will be to wrong your Perth of her due honors, who deserves no less of you
than that she should be thus blazoned, and registrate to posterity, to defraud
your self of a monument; which after you have left this transitory world
shall keep your name and memory to after times. This shall be preserved by
the Town of Perth for her own sake first, and after for yours. For to her it
has been no little glory that she has brought forth, such a citizen, so
emi^ent in love to her, and so dear to the Muses. Edinburgh, Julij 12. 1637.

W. D.

ANent the defunct, his name was M. James Gall, a Citizen of Perth, and a
Gentleman of a goodly stature, and pregnant wit, much given to pastime, as
golf, archerie, curling; and Joviall company. A man very kind to his
friends, and a pretty poet in liberal merriments, and tart satyrs; no less
acquaint with Philoenus, and the Acidalian Dame, than with the Muses.

For the mourner, he yet lives and mournes: and seeing he is of purpose to set
forth the web of his life, which is very long, now almost an hundred elnes,
counting an elne for a year, it is needless to speak of him here, all know him
(that know him) to be a good man, and has been occasion of mirth to many, to
none of mourning, as M. Gall by his immature death has been^ to him. It
seems sufficient, until the time he him self set out the history of
himself, to set down here t^ inventar of the ornaments of his Cabin, which, by
a Ca tachrestick name, he usually calls Gabions.

This Inventarie we have in a torn, and worn copy, and in respect there are
some lines in it we can not read, pray thee, gentle Reader, be content of that,
that is to the fore, till we can obtain from M. George the whole piece, which
was alleged to be written by M. Gall, although, in verity, the Author of this
book did write it, and as I think, not without M. George his own advice, and
for his friends recreation.

The Inventarie of the Gabions, in M. George his Cabinet.
OF uncouth forms, and wondrous shapes,
Like Peacoks, and like Indian apes,
Like Leopards, and beasts spoted,
Of clubs curiously knoted,
Of wondrous workmanships, and rare,
Like Eagles flying in the air,
Like Centaurs, Maremaids in the Seas,
Like Dolphins, and like honey bees,
Some carved in timber, some in stone,
Of the wonder of Albion;
Which this close cabine does include;
Some portends ill, some presage good:
What sprite Daedalian has forth brought them,
Ye Gods assist, I think ye wrought them,
Your influences did conspire
This comely cabine to attire
Neptune gave first his awful trident,
And Pan the horns gave of a bident,
Triton his trumpet of a buckie,
Propin'd to him, was large and luckie:
Mars gave the glistring sword and dagger,
Wherewith some time he wont to swagger,
Cyclopean armor of Achilles,
Fair Venus purtrayed by Apelles,
The valiant Hectors weighty spear,
Wherewith he fought the Trojan war,
The fatal sword and seven fold shield
Of Ajax, who could never yield:
Yea more the great Herculean club
Brusde Hydra in the Learn dub.
Hot Vulcan with his crooked heel
Bestowed on him a tempred steel,
Cyclophes were the brethren Allans,
Who swore they swet more then ten gallons
In framing it upon their forge,
And tempring it for Master George:
But Aesculapius taught the lesson
How he should used in goodly fashion,
And bad extinguis't in his ale,
When that he thought it pure and stale,
With a pugill of polypodium:
And Ceres brought a manufodium:
And willed him tossed it at his fire
And of such bread never to tire;
Then Podalirius did conclude
That for his melt was soverainge good.
Gold hair'd Apollo did bestow
His mightie-sounding silver bow,
With music instruments great store,
His harp, his cithar, and mandore,
His peircing arrows and his quiver:
But Cupid shot him through the liver
And set him all up in a flame,
To follow a Peneian Dame:
But being once repudiat
Did lurk within this Cabinet,
And there with many a sigh and groan,
Fierce Cupids wrong he did bemoane,
But this deep passion to rebet
Venus bestowed her Amulet,
The fiery flame for to bear down,
Cold lactuce and pupuleum;
And thenceforth willed the poplar tree
To him should consecrated be.
With twenty thousand precious things,
Mercurius gave his staff and wings:
And more this Cabine to decore,
Of curious staffs he gave fourscore,
Of clubs and cudgels contortized:
Some plain work, others crispe and frized,
Like Satyrs, dragons, flying fowls,
Like fishes, serpents, cats, and owls,
Like winged-horses, strange Chimaeraes,
Like Unicorns and fierce Pantheraes,
So livelike that a man would doubt,
If art or nature brought them out.
The monstrous branched great hart-horne,
Which on Acteon's front was borne:
On which does hing his velvet knapsca.
A scimitare cut like an haksaw,
Great bukies, partans, toes of lapstares,
Oster shells, ensigns for tapsters,
Gadie beeds and crystal glasses,
Stones, and ornaments for lasses,
Garlands made of summer flowers,
Propin'd him by his paramours,
With many other precious thing,
Which all upon its branches hing:
So that it does excel but scorn
The wealthy Amalthean horn.
This Cabine contains what you wish,
No place his ornaments does miss,
For there is such variety,
Looking breeds no sacietie.
In one nooke stands Loquhabrian axes,
And in another nooke the glaxe is.
Here lies a book they call the dennet,
There lies the head of old Brown Kennet,
Here lies a turkasse, and a hammer,
There lies a Greek and Latin Grammar,
Here hings an ancient mantua bannet,
There hings a Robin and a Iannet,
Upon a cord that is strangular
A buffet stool sexangular:
A fool muting in his own hand;
Soft, soft my Muse, sound not this sand,
What ever matter come athorter,
Touch not I pray the iron mortar.
His cougs, his dishes, and his caps,
A Totum, and some bairnes taps;
A gadareilie, and a whisle,
A trumpe, an Abercome mussell,
His hats, his hoods, his bells, his bones,
His allay bowls, and curling stones,
The sacred games to celebrat,
Which to the Gods are consecrat.
And more, this cabine to adorn,
Diana gave her hunting horn,
And that there should be no defect,
God Momus gift did not inlake:
Only * * * was to blame,
Who would bestow nothing for shame;
This Cabine was so crammed with store
She could not enter at the door.
This pretty want for to supply
A privy parlour stands near by,
In which there is in order placed
Phoebus with the nine Muses graced,
In compass, siting like a crown.
This is the place of great renown:
Here all good learning is inschrynd,
And all grave wisdom is confined,
Clio with stories ancient times,
Melpomene with Tragic lines,
Wanton Thalia's comedies,
Euterpe's sweetest harmonies,
Terpsichore's heart-moving cithar,
Lovely Erato's numbering meeter,
Caliope's heroic songs,
Vranias heavenly motions;
Polymnia in various music
Paints all with flowers of Rhetoric,
Amidst sits Phoebus laureat,
Crowned with the whole Pierian State.
Here Is Galene and Hippocrates,
Divine Plato and Socrates,
The Arabian skill and exccellence,
The Greek and Roman eloquence,
With many worthy work and story
Within this place inaccessorie.
These models, in this Cabine placed,
Are with the world's whole wonders graced:
What curious art or nature framd,
What monster has been taught or tamd,
What Polycletus in his time,
What Archimedes rich ingine,
Who taught the Art of menadrie
The Syracusan synedrie.
What Gods or mortals did forth bring
It in this cabinet does hing,
Whose famous relicts are all flowr'd,
And all with precious pouldar stowr'd:
And richly decked with curious hingers,
Wrought by Arachne's nimble fingers.
This is his storehouse and his treasure,
This is his Paradise of pleasure,
This is the Arcenall of Gods,
Of all the world this is the odds:
This is the place Apollo chooses,
This is the residence of Muses:
And to conclude all this in one,
This is the Roman Pantheon.
An apology of the Author, done as by the Mourner, to the Lovers of Learning.
LET none offend, though in mine age I sing
Swan-like, some lawful joys youthead did bring:
My songs are mournings, which may clearly show
The Inconstant course of all things here below:
Yet guided by that steadfast hand always
Which, midst confusions great, the balance stays:
Thus Heraclitus-like sometimes I mourn
At giddie Fortunes reelings: thence I turn
Like to Democritus in laughter wholly
To see the inconstant changes of her folly.
Thus do I mourn, and laugh oftimes, by course,
As giddie Fortune reeles from good to worse:
For neither is the battle to the strong, Eccles. 9. 11.

Nor does unto the swift the race belong,
Nor bread to these whose wit should have commanding,
Nor riches to the men of understanding:
Nor favor does to men of knowledge fall,
But chance (as would appear) does order all.
So, if the second causes we do view,
We shall find out a paradoxe most true.
But O thou prime and supreme cause of all,
Nothing to thee by fortune does befall,
For Thou, in midst of all these great confusions
Fores^s, and works most permanent conclusions,
Keeping most comely order in varieties,
And making concord in all contrarieties.
Hence does it come to pass of thy benignity,
That wicked men possess both wealth and dignity.
But, as its written, riches are preserved, Eccles. 5. 1^

And for the evil of th'owners are reserved:
And as a mighty load the bearers smothers,
So some to their own burt rule over others,
Not looking to the account they must needs make, Eccles. 8. 9.

Nor bow their smiling fortune may turn back,
Whose honor like the sea does ebb and flow,
Whose beauty has the time to fade and grew,
Whose riches, like the Eagle, has their wings,
Now lighting down on earth, to Heaven then springs. Prover. 23. 5.

The body's Summer rose is quickly gone,
By winters stormy age all overblowne,
To show earths constant changes: and that all
Which here on earth do spring must likewise fall.
Thrice happy he that state who quickly finds,
Which is not shaken with earths contrare winds!
Hence Solitary and poor content I live,
Since bitter hap blind fortune does not give:
And, like Diogenes, contemplate all,
Within my Cabine, that here does befall:
Which gives me subject both to sing and mourn,
The times ov'rpast, which never shall return.
I praise the worthy deeds of Martial men,
And I do wish the whole world might them ken:
I praise their virtues: No, their Virtuous deeds
Do praise themselves, and as most lively seeds
Beget like children: so commemoration
Begets them native sons by imitation.
Native! more native than by blood descended,
Who with their fame their fortunes have mispened.
For what availes to point a noble race
By long descent of branches, if in face (...). Sat. (...).

Like virtue does not shine, and equal worth
Ignoble deeds belie a noble birth;
Maugre all contrare thoughts, this true shall try
Virtue alone is true nobility.
If one most vicious in my line should be
Five hundred years ago, what is it to me,
Who virtuous am;? What? can it derogate
To my good name? or violate my state?
Or if antcestors brave shall me preceed,
And I do prove the knave, what shall proceed
By their Heroic virtues unto me,
Whose vicious life denies my progeny?
For lineage and forebears, Naso said,
Are not cal'^ ours, nor what our selves not made. Meta^. 13.

To prove this paradoxe I durst be bold Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 11

With judgment of the learned but I hold
My pen: for all do know of old what is said,
I rather that Thersites were my daid,
And I Achilles-like, most noble, rather (...). Sat. (...).

Then I Thersites, he to be my father:
True generositie does so esteem,
Though ignorance the contrare would maintain.
But Momus must needs carp, and Misanthropos
Be Ariopagita-like Scythropos.
Scarce were these lines as yet come to the birth
When some false flattering sycoph^nt gave forth
Most foul aspersions, making rumors spread,
That citing of some ancient stories bred
No small disgrace unto the present times,
Places, and persons of most ancient stemmes.
And that I write of purpose to attaint them;
I wish of this their wrong it might repent them:
^or as the contrare's true, so I protest
I never bad a purpose to infest
The meanest, far less these of better sort,
Where birth and grace do make a sweet consort.
Yea, more I do protest, against my will
These lines were reft from under my rude quill:
I never did intend so great a height
That they should touch the press, or come to light:
But now, since more there is then my design,
I forced am my just defense to bring
Against my traducers, who maliciously,
With banefull invie's tooth, have snatched at me
But I appeal to all judicious learning,
Whose wits are exercised in decerning,
If I your approbation do find,
I care naught these Ardelio's catching wind;
Nor other Patrons do I seek but you,
To take of this small piece a little view,
And give just censure joined with your protection,
More worth then Zoilus hate Gnatho's affection;
Your favors shall me shelter and defend
Against all invies rage to live to end^
Trusting in God to keep my conscience pure,
Whose favor most of all shall me secure.
Farewell.

De Authoris praematuro obitu, Elegidion.
A Damsone jaces, raptus florentibus annis?
Totque animi dotes hausit acerba dies?
Tam carum Phoebo letali tabe lev are
Arts Phoebaeae non potuere ca put?
Quod tibi si canam fas aspexisse senectam,
Pectoris and diti promere clausa sinu:
Inferius Tiberi non Taus nomen haberet:
Et Romae aequaret Pertha superba decus.
Haec vide, quae prima lusit vernante juventa
(Talis erat Ciris Virgiliique Culex)
Aspice, conatu quam nil molitur inepto,
Grancia seu memoret, sive jocosa canat.
Martia grandiloquo memorat dum bella cot^urno,
Maeoniam credas incinuisse tubam.
Si lauds canat Heroum, aut facta inclyta Iovae,
Daunigenam jures increpuisse fides.
Ad jeca si laetae demittat plectra Thaliae,
Bilbilidae dicas plectra movere sales.
Si canit historias, diae si dogmata legis;
Dixeris his omnes invigilasse dies.
Denique sic unus cuncta proludit in art,
Ceu brevis ars, illi vitaque longa foret.
Quod si tantus honos florum; quae gloria messis
(Hanc nisi praeriperent fata inimica) foret?
At tu quae primae dederas spiramina vitae,
Cui vitae aeternum reddidit ille diem,
AEternos titulos spiranti in marmore scribas,
Vsque memor civis, inclyta Pertha, tui.
TH. CRAFORDIUS.

TO PERTH, ANENT TWO of her Sons, her two Suns, Mr. Henry Anderson, and Mr.
Henry Adamson, his Nephew.
TWo Henry's, like two Suns, upon thee rose,
The Uncle, and the Nephew, and did close
The one a summer, the other a winter day,
Nor longer could on our Horizon stay.
With homebred beams the one on thee did shine,
The Other with rays brought from the coast Lavine.
But herein These excel fair Phoebes brother,
He and his beams do rise, and set together;
Their rays shine most, themselves when under earth,
And shall perpetual splendour give to Perth.
So be it ay, upon thee, noble Town,
May many such suns rise, and so go down.
I. A.

Ad Authorem proximi Epigrammatis, de tertio Perthi Sole, Patricio Adamsono,
Poeta and Oratore elegantissimo, qui Perthi natus and educatus, ob eximias
animi dotes, insignem eruditionem, and incomparabilem eloquentiam, pari pietate
conjunctam, in Archiepiscopatum Andreanum evectus est, (...)
PErtha duos tantum vidit, sua pignora, Soles
Laetifica claram spargere ^uce diem?
Hinc Adamsoni discussit nubila lampas,
Hinc Andersoni fulserat ante jubar.
Tertius hinc ortus (gentilis and ipse nepotis)
Clarus in arctoo Phoebus and orb fuit.
Nec tantum Arctoo; sed and hunc quoque Gallia Soles
Aequantem stupuit quos sua terra dabat.
Aequantemque suos mirata est Anglia Soles,
Lumine multiplicis enituisse facis.
Non alius quisquam docti pollentior oris
Fulmine: non calamo qui superaret, erat.
Prompta illi Graiae and Latiae facundia linguae:
Nota illi veterum dogmata cuncta Soph^.
Illius, orbatae Buchanani in funere, Musae
Pectora ceu sacros incoluere lares.
Nota mag^ nulli d^ ^cula: nullus,
Haec melius posset qui reserare, fuit.
Nec, quanquam occiduas curru^ demisit in undas,
(...) occu^ potest.
T. C.

In Authorem Libri.
NVper Adamsonus vicit splendore Triones,
At nunc occid^m spissior umbra tegit.
Non tamen in caecas omnino evanuit auras,
Liquerat en patrio lumina clara solo.
Perthigenasque suos secus hand intermicat ille,
(Accendens radio nobiliore diom)
Ac Phoebe, reliquis praefulgens lu^ida stellis,
Noctigenam pleno dum movet orb facem.
Ad Pertham.
QVid fles? Quid tristi rumpis praecordia luctu?
Pone modum lachrymis, inclyta Pertha, tuis.
Occiderat tuus (heu) fato Adamsonus iniquo:
Non tamen interiit: sed redivivus adest.
To the memory of the Author.
Dear Soul, thou have obtained more lasting Fame,
In follies colors wisdom setting forth,
Than if ten fabriks like Mausolios frame
Were for thee reared in witness of thy worth.
Thy Perth may boast of such a grateful son,
Who thus has honored his dear aged another,
Thy Muse such glory and such fame has won
To her, as no oblivioun can it smother.
Art, wit, and learning; learning, wit, and art
Do joyntlie justle here, each of them striving
Which carry shall the prise, and bear chief part
In these thy lays, thy native Town describing.
Thy Georges gabions show to underlings
That all things trifles be, that heaven not reaches,
By what thy Gall and he, in rapture, sings,
Much wisdom divine and humane thou teaches.
Thy death the Muses darlings all shall mourn,
And shall a tomb erect unto thy name
Of tears turned cristall; and upon thine urne
These words shall write, as blazon of thy fame:
Here lies his dust, by whose most learned quill
He and his Perth do live, and shall live still.
IO. MOORE.

Faults escaped.
Courteous Reader, who intends to read this book, may it please thee amend with
thy pen these faults before thou read.

Page 29. linea ultima, for where, read with. page 48. lin. 25. for Thus
entering through well straightly, read, Thus entering, though well straightly, page
52. lin. 17. say, read see. page 56. lin. 10 sault, read salt. Page 71. lin. 4.
And wraks of that city, read, And of that cities wrake. p. 76. l. 10. cooles,
read cool.

OF Master George Ruthven the tears and mournings, Amids the giddie course of
Fortunes turnings, Upon his dear friends death, Master James Gall, Where his
rare ornaments bear a part, and wretched Gabions all.
The first Muse.
NOW must I mourn for
Gall, since he is gone,
And ye my Gabions help me him to moan;
And in your courses sorrow for his sake, The auth^ of this boo^ did write t^
Pantheon, which wa^ fathered o^ Master Ga^

Whose matchless Muse immortal did you make.
Who now shall pen your praise, and make you known?
By whom now shall your virtues be forth-shown?
Who shall declare your worth? Is any able?
Who dar to meddle with Apelles table?
Ai me there is none: And is there none indeed?
Then must ye mourn of force, there is no remeed:
And I, for my part, with you in my turn
Shall keep a doleful consort whilst ye mourn:
And thus, with echoing voice, shall houle and cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
Now first my Bows begin this doleful song, Bows.

No more with clangors let your shafts be flung
In fields abroad, but in my cabine stay,
And help me for to mourn till dying day.
With dust and cobwebs cover all your heads,
And take you to your matins and your beads,
A requiem sing unto that sweetest soul,
Which shines now, sancted, above either pole.
And ye my Clubs, you must no more prepare.
To make you bals flee whistling in the air, Clubs.

But hing your heads, and bow your crooked crags,
And dress you all in sackcloth and in rags,
No more to see the Sun, nor fertile fields,
But closely keep you mourning in your bields,
And for your part the trible to you take,
And when you cry make all your crags to crake,
And shiver when you sing alace for Gall!
Ah if our mourning might thee now recall!
And ye my Loadstones of Lidnochian lakes, Curling stones.

Collected from the loughs, where watrie snakes
Do much abound, take unto you a part,
And mourn for Gall, who loved you with his heart:
In this sad dump and melancholic mood
The Burdown ye must bear, not on the flood,
Or frosen watrie plains, but let your tuning
Come help me for to weep by mournful cruning.
And ye the rest, my Gabions less and more
Of noble kind, come help me for to roar,
And of my woeful weeping take a part,
Help to declare the dolor of mine heart.
How can I choose but mourn? when I think on
Our games Olympike-like in times agone; Archerie

Chiefly wherein our cunning we did try,
And matchless skill in noble archerie;
In these our days when archers did abound
In Perth (then famous for such pastime found.)
Amongst the first for archers we were known,
And in that art our skill was lovvdly blovvn;
What time Perths credit did stand with the best
And bravest archers, this land has possessed.
We spared nor gains, nor pains for to report
To Perth the worship, by such noble sport:
Witness the links of Leith, where Cowper, Grahame,
And Stewart vvin the price and brought it home;
And in these games did offer ten to three
There to contend: Quorum pars magna fui.
I mourn good Gall, when I think on that stead,
Where ye did hail your shaft unto the head,
And with a strong and steadfast eye and hand
So valiantly your bow ye did command;
A slidrie shaft forth of its forks did fling,
Clank gave the bow, the whistling air did ring,
The bowlt did cleave the clouds and threat the skies,
And thence, down falling, to the mark it flies,
Incontinent the aimer gave a token,
The mark was killed, the shaft in flinders broken:
Then softly smyling, good Gall, thus quod I,
Now find I time my archerie to try,
And here by solemn vow I undertake,
In token of my love, even for thy sake,
Either to hit the mark, else shall I never,
More with these arms of mine use bow and quiver.
Therewith my ligaments I did extend,
And then a noble shaft I did commend
Unto my bow, then firmly fixed mine eye,
And closely leveld at Orions knee,
A star of greatest magnitude, who kend it The pre^nded Poet ^hen he shot
^rivers, used ^say Have ^the knee of ^ion.

So well as I, prays you be not offended;
(For I did use no magic incantation
For to couduct my shaft I will find cation.)
Then cleverly my flen soon can I feather,
Upon my left arm was a brace of leather;
And with three fingers hailing up the string,
The bow in semicircle did I bring;
With soft and tender lowse out went the shaft,
Amids the clouds the arrow flew aloft,
And, as directed by a skillful hand,
With speedy flight the steadfast mark it sand,
The aimer gave his sign, furth-with was known,
The shot was mine, the boult in flinders flown,
Above his shaft, in such difficile stead,
Closely I hit the mark upon the head;
Then on the plain we capreld wonder fast,
Whereat the people gazing were aghast;
With kind embracements, did we thurst and thrimble,
(For in these days I was exceeding nimble)
We leapt, we danct, we loudly laughed and cried:
For in the earth such skill was never tried
In archerie, as we proved in these days,
Whereby we did obtain immortal praise.
Then Gossop Gall (quod I) I dar approve
Thou have a trusty token of my love.
What shall be said of other martial games?
None was inlaking from whence bravest stemmes,
Victorious trophies, palms, and noble pynes
Olives and laurels, such as ancient times
Decor'd the Grecian-victors in their plays,
And worthy Romans in their brave assayes,
For trial of their strength, each matched with other,
Whose beauty was, sweat mixed with dust together.
Such exercises did content us more
Then if we had possessed King Croesus store.
But O! ye fields my native Perth neerby,
Prays you to speak, and truly testify,
What matchless skill we proved in all these places,
Within the compass of three thousand paces,
On either side; while as we went a shooting,
And strongly strove who should bring home the booting,
Along the flowrie banks of Tay to Amound,
Ay when I hit the mark I cast a gamound;
And there we view the place where some time stood
The ancient Bertha, now ov'rflow'd with flood Bertha

Of mighty waters, and that Princely hold
Where dwelt King William, by the stream down rold,
Was utterly defaced, and overthrown,
That now the place thereof scarce can be known.
Then through these haughs of fair and fertile ground,
Which with fruit trees, with corns, and flocks abound,
Meandring rivers, sweet flowers, heavenly honey,
More for our pastime then to conquesh money
We went a shooting, both through plain and park,
And never stayed till we came to Lowswork:
Built by our mighty Kings for to preserve us,
That thenceforth waters should not drown, but serve us;
Yet condescending it admits one rill
Which all these plains with cristall brooks does fill,
And by a conduit large three miles in length
Serves to make Perth impregnable for strength
At all occasions; when her clowses fall,
Making the water mount up to her wall.
When we had viewd this mighty work at randon,
We thought it best these fields for to abandon,
And turning homewards, spared nor dyke nor fowsie ^wsie, or ^lhousie.

Until we come unto the boot of Bowsie,
Along this aqueduct, and there our station,
We made, and viewd Balhowsies situation,
O'reluking all that spacious pleasant valley,
With flowers damasked, level as an alley
Betwixt and Perth, thither did we repair
(For why the season was exceeding fair)
Then all along this valley did we hye,
And there the place we clearlie did espy.
The precinct, situation and the stead, ^he battle ^he north

Where ended was that cruel bloody fead
Between these cursed clans, Chattan, and Kay Inch betw^ thirty an^ thirty.

Before King Robert, John; upon the day
Appointed, then and there, where did conveene
Thirty against thirty matched upon that green,
Of martial fellows, all in rageing mood
Like furious Ajax, or Orestes wood,
Alonely armed with long two-handed swords,
Their sparkling eyes cast fire in steed of words,
Their horride beards, thrown brows, brusled mustages
Of deadly blows t'enshevv were vive presages.
Thus standing Fortuns event for to try,
And thousands them beholding, one did cry
With loud and mighty voice, Stay! hold your hands!
A little space we pray; The case thus stands;
One of our number is not here to day;
This sudden speech did make some little stay
Of this most bloody bargain, the one party fight
Would not unless the number were made right
Unto the adverse faction, nor was any
That would it take in hand amongst so many
Beholders of all ranks into that place:
On the other side none would sustain disgrace
To be debarred from his other fellows,
He rather hung seven years upon the gallovves.
Thus as the question stood, was found at length
One Henry wind, for trial of his strength
The charge would take, a sadler of his craft, Henry wi^

I vvot not well whether the man was daft,
But for an half french crown he took in hand,
Stoutly to fight so long as he might stand,
And if to be victorious should be tide him,
They should some yearly pension provide him.
The bargain holds: and then withal their maine
Their braikens bukled to the fight again;
Incontinent the trumpets loudlie sounded,
And mightily the great bag-pipes were winded:
Then fell they to it as fierce as any thunder,
From shoulders arms, and heads from necks they sunder;
All raging there in blood, they hewed and hasht,
Their skin coats with the new cut were out^lasht;
And scorning death, so bravely did they fight it,
That the beholders greatly were affrighted:
But chiefly this by all men was observed,
None fought so fiercely; nor so well deserved
As this their hired Soldier, Henry Wind,
For by his valor victory inclinde
Unto that side; and ever since those days
This proverb current goes, when any says,
How come you here? This answer does he find,
I Am for mine own hand, as fought Henry Wind.
So finely fought he, ten with him escapt,
And of the other but one, in flood who leapt,
And saved himself by swimming over Tay:
But to speak more of this we might not stay.
Thence did we take us to the other hand,
From this divided by a crystal strand:
From whence the King beheld with open sight
The long-time doubtful event of this fight,
From of his pleasant gardins, flowrie wall,
Which we the guilted Arbor yet do call;
And here some monuments we did descrie,
And ruined heaps of great antiquity:
There stood a temple, and religious place,
And here a palace; but ah woeful case! Black Frie^ where kille^ was King James
the first.

Where murdered was one of the bravest Kings
For wisdom, learning, valor, and such things
As should a Prince adorn; who trads and arts
By men of matchless skill brought to their parts,
From Italy, Low Germany, and France,
Religion, learning, policy to advance,
King James the first, of everlasting name,
Killed by that mischant traitor, Robert Grahame,
Intending of his crown for to have robbed him,
With twenty eight wounds in the breast he stob'd him.
Unnatural parricide, most bloody traitor!
Accursed be thou above any creature,
And cursed be all, for so it is appointed,
That dar presume to touch the Lords anointed.
This phoenix Prince our nation much decord,
Good letters and civilitie restord,
By long and bloody wars which were defaced,
His royal care made them be reembraced:
And he this city mightily intended
To have inhanc'd, if fates had condescended:
For which if power answered good will, we would
With Gorgias Leontinus raise of gold
A statue to him of most curious frame,
In honor of his dear and worthy name.
He likewise built most sumptuously fair
That much renownd religious place, and rare,
The Charterhouse of Perth, a mighty frame, The Charter ^ouse, or Car^usian
mo^astery, where ^uried was ^ing James ^e first, was ^uilt by him.

Vallis virtutis by a mystic name,
Looking along that painted spacious field,
Which does with pleasure profit sweetly yield,
The fair south Inch of Perth, and banks of Tay.
This abbayes, stiples, and it is turrets stay
While as they stood (but ah where sins abound
The loftiest pride lies leveld with the ground!)
Were cunningly contrived with curious art,
And quintessence of skill in every part;
My grandsire many times to me has told it
He knew their names this mighty frame who moldit:
Italians some, and some were French men borne,
Whose matchless skill this great work did adorn.
And living were in Perth some of their race
When that, alace, demolished was this place,
For greatness, beauty, statlinesse so fair
In Britans Isle, was said, none might compare
Even as Apelles for to prove his skill
In limming Venus with a perfect quill,
Did not on some one beauty take inspection,
But of all beauties borrowed the perfection:
Even so this Prince to policy inclinde,
Did not on some one fabric set his mind
To make the prototype of his design,
But from all works did all perfections bring,
And rarest paterns brought from every part,
Where any brave Vitruvius kyth'd his art,
So that this great and princely enterprise
Perfections of all models did comprise.
And in this place where he does buriedly
Was kept the Relict wherein he did dye;
His doublet, as a monument reserved,
And when this place was razed, it was preserved:
Which afterward I did see for my part,
With hols through which he stabbed was to the heart.
Then, good Gall, thus quod I, what show of reason
Moved this unnatural traitor work such treason?
Reason! good Monsier, Gall did thus reply,
Reason! so much in show I do deny,
Reason! No reason did he have at all,
But wormwood, bitter malice Stygian gall
Within this traitors heart did closely lurk,
Which moved him this tragedy to work:
And I would truly tell this woeful story,
But that my tongue does fail, mine heart's so sorry:
Yet whiles that we unto the town do go,
Monsier, the true occasion, will I show.
This worthy Prince, according to the taillie
Made by King Robert, when heirs male should faillie,
Of his Son David then Earl of Statherne,
So soon, I say, the King as he did learn,
That heirs male of this David were surceast,
Into these lands he did himself invest:
For David leaving after him no son,
His lands by right come back unto the crown,
Yet after him one daughter did survive,
In marriage which to Patrick Grahame they give,
To whom she bare a son, one Melisse Grahame,
Whose parents dying young, Robert did clame,
As uncle, and as tutor, of these lands
To have the charge devolved in his hands:
Which when the king most justly did deny
To give, and gravelie show the reason why,
This bloody traitor from his gorge did spew
Words treacherous, nor to be spoke, nor true.
For which he justly traitor was declared,
But he the Kings authority naught cared,
But more and more pursuing his intent,
To Walter Earl of Athole straight he went,
Whom well he knew to have the like design,
Above all things for to cut off the king,
And all the race sprung of Eliza Mure,
With witches did consult and sprits conjure,
This to effect, and all the infernal furies
With draughts and spells, and such unlawful curies:
At length he finding that incarnat fiend,
Believed his response should have steadfast end,
Which was, that he should once before he die
Be crowned King with great solemnity:
Which came to pass indeed, but not with gold,
For his familiar sprit keept that untold:
Thus these two traitors cruelly did hatch
The treason, which this good king did dispatch.
Both of these traitors at the crown did aim,
The One thought his nephew might it some time claim,
And he without all question would succeed:
For well he knew to cut the fatal thread:
Likewise that other Hell-taught traitor Walter
Believed by no means his response could alter,
Thus both of them fed with ambitious hopes,
Keep'd secret by themselves their partial scops,
But mutually this one thing they intend,
The king must die; and here their thoughts they spend.
But this Earl Walter subtle more than the other
His quaint design began cunningly to smother,
Observing well the Grahames proud haughty brain,
Greatly aggreag'd the wrongs he did sustain,
Affirming that there was none had a heart
But would avenged be, and for his part
He would assist, and when that turn were ended
Against all deadly Grahame should be defended.
Thus by ambition witcht, and rage demented
This traitor execut what was intented.
Who from the famous Trojan had his name
And from the woods, when he did hear the fame Aeneas Sylvius.

Of this infamous fact at Edinburgh then
Residing to make peace between these men
Who of the Greeks and Trojans are descended,
O how he was enraged! O how offended!
To see so brave a Prince so traiterouslie
Cut off, he roard and railed outragiouslie
Against all the nation; but when he justice done
Had seen upon the traitors, then his tune
He quickly changed, now have I seen (said he)
A cruel crime revenged cruelly.
This tragic task, Monsier, in hand to take
Mine eyes do melt in tears, mine heart strings crake,
What! shall I speak of Priam King of Troy
By Pyrrhus killed? that cannot much annoy:
Or shall I of brave Julius Caesar tell,
Whom these two traitors did in Senate kill?
These may affect us with some small compassion,
But for to speak of this is a tentation.
Caesar for valor, learning and meek mind,
And ah too much like Caesar in his end.
Excusa moi, Monsier, mine heart's so sorry,
That I can tell you no more of this story.
When I think with what gravitie and grace
This tragedy was told, tears weet my face:
And I do wish good Gall, thou were on live,
That with Meonian style thou mighst descrive
Such memorable acts; or else thy spirit
In some new body placed, it to inherit:
Ai me, this can not be, which makes me cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
The second Muse.
BUt this sad melancholic disquisition
Did not befit our Joviall disposition
In these our days: Therefore when we had mourned
For this good King, we to the town returned,
And there to cheer our hearts, and make us merry,
We kindly tasted of the noble berrie;
Melancholy and grief are great men-killers:
Therefore from Tamarisk, with some capillars
Infusde we drank; for to preserve our splens
From grief, our lungs from cough, and purge our reins.
But this recept Gall did not keep always,
Which made him die, alace, before his day.
Then home we went unto our beds to rest us,
To morrow again we to the fields addressed us;
And in my bed as I did dreaming ly,
Me thought I heard with mighty voice, one cry
Arise, Monsier, the day is vvondrous fair,
Monsier arise, then ansvvered I, Who Is there?
Arise, Monsier, the third time did it call.
Who's there? Quoth I, It is I Master Gall.
Then I avvoke, and found it so indeed;
Good morrow Master Gall. Monsier, God speed.
Good Master Gall, Dreams did me much molest
This night, and almost rave me of my rest.
Monsier, quoth Gall, What motion might that be?
Said I, I dreamed I was in archerie
Outmatcht so far, that I was stricken dumb,
For very grief to be so overcome.
Monsier, said he, That Is been a mighty passion,
That has you stricken dumb in such a fashion.
A passion, so great, that I did sweat,
My sinews tremble, and my heart did beat.
At length, respiring, these few words did speak,
O noble heart, of force now must thou break!
For to these days was never in this land
That did o'rcome this matchless maiden hand;
And dreaming, as I grudged with Master Gall,
Incontinent a voice on me did call;
Arise Monsior, arise: then I awoke,
And found it was Gals voice unto me spoke,
Which made me doubt, if so could come to pass:
Then answered Gall, although your bow were brass,
That might be done; and I Am the man will do it
What say you Gall? Quod I, then let us to it.
Forthwith we dressed us in our archer grath,
And to the fields we came, like men in wrath:
When we our nerves and tendons had extended,
Incontinent our bows were bravely bended;
The sky was wondrous clear, Apollo fair
Greatly delighted to behold us there:
And did disperse the clouds, that he might see
What matchless skill we proved in archerie.
The cristall river Phabus beams reflected;
As glad of us, them in our face directed:
The flowrie plains, and mountains, all the while
That we were shutting, meriely did smile.
Mean while, for honors praise as we were swelting
The sweat from of our brows and temples melting,
Phoebus, as seeming to envy our skill,
His quiver with some fiery shafts did fill,
And from his silver bow at us he darted
These shafts, to make us faint and feeble hearted:
Whose mighty force we could not well oppose,
Under a shade we therefore did repose
A pretty while, hard by a silver stream,
Which did appear some melody to frame.
Running along the snow white pibble stones
Mourning did murmr joys, commixt with moanes:
A cup I had of Woodbind of the wall
And drinking, said, This to you Master Gall.
Quoth he, Monsier, since that we have no better,
With all mine heart I will you pledge in water:
This brook along the flowrie plain meanders,
And in a thousand compasses it wanders;
And as it softly slides so many ways,
It sweetly sings as many rowndelayes,
And, harmony to keep, the honey bees
Their trumpets sound amongst the flowers; and trees
Their shadows from their shaggie tops down sending
Did bow, in token of their homage rendering
But in short while Phoebus his face withdrew;
Then freshly fell we to it again of new,
And kyth most skillful, and most pleasant game,
While to the lands of Loncartie we came.
Then thus, quod I, Good Gall, I pray thee show,
For clearly all antiquities ye know,
What mean these skonses, and these hollow trenches
Throughout these fellow-fields, and yonder inches?
And these great heaps of stones, like Pyramids?
Doubtless all these ye know, that so much reads.
These trenches be (Gall answering, did reply)
Where these two armies Scots and Danes did ly
Encamped, and these heaps the trophae's be,
Reared in memorial of that victory,
Admired unlook't for, conquest in that day,
Be the only virtue of a Hynds-man, Hay,
And his two sons, from whence immortal praise
He gained, and glory of his name did raise
To all succeeding ages; as is said
Of Briareus an hundredth hands who had,
Wherewith he fought, or rather as we see
A valiant Sampson, whose activitie
With his asse-bone kills thousands, or a Shangar
With his oxe-goad kills hundreths in his anger:
Even so, this warlike wight with oxens yoke
Beats squadrons down by his undaunted stroke,
And did regain the victory, near lost,
Unto the Scots, by his new gathered host
Of fearful fleers, in a woeful plight,
By his encouragements infusing might
Into their nerves, new spirits in their arters,
To make them fight in blood unto the garters,
Against their hateful foes, who for to be
Did fight, more than for price or victory.
Such cruelties their bloody hearts possessed
To have old quarrels on us Scots redrest,
For utterly quail'd Pights, and for their own
Armies by us so often overthrown.
This worthy chieftains happy enterprise
Which saved this country from the tyrannies
Of cruel Danes, and his two Mars-like sons
Do for all ages wear the quernall crowns,
Like Thrasibulus; ever bluming bays
Do add much splendor to these worthy Hayes.
And always since they for their weapons weild
Three rubric targets in a silver shield.
Which shield the soaring falcon does sustain,
To signify these three men did obtain
The public safety, and the falcons flight
By mounting, shows their worth; by lighting, right
Unto their lands; for honors high regard:
Which in all ages should have due reward.
Like shall all find, who loyal to the state
And countries well do prove, though small or great:
Men shall them praise, God shall preserve their stemmes,
Immortal fame shall canonize their names.
Thence forward went we unto Campsie-lin,
From whence the river falling makes such din Campsie-li

As Nilus Catadups: There so we sported
It is impossible for to report it:
Whither we walked, or did we sit, or stand,
Quiver was tied to side and bow in hand;
So that none thought us to be mortal wights
But either Phoebus, or fair Phoebe's Knights.
There we admired to see the Salmond leap,
And overreach the waters mighty heap,
Which from a mountain falls, so high, and steep,
And tumbling down devals into the deep,
Making the boiling waters to rebound,
Like these great surges near by Greenland found:
Yet these small fish ov'rcome these watrie mountains,
And kindly take them to their mother fountains,
With what affection every creature tenders
The native soil! Hence comes great Jove remembers
His cradell Creet, and worthy more than he,
Let th'idle Cretians at their pleasure ly,
Even these most worthy Kings, of mighty race
Come of great Fergus, long to see the face
Of their dear Caledonia, whose soil
Does make their kindly hearts within them boil,
To view these fields where Martial men of arms
Great monuments have reared, with loud alarmes
Of thundering trumpets, by a hundredth Kings
And seven, one Queen; what ancient Poet sings
The like descent of Princes, who their crowns
And scepters have bestowed upon their sons
Or nearest kinsmen? Neither is it so
That this continued line had never fo ^he old ^emies of ^cotland.

To interrupt the same, witness these standers
That bear the Roman Eagle, great commanders
Of most part of the glob, and cruel Danes
Victorious elsewhere, but not in our plains,
Pights and old Britans; more than these to tell,
Who in the compass of this Island dwell
But, praisde be God, Britain is now combinde
In faith and truth, one God, one King, one mind.
Let scoffers say that neither wine nor oil
(Whose want stayed conquest) grows within this soil: Commodi^s of Scot^d.

Yet if gold, pearl, or silver better be,
As most men them account, it does supplee:
Yea things more needful for man's use it yields,
Herds, flocks, and corns abound here in our fields,
Wild beasts in forests, of all kinds in plenty,
Rare fowls, fruits, fishes, and what else is dainty;
Perpetual fire; to speak it in a word,
The like no where is found, it does afford.
Thus providence divine has it ordained,
That humane commerce may be entertained,
All soyls should have, yet none brings all things forth,
Yea grounds most barren often have greatest worth
Contained in their bowels: this to tell us,
Non omnia producit omnis tellus.
Hence comes that men their gold for iron change,
And so far from there native countries rainge,
Their softest silk for coursest canvasse give,
Because by commerce men do better live,
Then by such things their native grounds forth measure,
By traffike they do find more gain and pleasure:
Yea things more simple much more useful are,
And for man's well more profitable far.
Thus iron serves for all brave arts, much more
Then gold, let Midas heap it up in store:
And canvasse serves for ventrous navigation,
Where silks are only for cloths green seek fashion,
And though wine glad the heart, yet stirs it strife,
But grain the staff is which sustaines our life:
So humane fellowship to intertaine,
Our fishes and our corners bring oil and wine.
But above all our soil throughout all parts
Bears bravest Chiftans, with courageous hearts: Couragio worthies Scotland.

These be the bar of conquest, and the wall,
Which our most hateful foes could never scall.
Would you behold one Hanniball o'returne
Fourscore of thousands? look to Bannokburne:
Or would you see Xerxes his overthrow
And flight by boat? Edward the second know:
Or Carthaginian towers with all their mights
Destroyed? view Camelon with faithless Pights:
Or would ye know great Castriot, whose bones
Could Martial virtue give, dig'd from the stones,
Where he did buried ly? take for that part
The Brusse and Douglas, carrying his heart
Through many lands, intending it to have
Solemnly buried in the Holy-grave.
This heart though dead, within their hearts begetting
Brave hearts, against dangers their bold breasts outsetting.
Would you a King for zeal unto Gods house
Like Isreal's David? Our Saint David choose.
Or know King James the first, like Julius Caesar,
Or Gregory like Alexander; these are
With many more the worthies, whose renovvn
By martial deeds have kept close this crown.
Yea more to speak of such heroic themes,
Who knows not the worthy great King James
Of Britains union first; whose virtues great
Were more than equal to his royal seat;
Whose matchless wisdom, and most learned quill
Did nectar and ambrosia distill,
And ravished with amazements all who heard him,
But most for active prudence all admired him.
Happy in all his life, whose worthy name
A peaceable Augustus did proclaim.
Who conquered more by wit, than by the sword,
And made all Europe muuh regard his word.
And good King Charles the son of such a Father,
Thrice happy by thy Virgin Crown; yea rather
More happy, if more happiness can be,
In earthly things, by thy high pedegrie;
But most of all by Heaven, which has appointed
This maiden crown for thee, the Lords Anointed,
The man of his right hand, and for thy seed,
Which God mot bless and all who shall proceed
Forth of thy loins, and stablish in thy place
So long as Sun and Moon shall run their race.
Then reign, great Charles, our nostrels sweetest breath,
Long may thou reign Defender of the Faith,
Enthroned among these vvorthie peerlesse pearls,
And let all say, God save our good King Charles;
And deeply in his heart imprint that zeal,
To make the law supreme the peoples well.
What shall we speak of Martial Chiftans more?
Of Gideons, and of Sampsons we have store,
Whom God did raise, for to defend our state
Miraculously, in times most desperate.
What braver Hector, or more brave Achilles
In Greece, or Phrygia, than Sir William Wallace?
And John the Grahame, his mate, and brother svvorn,
Whose living fame his name does much adorn?
And if we list this subject more to handle,
What Governor like good Earl Thomas Randall?
Or doughtie Douglas with courageous heart,
Whose name wrought dreadful terror in each part?
But this heroic theme, so passing great,
Impossible it is all to relate,
Our worthy rulers even unto their days
They do not want their own deserved praise,
Nor shall they for my part want due renown,
Virtue to advance, and vice to trample down.
These be the wall of Gods own work and framing
Against our foes, and of his own maintaining,
Wherefore we bless his holy Name that made us,
And pray that never foreign scepter lead us,
T'impose hard laws, and tributaries make us,
To chastise us with scorpions, and to rake us;
And likewise pray, that Ajax-like, we would not
Undo our selves, which all our enemies could not.
But O dear Caledonia! What desire DIN^URGH.

Have all men who have heard thy fame t'admire
Thy monuments? How much more these who be
Thy sons, desire thy maiden soil to see?
Thy maiden castle, and fair Maiden burgh,
The stately winged City, which is through
All ages much renow'nd with streets so fair,
And palaces so mounted in the air
That if the deepnesse of imagination
Could limme a landskape by deep meditation,
Scarce could it match, where bravest youths abound,
And gravest counselors are always found:
Where Justice joineth hand with true Religion,
And golden virtue keep the middle region,
As register, where these acts are enrold,
Better than in Corinthian brass or gold.
Let Poetaster-parasits, who fain,
And fawn, and crouch, and coutch, and creep for gain,
And, where no hope of gain is, huffe, and hur,
And bark against the Moon as does a Cur;
Let such base curs, who naught but gobbets smell,
Wish the disgraced, and deeply sunk in hell
Whether themselves do go; yet shall thou stand,
And see them ruined all that thee withstand:
God shall be-friend thy friends, and shall all those
Array with shame that causeless be thy foes:
Thou art this ancient Kingdoms bravest part,
For wit and worth thou art its hand and heart,
And who the Kingdoms compend brave would see
Needs do no more but survey take of thee.
Hence these desires fair Caledonias soil
To view, where bravest stratagems with toil
Have acted been, hence comes these kindly wishes,
To see these fields, even like these kindly fishes,
Which we behold ov'rcome this mighty lin,
And seek the fountains where they did begin.
The third Muse.
THus as we did behold the Salmond sporting,
We spyed some Country clowns to us resorting, Country clowns hal^ asses.

Who stricken were with sudden admiration
To see us graithed in such antique fashion,
Their stairing eyes grew blind, their tongues were dumb,
A chilling cold their senses did benumme.
Said we, What moves you Ghosts to look so griesly?
They scarcely muttering, answered, and not wisely,
Often have we heard of such strange wights as ye,
But to this time we did them never see,
If ye be men or not, scarce can we tell,
Ye look like men, yet none such here do dwell.
Then said good Gall, Monsier, these fellows stupid, Gall was a ^le and good^
man, M. George a ^onnie little ^an.

Doubtless take me for Mars, and you for Cupid;
Therefore let us be gone, we will not tarry,
Yon clownes will swear that they have seen the Farie
When they come home at night, and by the fire
Will tell such uncouth tales, all will admire,
Both man and wife, the laddes and all the lasses,
For be ye sure such clownes are very asses.
Thence down the river bank as we did walk,
And mirrielie began to chant and talk,
A pretty boat with two oars we espied
Fleeting upon the waters, then we cried,
HOW boatman come; two fisher men neerby
Thus answered us again, And who does cry?
Said we, Good friends, to favor us delay not,
The day is very hot, and walk we may not,
Therefore your kindly courtesy implores,
To let us have these little pair of oars
For down the river we would make our way,
And land at Perth, With all our heart, said they,
For we likewise at Perth would gladly be,
Only we want such company as ye.
All men were glad of us, none did refuse
What ever thing it pleased us ask or choose,
Then we inbarked with two boys in train,
Who recollect our shafts, and these two men:
As down the river did we softly slide,
The banks most sweetly smyld on other side:
To see the flowers our hearts did much rejoice
The banwort, dazie, and the fragrant rose;
Favonius in our faces sweetly blew
His breath, which did our fainting sprits renew.
Then with Sicilian Muse can we dissemble
Our secret flammes, making our voices tremble;
While as we sweetly sung kind Amaryllis,
And did complain of sowre-sweet lovely Phyllis,
So sadly, that the Nymphs of woods and mountains,
And these which haunt the plains and crystal fountains Nymphs.

Bare-legged to the brawns, arms bare and breast,
Like whitest evorie bare unto the waste,
The lillies and the roses of their faces
Running more pleasant made, their waveing tresses,
Well curled with the wind: all these drew nigh
The waters brink, in song to keep reply,
Treading the flowers, When Gall them so espied
O! how he cast his eyes on either side.
And wished to have smeld one flovvr, where they had traced,
Judge what he would have given to have embraced.
But chiefly Echo fettred was in love,
At every word we spoke her tongue did move, Echo.

Then did we call, Svveet Nymph, pray thee dravv nigh?
She ansvveering us most willingly, said, I
Dravv near said Gall, for gladly would I please thee,
Do not deny to hear me. She said ease thee,
Then comesvveet Nymph, thy face feign would I know,
She quickly answering him again, said, No.
Why so, said he? Here is there no Narcissus.
To this her old loves Name did answer, kiss us.
Kiss us, said he, with all my heart, again.
This is the thing I would: she answered, Gain:
Gain! such a gain, said he, I crave always;
No countenance she shows, yet answers ay;
And bashfuly obscures her blushing face,
Lest from Cephisus son she find disgrace.
But if that she had known Gals tender mind,
She had not proved so bashful and unkind.
When ended were our songs with perfect close,
We thought it best to merry be in prose;
Then seriously and truly to discourse,
Of diverse matters grave, we fell by course,
But chiefly of this blind worlds practice bad, ^ontempt of ^rning.

Preferring unto learning any trade.
For these evil times hold not in such account
Men learned, as the former ages wont:
But if the worth of learning well they knew,
Good Gall (quoth I) they would make much of you,
In Poetry so skild, and so well red that a Poet ^n do.

In all antiquity, what can be said
Whereof you fluently can not discourse,
Even like the current of this rivers course?
Things absent you can present make appear,
And things far distant; as if they were near,
Things senseless unto them give sense can ye,
And make them touch, taste, smell, and hear, and see:
What can not Poets do? They life can give
And after fatal stroke can make men live;
And if they please to change their tune or note,
They Will make men's names on earth to stink and rote.
Who did fix Hercules amongst the stars?
And Diomedes for his wit in wars
Made equal to the gods? But odious
For vice Thersites vile, and Sisyphus?
These were the immortal muses, who do sing,
As vice and virtue do their subjects bring,
Therefore this counsel wisdom does impart you,
Flee filthy vice and intertaine fair virtue.
Yet it is not so that every spirit fell
Whose wicked tongue is set on fire of Hell,
Nor every Momus, nor Archilochus,
Whose mouths do vomit venom poisonous,
Has inspiration of the sacred Muses,
Such wickedness the Aonian band refuses:
But he who vice most gravely censure can,
And virtues praise advance in any man
With perfect numbers, such one is a Poet,
But in their days, alace, few men do know it,
Like my dear Gall: who gravely did reply
A good Mecaenas lets not Poets die,
Poets make men on gold winged fame to fly
When lands with loss; life changed with death shall be.
As we thus talked our berge did sweetly pass
By Scones fair palace, sometimes Abbay was:
Strange change indeed, yet is it no new guyse,
Both spiritual lands and more to temporise.
But palace fair, which does so richly stand,
Where gardens, orchards, parks on either hand,
Where flovvres, and fruits, the heart, and fallovv dear,
For smell, for taste, for venison and cheer,
The nose, the mouth, and palate which may please,
For gardine chambers for delight and ease,
Damask't with porphyrie and alabaster,
Thou art not subject for each Poetaster,
But for a Poet, Master in his art,
Which thee could whole descrive, and every part,
So to the life, as t'vvere in perspective,
As readers that they see thee might believe.
Mean while our boat does with the river slide
The country Nymphs who in these parts abide,
With many a shout moving both head and hand
Did us invite, that we would come a land.
Not now, said we; and think it not disdain
For we do promise for to come again,
And view where some time stood your Cathedral,
And mount, which Omnis terra you do call. ^dge of ^y.

Just by this time we see the bridge of Tay
O happy sight indeed, was it that day;
A bridge so stately, with elleven great arches,
Joining the south and north, and commoun march is
Unto them both, a bridge of squared stone,
So great and fair; which when I think upon,
How in these days it did so proudly stand,
Ov'rlooking both the river and the land;
So fair, so high, a bridge for many ages
Most famous; But alace, now through the rages
Of furious swelling waters, thrown in deep,
Mine heart for sorrow sobs, mine eyes do weep.
And if my tongue should cease to cry and speak,
Undoubtedlie my grief-swoln heart would break.
But courage, Monsier, my good Genius says,
Remember ye not how Gall in those days
Did you comfort, lest melancholious fits
Had you oppressed, your spleen so neerelie sits,
And told you in the year threescore thirteen
The first downfall this Bridge did ere sustain,
By ruin of three arches nixt the town,
Yet were rebuilt. Thereafter were thrown down
Five arches in the year fourscore and two,
Reedified likewise, and who does know
Monsier, but ah, mine heart can scarcely sober!
Even that great fall the fourteenth of October,
Six hundred twenty one, repaird may be,
And I do wish the same that I might see:
For Britains Monarch will it sure repair,
Courage therefore, Monsier, do not despare;
Is It credible to be believed or told,
That these our Kings, who did possess of old
Scotland alone, should such a work erect
And Britains mighty Monarch it neglect?
Absurd it is to think, much more to speak it;
Therefore good Monsier ye do far mistake it;
For never had ye King was more inclinde
To do great works; nor of a braver mind,
Providing he can have due information,
His word will prove of powerful operation:
For Kings are Gods on Earth, and all their actions
Do represent The Almighty's great perfections.
Thus Gals sweet words often do me comfort,
And my good Genius truly does report
Them unto me, else sure my spleen should wholly
Be overcome with fits of melancholy;
Therefore I courage take, and hope to see
A bridge yet built, although I aged be,
More stately, firm, more sumptuous, and more fair,
Then any former age could yet compare:
Thus Gall assured me it would be so,
And my good Genius truly does it know:
For what we do presage is not in gross,
For we be brethren of the Rosy Cross;
We have the Mason word, and second sight,
Things for to come we can foretell aright;
And shall we show what mystery we mean,
In fair acrosticks CAROLUS REX, is seen
Described upon that bridge, in perfect gold:
By skillful art; this cleerelie we behold,
With all the Scutcheon of great Britains King,
Which unto Perth most joyful news shall bring,
Loath would we be this mystery to unfold
But for King Charles his honor we are bold.
And as our Boat most pleasantly did pass ^st building (...) the bridge (...)
Tay.

Upon the cristall river, clear as glass,
My dearest Gall, quoth I, long time I spend
Revolving from beginning to the end
All our records, yet searching can not find
First when this bridge was built; therefore thy mind
Feign would I know: for I am very sorry
Such things should be omitted in our story.
Monsier, said Gall, things many of that kind
To be omitted often do we find:
Yea time has also greatest works destroyed,
Wherein the learn'dest pens have been employed.
But if that I should tell what I do know,
An ancient story I could to you shovv,
Which I have found in an old manuscript,
But in our late records is overslipt,
Which story no less probable is, than true,
And, my good Monsier, I will show it you.
I leave to speak what Hollinshed has told
Of Cunidag, was Britain king of old,
The time Vzziah was of Judah king,
And Jeroboam did over Israel reign,
Ere Rome a city was years forty five,
Ere sons of Rhea did for masterie strive,
How that this Heathen built three cells of stone,
To Mercury at Bongor built he one,
His way for to direct: then to Apollo
At Cornuel another did he hallovv,
For favorable response: the third to Mars,
Where Perth now stands, for to assist his wars.
But good Monsier this story is too old,
Therefore I leave the rest of it untold,
The time will not permit me to out-read it,
I Am sure in Hollinshed ye often read it.
I will a story of no less credit tell,
In after ages truly what befell.
When mighty Romans came into this soil,
With endless labor and undaunted toil,
After great conflicts and uncertain chance
Of Fortunes dye, they did in arms advance,
At length unto these parts where Perth does stand
Under the conduct and victorious hand
Of that most valiant Chieftain of great fame
Brave Julius Agricola by Name.
And there hard by a river side they found
The fairest and most pleasant plot of ground,
That since by bank of Tiber they had been,
The like for beauty seldom had they seen,
Of eighteen hundredth paces good, in length,
From Muretowne brays to foot of Carnaks strength,
King of the Pights, which stood on Moredune hill,
The foot thereof from Friars dwelt thereintill
Now named is, in breadth eight hundredth paces,
Painted with white, red, yellow flowrie faces,
So equal fair; which when they did espy,
Incontinent they Campus Martius cry,
And as an happy presage they had seen,
They fixed their tents amidst that spacious green,
Right where now Perth does stand, and cast their trenches
Even where Perths fowsies are, between these inches,
The south and north, and bastalies they make,
The power and strength of Scots, and Pights to brake,
Who presently would fight, by wise cunctation
They frustrat all their hope and expectation:
For well this most victorius Roman knew
T'abate his Enemies rage and courage too.
Finding the place even to their hearts desire,
With grass for pasture stored, and wood for fire,
The river likewise very opportune
For lighter vessels to pass up and down,
And correspondence with their Navy make,
As Soldiers wise, they all occasions take,
And do conclude to winter in that place,
To foil their foes, by voluntary chase.
Mean while courageously they do advise
A bridge to build, for further enterprise, Wright work.

Then forthwith fall they with redoubling strokes
To fell the tall fur trees, and aged oaks;
Some square the timber with a stretched line,
Some do the tenons, and the morties join,
Some frame an ovall, others make a cub,
Some cut a section, other some do grub,
Some with great compass semicircles form,
Some drive the wadges, painfully some worm,
Some do hoyse up the standers, others fix them;
And some lay goodly rafters over betwixt them;
What strength or skill can work, from point to point
They cunningly contrive with angular joint,
And do most strongly bind these contignations,
To make them stand against all inundations.
All men are set on frame, all hands are working,
And all ingines are bussied without irking.
Thus in short space, a bridge they strongly make,
With passage fair; and for their safeties sake
A mighty strength to be, they frame withal,
On either end, a bridge to lift and fall,
That soldiers might within it keep at ease,
Admitting, or repelling, as they please
Thus fortified, lest that they should neglect
Due honor to their gods, they did erect
To Mars a temple, rather did restore
The temple built by Cunidag before:
For time on all things works demolition,
And heathen men maintain like superstition.
Then did this valiant chiftaine name the river
In Italies remembrance Neo-Tiber.
Which afterward it kept for many a day,
How long I know not, now its called Tay.
Likewise an house of mighty stone he framed,
From whence our Castell-gavell, as yet is named.
And, if Domitian had not called him home,
I think he should have built another Rome.
But all these monuments were worn away
Ere did King William Perths foundation lay,
Only Mars temple stood upon that green,
And the house built by Agricola was seen,
And some characters cunningly incisde
With Julius Agricola imprisde
In solid marmor, and some print was found,
Where camped had an army, and the ground
Where there had been a bridge: all which did yield
Occasion to King William for to beild,
After old Bertha's overthrow, that city,
These ancient walls, and famous bridge; ah pity
If they were as! But what does not the rage
Of men demolish and consuming age?
For good King William seeing where had been
Of old a passage, forthwith did ordain
A mighty bridge of squaired stone to be.
These famous walls and fusies which we see,
Perth his chief strength to make, and seat of power
Did with most ample privilege indue her.
These be the first memorials of a bridge,
Good Monsier, that we truly can allege.
Thus spoke good Gall and I did much rejoice
To hear him these antiquities disclose;
Which I remembering now, of force must cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
The fourth Muse.
THis time our boat passing too nigh the land,
The vvhirling stream did make her run on sand,
Aluif, we cried, but all in vain, to abide,
We were constrained, till flowing of the tide.
Then Master Gall, quod I, even for my blessing
Now let us go, the precious pearls a fishing, Fishing of pearls.

The Occasion serves well, while here we stay
To catch these mussels, you call toyts of Tay:
It Is possible, if no ill eye bewitch us
We jewels find, for all our days to enrich us:
The waters here are shald, and clear, and warm,
To bath our arms and lims will do no harm,
For these sweet streams have power to bring back
Our spirits which in outward parts make slake
Our natural strength, but when these sprits retire
They multiply our heat and inbred fire,
Helping our vital, and our natural parts,
Our lungs, our levers, stomachs, and our hearts,
And mightily refrigerat our reanes,
But above all they do refresh our spleans.
For such a bathing bravely does expel
Melancholy, which makes the splean toswell.
More than it should, causing an atrophie,
That we like skelets rather seem to be
Then men, and Atropos appears to laugh,
Thinking we look liker an Epitaph,
Then marriage song; likewise it does us make
Both supper and collation freshly take.
Content said Gall: Then off our shoes we drew,
And hose, and from us we our doublets threw,
Our shirt sleeves wreathing up, without more speeches,
And high above our knees pulling our breeches,
In waters go, then straight mine arms I reach
Unto the ground, whence cleaverly I fetch
Some of these living pearled shells, which do
Excel in touching and in tasting too,
As all who search do by experience try,
And we oftimes; therewith I lowdlie cry,
Good Master Gall, behold I found a pearl,
A Jewel, I assure you, for an Earl.
Be silent, said good Gall, or speak at leisure,
For men will cut your throat to get your treasure,
If they its worth did know so well as I.
Harpocrates my patience will try,
Said I again, for I am not like such
Who hurd their treasure and their speech as much.
But Gall, to stay long, no ways could be moved
This element, said he, I never loved.
To land: on goes our clothes, along the way
Then did we go, and taking clear survey
How proper Perth did stand, one might have drawn
Its landship fair, on paper, or on lawn.
Good Gall, said I, ofttimes I heard of old The walls Perth.

To be of truth these things ere while you told:
But of these walls I doubt that which you said
That good King William their foundations laid.
Their founding is more late, I you assure;
That we from strangers rage may be secure,
They builded were, even then when James did reign
The second, and in minor age was king,
Upon a bloody slaughter, I hear tell,
Which twixt our town and highland men befell;
For taking, as the custom was, a staig
At Midsummer; said Gall, Monsier, you vaig.
Which word indeed my spleen almost did move:
Then Gall, said I, if that I did not love
You most entirely, I would be offended.
Said he, good Monsier, Would you have it mended?
Then I that story will you truly tell,
And if I fail so much as in a spell,
Speak all your pleasure, I my peace shall hold,
An^ grant my tongue in speaking was too bold:
Therefore Monsier, be not so much annoyed,
These walls have often been built, and often destroyed
And stratagems of war have acted been,
As worthy as the world has heard or seen.
By Sojours as good as the Earth has born,
This boldly to avow I dar be sworn:
Englands first Edwards three can show the same,
And Scotlands Wallace, Bruce, and Stewarts fame,
Whose prowes within this Isle were not confined
The Netherlands and France scarce them contained,
Nor other parts of Europ, and it is clear
What great exploits they bravely acted here,
These stories are well known, I must not slack,
For by and by the tide will call us back,
When Edward Langshanks Scotland did surprise,
The strengths first did he take, as Chiftaine wise, ^allace ex^leth the (...)
our Perth.

But his chief strength to keep both South and North
Lovv-lands and high-lands on this side of Forth,
Perth did he choose, and strongly fortify
With garrisons of foot and chavalrie.
And what the former times could not outred
In vvalls and fovvsies; these accomplished.
Thereafter vvorthie Wallace first expelled them,
And for to leave these walls by force compelled them. ^allace sur^ders the
^vernment.

Whom after foughten was that fatal field
Woeful Falkirk, envy did force to yield
Up his government; to Perth then came,
And in the Nobles presence quatte the same.
Leanfac'd envy does often bring a nation
To civil discord, shame, and desolation.
Such bitter fruit we found, all to confusion
At once did run, was nothing but effusion
Of guiltless blood: Our enemies did take
Our strengths again, and all things went to wrake,
Such was our woeful state, unto the time
The brave King, Robert Bruce, came to this clime, Bruce.

Most happily, yet small beginnings had:
For many years before this land he fred
From enemies rage, till wisely he at length
By soft recoiling recollected strength;
Then came to Perth, and did the same besiege Buchan. li^ 8. page 272.

And take; who through persuit and cruel rage
Killed Scots, and English all were in it found,
Brake down the walls, them equaled to the ground.
But after this victorious King did die,
And brave Earl Thomas Randolf, by and by
All things perplexed were, the Baliol proud
With English forces both by land and flood Baliol.

In Scotland came, arrived at Kinghorne,
And through the country mightily did sorne.
Our Governors, the Earls of Merche and Mar
Sufficient armies levying for war
This pride for to repress, did fix their tents
At Dupline camped Mar: mine heart it rents Duplin field

To tell the woeful event, in the night
This Earl and all his host surprisde by sleight,
Ye know the story, all to death near brought,
The Englishmen on Scots such butcheries wrought.
Thus Baliol proud to Perth did make his way,
The city all secure ere break of day
For to surprise, naked of walls and men,
As pray most easy did obtain, and then
To fortify the same, in haste, did call,
Go cast the fousie, and repair the wall.
The Earl of Merch, hearing the woeful chance,
Incontinent his army did advance
To Perth, hoping the same he might regaine,
Did straightly it besiege, but all in vain,
He forced was to reteir; Baliol to Scone
Then went, was crowned, rather usurped the crown.
By these fair Fortuns having gained a faction,
Not for the countries peace, but for distraction
Did overswey the balance, none with reason
Durst call the Baliols enterprise a treason,
Because it had good success; so does reele
The Inconstant course of giddie Fortunes wheel.
Constant in changes of blindfolded chance.
Mean while King David Bruce did flee to France
As yet a child, his tender life to save
From tyrannizing Baliols bloody glave.
Baliol installed, in guarding leaves the town
To some true traitors, not true to the crown. ^erth besei^d three ^onths.

Hereafter Nobles and commons all combinde
Whose kin were killed at Dupline, in one mind
Avenged to be, did come in awful manner
Unto the city, with displayed banner;
And strongly it beseige three months and more,
Till strong assault, and famine, urgeing sore,
Forced them to yield, the traitors openly killed
The walls were razed again, and fousies filled. Is taken, a^ her walls r^ zed.

Yet Baliol once more did obtain the same,
And with new Fortunes much advance his name
But who does not find Fortunes fickle chance?
Whom erewhile she so highly did advance
To hold a scepter, and to wear a crown,
Now tyrannizing proudly pesters down:
King Edward came with fifty thousand brave
To Perth, the Baliol, lead as captived slave. King Edwa^ the third t^ keth
capti^ the Baliol^ takes in Pe^ and rebuil^ her walls.

Trust not in Kings, nor Kingdoms, nor applause
Of men, the World's a sea that ebbes and flows,
A wheel that turns, a reele that always rokes
A bait that overswallowed men choaks.
Seditions rise again, this Edward Windsore
With greater forces came, and made a wind sore
To blow through Scotland, minding a new conquest,
Did all things overwhelme, even as a tempest
Castles ov'rcome, strongly beligger Perth
It take, rebuild her walls, all thrown to Earth,
Upon the charges of sex Abacies,
With bulwarks, rampires, rounds, and bastilies
Of squared stone, with towers and battlements,
Houses for prospect, and such muniments,
For strong defense, clouses and water falls,
With passage fair to walk upon the walls,
And spacious bounds within sojours to dreele,
To merch, to string, to turn about, and wheel.
These were the Abacies, Couper, Landores,
Balmerinoch, Dumfermling, Saint Androes,
And Aberbrotok; who these works did frame,
For merit, and for honor of their name:
Such zeal had they, though blind; ah now a-dayes
Much knowledge is professed, but zeal decays.
Thus was the city strongly fortified, ^ng Robert ^e second ^liggereth ^rth,
assisted (...) the Dou^as, and Earl Rosse.

Till Robert the first Stuart first assayed
With four great armies, yet by force repelled
And after three months sage with grief compelled
To sound retreat, Douglas mean while in Tay
Most happ'ly did arrive: then they assay
To reinforce the charge, and with munition
For battery new prepared, and demolition,
Most furiously assault, a month and more,
Yet nothing could avail their endevoure,
Until the Earl of Rosse with new supply
Did fortify the leaguer, and drew by
The water, which the wall did compass round,
By secret conduits, and made dry the ground.
Then after sharp assault, and much blood spended,
Bravely pursued, and no less well defended,
Finding themselves too weak who were within
More to resist, to parlie they begin, ^rth surren^red by the (...).

And treat of peace; both parties jump in one,
With bag and baggage that they should be gone,
And so it was: The city they surrender
No English since has been thereof commander.
Read George Buchanane Boece, Master Mair
These histories they word for word declare.
After this seige the walls some part thrown down
But were not wholly razde, to keep the town
In some good sort, ready for peace or war,
If not a bulwark, yet some kind of bar.
Thus did they stand, until these heighland men
Amidst their fury killed a Citizen; The He^ land men a Burges Perth.

A Citizen to kill, an odious thing
It then was thought; no sacrifice condign
Could expiat the same, though now each knave
Dar to account a citizen a slave;
No such conceat in all the World again,
As proudlie-poor such fondlings do maintain.
This sudden slaughter made a great commotion,
The Burgesses without further devotion Are pers^ by the ci^ zens to Ho^
manstair^

As men with war inured, to arms do fly,
Upon these Heigh-land men avenged to be,
Which they perform, chaffed in mind as bears,
And do pursue them unto Hoghmansstaires;
In memory of this fight it has the name,
For many men lay there, some dead, some lame,
On which occasion they began fortify,
And build these walls again, as now we see; The (...) building (...) the walls.

Though not so brav'ly as they were before,
For that did far surpass their endeavor,
Yet some resemblance they do keep and fashion
For they be builded near the old foundation.
These are the walls, Monsier, as I have shown,
Which often have been built, ofttimes down thrown
With stratagems of war, fame has renownd them,
And if not Mars, yet martial men did found them.
But now, good Monsier, needs none more at all
Them to destroy: they of themselves will fall.
So said good Gall, and humbly begged leave
For that offense so rashly he did give.
Oh! if he were on life to say much more,
For so he was disposde some times to roar.
The fifth Muse.
YEt bold attempt and dangerous, said I, Perths old ^rgesses all ^osen men
greatest ^nhood, for ^ence of ^t strength, chapter lib. 16. (...). 593.

Upon these kind of men such chance to try
By nature inhumaine, much given to blood,
Wild, fierce, and cruel, in a disperat mood.
But no such danger, answered Master Gall,
As fearfullie you deem, was there at all:
For Perth was then a city made for war,
Her men were soldiers all, and bold to dar
Such motion attempt, a soldier keen
The smallest outrage hardly can susteene.
Many such stratagems declare I might,
Which Perth has acted in defense of right:
How Ruthvens place, and Duplins, in one day The battle the bridge Tay its
^ent.

Were burned, or battle of the bridge of Tay,
With manly courage fought, where, killed were many,
Upon the day sacred to Magdalene,
Five hundredth forty four, for which she mournes,
And many times her cristall tears she turns
In floods of woes, remembering how these men
Were justly by their own ambition slain,
Thinking to sack a town, some through despair
Did overleap the bridge, and perish there:
Some borne on spears, by chance did swim a land.
And some lay swelting in the slykie sand,
Agruif lay some, others with eyes to skies,
These yielding dying sobs, these mournful cries.
Some by their fall were fixed on their spears,
Some swatring in the flood the stream down bears,
By chance some got a boat, What needs more words?
They make them oars of their two handed swords:
Some doubting what to do, to leap or stay,
Were trampled under foot as mirie clay;
Confusedly to fight and flee they thrimble,
The shifring spears thurst through their bodies tremble,
And strongly brangled in splents do quickly flee,
The glistring sword is changed in crimson dye;
To wrak they go; even as the raging thunder,
Rumbling and rolling roundly, breaks asunder
A thick and dampish cloud, making a shower
Of crystal gems, on Earths dry bosom power,
So broken was that cloud, the purpure blood
In drops distilling, rather as a flood,
The dry and dustie ground does warmely draine;
And dying bodies in their own blood stain,
Or as the comets, or such meteors driven
Or stars which do appear to fall from heaven:
So tumbling headlong spears in hand they traile;
As fiery dragons, seem to have a tail;
Or Phaeton, or some sulphurous ball,
So from the bridge in river do they fall.
I pray the Gall, quoth I, that story shovv ^he occasi^ of the bat, (...).

Some things I heard of it, and more would know,
Tell it I pray. No, no, Gall did reply,
Lest I offend our neighbor town neerby,
When they shall hear how malice did provoke them,
Ambition them guide and avarice choke them;
Thinking upon our spoils triumph to make,
And on the occasion given our town to vvrak,
With full commission purchased for the same,
T'intrude a Provest, else with svvord and flame
All to destroy, given by the Cardinal,
At whose devotion then was governed all:
So in that morning soon by break of day
The town all silent did beset, then they
To clim the bridge begin and port to skall, ^he enemy ^tereth the ^wne too
^ldly.

The chains they break, and let the dravvbridge fall;
The little gate of purpose was left patent
And all our Citizens in lanes were latent,
None durst be seen, the enemies to allure
Their own destruction justly to procure;
Thus entering through, well straightly, one did call,
All is our own, Come fellovv-souldiers all,
Advance your Lordly pace; take and destroy,
Build up your Fortunes; O with what great joy
These words were heard! Then did they proudly step
As men advanced on stilts, and cock their cap.
With roulling eyes they look, and hand in side
Throwing their noses, snuff, and with great pride
Selflooking set their brawnes, themselves admire
And doubting at their own hearts closely spear
If it be they; thus wondering do they pause
A pretty while, anon they quickly loose
With swifter pace; and turning round, they move
If there be any gazer to approve
Their great conceat; thus, inly filled with glie,
They wish their wife or mistres might them see:
Scorning Alcides, they his strength would try,
And in their brain the World they do defy.
With such brave thoughts they throng in through the port
Thinking the play of Fortune bairnely sport,
And as proud peacocks with their plumes do prank
Along the bridge they merche in battle rank,
Till they came to the gate with iron hands,
Hard by where yet our Ladies chapel stands,
Thinking to break these bars it made some hover,
Too strong they were, therefore some did leap over,
Some crept below, thus many pass in by them,
And in their high conceat they do defy them.
Forwards within the town a space they go,
The passage then was strait, as well ye know,
Made by a wall, having gained so much ground
They can exult: Incontinent did sound The enemi^ flees.

A trumpet from a watchtowre; then they start,
And all their blood does strike into their heart;
A wondrous change! even now the bravest fellows
In their own fancies glass, who came to quail us
The vital sprits their artires do contain,
Their panting hearts now scarcely can sustain.
Our souldiurrs then, who lying were a darning,
By sound of trumpet having got a warning
Do kyth, and give the charge; to tell the rest
Ye know it well, it needs not be expressed,
Many to ground were born, great blood was shed,
He was the prettiest man that fastest fled.
Yea happy had they been, if place had served
To flee, then doubtless more had been preserved.
Within these bars were killed above threescore
Upon the bridge and waters many more.
But most of all did perish in the chase,
For they pursued were unto the place,
Where all their baggage and their canon lay,
Which to the town was brought as lawful prey.
What shall I more say? if more you would have,
I Will speak of these three hundredth soldiers brave, Johnston ^and.

Like these renowned Lacedaemonians,
Courageous Thebans, valiant Thespians
Resolved to die, led by Leonidas,
Stopped Xerxes army at Thermopylas.
Such were these men who for Religions sake,
A cord of hemp about their necks did take,
Solemnly sworn, to yield their lives thereby,
Or they the Gospels verity deny:
Quiting their houses, goods, and pleasures all,
Resolved for any hazard might befall,
Did pass forth of the town in arms to fight,
And die, or they their liberty and light
Should lose, and whosoever should presume
To turn away that cord should be his doom.
Hence of Saint Iohnstoun riband came the word
In such a frequent use, when with a cord
They threaten rogues; though now all in contempt
It speak, yet brave and resolute attempt,
And full of courage, worthy imitation,
Deserving of all ages commendation
Made these men put it on, symbol to be,
They ready were for Christ to do or die.
For they were Martyrs all in their affection
And like to David's Worthies in their action;
Therefore this cord should have been made a badge
And sign of honor to the after age.
Even as we see things in themselves despised,
By such rare accidents are highly prised,
And in brave skutsheons honorably born,
With mottoes rare these symbols to adorn.
Thus some have vermin, and such loathsome swarms,
Yet honorably borne are in their arms,
And some have myce, some frogs, some filthy rats,
And some have wolfs, and foxes; some have cats;
Yet honorable respect in all his had,
Though in themselves they loathsome be and bad,
Thus Millaine glories in the bainfull viper,
As none more honor mystery none deeper;
The ancient Gauls in toads, in lillies now
Metamorphosde: The Phrygians in their sow.
Athens their owl with The Eagle will not barter,
And Honi soit who thinks ill of the garter.
What shall be said then of this rope or cord?
Although of all men it be now abhord,
And spoke of in disdain, their ignorance
Has made them so to speak, yet may it chance
When they shall know the truth, they will speak better,
And think of it as of a greater matter,
And truly it esteem an hundredth fold
Of much more honor than a chain of gold.
Thus may you see Monsier, men of renown
Of old time have possessed this ancient town.
And yet this may we boast, even to this day
Men of good wit and worth do not decay;
For to this hour some footsteps still remains
Of such courageous hearts and cunning brains.
Good Master Gall, quoth I, I know that well
Whereof you speak, and clearly can it tell,
For I did say these Men, being then of age
Some twelve or threttene years, a pretty page,
As easily you may guess, and can you show
Some partial points whereof you nothing know.
Nor are they written. Then answered Master Gall,
A witness such as you is above all
Exception, therefore show what you did see,
Or hear, good Monsier, Your antiquity
Is of great credit: Master Gall, quoth I,
Much did I see, and much more did I try:
My Father was a man active, and wight
In those days, and who helped for to fight
The battle of the bridge: within few years
Thereafter was I borne, then all our quires
And convents richly stood, which I did see
With all their pomp; but these things told to me
First will I show; a story of much ruth
How that our Martyrs suffered for the truth Persecut^ at Perth (...) the truth.

Of Christ's blessed Gospel, on Paul's holy day
Before the fight was of the bridge of Tay
In that same year; the silly Governor
Led by the crafty Cardinal, with power
Held judgment on these men, and under trust
Condemned them; nothing their bloody lust
Could satiat: The Citizens made sure
Their neighbors should nor loss nor skaith endure,
Go to their homes, forthwith the Cardinal
Causde lead them unto execution all.
And from the Spey tower window did behold
Doom execut, even as his Clergy would:
Which treacherous fact did so enrage the town,
No credit more to black, white, nor gray gown
After these days was given: Thus in the place
Where malefactors end their wicked race,
These innocents do make a blessed end,
And unto God their sprits they recommend,
In witness of the faith, for which they die,
And by the Sprit of truth did prophecy
These words, looking and pointing with the hand
Toward our Monasteries, which then did stand
Most sumptuously adorned with steples, bells,
Church ornaments, and what belongs else,
"These foxes which do lurk within these holes,
"Delighting in the earth like blinded moles,
"Drowned in their lusts, and swimming in their pleasures
"Whose God their belly, whose chief joy their treasures;
"Who caused have our death, shall hunded be
"Forth of these dens, some present here shall see
"The same ere it be long, then shall ye say,
"Its for Gods truth that we have dyed this day.
"And all these sumptuous buildings shall be cast
"Down to the earth, made desolat, and wast:
"This to perform Gods zeal shall eat men up,
"To fill the double potion in their cup:
"The apples then of pleasure, which they loved
"And lusted after, shall be all removed.
"Yea scarcely shall they find a hole to hide
"Their heads (thus by the Sprite they testified.)
"And in that day true Pastors shall the Lord
"Raise up to feed his flock, with his pure word,
"And make Christ's people by peculiar choice
"Dignosce the sheepheards from the hyrelings voice.
Which as they did foretell did come to pass
Some sixteen years or thereby, more or less,
Thus with clear signs, by Gods own Sprit expressed,
In full assurance of heavens bless they rest.
Mean while Saint Catharins Chaplan standing by,
Wringing his eyes and hands, did often cry, Catharins ^plan.

Alace, alace, for this unhappie turn,
I fear for it one day we shall all mourn,
And that by all it shall be plainly said,
That we blind guides the blinded long have led;
Some Churchmen there, bad pack him heretic,
Else certainly they should cause burn him quick,
This done, friends take their bodies and with mourning
Do carry them toward the town, returning
With heavy hearts, them to this chapel bring,
But no Soul Mass nor Dirige durst sing.
Yet this good Priest did lay them on the altar,
And all night read the pistle, and the psalter,
With heart devote, and sad; from th'evening vapers,
Placing upon the altar burning tapers
Unto the dawning: exequies thus ended.
Their bodies to the Earth are recommended.
This Chapel some time stood by our theater,
Where I my self sprinkled with holy water,
After these days did often hear the Mess
Albeit I knew not what it did express,
But this I saw, a man with a shaven crown,
Razed beard, and lips, who looked like a baboun,
Perfumed with odours, and in Priestlie vestures,
Did act this mimik toy with thousand gestures;
A mystery indeed, nor which no fable
Acted on stage to make you laugh more able.
After these innocents were martyred thus
As you have heard, Churchmen were odious,
And, when occasion served, so did they find,
For, so soon as did blow a contrare wind,
The hour was come, and then our Knox did sound,
Pull down their idols, throw them to the ground. Knox preac^ eth, idols a^
throwndow and religion places.

The multitude, even as a spear, did rush then
In poulder beat; and called them all Nehushtan.
Our blak Friars Church and place, white friars, and gray
Profaned, and cast to ground were in one day.
The Charterhouse like a Citadale did hold ^e charter^sethrown ^n.

Some two days more, until these nevves were told
We should be razed and sacked, and brought to ground,
Not so much as a footstep should be found
Where was such city; neither sex, nor age
Should saved be, until the cruel rage
Of fire and svvord should satiat that moud,
Quenching the fire with Citizens own blood
And with destructions besome svveep from station,
And savv with sault; perpetual desolation
To signify: These nevves made great commotion,
The fearful people ran to their devotion:
Doctrine and prayers done, chief men advise,
To take in hand first what great enterprise.
Said one, This place hard by our town does stand
A mighty strength, which easily may command,
And vvrake our city, therefore let us go
In time, and to the ground it overthrow,
For sure our Enemies will possess the same,
And us from thence destroy with svvord and flame,
Even at their pleasure. Then they all conclude
In arms to rise; and rushing as a flood
Which overflovves the banks, and headlongs hurles
The strongest bulvvarks with devouring vvhirles,
Svvallovving the mighty ships them overvvhelme,
Nothing availes his skill that guides the helm;
Even so the multitude in arms arise
With noise confusde of mirth and mourning cries
For that fair Palace, then sexscore nine years
Which had continued; turning of the spheres
The fatal period brought, to ground it must,
And all its pomp and riches turn to dust.
Even as these Martyrs truly did foretell
In every point the judgment so befell.
Towers fall to ground, Monks flee to hide their heads,
Nothing avail their rosaries and beads;
Then all men cried, Raze raze, the time is come,
Avenge the guiltless blood, and give the doom.
Courage to give was mightily then blown
Saint Iohnstons huntsup, since most famous known S. Iohnsto^ huntsup.

By all Musicians, when they sweetly sing
With heavenly voice, and well concording string.
O how they bend their backs and fingers tirle!
Moving their quivering heads their brains do whirle
With diverse moods; and as with uncouth rapture
Transported, so does shake their bodies structure:
Their eyes do reele, heads, arms, and shoulders move:
Feet, legs, and hands and all their parts approve
That heavenly harmony: while as they threw
Their brows, O mighty strain! that is brave! they show
Great fantasy; quivering a brief some while,
With full consent they close, then give a smile,
With bowing body, and with bending knee,
Me think I hear God save the Company.
But harmony which heavens and earth does please
Could not our Enemies furious rage appease;
Cruel Erinnis reigns destruction shoring,
Ten thousand soldiers like vvilde Lions roaring
Against our town do merch, fame desolation
Proclaims; the church then named the Congregation
Makes for defense: But ah the Burghs distractions!
Papists and Protestants make diverse factions;
The town to hold impossible they find,
The fields to take they purpose in their mind,
Factions within, munition, victual scarce,
Hardly to hold eight days they find by search.
Amids these doubts these valiant fellows come
In arms aray'd, and beatting of the drum,
With coards about their necks, Come, come, they cry,
We be the men who are resolved to die.
First in this quarrel; we to death will fight,
So long as courage will afford us might,
And who so yeeldes alive, this tow portends
Straight must he hing where did our dearest friends
Who suffered for the truth, nothing we skunner,
This certainly we count our chiefest honor.
Thus as Manasses half tribe, Ruben, Gad
Do leave their cattle, and mount Gilead,
Before their brethren over Jordan go,
In arms to fight against their cursed fo;
So these three hundred do abandon quite
Their city, houses, goods, and chief delight,
Resolved to die all for the Gospels light,
Armed before their brethren merch to fight;
And having gained a place meet to abide,
Their enemies to resist, courage they cride,
Be merry fellows all, leave sad complaints,
Dine cheerefullie, for sup we shall with Saints.
Fame spreads the brave attempt, all martial hearts
Inflamed with divine zeal flock to these parts
From places most remote, in arms they rise
T'assist the matchless happy enterprise.
God gives hearts to Men, and mightiest things
By weakest means he to confusion brings:
Our enemies ears are filled that all our fear
Was into courage turned from despare;
Their fiery rage is quenched, their hearts do fail,
Where God forsakes naught does man's strength avail.
Then what their open force could not work out,
By sleight they endeavor to bring about,
They treat of peace: peace flees with joyful wings,
But under it was hatched most lewd designs
When time should serve: But he whose thought does rule
This Worlds great frame their madness did control;
And graciously through his abundant pity
Preserved our Innocents, and saved our city. (ded
When by small means they found themselves confoun-
Even to their very heart roots were they wounded:
Then they began to rail, and show their passion,
Saying, Such riband's meet for such profession.
And in contempt, when any rogue thy see,
They say, Saint Iohnstouns Ribands meet for thee.
Or any fellow resolute in mind
For some great act, this riband fit they find
For such a one, Thus time made all men use
This word, and ignorance through time to abuse,
For every bad conceat, which for Religion
Was stoutly undertaken in thsi region:
Which I did see, and hear, and well do know,
And for your life the parallel me show
In all the World; except Leonidas
The rest, without a third I overpasse.
Thus our Saint Iohnstons riband took the name
Whereof we have no reason to think shame.
Our Shipper heerwith called, HOW, turn aback,
The waters flow, and tide does quickly make,
Therefore of this to speak more was no leisure,
For wind and tide (you know) stay no man's pleasure.
With post haste to our bearge we make our way,
The day far spent, longer we might not stay;
Our ship now fairlie fleeting comes a land,
Two skillful rowers take the oars in hand
We reembarked, down the river slide,
Which was most pleasant with the flowing tide,
The bridge draws nigh where contrare streams do run,
Take heed shipper, said we, these dangers shun,
The whirling stream will make our boat to cowp,
Therefore let us pass the bridge by Wallace loup.
Which when we did behold, amongst other things ^allace ^p.

We much admired who lent his feet such wings:
Empedocles may leap in Aetna burning,
In Tiber leap may Cocles home returning,
The one burns in flame, the other falls in flood
But Wallace overleaping makes all good.
When we these Heaven-like arches had surveyed
We admird in the air these hinging stones what stayed. ^ometricall ^cription
^wo sorts ^rches.

Then thus said Gall; these on their centers stay,
As on their bases fixed, and all their sway
They press toward the same, a wondrous thing,
Albeit the Center in the air does hing,
Yea diverse circles sections diverse ways
Tend to their proper centers, as their stays;
So these two sections do conjoine in one,
To make the arch, and finished in a cone,
As every peace these bowing arches bends,
It rightly pointing to the center tends.
So heavens respect the earth, and all their powers
Together in her bosom strongly powers,
Which is their center, root, and sure pedestall
The steadfast base whereon this World does rest all.
Thus man's ingine Gods works does imitate
And skillful Art does nature emulat.
As Archimedes in a sphere of glass
The worlds great fabric lively did express,
With all the stars fixed in the azure heaven,
And all the motions of the wandering seven,
Moving about a fixed point or center,
Observing hours, days, months, summer, and winter.
Even so the arches of this bridge proclaim,
And show the building of the starrie frame:
But now all lost, needs Archimedes skill,
Oh if it were supplied by Master Mylne!
Thus having past the bridge, our oars we bend
To shore, so this day voyage made an end.
The sixth Muse.
AS we arrived at our Ladies steps,
Incontinent all men reverst their capes,
Bidding us welcome home, and joining hand,
They ask from whence we came, and from what land?
Said we, Some curious catching every wind (...)

Do run through sea and land to either Inde,
And compassing the glob, in circuit role,
Some new found lands to search beneath each pole,
Or Memphis, wonders, or the Pharian tower, (...) mira^ of the ^ld.

Or walls which show the Babylonian power;
Or hung in the air the Mausolean frame,
Or statelie' temple of the Trivian dame,
The Rhodian Colossus, and the grove,
Where stood the statue of Olympian Jove,
With endless toil and labor pass to see,
Or if in all this world more wonders be,
They search the same, and so they stoutly boast,
Yet both themselves and pains are often times lost:
For going men, if they return perhaps,
Strange change, in swine transformed are their shaps:
Albeit some, though rare, who go from hence,
Return, like him of Ithaca was Prince:
But we, more safely passing all alongs,
Are not bewitched with such Siren songs.
In little much, well traveld in short ground
Do search what wonders in the world are found;
Treading these mountains, and these pleasant valleys,
Elisian fields had never braver allies
Then we imagine, and for wonders rare
More than the Carian tomb which hings in air
Do we conceave. Of travels let them talk,
We in the works of learned men do walk
And painfully their learned paths do tread,
For sure he is traveld far who is well read
Yea who so views my Cabinets rich store,
Is traveld through the world, and some part more.
Let this suffice we travel to content us,
And of our travels think never to repent us,
Yea in our Muses, we do travel more
Than they that coast and sound the Indian shore.
Yet think not so brave travels we condemn,
If with safe conscience we may use the same;
Nor do we speak void of experience,
For both of us have traveld been in France,
And France for all, and if that will not ease you
We think then all this world will never please you.
Then went we home to get some recreation,
But by and by befell a new tentation:
Our neighbor archers our good sport envying,
A challenge to us sent, our patience trying,
And did provoke us, if we shut for gold,
Or honors praise, betimes, to morrow would:
Or for our mistres if we had a mind,
Doubtless, said Gall, thereto we are inclinde:
But for the present we have taken in hand
To view our fields by river and by land;
Boast not therefore, for nothing will disheart us,
Nor from our present progress will divert us.
But of our journey having made an end,
Our lives in such brave quarrel will we spend.
This answer when they heard, they did compeer
With ardent hearts some further nevves to speer,
And what brave sport we found, what pastime rare?
Forthwith in lofty verse Gall to declare
Began, his breast when Phoebus once did vvarme,
Their ears and hearts, his heavenly voice did charm,
And I to keep a consort with full voice,
As fell by turn, did make them all rejoice
With sweetest rimes; for both of us inclinde,
Even as Democritus did truly mind
Of Poets all, when once that sacred fire ^cludit sa^ Helicone ^tas Demo^tus,
Ho^. in art.

With divine fury did our breasts inspire.
And thus with heavenly rapture, as transported
That whole days journey Gall to them reported,
Till Hesperus appeard, and in despite
Of heavens which hearkened, forced to bid good night.
Which when I call to mind, it makes me cry
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed the to die?
The night was short, Phoebus did touch the line
Where cruked Cancer makes him to decline,
No sleep could close mine eyes, but wake must I,
Till fair Aurora did inlight the sky.
Then up I got, and where good Gall did ly,
With mighty voice and chanting did I cry,
Good Master Gall, arise, you sleep too long
With Hey the day now dawnes, so was my song,
The day now dawnes, Arise good Master Gall,
Who answering said, Monsier, I hear you call:
And up he got. Then to our bearge we go,
To answer us our boatman wondrous slow,
When we did call, thrice lifting up his head,
Thrice to the ground did fall again as dead.
But him to raise, I sung Hay the day dawnes;
The drowsy Fellow wakning, gaunts, and yawnes;
But getting up at last, and with a blow
Raising his fellow, bad him quickly row.
Then merrielie we leanche into the deep,
Phoebus mean while awakned rose from sleep,
At his appointed hour, the pleasant morning.
With gilded beams the cristall streams adorning:
The pearled dew on tender grass did hing,
And heavenly quires of birds did sweetly sing:
Down by the sweet south inche we sliding go,
Ten thousand dangling diamonds did show
The radiant repercussion of Sols rays
And spreading flowers did look like Argoes eyes.
Then did we talk of city toiles and cares,
Thrice happy counting him shuns these affairs,
And with us have delight these fields to haunt
Some pastoral or sonnet sweet to chant.
And view from far th'ambitions of this age,
Turning the helmes of states, and in their rage
Make shipwrake of the same on shelfs and sands,
Running be lawles laws and hard commands,
And often drown themselves in floods of woes,
As many shipwraks of this kind well shows.
We pass our time upon the forked mountain,
And drink the cristall waters of the fountain.
Dig'd by the winged horse; we sing the trees
The corns, and flocks, and labors of the bees;
Of shepherd lads, and lasses homely love,
And some time strain our oaten pipe above
That mean: we sing of Hero and Leander
Yea Mars, all cled in steel; and Alexander.
But Cynthius us pulling by the ear
Did warning give, to keep a lower air,
But keep what air we will, who can well say
That he himself preserve from shipwrake may?
In stormy seas, while as the ship does reele
Of public state, the meanest boy may feel
Shipwreck, as well as he the helm who guides,
When seas do rage with winds and contrare tides.
Which: ah too true I found, upon an ore (...) speaks (...) Gowries ^spiracie.

Not long ago, while as I swim'd to shore,
Witness my drenshed clothes, as you did see,
Which I to Neptune gave in votarie
And sign of safety. Answered Master Gall,
Monsier, your table hung on Neptunes wall
Did all your loss so livelie point to me,
That I did mourn, poor soul, when I did see.
But you may know in storms, thus goes the matter,
No fish does sip in troubled seas clean water.
Courage therefore, that cloud is overgone,
Therefore as we were wont, let us sing on.
For in this morning sounded in mine ear
The sweetest music ever I did hear
In all my life, good Master Gall, quod I
You to awake, I sung so merrielie.
Monsier, quoth he, I pray thee ease my spleen,
And let me hear that Music once again.
With Hay the day now dawnes, then up I got,
And did advance my voice to Elaes note,
I did so sweetly flat and sharply sing,
While I made all the rocks with Echoes ring.
Mean while our boat, by Freertown hole does slide,
Our course not stopped with the flowing tide,
We ned nor card, nor crostaffe for our Pole,
But from thence landing clam the Dragon hole, Dragon ho^

With crampets on our feet, and clubs in hand,
Where its recorded Iamie Keddie fand
A stone enchanted, like to Gyges ring,
Which made him disappear, a wondrous thing,
If it had been his hap to have retaind it,
But loosing it, again could never find it:
Within this cove ofttimes did we repose
As being sundred from the city woes.
From thence we, passing by the Windy gowle,
Did make the hollow rocks with echoes yowle; Windie^ gowle.

And all along the mountains of Kinnoule,
Where did we shut at many fox and foul. Kinnoule^ castle.

Kinnoule, so famous in the days of old!
Where stood a castle and a stately hold
Of great antiquity, by brink of Tay
Woods were above, beneath fair meadows lay
In prospect proper Perth, with all her graces,
Fair plantings, spacious greens, religious places,
Though now defaced through age, and rage of men,
Within this place a Lady did remain ^nnouls La^ did see ^allace and ^e Bruce.

Of great experience, who likewise knew
By sprite of prophecy, what should ensue,
Who saw wight Wallace, and brave Bruce on live,
And both their manhoods lively did descrive
Unto that noble Prince, first of that name,
Worthy King James, who hearing of her fame,
Went to her house, these histories to learn,
When as for age her eyes could scarce discern.
This Lady did foretell of many things ^e prophet.

Of Britains unioun under Scottish Kings,
And after ending of our civil feeds,
Our spears in syths; our swords should turn in speads,
In sign whereof there should arise a Knight
Sprung of the bloody yoke, who should of right
Possess these lands, which she then held in fea,
Who for his worth and matchless loyalty
Unto his Prince, should greatly be renownd
And of these lands instyl'd, and Earl be crowned;
Whose son in spite of Tay, should join these lands
Firmly by stone on either side which stands,
Thence to the top of Law Tay did we hye,
From whence the country round about we spy,
And from the airie Mountain looking down, Situation (...) Perth.

Beheld the stance and figure of our town,
Quadrat with longer sides, from east to wast,
Whose streets, walls, fowsies in our eyes did cast
A pretty show: Then began I to declare
Where our old Monastries, with Churches fair
Sometime did stand, placed at every corner
Was one, which with great beauty did adorn her,
The Charterhouse toward the southvvest stood,
And at South-east the Friars, who wear gray hood.
Toward the North the BlackFriers Church did stand;
And Carmelits upon the Western hand;
With many chapels standing here and there
And steeples fairly mounted in the air,
Our Ladies Church, Saint Catharins, and Saint Paul's,
Where many a mess was sung for defunct souls.
The chapel of the rood, and sweet Saint Anne,
And Lorets chapel, from Romes Vaticane Lorets cha^ pell transpo^ ted to
Pert^ from Rom^ Vaticane.

Transported hither, for a time took sasing,
(You know the Cloister monks write never a leasing.)
For what offense I know not, or disdain,
But that same chapel borne hence is again,
For it appears no more, look who so list,
Or else I Am sure its covered with a mist
Saint Leonards cloister, mourning Magdolene,
Whose cristall Fountain flows like Hippocrene.
Saint Iohnes fair church, as yet in mids did stand:
A braver sight was not in all this land
Than was that town, when thus it stood decord
As not a fevv, yet living, can record.
And to be short, for this we may not tarry on,
Of that old town this naught is but the carrion.
Monsier, said Gall, that for a truth I know
These Kirks and Cloisters made a goodly show;
But this as truly I dar well allege,
These Kirkmen usde the greatest cousenage
That ever was seen or heard. Good Gall, quoth I,
How can that be? Monsier, if you will try,
Too much true shall you find. Pray thee, good Gall,
Your speech to me seems paradoxicall;
Therefore I would it know: Monsier, quoth he,
And shall I show what such Idolatry
Has brought upon that town? The many closters
Where fed there was so many idle fosters,
Monks, Priests, and Friars, and multitude of Patrons,
Erected in their queires; the old wifes and matrons
Gave great head to these things, which they did say,
And made their horned husbands to obey;
And mortify so much unto this Saint,
And unto that, though they themselves should want*
Yea twenty Saints about one tenement,
Each one of them to have an yeerlie rent,
And all to pray for one poor wretched soul,
Which Purgatory fire so fierce should thole.
So these annuities, yeerelie taxations,
Are causes of these woeful desolations
Which we behold. The ground of all these evils, Saints how ^ade idols, ^d
devils.

What to these Saints they gave, was given to Devils.
God made them Saints, men set them in Gods stead,
Gave them Gods honor; so them idols made:
Thus Satan served is; what men allow
On idols in his Name; to him they do:
And now these Friars destroyers may be seen,
And wracks of that cities the cause have been:
For none dare buy the smallest peace of ground,
So many annuel rents thereon are found,
And if he build thereon, doubtless he shall
Spend in long suits of Law his moyen all.
If some good salve cure not this sore, I fear
It shall be said, some time a town was there.
Good Gall, said I, some melancholious fit
Molests your Joviall sprite, and pregnat wit,
I would some Venus-heir might cure your sadness;
Repel your sorrovves, and repleage your gladness:
Therefore I Will quickelie go a herbarising
To cure that melancholik mood by snising.
Herevvith we turn our pace, and down again
Pass by the Windy gowle, unto the plain;
And herbarising there a pretty while,
Galls lusty face blithly began to smile:
Guess then how blithe was I, if I had found
(I would not been so blithe) a thousand pound.
Thus recreat, to boat again we go,
And down the river smothly do we row,
Neerby Kinfaunes, which famous Longoveil
Sometime did hold; whose ancient svvord of steel Kinfanes.

Remains unto this day, and of that land
Is chiefest evident; on the other hand
Elcho and Elcho park, where Wallace haunted, Elcho.

A sure refuge, when Englishmen he daunted;
And Elcho. nunrie, where the holy sisters
Supplied were by the Fratres in their misters.
By Sleeplesse Isle we row, which our good Kings ^leeplesse Isle.

Gave to our town with many better things.
Before there was in that near neighboring station,
Or Friar or Nun to set there their foundation.
On the other side we looked unto Balthyok
Where many peacock calls upon his mayok. Balthyok.

Megeance fair place, and Errols pleasant seat, Megeance. Errol.

With many more, which long were to relate.
Right over against is that vvood Earnside,
And fort where Wallace ofttimes did reside: Earnside.

While we beheld all these, the tide did flow,
A lie the rudder goes; about we row,
Up to the town again we make our course,
Sweetly convoyed with Tayes reflovving source.
There we beheld where Wallace ship was drovvnd,
Which he brought out of France, whose bottom found Wallace ship.

Was not long since, by Master Dickesons art,
That rare ingeniour, skild in every part
Of Mathemathick; Quoth I, Master Gall,
I marvel our records nothing at all
Do mention Wallace going into France, ^allace go^g to France ^t recorded ^d
why.

How that can be forgote I greatly scance,
For well I know all Gasconie and Guien
Do hold that Wallace was a mighty Gian,
Even to this day; in Rochel likewise found
A Tower from Wallace name greatly renovvnd.
Yea Longoveils antiquities, which there
We do behold, this truly do declare
That Wallace was in France; for after that
The public place of government he quat,
Were full four years and more, before he shed
His dearest blood, ah dearest truly said:
And think you then that such a martial heart
Yielding his place, would sojourne in this part,
And lazely ly loytring in some hole?
That any so should think I hardly thole;
Therefore I grieve our men should have forgotten
Themselves, and left so brave a point unwritten;
Or should it contradict, there being so many
Good reasons for this truth, as is for any.
Monsier, said he, that is not a thing to grieve at,
For they did write his public life, not private:
For sure it is, after his public charge
Grief made him go to France, his spirit t'enlarge,
His noble Sprite, that thraldom suffered never,
For he to liberty aspired ever;
And turning home, his ship causde sunken be,
To stop the rivers passage, that from sea
No English ship should come Perth to releave,
For any chance of war Fortune could give.
But now this ship, which so long time before
In waters lay, is fairlie haild a shore;
What cannot skill by Mathematick move?
As would appear things Natures reach above.
Up by the Willow gate we make our way;
With flowing waters pleasant then was Tay.
The town appears; the great and strong Spey tower,
And Monks tower, builded round; a wall of power
Extending twixt the two, thence goes a snout
Of great squair stones, which turns the streams about;
Two ports with double walls; on either hand
Are fowsies deep, where gorged waters stand,
And flow even as you list: but over all ^erths Whit ^all.

The Palace kythes, may named be Perths Whithall.
With orchards, like these of Hesperides
But who shall show the Ephemerides
Of these things, which sometimes adornd that City?
That they should all be lost, it were great pity.
Whose antique monuments are a great deal more
Than any inward riches, pomp or store;
And privileges would you truly know?
Far more indeed, than I can truly show;
Such were our Kings good wills, for to declare
What pleasure and contentment they had there:
But of all privileges this is the bravest,
King James the Sixth was Burges made and Provest;
And gave his Burges oath, and did inrole King James ^he sixth Pro^est of Perth.

With his own hand within the Burges scrole
And Gildrie Book his dear and worthy Name,
Which does remain to Perths perpetual fame,
And that Kings glory, thus was his gracious pleasure
Of his most loving heart to show the treasure;
Writing beneath his Name these words most nervous,
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
That is, It is the Lions great renown
To spare the humble, and proudlings pester down.
Which extant with his own hand you may see:
And, as inspired, thus did he prophecy,
What will you say, if this shall come to hand,
Perths Provest Londons Major shall command.
Which words, when we did hear, we much admired,
And every one of us often inquired
What these could mean? Some said, he meand such one,
That London, yea all England like had none,
Some said, he minds his dignity and place;
Others his gifts of Nature, and of Grace.
All which were true indeed, yet none could say,
He mean'd that Englands scepter he should swey,
Till that it came to pass some few years after,
Then hearts with joy, and mouths were filled with laughter:
Happy King James the sixth, so may I say,
For I a man most Joviall was that day,
And had good reason, when I kissed that hand,
Which afterward all Britain did command.
Monsier, said Gall, I swear you had good reason
Most glad to be that day: for you of treason
Assoylied was, of your unhappie chief:
Pray thee good Gall, quod I, move not my grief.
Said Gall, Monsier, That point I will not touch,
They Will tine their coals that burns you for a witch.
A witch, good Gall, quod I, I will be sworn,
VVitchcraft's the thing that I could never learn;
Yea Master Gall, I swear that I had rather
Ten thousand Chiefs been killed, or had my Father,
The King is Pater patriae, a chief
Often times is borne for all his kinnes mischief.
And more, I know was never heart, nor hand
Did prosper, which that King did ever vvithstand.
Therefore good Gall, I pray thee let that pass,
That happy King knew well what man I was.
While we thus talk, our boat draws nie the shore,
Our fellows all for joy begin to roar
When they us see. and lowdly thus began call,
Welcome, good Monsier, welcome Master Gall;
Come, come a land, and let us merry be,
For as your boat most happily we did see,
Incontinent we bargaind to and fro,
Some said, It was your Berge, and some said, No:
But we have gaind the prise, and pleadges all,
Therefore come Monsier, come good Master Gall;
And let us merry be, while these may last;
Till all be spent we think to take no rest.
And so it was, no sleep came in our head,
Till fair Aurora left Tithonus bed.
Above all things so was good Gals desire,
Who of good company could never tire,
Which when I call to mind, it makes me cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
The seventh Muse.
UP springs the Sun, the day is clear, and fair,
Etesiae, sweetly breathing, cools the air;
Then coming to my Cabin in a band,
Each man of us a Gabion hints in hand.
Where me their Sergeant Major they elected,
At my command that day to be directed. Talenes n^ virtue.

What pretty captaine's yone (so said some wenches)
Ladies, quoth I, Men are not met by inches.
The Macedonian Monarch was called great,
Not from his Bodies quantity, but state
And Martial prowess, good Ladies then to heart you,
You shall well know that talenesse is no virtue.
Thus merche we all alongs unto Moncreiff
Where dwells that worthy Knight, the famous chief Moncreif

Of all that ancient name: And passing by
Three trees sprung of one root we did espy:
Which when we did behold, said Master Gall. The b^ thren trees

Monsier, behold these trees, so great and tall
Sprung of one root, which all Men Brethren name,
The symbol which true concord does proclaim.
O happy presage, where such trees do grow,
These Brethren three the threefold Gerion show,
Invincible, remaining in one mind,
Three hearts as in one Body fast combinde,
Scilurus bundell knit, does whole abide,
But easily is broke, when once untied.
So these three trees do symbolize most clearly;
The amity of hearts and minds, inteirly
Kythes in that happy race, and does presage
To it more happiness in after age;
Loves sweetest knot, which three in one does bring
That budding gemme shall make more flourishing
Fair Brethren Trees, and since so is your Name,
Be still the badge of concord, and proclaim
All health and wealth, unto that happy race,
Where grace and virtue mutually embrace.
To Moncrief eastern, then to Wallace-town
To Fingask of Dundas, thence passing down
Unto the Rynd, as Martial Men, we fair.
What life Man's heart could wish more void of care?
Passing the river Earne, on the other side,
Dreilling our Sojours, Vulgars were affraide.
Thence to the Pights great Metropolitan,
Where stands a steeple, the like in all Britain bernethie.

Not to be found again, a work of wonder,
So tall and round in frame, a just cylinder
Built by the Pights in honor of their King,
That of the Scots none should attempt such thing,
As over his belly big to walk or ride,
But this strong hold should make him to abide.
Unless on Pegasus that he would flee,
Or on Jove's bird should soar into the sky,
As rode Bellerophon and Ganymede:
But mounted so must ride no giddie head.
From thence we merch't directly unto Dron,
And from that stead past to the Rocking stone;
Accompanied with Infantrie a band,
Each of us had a hunting staff in hand,
With whistles shrile, the fleeing fowls to charm,
And fowlers nets upon our other arm:
But as for me about my neck was borne,
To sound the chase a mighty hunting horn;
And as I blevv with all my might and maine,
The hollovv rocks did answer make again,
Then every man in this clear company
Who best should vvinde the horn began to try;
Among the rest a fellovv in the rout
Boldly began to boast, and brave it out,
That he would vvind the horn in such a wise,
That easelie he would obtain the prise,
But to record what chance there follovved after
Gladly I would, but grief forbids laughter,
For so it was the merry man was mard,
Both tongue and teeth, I vvot, were tightly tard;
Then no more stay; Fellovv, good night, quod we,
The Old proverb says, that Dirt parts Company.
By this we were just at the Rocking stone,
Amongst the worlds great wonders, it is one The rocki stone of B^ vaird.

Most rare: It is a Phaenix in its kind,
The like in all the world ye shall not find:
A stone so neicely set upon its kernels,
Not artificial, but natural chernels,
So huge, so grave, that if you please to prove it,
A hundred yoke of oxen will not move it,
Yet touch it with your fingers smallest knocking,
Incontinent it will fall to a rocking,
And shake, and shiver; as if obedient,
More by request, than by commandment.
Then up I clame this rock, as I was wonted,
And like Aegeon on Whales back I mounted,
And with Etites ra^ling stone I knocked,
And as it ratled, even so was I rocked.
So fair a cradle, and rare was never seen
Oh if my Cabinet could it contain!
Next at the bridge of Earne we made our Station,
And there we took some little recreation; Bridge of rne.

Where in Heroicks Gall fell to declaring
All circumstances of that days wayfairing,
And there so merrielie we sung, and chanted,
Happy were they our company who haunted,
Which when I call to mind it makes me cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die.
The eight Muse.
WHat blooming banks sweet Earne, or fairest Tay,
Or Amond does embrace; these many a day
We haunted; where our pleasant pastorals
We sweetly sung, and merry madrigals:
Sometimes bold Mars, and sometimes Venus fair,
And sometimes Phoebus love we did declare;
Sometimes on pleasant plains, sometimes on mountains,
And sometimes sweetly sung beside the fountains. ^unting ^er of old, ^d Luth^

But in these banks where flows Saint Conils Well,
The which Thessalian tempe does excel.
Whose name and matchless fame for to declare,
In this most doleful dittey, must I spare:
Yet thus dar say, that in the World again
No place more meet for Muses to remain;
For shadowing walks, where silver brooks do spring,
And smelling arbors, where birds sweetly sing,
In heavenly Music warbling like Arion,
Like Thracian Orpheus, Linus, or Amphion,
That Helicon, Parnassus, Pindus fair
To these most pleasant banks scarce can compare.
These be the banks where all the Muses dwell,
And haunt about that cristall brook and well,
Into these banks chiefly did we repair
Erom Shunshine shadowed, and from blasting air.
There with the Muses we did sing our songs,
Sometimes for pleasure, sometimes for our wrongs;
For in those days, none durst approach their table,
But we, to taste their dainties, this no fable.
From thence to Methven wood we took our way,
Soon be Aurora fair did kyth the day;
And having rested there some little space,
Again we did betake us to our chase,
Raising the Does and Roes forth of their dens,
And watrie fowls out of the marrish fennes,
That if Diana had been in that place,
Would thought, in hunting we had stained her grace.
To Methven Castle, where Gall did declare
How Margaret Teuther, Queen, sometimes dwelt there;
First daughter to King Henry seventh, who closes Queen Margaret Teuther.

York-Lancaster in one, Englands two roses.
A happy union after long debate,
But union much more happy, and more great
Even by that same Queen springs, and by her race
Whereby all Britain joys long wished peace.
Hence came King James his title to the Crown
Of England, by both parents of renown.
Hence comes our happy peace, so be it ay,
That peace with truth in Britain flourish may.
Right over to Forteviot, did we hy, ^orteviot.

And there the ruined castle did we spy
Of Malcolme Ken-more, whom Mackduff then Than^ (...). Malcolme ^enmore.

Of Fife, (so called) from England brought again,
And fiercely did pursue tyrant Makbeth,
Usurper of the Crown, even to the death.
These castles ruins when we did consider,
We saw that wasting time makes all things wither.
To Dupline then, and shades of Aberdagie,
From thence to Mailer, and came home by Craigie.
Soon by that time, before three days were done,
We went to se the monuments of Scone,
As was our promise, Scones Nymphs see we must,
For in such vows we were exceeding just.
And there with Ovid thus did we declare,
Here is a green, where stood a Temple fair:
Where was the fatal chair, and marble stone, The marble ^haire.

Having this Motto rare incisde thereon,
This is the stone, if fates do not deceave,
Where e're its found the Scots shall kingdom have.
Which Longshanks did transport to Troyuovant,
As Troy took in the horse by Grecia sent
So we, who sprung were of the Grecian crew,
Like stratageme on Trojans did renew.
Oh if this fatal chair transported were
To Spain, that we like conquest might make there,
From thence to Italy, to Rome, to Greece,
To Colchos, thence to bring the golden fleece:
And in a word, we wish this happy chair
Unto the furthest Indes transported were,
That mightiest Kingdoms might their presents bring,
And bow to Charles as to their sovereign King.
Neerby we view that famous Earthen Mount,
Whereon our Kings to crowned be were wont: Omnis terr.

And while we do consider, there we found
Demonstrat was the quadrat of the round,
Which Euclide could not find, nor Pater Erra,
By guess we did it find on Omnis terra.
And if you Geometers hereof do doubt,
Come view the place, and ye shall find it out.
A demonstration so wondrous rare,
In all the world, I think, none may compare.
Thence need we must go see the Mure of Scone,
And view where Pights were utterlie undone Mure of Scone.

By valiant Scots, and brought to desolation,
That since they never had the name of nation.
Seven times that fight renewed was in one day
Pights seven times quaild, Scots were victorious ay;
Hence is it said, when men shall be undone,
We shall upon them bring the mure of Scone.
King Donskine with his remnant Pights near Tay
All killed, did crown the victory of that day.
Then valiant Kenneth went to Camelon,
And threw to Earth King Donskins ancient throne.
So greatest Kingdoms to their periods tend,
And everything that grows, must have an end.
Where is that golden head that reing'd so long,
The silver arms and belly of brass most strong?
The iron legs divided now in toes
Are mixed with clay: and so the world it goes.
Thus nations like stars in multitude,
Like sand on shore, or fishes in the flood;
Yea rooted in the Earth so deep, so long,
As on the mountains grow the Cedars strong,
Yet time has overturned them, and their names
Are past, as Letters written on the streams:
To tell us, here we have no constant biding,
The world unto decay is always sliding,
One Kingdom ever does remain, and all
Against it who rise to powder turn they shall.
Near this we did perceave where proud Makbeth,
Who to the furies did his soul bequeath, Makbeths ^stle on Du^^oun hill.

His castle mounted on Dunsinnen hill,
Causing the mightiest peers obey his will,
And bow their necks to build his Babylon;
Thus Nimrod-like he did triumph upon
That mountain, which does overtop that plain:
And as the starrie heaven he should attain,
A lofty tower, and Atlas caused build,
Then tyrannizing, raged as Nimrod wild:
Who had this strange response that none should catch him
That borne was of a woman, or should match him:
Nor any horse should overtake him there,
But yet his sprite deceav'd him by a mare,
And by a man was not of woman borne
For brave Makduff was from his mother shorn. Makduf.

Makduff called Thane of Fife, who home did bring
King Malcolme Kenmore was our native King.
Ken-more, great-head, a great-head should be wise,
To bring to naught a Nimrods enterprise!
Up to Dunsinnen's top then did we clim,
With panting heart, weak loins, and wearied limme,
And from the mountains height, which was well windy,
We spy where Wallace cave was at Kilspindie.
But there we might not stay, thence to the plain Wallace cave.

With swifter pace we do come down again.
Descent is easy, any man can tell;
For men do easelie descend to Hell.
When we had viewed these fields both here and there,
As wearied Pilgrims began we Home to fair;
Home, happy is that word, at Home in Heaven,
Where Gall now rests above the Planets seven,
And I am left this wretched Earth upon,
Thy loss, with all my Gabions, to bemoane:
Then mourn with me my Gabions, and cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
The ninth Muse.
WHat! Could there more be done, let any say,
Nor I did to prevent this doleful day?
For when I saw Galls fatal constellation
Would not permit him in this Earthly station
Long to abide; then did I give a trial,
To make impartial fate susteene denial,
By herbarising while I proved my skill,
On top of Law-Tay, and stay Mooredowne hill,
Collecting vegetables in these parts,
By all the skill of Apollinian Arts,
If possible't had been, fate to neglect him,
By heavenly skill immortal for to make him.
But since that Phoebus could not stem the blood
Of Hyacinthus in his sowning moud,
How then should I? a mortal! ah too shallow!
In wit and art press to outreach Apollo?
Far be the thought, I therefore must absent me,
And never more unto the World present me,
But solitary with my Gabions stay,
And help them for to mourn till dying day.
Then farewell Cabine, farewell Gabions all,
Then must I meet in heaven with Master Gall:
And till that time I will set forth his praise
In Elegies of woe, and mourning lays,
And weeping for his sake still will I cry,
Gall, sweetest Gall, what ailed thee to die?
FINIS.

