THE True History of the Tragic loves of HIPOLITO and ISABELLA Neapolitans.
Englished

London Printed by Tho: Harper, and Nath: Field, 1628.



To the Volume.
BY sale of all things,
humane and divine,
Since all sorts live;
what selles life's sacred line,
And with that life, the soul puts under Press;
Me thinks should render rich Men, Midasses:
Here then the Immortal soul is sold, with life
Of two, by Love made one, in Man and Wife.
Love breeds Opinion, and Opinion, Love,
In whose Orbs, all the liberal Sciences move:
All which contracted in one Tragedy,
Sell (great Octauius;) and Augustus be,
In all worth, for thy sale commodity.
G. C.

THE TRVE HISTORY of the tragic loves of Hipolito and Isabella, Neapolitans.
AMongst all the accidents that usually draw men into the greatest admiration
and astonishment, there are none so strange or prodigious as those which Love
produces: A passion, or rather fury, so violent; as that, overthrowing the
reason and understanding of those it seazeth, it leaves them no consideration
of the event of what it makes them undertake. And although the examples of the
wars, euersions of Kingdoms and estates, with the errors it has caused the
wisest men to commit, and the ruins into which it has precipitated the
greatest Personages, be so ordinary as no man can be ignorant of them; yet we
find scarce one that will make the right use of them; nevertheless, they
ought to be known, to the end that some more happy than the rest, may by the
representation of others miseries, be diuerted from falling into the like.
Amongst the chiefest where this passion has displaied her tragical effects;
This of which I now undertake to write, deserves a remarkable place.

Italy has been in all times a region fertile in high and noble spirits, and
capable of the greatest and fullest fruits of virtue or vice, and also the most
amorous and subject to love of all other Nations: which has been the occasion
that the men (finding this inclination so common and natural to them) have
ordained the laws for the lives of women so strict and severe in their
restraint, to which they subject them, as not assured of their chastities
without the interdiction of the sight and frequentation of men, excepting only
the conversation of their near allies. Now amongst all the Towns of Italy,
where virtues and fair exercises are in greatest recommendation, and where is
commonly the best and noblest company, Naples is one of the chief, and where
there is a greater liberty then in other Cities of the Country. In this City
there lived a Gentleman, Fabritio by name, who as well for the much desert of
his virtues, as for the noblenes of his desce^t, held the place of one of the
most honored Magistrates of the City; In which charge he so well demeaned
himself, and got himself so good a reputation, as having buried one Wife, he
married a second, of birth and means much above his own: for though both
Nature and Fortune had yielded him enough, yet they both had more aduantaged
her than him. This Woman by name Liuia, had to her first Husband a Lord of the
best blood of the Country, who left her two children, the eldest named
Pompeio, the other Cornelio. Fabritio had by his first Wife amongst other
children a daughter named Isabella, the which besides an excellent beauty with
which she was adorned, was endowed with so great an understanding, as she
seemed not only to surpass those of her age, (which was then about fifteen
or sixteen years) but to leave short of her, all those that ever nature had
produced excellent of her sex, in such sort as she was esteemed and admired of
all as the wonder of her time. And that which yielded her more luster, was a
certain brave and proud fashion, but suited with a sweetness agreeable to her
age and condition, that made her loved and feared both at once. Those whom
Nature has given to taste the sweetness of a fatherly love, may imagine what
pleasure and contentment Signiour Fabritio received in being father of many
hopeful children, especially of so rare a treasure as this daughter, being
withal favored with so great an increase of fortunes, and conuenience (by
this second marriage) to breed and more highly advance his children, and
chiefly his Isabella: for whom he and his wife Liuia had designed a marriage
with Pompeio (her eldest Son by her first Husband) who of her part also was
most glad to have so happily found for her self so good a Daughter, and her
Son so fair a Wife, breeding her more carefully then if she had been her
natural child. The good and commendable project of this marriage being agreed
on by these Parents, and whereon they built the principal happiness of their
house and family, brought them much more ruin then it had promised them
contentment; being the ordinary pleasure of fortune to build upon the
foundation of our designs, events most contrary to our hopes. This Maid to
whom the greatness of her wit (with her knowledge of Letters) did advance the
discourse of her soul to the judging of things far above her sex, or what
her age might seem to bear, did make her also disdain that which she thought
unworthy of her fair parts, bestowing her time more on priuacy than
conversation, partly in study, partly in Music; sometime marrying with her
Instrument her voice which she had perfectly sweet; sometime using her Needle
in working some rare story or curious Hieroglifique, that every thing might be
a witness of the well-spending of her time.

Being arrived at the seventeenth year of her age, she had notice given her
by her father of her appointed husband, with much discourse of the sense she
ought to have of so good a fortune. To which she made such answer, as a Father
may expect from such a daughter; who besought him only to leave yet awhile
some liberty to her youth, and time to frame her self to the obedience of a
Husband.

Liuia being discreet and wise, and knowing many imperfections in her Son,
had left him to abide ever since her marriage in a Country house of hers, some
eight or ten miles from Naples, where she kept discreet and well-fashioned
people about him, to the end to correct and some way amend the ill habits of
his mind and body, for certainly he was borne unpleasing to the eye, and very
incapable of any thing gentle or virtuous: but as it is impossible to overcome
so great an enemy as Nature, (which though you beat from you, yet will return
again) so proved the care of his Mother, and the pain of those about him most
unprofitable to this young man, who having attained to the age of twenty two
years, was then advertised by his Mother of her intention for his marriage, of
which the beauty of this fair Maid made him so greedily desirous, that after
his first fight of her, he had no disposition to be from his Mistress, who
then began to look better upon him then she was wont to do before she knew
her Fathers pleasure. So frequentation made her know him, and her knowledge of
him to disdain him: her disdain bred hatred, her hate despair, and despair
those strange resolutions in her that you shall hereafter understand. In this
time an Uncle of hers, called Hipolito, was returned home from Bolonia, where
he had remained four or five years, as well to study, as to learn
Horsmanship, Fensing, Music, and other commendable parts befitting a
Gentleman, in which having bestowed himself to the age of one or two and
twenty years, his elder Brother (who assumed the office of a Father) thought it
fit to call him home to advise with him of the settling of his estate.

This young man being returned to Naples, fair mannered, handsome, that knew
to dress himself well, and whose speech was graceful and pleasing, was
forthwith known and affected of all, but chiefly of his Niece, with whom (as
well through the affinity of their natures and years, as of their blood) he
was received into that peculiar degree of friendship and primacy, as if he had
been her Brother; yea more, they had so great a communication and mutual
relation each with other, as they were grown to esteem it an injury to
themselves not to make each master of the others nearest thoughts. They had not
long lived in this fashion when the young Maid acquainted him with her
appointed marriage, and her little affection to it, complaining much of the
cruelty of her fortune, and the severe resolution of her Father to couple her
with a man so ill suting her in every thing, and who (setting aside the
advantage of his birth and means) had nothing in him remarkable.

The company of this Uncle of hers increased still her disdain against her
lover, by the approofe he gave of her opinion of the others wants, whose
company annoyed them both more then they were pleased with, in such sort, as
they sought all means to free themselves of it, and retire to reading and
other mutual pleasures between themselves. But as it is easy and most
ordinary for extremities even in virtuous things to slip into vices; so this
excellent friendship could not long contain it self within the bounds and
limits of his duty, but growing to a farther liberty by their private
frequentation, began to be accompanied with a certain unmeasured doting upon
this retiredness, and a melancholy passionate grief in absence each of the
other, and a loathing of all other company, and in conclusion, (it being the
custom of their age to discourse of love more then any other subject) love so
mingled with them, that it became the master of both their hearts. And although
their years had as yet given them little practice in this affair, and that
fear took from him, and shame from her, the ordinary means of declaring
their affections; yet the quickness of both their apprehensions made them both
soon acquainted with their reciprocal passions. Which encouraged Hipolito one
time among the rest, to take this advantage of a discourse they had had of
love, and the thraldom his subjects live in, and speak to this purpose.

Certainly Niece I have read a maxim which I now receive for purer truth then
heretofore, that men cannot rightly judge or discourse of the true quality of
any passion without having had some trial or feeling of it himself, and
whereas I have diverse times with your self and others, enforced in my
discourses what I had read and heard of the strange effects of love, and how
there is no passion nor any part of the soul that yields not to it, and that
reason and prudence are able to make but weak resistance against it, yet I
must confess I speak rather for arguments sake, then believing in the truth
of what I related, esteeming indeed, that affect the easiest to govern and
hide of most others. But I must now confess all true, and much more then I
could have said or can, that might express the admirable effects that love
produces, and strong hand it holds over our reasonable part.

How now Uncle! (answered she) will the laws of our friendship allow this,
that you have thought one thing, and spoken another to me? Pardon me Niece
(answered Hipolito) it has not been that I would bar you of any thought in
my bosom, nor that I would, or alas could hide this from you; fear only has
denied me the liberty. Neither think (I beseech you) that I would any way
offend you, or fail in the least cause of a friends duty, but rather double
my respect and observance, as the subject and cause is increased; and will
believe that the occasion of this discourse is happened me by fate, to remove
my fear, and give you some occasion to approve the power of this deity in
me, whom of a free man it has made a captive, and instead of that Uncle and
friend, I have been hitherto to you, your servant and vassal; and turned all
my free thoughts into so devoted an observance, that they have no will left to
will any thing but obedience to your thoughts, to honor you, to desire you,
and lastly, to make me so acceptable to you, as to be by you, only esteemed
worthy your affection.

The tears and earnest sighs that accompanied these words, stayed them there,
and made her no less amazed at their unexpected nouelty, then troubled and
doubtful, what answer she might fittest make to them: the conformity of her
passion of the one side more then half yielding, and of the other, her maiden
bashfulnesse drawing her with no less violence back; at last after a little
silence, the witness of some change in her thoughts, quoth she, I do now
find it true that I have heard wise people say; that a virtuous and fair
appearance often couers a vicious design; and for this reason, if solitude had
not been ordained to our sex, I had so disposed of my self, as to shun the
unhappy consequence, which ordinarily (by my observation) follow the society
and haunting with men, even those that opinion ranks amongst the honestest,
but you I thought so innocent of dissembled purposes, and all your courses so
led by virtue, as nothing but your self could have persuaded me (I being what
I am) you would have intended any thing against that which I shall ever hold
deerer then my life. I see the too much neerenesse I have allowed you, gives
the boldness to take this advantage, (or it may be the guessing me too
easy,) to try and know the disposition of my humor, it being otherwise
impossible you should attempt the honor of one so near you, as nature binds
you to the preservation of it; but since it is thus, I hope hereafter to let
you better see, I detest these things, and neither your subtlety nor company
please me.

Those which being young beginners in love, have to an extreme passion,
received such a refusal, may conceive the anguish this answer brought to
poor Hipolito; who thought he heard a sentence against his life; and loosing
color, speech, and understanding, remained a good while without speaking; at
last returning to himself as from an extacy, with a trembling voice, as full
of sighs as words, he made this answer. If my fortune have led me to an
enterprise so harmefull to my self, and to you so offensive; your perfections,
the divine force of love, or my cruel destinies, not my will must be accused;
which has but by violent necessity offended you. O be satisfied with the
infinity of those other miseries that I see prepared for me, without adding to
them the privation of your company, and leave me yet the short comfort of that
trouble, whereof I hope ere long, by the end of my life to deliver you, and my
self by the same mean, from the punishment of myrashnesse, the which I
earnestly beseech you not to imagine to have been guided by any craft or
subtlety. I have all my life had this vice of dissimulation in too great a
horror to be able now to use it; especially with you, toward whom (though it
were familiar to me) yet the laws of my affinity and love would forbid it
me. Believe me, truth accompanies my words; and the respect of your honor,
my intentions: which have no other end then the assurance of your favor, and
of a more particular affection then friendship may dispense with you to bear
to another: it is no breach of your honor that I pretend unto; nor more then I
will hope you may think belongs to me, being but so ^arre a preferring me
before others, as the obligation of nature, and our vowed friendship makes to
become due to me.

He was beginning to say more, when one came to call them to supper; so as
Isabella had only leisure to tell him, that she was to hear no more of those
matters: which thrust him yet farther into despair; by which occasion, and the
many tears he had shed, his face was so changed, that he was feign to
persuade his brother and sister in law, that he was not well, so excusing
himself for not supping, he went to a house of another of his brothers, a
Notary, a rich man, and there lodged with another fourth brother named Scipio
somewhat elder then himself, where he lay with opinion of every one that he
was sick as he seemed, and removed his brother from his chamber, to the end
to enjoy more fully the liberty of his plaints and passions, which all the
night held him in such unrest, as he not only slept not, but fell into a
fever, a fit bodily disguise for the affliction of his mind. He lay four
days contending in his reason, with love for the mastery: and to beat him
from the hold he had got in him, but alas, what resistance can men make
against gods? He was already in the snare, which the more he strugled to get
free of, still the faster held him, and was forced back to the pursuit of his
unfortunate love. He resolved to take more courage, and to write to his
mistress, since he had neither means nor assurance to see her.

She was no less divided, by as great a civil war of love, sometimes
accusing her self of ingratitude, sometimes of cruelty, for casting him she
loved best of all worldly things, into so great a despair: of this she would
excuse her self upon a greater fault, that she had too easily received the
first offer of his service, whom divine, humane, and the laws of public
honesty, had forbidden her.

In the mean time Hipolito was often visited by his brother Fabritio, and had
speech with him of the marriage of Pompeio with his daughter, which he seemed
much to approve of, wisely dissembling his grief, and offering Pompeio his
service in all good offices to his mistress, for which he hourly importuned
him. Amongst these passages Hipolito's foote-man, fit enough for such
employments, brought Isabella a letter from his master, faining to be only
sent to inquire of her health. The fellow being gone, she retired into her
chamber, and read the letter, which was to this purpose.

IF I had left me any power to command my desires, I might be content to
discourse only with my self, of the sufferings of my most unhappy condition,
without importuning you with the view of my afflictions; but since love has
enforced the subjection of all my will to his laws, and your service, pardon
me (I beseech you) if enforced by both these, I fly to your pity, which I
implore with all the vows of my soul, as the only help and mean left me
to escape a never ending torment. Though it be uneasy to you, yet you owe it
him, who honors you above all worldly things, and adores you as the only
model of all excellence here below: who lives not but by you, nor desires life
but for you, and to be so happy, as to spend it in your service, to which I am
so vowed, as heaven shall as soon be false as I alter this resolution.
Accept, if you please, this devotion, and governing it by what laws you shall
think fit, make your self of it what assurance my life or death can yield
you, and let not cruelty which finds some limits, even in them to whom it is
proper and peculiar, be a perpetual blot to your fair virtues, in not
suffering me to find that mercy at deaths hand, that I may not at your.


A weak persuasion will carry a divided and doubtful mind, to that part
whither it self inclines; so these letters finding her leaning more to love
then duty, forced her through all the doubts that could oppose themselves, and
after some discourse with her self, of such differing accidents in those
occurrences as her able understanding set before her; reason at length gave
place to love, and respect to passion; but with this resolution, not to engage
her honor, or by any thing confess her purpose, till the last she could
possibly delay it to; and the next morning she sent this following answer.

IF I had not by all the points of a faithful observance, assured you of as
perfect a friendship as you can desire of me, I should allow the complaints of
your letter; being incident to every good disposition, to desire a friendship
with his kindred; or if our case were such as we might expect the end their
desires look to, who seek the union of their lives, by the holyknot of a
lawful love, I should receive that passion you complain to suffer for my sake,
as a most assured testimony, of the worthy opinion you held of me, to whom you
would permit your self to address such an affection; but since I am assured
of the one, and cannot hope any thing of the other; I advise you restore your
self to reason, that you may condemn (as you ought) your grieuings for their
unfitness, your passions as lecentions, and beyond the bounds of your part;
and to show you that pity has in me an equal place with friendship, since
you put your self upon the rules of my discretion, I beseech you lay from you
your unjust griefs, and impossible hopes, and expect from me, only all the
effects of a most solid, and most perfect friendship, such as my honor, and
what I am to you, can bestow upon you; in so doing, you shall find my faith
constant above the least change, that any thing of this world can endeavor to
make in it. This I promise; this I swear to you; and conjure you to be
contented with this utmost I can do, and not seek to entice my affection
beyond the bounds of my duty, assuring my self in so reasonable a suit, your
desires will agree with mine. I will lastly, entreat you to be well, that I
may suddenly receive the pleasure of your company.


This letter was better Physic to Hipolito's disease, then all the Physicians
of Naples could give him, which having read over, and over, infinitely often,
he was much troubled on what resolution to settle himself, and as a mind
possessed with desire, is ever therewith accompanied with fear, so did he give
so diverse interpretations to the letter, as not a word in it, but he made to
suffer a double understanding, sometime taking it for general and indifferent
words, sometime gathering somewhat thence to his own advantage: after many
discourses of his fantasy, he resolved at last on the better part, and hope
making him take heart, began by that mean to recall his health so well, as
that within two days, leaving his chamber, he went to visit a sister of his,
a Nun, between whom and him, by reason of the simpathie of their natures,
there was an extraordinary love and amity.

This Nun, understood but too much for her profession, and was then of the age
of thirty five years, having more exercised her wit about honest affairs of
the world (as far as the restraint of a Cloister might suffer her) then in
the strict observance of the duties of her order.

The Lady Isabella her Niece, had often leave to go to that Monastery, as well
to hear the Service, as to see her Aunt, and learn of her to work curious
works with the Needle, which she much affected.

She was glad to see her brother so well amended, and having made him sit, and
discoursing of his sickness, she blamed the strictness of her condition,
that had denied her the mean of visiting him, as otherwise she would have
done, if the Laws she lived under would have permitted her. To which, finding
he made no answer, but sat immoderately sighing; she added, certainly
Brother, either it is your sickness has so strangely altered you, that I may
say, I scarce know you, or you have somewhat in your mind, that you will keep
to your self, that makes you so melancholy, as may hazard the casting of you
down again, if you take not heed. You know there is no disease more
dangerous then that of the mind, the Physicians have no Receipt, nor
Apothecaries any Drugge, that may avail to heal it: the best thing for it, is
the advice of a faithful friend, and where can you expect it more faithful,
then from me, who you know have not only loved you above my other Brothers,
but even before my self. I beseech you by that inviolable, and more then
sisterly love, make me a partner of your sufferings; upon this assurance that
you shall find me secret, serviceable, and assisting you to all you can
desire; despise not a veiled head, as an unprofitable thing that cannot give
you comfort equal with others more conversant in the world. Dear Sister
(answered Hipolito) my affection to you is built upon too sure a foundation to
be shaken, or endangered by any earthly accident, nor have I ever doubted of
the ability of your understanding, but my despair of remedy to my affliction,
takes from me all will to give it you; for give me good Sister, and since you
can in nothing help, let me alone endure the penance of my idle thoughts.
How? (answered she) where is the resolution you men attribute to your selves
above the courage of women? Certainly, your part of it is very little, that
you despair of executing, before you attempt the means; if your own
invention do not presently give you a smoothe way to your desires, you must
not therefore think that others cannot find it out for you, the fullest
understandings, in their own affairs are distrustful, and for fear of
loosing themselves, do often repair to the faith of a friend for their
resolution. If I can serve in nothing else but to keep your griefs for you,
it is no little lightning to a heavy and oppressed heart, to leave his
vexations with those he knows, will affectionately embrace all, to take but a
part from him. The principal effects of friendship, are help and consolation;
though I be unuseful for the one; yet am I most fit for the other, and I hope
able for both. God often times raises the means of our relief beyond our
hope, and from those we lest expect it: dear Sister (answered he) out of the
mere duty of my love, and no hope at all of any allay to my griefs; I will
tell you their subject, which shame ought still as much to conceal, as
reverence to the laws of Nature, should have at first forbidden. Know (dear
Sister) I have been so long engaged, that now in despite of my best
oppositions, I am constrained to give my self up to the love of our Niece
Isabella. This has been, and is the occasion of my anguish, and must so
remain as long as my unhappy fate shall allow me life: behold the laborinth
of my pains, and the little means I have to get out, since I am already gone
on so far. With this he told her the discourse of all had past between
them, showing her the letters he had writ, and her answers to them. To which
his Sister said, I find now that one of the greatest faults that the Ancie^ts
have made in the picture of Love is in blinding his eyes, for though he
indifferently disperseth his shafts amongst all sorts of creatures, yet the eye
was never against this effect, and in that respect they needed not have
blindfolded him, but this mark I see belongs better to those whom he has
once touched, and whom he leaves not only blind in body, but even estranged
from all due considerations of the mind, so much as they remain insensibly
confused and lost in themselves, without ability to make use of their own
understandings.

Oh how truly was it said of that Phylospher, that for the most part we make
things difficult and impossible to our selves for want of courage to undertake
them! Make your self (Brother) judge of this in your self, who upon the first
difficulty that affronts you in your design, remain astonished and
confounded. You love a Lady that is upon the point of marriage with another.
There are many marriages intended, yet so crossed, as they never arrive to their
consummation: and though that must be, yet were not that the worst that might
happen you; marriage often bringing conuenience to love. Next, you love one
that you cannot marry? Well? and has love no other ends for his contentment,
then marriage? since it as often disseuers affections as it ioynes them, while
being subjected to the laws of an obligation and duty, you disarme him of his
chiefest forces. A wife (though never so fair) is like a guest, or the rain
that becomes a trouble in three days.

But you will say, I love one whom the laws do forbid me both all desire and
all hope to enjoy, which so distracts me in this thornie way, as I am there
ruined with the impossibility of getting out. You are not the first that have
undertaken things as much forbidden, which have yet attained to a happy end.
Think virtue consists in great and difficult things, and is pleased in a
resistance, and the more pain and difficulty there is in an affair, the more
glory follows the enterprise, and pleasure the excution: the attempt may
content you, whether you gather the desired fruits of your pains, or fall
under an impossible enterprise, and where your fortune fails you, not your
courage. In sum, you stand not in ill ^earmes. I find in these Letters ground
enough to build hope enough on: leave the government of this business to me;
it may be I shall give you a better account then you expect of it. Be you of
good cheer, go see your Mistress, and procure her repair hither upon our
Ladies day to hear the Vespers, and fail not to be here your self.

All these fair promises of the Nun wrought little in her Brothers belief;
only they so far restored him to himself, as that commending his love to
her care, with more affection then he would have done his life, he returned to
his Brother the Notaries house till the next day after dinner, when he went to
see Fabritio, and (under that pretense) his Daughter Isabella, where he
received the gladdest welcome from Brother, Sister, Niece, and Signiour Pompeio
that might be. That afternoon past in the discourse of his sickness, and how
much every one suffered for him. Evening being come, he returned home,
deferring the speech with his Niece till next day, which was our Ladies Eve,
when he was to dine with his Brother Fabritio, and Pompeio should be gone home.
He then entreated her to go the next day to the Nuns to Vespers, if she could
get leave, which she easily obtained: her Mother in law being sick, and
accompanied with an old Gentlewoman her neighbor. She carried with her only
her Maid Iulia, in whom she wholly affi^d.

This commodity gave Hipolito a presage of his good fortune, and her the first
danger of her ruin, whereof she had some apprehension at her departure; for
getting up into the Coach, a weakness seized her, with a headache, and a cold
sweat all over her body, and having been a while in the Coach, the Horses that
used before times to be quiet enough, began to start, and rush one upon the
other, with such force and confusion as drove the Coachman into danger of his
life, who had much a do to bring them into order again. These accidents not a
little affrighted the understanding of the unfortunate Lady: but the force of
our destiny violently drives us to what is fatally ordained to us; so these
things could nothing hinder her from the persuit of her misfortunes, in spite
of all the contradictions of either her fear, or reason.

Being arrived at the Nunnerie, she found her Uncle and her Aunt walking
together in a Garden, there attending her coming, who as soon as they had
perceived her, and seeing her paler then she used to be, her Aunt said to her;
Certainly Niece you have not brought your best looks hither, me thinks you are
afraid of shaming my Brother, and therefore will partake with his sickly
looks. Then Isabella told them what had happened her in her coming, and
occasioned that fear which perhaps her looks had still retained.

Well then (said the Nun) since ye are both of you ill at ease, my counsel
is, that ye repose your selves, and dispense with to days devotion. Iulia and
I will go hear the Vespers for you. No good Aunt (said Isabella) I came not
here to see your Garden; I will go hear service with you and I think my Uncle
is here for the same purpose too. God will be no less pleased (answered the
Nun) with your wills, and perhaps more, then if ye did what might prejudice
your healths. The Divines say, that although in the affirmative precepts of
piety one be not always busied in the action affirmative, yet that the sight
alone suffices: in precepts negative, the troth is, we must be conversant, and
bent to the action negative. Stay here, stay, I will take your sin upon me;
and with that went away, carrying Iulia along with her. Well Niece (said
Hipolito) let us stay then, since it is my Sisters counsel, and taking her by
the hand, led her to sit under a hanging roof covered with Gelsomines and
Musk-Roses, and began to speak to her in this sort.

If ever man had reason to praise Heaven, it must be I, for the happiness I
now receive in this means offered me, to return you my due humble thanks for
the honor of your Letters in my sickness: and to unfold the thoughts of my
soul to you; to the end that comprehending them better then heretofore you
have suffered your self to do, you will daine to receive my griefs and
relieve them. I beseech you then take my words in that good part that my
affection deserves, and with such pity of my afflictions as your goodness
ought to move you to. I will not importune you with the repetition of any my
former discourses, you may have remembered enough to found your determination
upon, and to know the bounds of mine intentions so limited, as that I nor
pretend, nor desire ought of you that is not in all honesty and honor
permitted: nor more then a pre-eminence of affection, such as love may stablish
in a heart, that is, to give the fruits to others, for whom they are by the
superstition of our laws, and their favorable destinies more happily
reserved. All I desire is, that as all my thoughts are dedicated and vowed to
the service, honor, and love of the heavenly virtues of your soul, and all my
wishes but to be acceptable to you; yours may so far answer them, as to set
all other friendship and affections behind mine, and so far distinguish my
portion in you from other men's, as not to receive them in comparison or
equality with me. Pay me no more then for Gods sake with the love of a Niece,
which may be common to many more; and judging aright of my devotions, receive
them, since they tend not to your prejudice, nor to any thing unlawful or
interdicted.

I had thought Uncle (answered Isabella) I had so satisfied you by my Letters,
as you had remained as well content as you have cause to be, and that your
reason had had the power to disperse those vain fantasies that had clouded
your judgment; but for ought I see, the work is new to begin: would to God I
had beleft those presages that should have diuerted me from coming to this
place to enter anew into our wonted contestations. I know (Uncle) that all
desires tend unto the end of their contentment. You say that that of your love
is fixed upon the soul, and those perfections which you make your self
believe mine is accompanied with. These are still for ought I can perceive
those first dissembled protestations, by which those that are seized with your
passion, are wont to abuse such as they find easy of belief, and within the
bounds whereof they determine not to keep themselves: and though there might
be found some men so discreet as would be content to be so limited, yet love
still being become their master, and having taken from them all power of ruling
and bounding their will, and bowing it to the appetites of the body (which is
most conversant with us) it soon wearies the wit and spirit with the
contemplation of things separated from humanity, and draws it to the pursuit
of those delights and pleasures, to which our senses and appetites do lead
us. Do you not know that the brands or Torches which they paint in Cupids
hands betoken his double and different effects? for as the light of the fire
pleases the eyes, and rejoices us when we behold it only, and not feel the
heat too near us; but when it comes to burn us, we suffer then the hurt of
that thing that before so much delighted us; even so Love has his beginnings
pleasing, because he does not at first possess and take up the discourse of
our reason, and represents nothing to us for a while but the sweetness of a
felicity and contentment which he sets before us, and makes us easily hope
for: but when he has once seized us wholly, as he takes his possession, he
dazels us with the alluring appearances of his pleasures, and putting us into
the midst of his flame, melts and makes to waste from us all the freedom of
our reason and judgment that we had before. It were better therefore (good
Uncle) you draw back the first foot you have set into it, before the other
follow it, and fail you too, and not to desire of me what I can neither give,
nor you ought to pretend unto. You know I am upon the point of marriage: if ill
hap discover your addresses (as time if you persevere cannot long hide them)
you not only ruin this my fortune, which brings me profit, if not
contentment, but with it my reputation; and be assured, if I give you not a
most ample content, it is not want of will but power.

This discourse which Hipolito believed to come from a sincere truth, and not
mingled with dissimulation, sent him back to his old fever, and made him
speak thus. Niece, why should you not conceive my love rather placed between
Hercules and Mercury, that is, between Reason and Courage, as ancient
Academies have painted him, then between voluptuous pleasure and
unfaithfulness, where you seat him? Why, will you not allow him virtue for
his object, before a base lust, and which you forbid me too? Why, will you
rather think me wicked and false, then such as I am, and you have reason to
judge me? I could easily answer the scrupulous ceremonies of law with which you
combat me. The holy Bible offers me examples of such, and things much farther
in neerenesse of alliance. The force of love is divine, and may justify us
against all civil or Ecclesiastical ordinances. But I will not go so far,
nor alter the style of my first language, or overthrow your marriage, much
less your reputation. I have enough protested, but since so unprofitably, I
find death must end my love, and despair; and I hope it will not be long
first: I shall not be alone unhappy, when like Timageres you happily will too
late repent the ruin of your Miletus, and so revenge upon your own self your
cruelty. In speaking this, the tears fell from his eyes, and drew as many
from Isabella.

As they were taking new heart and speech, the Nun returned from her short
Vespers, and at the entrance of the Garden (to be freed from Iulia) gave her
her Psalter, to deliver her Maid, willing them to provide some collation. And
coming to her Brother and Niece, a little smiling, quoth she: how now sweet
hearts, I am afraid you have spent this time ill you are both so sad, make me
a partner of your entertainments: though I be not so cunning as you worldlings,
yet I am not such an innocent as my habit speaks me, I have books ye know of
other use then to the Church; nor am I altogether vnpractized in any thing;
fear not to give me your discourse, for should it be even of Love, I might be
able to put in a word.

Of Love Aunt (answered Isabella) the devotions and walls of a Cloister allow
it no entrance.

What (answered the Nun) can you that have read so much be ignorant of his
effects, in the Temple of A^ubis, in Saturnes Temple at Alexandria, or how
little the strict guard of Danae, Laeda, and many others, could prevent the
powerful workings of this God? There is nothing that his brands cannot fire,
or his arrows pierce; and I had ill spent my time in the house of your dead
Mother, who was the woman I loved best in this world, and whose memory I do
most honor, if I had learned nothing of this.

My Mother Aunt (answered Isabella) what can you say of her? I was not so blessed
as to see her in an age fit to judge of her condition, but sure she died with a
more fair and unquestioned reputation, then (if her life and manners had not
thoroughly deserved it) this age would have given her.

Niece (answered the Nun) nothing vndoth us but indiscretion: your Mother was
happy in placing her favors upon a wise and respectfull Gentleman, and she of
her part was in nothing unwary. This preserved her, and will keep up the
honor and happiness of all that join it with their love. I will give you the
whole truth, for I saw it.

The year I was professed Nun (it is some eighteen years since) the
Marquess of Coria was sent to this Town in business of his Majesty's; he
stayed here some seven or eight months, bestowing the time his great
employments left him in the noblest exercises, and most worthy his quality;
he was some five and thirty years old, and the most accomplished man that I
ever saw. The Lords and Gentry to do him honor, made him many feasts, and
there always followed Balls, Masks, Comedies, and other pleasurable
pastimes, in which he would again return his thanks to them. He took much
pleasure in Masks, for the privilege it gave him of discoursing with Ladies.
My eldest Brother was the man of this Town he most affied in, and to whom he
did most freely impart his negotiation; my Sister the woman that pleased him
best, finding her excellently fair, well graced, of a pleasing discourse, and
an understanding above the rest. This inclination grew to a love, in which he
governed himself so well, and so well disguised it, that he escaped all
suspicion. He resolved to impart it to my Sister, but with such fitness as
none but she, or some most trusted woman should know it. And knowing the
common curiosity and sudden suspicions that ordinarily follow near
frequentations in those kinds, might soon ruin his hopes, he retained still
his ordinary modest fashion and seemings. But the Carneuall drawing near, the
Masks and daunces were also more frequent, and gave him more conuenience to
speak to her, and entertain her as he did; yet so disguized, as though he
was known to be in the troop, yet he was unknown to all but her, to whom
(finding, or presuming, that she was not displeased, he should make more
estimation of her then the rest) he gave a sign to know him by, which made
the means of his approaches more easy. And after having enough by general
and doubtful words, given her the chief end and aim of his desires, at last,
he revealed himself wholly to her.

To be short, his discretion so managed his affair for him, as that helped
with the force of his virtue and nobleness, (and the service of my Sisters
Nurce, whom he found means to gain, and make the messenger of his letters)
he led my Sister to such composition, as that (conuenience and safety
permitting) she gave him promise of sight, and speech with her in more
priuacy. Such as are practiced in Italy, and Spain, understand well enough,
what such permissions do promise to those that women have a will to favor. To
bring this to pass, there happened a very fit mean; which was the necessity
of an affair of import for the Kings service, wherein he was to send to Rome
out of hand to his Holiness. The Marquess (and the Counsel by his advice)
judged my Brother, fitter then any other for this purpose; whereupon, soon as
the Carneuall was ended, my brother made that voyage, where he was five or
six weeks; in which time, the Marquess taking the occasion, found means to
visit my Sister by night, following her permission, which stretched at length
even to the point, whither they say love pretends; with such continuance as
that every second night he visited her, without ever having bin discovered by
any but my Sisters Nurce, who lay in her Chamber, and I in her inner Chamber,
by reason of a sickness I had, that made me leave the Monastery a while, to
be the better tended in my Brothers house? And, who not being yet thoroughly
recovered, slept not so soundly, but I sometimes heard soft noises of doors,
and murmures of words, which put me into a little suspicion, with some other
things that I had already been employed about, which kept me still in doubt:
In such sort, as one day I cast out a word to my sister; who so rebuked me,
that I never after durst speak any more to her of it.

But near upon the time that my Brother was expected back again; she
offered occasion of speech with me to that purpose, expressly coniuring me
to harbor no such opinions in my fantasy, and not to frame any false and
injurious tales of her. I that loved, and honored her more then any other
thing, and had all the obligation of nature, and love from her to make me do
so: gave her all the assurances that she could desire, of what she commanded
me, telling her by way of discourse what I had seen here, which so satisfied
her, seeing I had both engaged my self, and had besides a little knowledge of
the world; as she promised me, if time gave her proof of the faith I professed
her, she would one day speak more freely to me, then yet she would, as
afterward she did, which ye shall hear.

But first ye must know, that my Brother being returned, this practice between
them ceased, not their loves; but virtue was of both sides so reciprocally
obeyed, as their pleasure, nor desire, had not the power to carry them beyond
the limits of respect, nor had they other commerce then by letters, and those
but seldom. Not long after Easter, the Marquess having dispatched the
affairs he had in charge, was called home by the King his Master, which
summons, honor, and duty both commanded him to obey. You may imagine, what an
affliction was this eternal separation, both of them despairing ever to see
one another again.

I will only add this for one of the rarest, and most notable examples of
discretion, and constancy in them both, that I think has been ever seen
upon the like occasion: that in a feast which the Signory of the town made him
before his departure, whither the Ladies were invited, and among the rest my
Sister, whom he led in the gran ballo, or Measures, and in whose pauses, or
times of rest, this sad subject served them for entertainment, that neither
there, in taking their leaves, nor here in this place where he saw her
afterward (as if it had been by chance, coming to bid our Abbess farewell)
none could ever by either of their faces, or gestures, perceive any alteration
in their minds, or any appearance so differing from their accustomed fashion,
as might give any the least suspicion of the truth. He being gone, and my
Sister big with child, and drawing near her time; she came hither to see me,
and took of me the greatest assurances she could deuize of secrisie, of what I
should receive from her. Which I have hitherto most inuiolably kept; and should
still, had not this occasion pluct it from me, besides that, ye, and I owe an
equal respect unto her memory, and all other danger is long since past. She
fpake to me in this sort.

Sister, you may remember, when my husband was employed to Rome, we had speech
together of a conceit you had then taken; and I promised, so you would have
patience for the present, I would hereafter talk more freely to you. The
occasion is now come, that (having had many testimonies of your love, though
peradventure, your youth might give cause to question your discretion) I shall
repose my self upon the assurances, and trialls that I have had of your
affection in the thing that more concerns me then my life; assuring my self,
it cannot light into more faithful, more fit, or more safe hands then into
yours.

Then she relates to me, the loves of the Marquess and her, and how the
child, with which she was then great, was his, as he knew, and not my
Brothers; but because she was not above three weeks gone with child before my
Brothers return, it was easy to conceal it. Nevertheless, she desired the
Marquess should know (as was agreed between them) what issue her great belly
should come to: which she determined her self to do, if God gave her life,
but if it pleased him by her death, to deprive her of the means, she desired
me to discharge this office, and to this purpose; three days after she should
be brought a bed, a Pilgrim should come, faining to be returned from
Jerusalem, bringing images, and other things of devotion, and should ask alms
to make his voyage to Saint Jacques in Spain: whom you shall find means (said
she) to take into your chamber, and give him this little cofer, whereof this
is the key: there is in it a Jewel, his picture, and his letters, at the
bottom of one of which, you shall write a son, or a daughter, according as I
shall be delivered, and you shall so discharge him, without more words to him.
If I die, you shall be freed of this trouble, and shall only keep this box,
which she opened, and read his letters to me, the best written I think, that
ever were seen; the Jewel was this Diamond, which you have so much desired,
and I have ever promised you: she gave it me at her death, in the presence of
my Brother to keep for you till your Marriage.

Now you must note, that the Marquess was to send some one of trust to Naples,
about the time of my Sisters lying in; who clad like a Pilgrim, should
temporize and dissemble himself for a time, in all but the place, where he
was certainly to be found out, by those he should be sent unto from, though
he knew them not. God would that soon after his arrival, she was delivered of
you, Niece, so happily, as she had the means to see him dispatched herself.
But she left the cofer with me still, which I kept till her death, she
commanded me to burn within a while after, all that was within it (as I did)
and gave me the Jewel (as I have told you) the which my Brother believed, she
had had of her Borther the Bishop of Ostia, when she went to see him on his
deathbed, a little before her being with child of you.

Behold the truth of the History, to which I swear to you, I have added
nothing of my own, but delivered the simple truth of all as it past; being
one of the seldomest seen, and rarest passages carried in this kind, that I
think has been lightly heard, or read of; and by relation, whereof I hope I
shall not have diuerted, or slact either of you in the offices of that amity,
which the mutual opinions of your near alliance each to other has engendered
between you: and wherein (though ye may in truth discover the mistaking of
your beleefes hitherto) yet your virtues, I know will smoothe over greater
errors, for the honor of your house, and the memory of so worthy a woman as
she was.

Isabella through this discourse, faining to be much displeased with her Aunt,
said to her; pardon me (Aunt) if I bate you a little of the respect I bore you,
to the end to give the cinders of my dead Mother their due; which command me
to tell you that I hold the story you have told, as repugnant to truth, as all
those that have known her, have ever judged her actions conformable and
obedient to virtue. And you can not more plainly forbid me your conversation,
then by defaming the honor of one I owe so much to as a Mother.

No, no Niece, (said the Nun) I pray you do not think I have discoursed any
thing to you that is not most true, or have spoken at all to offend you, or
blemish the honor of my dead Sister, in the reverence whereof (though you be
her Daughter) you shall never exceed me. 'Twas by chance I fell into this
discourse, and upon the occasion your words gave me, and upon that assurance
that ought to be betwixt us, which I imagined too great to have suffered any
such distrusts to have stepped between us. The experience that the world and
more years may give you, will show you, that such, and stranger accidents than
these, are nothing impossible: Although I must confess, if I had imagined it
would have so much offended you, I had withheld my self from speaking any
thing of this matter.

I would not Sister (said Hipolito) for the better half of my life but you had
brought me this unexpected quiet, and drawn me out of the conflict my soul
was in, and rebellion against me, and my destinies against all my dearest
desires, nay, against Heaven it self, for having plunged me into a gulf of
miseries so deep, as no other thing but the remedy this your discourse may
prepare for me, can deliver me out of.

Behold (answered the Nun) to what pass I am come; for my own part, I hold
you both dear, and love you with so equal an affection, as I cannot make any
distinction between you, and having at once pleased the one, and offended the
other, I am as much afflicted with that distaste, as glad of the other
contentment. But had I known the occasion of these contrary motions, perhaps
my small understanding had prompted me to have so fitly spoken, that I had
remained equally accepted of you both.

I pray Aunt (said Isabella) let us leave this ill subject; it is not only to
you Niece (said she:) but to me dear Goddess (answered Hipolito) who
proposing to my self from hence all my happiness, will believe that my Sister
is miraculously fallen upon this discourse, to draw back my life not from the
grave, but (which is worse) from the for-euer languishing griefs, whither the
mischief of my desperate condition was leading me. Then began he to discourse
anew of his loves, as if he had not yet imparted them to the Nun, who the
better to give the last accomplishment to this work, had sent word that her
Niece was to sup with her, and that the Coach should not a wait her return
till the evening. She observed well the Maids countenance during Hipolito's
discourse, and believed her heart meant him no ill, though she often
interrupted him, as desirous they should believe the contrary: in the end she
enforced her self to this speech.

Was it not enough that you had digrest so much from what you ought, as to have
followed the direction of so unreasonable an opinion, and so far presumed as
to have thus often importuned me, but that you must now be transported beyond
the limits of modesty and your own honor, in daring to lay open all this to
her, before whom the least thought of it should make you blush? I beseech you
be satisfied with my patience, and your own impudence, without going farther.

The Nun believing she said this rather forced then heartily, interrupted
her, saying, (Niece) scorns do not always sit well upon modest women, nor
ought they to light indifferently upon all those that offer them their service:
The honesty, birth, wit, judgment, good fashion, with other fair parts and
virtues of such as possess them, ought to commend and make them more
acceptable then others, less remarkably accomplished; and she that should not
make this difference, must deserve to be thought without judgment or
understanding. You are not of that number; and the especial communication of
your friendship with my Brother, shows in what rank you hold him. And now
that you have occasion to judge his, to you greater then ever, and more
complete, since his parts heretofore made you esteem him worthy your favor,
why must the increase and perfection of his love be the diminution and end of
yours? restore your self to your self, and do not a thing so unlike you; do
not (sweet Niece) make him miserable, whom you have ever known honest and
worthy of love, nor pay the debt of the faithful service he has vowed to you,
with a less favorable usage then you were content to allow him when you owed
him less. Isabella, though she made show that these discourses displeased her,
and that she believed the tale of her Mothers loves to be but a cunning
imposture of her Aunts, to draw her to her Brothers desires, nevertheless this
served for the first excuse of their loves, and to clear the^ of those
difficulties which till now had divided them; for in the end, led by her
destinies, woone by her Aunts persuasions, with the oaths and assurances she
gave her of the truth of her relation, and by the tears and coniurations of
Hipolito, but chiefly by the force of love, she yielded her self wholly to his
power: for alas, how can a silly Maid maintain her liberty against him who
subdues all whom he will, and even when he will to his yoke and subjection.

At last then, after such ceremonies as likely pass in things of this kind,
Hipolito is received by Isabella for her servant, with such contentment as
only those may imagine who have incountred the like happy successes, but with
condition that his love should be still confined within those discreet limits
he had before offered, without forcing her permission farther then her looks
and speech should give him cause to hope. These are leaves with which many
cover the workings of their loves, to give the more gloss to the colors of
their intentions. But he willingly receives that law which inables him to make
a greater, and he who desires to have a victory, embraces it upon any
conditions; under the hope, that being once master, his obedience lies in his
own hands. All this poor Maid could desire, was sworn and promised by her
Uncle, with all the assurances could be given. So having supt, and the Coach
being come, they took their leaves of the Nun, with many thanks for the
easy mean she had given them to establish their contentment, promising each
to other an often meeting in that or other alike convenient place. Some happy
days they enjoyed to the full of their wishes, but as all things are subject
to mutabilitie; so neither could this happiness long subsist, without some
feeling of the inconstancy of fortune.

Fabritio presses his Daughter to her marriage, believing her Uncle his
Brother no small part of the cause of the coldness of her inclination to it;
thereupon he resolves to send him to Padua, to confirm those noble parts his
education had begun in him, and tells him this his resolution; laying before
him his youth, and how much it was yet too early to retire himself, and put an
end to so fair beginnings, that it behooued him to go yet further to exceed
the vulgar; that his fortune was to be built upon extraordinary merits, since
his own means were not great; and that only for so good purposes he should
make use of him, as of one that ever would reckon him one of his; and that
though at Naples there was no want of honest exercises, yet they had not
letters, the chief ornament and perfection of a Gentleman: besides, that, the
place of our birth is never so fit for our education as another.

Hipolito surprised with this unexpected news, was unprovided of an answer,
yet neither accepts nor refuses it, but found some pretense to delay the
time for a few days. In the end, his duty, his honor, his reason, and the
reverence he bore his Brother made him consent; but his desire, his passion,
his love and contentment contradicted it: amid these doubts he went to advise
with his Sister the Nun, where having long waied all these considerations,
and finding that the respect and honor of his Mistress, was too strong for
any other argument for his stay, and the many accidents that might cross their
contentments being to be feared; besides, that his Brother the Notarie, of whom
he depended, and who began a little to suspect this business, had absolutely
told him, that if he would ever hope for any thing from him, he was out of hand
to obey the appointment of their elder Brother, which was for his good and
advancement; and that if he voluntarily rejected the well wishes of his
friends, he should find himself abandoned of them, and of all the hope of his
fortunes. The Nun (on the other side) persuaded him, that the yielding to his
Brothers, besides that it might be to him a step to his better fortune, would
be a no less principal safety for the communication of his, and his
Mistresses desires, it being hard and almost impossible that the first hear of
their loves could be so cunningly covered, but that some flames would be
perceived, that it was not for him to hope to interrupt her marriage, and
though he could, yet that he should rather help it forward as the fi^test
mean to establish their happiness, gaining thereby the liberty to see, haunt
and communicate each with other, with all the priuacie they could desire; that
it was to be feared that time might open the eyes of Signiour Fabritio, and his
Wife, to see more then they would they should, that after this marriage these
fears would cease, their actions being no more subject to so much
ouer-looking, the suspicion of the occasion of those hindrances being taken
away.

Hipolito at length concluded upon his journey to Padua, and that a while after
Isabella should consent to the marriage, without showing any greater easiness
then before; to remove all surmize of her Uncles being any cause of her former
backwardness: without staying then till Fabritio should press him again, his
Brother of himself, vrges him for the means to accomplish his will, promising
him so well to employ his time and expense, as should give him contentment;
this Fabritio, receives gladly.

The day before his departure, he met his Isabella at the Nunnery; there did
their approaching separation, give all passage of both sides to those griefs,
tears, and sad complaints, that the violence of a mutual Love passion, might
raise in the young heat of these Lovers affection; there was Fortune hewn,
and their Destinies accused of too excessive a cruelty, for bringing on them so
sudden a night of parting, even in the morning of their warm affections. After
that, their Eyes, Voices, Lips, and Arms, had done their mutual offices, and
that the Nun had comforted them, with the assurance of her continual
assistance; they confirmed again the promises of their Loves, with the strong
pledges, of all the solemnest Oaths they could deuize, inuoking all the
execrations, and miseries that Heaven, and Hell could lay upon either of them
that should fail in the least point, with protestation, that what ever other
vow they should make repugnant to these (which again, and again, they
repeated) should not be by voluntary consent, but forced, and constrained: and
thereupon went and heard Mass together.

To the end, to write with more safety each to other, they resolved Hipolito
should enclose his letters, within those he should write to the Nun, who
should give them to Isabella, and return him again their answer. They
coniured one another also, to bear the anguish of their absence with patience,
and so to command themselves at parting, as no appearance of either side,
should breed any suspicion of their affection: which they did fitly enough; for
Hipolito found means to speak to his Brothers, and take leave of them, and
his Sisters in the absence of his Niece, whom afterward he met, as by chance
going to her Chamber, and there took his leave of her with little stay. She
took only leisure to entreat him, that she might see him before her
marriage, which she promised to send him word of.

He was no sooner at Padua, which was in September, but he caused to be made
a Mirhor of Crystal of the Rock covered with gold, and in that, his Picture
enclosed, the inside of the cover, was sealed up with their cifer, or mark,
which was in this form [ SS.] Without of one side was a Heart in the mids of
a fire kindled by the beams of a Sun, and blown by a Cupid, with these
words written about it; Puro ardet and vno: of the other side, was a burning
Fire ascending upward, and Tears showring on it, with these words; Nec
lachrymis, nec mergitur vndis: and sent it by his Laquey disguised, directing
it to the Nun, with this letter following.

I Have been ever of opinion, that the passions of Love had their effects,
much more approaching to extremes, then all others, and their fruits far
above imagination, and discourse. The dear proof that now I have, assures me
of it. I have as yet only tasted the pleasure one receives in the sight, of
what he truly loves; and thereby, do guess at the perfection of that
contentment, which possession yields. But I am at the present, so thoroughly
afflicted with the privation, of both the one and the other, as none but he
that feels it can imagine, nor though he felt could express it. Yet I do
digest it with such patience, as it pleases the well come necessity of so
rare, and worthy a subject to lay on me, willing to live in sufferance, or
rather to beg a languishing life of so beloved a remembrance, as is the
representation of your fair Idea, assuring my self you will not altogether
banish mine from your eyes, but be pleased to entertain likewise the memory
of that servant of yours, who will be ever so much yours, as Heaven shall as
soon be false, as he unfaithful: and do not you (O my dearest) whose pure
Soul, has never produced action of crime, to these other base, and common
ones; but like it self spotless, and Noble, do not you (I beseech you)
suffer it to fall under the ordinary effects of time, and absence; but live
pleased to Love him, who will live adoring you, and from the heat of whose
affection you have already inkindled, and raised those flames, which never can
be extinct, or abated.


This letter being received by the Nun, was forthwith, delivered together
with the present to Isabella; whom now Pompeio visited with more frequencie
then ever, being assured by his Father-in-law, and his Mother, that he should
marry her before the Carneuall next; the troublesome importunities of these
Parents, redoubled the grief the young maid felt for the absence of her
Hipolito.

All the ease she found, was in those often devotions she made at the Nunnery
with her good Aunt, by whose help, she caused to be made her Picture, by an
excellent Painter in a small Oual, and got it incloased in a little Enameld
box of gold, upon one side of which, there were two Cupids Painted, houlding
each in the one hand their Bow, and in the other, a Crown of Palms, which
they held aloft; as for reward of him that shot best, and written about, Neutri
sed vtrique, and on the other side, were their Cifers joined, made of opposed
Sha^ts, enclosed within a Chaplet of Myrtle, and Pomgranade, and about it, Non
nisi mutuis confodi potuere sagittis: which she sent to Hipolito, by him that
had brought his letter, with this answer.

IF the effects of our desires, were subject to no contraction, and Fortune
were always obedient to our wills, the glory not only of our actions, but of
virtue it self would be defaced, the pleasure of our hope lost, and that of
our enjoying abated, and diminished. Certainly, all things whatsoever must
confess themselves indebted to their contraries; because by the opposition of
the one, the perfection of the other is only best known. Think then that the
sharpness of this absence, which our disaster makes us now feel, is but to
relish to us, the better the sweetness of each others presence, when Heaven
shall favor us to enjoy it, and which we are not to fear will be long
interdicted us. But being I do no less, longingly awaite the one, then I
lothly abide the other: I will vow to you, that I should esteem my self most
happy, if I could be suffered, but to enjoy the liberty of my loanenesse with
peace. But behold the misery of my condition, being not daily, but hourly
drawn, or rather haled by force, to the satisfaction of the loathsome, and
unpleasing importu^ities of my tormenters; to whose subjection, the the tyranny
of my fate has too unjustly reserved me. So as in this continual war, with
my nature and desires, I live so artificial, and forced a life, as I scarce
understand my self: but bear it, forming to my self by such faining, some
little ease (and all that is left me) from from the affliction of my lives
hours. Live assured of my vows, which I will keep inviolable to you; and as
I have been the first cause that your heart has felt the force of Loves fire,
be likewise assured, you shall be the first, and alone that shall ever embrace
me.


They continued all they could the commerce of their letters; in the mean
time, Signior Fabritio wanted no counsailers to persuade his daughter, what
happiness this marriage with Pompeio did promise her: She finding which
course was her best to hold, made show of more good liking toward him then
aforetimes, the which gave great contentment to Signior Fabritio and Liuia, who
now esteeming her wholly reclaimed to their wills, made her acquainted with
their desire of the dispatch of her Marriage, presently after the end of the
Christmas holy days; She that always believed it should have been deferred
till the end of the Carneuall, (for fear of being surprised) writ to Hipolito
this letter following.

YOu have always promised me, and I have presumed on it, that I should have
the happiness to see you before the days of my sacrifice. Now knowing they
are to be hastened, and that presently after these holy days, I must into my
fetters; I have found the means to acquaint you with this sad news, whose
events, I hope you will prevent with your promise. To this I do summon you,
beseech you, conjure you, by the obligation of your word, by the duty of your
love, by the assurance you have of mine, by the holy oaths we have made, and
by that respect and reverence, you owe to those divine powers, which our
invocation made our witnesses. You owe my misfortunes this consolation, because
the hope of your contentme^t in it was not the first, but only cause of my
consenting to this match. I will not fear you will by refusing this my first
request, give me so just occasion to distrust your affection, because you owe
it; it lies in your power to do it, I desire it, and there needs but your
will, to the accomplishment of your due, and my satisfaction.


This letter was safely delivered to Hipolito, which more afflicted him, then
if it had brought him the doom of his death. And, but that he knew it
madness to oppose what he could not hinder (and though he could, it might be
his destruction) he had to his uttermost labored to have crossed it: but he
yielded in his resolution to necesssitie, and conuenience, and sent this
answer.

THey are weak and cold affections, that need so much chafing, and
remembrance of their duties, and not those who by their own feelings are
enough disposed; it is not from these things that I would give you the
estimation of my obedince, but by the hazard, of as many lives if I had them,
as I would wish there might be days between this and the accomplishment of
what you inform me, since Heaven shows it self so intentive to my ruin, as
to hasten so much the time of your appointed Marriage, we must endure his
bitter laws. But if it mean absolutely to triumph over my happiness, it must
suddenly break off the course of my life; for that only shall deny me the
bliss of your sight, almost with this letter which leaves me as full of
griefs, as I wish you may be ever of contentment.


By good hap the Post of Naples, was then at Padua, who had brought letters and
money to Hipolito from his Brothers, and by whom he returned them answer,
which gave him the fitter commodity to steal his journey without being
discovered. He went disguized during the Christmas holy days, and by bywayes
got to Naples, where he arrived late in the evening, and without being known
to any one, found the way the next morning to the Nunnery, where he lay
concealed for the space of eight or ten days in his Sisters Chamber; in
which time Isabella (who quickly heard of it) had but three times the means to
see him; and then caused certain works to be made there, which was the
pretext of her visitations. During the two last whereof, the good and discreet
Nun left them alone in her Cabinet, two or three hours, where they employed
the time about (you may imagine what) rather then to look on Pictures. For so
was it fit, and reasonable, that the dear and last gage of the confirmation of
a love arrived to his perfection, should be reserved for him, whose merit and
affection might best claim it; not for one that had but the shadow given him
by the blind tyrany of fate.

A little after Twelfe day, because the time of her Marriage drew near, and
his longer stay, could not be but incommodious and dangerous; he prepared
for his departure, and after having anew repeated their old oaths, and
assurances; and given each other fresh witnesses of the affections of their
souls, by all sorts of lamentable complaints, that may be occasioned by so
d^spleasing a separation (which they could not leave off till Tears, Words,
and time failed them) he left her.

Shortly after, and almost as soon as Hipolito was arrived at Padua, the long
promised Nuptials of Pompeio, and Isabella were dispatched, with the honor of
much great and Noble company, Combats, Races for prizes, Masks, and other
pleasures usual in such occasions.

He that had well observed Isabella's looks that day (howsoever she might
dissemble them) would have judged that what she did then, was more by
constraint, then out of her wills election. This alteration (apparent sometimes
in her tears, which yet she strove to hide) was by such as perceived it,
attributed rather to the apprehension she might have of the change of her
condition (which often troubles in such occurrences, the chaste hearts of young
maids) then to the true cause, which none knew of. The dancing being ended,
the Bride led into her Chamber and undressed, and the women that accompanied her,
departed, she retired into her inner Chamber, where in despite of her best
resolution, the force of her tears ouer-bare the strongest opposition her
reason could make Detesting with sobbing, and broken complaints, the fault she
made against her faith to Hipolito, and the more she sought to curb her
passion, the more violent it grew, so as in this conflict, she was half
distracted. In the end coming a little more to her self, she took paper,
and bad her maid bring her handkercher, faining that her nose bled, to excuse
her long stay; and in the mean time opened a vain so well to her purpose, as
she had blood enough to write this letter to Hipolito.

SInce my tears are not able to write my griefs, my blood shall, and I would
these were my last drops, that I might die as innocent in my actions, as I will
for ever live constant in the sincerity of my will toward you. Which will is
so contrary to what I am forced to, as that (but for being your command) I
would sooner have consented to my death, and though the offense might be
excused through my constraint, yet nevertheless the extremity that forces me
to the fault I commit against you, and against my self, will never be able to
serve me for remedy against the incurable ulcer that I make in my soul, in
being able to suffer that any other should be partaker of that which is only
due to you, and that (as consenting to the victory of mine enemy) I should
yield my self to him for his prey and trophy. I go then, no, rather I am
dragged to a loathed bed. Why did not my destinies rather ordain my life for a
bleeding sacrifice upon the altar of Diana, then to slave it to the tyranous
servitude of these unworthy bands? from the which (if you will not) I vow death
must be ere long the means of my deliverance,


She had only the leisure to end and seal this Letter, when her Mother who
had staid all that while in her Chamber, came to take her to bed and found her
binding up her hand, which she fained to have hurt by mischance. She seeing
her face so sad and full of tears, imputed it to the anguish of her hurt, and
to the apprehension that Maids usually have of their first nights endurings.
But when she was to go to bed, her tears brake out anew, and her Mother
finding her unwillingness so great, as she could hardly in a long time draw her
out of that inward Chamber where she was, sent for her Father, and said much to
him that witnest her grief to find things in so ill terms, and that this
marriage was engaged beyond the recovery of repentance. At length she was put
to bed, not without the pity of all about her, and belief that only her word
was forced, not her will gained to this marriage: and had her Husband
understood any thing, he might easily have perceived in bed how the world
went; but having no sight but in his eyes, he could see no farther than their
object. He suffered scornful refusals even till morning, when he received it
for a great favor, to receive but a kiss.

Some days after the Carneuall, this solemnity lasted; and then Pompeio and
Isabella were honorably conducted to their own house, where his chiefest
abode was before. A little after, the Nun that had conuaied Isabella's letter
to Hipolito, received, and sent her this following answer.

THis is not the only example that may teach us that things which have their
beginnings removed from the vulgar, and differing from the ordinary tract of
the world, have their consequences so rare and seldom seen, as that our
ignorance to prevent them, and the difficulty of finding out the remedies,
would rather take from whom they concern, all will to pursue them, then give
them any hope of their atchieuement. But since virtue shines most in the most
difficult things, and the more things seem impossible, the more their
execution is worth the compassing. Let us (dear soul) stoop, but not sink
under the burden of these afflictions, death is a possible and easy remedy for
all, since we have it when we list in our own power. But as it were the end of
our present miseries, so would it be the privation of our future happiness.
That then must be our latest refuge, when desperate of enjoying the one, we
may thereby escape the other. Shall we throw our selves at the feet of
misfortune? if we must conclude there, let me make my ruin memorable by the
fair marks I shall leave of the power love has in a resolved breast. Leave
me the care of what remains, for you have for your part but too well
discharged your duty, since all the honor of our love has hitherto been
yours; and having no other merit to answer it with, it is fit that all the
smart should be mine. But we both feel that part too much: be not you weary
still to love me, assuring your self my service shall for ever accompany the
faith of mine affection, patience my misfortune, and it may be a happy event my
enterprises. Of which I hope at Easter to come and advise with you.


These Letters gave Isabella some comfort, whose sorrows neither the great
feasting, entertainments, visitations of kindred, friends and neighbors, the
commodities of a pleasant and rich house, nor all the fondness of her new
Husband could any whit diminish; so much her mind labored with the impatience
of love and desire, with the absence of her Hipolito, and with the displeasure
she took at the fault she accused her self of having made against him. In
this time Hipolito sent his elder Brother word that he would visit him at
Easter, who now having married his Daughter, was indifferent for his Brothers
return: and he having received a leave, came two days before Easter; and the
day after, came Pompeio and his Lady thither. The joy and contentment of these
lovers at their meeting was so great, as bred them no little pain to dissemble
it: Isabella fayning such a welcome come to her Uncle, as if his coming had
been vndream't of, and unexpected. They were there together eight or ten days
without opportunity of any priuacy, but once, because she could not go now as
before without company to the Nunnery.

In this time Hipolito using the fittest carriage for the time and quality of
his love, addressed himself so well to his Nephew, and so woone his affection,
as no man's company was so pleasing and acceptable to him as his. After that,
Pompeio and his Lady went home to their own house, but not without having
first drawn a promise and assurance from Hipolito, that he would within two
days see them: which he did, being now freed from the curiosity of many eyes,
and having only his to blind, which were of themselves well enough seeled.

There was yet in the house an old woman, who had long lived there a servant,
who being the general Key-keeper of all the rooms, and so went too and fro
through the house, entered easily into those suspicions that a wicked old age is
often subject to, being also led by those many appearances which love in an
unwary young couple (transported with the conuenience of an unexpected
liberty) takes not heed to prevent; and hatching this opinion without making
show of it to any, more narrowly watches their behauiours, who having with
contentment enough enjoyed some days together, concluded it at last better to
use discreetly those oportunities, than abuse their fortune; as also the good
Nun had carefully advised them to beware of being surprised in inconveniences.

Hipolito returns to Naples, from whence he often visits his Nephew for his
Neeces sake, who could not so well command her passions, but she must show much
more contentment in her face, when her Uncle was there, then at other times,
feasting him more then her Husband, who was so blind and yielding to them, as
he would leave them to entertain one another (as he called it) and himself
spend the whole day in hunting. Wherein Hipolito excused himself, being the
thing he was most unfit for, and least delighted in; the malice that appeared
in the doubtful looks of this busy old woman, began to make them distrust
her, so as Hipolito durst neither go so often, nor stay so long in the house
of Pompeio, as before: who both took his strangeness ill, and complained of
it to his Wife.

He gave her leave to go to Naples to see her Mother, with charge to return
with her Uncle; ye may imagine this iourny was undertaken with much gladness,
and the condition accepted with more. She remained with her a good while;
favored with her Mothers sickness, and the commodity of often going to the
Nunnery, where she had ever somewhat or other a making for color of her going.

During her absence from home, an Uncle of her Husbands (sometime his guardian,
a Knight of mark and noble descent) came to see him, and his house, living at
that time not far thence; where having some days expected his Neeces
return, thought her long stay very strange, and told his Nephew that he was
not to wink at such courses, and that since she had brought little other
advantage to his house, he was to expect from her at least a careful eye over
his domestical affairs, which would run into confusion if she continued this
fashion.

The malicious old woman upon this occasion could not contain her self from
discovering to the Knight what she thought of her Lady, beseeching him to take
it well, as coming from an ancient and faithful servant of that house, who
could not pass over so great a blemish without violating her duty. He seemed
to believe nothing of what she said, and like a subtle Fox, reproved her
sharply taxing the v^ldnesse of her disposition in conceiving so false and
wicked an opinion, of a discreet and virtuous Lady, and her impudence in
daring to speak it to him.

The old woman in her own excuse, told him all the particulars she had built
upon, which sunk so deep into the apprehension of this man, as they never
after left him. As it is the property of a malicious nature, to do injury to
what it hates, (according as the passion is defined, to be a disposition of the
will intentive to the hurt of others) so this minister of hate, willing to
execute her fury upon these poor lovers, took the occasion of their mutual
affections, to exercise upon them her own rage, for not being now able in her
withered age, to have the part in these Love pleasures, like one ever before
liquerish of such fruit, and now not capable of being satisfied, for the three
score and fifth decreped year of her age, that had already disfigured her face,
with a hundred foultes and wrincles, forbad all beholders not only the desire,
but even opinion. Certainly, as the Child is the sign of Virginity past;
the scarre, that there has been a wound; and Diomedes his slipper, that he
had a lame club-foote; so was the past ill life of this old woman, enough
visible in that crooked disposition of her mind, that drove her forward in the
ill fruits of her hate and malice, who as Prisoners sometimes play with their
Shackles and fetters, so not knowing perhaps how else to pass the time, and
deceive the languishment of a weary age, busied her self with the afflicting
this young cupple, so shaking (as it were) the fetters of her loathed Prison
and solitude. We must believe so; for it is most credible that in matters
uncertain, and that consist in the only knowledge of their cause (as are
these inconveniences happening in the way of the renown and credit of fair
demeaned people) the opinions of honest minds, will rather accord to their
honor, then suffer the rashness of their judgments to conclude them vicious.
If we find some faults in the life and actions of men and women, we should
rather determine them the defects, or errors of virtue, not yet arrived to the
perfection, then flat wickednesses, proceeding from a settled vice; and speak
of them with a modest shame, and charitable compassion of poor humane Nature,
which cannot produce creature so perfect and accomplished, as their lives shall
be altogether exempt from reprehension, but there will ever be somewhat faulty
and wanting.

Examples do teach us, that it has ever been an infamous, and dishonest
fashion, to blot and destroy the credit and fame of people, by reason of the
importance, and consequence of so many miserable accidents that ensue thereof:
for what else do these exact obseruers, but sacrifice to the worlds malice (as
to an evil spirit) their outrages; provoking untimely (and often most
unjustly) the sorrows, and furies of such as apprehend themselves injured. As
the Carpenters that had the charge of the Deliak Galley, have (by supplying, or
lining still the rotten and decayed ribs, with new pieces of wood, kept it
sound and entire since the time it was first built: So certainly must we do
with this Reputation, and it is no more hard to maintain, and hold up a good
name and honor, then a flame, in keeping still under it somewhat to support,
and preserve it alive; but when once fury, and malice have utterly quenched,
and killed it, there is then no more hope left of recovering the one, then
renewing the other, when the matter is spent; yet such is the perverseness of
the age we live in, and so many ill inclinations there are, as for a little
profit, or pleasure, they care not to see all things in combustion, and as a
field full of weeds, so is the world in every corner, full of ungrateful, and
disloyal minds.

The wise therefore ought to be circumspect, and as mischiefs are like to
arise, seek to prevent them, and if not utterly kill, and root them out, yet
keep them under forgetting the mastery of their reputations.

The wise (said the wise man) receive profit from their enemies, wherefore they
at least, whose lives are not without color of suspicion, ought curiously to
practice this art and science.

The Satyr pressing to embrace and kiss fire the first time he saw it,
Prometheus cries to him, Satyr, thou will wipe the beard off thy chinne; for it
burns being touched, it gives (besides) warmthe, and light, and is our most
useful element being well and rightly used. So doubtless, nothing in this
world is so hurtful, but one side or other, it may be approach't and handled,
and applied to some use, and profit. Fools are the poison of society, but
such as are descreete and prudent, can turn to their own profit and
advantage, and fit to their own use, all the designs of enmity and hatred.
And even so, what proved most hurtful to Hipolito and Isabella, might have
become no less profitable to them, if they had been as careful and wary as
they should have been.

To wit, in this time, that this Uncle and guardian (incensed with what he had
from the old woman's report) grows from that time vigilant and watchful over
them. He uses means that Isabella is sent for, who soon after arriues
accompanied with her Uncle; both of them resolving to honor this old
Gentleman, as they did. After their greetings, Isabella gave him a fair
wrought Towell, and a Purse of the Nuns work, and to her Husband many other
little toys; wanting no fair and probable excuses for her tarriance. This
Knight or guardian stayed there three days after their return, prying into
all their actions, and watching them strictly, leaving no means unsought,
whereby to discover their nearest passages.

And as one of that age and Nation, being once rouch't with a suspicion,
yeeldes himself easy to persevere in it, upon any the least appearances that
may be presented to him; so, though he perceived none sufficient to confirm,
and se^tle his judgment upon, yet the insufficiency that he knew in his
Nephew, and the disparitie between his wife and him, made him dislike the
honest priuacies between her and her Uncle, although they stretched no farther
then might be permitted. He resolves before his departure to put a man to his
Nephew to wait on him in his Chamber, that had been of his own breeding,
whom he furnished with all such instructions as he thought the fittest to
bring him to the knowledge of what he desired to discover.

This Chamberlain is willingly received of both the Husband and the Wife too,
who nothing suspecting him for that Centinell and Watchman over her, that her
Uncle had designed him for, labored to make him hers by the deserts of a good
and kind usage. Hipolito of the other side, let pass no occasion that might
bind him to him; but under the disguize of a fained affection to their
service, and acknowledgment of his ob^igation (this crafty malicious fellow)
soothes, and lulles them a sleep. Thus this young coupple ingulfed in the
mids of their pleasures, guided by the only motion of their desires, foresee
not the Shelues, and Rocks that threaten them with the Shipwreck and utter
loss of all their contentment.

So hurtful often times is our happiness, in hindering the persuite of our
designs, through the sloth, negligence, and inconsideration, with which it
stupifies us, and drives us headlong to our ruin.

This Chamberlain seconded with the old woman, (to whom the Knight had also
declared his intention) had within a month or two, at certain times of
Hipolito's repair to his Masters house, perceived somewhat between them,
which he forthwith acquainted the Knight withal. Who thereupon goes to
Naples, where (like enough by his means) there was already some whispering
rumor spread about of this news; and where no sooner arrived, but without any
word to his Brother Fabritio, or his Wife Liuia, of what led him thither; he
goes to the Notary; who was Hipolito's chief refuge, and tells him, that if
his Brother out of hand refrained not his dishonest frequentation with his
Niece, he was in danger ere long to smart for it, adding how much they abused
the advantage of their near alliance; and that he had not believed the first
report of the unlawful priuacies that had long been between them, but now
was so undoubtedly resolved thereof, as he could no longer be ignorant, or
conceal them: and that (save for the respect and honor of their house) he had
ere then, taken such revenge as had befitted such a forfaite: how he had
revealed it to none but himself only, as one who best, and with least
scandal might stop the progress of the business, and bury it: and whose
wisdom he knew of ability, for so discreet a conduct, and as the
consequence of the affair required. All the allegations that the Notary could
make to the contrary of this Knights opinion, and to possess him with other
belief of his Brother and Niece, and how there was nothing, that could be
judged more licentious between them, then their near alliance permitted,
served to no purpose.

In conclusion, he entreated him that he might know no more such fashions in
his Brother, least he found his course more roughly interrupted then he looked
for.

This Notary mistrusted nothing of the truth the Knight had told him, being
himself a man that used not to condemn any kind of this vice, and besides,
had before (as granted) warned his Brother to be wary in the menage of his
affairs, aduertising him how hard a matter it was for him, long to conceal
them, if he once gave over their conduct, wholly to the liberty of his
affections. Soon after (then) he tells him what the Knight had discovered;
whereupon he refrained from visiting his Niece as before, save by letters,
which yet were frequent, and gave her often news of him. She on the other side
(to whom writing was not sufficient) being of a nature apt enough to expose to
all dangers, her Fortune, and Life, to give the greater proof of her
affection, to whom she had vowed it; and condemning all artifice of
dissimulation, and even discretion, as proceeding from a mind, too free within
it self, and exempt from passion; full of unrest, could not contain her
self, from discovering the alteration in her thoughts, but yielded to rage,
and displeasure (upon all occasions) against this old woman, and often against
her new man, of whom she was now grown distrustful.

Being aduertized by Hipolito, of an intention he had to accompany the Prince
of Lusignan to Rome; her quick invention, supplied her readily, with a
colorable occasion to go to Naples, and such as her Husband was most willing
with, there she learned more particularly, all what this Knight had told the
Notary, by the advice of whom, and of the Nun, Hipolito goes to Rome.

Isabella's journey was not approved of by the Knight her Uncle; and confirmed
in him, and in others, the doubt into which he was entered of this Love, and in
her Mother also, who thought much more of it then she spoke.

During Hipolito's abode at Rome, the old Woman, and the Chamberlain, had but
few pleasant hours, but still she found somewhat or other amiss in their
actions: so as one day, this old carcass told her, that for being too true a
servant to her Master, her Lady loved her not; and that if she could have
seen and said nothing, she had lived a quieter life. This came to the Husbands
ears; who sounding not the bottom of it, past it over.

The Chamberlain was more subtle, for though he could hear it said, that
they were worthy of hate, that could endure to serve in a place, where they
were known to be only set to do base offices; and serve for candles, to
light strangers into all the baseness of the house, with much more to that
purpose, yet, he stopped ear and mouth, to all, and seeming to understand
nothing of it, made likewise no answer to any thing.

The Knight who had been still informed of al things, came again to his
Nephew: where freely he told his Niece, of his discontent at her fashion of
life, entreating her to change it, or that else he was to make the World know,
how unworthy she was, to hold the honor of such a house and alliance. All her
well couch't and probable speeches (which the many angry tears of her great
heart, would not of a long time give passage to) did no whit abate the
obstinacy of this Uncle; who at length, more sweetning his speech, then
altering his opinion; told her, that to make her innocence appear, and remove
all misdoubts (since things were already come to so ill a pass) she was by a
change of life to remove their c^use; and that to this, there wanted but her
will, by the resolution whereof, she might always make her self appear,
such as she desired the World should judge her. After having well thought of
what course was fittest for her to take, she had recourse to the enforced
remedy of dissimulation; She spoke not so much of her Uncle as before, nor so
often commended his actions, nor curiously enquired after him, yet she often
heard news of him, though not so secreetly, but still this Chamberlain
perceived, and took notice of frequent messages to his Lady, which his Master
had no word of; she showed her seife more easy to please, and be served then
in former times, and to show her purpose of confining her thoughts, within the
compass of her house, and attend only to the care of her domesticke affairs,
she took the charge of them upon her, with so fit and dextrous a management,
that one would have thought, she had busied the study of her whole life in
them. She caused to be made her a Cabinet, or study, with the entry into it of
her garderobe, or inner Chamber, and a passage out into the Garden of the
house, by a narrow staire-case glazed of either side, and the Glass covered
with false windows, to see, and not be seen. She caused it to be Varnish't,
Gilt, adorned with Pictures, Books, China cofers, and other such singularities
as people that understand, and are curious in that kind use to have. There she
spent such time as the company of her Husband, Stangers, and Household business
left free to her. She went sometimes to Naples, but stayed not; three or four
months togethers, she was constant to this new life, with much content to her
Husband, Mother, and the Knight her Uncle.

During her Hipolito's absence, she caused to be made a Bracelet of Knots of
her Hair to wear on his arm, studded with Rubies, and Diamonds, with a large
lock of Gold four square, and set with a rich stone at each corner, the midst
was Inameled blew, resembling clouds sown with Tears half hidden, and
little appearing, and written about, Conduntur non siccantur, which she sent
with this letter.

TO bear always a face differing from my passions, to have my words contrary
to my thoughts, my deeds to my will, tears in my heart, and laughter in my
mouth, anguish in my soul, and joy in my looks; disdain within, and respect
in outward appearance, to be always present, where my mind and thoughts, are
utterly absent, to faigne a doting affection, out of a perfect loathing.
Brief, to show a full content in living under the subjection of a most
contrary servitude; these are the ordinary pleasures of my life. Till now, the
hope I gave my self, that it might be Heaven would in the end grow weary of
afflicting us, has enabled me to struggle with the miseries, of this my
strange condition; But I must confess, I do now begin to feel so great a
failing in the force of my patience, as if I find not my self speedily
assisted, with the demonstration of some thught and care of your part for my
deliverance, I shall give over the care of my life, for alas it were but
unprofitable to you, and to me most miserable. Think on it, and make me I
beseech you capable of your deliberation, and keep with the memory of my
truth, this pledge (perhaps my last) that herewith I send you.


This letter so moved Hipolito, as immediately upon the receipt of them, he
returned to Naples, where he could not stay three days without seeing his
Niece, with whom (after the Husbands many welcommings) he was retained
certain days with more ease then needed.

Alas, that the first day could not pass, without reducing to them their
former fashion; they stirred not out of their Cabinet, the Husband was left,
the care of his affairs neglected; such as came to speak to them, had no more
audience or access: all business, all company was displeasing and
troublesome, all the Husband could have, was after suppers, some lean
entertainment, mingled oftentimes with certain ambiguous speeches, and smiles
sauouring more of mockery, or contempt then othewise: which began at last to
displease him, and they perceived it, and withal, were told by Isabella's
maid Iulia, that the old Woman, and Chamberlain, were diligent priers into
their behauiours, and held hourly little counsels between themselves of
their actions; which made them presume, that they would not fail to give the
Knight her Uncle notice of every thing. Hipolito hereupon takes new counsel,
which was (having informed himself perfectly of the secreatest mean of
coming into the Garden, by a little door out of the Park, and thence into
the Cabinet by the close stairs) to return to Naples, as he did, and thence
fained a journey to the Court of Sau^y; this is given out in the house, and his
Brothers being advertised of it, do gladly furnish him with Horses, Money, and
Letters of favor to their friends. He would yet carry but one Lacquey with
him, whom he wholly affied in, and with him went to a house of his Brothers
the Notary (some eight miles from Naples where he at that time was) from
thence his Isabella had news of him; and there he lay concealed for the space
of two months; going thence every second or third night to see her, having
found by ways into the Park, whence he past into the Garden, and so into the
Cabinet; he arrived there commonly at nine or ten at night, mean while his
man held his Horses in a most unhaunted, and remote place of the Park, where
he awaited him till too or three in the morning, and to avoid all suspicion
she used before, to retire her self into her Cabinet after Suppers, and lie
there alone.

From the beginning of September, till about the end of October, this fashon
held between them: But alas, the night has eyes, and truth is seen in the
dark. It Is known Hipolito conceales himself in this house. Pompeio's Uncle
that had understood all the passage of his former journey, knows this last
deceit too, but not the conueiance of the Cabinet. He grows more enraged then
ever; goes to his Niece, taunts her with all the sharpest language he had,
threatening her and her Hipolito, with no less then an ignominious death: tells
all to the Husband, reproaching him for his little sense of this injury, and
his want of courage to revenge it.

And having sufficiently plaide his part there, goes forthwith to Naples, and
does there also the like, discovering all to Fabritio and his wife, from point
to point, how every particular had past, the warnings he had given, and
entreaties he had made to them to decist from their course: then inueyes
against the Notary, who denies his Brothers being at his house (at least to his
knowledge, himself being then at Naples) Hipolito, was forthwith aduertized
of this, to the end he might not be found there; but because those of the
house, could not so readily be instructed (some woman and a child affirming
that he had been there, and was but two days before gone from thence) this
made all the rest credible, and after all the bitterness that the displeasure
of such an affair could put into his words, and that he had therewith bound
his two brothers by their oaths not to receive Hipolito, this Uncle left them;
resolving to use all means to surprise him.

Thus, this poor miserable Lover, beaten with so many tempests, left of his
chiefest friends, abandoned of all hope* finds (though too late) how slippery
is the downe-fall of our pleasures, and how great the disproportion is of the
short contentments, and long miseries of this life.

He retire himself to his Brother Scipio's house, who was married some twelve
miles from Naples, in the way to Suca. There he remained some days, and after
having rested his wits diuersely distracted, and ouerwrought with the
consideration of the extremity he was in, and what course was fittest to be
taken, he resolved by the advice of his Brother (a man more subtle in vice,
then ingenious in virtuous matters) to cause dispersed abroad, a rumor that he
was slain, hoping by this mean to drown al noise already spread of matters
past, and lay a certain ground whereon to build the last design for the
contentment of his Mistress and himself.

Before he began to put this in execution, he sent her a Tablet full of stances
written upon the subject of his Fortune, covered with Gold, sown full of
Thorns to the life in Inameled work, and in the midst of either face was a
Tomb of black Amell, and on the top of it a Semperuiue to the life, and at
the foot written, Del piacer Sepolto la seranza viua; with this letter
following, which the Nun (whom he sent it to,) caused it to be delivered.

LEt not these accidents that combat us, I beseech you, drive you into despair
of their remedy. Believe me, as long as Heaven shall spare me life, our
misfortunes shall enjoy no peaceable victory over us, nor fall on us,
unresisted. And since what you suffer, proceeds only through my occasion, if
my death could deliver you; I should hold it most happily gained; but knowing
it unavailable, and that it would rid only me out of pain; to faigne it, may
perhaps give remedy to us both. Let not then the news you shall hear of it
afflict you, as a truth; though in appearance as believing it. It Is the last,
and best mean I have resolved on, to gain us the freedom of our
contentments: desiring therein only, and only aiming at your happiness, and
that I may still enjoy your love, be happy to receive your commandments, and
serve you, having nothing so deeply ingraued in my soul, as the faithful
observance I owe you; and if any remembrance shall accompany it is immortality,
believe, it will be only that of your name, and of my obligation; the which
though it be impossible for me to repay, my will at least shall never fail
me. But I as yet, give you only words, the shadow; I hope shortly, my deeds
will prove enough fortunate, to let you see the body.


Soon as Hipolito was sure his Mistress had received his letters, he began
to play his fained Tragedy, certain people are set on, who come betimes in the
morning to his Brothers lodging, telling him that there was a man slain, that
night in the next Village, upon the way to his house, with the Horse he rode
on, and it should seem was his younger Brother. He rises hastily, and goes to
the place whither these people led him, where he found a thing trust up in
form of a man, which he had caused to be stuffed with hay, and dressed up in a
suit, his Brother had sometime worn, cut and mangled in diverse places,
resembling blows, and thrusts with swords, and all besmeared with blood, and
his Horse also dead by him. He takes a Notary of the Village, and a Priest for
his purpose, and in presence of those that conducted him thither, and some
other of his own people, caused to be made a verbal process, how his
Brother Hipolito had been by them found in that place, newly slain with so
many hurts, in such places, clad in such a suit, his Horse likewise dead,
beside him: and instantly, omitting nothing that might make all credible,
caused that bundle, or false man to be buried as if it had been the body of
Hipolito, in the Church of that Village; puts himself into blackes, and sends
forthwith, the verbal proesse to Naples to his Brothers; ere long, the death
of Hipolito was generally bruted about, and came to the cares of Pompeio and
his wife, who faining to believe it, (and the Husband believing) seemed much to
lament it.

The Winter was at that time well spent, when Hipolito having executed this
stratagem, gets him disguised all alone, on foot, by night, by unused by ways
to the Park of Pompeio's house, and lodges in his Mistresses Cabinet, where
he was two days, there they consulted of what was to be done, for their
delivery out of thraldom.

It was concluded then, that they must resolve for Cypres, or Candy, and that,
to that effect, he would provide a Bark, and lay it ready victualled, and
furnished of all things fit, against the end of March, or beginning of April
next. For this purpose she gave him such moneys as she had, resolving withal,
to employ her uttermost endeavor, to get together the most she could, to make
their voyage, and maintain them after. In the mean time, they resolved, he
was to visit her, with the oftnest, and secretest means he could, having
provided himself, of some safe retraite for himself not far of.

Being gone, she advised with her self, to persuade her Husband to make a
voyage into France, the peace being made between the Kings of France, and
Naples. She wanted no fair inducements to urge him with; how it was a shame
for one of his age, and place in the world, to have never seen other, then the
angle he was borne in: that this voyage would fashion, and make him up better;
and yield him more known, and honored of the best and Noblest company: that
he had not yet gained that esteem in the World, that he might enable
himself to expect, by more enriching his mind, with experience to judge, and
ability to discourse, in which, an infinite of others out went him, and were
therefore preferred, and respected before him: which both in birth and means,
and all other things, were far to yield to him: and how though his present
estate in possession yielded him not much, she would find him enough, without
much preiudicing it, for that effect: that his lands were well timbred, so as
the sale of four, or five thousand crowns worth, would not be much mist:
that they would lease out part of their lands, and make that way as much more
money in incummes: and that with such a like sum, he might make his voyage,
with credit and honor: how for her part, she would keep but her maids, and
one man, and to avoid expense, would retire her self to Naples to her Mother,
who she knew would think her company no trouble.

She gildes her language so well, that her Husband begins to relish the
motion, and goes to his Uncle and guardian, and communicates it to him: who
likes well enough of the business; and gives the charge to Isabella, to find
Merchants, and make the bargain with them, saying, he would authorize her,
because her Husband was yet in his minority.

You may imagine whither she bestirred her self or no, or Hipolito of the
other side, who (having provided a Bark, Rigged, Victualled, and furnished
with all things necessary to make the voyage into Cypres, upon the first day of
April) goes confidently about with his Lacquey disguised, like Venetian
Merchants, coasting the Country, to look out some place of retreite for
himself near his Mistresses house; and as there is no difficulty, but money
passes through it, he gains by that bait, a Country fellow that dwelt in a
little house, by a Woods side; far enough from neighbors, and only three
miles off from his Mistress; where he remained till the periode of his
misfortune, faining himself fled out of Venice for certain debts, and that
during his absence, his friends were laboring some reasonable composition for
him, with his Creditors, his poor Host, for the profit he received by him,
could have wished him still in business: having expressly forbidden those of
his house, not to discover him to any one, served him with all things for
himself, and his Horses.

When he went by night to see his Mistress (which was often) he made his
Host believe, that it was either to speak with some that negotiated for him,
or to deliver, or to receive letters at a place they were still by appointment
left.

In the mean time, Isabella of her part was not idle, for having bargained for
five thousand crowns worth of timber, with Merchants that had the money ready
at an hours warning, and leased out a great part of her Husbands lands for
certain years, for the receipt of five thousand more, she aduertized the
Knight her Uncle of it, and intreates of him to come the eighteenth of March,
to see the covenants dispatched for his Nephew, her Husband, at his house:
whither he came the seventeenth day to dinner.

Hipolito, and Isabella had determined (this money being received, and locked
up in her Cabinet, which they made account, would be at the furthest by the
twentieth day) to depart the night following, upon Hipolitos Horses, he
carrying his Mistress behind him; and his man, and her maid upon another
Horse, all laden with as much as they could carry in Money, and Jewels, and
gain that night the Port Gaietta, and straight hoise up the sails of the
Bark that lay ready for them, accomodated at all points, as well with Linen,
Clothes, Books, as all other necessary mooueables.

The Knights two spies had so well watch't over the unfortunate Isabella, that
they had heard some one walking and talking in the night with her, in her
Cabinet, who they knew were none of her women, having found them both a sleep
in her gardrobe: besides, had further discovered, that Iulia did often times
convey meat, and wine thither, without telling for whom: and at three or four
several times, that it had rained in the night, they had tract the footing of
some person, going and coming through the Garden, to the staire of the
Cabinet, and thence to the Park gate, and the entry thereof beaten with the
footing of a Horse.

All this is told to the Knight, soon after his arrival, who without seeming
to have known any thing new, passes the rest of the day in discourse of his
Nephews voyage; of the train he should carry with him, of the government of
his expenses; and time of his stay abroad, and his return.

The night being come, he sent one of his men to watch without the Park gate,
which was fastened only, but that of the Garden locked every night, commanding
him to conceal himself all he could, and speak to no man of it, and if he
saw any one come in that way, to bring him present word. That night there
appeared nothing; the next morning betimes, the Merchants come, the covenants
are past, and dispatched, the last moneys received and locked into Isabella's
Cabinet, and early enough for her to advertise Hipolito of it, by that mean
they used to hear from one another those days they met not, which was by
leaving their letters in a hollow tree in the Park, where they fetched, or
sent for them at a fit hour. Hipolito sent his man thither that night at
Supper time, who found a little note, containing the advertisement of all.

The night coming, the Knight sends his man again as before. Misfortune, and
mischief intentive to the ruin of these unhappy lovers, and meaning to set
them for paternes to show how little auailes man's foresight, to withstand the
Heavens appointment; and that when we hold the end of our hopes nearest, and
most certain, it is then commonly, that we feel the events farthest off, and
most contrary to our expectations: This mischief (I say) would that Hipolito,
who now prefumed all things so happily laid, as there wanted nothing but to go
to take his Isabella, (and whom the long expectance of this so desired hour,
had made utterly impatient of any longer stay) came his accustomed way, at nine
of the clock at night, having left his man, and Horses in the Park.

The Knights man having discovered them, comes to his Master undiscovered by
any, tells him what he had seen; he sends him with two more of his men with
Pistolls to make good the Park gate, and stay by force such as were gone in,
or shoot them if they pressed out, they found means to get out undiscovered
before the gates of the house were shut in.

The Knight went to bed, so did his Nephew soon after, and was as soon a
sleep; when he knew his men gone, this Knight rises, and sends a Gentleman of
his, whom he kept with him, for his Nephews man, him he commanded, to watch
and bring him word, when his Neeces maids should be gone out into her inner
Chamber; which having done, he sends this Gentleman of his, commanding him with
a sword drawn to keep the women upon their lives, from stirring out of the
room they were in, or making any noise, or exclamation, till they were sent
for out.

Iulia was within, with her Mistress in her Cabinet. In the mean time, plants
himself at the door of the Cabinet, listening what was done there, he could
hear speaking, but not the words, opening and shutting of cofers, removing of
moneys, and other things; at length, after a whiles stay, being near eleven of
the clock, he heard Iulia coming to the door saying: I will go see then
Madam, if all the house be a sleep, and take these purses that I have: and her
Mistress answering her, stay not then, for it is time we were gone; thereupon,
the maid half opening the door, perceived this man, that presses to enter
in, which she strove against, and during their contention, Hipolito saues
himself by the stairs into the garden, thinking that he not being taken, his
Mistress should run no hazard: yet he could not shift himself away so
suddenly, but the Knight having borne open the door, might perceive him
shutting the other after him.

His Nephews man, that he had put to him, entered the Cabinet with him; as
soon as Isabella saw that fellow, she could not hold from flying furiously at
his face, with such injuries, as witnest the belief she had of being
discovered by him.

The Kinght sends him to wake, and bring his Master, and sends a man he had
there of his own in the next room, along with Iulia, into the chamber
himself lay in, to the end, to gain the truth out of her, more easily by
this separation.

Nature then showed sufficiently in this poor Lady, how she pleases her
self, often times to stray from the course of her ordinary rules, and make to
appear in subjects, we esteem weak and less perfect, high and great
effects; showing us in this woman, how far differing a soul from the vulgar,
and capable of rare virtues, is often found in that sex: and how a resolution
having once taken sure footing in them, remains commonly more firm, and
immooueable, then in men; she then, in this cross and unexpected accident,
instead of having recourse to Tears, and Prayers, (the refuge natural to the
weakness some impute to women) armed her self (contrariwise) with such an
unstirred assurance, amazed her enemies: for this Uncle having set his dagger
to her throat, and asking her who it was went down the stairs, and whither
she was going, at such an hour with that money, which was part put up into
bags and sackes, and part spread upon the table, she without show of
amazement, told him, that it was the fashion of a poor soul'd man, to speak
to a woman with his arms in his hand, and that without more threatening it was
an easy matter, to ^ill, one who resisted not; that never Noble, nor honest
mind, used to alot any part of his time, to so base occupations, as to play
the hourly euesdroper, and spy over the actions of an honest woman: That no
body was gone down the stairs, but that she then shut that door, when her
maid opened the other to go fetch purses, to put up the rest of that money
upon the table, to be locked up: that her bidding of her return quickly, that
they might be gone, was to dispatch her sooner to bed, because it was late.

The Husband being come, was not a little amazed at the news his Uncle tells
him, which before he dreamed not of: yet, even the Uncle himself, begins a
little to stagger in his confidence, seeing the constancy of this woman; when
his man came to tell him, if Iulia might be assured her life, that she would
confess the truth.

The Knight leaves Isabella in guarde, with this servant of his, and his
Gentleman, commanding them upon their lives, not to suffer her to rise out of a
Chair, where they made her sit; and thence, he and his Nephew goes into the
Chamber where Iulia was, where they were scarce entered, when she retaining of
the base condition of a low servile heart, falls full of tears at their feet,
begging pardon, which is promised her, upon a true relation, of her Ladies
practices and intent, which she made, and was forthwith brought to Isabella,
who beholding her with them, and looking her in the face, guest how the matter
went, and forceing to rise up, said; Ah false treacher, why am I not suffered
yet before I die, to punish thy detestable disloyalty?

They made this maid, avouch to her all she had told them.

They ransack't her cofers, which were all open; in one of them, they found all
the letters Hipolito had written to her, bound up by themselves; they found in
another, her Jewels ranged together; and not far off, two other little boxes
of Mercury sublimate, and other poisons made into Pills; in the upper part of
one of the Chests, they found laid in a place apparent enough to the sight,
this following Evidence, written with her hand.

I Know that the precipitation of your judgments is so sudden, so moved
with passion, and waying to the worser part; as that my departure shall be no
sooner known, then blamed of you; and my self condemned as an incestuous
adulteress, in leaving one, who is held to be my Husband, to go away with
him, that is reputed my Uncle.

But I beseech all those, before whose eyes this Evidence shall come, that
having patience to read it, they will rather settle their opinions upon the
certain assurance of the truth they find in it, then upon the false
appearance of a common error. It Is an exceeding great grief to me, that in
defense of my innocence, I must discover both my fault, and my shame, and
inhumanly break open the Sepulcher, and disease the bones of the dead, taint
the honor, and blemish the memory of her that brought me into the World: But
since I have only this mean, whereby to wash off the stain of my reputation,
I beseech her Ghost to pardon me, and both God and men not to impute to
impiety, and ingratitude, what I am compelled unto, through necessity, and
for my justification.

It is known, and I have learned, that the Laws do say, that only the
consent makes the Marriage; which consent cannot proceed but from a voluntary
and free will, and exempt from all force, and constraint, the which being used
therein, forbids what arises thence, to be called a consent of the will; and
consequently bars all possibility of establishing a Marriage upon the
contrary of that whence only it ought necessarily to come.

There is not any one that has been practiced with any frequency in the
business of our house, but must needs know, what artifices, subtilities, what
authority, and force, what threatenings and ill vsages, my Father (or he whom
I did esteem for such) and those of whom I depended, have used toward me, to
make me condescend to the Marriage with Signior Pompeio; their force and
constraint, had the power to make me his Concubine, not his wife; my will
contracting it, and the ability of becoming so, being taken from me, having
promised, and given my self before for wife to Hipolito.

And since the Laws permit such as enter into any Religion by force, who both
do, and swear the obligation of those usual vows; since the Laws (I say)
do give them, the ability to dispense with those, and give over their orders;
why shall not Marriage have the like power, whereof the promises cannot bind
those more strictly who make them to men, then the vows of Religion do those
that swear them to God? I am not ignorant, that the common opinion every one
has, that Hipolito as Brother to my Father, and therefore my Uncle does
thereby conclude my Marriage with him unlawful: But it is not so long since,
but I may entreat some yet of this age to remember, that about eighteen, or
twenty years since, the King sent to Naples the Marquess of Coria, a
Spaniard, who stayed there some time, during which, he made love to my Mother,
and gained such interest in her, as that during the absence of Signior Fabritio
her Husband, in a Voyage he made to his Holiness, his affection had arrived
to what the affections of men do usually pretend. For in this time I was
begotten: I call God to witness of my words, and that I speak a perfect
truth. My Mothers Nurse, and her Sister in Law the Nun, are yet both living,
who are neither of them ignorant hereof.

But to allege a proof, that may at all times be produced, I assure my
self, there may be found among the Registers of the Towne-Treazor, the day of
the departure of Signior Fabritio to Rome, and of his return to Naples; and by
his charges, and their discharge in his employment, and the expedition he
obtained of his Holiness, may be seen the day of my Birth in his papers, and
that of my Baptism in the Registers of the Church where I received it.

Let these be brought, and it will be found that it cannot be I should be
his Daughter; since by the immooueable Laws of Nature, a child (to live) must
of necessity be borne either upon the seventh, ninth, or eleventh month
after Conception: And so far was it from any of these, as in the beginning of
the eight after his return, I was borne; a time altogether insufficient, and
incapable of giving life to a child.

Being not Daughter to Fabritio, I am not Niece, nor of kin to Hipolito; Now
since freedom and liberty begets the will; the will consent; and consent the
Marriage; and that all this has given me for wife to Hipolito: Since no
alliance can be any bar between us; since force, or violence draws, or
works no obligation; and since by that only, I was cast under the bondage and
servitude of Pompeio: why shall it not be lawful, for me to redeem my
liberty, from the unjust usurpation, of him that has too long abused, and
enjoyed by violence, what was none of his; and restore my self, into the hands
of him to whom God, the Laws, my Election, and my Faith has given me.

The contentment that I give my self, in being able to work my release from
mine enemies; makes me resolve to suffer with cheerfulness, all the injuries
of Fortune, of the Heavens, of the Time, of Necessity, and all that can happen
me in a strange Clime: Where resolved to go confine my self, and end the rest
of my days; I beg of my friends no more, then to forget my name, and imagine
me dead.


This Evidence being read, she was asked, what she intended with those
poisons; she said, she made them to take, if she were pursued so narrowly, as
she could not save her self; to the end, to bar her enemies the
contentment, and prevent the mischief of falling alive into their power.

After she had confessed much more, and more voluntarily, then she was
questioned; the Uncle said; since you determined to be your own executioner,
and punish your own dishonestie; it were pity (though you have been
prevented in the execution of so wicked an enterprise) that you should be
frustrated too, in the just punishment, you have so well deserved, and so
prouidently prepared for your self; and therefore you are speedily, by the
mean of your own appointment, to receive your death; wherewith, taking one
of the pills, which her Uncle presented her; she answered them; it is for
them that have either pleasure, or desire of life, to seek the means to keep
it; and for such as have lost both the one, and the other, to hasten the end of
it, and fly to death, which is so far from being a thing odious to me,
(being deprived of my Hipolito) as that (were ye as inclinable to pity, and
should deny it me; as you are bent to cruelty, and to give it me) I would
beseech you, to let me take it with my own hands.

Now after all the treacherous, and ignoble courses you have taken against me; I
must confess my self much bound to you, for shortning my miserable life,
whose end, is as pleasing to me, as the course has been unfortunate: hoping
that as God does affoorde you by this mean, the triumph of your desires over
me, and me the end of my afflictions; he will also please to give my soul
her rest in eternal bliss, which I humbly crave of him, and that the long
pains of my life, and unjust Martyrdom of my death, may obtain me his
pity, and my sins their pardon.

She spoke these words, with so resolute, and unmoved a face, and fashion,
that all those about her, were seized with astonishment, and pity.

Her Uncle himself, and Husband began to speak to her, testifying a
moderation of their doom, and rage; when she swallowed the Pill, and with a
nimble hand taking two more, said; One is too few, and nothing is hard to do
that gives us contentment, and bars our enemies the pleasure of a long
vengeance.

Soon after, the force and quantity of the poison wrought his effect; and
seizing all the Vital parts, left her only power to speak these last words:
Receive, receive, my Hipolito, these last proofs of my affection; and know by
my death, what power a faithful love has in a soul resolved: and upon that
word yielded up the ghost, in the same chair, where they had set her: leaving
her memory no less admirable, for the constancy of her end, then remarkable,
for the boldness of her desperate enterprise.

Here (Reader) with Isabella's end, would I end too; so wearied I am, with the
already too sad relation, of these unhappy Lovers fortunes, and most unwilling
to add hereto, the lamentable end of the poor Hipolito, whom my Author tells
me, his Isabella's death, made so desperate a despiser of his own life, as to
forsake all his hopes, means of sustenance, friends and allies, and die an
exile to his Country for her reuenges sake.

For I find that within few weeks after her death, he slew her Husband, and
his Uncle upon their way, in a journey to Rome; for which fact, neither his
Brothers (who being questioned about him, were driven to much trouble for him)
nor any other friend, or his Country durst own him: but he was constrained
(being oppressed with extreme want) to return himself, into the State of
Venice, where five years after Isabella's death, to avoid staruing, he was
enforced to Marry a Widow, that had some reasonable means to sustain him a
while with, but no more then what he had in a short time so far wasted, as
she (as well out of coffeehouse thereat, as also discovering perhaps
withal, the many degrees of comparison between the love she found he bore
her, and might imagine, he might bear to an Isabella, or one more worthy of
him, then she, who was neither handsome, nor well natured) poisoned him, as it
was thought, with a mess of broth, she caused to be made for him one
morning, that he had taken a little Physic, for some indisposition of body he
complained of.

There was found in his Study, after his death a table, which it seemed, he
had not long before caused to be made, wherein there was Painted his Isabella,
lying along dead, with her eyes closed, and himself, kneeling at her feet,
with certain verses under written; speaking (it seems) to her eyes. The
verses were to this purpose.

Sleep in your lids (ye loved shades
Of my veiled Suns;) I vow
It Is not to spare my blood, that thus
I spill my tears on you.
Grief and affliction (only due
To me) are justly bent
To give me a wasting life, to endure
A lasting languishment.
That when mine eyes can weep no more,
My heart might bleed; and I,
(Because I lived the longer life)
A longer death might die.
FINIS.

