THE Spiritual Fishing. A SERMON Preached in Cambridge by that Reverend and
Judicious Divine, Mr SAMVEL HIERON. Printed by the true Copy written with his
own hands a little before his decease.

LVKE 5. Verse. 10. The last words of the Verse. Henceforth thou shall catch
Men.

AT LONDON Printed by JOHN BEALE, for widow Helm, and are to be sold at her
shop under St Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1618.

To the Worthy, Religious, and Virtuous Lady, the Lady MARGARET YELVERTON,
Wife to the much honored, Sir HENRY YELVERTON Knight, the Kings Attorney
General, continuance of all happiness.
Madam,
NO sooner came this Sermon unto my hands, (the Author whereof for his approved
zeal, worthily deserved the title of an eminent Light and Ornament of our
Church) then I vowed the dedication thereof unto your Ladyship; Nor may it
seem unworthy your favorable acceptance (the principal aim of my
expectance) in regard of that singular testimony which all men that have been
conversant in his Works, do give of the Author, being such a one as neither
affection could corrupt, nor affectation transport; but of that spirit, as he
was zealous with a good conscience, making humility his path to glory. Jn a
word, (Madam) his former Labors (now reduced into one Volume) have been ever
countenanced by some choice Patrons: Nor may this (being equal with most of
the rest) claim less prerogative then the rest. Thus wishing you that benefit
for which it was intended, to the glory of God, whereto it is directed, J rest,

Your Ladyships respectively, J. B.

To the Christian Reader*
CHristian and courteous Reader, being moved by such who had interest in
bringing to light this Sermon, that I would prefix some small Epistle, I would
not hang back from performing so small a kindness. And two considerations
especially swaied me to write a few lines in this kind. The first whereof is
the Authors great deserts toward the Church of God; great in teaching, great
in writing. Many a man there is, who having learnedly, iudiciously, and plainly
taught the truth of God, having taken heed to the Ministry which he received
in the Lord, to fulfill it, and that in preaching alone; not withstanding he
has left his memorial blessed upon earth, even in that regard and naked
respect. But if there be one man of a great company, who as he taught
religiously and powerfully in his life, so besides in his life he did write to
the comfortable edification of the Church, and yea also left after his death
other things to be published for the behoof of Gods Saints, without question
such a worthy may well have double honor put upon him. Many such deserving
instruments, has God raised up in our Church exceeding both for mouth, and
pen: among the last of which, the Author of this Sermon need not to be
ranked. Pro. 31. 31.
His works praise him in the gates as Solomon speaks of the virtuous Woman's
deeds. The second and third, nay the fifth and sixth editions of certain
Treatises written by him, though in a dumb, nevertheless with a moving
rhetoric, speak effectually to his commandation. In the second place, that
did not a little encourage me, that this Sermon (if much affection have not
dazzled some eyes) may well be esteemed amongst one of the chief he did
deliver. It was preached in a famous University, in a most learned, and full
auditory, it was heard with attention (his godly voice, and sanctified gesture
enliuening the hearers:) afterward it was spoken of with reverence and
affection; as both hearing it, and hearing of it, I can truly avouch, it was
his farewell Sermon to his Mother University, although not (I supose) in the
Authors intent, yet in the event: the Lord often directing matters* otherwise
then for the present we dream of. Receive therefore Christian Reader this
Sermon, sound for edification, sweet for application, showing Ministers their
duty, showing people theirs, and therefore not unwelcome to ad good either
teachers, or learners. Thus wishing thee all blessing from God in this and all
other like furtherances of thy devotion, I recommend thee to the Lords mercy,
beseeching him for Christ his sake, to fulfill every honest desire of thy heart.

Thine in our common Savior, E. C.

THE Spiritual Fishing. Text, LVKE 5. ver. 10. The last words of that verse,
Henceforth thou shall catch men.
WHereas here our Savior translates this phrase of Fishing, or catching, from
an ordinary and inferior course, unto a more heavenly and spiritual
business, even to the winning of souls; it gives very direct occasion to
handle these things.

First, The state of the world, which is as the Sea.

Secondly, the state of the Church, which is as a Ship or Boat in the Sea.

Thirdly, the state of men by nature, who be as Fishes ranging after their own
disposition, vncaught.

Fourthly, the state of Ministers, who be as Fishers.

Fifthly, the state of the Gospel preached, which is the hook, or bait, or
net to take souls.

These things are not strained or forced, but arise out of the place directly.
For since Peter and the rest must change their course, and fall to a new kind of
Fishing; what is the Sea which they must lanch out into, but the World? what is
the Boat, but the Church in which they labor, and to which they seek to
gather souls? what is the booty they must seek for, but the sons of men?
and what are they but so many Fishers? or what is their net, but the Gospel,
the word of Salvation which they Preach? Of every of these I will speak
something, and that briefly.

That the state of the World, is as the Sea, it is plain by these places;
Before the throne there was a Sea of glass like unto Crystal ( Reu. 4. 6.
), In that day the Lord with his sore and great and mighty sword shall slay the
Dragon that is in the Sea ( I* 27. 1.
): And the state of the World is as the Sea in a fourfold respect; The State of
this World compared to the Sea in 4. respects.
first, because of the general unstableness of the things thereof. The
vnsedlednesse of that vast creature the Sea is well known. It is in continual
motion (it cannot rest Isai. 57. 20.
it) ebbes cannot contain it; sometimes again, it falls back so low, that a
man must go far from the bank before he can come near it. It is (under
God) chiefly governed by the Moon, then the which there is no one thing more
subject unto change, it being never beheld two nights together in one
proportion. Thus is the World, whether we look upon the general states of
Kingdoms, or the personal estates of particular men, either for their goods
or for their bodies, we see nothing but a continual alteration: Crowns are
translated from head to head, and Scepters pass from one hand to another;
fenced Cities are made heaps, and walled Towns become as the plowed fields:
they which were once fastened as a nail in a sure place, and having set their
nests on hie, dreamed of nothing but perpetuities for them and theirs, are
suddenly thrown out of all, and rolled and turned like a ball ( Is. 22. 18:
). The great houses are smitten with breaches ( Am. 6. 11.
) and the wide dwellings and large chambers, sieled with cedar, and painted
with vermilion ( Ier. 22. 14.
), are in a moment left without an inhabitant ( Is. 5. 9.
). Haman is to day the second in the Kingdom, but stripped of all, is hanged up
to morrow ( Hest. 7. 10.
). This year is Jerusalem the Princess among the Provinces, but the next
year made tributarie ( Lam. 1. 1.
); her nobles which did erewhile put on scarlet, do now embrace the dung Lam 4.
5.
. Now does Nebuchadnezzar walk in his royal palace of Babel, priding himself
in his outward state; but while the word was in the Kings mouth, a voice came
down from Heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee be it spoken, thy
Kingdom is departed from thee, Dan. 4. 26. etc.
etc.: Yesterday Jobs cattle went out by their thousands, he had both sons
and daughters to do him honor, and servants at his command: to day here is
not a hoof to be seen in his ground, not a child to call him blessed, not a
ladde left to attend him. This is the uncertainty of this ebbing and flowing
World, the fashion of it goes away 1. Cor. 7. 31
.

men see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep: For he commands
and raises the stormy wind, and it lifts up the waves thereof Psalm. 107.
24. 25.
. The World is a fit pattern hereof, in respect of the continual stirs and
troubles that are in it: Nation against Nation by wars, man against man by
diverse kinds of contentions, of every one that lives therein is the saying of
Job verified, Man that is borne of a woman is full of trouble Chap 14. 1.
, Man is borne unto travail, as the sparks fly upward Chap. 5. 7.
. It was the punishment which God laid upon him, that in sorrow he should
eat his bread all the days of his life Genesis 3. 17.
: and albeit some have a more calm passage then some others have, or like
Jonas Chap. 1. 5.
can lie and sleep, when others are tossed with the storm, yet none can live
without some vexation; he is not always carried with full sails to the end of
his desires.

3. The world resembles the Sea by the oppression Am. 8. 4.
: one man bites and deuoures another Call. 5. 15.
; Manasseth, Ephraim; Ephraim, Manasseth Is. 9. 21.
. To this pertaines that of the Prophet, That men are made as the fishes of the
Sea Hab. 1. 14.


4. In respect of the sway the Devil bears in The Sea is great and wide,
there is that Leuiathan whom the Lord has made to play therein Psalm. 104. 26
. Now look how this monster domineeres in the Sea, so does Satan here in the
World: therefore he is called the God of this World 2. Cor. 44.
, and said to work in the children of disobedience Ephesians. 2. 2.
: And to justify this comparison, as the World is called the Sea, so is the
Devil Leuiathan Is 27. 1.
. Thus we see how the World is compared to the Sea: The state of the Sea is
uncertain, so is the World; it is tempestuous, so is the World full of tumult:
In it the great fishes devour the less, so in the World the poor and weak
are a spoil to the mighty: Leuiathan takes his pleasure in the Sea, so does
Satan rule and bear sway in the World.

To press forward the counsel of S. John, Use.
Love not the world neither the things that are in the world 1. Epist. 2. 25


The Doctrine now delivered, affoords a strong reason to enforce it: For where
there is so much uncertainty, so much confusion and trouble, such oppression
and cruelty, where the Devil bears such exceeding sway; what is there to be
found worth delighting in? A man imagines himself sure in respect of his
outward estate; at an instant comes as it were a wave and washes away all: he
promises peace and quietness to himself; suddenly arises a storm, and puts
him to a trouble which he thought not of: much ado shall he have to escape the
hands of the oppressor, be he as he will; nay, the better and holyer he is, so
much the more that great Leuiathan that old serpent has him in continual
chase. Mark and consider, oh ye men of the earth, all whose striving and
plotting and plodding is for the world; consider what it is upon which you dote
and with which you are enamoured so exceedingly; it is even a very Sea of
uncertainties and bottomless Ocean of confused vexation, the very hold and
kingdom of the devil. We hunt after it, but where is our assurance when we
have got it? or what have we procured to our selves, but vanity and vexation
of spirit? The further we wade into it, the further are we from the Lord: for
the amity of the World is the enmity of God Iam. 4. 4.
, and the more business we have in it, in the greater hazard we are to be
drowned in perdition and destruction 1. Tim. 6. 9.
. Happy were it for us if the meditation of this point touching the proportion
which is betwixt the World and Sea, were able to vnglue and untwist our
affections, which are so nearly tied unto it, and to stir us up like
passengers by Sea to long for the Haven, and to strive for that eternal rest,
a kingdom not of uncertainty, but which cannot be shaken; a place not of
trouble, but where shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying,
neither shall be any more pain Reu. 21. 4.
. There the prince of darkness cannot endanger; for the Lamb is the light of
it ver. 23.
, and God himself shall be all in all to those that dwell therein 1. Cor. 15.
28.
. This is the Use.

THe next thing is touching the Church: The state thereof in the World is like
the state of a Ship or Boat upon the Sea; The state of the Church in this
world, compared to a ship or boat upon the Sea.
And that especially in this respect: Because it is subject to continual
tossings.

Of Trauailers by Sea it is said, that they are tossed too and fro, and stagger
like drunken men, and all their cunning is gone Psalm. 107 27
. Not unlike to this is the state and condition of Gods Church. It fares with
it, as with the Ship Jonas was in; There was a mighty tempest in the Sea, so
that the Ship was like to be broken Chap. 1. 4.
: or which the Disciples were in; There arose a great tempest in the Sea, so
that the Ship was covered with waves Mat. 8. 24.
. Such was the state of the Church of old, the members whereof complained, how
the waters had almost drowned them, and the stream had gone over their soul
Psalm. 124. 4.
. And David as a man experienced in such storms, cries out to God Psalm. 69. 1.
, Save me, for the waters are entered, even to my soul: and deliver and take
me out of the great waters Psalm. 144 7.
. And as it was with the Ship in which Paul was so exceedingly hazarded, that
they saw neither Sun nor Stars in many days Act. 27. 20.
: so the Church of God, is often driven into that extremity, that it is for a
time, even deprived of all ordinary comfort, and seems to be without all hope
of any more refreshing. Hence are these complaints of the Church, O God why
have thou put us away for ever? Why is thy wrath kindled against the sheep of
thy pasture? think upon thy congregation etc. Psalm. 74. 1 2.
; and will thou be angry with us for ever? and will thou prolong thy wrath from
one generation to another? will thou not turn again etc. Psalm. 85. 5. 6
. Thus David as a trauailer in this Ship, cried out, Will the Lord absent
himself for ever? and will he no more show favor Psalm 77. 7.
? And Heman the Ezrahite; Lord why do thou reject my soul, and hidest thy
face from me Psalm. 88. 14.
? It is a law that cannot be broken, that the chosen of God must through many
afflictions enter into the kingdom of God Act. 14. 22.
; God has so appointed for his own glory.

My power is made perfect through weakness 1. Cor. 12. 9.
. The Lord brings matters to an exigent, and suffers them to come to the
very brinke of hazard, that so his might and goodness in the delivery of his
servants may be the more apparent. When the Church of Israel was in a
wonderful strait, the Sea before them, the mountains on both sides, the
enemies at their heels, Now (says God) I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and
upon all his host: the Egyptians also shall know that I am the Lord Exodus 14. 4.
.

2. For their good: first, It makes them to look upward with the greater
feruency. David says of ordinary passengers by Sea, that when they mount up to
the heaven, and descend to the deep, so that their soul melts for trouble
etc, then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble etc. Psalm. 107. 28.
. The Mariners with Jonas when the storm was up, down were they upon their
knees, and every man cried unto his God Ioans 1. 5.
. And so the swelling waves of afflictions, do not quench but kindle the
devotion of Gods servants* In their affliction they will seek me diligently
Hosea 5. 15.
. Secondly, it makes them long so much the more for the Haven (where they would
be.) Note Paul's daily dying, and the continual troubles which he was exposed
unto, made him long to be dissolved Phil. 1. 23.
, and to be as glad when his time of departing was at hand 2. Tim. 4 6.
, as the poor weather-beaten Mariner is to see the land. Thirdly, it makes the
deliverance when it comes to be the more esteemed Psalm. 107. 30.
, When they are quieted they are glad, and double welcome is that refreshing
which comes at the very pinch of necessity. The redeeming of David's life from
the grave, the raising him up from the very mouth of the pit, made him to vow
with himself never to forget Psa. 103. 2. 4.


This serves to adm^onish all that fear God, Use 1.
what they must make provision for, if they will be saved. By their profession,
they are entered into the Church of God, not as into a Garden of pleasure, where
they may adventure to say every one to his soul, Soul, live at ease, eat,
drink, and take thy pastime Luke 12. 19.
; but as into a Ship, a house of continual motion, where though there may be
calmness for a time, the Sun shining out, the winds laid, and the Sea smooth,
yet it is wisdom to be in continual expectation of a storm. God has not
called us unto case and quiet, but to the cross. Many things are to be endured
betwixt our setting out here, and our arrival at the Land of Promise. Many
storms to be gone through, many rocks and sands to be adventured by, many
Pirates seeking the spoil of our souls to be grapled with, before the haven of
Rest can be entered into. The ignorance, or the inconsideration of this point
has deceived many. They may thus fitly be shadowed out. Some fresh trauailer
standing upon the shore in a fair day, and beholding the Ships in their
beauty lie ready rigged and trimmed in the Harbor, thinks it a gallant thing
to go to Sea, and will need adventure; but being out a league or two, and
feeling by the rocking of the Ship his stomach begin to work and grow sick,
and his soul even to abhor all manner of meat; or otherwise a storm to
arise, the wind and the water as it were conspiring the overthrow of the
vessel, and every sea carrying in it the face of death; forthwith repents his
folly, and makes vows, that if he can once recover the shore, he will bid an
eternal farewell unto all such voyages. Thus, there be who in the calm days
of peace, when Religion is not ouerclowded by the times, that will needs join
themselves to the number of Gods people, they will be as earnest and forward as
the best. But when a tempest begins to appear, and the Sea to grow rougher
then at the first entry, the times alter, trouble is raised, and many cross
winds of much opposition and gainsaying begin to blow, they are weary of their
course, and will needs be set ashore again, resolving never to thrust
themselves into any more adventures. How needful then is it that Christians
should often remember, how by Christ's speech here, the Church is necessarily
resembled to a Ship? enter not into it, to be a guide or a passenger, a
Minister, or a professor, unless thou resolutely make provision for a storm.
Till the end of the voyage there is no rest to be looked for: wherein
notwithstanding this may be for a comfort, that this Ship (the Church of God)
has a privilege which none has else, no not the greatest Gallioun or Argosy
under heaven; It may be tossed, but can never be drowned, Though the waters of
the sea rage and be troubled, and the mountains shake at the surges thereof;
God is in the midst of it, therefore shall it not be moved, God shall help it
very early Psalm. 46* 3. 5.
. It is as the Arc of Noah, which (because God had shut it upon Noah)
therefore it was borne up even amidst the waves Genesis 7. 16. 17
; or as the Boat in which Christ was Mat. 8. 24. 26
, which was welneere covered with waters, yet at an instant, by the command of
him which is the Lord of the Sea, there followed a gracious calm. Christ is
the Pilot, and (as was said of Paul) God has given to him all that sail with
him Act. 27. 24.
, and he will give them eternal life, and they shall never perish John 10. 18.
.

The second use serves to teach us (because the Church of God is as a Ship in
this sea of the world) the necessity of furnishing our selves with such things
as appertain to this spiritual voyage: Use 2
not to insist upon many, two things especially must be looked too. First, That
we be diligent in observing the direction appointed by God, for the true
guidance of our course. The Seamen have their Card and their Compass, they
have the Sun and Stars, and the motions of heaven to direct them. That which
our course must be guided by is the word of God; it is like the pillar that
went before the host of Israel according to the moving or standing whereof they
ordered all their iourneyes. Hither may be referred that of Peter 2. Epist. 1.
19.
, We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. It is an allusion to a
Seacourse: when the Admiral hangs out a Lantern, and all that come behind
steer to that. We cannot wander if we be led by this light: It is that good
Spirit which David prayed to be led by unto the land of righteousness Psalm.
143. 10.
. What other Load-star of custom, or opinion or fashion of the times men
attend upon, they must needs run upon the rocks and make shipwreck of the
faith. Secondly, That we take with us the knowledge and faith of Gods promises.
It is called the Anchor, Hebr. 6. 19. This is our stay, in the day of tempest;
I know whom I have believed 2. Tim. 1. 12.
: such an one cannot be moved, for his heart is fixed, and belieueth in the
Lord Psalm. 112. 7.
. The promises being either not known or not applied, the soul is tossed
without rest, and must needs be overwhelmed with despair. This Anchor being
tied to the soul by the strong cable of a li^ely faith, gives comfort unto it
in the greatest storm.

THE third thing is concerning the state of men. The state of me^ by nature
compared to fishes in the Sea, ranging after their own disposi io^*t vncaught.
Doctrine.
The fish to be catched out of this Sea, and to be brought into this Ship, are
men, Thou shall catch men from henceforth. From whence this is gathered:

That we are all by nature in the state of condemnation. This is clear out of
this place. By this fishing, or catching (the very substance of the Ministers
office) is meant, a bringing of men into the way of life. Now then, in as much
as we are all by nature vncaught (otherwise why should Christ send out his
Apostles to take us?) it follows, that we are all by nature without grace,
even in the very gulf and jaws of eternal woe. This is easily proved by the
Scriptures; All flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth Genes. 6. 12.
. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand and seek God. All are gone out of the way:
they are all corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one Psalm 14. 2. 3.
. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way
Isa. 53. 6.
: By nature the children of wrath as well as others Ephesians. 2. 3.
; without Christ, and were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and were
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, and had no hope, and were without God
in the world Verse 12.
: Unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts etc. Titus 3. 3.
Destruction and calamity are in our ways Romans 3. 16.
.

And well in this are we compared unto the fish: For as the fishes skippe and
play and take their pleasure in the sea, and are unwillingly taken in the net,
and labor to get out, and being in the boat, would feign, if they could,
leap back into the sea; so naturally we take pleasure in our sinful ways.
It is a pastime for a fool to do wickedly Prou 10 23.
. The net of the Gospel must enclose us; of our selves we abhor it, and to the
death will not come within the compass of it; and being entangled, we desire
still to be loosed, and to return again unto our wonted course. This is the
very true state of us all. We neither are in the state of grace by nature,
neither do we desire it. We be plunged into a sea of misery, and in our own
disposition we would never forsake it.

It were well for us, if we could learn by this to see our selves what we be,
and what we would ever be, if we were lest to the swinge of our own
affections. Nature has (as it were) spawned us forth into this worldly sea:
and as it self lies in wickedness 1 John 5 19
, so do we drink iniquity like water Job 15. 16.
. It is sweet unto us in our mouth, and we hide it under the tongue, we savor
it, and will not forsake it, but keep it close in the mouth Job 20. 12. 13
. We neither know the means of our salvation, nor affect it when it is
offered. Either the Scripture is false, or this is true. How happy were we if
this could humble us! it would make us afraid of following our own thoughts,
or of being led by the sway of our own hearts. Our not knowing the misery of
our own estate, is the cause of all the security, of all the profaneness, of
all the boldness in sin, of all the contempt of Gods word which is in the
world at this day. This place among others, is as a glass to show us what we
are; strangers from salvation, and as far from any inclination to it as a
fish is from a will and desire to be caught.

THe fourth thing is of the state of the Minister. The state of ministers, who
be as Fishers.
Here are two things: First, the state of the Ministry: Secondly, the
labor, business and work of the Ministry. Of the first thus we see:

That it is no superfluous or needelesse function, Doctrine 1.
but a calling of great necessity for the winning and saving of men's souls.
This is cuident out of this place. The Lord intending the conversion of some,
and being able diverse ways to accomplish his purpose in that behalf, yet has
thought it good to single out this means among all the rest, even by man to
catch man, and by his ministry to bring souls into his Kingdom. This is
that which the Apostles, says, Ephe. 4. 11. 12. He gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
repairing of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry. The Saints which
belong to the election of grace, being scattered up on the earth here and
there, his pleasure is by Paul and Timothy to gather them together unto
himself. They be the Lords Laborers to bring in his Harvest Matt. 9. 38.
, his Workmen to advance his building 1 Cor. 3. 9.
, his Shepherds to take heed unto his flock Acts 20. 28.
, the Stars in his right hand to give light unto his Church Revel. 1. 20.
. There being thousands of souls to be saved in Jury, the Lord will have them
to be brought in by Peter's ministry Acts 2. 41.
: Philip must be sent to catch the Samaritans and the Eunuch Acts 8.
. In Corinthus there was a great draught (I have much people in this City:)
therefore there Paul must go to work Acts 18. 10.
. Here is the necessity of the calling.

To reprove their profane and wretched opinion, Use
who think, that among all the professions which are at this day in the world,
that of the Ministry may best be spared. It is strongly thought by many, that
it were no danger or prejudice to men's souls, though there were no Minister at
all to instruct them. O say some, what need they trouble themselves? Every
man must answer for his own soul; and if we do not as we should, we shall
bear the blame.

Thus they would shift off all dependence upon the ordinance of God, and lay an
imputation of superfluity upon that calling, by which it is the pleasure of
God to save those that believe. This one place is sufficient to stop their
mouth; For I may truly avouch it out of the words here, that (ordinarily)
there is no more hope of a man's salvation without an able and industrious
Minister, then there is that the fish in the Sea will of it self come ashoare,
and offer it self unto us without the labor of some, to go out into the deep
with boats and nets to bring them in. Henceforth thou shall catch men.

Secondly, thus: Doctrine 2..
That the calling of the Minister is noidle calling, but a calling of labor, a
calling of much business and of great employment.

The Ministers are fishers, whether that be not a profession of much labor,
judge you. To make the thing it self manifest, this is worthy to be observed;
That the most names given in the Scripture to men of this calling, do betoken
labor; Seers 1. Sam. 9. 9.
, Watchmen Ezech. 3. 17.
, Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 20.
, Laborers Matthew. 9. 38.
, Disposers 1. Cor. 4. 1.
, Husbandmen Mar. 12. 2.
, Seeds men 1. Cor. 3. 9.
, Shepherds John 10. 2.
, Cryers Lu. 3. 4.
. There is no title given them, but implies action, yea and industry very
great. It is a worthy work 1. Tim. 3. 1.
, their Maintenance is with that condition 1. These 5. 13 1. Cor. 9. 14.
; otherwise no title, no name nor show can free them from Contempt Matthew. 5. 13
.

It meets with two evils in Ministers; first, the idleness which has
overtaken some that are called to this busy profession; They are such as the
Prophet reproves, Use 1.
Watchmen that are blind, that have no knowledge, that are dumb dogs and
cannot bark: that lie and sleep and delight in sleeping Isa. 56. 10.
. I take no pleasure in laying open the nakedness of men of mine own coat:
yet God forbid that I should use my tongue to the licking of their sores, which
prove the very bane of Gods Church, and do make it lie like the field of the
sluggard, or as the garden of the idler. Secondly, the spirit of greediness
which (is to be feared) is in many. They can never have enough etc. Isa. 56. 11.
. They go out to catch, yet not souls to God, but preferments to themselves,
and are still fishing for advancement. They have not learned that of the
Apostle: I seek not yours, but you 2. Cor. 12 14
; It is not your favor which I do affect, it is not your wealth which I seek
for, it is your salvation which I endeavor. This is the honor of a man's
ministry, the glory and crown of his calling.

It overthrows the common fancy of the Use 2.
people, who account the Ministers calling to be an idle and a lazy calling;
we get our livings easily in the conceit of some, and it is no sin nor pity
(in their understanding) to defraud us; and how usual is it in the mouths of
many, to say, We must labor for them? I confess, that as some use it, it is
a calling of excessive idleness, if they be such as feed themselves, and
feed not the flocks Ezech. 34. 1
, such as take away the key of Knowledge Lu. 11. 52.
; but consider it in it own nature, and as it ought to be performed, we shall
find it to be a service of greater business. Let Peter, or any successor of
Peter busy himself (as he must) sometimes in preparing, sometimes in mending,
sometimes in casting abroad, sometimes in drawing in his net; no man shall have
any just cause to twit him with idleness, or to say, That because he is a
Minister, therefore he has an easy occupation.

THe last thing is, That the net in which men must be taken, Doctrine.
is the preaching of the Gospel.

Christ here acquainting them generally with his purpose how to employ them,
The state of the Gospel preached, compared to a hook, bait, or net, to catch
men's oules.
after changed the phrase when it came to the point of execution; and he which
now spoke of fishing; told them afterward of preaching, Matthew. 10. chapter
verse 7. of Teaching the nations Matt. 28. 19.
, of Declaring the Gospel to every creature Mar. 16. 15.
, of Feeding his sheep John 21. 15.
: and Christ himself compares the Gospel to net Matt. 13. 47.
. The comparison agrees fitly after this manner:

The preaching of the Gospel is like to a net; first, in the general drist
and use: the use of a net is to take fish: the drift of preaching is to bring
in souls. Secondly, in the ordering of it: It is not the net lapped up
together that brings in the draught, but haled out at length and spread forth
that encloseth the fish: It is the opening and unfolding of the Gospel, the
stretching it out by preaching which does encompasse souls. There may a fish
or two hang in the net being let down on a heap, but that is a chance, and
is no wise aduenturing. The word read, and so brought in (as it were) in
gross, may (by the mercy of God) take some; but we have no warrant from hence
to make a rule general. Again, it is need that the net be strong,
otherwise the greater kind will break through, and make all the labor and
charge to be in vain; so it is meet that the Doctrine be well strengthened
out of the word of God, that it be well proved, that it be well pressed and
applied, that the consciences of the hearers may be convicted, and that they
may see it is God, and not man with whom they have to do. For a man shall meet
with many froward and wilful and violent natures, that will not be held in,
but when they feel themselves within the net will cry, Let us break their
bands, and cast their cords from us Psalm. 2. 3.
; so that even a kind of violence may be used to keep them from destruction.
Thirdly, in the success of it. Many a draught the poor Fisherman makes and
takes nothing, yet he leaves not off: many a time is the net of preaching
shot forth, and yet none converted thereby: so it pleases God to exercise the
patience of his servants; yet still the work must be followed, and the Lords
leisure must be waited for. Often does the net enclose many, which yet after
break away; and many are at first drawn in by the power of the Gospel, which
yet afterward slide back and return again to their old profaneness. There
is much brought in in the Net, which yet is good for nothing when it is got:
There come in frogs, and weeds, and a great deal of trash, which in the end is
cast away, though for the love of the fish there were no little pains in
drawing it in: so, as it is showed Matthew. 13. 47. etc. many hypocrites and
reprobates are gathered into the outward society of the Church by preaching,
and so are let alone like weeds until the day of harvest, Matthew. 13. 30. Thus
as our calling is to be fishers, so our Net is preaching.

It shows plainly, Use.
that all the enemies and adversaries of preaching, are enemies to the good and
salvation of men's souls. This is the Net, and without this I will not fear to
say, that surely men shall perish in their sins. The devil that great hunter
after souls, labors by his instruments, even with the very spirit of his
hellish policy, to disgrace this course, to suppress it, to put it down, to
draw men from affecting it. He knows it to be the means to abridge his
kingdom, he fears the pulling of some soul or other out of his clutches at
every Sermon. Let us not suffer our selves to be cosined by his wiles. Let me
that am a Minister remember the Service I am called to, even to catch men, to
win souls, let me be ever plying this business; and you (Beloved) when the
Lords Net is cast in among you, run not from it, grudge not at it, press and
strive to be brought within the compass of it, otherwise you shall continue
within the sea of this world still, and shall never be saved. Fishes do die if
they be taken; we can not escape eternal death if we be not caught. The hook
may be sharp, but the bait is sweet, and it will seem a yoke to our nature,
to be knit up (as in a Net) and to be restrained from our own wonted carnal
liberty; but let us look to the end, which is the salvation of our souls. (*)

FINIS.

