THE PEACE OF ENMITY.

A SERMON Preached in PAUL'S Church the 12 day of February, in the year of our
Lord God, 1639.

BY AUGUSTINE HILL, Rector of Dengey in the County of ESSEX.

AUG. Pacem habete cum hominibus, Bellum cum Diabolo, vitiis, vanitatibus.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY GARWAY, Lord Mayor of the City Of LONDON; And to
the Right Worshipful The ALDERMEN His BRETHREN:
Right Honorable,
YOur Lord-ships favorable acceptance of my weak endeavors puts life into
them, which were even before their birth dead, in mine own opinion of them,
and had dyed as soon as they were borne, but that you was pleased to breathe
upon them, so that having from you received a public life, they humbly beg of
your Lordship to foster them, in this hard censorious age. Your encouragements
came to me, as Gods mercy came to Adam, and us in him in my text, in the
needful time of trouble, therefore are more grateful to me, and with more
gratitude ought to be, and are received. God knows best which way to bring us
to himself, and if our Pilgrimage was sweet, we should forget our Country, yet
where God sends us comforts, not to kiss that hand, by which we receive them,
is wretched unthankfulness. My poor Sermon, enriched by your Honors
acceptance, flies into your bosom for shelter, and may the comforts exhibited
therein, remain there, and in the hearts of all yours, and of all the pillars
of this government, whereof you are principal. It is published as near as I
could, totidem verbis, as it was preached. I feared to add any thing to it,
lest that which was put to, might be displeasing to your Lordship, and so
discarded of your protection, or to leave out any thing, lest some part of it
(though never so mean) might have bin beneficial to one or other, and so an
injury done in the loss of it. It has a great disadvantage, in that what
little life there was in the delivery, is wholly lost, unless quickened by the
Fancy and apprehension of the reader, whose ear might relish that which the
eye will perhaps distaste, and for my self, though preaching be my
delightful burden, yet the press is a pressure more then ordinary to me,
being no whit acquainted that way, nor having friends and acquaintance to
direct me in it. But I beseech you to cover all my weaknesses with your most
favorable construction, and not only to cover them your self, but to shelter
them from the storms of censure, which are likely to light on them. The Lord
continue and increase unto you the blessings of his right hand and of his left,
and to those that are your right hand and right eye, in the Government of this
ancient corporation, the right Worspipfull, the Aldermen your Brethren, that
you and they may see clearly into, and see strongly executed those things
which belong to the safety and welfare of this renowned body, and that they,
whose lips preserve knowledge, may still have a cheerful portion of meat in
due season. It is the Crown of your honor and estates, and your poor Orator
will pray that it may ever flourish, and that the Oil may abound in your
cruses, and multiply in the effusion of it, as is the desire of him that is

Yours, ready to be commanded AUGUSTINE HILL.

THE PEACE OF ENMITY.
GENESIS 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed, he shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.


WHen God had made the great world, he made man the little world, as an
abstract of the creation, and Epilogus operum, Aug.
a conclusion of all his works, placed him in paradise, who was a Paradise in
himself; his soul as rich as that soil, naked, because clothed with
innocence, instead of a garment, Sin it was that opened the eyes of his body,
and shut the eyes of his mind, clothed his outward and stripped his inward man:
hinc illae lachrymae, hence are the tears of us his posterity. The sum is
that of Solomon: God made man righteous, but he has sought out many
inventions, and in seeking his inventions, he found a way to lose himself,
and all of us. But God had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on us also,
and by a gracious promise of his own son in my text, restores him. Mortality
seazeth upon Adam, everlasting death had stretched out her hand to have smitten
him (as Jeroboam did against the Prophet) but God withered it. Justice cries
give, give, and sets open her devouring throat to swallow him, but the Lord
stops her mouth with a morsel from Heaven. The substance of my text is Gods
wonderful mercy in sinful Adams restoration, brought in by a gracious
Parenthesis, in the midst of Gods justice, and man's necessity, in the very
pinch of extremity, like a shower of rain in the time of draught, or tanquam
flos rosarum in diebus hybernis.

Isidore.
The weight and moment of the matter, requires your attention: it is Oceanus
Theologiae, a maine Ocean of Divinity, it is omnis latitudo Scripturarum, the
whole breadth of Scripture, our forefathers Gospel, and the seminary of ours.
On this, the eyes of all primitive believers were fixed, and by faith in this
promise were saved. It Is the foundation of Christian Faith, the secret of
Christian hope, the inducement of Christian love, and therefore ought to be
thrice welcome to us Christians.

The just Judge of all things, commonly ordinates the punishment to the
offense, he that is the first in sinning, must be the first in suffering, Adam,
the last in the transgression, must be the last in execution. The Anathema
first takes hold on the serpent, Bernard. Chrysostom.
Diabolum serpentem, or Diabolum per serpentem, the devil by the serpent,
speaking through that cane and trunk, like a Jesuit through an image, whose
malediction, as it is divided into two verses, so it has divided the minds of
men into two opinions, some restrayning it to the spiritual serpent the
Devil, others conjoyning the terrene serpent, as a sharer of the punishment,
which is most consonant to divine Justice, which punishes the act done, and
suffers not the means by which it is done, to go scot-free: as an
affectionate father, having his only son murdered, causes not only the
murderer himself to suffer condign punishment, but expresses his
indignation toward that weapon, by which that bloody fact was committed (...),
Chrysostom.
In the former verse God wrackes the instrument, in this he ruins the author
of rebellion. I will put enmity between thee, etc.

My text is, like the times, litigious, it thunders out wars, and rumors of
wars, seditions, tumults, colluctations, enmity. We may name it as Isaac did
the first well he dug, Esek contention, or his second well, Genesis 16, 20, 21
Sitnah hatred: contention, and hatred are in it, open violence and secret
circumvention: God himself the breeder of this contention, the occasioner of
this quarrel it is vox Dei the voice of God and not of man, who here is both a
Prophet, and a Preacher of enmity, I will put Enmity; and therefore it is not
evil, for God himself, who is goodness it self, is author of it: It is not
casual or contingent, as the Philistines were half persuaded of their plague
of Emerodes, a chance had happened to them: but a predestinate, prevised
decree, 1 Samuel 6.
a settled enmity, I will put, it is not a slender and trivial discord, but
enmity it self in the abstract; it is not unjust in regard of the adverse
parties, the Serpent, and the woman, once at a false amity, now God puts a true
enmity betwixt them; which was not only personal, bounded to themselves
alone, but derived to their posterities, perpetuum certamen, an everlasting
conflict between them, and their seeds for ever: nor is the issue
uncomfortable, for the victory is already determined for the woman, and her
seed: he shall break, etc. Now whereas the Septuagint render it, (...),
observabit te, it should rather be, as a Critic observes, (...) conteret; or
else it is too short, and though the Original be equal in both, yet Divines
have generally noted an inequality, multo gravius accipies damnum quam offeres.
He shall break thy head, Tremell.
and thou shall (but) bruise his heel.

So that my text is, Castrorum acies been ordinata, an army well marshalled
where every one keeps his place and rank.

First, here is the prime agent, and heavenly disposer, I.

Secondly, his active power, determination or constitution it self, will put.

Thirdly, the Instrument, or means used to effect it, enmity.

Fourthly the subjects of this contrariety, the serpent, and the woman, his
seed and her seed, opposite ex Diametro one to the other.

Fifthly the effects. He shall break thy head, and thou shall etc. or in
military terms, we have,

First the moover of this quarrel, divine goodness, justice, and providence.

Secondly, the measure of it, (...) enmity, not only simultas, a secret
spleen, but open manifest malice, and detestation, joined with a desire to do
hurt.

Thirdly the Antagonists or Combatants; The serpent and the woman, and their
innumerable armies.

Lastly, the Success of the Combat, the conflict is fierce, there are hurts on
both sides; but the conquest is glorious: He shall break thy head, etc.

In the one Champion you may see valor, and victory; valor in that he aims,
and strikes at the head: victory in that he breaks the head. In the other,
Wicednesse and Weakness: Malice joined with power restreyned, and disabled to
perform his mischievous intents: In that he can but bruise, though he desires
to do more, and that but the heel, though he desires to go farther: Thou
shall but bruise, his flesh is impenetrable; and but his heel, his body is
impregnable.

Gal. 4.24.
Yet this is but the casket, there is a rich jewel within, for I must use the
Apostle his phrase. (...), These things are an Allegory, there is a sweet
kernel shut up under this shell of words? And this particle he, or it has a
double portion among the rest. (...) a most fair, and rich Margarite: Christ
himself, a precious treasure hid here in this field of enmity, and he whom the
heaven of heavens cannot contain, is couched in this small continent, The seed
of the woman, by whom the head of the serpent must be broken, the Son of God,
in whom all the nations of the earth must be blessed. I am sure, full of grace
and truth are these words, in God the Father, so fully, freely, and fitly
promising to send his own Son, to save the world, as soon as it was lost,
and to restore man, as yet by an actual sentence of Judgment, uncondemned.
These choice particulars are in this text: all which with brevity I will
orderly and plainly point at. I must begin well, (...), with God himself (l).
God is in this place in this particle. Aug.
Ego cum pondere pronuntiandum, says a Father. But if any not satisfied with
this Solecisme should ask this Question, what is his name, and his sons
name; Let him know, Prove. 30.4.
Deus est nomen suum, and nomen suum ipse est, God is his name, and his name is
himself: and if we will be wise to sobriety, let us not be so curious to know
what he is in himself, as careful to observe what he is to us: Our Creator
in the first chapter, our Redeemer in this verse.

J will] the will of God is the first fountain, and Sovereign cause of all
things; He works all things according to the counsel of his own Will. He is
no idle, Ephesians. 1.11.
or Idol God, as ignorants make him, that sits in the chair of contemplation,
but he is always active and operative, Curiosus et plenus negotii 'Deus: A
curious, exquisite, provident God, full of business. Aug.
Nor is he housed above the Moon, as the Peripatetickes would have him, but he
takes care of things below, and that from the highest to the lowest, yet nec
superior in illis, nec inferior in istis, neither superior in those, Aug.
nor inferior in these; he sees and forsees all things, from eternity to
eternity, as if present; he foreknoweth what they shall be, he works them
before they are, decrees them before he works them, bringes to pass what he
decrees, and turns all things he brings to pass to his own peculiar designed
ends: and this is all (...), according to the counsel of his will: and in my
text it is (...) the good will and pleasure of God prevising, purposing,
providing aforehand, that mercy and comfort which he meant to show to his in
future generations, I will.

But can such bright beams produce such a foggy vapor as enmity? can so pure
a fountain send forth such troubled streams? Far be it from the Maker of al
things to do that which is unbeseeming his heavenly moderation and as far be
it from us to conceive so of our merciful Creator. The rule is true, Ideo
misit Deus bonam separationem, ut malam rumperet conjunctionem. God therefore
sent a good separation, that he might dissolve an evil conjunction. And as for
the inference of this enmity, Zach ^.7.
Grace, Grace unto it: yea blessed be the womb that bare it, and the paps that
gave it suck. This war is our peace, this strife is our atonement. This
enmity between Satan and us, is our unity with God, and our amity with the
blessed Angels: Here are grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, the sealed
gates of everlasting life rend open by these brushes. Ephesians. 3.10.
This is (...) the manifold wisdom of God, that fetches about his purposes
from a far, and by strange means effects his designements, works out his
own ends, and our comforts by contrary instruments, procures health by poison,
takes honey out of a weed, water out of a Rock, oil out of a stone, good out of
evil, light out of darkness, salvation out of enmity. I will put enmity.

The next thing is the parties betwixt whom the litigation and contention is,
the Serpent and the woman, two companions in evil, confederates in rebellion:
now God sets them at variance.

It is a rule of Tacitus, that society once thoroughly broken proves deadly, and
he gives the reason of it, Quae apud concordes vincula charitatis, Tacitus.
incitamenta irarum apud infensos sunt. Those things which before coupled their
friendship, in a mutual, interchangeable familiarity, are now occasions of
greater detestation. The text verefies it: The serpent, and the woman were as
inward as might be, in injustice, they took sweet sour counsel together, had
stricken their right hands together, in a wrong fellowship, now they are in an
uproa^e, and intestine insurrection, The society that keeps not within the
pale of obedience, is nothing else but a partnership in conspiracy, a
disordered Order easily broken, Concordia discors, it begins in sedition, and
ends in contention: and though wicked men symbolize in that which is naught,
yet God does Commonly knap in sunder their staff of bands, bruise the heel or
break the head of their combination. And though there be a day when Herod and
Pilate be made friends, Luke 23.12.
and cleave together in their devices, like the woman and the serpent, against
the first and second Adam; Yet there shall be a time, when they shall be
separated each from other as far as the East from the West, Their affections
as far remote, and distant as the Hyena and the dog; the weak strings of
their rotten society loosed, and their bows strongly bent in a mutual
opposition. It is just with God to set them one against another, who have set
themselves against him: and to make revolters from him their Captain, to
mutinize among themselves. Thus God threatened to set the Egyptians against the
Egyptians; as Cadmus his army, bred of serpents teeth, Isa. 19.2.
killed each other. Capital is this enmity between the serpent, and the
woman: So that you may as soon bring the two poles of heaven together, as
these two to unity. For it is enmity in the abstract, and so it bars the
subjects of any coalition. Reconciliation may be made between enemies, but
never where enmity it self is settled, as betwixt these two: And being thus
parted, my discourse must likewise sever them.

Thee]. i. the Devil: whose Creation, or corruption it pleased God that Moses
his pen should not exactly describe unto us, et secretum suum sibi, nec audemus
hic aliquid coniicere, quod ille curauit retinere, As Saint Bernard well, Bern.
upon a better occasion, Let the Lords secrets be with himself: I will not
have an eye to see, where God has not a finger to set down. And though I am
ignorant of his nature, yet will I strive not to be ignorant of his devises:
Revel. 20.8.
undoubtedly He it is whom the spirit of God calls (...), The Dragon, the old
Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan. A Father briefly describes him and his
companions, Aug.
they are Spiritus nocendi cupidissimi, a justitia penitus alieni, superbia
tumidi, Jdem tract. 100 in Ioh.
invidentia lividi, fallacia callidi. And in another place the same Father
terms them both desertores, forsakers of God, and deceptores, deceivers of us.
This is one of the Champions, you may match him with that Goliath of the
Philistines. The other is a weak opponent, but comes like David, in the Name
of the Lord.

The woman) mannesse, or she-man according to the original: man's helper,
dimidium anime, his better half, his yoke fellow, his second self. Yet
Translators have here rendered it Mulier, a Mollitie, from her niceness, her
tenderness of constitution, (...) genus mulierum, a Creature that delights in
Ornaments. Saint Chrysostom says keenely, she was the Devils engine to undo
man. Tim. 2.14.
But Saint Paul more mildely, she was of two earthen vessels the weaker, and
deceived in the transgression: And his conclusion is sweet, through bearing of
children she shall be saved, for she should at the last bear him that should
both save her, and all true believers. Prove. 31.
Mulierem fortem quis inveniet, (says the wise man) who can find a strong, or
a virtuous woman! which a Father expounds to be an admiration, Bern.
not a dubitation: For though Solomon knew the weakness of that sex, yet he
looked at the stability of Gods promise, that the same hand should be an
instrument of wounding, and healing: Et qui vicerat per foeminam, Bern.
vinceretur per ipsam. He that had overcome by the woman, should be overcome
by the woman: though not by the same individual person: For divines note that
Eve imagined her self to be the mother of the holy seed; and therefore when
she bare Cain, she said, Genes. 4 1.
acquisivi virum a Jehovah, I have gotten a man of the Lord: Others more
punctually making (eth) a sign of the accusative case, and not only so,
Genes. 4.2.
but an emphaticall demonstrative equivalent to the Greek Article ((...))
render it, Acquisivi virum, Jehovah, I have gotten that man that is the Lord:
but seeing her expectation frustrate, she names her next son Abel, vanity, to
show how vain her opinion was. For it was not Eve, but that handmaid which the
Lord had appointed.

These are the two combatants, Numb. 22.
that stand in my Text, like the Angel in Balaams way, with their swords in
their hands drawn one against the other: the persons whom God sets at
variance: yet neither is this their enmity personal, bounded to themselves, or
limited to their proprietaries, but diffusing it self through the veins of
their seed, and like a Gangren, running over the whole body of their posterity,
thy seed and her seed. Immortal is the hatred and dissension of mortal men,
and enmity runs in a continual line. The malice kindled among Ancestors is
cherished by succeeding progeny: Nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis:
Children and childrens children will add fuel to it, and possess the
inflamed blood of their parents. To have Jonathan Saul's son to love David
Saul's reputed enemy, is as great a wonder, as to have Saul himself among the
prophets: following generations commonly tread the steps of the former: Chrysostom.
but especially endless are those quarrels ubi inimicitiae divina authoritate
firmantur. As in the text, between the serpent and the woman and their seeds.

Thy seed] Whose? The Devils! Surely, we may say, as the Disciples in another
case, This is a hard saying: or we may beg with them, Master, teach us these
things: there wants some Oedipus of holy writ to dissolve this doubt.

It has been the fond opinion of some, that Devils are corporeal and have
seminall propagation. Psellus set it a foot, Cardanus maintained and confirmed
it; and Scaliger justly confutes it. Math. 9.34.
Probable it is, that there is a chief of those wicked spirits, styled the
Prince of Devils, Ephesians. 2.2.
and the Prince of the power of the Air; and pointed at before in the Text, in
that single term, thee: And many others there are, it not seduced by him (as
Aquinas thinks) yet subjected to him, or at least sharers with him both of his
sin and punishment, Math 25.
called his Angels, and in my text, his seed. There are also others which are
of the Serpents seed; we shall not need rake hell to find them, they are not
of the nature of spirits, but clothed with flesh and blood: As Tully speaks
of Cataline, Vivunt and in Senatum veniunt, They live and daily converse
amongst us. Christ calls Judas a devil, John 6.70. John 8.44. Marlorat. in
locum. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 42.
tells the Pharisees, Ye are of your Father the Devil: Non quoad substantiae
traducem, sed naturae corruptelam, not in regard of the traduction of their
substance, but the corruption of their nature: non nascendo, as the Manichees
held; but, imitando, by imitating his cursed works. These two ways they are
the devils seed, by corruption of their nature, by imitation of the devils
works. Such are those, qui conantur destruere fidem, that endeavor to destroy
faith, and take that out of the earth, as Tyrants; or corrumpere fidem, to
corrupt the faith, as Heretics: When Marcion asked Policarpus, Agnoscis me?
Do thou know me? His answer was, Agnosco te primogenitum Satanae: I know
thee to be the devils first borne child: or those that seek disrumpere
charitatem, to break the bond of Christian charity, as Schismatiques, and in
general, all carnal unregenerate men, that either truly know not Christ, or
in the whole course of their lives deny him, are (...), as Saint John says, of
that evil one, the Devil.

Her seed] The woman's seed must be conceived to be Christ and Christians.
Christ in the first place. He was the woman's seed, of her loins, of her
bowels, bone of her bone, and flesh of her flesh; Eusebius Emissenus.
he took from her a true real substantial body, Sanguinem quem pro matre
obtulit, antea de sanguine matris accepit: Contrary to that of the Marcionites
and Manichees; the one dreaming of an imaginary body of his, only in show,
semblance and apparition, corpus Phantasticum, the other of a bare heavenly
body, which he brought with him from heaven, and with which he passed through
her body, as water through a Conduit-pipe, without any assumption of her
nature. In my text he was the seed of the woman, (...), Romans 1.3. John 1.14.
Galat. 4.4. Ierem. 31.22.
he was made flesh, made of a woman, (though not by the usual course of
nature.) The Lord shall create a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass
a man. Foemina circundans virum est virgo concipiens Deum. Bernard. Hom. 2.
A Virgin shall conceive, and bear God incarnate. But how a mother, and yet a
Virgin? wonder we may, yet we cannot but believe, when the holy Ghost supplies
the place of a parent, Non goneratione, sed jussione, Aug.
and benedictione, (...), not by carnal effusion of seminall humor: but by
manufacture, or handyworke. I may conclude with Saint Ambrose: Ambros.
Multa in Christo invenies secundum naturam, and ultra naturam. It was natural
that he should be the seed of the woman, above nature, that it could be without
the seed of man. And this is the complement of all humane generations: Adam was
neither of man, nor woman, but slime. Eve of a man, without a woman; all we of
man and woman: Christ of a woman, without a man.

Her seed,]. i. Christians in the second place, which are not so properly the
woman's seed, as her seeds seed, borne not of flesh and blood, John 1.13. 1 Pet.
1.23. Psalm. 22.30.
nor of the will of man, but of the Will of God, the Word of God, the seed that
serve God, and are accounted to him for a generation; not that natural seed of
Abraham, of which God said to him that his seed should be as the dust of the
earth, Genes. 13.16. But that spiritual seed which should be as the Stars of
Heaven. Genes. 15.5


So then his meaning is, that betwixt Christ and believers on him, and the
Devil, and his adherents in hell, on earth, there is a perpetual enmity.

Christ's enemy the Devil was in his Cradle, on the Cross, an enemy at the
temptation, in his preaching, in his miracles, and in that whole work of man's
redemption.

An enemy to Christians he is and ever will be: He makes war with the remnant
of her seed which keep the Commandments of God and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ. Apoc. 12.17.
Apoc. 13.
He persecutes those that dwell in heaven, those that live here with erect
conversations, lifted up unto the Author and sinisher of their faith. It is not
thus with the wicked, they feel not the forces of his enmity, Pax, Pax, all
that they possess is in peace, while Satan peaceably possesses them: they
make a covenant with hell, are at an agreement with death, and stick not to
say, Apoc. 18.
as the great Whore, I sit as a Queen, and shall never be removed. No man
hunts for tamed Fowls, but wild and estranged, these are his already, it is in
vain to seek their further Captivation. But he looks with the aspect of a
Basiliske upon the life of a righteous man. A Saints soul is a pearl in his
condemned eye, true believing Christians are the maliced parties, whom he and
his do prosecute with deadly hatred. In sanctificatis nobis maxim diaboli
tentamenta grassantur, quia magis exoptata est ei victoria de sanctis.
Sanctified men are the mark of his temptation, and over them he does
principally desire a victory: As there is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents; so is there joy in hell over one righteous man that falls into sin,
and the snares of the Devil, more then over many that are his bondslaves.
Chrysostom.
Adhoc praelium accinge te Christian. Buckle thy self, O Christian to
encounter this enemy of thy Master, and of thy self, that has undone thy
parents, and seeks to destroy thee likewise, et pro affectu, pro charitate,
pro ipsa denique natura, for affection, for Charity, even for natures sake,
revenge on him these injuries, and let him never triumph, and set up his
banners for tokens in the ruins of them, and thee.

We must all know, that we have such an enemy, that Viet armis labors for, and
delights in our destruction. Mortalium Calamitates epul^ D^monum, our miseries
are his banqueting dishes, et solatium perditionis, Synesius.
as Lactantius thinks, Lactant.
the only comfort he has to bring us into the same perdition with himself.

And that we may more seriously consider our danger in regard of him, we may
discover him to be a powerful, a Politic, and a malicious enemy, And these
three concurring in him, the danger is so much the greater, power to do, skill
to direct and manage, and an inward principle of malice to set both brain and
hand on work must needs be noxious.

1. Powerful he is, of great strength, Luke 11.
and therefore called a strong armed man, he is said to have ten horns, to
denote his great puissance, to push at the servants of God, and cast them
down. He is Leo in cubili, Aug. in Psalm. 9.
in quo and vis and Dolus, A Lion in his den, in whom there is both strength
and deceit.

2. Politic. Astus pollentior armis: Cunning and skill to manage a battle is
of as great consequence as force, and power; the devil is not wanting in this
kind, he has his plots and stratagems of war, Mill nocendi arts. No
Ulysses comparable to him for deceit, he can transform himself into an Angel
of light: No Proteus can equal his variableness, 2 Cor. 11.
and cunning unconstancy; He is said to have seven heads, now seven is a
number of perfection; he is then Master of his trade for sleights and
subtilties: And this he has partly from his knowledge, partly from his
experience.

His knowledge, either natural, for he reteines a great part of that he once
had, and is deeply acquainted with the Mysteries of second causes; or acquired
by an easy, and infallible way of speculation, not by a tedious searching of
causes by their effects: proceeding a notis ad ignotiora, as we do. Partly
from his experience, he is acquainted with all ages and passages past, and
keeps a sure Register of them. Seris venit usus ab annis: Experience comes
from old age. He is, and needs must be experienced, that is as ancient as the
world it self; therefore he is called that old serpent. But these two would
not disadvantage us if there was not nocendi animus, a mind to do us
mischief, but such there is in him: he is

3. A malicious enmity. Saint Basil writes of the Leopard, that he bears such
a natural hatred to man, that if he do but see his picture, he is ready to
fly upon it, and tear it in pieces: such a spiritual hatred has the Devil
to man's soul, Hoc continuum stadium ejus, hoc unicum desiderium, ut animas
devoret. Aug. sol. 16.
This is his continual study, his daily desire, to devome souls.

Make we use then of this brief discovery of our enemy.

Let his power teach us to give our selves unto prayer, that is a Christians
best offensive weapon. Bern.
Gravis equidem nobis inimici tentatio, Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 26.
sed long gravior illi nostra oration. Prayer is B^mbarde Christianorum (as
Luther calls it) and as Constantine fought with Eugenius the tyrant, Magis
orando quam f^riendo; so must we with this enemy of ours; for when we pray to
heaven, heaven fights for us, and he that has God to his friend needs fear
no enemy. And our best defensive, it will be as a shield and buckler to ward
off all blows, yea an Armor of proof against all assaults. As Saint Bernard
to his hearers, Rogo vos fratres, ut semper ad manum habeatis tutissimum
orationes refugium. But withal, Bern. ser. 5. Qu^d ag.
let us remember, that our prayer be not light frozen or perfunctory, for then
it will have no force to offend our enemy, or power to defend our selves, but
such strong cries as our Savior is said to send up in the days of his flesh,
to resist our strong adversary, that his potency may be overcome by that kind
of omnipotency of prayer.

Let his policy teach us vigilance, to lie always in excubiis in watch and
ward, to resist our adversary, to secure our selves. Magna and necessaria
vigilantia est. Aug Euch. ad Lam. c. 60.
We have need of a great deal of watchfulness, to be careful to prevent him,
who is so watchful to circumvent us. Why are we then so secure, O Christians!
do we so little prize our own safety, or suspect our enemy? Sic notus
Ulysses: vigilat hostis, dormis tu? Therefore, Aug.
Arise Sampson, the Philistines be upon thee. Awake O Christian the Philistines
of hell be upon thee.

His malice will teach us wisdom, to be wise as serpents to resist that old
serpent the devil: let us be sure to preserve our head Christ by faith, not to
put off our skin, our armor, but in a certain security, that which is in
heaven, and for the present to have ever about us that (...) Ephesians. 9. Lastly
to carry about us our sting, ^he Word of God, Scriptum est, which is, Origin.
i^ N^^er.
supra omnia tormentorum genera, above all kind of torments to the Devil, the
only way to destroy him.

And as we have, so we ever shall have such an one, an implacable, an
irreconcilable adversary, Habemus praelium nullo unquam foedere dirimendum. We
have a difference that shall never be composed, a war that no truce shall
ever take up. Therefore let us not think of a league or dream of any
conditions of peace, Male cum host conjungitur a quo divina sententia
separatur. It is ill combining our selves with him from whom Gods commandment
does separate us. There must be no harmony where the chief musician will have
a jarre: this discord pleases God: And the Lord of hoastes has enrolled us in
his Muster book to be his soldiers. Let us sight manfully these battles. Et,
bella geri placeat magnos habitura triumphos. Let us wage these wars, which
will have both a certain victory, and a glorious triumph.

An enmity there is we see, between Christians, and the serpent with his
infernal seed. Nor is it otherwise with his terrestrial: they are of their
father the Devil, and his works they will do. Hitherto tend the practices of
Tyrants, Bern. de pugna spirit. ser. 2.
Heretics, and Schismatiques, to oppose Christ and Christians. Inter
Babylonem, et Jerusalem nulla pax, sed guerra continua.

Genes. 25.
So that I may say of my text, as God did of Rebecca's womb: two several
nations are in it, and two manner of people to be divided out of the loins
thereof: Christians, and unbeleevers; sheep, and goats; the Children of
promise, and the children of the flesh; the children of God, and the children
of the Devil; betwixt whom there will ever be a division, separation, a
partition wall, (...) a great gulf of contradiction. I find the Genesis of
this enmity here in my text, the Exodus thereof I know not where, nor when to
find: From the beginning it was thus, now is, et excandescit eundo, it gets
strength the further it goes: And when an Angel from heaven has sworn by him
that lives for ever, there shall be no more time; then, and not till then,
there shall be no more enmity. I allege no other reason then that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.
what communion has light with Darkness etc.

For my part, I will not blow the Coals of dissension, there are too many
Phaetons that set the world in a combustion: Et utinam abscindantur, say I,
with the Apostle, I would they were even cut off that are troublers of peace.
Gal. 5.
We cannot but see and condole the enmity, that is between the woman's proper
seed, and how her children struggle within her to her great pain and travail;
here is not only Jsmael's hand, but Isaac's hand against Isaac, one Christian
against another, as though we meant of purpose to verify that which our
Savior spoke ex hypothesi: I came not to send peace, Math. 10.35.
but a sword, to set a man at variance against his father, and the Daughter
against her mother. Or that other: there shall be five in one house divided;
three against two, Luke 12.52.
and two against three. The Poet complains Serpentum concordia major, quam
hominum interse. Inven. There is more agreement of Serpents among themselves,
then of men; nay betwixt Devils, then Christians: Aug.
Legiones Daemonum in uno homine convenerunt, et duo homines in una domo vix
convenient. A Legion of Devils could agree together in one man, and two
Christians can scarce agree in one house. Surely prodigious is our intestine
enmity; And though God did graciously in my text make it the Churches
restitution, yet we seek to make it her ruin. It is observed, that when
sheep fall a butting one against another, a storm follows not long after:
when the sheep of Christ are so malignant one to another, it is a fearful
presage of an ensuing storm. They say of Bees, when they stir and strive
among themselves, it is a sign their King is about to remove and leave the
hive. When we make such stirs, tumults, and schisms in Religion, it may be
feared, God is going to remove from us. But let us all labor to continue his
presence still among us, that he may still take delight to walk in the midst
of the seven Golden Candelestickes. O pray for, and practice the peace of
Jerusalem, that he who makes men to be of one mind in an house would make us to
be of one heart and of one soul together in a blessed communion of Saints,
which may never be dissevered; and let us all endeavor to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3.


Leave we then this enmity, and follow the line of my text, and it will bring
us to the Prince of peace.

He) Faustus the Manichee puts a rub in my way, in saying the old Testament
had nothing in it prophetical concerning Christ: but I will easily step over
it; for who was Jacobs Shiloh, I saiahs Immanuel, Zacharies Branch, and this
semen mulieris in the text, but Christ? And the vulgar translation seems to
stop my course, ipsa she shall; so it reads the word. And the Papists
commonly, either to dignifie the Mother above the Son, that she, not he,
should break the serpents head, as most of their wooden Priests, and many of
their brazen faced Jesuits: or by the Son, that she by him should break the
Serpents head, as Bellarmine with more modesty, but Ribera with a few others,
with more honesty, do acknowledge it wholly to belong to Christ, according to
the Original (...), and the Septuagint (...): he, and he alone could break
the serpents head, without any further Damage then a bruised heel.

The power of Christ is described both by the effect which it produces, and
the object it works upon.

The Object is the head, the (...) or the highest part of the body, and most
sovereign for the direction of it, caput, because the senses do capere
initium, take their beginning from thence. The effect is breaking, the word
signifies not only to wear and wast by degrees, but to break as a ship is
broken in a tempest, it is so used Job 9.17. (And further there is an Ellipsis
of the particle. (...))

Both these imply the total and final victory of Christ. The part is
dangerous, the head: the wound is deadly, and shall never be healed, he shall
break thy head. Thus the prophet; Isa. 17.
The Lord shall pierce Leviathan that crooked serpent: and our Savior
himself, Luke 10.18.
I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven: and that beloved Disciple, for
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1 John 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. These works were of
Adoration, of consultation and of temptation.

Of Adoration: For before Christ's incarnation he did tyrannize over the world,
and his kingdom was established, he was generally then adored and worshipped,
as he is now by Indians in Dei imitationem, Eusebius.
as Eusebius observes, after the manner of God; nay humane flesh was not too
precious to do sacrifice to him: even among Gods people their tender infants
must not be spared to pass through the fire unto Moloch, Ierem. 32.35.
which some think to be Mercury, others Saturn, others Jupiter the King of
the Gods, ( Melech, and by corruption Moloch) which Gods of the Nations were
truly Devils. And that addition which Saint Steven sets down, gives a
liberty of conjecture that it was Deus tutelaris, Acts 7.43.
the tutelary God of the Ammonites, to him was this bloody sacrifice powered
out: but when the fullness of the time was come, these bloody sacrifices were
broken off, Christ abolished this tyranny, and took the scepter into his own
hand, to govern his people by righteous laws, and commandments, which are
not grievous, till they come to reign with himself in his heavenly Kingdom,

2. Consultation. His Oracles were then the General rule of counsel and
advice, both for public and private actions, till Christ came; who having the
words of eternal life, brought grace and truth into the world: And then all
his Oracles ceased; as it is recorded of Augustus Caesar, who enquiring at the
Oracle at Delphos who should succeed him in the Empire, had this for an answer,
Peucerus.
(...). An Hebrew Child, King of the Gods, has commanded me to leave this
House, and to return to Hell, therefore henceforth forsake our Altars.

3. Temptation: whereby he corrupted the hearts, and lives of men: The vigor
of this is taken away by Christ, so that his solicitations are not so
prevalent as they were before, Heb. 4.15.
because Christ was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin,
and so is able to succor them that are tempted.

In sum: venit, vidit, vicit, he came from heaven, he saw the earth, he
overcame the Devil: he spoiled Principalities and Powers, Colos. 2.15. Hebr.
2.14. Psalm. 68.18.
He has destroyed death, and him that had the Power of death, that it the
Devil. When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive; that is, the
captivity of the Devil, as Chrysostom. expounds it: then was my text fully
accomplished, and the serpents head was broken.

Now if we ask the ground of Christ's quarrel with the serpent, and the
occasion of this victory: We must know the cause was ours, the serpent had
broken our head first, therefore Christ undertook for us, and brake the
serpents head: The conquest is ours, communicated to us now, and to be
consummate when we come to heaven. The comfort is ours, that our Captain has
conquered our enemy, and we need not fear to encounter with a broken staff a
Debilitated opponent; And the thankfulness must be ours, to sing every day
some song of thankesgiving unto him that has taken us out of the fanges, and
throat of destruction. Luke 1.75
And this must be remembered, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, must serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before
him, all the days of our life.

And now I come to the last part of my text, which is like the sting in the
tail of the Scorpion, Thou shall bruise his heel.

The hurt our Savior received, did principally light on him on the Cross;
touching which, if sense be Judge, more then his heel was bruised; and his
heel more then bruised: but faith will testify, that but his heel was but
bruised: For he saw no corruption, he delivered himself from death; he revived
his dead ashes, built again his destroyed Temple within three days, and on
the fourtieth after, carried it up with him into heaven, and crowned it with
immortality. So that, the phrase is elegant, being a resemblance of the humane
nature of Christ, of a passible quality and condition: and an intimation of his
divine, sustaining his weak manhood to endure those sufferings, to digest
those bitter pills, and to make them medicinal to himself, and his. Greg. Ni
Naturae nostrae integumento caelata fuit divinitas, ut instar Piscium, cum
esca carnis simul attraheretur hamus divinitatis. Christ like a skillfull
fisher, did cover and hide his Godhead with the worm of his humane nature: now
the Devil thinking to swallow the worm of his humanity, captus est hamo
divinitatis, was caught with the hook of his divinity: and so in bruising
Christ's heel, his own head was broken. Or like a cunning wrastler, Christ did
set out the heel of his humanity for his adversary to strike at, and with the
hand of his divinity cast him down, yea broke his head.

Nor is this applied only to that one passion of Christ, but extended to all
his sufferings, which shall be for ever accomplished in his militant members.
For he is the head, the Church is his body, believers the several parts of it:
he must needs then be sensible of of their sufferings, and their damages and
hurts redound to him. Acts 9.4. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? non ait, quid sanctos meos, quid servos
meos, sed quid me persequeris? hoc est, membra mea: Caput pro membris clamabat,
et membra in se caput transsigurabat. He says not, why persecutest thou my
Saints, my servants; but me, my members? The head cried for the members, and
did transfigure them as it were into it self. So that his heel may be said to
be bruised, when his children are tempted by satan, or afflicted by his
malicious seed.

Two things naturally arise from hence.

A tolleration of the Serpents malice. A limitation of his might.
For the first, God does suffer the Serpent to exercise his malice on the
members of Christ here below, to bruise their heels, and that either for their
trial, as to Saint Peter, Luke 22.31. 2 Cor. 12.
or for their humiliation, as to Saint Paul: or for some other end, which
himself best knows. I am sure, all things shall work together for their
good; Aug.
etiam peccata, even their sins, either ad poenitentiam, or, ad cautelam; to
make them repent of sin past, or take heed of sin for the future: and the
bruising of their heels shall be the saving of their souls: yet bruised they
must be. Conteritur quidem serpentis caput, Bern.
sed facile est experiri calcaneo insidiantem. Christ has taken us out of the
devils claws, notwithstanding we are not yet out of the reach of his chain:
Modico adhuc tempore sinitur malignari. A little while he is suffered to bruise
our heel, Romans 16.20.
but the God of peace shall bruise Satan under our feet shortly.

And as God suffers the devil himself to tempt them, so does he his Impes to
afflict them here; righteous Abel is slain by cursed Cain; Joseph sold by his
wicked brethren, the Children of Israel in bondage under Pharaoh, John Baptist
beheaded for a dance, Revel. 14.15.
here then is the patience of the Saints.

Let us then be contented to have our heels bruised: It is happiness enough
to get the blessing, though with Jacob we be sent halting to our graves.
Therefore let every one resolve with himself, Totum licet saeculum pereat,
nihil moror, dum patientiam lucrifaciam. Tertul.
Let the whole world perish; I care not, so I may gain patience.

For the second. God does not suffer the Devil to wreake his malice, and to
power out the full viols of his spite on them, but sets him his bounds which
he cannot pass: he must but bruise their heel: his malice is limited, his
power is restreined; he can go no further then the permitting hand of heaven
will give him leave: Aug. Job 1. Job 2. Math. 8.
Ne oviculam unam; he could not touch one of Jobs sheep, till he had his
commission; nor his body till it was renewed: nor enter into the heard of
Swine, without Christ's sufferance, muchlesse can he go beyond his license in
touching the souls of the Elect by temptations. I confess his malice is
boundless, endless, inexorable, as the grave or hell, never satisfied: But
God puts his hook in his nostrils, bounds him with a huc usque, hither shall
thou go, and no further; here shall thou stay the proud waves of thy malice,
thou shall but bruise his heel. As Achilles being dipped in the Stygian lake,
had his body so impenetrable, that no part of it could be endangered but his
heel: so the faithful being washed in the precious blood of Christ, have such
a strong munition for their souls, that their vital parts cannot be
endamaged; their heels may be touched, but their head and heart are sure
enough: Saint Bernard sweetly to this purpose; Est quidem Leo rugiens, sed
gratias ago Leoni de tribu Inda, rugire iste potest, Bern in Psalm. qui habitat.
ser. 13.
ferire non potest. The Devil is a roaring Lion, but I give thanks to him that
is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, he may roar, but he cannot devour. And
Saint Augustine: Aug. de Temp. ser. 197.
Latrare potest, sollicitare potest, sed mordere non potest nisi volentem, He
may solicit us to sin, he may bark at us, but he cannot bite us, unless
we give him leave to fasten. So much do we owe to our blessed Savior.

Finally, as God shortens the devils horns; so he does his hands, his
instruments, that they can go no further to the damage of his, then he
permits them: And God is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13.
who will not suffer his to be tempted above that they are able. And when he
has chastened them enough, he will throw the rod into the fire: here is the
comfort of the Saints; that God will hedge about his Church with his
providence, and enclose it in a maze of his mercies, that the gates of hell
shall never be able to prevail against it.

Therefore, be comforted ye weak hands, be confirmed ye feeble knees, cheer
up ye drooping spirits; doubtless we have a strong City: Isaiah 26.1.
Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. And let this be our
consolation, that Christ has overcome the world, and greater is he that is
with us, then he that is with the world. Now to him that is the greatest of
all, to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be given all due
honor, praise, service, and thankfulness, now, and for ever, Amen.

FJNJS.

