THE APOLOGY OF THEOPHILUS HIGGONS LATELY MINISTER, NOW CATHOLIQVE.

Wherein THE LETTER OF SIR EDW. HOBY KNIGHT, directed unto the said T. H. in
answer of his FIRST MOTIVE, is modestly examined, and clearly refuted. *

Patior, sed non confundor.

2. Timoth. 1.12. ROAN.

By JOHN MACHVEL, dwelling in the street of the Prison, over against the
Crown of Orlea^s, 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVLY VIRTUOUS, the LADIES CATHOLIQVE of great
Britany.
MOST Illustrious, and Renowned Ladies;

It was the opinion of an ancient, and grave Thucydides.
Historian, that men should speak nothing of women; neither good, nor evil.
An opinion unworthy of the Author; which as In his Treatise of the virtuous
acts of women.
Plutarch approoueth not in his censure, so neither Sir Edward Hoby, nor my
self, have observed in our practice; howbeit, in a different manner, and upon
unlike respects: he speaking evil of you, to the disparadgement of your ^ites;
I good, to the advancement of your honors: he, out of his Zeal, and Wisdom
(which, perhaps, did both set forth together, as Curreba^t simul, sed ille
praecucurrit. Io. 20.4.
John, and Peter, but yet the first has outrunne the second) he, I say, out of
his zeal, and wisdom, to defame your Religion in your Persons; I, out of my
duty, and obligation, to give a just applause unto your resplendent virtues.
And thus I (with your Mary) have chosen the BETTER part, to speak good of
you, and not evil; as also, therein, I sustayn the TRVER part, because your
selves are not evil, but good.

In which assurance, and confidence, I may boldly defend the luster of such
excellent LADIES, against the misprises of this KNIGHT, attempting to blemish
their fame with his pen, which he should maintayn with his sword. A work no
less ignoble in him to undertake, then impossible to perform. For, were it
not a paradoxicall endeavor, in any man, to accuse Pallas of folly, or Venus
of deformity, and likewise in the rest, where the perfection of the subject
preuenteth the credibility of the discourse: Such also is the project of this
Knight, and so improbable is his conceit; since the general esteem, which
you have gained by the integrity of your lives, has made you incapable of his
wrongs. Neither so only; but, wherein he would make you inglorious, therein
your glory does consist.

Wherefore; 2. Cor. 7.4.
multa mihi fiducia est apud vos, multa gloriatio pro vobis; great is my trust
in you, great is my rejoicing for you. Yea I am glad, that I may come unto you,
as my principal defendours aagainst him, by whom you are equally offended; and
that the tempest, raised against me by this Knight, has driven me unto the
secure harbor of your honorable favors: whereof though I am unworthy by my
own deseruings, yet you can make me worthy by your gracious opinions. And I
conceive the greater hope thereof, because I am already entitled thereunto by
the Knight, saying; Page 12.
it is twenty to one, but some of YOUR Ladies will be pearing into this To me,
or against me rather.
Letter: therefore I will write no more, then I am able to justify. Whereby
your selves have a peculiar interest, from his own hand, to require his
justificatio^ of all those things, which, in his Letter, he has imputed unto
your obsequious, and faithful servant.

In which regard, I appeal unto you (religious, and prudent LADIES) and
assign you (with your favorable leave) to be my Judges in this trial; since
my CAUSE is honest, and your selves are just. She comes, before your
presences, in her native, and naked colors; not painted with eloquence, not
adorned with invention. Our unhappy Father sought no Genes. 3.7
sigge leaves, while he remained without sin, and (consequently) without
shame. They, that are guiltless, seek no colorable defense; for Stat.
Caecilius.
Innocence is her own eloquence, being easily sustained by her inward, and
proper strength: whereas an evil cause requires much art; being like a statue
(or Deest aliquid, quod intus esse oportet. Plut. in Laconic.
dead carcass) which has the shape, and proportion of a man, but has no
soul within, to give it life, and motion.

Finally, therefore, whatsoever shall be found defective in me, let your
wisdom supply, or charity forgive, since he, that offers up this little
Treatise unto your acceptance, has also dedicated himself unto your service;
remaining now, and ever,

Your Honors most humbly devoted THEOPHILUS HIGGONS.
ROAN. 12. December. 1609.
THE PREFACE UNTO THE READER. Wherein The Method, and Matter, of Sir Edwards
Letter, and this Apology, are briefly noted.
COurteous Readers;

Having granted forth a Prohibition against my pen, out of the Court of my
reason, not to intermeddle in that, which belongs not really, and properly,
unto my Cause; I will omit all other circumstances, contained in the Page
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
Preface of Sir Edwards Letter, and examine only, at this time, what Method,
and Matter he has projected therein, and prepared for his ensuing discourse.

1. Page 7.
My whole discourse (says i he) shall consist of six Paragraffes. In the
FIRST, The cause of your Alienation shall be sifted. In the SECOND, Your mayn
reason for Purgatory disprooued. In the THIRD, Your prime Father (S. Augustine)
answered. In the FOVRTH, your prime Protestant, D. Humfrey, defended. In the
FIFTH, The contrary position maintained. In the SIXTH, and last, A friendly
retreat sounded.

All which Sections, or Paragraphs, may be reduced unto three principal heads.
The first, unto MORAL points of honesty, pertaining unto the Will. The
second, fifth, and sixth, unto INTELLECTVALL points (of Faith, Science, and
Opinion) pertaining unto the Understanding. The third, and fourth, are referred
mixtly unto them both; being partly Moral, and partly Intellectual.

According to this proportion, and measure, I have made the distribution of
this Treatise. But forasmuch as praise, and dispraise belong rather unto things
Moral, then Intellectual (whence it is, that an error in the later, is more
pardonable, then in the former) in the FIRST Part of this Apology, I will take
a suruay of Sir Edward's first section, or Paragraph: in the SECOND, I will
consider his fidelity, and exactness in his third, and fourth Paragraphs: in
the THIRD, and last part, I will visit his second, fifth, and sixth Paragraphs;
wherein I shall represent unto you the truth, and substance of his disputes. In
which THREE parts, I will temper my style with sobriety, and moderation:
Whereby you, and Sir Edward him self, may well perceive, that the necessity
of defense, and not desire of reuendge, invited me unto this little pain.

THE FIRST PART; Concerning the MORAL points, objected unto me by SIR EDW. in
his FIRST PARAGRAPH.

CHAPTER I. Of my Puritanisme, and causes of my Alienation; pretended by the
Knight.
. 1. Of my Puritanisme.
1. PHILOSOPHY does teach, and experience does prove, that, amongst other
conditions of Sight, there is required a convenient distance betwixt the Organ
of seeing, and the Object to be seen: not too far; because the power of the
sight is limited, and confined unto a certain space: not too near; because the
species (the forms, or shapes) of the Object must have sufficient air, as the
mean, to derive, and conuaigh them unto the Organ. That is to say (in a more
familiar kind of speech, for the capacity of every Reader) We can not discern
a thing, which is too remote from the eye, or placed Sensibile positum supra
sensum, toli^ sensationem.
immediately upon the same.

2. This observation may be very beneficial unto Sir Edward; who (being no 1.
Sam. 9.9
SEER by inspiration) has been very much deceived in his sight; not only
betwixt Where he dateth his Letter to me.
Queenburrow, and S. Omers, where the distance was too great, but also betwixt
the Were he dateth his Letter to the Ladies.
BLACK FRIARS, and Fleetstreet, where the distance was too little for him, to
perceive the truth of those things, which he imputes unto my charge. And
therefore, if I, or any other, would dema^d; Why Sir Edward, living in the
circuit of the Black Friars (that is to say, in the midst of a zealous, and
religious Congregation) should untruly accuse me of Puritanisme in Fleetstreet?
the resolution may be this; The places were so near, that he could not see the
truth.

3. But I will not separate those things, which he has joined together. Behold
then (good Reader) the whole connection of his discourse; for I will not be an
unkind Atropos to cut the thread in sunder, before it be spunne out unto the
farthest length.

4. Page 12.
That famous College of Christ's Church in Oxford (which you have ill repayed
for the sweet milk, which you have sucked out of her breasts) has not yet
forgotten how you were ever stained with Puritanisme; how violently adverse you
were to all such, as were suspected to favor the Romish Sea. She does yet
smile to think, what pain you took, being Censour of the house, in putting your
and to the sawing down of a poor, harmless May Pole, because you thought it
came out of a Romish forest. When you were Lecturer at Fleetsir.
S. Dunstanes, your contributory Auditors thought your long prayer, and
spitting pawses too short, because the reverend Bishopps (yea even your own
Lord, and Master) were ever left out for wranglers, and Antichristian
Hierarchies, not worthy to be named, in the same day, with your holy Pastors,
and sanctified Ministers. Thus have you ever affected singularity. But how
comes it to pass, that you should now fall into the opposite co^trariety?
etc. So he.

5. Here Puritanisme is made the Aries to ruinate the walls of my credit; and,
being an eminent untruth, is placed in the very front, and forlorne-hope, of
his future assault; that so my chandge might seem either impossible, or
absurd, where the termini are so distant, and, consequently, the motion must be
long: howbeit the proportion is not just herein, betwixt corporal, and
spiritual things.

6. But, to deal orderly without confusion, and plainly without obscurity, in
the root of this accusation, upon which the branches of the rest depend; I
will first consider the point it self, or crime of Puritanisme, objected unto
me by the Knight: secondly I will reuiew the proofs, which he alleges to
justify the same.

7. FIRST then for this PVRITANISME; I will readily confess, with Sir Edward,
that it is a stayne: but I constantly deny, that it was, or could be so, unto
me, who embraced PROTESTANTINISME (as, in our country, it distinguishes from
the note of a Papist, and a Purita^) and esteemed it to be more probable in
reason, as I saw it to be more conformable unto the State.

8. Of which my understanding, and affection in these affairs, as my
conscience is my best witness, so I want not sundry ouertures to declare the
same, if my public association, if my private conference, if Lectures, if
Sermons, if, finally, any outward act may testify my inward thoughts, wherein
Sir Edward has no interest to be my Judge.

9. If I must yet make a more particular appeal, it shall be unto my Reverend
Lord, the L. Bishopp of London himself; for, as he knew me better then this
Knight, so he knew likewise, that a stained Puritan was unfit either to
receive his favors, or to do him Service; wherein sundry occasions presented
themselves unto me, to encounter PVRITANS; and yet they can not (or, if they
can, let them) say, that openly, or secretly, in whole, or in part, in
doctrine, discipline, or ceremony, I was inclinable unto their side.

10. Wherefore, to come, SECONDLY, unto Sir Edward his proofs of this
pretended stayne (for, if it be sufficient for him to accuse, I shall not be
innocent) I confess the Fact it self in his first proof, but I deny it in the
second.

11. First then (Sir Edward) unto your first; I confess the fact, which you
allege, I deny the cause, which you assign. For the original, and proper
motive of my disconceipt against that harmless Maypole (whereof I was the
Adversary, and you are the Advocate) was, because it came out of the College
grounds; taken thence by stealth, and erected (with scorn) near unto our
walls, without our consent; and this also to justify a former wrong, lately
offered in the same kind. This was the cause (as many can yet remember) first
moving me unto that enterprise; which, though it were not expedient for me
then to undertake, yet (being a woode^ proof in your behalf) it was not
convenient for you to mention at this time.

12. As for your second proof; it is more important, and material. And now I
am glad to see your writ of remoouall, whereby you bring my cause from Oxford,
to receive a trial at London. For as this injury is more marqueable, so is my
defense more ample in this case.

13. Wherefore I appeal unto you, Honorable, Rightworshipfull, and other,
well respected, Auditors (from whom as I have had many, and singular tokens of
your love, so I recognize it here, with my best thanks) whether you, in your
election of me unto the office of your PREACHER, or whether I, from the first
unto the last performance of that duty, gave any signification of these things,
whereof I am now accused?

14. But if in the manner, and matter of my Sermons; if in the composition, and
style, and other appurtenances of speech, I ever expressed a contrary affection
unto that, which is here imposed upon me; if usually, in my ordinary Lectures
(and, always, in a more solemn assembly) I made a general remembrance of the
Bishopps, and a special of my Lord, and Master; if I were different in habit,
and deportment from the singularity of stained Puritans; lastly, if I showed a
total conformity in regular demeanure, why should this whole fable, compounded
of so many untrue circumstances, be so improbably suggested against me by the
Knight? Surely this benefitt ensues unto me by such a wrong, that Fame
deserves little creditt in things more secret, and obscure, since it is
controlled in things so manifest, and clear.

15. I might also here produce, for more abundant refutation of this pretended
stayn, a certain prouerbiall report (intertayned by my good friends) of the
opposite contrariety; viz. If any man will hear a Popish Sermon, let him go to
S. Du^stanes. I might acquaynt you with many positio^s, delivered by me there,
in frequent auditoryes, which are Heretical in GENEVA, but Catholic in ROME.
I might appeal unto persons of different quality; Clericall, Laicall; learred,
unlearned; noble, base; etc. who accused me in the later, but ever freed me in
the former respect. And, if farther occasion shall be ministered unto me, I may
(perhapps) deal more punctually therein.

16. Mean while, thus much shall suffice concerning this Puritanicall stayn;
which, though it does more properly belong unto things INTELLECTVALL, then
MORAL, yet since it is here taken by Sir Edward into his sifting Paragraph,
with reference unto the sequel (wherein he severely examineth the causes of my
Alienation) I could not pretermitt it in this place.

. 2. Of the causes of my Alienation; and particularly of Debts.
1. But how comes it to pass (says Sir Edward) that you should now fall
into the opposite" contrariety? His answer is. page 14. etc
Happily you have done this either wholly to escape, or to agree the better
with your CREDITOVRS. Happily, having missed a former PREFERMENT, you think, by
this means, to be wooed by the State to return. Happily the yoke of WEDLOCK,
being somewhat burdensome to your shoulders, was an induceme^t to make you
cast off the plough. And is it, but happily, so? Behold his gradation. SVRELY,
not only some, but even all of these, were the cords, that haled on your FIRST
MOTIVE.

2. But hold your hand, good Sir, a while; you must not object, and answer
also; and it becomes me now to interpose my self, least your answer here,
might be more prejudicial unto me, then your objection. 1. number. 4. and 12.
before. Wherefore I will entreat particularly of your three assigned causes
of my Alienation, and first concerning the matter of Debts; which (as you Ibid.
say) the world knows were very clamours: again; page 19.
It was the grimme aspect of your own estate, etc.

3. As for your amplifications (the world knows: clamorous: grimme aspect)
they may be signs of your Rhetori concessum est se^tentijs vti falsis, etc.
Gell. l. 1. c. 6.
rhetorical vein; and so, letting them pass, I come unto the matter of your
accusation, which will easily vanish into smoke, and return into that Nothing,
out of which it was taken, and made, if you will vouchsafe to consider with me,
First, the quantity of these debts; Secondly, the reason of the same; Thirdly,
my means of dischardge; Fourthly, the disposition, and quality of my
Creditours; Fifthly, and lastly, my honest inte^tion to repay. Thus I doubt not,
but Sir Edward shall receive a just satisfaction; whereby also I shall stop
the wide mouth of his world.

4. Concerning the FIRST; it may be, that Fame has putt my debts to usury, and
made the increase greater then the principal; which, by many pounds, extends
not unto one hundred marks.

5. Concerning the SECOND; it may please Sir Edward to understand, that my
debts (whatsoever) arose not upon any vicious course of life, but upon other
respects, incident unto Scholars, and such, especially, whom either continual
attendance about their Lords, or evident hope of better fortunes, inuiteth unto
a more liberal expense.

6. Concerning the THIRD therefore; Sir Edwards world may bear witness for
me, that though my desert (having no value in it self) could be of no more
value, then it was made by the love, and kindness of others; yet, as my
possibility, and probability of immediate preferme^t were very great) in that
respect) so they, whose favor nourished my hopes in a comfortable expectation
(beyond many of my ra^k) would not suffer me to fall under a burden of so
little weight.

7. Concerning the FOVRTH then; if my Creditours had been as violent, as that
Matthew. 18.27.28.
ungrateful servant, who, forgetting his Masters patience toward himself;
showed impatience against his own fellow; yet were they so unwise also, that
they would destroy the fortunes, which should be common unto us both? No; that,
which they lent to buyld me up, they demanded not to pull me down, but
expected my harvest, wherein they might reap their own again; if with
advantage, it depended upon my will, which (being not like the barren ground,
wherein the seed is lost, but like the fertile, which yealdeth it again with
profit) has ever been more apt to recompense a benefitt, then to retayn a due.

8. Wherefore, for the FIFTH point (which, in consequence, does chiefly import
me) I am desirous to satisfy Sir Edward, and his world, therein, in all
syncerity of heart. But because Pro.
the heart of man is deep, and is known only (infallibly) unto him, Psalm.
139.
who walks in all our secret paths (or unto none, farther then he will
communicate the same) I appeal first, and principally, unto my great, and
sovereign Judge, by whom, and before whom, I must, and may justify my honest
inte^tion in this behalf. If I am guilty, he is the Accuser that shall be the
Witness, and he is the witness that shall be the Judge, and he is the judge
that shall condemn me, and from his sentence there lies no appeal. Here then
is my confidence, and comfort.

9. Howbeit, since Charity will think the best in all things, and of all men
(for 1. Cor. 13.5
she thinks not evil) and, specially, when she has probable inducements
thereunto; I am glad that they (Men) who (alone) can accuse me unjustly, may
(and ought) justly excuse me also. For, as at sundry times before, and unto
sundry persons, I did fully, and thankfully repay my debts, so, upon my
departure out of England, I gave some tokens of my moral inclination in this
kind.

10. I will not (though I might) go unto Oxford for my proof, but unto London,
whither I was cited. 1. Number. 4. and 12.
before, for a trial in the first, and fu^damentall objection, contrived by
Sir Edwards skill. And now, because he shall not farther call into question,
nor disprooue, my fidelity, and truth; I am compelled to name some men (the
first being one of my best, the other none of my worst friends) viz In Chancery
lane.
M. Garth, Ibid.
M. Simcotts, Near Charing cross.
M. Council: to whom (conjunctiuely) I dischardged the sum of eight pounds,
or more; when no necessity (but honesty) did force me thereunto. Whence Sir
Edward (out of his page 4.
Protestant Charity) may reasonably collect, and credibly affirm, that, in
borrowing, I had no purpose to deceive.

11. And here, though it may seem repugnant unto the duty, and affection of a
Son, to detract any estimation from his Fathers report, yet since his Annexed
unto Sir Edwards.
Letter is published to give more creditt, and authority unto Sir Edwards
calumniations, yea to satisfy any vnprejudicate Reader (for so the In his
Admonit.
Printer testifies in his name) and lastly, since here the matter it self
does ineuitably challendge it at my hands (for though there are other untrue
points contained in that Letter, either as much, or more prejudicial unto me
then this, yet I will seek no occasion to contradict any parcel thereof,
otherwise then it shall present it self unto me; nor yet will I accept it
farther, then pure necessity shall constrayne me) I must remove a scandal,
which, by virtue of the said Letter, may (perhaps) make a deep impression in
some men's hearts, to my singular inconvenience, and loss.

12. Whereas therefore, you (my dear, and loving Father) give this
signification in your Letter (bearing the form of an indictment against me,
your Son) viz. before he went beyond the Seas, he borrowed diverse sums of
money, with purpose (I am persuaded) never to repay them, and, amongst the
rest, he abused my self for ten pound; the former insta^ces (besides many other
proofs) may persuade you otherwise, and assure you of that, which a Father
does least suspect, or least accuse; to wit, the Moral honesly of your Son:
which, by the course of nature, has, from you, descended unto me, as my best
inheritance. And that it may appear unto your self, and others (who, either by
your own consent, or by Sir Edwards fault, have interest in these accusations,
to require my defense) that I did not abuse your Fatherly benignity (which
emptied your means to fill my wa^ts, as freely, as S. Aug. Conf. l. 2. c. 3.
Patricius himself dealt with his Augustine) I pray you to remember that, which
you did (or might) know long before: to wit, that I borrowed, and received the
said ten pounds of you, to further my suite in obtaining a S. Michaels in
Gloucester.
Benefice, being in his Majesty's gift, and vacant upon the deprivation of the
late Incumbent (stained with Puritanisme) and that I was expressly counsayled
thereunto by my Honorable Lord; howbeit, upon some difficulties, I surceased
from the same.

13. This was the occasion of borrowing that sum. But now, if you will
compare the time also, when I borrowed it, with the time of my departure out of
England, I may be fully cleared from all suspicion of abuse. For my departure,
out of England, being in November 1607. and the receipt of that money, about
Easter 1606. the distance of the times does prove, that my intention was not
fraudule^t; since at Easter 1606. I thought not of this departure in November
1607; which was (almost) two years after.

14. So then it is true, that I borrowed sundry sums, in general, and this,
in particular also, before I went beyond the Seas: but this word (BEFORE) is
here ambiguous (and, in one sense, very prejudicial) and therefore must be
distinguished: viz. Mediately, or Immediately before. If it be taken mediately,
as it signifies a good distance of time, I confess the accusation, in this
sense, to be very true; but then my honest intention receives little, or no
prejudice thereby. If it be taken immediately, as it signifies a propinquity,
and neerenesse of time; I must deny the accusation, in this sense, to be true;
and this, only, is it, which can be prejudicial unto the honesty of my
intention. To conclude then; I say, and, upon my salvation, I protest unto you,
that neither immediately, nor near upon my departure, nor after my first
resolution that way, did I borrow any money, but I did repay some; and so, in
each respect (both of not borrowing, and of repaying) I am freed from the
infamy of this pretended abuse; forasmuch as I might then have borrowed more,
and I might not have repayed any: both which had been to my great aduantadge,
when money was to be my best (if not my only) friend.

15. Now, if my true defense were not thus plainly, and articulately set
down, who would not conceive the meaning to be this? viz. Immediately before,
or upon his departure, he borrowed diverse sums of money, etc. For, by the
contempering, and mingling together of these words, borrow; abuse; never repay;
going beyond the seas; this sense must necessarily flow, and issue thereout:
and this, I know, is the construction, which is made by many, and specially by
them, whose will does make them more credulous in this case. Caesar in
commentar. Et Lamprid. in Heliogab.
Quod volumus, facile credimus.

16. But there is more art, then charity in these commixtions; which are as
prejudicial unto those, whom we are willing to defame, as the conjunction of
Saturn with a more benign, and happy starr, is fatal unto the bodies in our
inferior world. As for example. CLEMENT the eight (of blessed life, and happy
memory) is accused by de Antichr.
M. Gabriel Powell, of whoredom. When? Ante Papatum (says he) before his
Popedom. Who is the witness? Doctor Gentilis; his professed enemy. Well; be
it so: it was in his young of 16 years.
age (as D. Ge^tilis related it unto me) wherein, and Confess. l. 6 cap. 15.
after which, Augustine himself confesses, and lame^teth his greater follies.
But yet; why ante Papatum? Why should his Papacy (or the Papacy rather) in his
declining age, bear the fault of his youthful years? This was an evil
commixtion also, and, for the manner, it has a singular resemblance with the
other, whereof I have already treated, and wherewith I will conclude this
matter.

17. Finally therefore; as my Religion, and disposition do powerfully incline
me to GIVE every man his own (which is the proper act of Justice, but not of
Charity; which does FORGIVE every man his debts; and for this cause, though I
will pay others, yet I will spare Sir Edward) so I will endeavor, to my power,
to give a just satisfaction unto my Creditours, whether See before; number. 2. 3.
clamorous, or silent. Unto the first (if there be any such) I would owe
nothing but love: unto the second, I owe more love then before. I know the
precept, which S. Paul Romans 13.8.
gives, viz. Owe nothing unto any man, but this, that you love one an other. I
know that it is a mark, which David Psalm. 36.21
sets upon the ungodly man; he borrows, and pays not again. My desire to
observe that precept, and to avoid this mark, shall express it self in my
careful, and industrious provision for that little quantity of debt, which Sir
Edward esteems to be a great cause of my Alienation from his Church. But
whether there be any porportio^ betwixt the cause, and the effect, I will now
remitt my self, and him, unto the decision of the impartial Reader.

. 3. Want of Preferment.
1. I come now unto the second Cause, which is like unto the first; as, amongst
Facies non omnibus vna est, Nec diuersa tamen, etc. Ovid.
Sisters, the one is the half image of the other. The Miss of your preferment
was grievous unto you, says page 15.
Sir Edward: and; page 14.
having missed a former preferment, you think, by this means, that the State
will woo you to return.

2. In which accusation he is so confident, that, dividing the affection of
Aerius unto me, and reserving the opinion of that heretic unto page 56.
himself, he page 20.
challenges me, as a man infected with the disease of Aerius: and; page 10.
this was the disease of Aerius; and, page 11.
when I speak of Aerius, I think of M. An hater of God.
Theomisus. Which name Sir Edward gives me in his new baptism: and I am no
more unfortunate therein, then S. Innocentius, whom the Magdeburgians have
bated the first syllable of his name; or S. Athanasius, to who^ the Trinitarian
heretics have added one letter; or S. Cyprian, with whom a Pagan Philosopher
exchandged an other; making them appear as Nocentius. Sathanasius. Caprianus.
monsters, who were the lights of the world.

3. But digesting this wrong (as also many other; viz. page 1.
Fantastical wit, 10.
frantic fitts, 50.
railing Rabshekah; 6.
monstrous birth, etc. and sparing the Author, who accuses 49.
my currish pen, I proceed unto the matter it self.

4. And here, if Sir Edwards former objectio^ (of Puritanisme) had stood in
force against me; it had not been so much a mutation, as a progression, and
perfection in that gospel, to run, from it, into Brownisne, or Barrowisme,
and, from thence, into Anabaptisme; which, in the strict letter, sensed by
inward Spirit (according to the ancient rules of Protestant Religion also) is
the neatest, and most refined gospel of them, who fell away from The
Sacrame^taries, and Anabaptists fell from us etc. Luth. in Gal. 5.9.
LVTHER, the Powel de Antichr. page 324.
great Reformer of the Church. And surely, if the chandge of my Religion had
depended upon such a temporal respect, as Sir Edward does suggest, thoses
courses had sorted as fully for my commodity, and more nearly with my
conscience, then this opposite contrariety, which I now embrace.

5. But I plead no such defense. It was the light of truth, that convinced me;
the power of grace, that persuaded me; no corrupt affection, but evident
reason, no want in earth, but desire of heaven, no coffeehouse, which I
found, but comfort, which I sought, did bring me, effectually, unto this happy
chandge.

6. Which motion of my Soul, if it came from the earth, and had the same
beginning with this corruptible Body; my choice were improuident to forsake my
former, and to intertayn this present course. Could I not perceive, that, by
flying, I did not fly, but increase my evil? Did I not know, that this was no
salve for such a sore, but a remedy worse then the sickness it self, if either
I wanted, or sought for temporal means? Did I not foresee, that I should now
exclude my self from such co^petent means, as I had, and better fortunes,
which I expected; and that, withal, I should expose my name unto certain
obloquy, and my life unto uncertain danger?

7. Oh, says the Knight, but you thought, that the Sat would woo you to
return. No, not so: for am I not as a drop of water in that great Element?
But yet, you (Sir Edward) a member of page 4.
the most superlatiue Parliament, do you not (in charity) persuade my return,
and do you not frame sundry page 94.
Motives to this effect?

8. Your page 4. etc.
former lines were written in blood (as the laws of Draco) your later in milk;
wherein I am restored again unto my page 93.
name (Theophilus) and (almost) unto your favor; so that you, my
Aduersary-Friend, might justly have a second right in me (the first being
always reserved unto my Honorable Lord) to use, dispose, and employ me
according to your will, if my conscience did not retayn me in this Faith, with
an inviolable bond.

9. As for other Motives, more effectual, and powerable, then flesh, and blood
can easily resist, I will say nothing at this time. I may not publish the
favors of other men so freely, as Sir Edward does proclayme my faults. This
only may suffice to show unto men of charitable, and reasonable minds, that I
languished not with the disease of Epiph. haeres. 75. August. haeres. 53.
AERIVS (or See the Examen of Fox his Calend. Ianuar. 1.
WICKLIFFE) and delighted not my self in the singularity of opinion (as they
did) but, for the truths sake, which convinced me, for my souls sake, which
lay in peril, for my Saviors sake, who redeemed it with his blood, I repaired
unto that Hieronym. ad Damas.
Ark, out of which there is no safety in the waves of heresy, and schism; that
so I might be knitt unto that Church, whereof, In 1. Tim. 3.15.
S. Ambrose says, DAMASVS was Rectour in his time; and PAVL is at this day: a
Church one in faith, ancient in time, visible in succession, comely in order,
conformable in actions; It was S. Augustines observation in his time.
she, that is in all places, and like her self, wheresoever she is; the root,
without which the branches shall wither; the united body, out of which the
divided members shall perish, and decay.

. 4. Of my Wife; etc.
1. THe third Cause, which Sir Edward assigns of my Alienatio^, is my
Mariadge; a yoke (says page 15.
he) to burdensome to your shoulders; the mariadge-God, Himenaeus, was none of
your best friends, etc. Concerning which subject, I might intertayn the Reader
with a long discourse. But, cui bono? as Cassius was wont to say: to what good,
or for what end, and purpose?

2. Seeing two sorts of people, generally, in the world; Good, and Evil:
Wise, and Foolish: Charitable, and Malicious; I have cast my reckoning thus: I
shall not be condemned by the first, and, I care not to be accused by the
second.

3. Howbeit, to satisfy the just expectation of some, and idle curiosity of
others, in this matter; I say, that I sought not my Wife in the beginning, but
was sought by her friends; Gentlemen of quality, able, and willing to further
me in the courses of this world, and specially in my late profession. I
accepted their conditions, and liked hirs; the promise was made, the knot was
tied: yet so, that she was to remayn, wholly, under their provision, until I
should be actually possessed with all convenient means: and then her portion
was to be in my hands, her self in my care.

4. Now, if Sir Edward will press me yet farther with that uncivil dema^d of
the A. Gellius lib. 5. cap. 20
Roman Censor; Habesne vxorem ex animi tuisententia? I might answer unto him,
as the party unto the Censor: Habeo equidem vxorem, sed non hercle ex animi tui
sententia. It was enough for him, and me, to make our choice, to our own
contentment, in this case. If there were any other default, Sir Edward knows
the wise, and necessary counsel for me, and other husbands also: A. Gell. l.
1. c. 17.
Vxoris vitium aut tollendum, aut ferendum: qui tollit, vxorem commodiorem
praestat; qui fert, sese meliorem facit.

5. But to deal with you, in good earnest; Sir: do not think so uncharitably
of me, that I wanted due affection unto my spouse, or, that wanting due
affection unto her, I would therefore renounce the Spouse of Christ; as you
pretend your Church to be, and inuest her with that name. No; there had been
other alleuiations in this behalf, not so unkind to her, not so dishonest
before men, not so impious in the sight of God. But, that I might embrace a
comfortable union with the Spouse of Christ (the Catholic, Roman, Apostolic
Church) I am therefore separated by place (not love) from her, betwixt whom,
and me, there is a perfect neerenesse in this great distance. And though Sir
Edwards pen has made a See afterward. Chap. 2.. 3. number. 22. 25.
foul blott to the prejudice of her good affection toward me, yet I will
believe it to be a part of the common wrongs, which we sustayn from this
ungentle Knight. And thus assuring both her, and him, that I want not
affection, but means to express it (which I will endeavor to do, whether
within, or without the Land) I will conclude this matter, and, therewith, this
chapter also.

6. Perhapps now, I may be condemned for writing too much, or too little in
this kind; howbeit, he, that ingageth me into the doubtful censure of the
Readers, has made the same adventure of his own fortune. If we fare equally,
I am eased by his company. If I fare worse, I have patience to bear, and
charity to forgive. If better, he has no reason to complayn.

CHAP. II. Of sundry other crimes, objected unto me by Sir Edward, in his first
(sifting) Paragraph.
. 1. Of my disconceipt toward the Catholic, Roman faith, after my Alienation
from the Church of England.
1. SIR; the amplitude of your discourse exceeds the commission of your
title. For though your first Paragraph does promise (according to the
inscription) page 7.
to fifth the CAUSES of my Alienation (which you have raised unto THREE) yet the
greater part thereof spends it self in other pretended crimes; viz.
disconceipt toward my present Religion; perjury in promises; astorgy, and
unnatural affection unto my Father; and such like: things without cohere^ce in
them selves, or reference unto their title: and yet, Sir, you accuse the page 2.
misshapen disproportion of my book; as though my co^ceipts had payned the womb
of my brains, and, striving for birth, had broken from me rather by violence,
then by order. Which accusation may (perhapps) belong rather unto your self,
whose zeal to do me wrong, distempered the method of your thoughts; so that
the things, which began to proceed from you at the first, retired themselves
to yeald passadge unto the rest: as Genesis 38.27.
Zara began first to come into the world, and yet withdrew himself, to give
place unto the birth of Pharez.

2. But I pass by your method, and I come unto your Matter; wherein if you be
found defective also, either by your own invention (which is good) or by
others suggestion (which I would rather believe, in this case) then your
stayning calumniations must, in the end, return, and ebb again upon you (or
the^) from whom they flowed in the beginning. And now I will treat
particularly of the pretended crimes; which, being dispersed in your sifting
Paragraph, shall be reduced here, more exactly, unto their several heads.

3. The FIRST criminatio^ therefore (annexed unto the former Causes) touches
my disconceipt toward the Roman, Catholic faith: as though my Alienation from
you, were rather in actio^, then affection; outward, the^ inward; in mouth,
the^ mind: and this you prove by a triple FIRST. I do easily believe (say page
16.
you) upon his credible report, that at such time, as M. Etkins (your old
fellow Chaplayn, and friend) at S. Omers.
desired your company to Bruxells, or to England, you smote your hand upon your
breast, and, in great passion, uttered these words; O that I might safely
return, for that is my desire. Yea more; you page 16.
say, that, at his sight, I had Peter's tears in my eyes, for the denial of my
Master, etc.

4. As for the person relating, he does me wrong, if you wrong not him in the
relation it self. For I appeal unto his conscience (which represents things
past, in her secret, and inward reflex) whether I gave him the least sign, or
suspicion of inconstancy in this (truly, and only Catholic) faith, or whether
I expressed any, the least, affection toward that, which he now does, and I did
sometimes, profess. Does he not remember, that my Father, treating with me to
show obedience, and humility in hearing the judgments of some principal
Deuines in England, but finding no hope of my conformity, according to his
desire, said thereupon; What then should he do in England, if he be so
obstinate? Yea, does he not remember his own apology for me, in my Fathers
presence; In good faith I do believe, that he is so persuaded in his heart?

5. That he proposed unto me a jorney for Bruxells, or England, or both, I deny
not; as also that I showed an affection in me, loyal unto my Prince, dutiful
unto my Country, loving unto my Friends (whom I was desirous to see) but yet
without any such tragical action, or passion, to any such end, and purpose, as
you, from him, pretend. Wherefore I must leave you both to divide this wrong
betwixt your selves; which is so much the greater (whether in you, or in him)
because you are one, whom I never offended; he is one, whom I ever loved. And
what soever the effects of his friendshipp toward me, have been, they are not
proportionable unto this discourtesy, if the matter it self were true; as, God
knows, it is most false. Seneca said wisely, upon his own experience; Quidam
sunt amici leaves, and inimici graves: which yet I will never apply unto him,
unless I find, by better informatio^, then you seem either to receive, or
give, that he has done me this wrong, which you have published in his name.
And so much for the first.

6. Your page 17.
The small liking, which you have to the Romish Religion, you sufficiently
manifested, when as being reconciled to that Synagogue, by one Flud, a Priest,
you did yet, after your return out of Yorkshire, write a little Pamphlett of
Venial, and Mortal sins, flat against the principles of that profession.

7. If after Reconciliatio^ unto the Catholic Church, I had written, or spoken
against any article of her faith, my crime toward her, might seem inexpiable,
and your advantage against me, very great. Howbeit, it is neither the one, that
I am guilty of, nor the other, which I fear; but it was your pleasure, Sir, to
make a chain of such wrongs, and to weaue them in your discourse.

8. I answer therefore, FIRST; that I wrote not that little Pamphlett, after
my return out of Yorkshire, but before. SECONDLY; that as I came unreconciled
into the presence of that Venerable Priest (F. Flud) so I never saw him, nor
heard of him, until my arrival in S. Omers; where also himself had remained
one whole year (at the least) before that time. And I marvel, that your
intelligencer concealed this point from your notice; which he could not but
know much more certainly, then that I was reconciled by such a Priest: though
here also I leave your informer, and your self, unto your better proofs.
THIRDLY; that I wrote it according to my opinion therein, precisely at that
hour. And truly this was one of the 3. or 4. points, wherein I had the
learned, judicious, and expedite resolution of that Reverend Priest, after my
arrival; being persuaded (absolutely) in most points, at that time, and
chiefly in the chiefest, and metropoliticall question, concerning the Men must
diligently seek out the true Church, that so they may rest in her judgment,
says D. Field in his epist. dedicat.
CHVRCH. So then I neither wrote against that, which I did believe, nor yealded
unto that, which I did not conceive. FOURTHLY; that the occasion of writing it,
was a certain conference betwixt me, and a Catholic gentleman; unto whose
hands I delivered it, and desired him to procure me a good resolution
thereunto. FIFTHLY; that the occasions of publishing it, were many, and one
principal; viz. to divert a strong suspicion, intertayned (somewhere) to my
prejudice, as I was induced to think by sundry reasons. SIXTHLY; that some
particulars in that pa^phlet (as namely, in fine.
Secreta mea mihi, etc. have long since made the construction more clear unto
Sir Edward, and his world, which, sometimes, was more secret, and obscure.

9. This is (good Readers) the true text of this matter, which now I referr
unto your judicious interpretation. Let me add only a word (for a final
complement herein) and say thus much; that if I were as guilty of, or in this
fault, as my Accuser would make you believe, yet I might be excused rather then
See the Examen of Fox his Calendar. Part. 1. page 374. etc.
CRANMER himself, whose several Treatises pro, and contra, for, and against
the Real Presence, were exhibited by Bonner in a public Judgment; when it
was no small mortification (you may think) unto that cha^dged Father, to behold
the faces of his unlike children. Wherefore, Ovid. Met. 13.
Haud timeo, si jam nequeo defendere crimen,
Cum tanto commune vivo.


10. But as there is no proportion in our faults (if yet I committed any) in
respect of all the circumstances, of Person, matter, manner, etc. so ZWINGLIVS,
a greater Patriarch then he (and one of the Apo. 11.3.
two witnesses against Antichrist, as de Relig. in exposit. 4. Praecepti.
Zanchius belieueth) may hold out his buckler for my defense. For he ( Sir Edw.
phrase. page 100.
mark you me now) falling away from Luther, and teaching a doctrine (of the
Sacrament) contrary unto his former preachings, confesses plainly, that De
vera, and falsa Relig.
he knew the truth long before, but he served the time; wherein he is commended
by Christ as a faithful, and wise servant, who gives meat unto his family in
due season. So says your Zwinglius: of whom the censure of De Eucharist. lib.
1. c. 1.
Bellarmine is (perhapps) very true; to wit: Zwinglius betrayeth his impiety
to cover his ignorance. Howsoever it be; the censure of his fellow witness,
Loc. Com. Luth. Fabric. class 5. page 50.
M. LVTHER, is very terrible against all that Sacramentary faction; viz. He
that takes pleasure in his own damnation, let him believe that the truth is
taught by these Spirits, since they began, and defend their opinions by lies.

11. So much for your second proof; and now page 19.
It is not long since you have complained, through impatient emulation, and
ambition, that, if you might have been then preferred, and not advised rather
to return to the University, to repayr your wings; You would not have changed
your copy so soon, nor made so sorry a flight from us to ROME. This you know
to be well known, and, upon farther occasion, may be better specified unto the
world.

12. I answer; The thought never entered into my heart, the speech never
proceeded out of my mouth. And I am glad, as well for your own, as my sake,
that you have some other Author, then your self (who sit at the receipt of
custom, and keep an auditt of intelligences) to specify in these behalf; that
so, when he comes forth, and cries adsum, I may answer confidently, and say
unto his face, Psalm. 26.12.
Mentita est iniquitas sibi. Wherefore, remove these wrongs from your self
unto their proper Authors, that I may behold them in their own center: then
you are free, whosoever shall be found guilty in this matter. For I assure you,
that I am incredibly abused; and, whosoever the Author be, I beseech the
Readers to understand, that Matthew. 1^.28.
Inimicus homo hoc fecit.

. 2. Of unnatural affection to my Father.
1. SIR Edward is desirous to make me odious, and contemptible in the eye of
his world; and therefore he would show, that I am an unnatural Husband to my
Wife, and, likewise, an unnatural Son unto my Father; persons, that should
be conjoined with indissoluble bands of love. For the bands betwixt the first,
are, sacramentally, Supernatural; betwixt the second, intrinsecally Natural,
and Inseparable in both. In the first two are made one: in the second, one
brancheth from the other: so that, betwixt the Husband, and Wise, there is a
concourse of equal duties: from the Father there is a decourse of affection
unto the Son, and, from the Son, a recourse unto the Father.

2. How I am condemned in the first respect, you have Chap. 1.. 4.
already seen; how I am condemned in the second, you shall now receive a
double proof. FIRST. Your Father took a long journey (says page 17.
Sir Edward) to seek out his lost Son, who never opened his mouth to ask him
blessing for his pains. Then (after an amplification of no value, or
su^stance) he adds: page 18.
Was not this, I say, grief enough, but that you must deprive him also of that
private duty, which was due unto him? And hereupon (amongst the rest) he
breaks out into this passion; page 22.
If these be the fruicts of your Religion, my Soul abhors it.

3. Spare my Religion, good Sir (least you increase the wrong; extending it
unto many others, yea unto God himself) and lay the faults upon my person
alone: so all Readers may condemn me, as a man unworthy to draw any more air,
or to tread any longer upon the earth. For though all are not Fathers, yet all
are children; and so, Piety in them will detest such impiety in me.

4. But, Daniel. 13.4.
reuertimini ad judicium, etc. Return unto judgment (you impartial Readers)
and you shall see, that I will specify in my own defense. And what
specification can be more effectual in this case, then to produce those
persons, who, only, can be witnesses either for Sir Edward, or against me, in
this behalf?

5. These are my Father himself, and my See before;. 1 ^num. 3.
ancient friend. For my Father can not deny, that, as soon as I came into his
unexpected presence (which was upon a sunday, in the afternoon) I did
immediately humble my knee, as low as my foot, and desired his benediction, as
in former times. The same night, and likewise the next morning (in the sight,
and audience of M. Etkins, at each time) I performed the same duty, and in the
same manner. Upon his departure, the same day, I entreated his blessing also,
though not with the like humiliation of my body, as before, because our
Farewell was taken in the open streets.

6. And thus (as you see) at 4. several times, in the space of 24 hours, I
most humbly, and affectionately yealded that private duty unto my loving
Father, which Sir Edward first affirms, and then amplifieth upon it, at his
pleasure (before, to mine, now to his own disgrace) that I NEVER opened my
mouth to do. But he, that accuses me herein, is the same man, who said; See
Chap. 1.. 1. number. 4.14.
In your long prayer, at S. Dunstanes, the Reverend. BB. (yea even your own
Lord, and Master) were EVER left out for wranglers, and Antichristian
Hierarchies, etc.

7. Now, if I would insist in the stepps of your amplifying vain, you, Sir
Edward, might pardon my just plea against your injust wrongs; and others would
say, that it were lex talioms; a reflection of your own pen, and a Agens agendo
repatitur.
repassion from your own action. But it was my See before; Chap. 1.. 2. number.
17.
promise to spare you, though I paid others; and so I remitt us both unto
them, who have interest to give their censure in these things. For they, who
will adventure to write, can not exempt themselves from the jurisdiction of
their Readers; but they hold out their hands for every man to feel their
pulse, and to judge of their temper. And so much for your first; now to your
SECOND proof; which is more capital.

8. page 18.
Contrary to your Fathers express commandment, and request, and your own
solemn promise made unto him, you made his presence known to your CONFESSOVR:
whereby he might have been in danger, as much as in you lay, to have lost not
only his unnatural Son, but even his dearest life, in a strange land.

9. Rhetoric still; but more bloody then before. As for my self (the
principal in this accusation) I will say nothing: yet give me leave to speak
for others, who am thus condemned my self. Let me then be punctual with you,
and search into the probability of this danger. What was it, which my Father,
and my Friend did fear? Open HOSTILITY, or private VIOLENCE, or formal
JUSTICE?

10. Not open hostility; for there is a confirmed Protestants, of different
quality, as well before, as since that time, have conuersed in S. Omers, more
publicly also, without any molestation? Yea I know, that some gave offense,
but received none.

11. Not private violence; for what example Fathers of the SOCIETY; let me ask
you first, whether I am, or were, in any grace with them, or no? You say that I
am; and your own language is this: page 4.
You are matriculated amongst those merciles helhounds. Let me ask you
secondly; whether, you think, I had so little grace in me, that I would not
have interposed my life, and blood, to hinder such an unchristian design?

12. Accuse me, as you please; but let it not be offe^siue unto you, that I
should speak for others, and testify what I know, upon my own experience;
which teaches me to speak better things. First then, I say for that SOCIETY;
that, as their state of life is, so are their actions; religious. I am a
witness (for as I have heard, so I have seen) of the candor, and sweetness,
wherewith those Fathers have intertayned their contreymen (different from them
in Religion, as my Father is) and gave no signification (in their words, or
actions) of domestic sufferings: 1 Genesis 45.
like Joseph, forgeting, and forgiving, the unkindness of his Brethren;
recompencing the hatred, which they find at home, with love in a strange land.
Which as the parties can not deny, so they can not but confess also, that they
were not in fear of the dangers, which Sir Edward does suggest, nor in hope of
the courtesies, which themselves did find. For which, then, of their good
deeds, will he stone these Fathers?

13. Secondly; I can not be silent in the behalf of my Confessor (least I
should deny his singular merits) the isntrumental Cooperatour with God, unto
my unspeakable comfort. Why should Sir Edward accuse him, whose innocent
thoughts were not embrued in this imaginary effusion of blood? He loved the
Son too well to hate the Father: neither was there any cause for my corporal
Father to be jealous of my spiritual Father; since his care was to save my
soul, but not to destroy his life.

14. Now, if open hostility, and private violence Justice, which was dreadful
in their thoughts? By what sword? Ecclesiastical, or Temporal? Not
Ecclesiastical; for as there is no Inquisition, D. IACOBVS BLASAEVS; natione
Flander, affectione Anglus.
Bishopp of that City ( Sir Edward; speaking of Francis, Duke of Anjou. page
106.
of whom I am glad to make so worthy mention; as well in respect of his own
parts; he being a second, true Ambrose, in who^ the great variety of learning
is accompanied with eminent sanctity of life, and an excellent gravity of
person, tempered with gracious affability of nature; as also in respect of his
general love unto our contreymen, and special benefitts unto many; in which
number I am) the Bishopp, I say, being not their Pastor, had neither will, nor
power, to proceed against such, as offend not by public, and notorious
scandal; from which they did wholly decline, as knowing what appertains unto
honest, and good deportment in these affairs. Not S. Bernard. de Consider.
lib. 4.
S. Bernard says: the material sword, and spiritual sword are both belonging
unto the Church: that is to be exercised for the Church, this by the Church;
this by the hand of the Priest, that by the hand of the soldier; sed sane ad
nutum Sacerdotis, and jussum Imperatoris.

15. If then they were (as, indeed, they were) free from danger in, or by any
of these means, either Psalm. 52.6.
they feared, where no fear was, or, by this pretense of fear, they would
derive hatred upon those men, who were desirous to give them the pledges of
their love. And this is no new devise in our contreymen (of Sir Edwards
Religion) to speak evil for good (upon their return out of Catholic lands)
to procure unjust hatred by unnecessary fear: as Numb. 13 33.
some ungrateful visitours of Canaan, did speak evil of it, and gave out
reports of the terrible Giants therein, purposely to deterr the people from
making entrance into the land of promise.

. 3. Violation of promises, and Oaths.
1. I Am now arrived upon the last accusation, which touches my infidelity,
and perjury. An example of the first, was mentioned. 2. number. 8.
before, and is to be considered here; viz. Contrary to your solemn promise,
you made your Fathers presence known to your Confessor. Which accusation may
appear untrue; because the Letter (whereof something is Chap. 1.. 2. number. 11.
already spoken) though it has not favored me in any relation, yet it is
wholly silent in this point. For thus says the Author thereof, in my Fathers
name. Being in S. Omers, I willed, and chardged him (my Son) not to reveal
my being there: not withstanding he made it known the same night; as, upon
examination, he confessed unto me the next morning: which made us presently to
come away, fearing our lives to be in danger amongst such a company of
helhounds, as that town is stuffed withal.

2. Behold (on my Fathers part) willing, and chardging me not to reveal his
presence: but (on my part) no promise; either simple, or solemn. Which point
being of singular advantage against me, if it had been true, had not been
concealed in that Letter, wherein each particular has the weight of all
circumstances (more then due also) to aggrauate the quality of my offense. But
as my memory does not witness, nor my conscience accuse me of any such solemn
promise, so it imported me, for just causes, to retayn my liberty therein.

3. For when my Father, and my Friend (whose true name, and quality were
known, upon some accident, before I saw him) pressed me very earnestly to
return; I desired, of them, a time of deliberation, for my mature, and certain
answer. Cic.
Diu deliberandum, quod statuendu^ semel. I was to consider long upon that,
which I was, but once, to undertake; my case being like unto his, who has the
conduct of an army, and can make but one fault in war (as Plutarch, in apo^
Reg. and (...)
Scipio said; A man can not make two faults in war) because there is no
remedy, but ruin by the first, before he can committ the second. So it was in
my affair; I was to stand, or fall, in body, and soul, upon this accepta^ce,
and present choice.

4. Whereupon, finding my self moved in conscience to take advise with, and
from, him, whose counsel was unto me, as the oracle of God, in all spiritual
things; I acquainted my Father, expressly, with my resolution herein; showing
him also, that, by detection of his presence, no danger should, or could ensue.
And though he was very willing to divert me from this course, yet, seeing my
constancy, he made me an absolute (I might say solemn) promise, not to depart
from S. Omers, before the tuesday morning; so that I should have the whole
monday for time of deliberation, according to my request. So still, here was no
promise from me, not to reveal his presence; but rather the contrary: and this
may be sufficient unto the objection of the Knight.

5. Now, whatsoever my Fathers commandment, or chardge was, or howsoever he
may think, that I erred in obedience, or others, that I failed in discretion;
yet my conscience did thus solicit me, with her effectual motions. But
whereas it is said farther, that I, upon examination the next morning,
confessed, how I had revealed his presence, the last light, unto a Popish
Priest, and that THIS made him come away, fearing, etc. I must humbly entreat
pardon to show, that my confession was not the cause of this sodayn departure.

6. For when I took leave of him, and of my friend, upon the Sunday night, I
left them in their resolution (as it seemed unto me) to expect my answer (for
return) upon monday in the evening, or (rather) upon tuesday morning; and,
accordingly, I intended to prepare my answer, either yea, or no, as the
difficulties should present themselves unto me, upon more exact recollection of
my thoughts. Howbeit, coming unto his chamber, on the monday morning, I found
him providing to be gone, with as much speed, as he could. Wherefore my said
confession (that I had revealed his presence unto a Popish Priest) was not
occasion of that departure, which he had prepared, and resolved upon, before I
entered into his sight. And though this were no less grievous unto me, then
unexpected, yet he gave me no such reason of this departure; but, that his
money fell short; things were uncertain; etc.

7. Thus much of my Infidelity; now I am to treat of Perjury: whereof three
remonstrances are produced by the Knight. FIRST. page 17.
You did protest, as you hoped to have any part in our Sauious passion, that,
within three weeks, at the farthest (if you lived so long) you would be in
England, after your Fathers return; etc. page 18.
You made your Father a sorrowful witness of your perjurious vow.

8. I will not deny any thing, page 12.
whereunto my Knowledge can suscribe. It is true therefore; I promised to
return. But you must observe You wrote a little Pamphlet contrary unto the
principles of the Romish profession. When? After your reconciliation unto that
Synagogue. What does that prove? Your small liking unto that Religion. And
(says the Knight, immediately thereupon) were you not now in Hucksters hands,
whose vigilant eyes have mewed you up in their idolatrous cage, I dare say you
had been in England long si^ce; FOR so you did protest, etc. Behold then the
inference, here, is to show my procliuity to renounce the Catholic Roman
faith, as a thing not intertayned in the secret approbation of my heart. But
of this scandalous imputation I have already treated in the. 1. number. 6 etc.
precedents; unto which I must now remitt the courteous Reader.

9. SECONDLY; as I hoped to have any part, etc.) I neither can remember, nor
will acknowledge to have proceeded from my lips. That, which my memory, and
conscience can best testify unto me, is, that I said; by the grace of God.
Which is a speech of great importance, I confess; but yet (formally) it has
not such power in exaggeration, as the other.

10. THIRDLY; Edward does deal so precisely with me, I may not give him leave
thus to circumcise the time, nor to chandge my words, at his own pleasure. For
I said not absolutely, WITHIN THREE WEEKS, at the farthest, I will return;
but I added a forsan (with which particle Sir Edward helps himself page 47.
elsewhere, to triu^ph over me, yet without a victory) PERHAPPS within three,
or four weeks: I cannot certainly resolve upon the time. And so, I know no
reason, why, upon my return within this year, or more, my word might not
stand inuiolate, and entire, in that respect, if I would rather press Sir
Edward with outward reasons, the^ acquaint him with my inward thoughts.

11. To come then more particularly unto matter it self; as I deny not my
speech, and, therewith, my intention, that, by the grace of God, I would
return, etc. so there are many circumstances herein, and specially three,
which may ease the burden, and clear the difficulty, on my behalf.

12. FIRST; that my Father, and friend, knew my resolution to be unprepared;
and yet now they would force it unto a birth, before the prefixed time. For it
was my HOPE, and it was their PROMISE, that I should have the whole Monday for
my deliberation; which was now denied. Wherefore this their sodayn (and
unnecessary) departure (contrary unto both) was the first cause of my abortiue
promise; borne, before it was conceived.

13. SECONDLY; my sympathizing eyes beheld the stream of tears, flowing from
a deep fountayn of love, and grief, in my dear, and careful Father: which
was the strongest eloquence of Nature to persuade my vnperswaded self; who
(being S. August. Conf. lib. 3. cap. 12.
filius tantarum lachrymarum) knew not what to say, or think, when my Soul
suffered a dissipatio^ of all her powers. Metal so softened was fit for any
impressio^. It was not a return, into a COUNTRY, with a FATHER (things of no
small value, in all men's estimation) but the present expense of my dearest
life, which I could, and should have promised to satisfy such love, and to
mollify such grief. Si haec tempestas propterme orta est, etc. if all this be
for my sake, dispose of me, at your own will.

14. THIRDLY; though I was thus prevented by them, besides my expectation, and
so carried out of my self, beyond my strength; yet there was annexed unto my
promise of return, a condition of security. But where should I rereiue it? At
Dover.

15. Behold now my error, which drew on my fault. For having thus
incautelously, and improuidently (in my benumbed spirits) made my promise to
return, so that I might receive security at Dover; and perceiving, afterward,
what danger I might incur (though I doubted not of my friends good will, but
of their power only) I desired, that my security might give me meeting at
Calais: least, otherwise, the Land might prove more dangerous then Sea; and
specially for two reasons. The ONE; because I then had (as now I have) a
grounded resolution of heart, to remayn a constant member of the Catholic,
Roman Church ( from which the certainty of faith is to be sought, says Part.
1. Sermon. coram Alexand. 5.
Gerson; a D. Field. page 85.
worthy guide of Gods Church) and therefore I should be less acceptable unto
them, whom, in all temporal things, I would gladly reverence, and obey. The
OTHER; because I stood the^ charged upon the point of Reconciliation, which M.
Etkins did insinuate unto me at S. Omers, and Sir Edward has now published in
his Letter, to prejudice the integrity of my. 1. number. 6.7.8.
Faith, and safety of my Life. But as he does untruly accuse me of
Reconciliation in ENGLAND, so my ignorance of the Law made me too confident,
and too fearrefull also; in this respect. Too confident; for when I knew,
experimentally, that Reconciliation is only a Sacramental act, to reduce us
into the favor of God, and unity of his Church, I did not suspect the severity
of the Law therein; and therefore, out of the comfort, and exultation of mine
own heart, I imparted something, in this behalf, by my Letters unto a person
of eminent dignity, and place. Too fearful: for understanding (afterward) the
penalty of Reconciliation, and not knowing how far the statute extends in
this case, I thought the peril to be equal, whether within his Majesty's
dominions, or without the same; neither had I any notice to the contrary, till
I perused the statutes; not many hours, before the writing hereof.

16. Now, if my Father, and my Friend, did fear the loss of their dearest
lives, where no law was in force against the^, nor any man conceived a thought
prejudicial unto the least drop of their blood, and yet did therefore depart
from S. Omers, against their own promise, and without any cause; had not I
just reason to provide securely for my self, when my life should be As I
conceived, in manner aforesaid.
actually in the mercy of justice, and exposed unto continual danger, upon
some inevitable acts of my Religion?

17. Thus you (see ^ood Readers) wherein I fail, as also upon what precedent,
and consequent reasons. If, heretofore, you have wholly condemned me, I
appeal from your first, unto your second, and better thoughts. If, now, you
excuse me wholly, you do more for me, then I would do for my self. For as I
find some thing, which I may defend, and some thing, which I may excuse, so
there is some thing, which I may, and do condemn. And so I recommend my self,
with this matter, unto the mercy of God, and unto the charity of the Readers;
desiring them to make this case their own, before they give their sentence
upon me.

18. The SECOND remonstrance of my perjury, Sir Edward delivers in this sort.
page 18.
The like solemn oath you took in the presence of M. Etkins, that, upon the
faith of a Roman Catholic, and as you hoped to be saved, this book of yours,
which you then showed him, should not be printed.

19. A solemn promise before; and now a solemn oath; in both which your
dealing is not simple, but double. Leaving therefore the forms of these
protestations, as calumniating exaggerations (for, evermore, there is 4. Reg.
4.40.
Mors in olla; some evil herb in your best pottage) I answer, that it was my
promise, and resolution to suppress that book. But how? Respectively, upon
the opinion, and hope of my return; which coming not to pass, according to
my just, and necessary desire, I was, and am (in conscience, and in reason)
acquitted from that promise. Here also you must observe, that M. Etkins was at
S. Omers in May, and that this Book was suppressed until It was the^ first
committed to the press.
October ensuing: whereby you may perceive, that, till I was in despayr of
return, I gave it not leave to issue forth into the public view.

20. Farther; I was yet provoked hereunto by many, and gross indignities; of
some my Betters, whom I always honored; of some my Equals, whom I always
loved; of some my Inferiors, whom I never offended; of many strangers, whom I
had wronged, no more then Sir Edward himself; and this, he will confess, was
in a very mean degree.

21. Finally; charity unto my self, to vindicate my name from reproach; charity
unto others, to draw them out of the snare of death; and (above all) my
gratitude unto my Lord for his great mercy, did vrdge, enforce, and impell me
unto that course.

22. I come now unto the THIRD, and last remonstrance of my perjury; viz. page
18.
Your Wife, and Creditours are thoroughly acquainted with many such your
voluntary, and intended perjuries; as, upon your next reply, shall be more
particularly specified: under whose name so ever you mean to cover it.

23. You see that I come unmasked into your presence; I borrow not the face of
any man to cover my shame: Specify therefore, if you please; and, if it be an
act of Cheualry to be an Index-maker of other men's lives, spare me not: Vtere
tuo judicio; nihil enim impedio. But yet, Tere^t. And. Act. 1. Sc. 2.
Ne temere facias, neque tu haud dicas tibi non praedictu^, CAVE. Let
discretion be the usher of your action, and temember, that TAKE HEED is a fair
warning.

24. Now to your accusation. It may seem strange, that neither your Charity
prevailed with you, nor Philosophy taught you, to deal more sparingly with my
Intention; which being not a transient, but an immanent act (inhering in the
will) is known (certainly) unto none, but unto God alone; by whom also it may
be communicated unto others, by revelation, or represented by vision, according
to his pleasure.

25. But it is a more vnchristia^, and vnknightly part to make my WIFE a
witness against me (and specially, without any just cause) which the Laws
themselves permit not, or exact not, in cases of greater importance. Howbeit,
my charity toward her will make me uncharitable toward you. Wherefore, Sir, I
believe you not. Your wrongs against me teach me, that you may wrong her; so
that, accepting your testimony in this case, I should make a forfaiture of my
reason.

26. As for my Creditours; I confess unto you, that, upon probability, or
hope, or (supposed) certainty of receiving moneys, I have been sometimes
deceived, and they, consequently, by me. I confess unto you farther, that,
near upon my departure, I was more liberal in my promise unto one man, then I
should have been. And thus Sir Edward also is now become my CONFESSOVR; who (I
doubt not) for my plainness, and syncerity, will give me a speedy absolution,
and a gentle penance.

27. Here (courteous Readers) the Scene of criminal accusations is done.
Wherefore I will take the Actour aside (his part being ended) and, in a
friendly manner, I will address my self to intertayn him with a new discourse.

. 4. A kind expostulation with Sir Edward, upon the former wrongs; and a
charitable interpretation thereof.
1. SIR EDWARD; there are three things, which I esteem very dear, and
precious: the safety of my Life; the honesty of my Name; the salvation of my
Soul. The first may be, the second is, the third neither is, nor may be, in
your power. The first I will submitt unto the benignity of my Sovereign, to
give, or take it: the third stands at the mercy of my Lord, to save, or
destroy it: the second remains at the charity of others, to suffer wrong, or
to obtayn right. For as in this particular (concerning my Name) you are active,
and I passive; so the Reader is uncertain unto us both, either to pronounce me
guilty, or you injurious.

2. But I have unfolded, and he may now behold, your SIFTING Paragraph; unto
which if I should give the due aspiration ( Iudic. 12.6.
Shibboleth for Sibboleth) you might, and he would, pardon my just boldness
therein.

3. For FIRST; my Innocence, in the things themselves, pleads effectually for
my defense, and your reproof. SECONDLY; my Innocency also toward your own
person; which I never offended by hand, mouth, or heart; in deed, word, or
thought. THIRDLY; our unequal quality says, that a noble Knight should not
thus entreat a poor Scholar; since you should be as far from doing me a
wrong with a Pen, as I am unable, or unfit, to answer it with a Sword. For,
howsoever you speak of your page 4. lin. 3.
often employments with both, yet I (and I know not your mind also) would
rather choose, with Plutarch. in Eumen.
Eumenes, to bear pen, and paper, then, with Neoptolemus, a sword, and
targett. FOURTHLY; the manner, by which your matter is carried, proclaymeth,
that you were more willing to disgrace my name, then able to resolve my doubts.

4. I said, and I showed, that the evidence of Scripture, the rule of
Apostolical Tradition, the practice of the ancient, and UNIVERSAL Church, the
consent of Fathers, the untruths of some chief Protestants, did strongly
induce, and persuade me, first to a just suspision, the^ to a necessary
rejectio^ of my late Protestanticall faith. And least the Answerer of my
discourse should First Motive. page 94.
throw dust into the air, with more contention, then profitt (as you have
done) I prevented such exorbitant courses, and prescribed the due, true, and
absolute method, which he must observe; viz. to oppose, and to prove, a
CONTRARY assertion unto each particular in my discourse: as, that Prayer for
the dead descended not from the Apostles: that the Universal Church (in S.
Augustines time, even by his own testimony) did not referr Prayer for the dead
unto the SOVLES; and to the souls, remaining in a temporal pain. etc.

5. These things you should have fairly, and orderly refuted; taking the
particulars in their place, and course, as they were plainly, and methodically
represe^ted unto you in my MOTIVE. The^ there had bee^ charity in your pains,
and judgment in your fact. But you (making a digression in your very ingresse)
sift the causes of my Alienation (not such as I deliver, but such as you
devise) and run, vastly, into my Puritamsme, my perjury, my unnatural
affection, my disconceipt toward the Roman faith, etc. that so, undermining my
creditt, with your engines, at the first, you might, afterward, blow me up with
more facility, and ease.

6. Now, for my own comportment, and behavior in making my answer unto this
sifting Paragraph; though the Reader (I presume) has (or might) observe it,
without any farther remonstrance, or declaration from me; yet I will briefly,
and plainly bring it unto his consideration, in this place.

7. FIRST then he might observe me to be free from the commission of many, and
from the concealment of other faults. In the first respect; a known wrong is
a sufficient remedy for it self. In the second; my sorrow may be a
satisfaction. Senecae.
Quem poenitet peccasse, pene est innnocens. Let my Repentance, therefore, for
that, which I have done amiss, make it undone, in your charitable thoughts.
God himself accepts this Sacrifice yea his Mercy binds the eyes of his
Divinity, hiding that from himself, which every man sees, and making him
forgett that, which he knew, before it was committed. Here is the prototypus,
by which our acts, and judgments must be drawn; that so we may make our
selves like unto him in our actions, who made us like himself in our creation.

8. SECONDLY; he might observe my Patience, which shows it self in the
perpetual course of my style. We are reviled, and we revile not again. Herein
I had rather have a victory over my self, to conquer my passions, then over
you to requite your wrongs. Besides; I have had a remembrance, and respect of
your blood, as being a page 50.
Gentleman; of your quality, as being a Knight; of your favor, and grace with
his Majesty, as being his page 105.
Servant; of your consanguinity, and affinity, as being allied unto persons of
highest rank; finally, of your page 49.
affection unto that Oxford.
University, which I am bound to reverence, and of your inuestiture therein
with a page 6.
Degree, by which you are honored, and which is honored by you.

9. Thus I have subdued my passions unto the strength of reason, and humbled my
reason unto the power of grace; that, as the Rock stands immovable in the
raging, and furious waves, so I might be quiet, modest, and temperate in the
midst of these great wro^gs; so great (perhapps) as can admit no parallele
in these later years, and upon the like respects.

10. And thus, as the beneuolous Reader has seen my cariadge to be no ways
correspondent unto the wrongs, so farther, he shall now see my CHARITY also;
which will easily believe, that, since Malice, and Falsehood, are ignoble vices
(and specially in men of his eminent place) Sir Edward may, and will decline
these imputations, by some probable, and convenient excuse.

11. FIRST then, it may be, that secret love to recall me, and not open malice
to defame me, invited him unto this course; as innocent Genes. 44.
Benjamin was accused of secret theft, by the policy of Joseph, his kind, and
unknown brother. And this I do the rather conceive, because my In the
aforesaid Letter.
Father himself seems to be in hope, that the whole rabble of Papists shall
understand so much (by Sir Edward Hoby) of the cause of my coming to their
hotch-potch Religion, that they will be ashamed to patronize me any longer, if
they be not past all shame. The meaning whereof is, either that I should want
my part in the Terram dedit homimbus. Psalm. 113.16
common portion of mankind (which I can not suppose) or that, being destitute
of relief in all Catholic lands, I might return home again, as the Luc. 15.
lost Son, unto his loving Father.

12. SECONDLY; it may be, that, in pursuing, and hunting me, he followed the
sent of information, and drew my picture conformably unto that Idea, which
other men's report, and not his own fiction, had formerly imprinted in his
mind. So Pythia gave her answer, as she received it from Apollo; and Tiresias
prophesied upon the flight of birds, according to the relation of Manto. In
this case, the thing may be false, but the person does not Mentiri est contra
me^tem ire. S. Aug.
lie, whose words are answerable unto his thoughts.

13. If it be so with you, Sir Edward (and I wish it so, for your own honor)
you are wronged the more, but I nothing the less. Wherefore (by allusion, not
comparison) I may justly say; Io. 19.11.
He, that delivered me unto you, has the greater sin. A sin toward me, by
abusing my name; a sin toward you, by abusing your pe^. Such a victory,
therefore, as you have gotten herein, if it were my shame, yet it is also your
own grief. Victus occubuit, and victor fleuit.

14. But yet I live; that is the mercy of my Lord: I want not convenient
means; that is the kindness of my friends: I remayn in their good opinion,
not impaired, but increased; that is against a subtle (perhapps malicious)
project. My conscience is free; wherein I triumph: my name is cleared; wherein
I rejoice.

15. Gal. 6.17.
From henceforth, then, let no man be troublesome unto me, nor unto himself.
This is my first, and it shall be my last (the non vltra) of my labors in this
kind. For since my Adversaries have failed in the beginning (the first borne,
and strength) of their assaults, ca^ I look for greater exactness in their
rechardge, and in their second attempt? No; Io. 2.10.
Omnis homo primum bonum vinum ponit, et, cum inebriati fuerint, tunc id, quod
deterius est: the best is drawn at the first; that, which ensues, is less
sincere, and pure. Farther; since a KNIGHT has failed in his enterprise, can I
expect more fidelity from others, whose quality has not such a special
obligation of HONOR, to require it at their hands? No; Scholars, who profess
the pen, may be more profound in knowledge, but Knights, who profess the
sword, are more punctual in their credit.

16. Finally therefore; let my Adversaries throw out their calumnious scripts,
as the hail, yet no indignity shall trouble my composed thoughts; but, Luc
21.19.
possessing my soul in patience, I will answer the Authors with silence,
their works with contempt.

The end of the FIRST PART.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Readers.
BEENEVOLOVS READERS; peradventure you have meruayled very much, Why my Answer
unto Sir EDWARD HOBYES Letter, has been so long in coming? and will marvel
Why, being now come, it is so short? Unto both these demands, I will give you a
satisfaction; brief, and true.

Concerning the FIRST then; you must understand, that, whereas Sir Edwards
Letter was published in June last, and had In his Epist. to the Ladies.
direction, from him, to salute me at S. Omers; I departed thence in May
before, and trauayled into France: where I had the first notice of this Letter,
about the midst of July following, but had no sight thereof till about the
end of that month; casually also, as it passed, by me in Roan, unto a Doctor
in Paris: so that I could not then retayn it, above 8. hours, in my hands. And
though I gave present order unto a Post, to bring me a copy from London, yet
he failed me; and so I was constrained (upon his return) to borrow the former
copy; which I received in September; but, for some impedime^ts, it lay by me,
until October; when (according to the small portion of time, which I could
allot unto such affairs) I began to address my answer.

Whereby, as the Reader may perceive the causes of this delay, so Sir Edward
himself may see the little courtesy of the LADIES to him, in recompense of his
great In his said Letter unto them.
kindness to them; who would not vouchsafe him the service, or (to use his
own word) yeald him so much boon, as to procure the delivery of his enclosed
Letter unto me, at S. Omers; whither (as far, as I can learn) it was never
convaighed by their means.

Concerning the SECOND; it may please you to understand farther, that, as I
provided my answer unto the whole Letter (digested, by the Authout, into SIX
PARAGRAPHS; as you have already seen in my Preface) and had imprinted a very
small parcel thereof, I was certified by a Catholic Gentleman (coming
lately, out of England, into these parts) that my ANSWER unto Sir Edward Hoby
(and specially for the moral points, in his sifting Paragraph) was earnestly
expected, both by my friends, and adversaries; amongst whom, Master L. D. (a
Minister, and sometimes kindly affected toward me) bestowing his liberality
upon M. Humfrey Leech, and me, pretended, that I neither durst, nor could
answer the KNIGHT; and, that my long silence was a sufficient proof.

For this respect then, I am enforced to send away this First Part of my
Apology with speed, and to make it the harbenger of the rest. A second reason
also of this single, and hasty birth, is, in regard of the news (truly, and
justly grievous unto my heart) which was brought unto me, by the said Cath.
Gentleman, concerning my late, honorable Lord, the L. Bishopp of London, lying
sick, and in emine^t peril of death. Wherefore, having Page 4.12.
appealed unto his Lordshipp, as being a most competent witness for my
defense, I desired, that (if it were possible) this poor schedule might be
presented unto his view, before his passadge out of this world. And, if my
heartiest prayers could prevail any thing with him, who has sovereign power
over us all, for Life, and Death, for Body, and Soul, he knows, that clamaui
de profundis etc. I have called, and I have cried unto him, out of the depth of
my soul, for my said loving Master; either to grant him a longer life here,
or an happier elsewhere. His affection toward me deserved this requital from
me; as you may perceive by his own words; viz. I wish M. Higgons better, then
any man in England; I except not his own Father, etc. which he Fulham house.
9. August. 1609.
wrote unto a very honorable Gentleman; avowing unto him farther, upon his
credit, that he neither knew, nor heard of Sir Edward Hobies book, till he saw
it in print.

Thus you have (good Readers) a satisfaction unto each demand. It may please
you now finally to understand, that the residue of my Apology (wherein, I am
sorry that the Knight does provoke me to encounter his weak, untrue, and
scandalous exceptions) shall come forth, in due time, accompanied with a Reply
unto D. Mortons Answer; which he calls a direct one; but he shall see it
corrected, to his benefitt, if he will, or to his loss, though he would not.
If the delay shall prove more tedious, then will content you, and the
discourse more rude, then will becomme me; you must remember, that, as my
Travail was, and is, intended for other uses, then to write, so it does not
afford either leisure, or means, which are requisite in this behalf.

Fare you well. Roan. December. 24. 1609. Your T. H.

Dilige Deum, amicos in Deo, inimicos propter Deum.

S. AUGUST.
FINIS.
Errors passed in some copies.
Page lin. Fault. Correction. 7. 27. clamours clamorous 8. 32. great) in great
(in 12. 30. ambigous ambiguous 15. 9. porportion proportion 16. 7. pen, pen)
26. 29. the censure of Bell. Bellarmines ce^sure 32. 8. forgeting forgetting
40. 13. then sea then the Sea In the Margent. 16. Galath. 5.9. Galath. 5.15.


