THE SPLENDOVR OF THE SPOUSE A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of WARE,
Anno Domini, 1638.

BY AUGUSTINE HILL, Rector of Dengey, in the County of ESSEX.

BERN. Pascimur and patimur.

AUG. Vsque ad hujus seculi sinem inter persecutiones mundi, and consolationes
Dei procurrit Ecclesia.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1640.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR THOMAS FANSHAW Knight of the Bath, his Majesty's
Remembrancer in the Court of Exchequer.
SIR,
IT was the greatest happiness that ever did befall me, that I was assumed
into your noble Family where I was furnished once, and a second time likewise
with Ecclesiastical promotions, without any deserts, yea little or none
attendance. A true Friend is decyphered to be an Angel clothed with flesh and
blood, such have you been to me, the most careful and faithful friend that
ever poor Scholar had. Coming to pay my annual tribute of thankfulness, a
Sermon, it pleased you to accept of it, and to cast a respective eye more then
ordinary toward me for it, though there be nothing in it to be affected, and
in my self no affectation at all of it, but rather an indignation against mine
own imbecility and endowments that I was not able to speak of those heavenly
things in that manner as might raise my hearers to divine cogitations. What
weight there is in it comes from your balance and favorable construction, for
it was handled in plain familiar words, rather to express clearly the
matter, then to hunt for polished phrases, and my desire is more to speak
fortia quam diserta, as Saint Hierome says, things of strength then eloquence,
and rather vivere then loqui, as Minutius Felix observes, to live, then speak
them.

But I am a man compassed with infirmity, it is truly said of me, my bodily
presence is weak, and my speech contemptible, 2 Corin. 10.10. But such was
your sweet disposition that you still cast a mantle upon mine infirm carriage,
which has engaged my heart in a more thankful observance toward your worthy
self. In testimony whereof I present to you this poor Sermon as a public
Record, that to your Noble Family I owe myself, and from thence have received
all the livelihood and means of subsistence which I now enjoy, my loins and
bowels bless you continually. The Lord increase upon you the blessings of
heaven above, the blessings of the deep that lies under, the blessings of the
breasts and of the womb, Genesis 49.25. and the goodwill of him that dwelt in the
bush dwell with you for ever, are the prayers of

Yours most thankefully and humbly devoted, AUG. HILL.

THE SPLENDOR OF THE SPOUSE.
CANT. 2.2. As the Lily among Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters.


I Have gleaned at this time in Solomon's Field, and that parcel of his called
the Canticles, a Song of Songs, by way of eminency; for though there be many
other sacred Songs, as that of Moses, of Deborah and Barak, Exodus 15. Judges 5.
and of the sweet Singer of Israel, and Solomon's own Songs were a thousand and
five, 1 Kings 4.32. yet this not only exceeds all them, but all other
mentioned in holy writ. Doctor Hall.
Let me use the words of a truly Divine man. Who can read this Book with
understanding, and not be transported from the world, from himself, and be any
where save in heaven before his time? there is nothing in it but savours of
spiritual ecstasy and soul ravishment; If I say no more of it, it is
sufficient that it is Solomon's, a man above a man, above himself, who being
ravished in spirit, and taken up as it were into the third heavens, warbled out
that sweet affinity and nearenesse, that is, and shall be betwixt Christ and
his Church, Ephesians. 5.32.
that great mystery as Saint Paul calls it. Interpreters are at odds about
the former verse, but agree in this, that it is the voice of Christ concerning
his Church, either describing her present condition amongst others, or
preferring her before them, or persuading her how she ought to demean her
self amongst them, to retain her native beauty and sweetness, though she be
beset with never so many thorns.

There is in the Text something positive, something comparative, the positive
part is, that the Church is Christ his Love, the other are Daughters, the
comparative part takes up the rest of the words.

The positive part shows the sweet style and title which Christ gives to his
Church; He calls Her Love, and with a happy appropriation, my Love, which is a
term both of propriety and possession. Others which are not the Church are
called by the name of Daughters, by which are meant either Foreign
Congregations, or such as live within the pale of the visible Church, yet
belong not to him, therefore he forbeares to challenge his interest in them,
and leaves them, to a common appellation, the Daughters, not my Daughters.

The comparative part has these things obvious to every eye: First the
subjects of this resemblance, the Church is like the Lilly, the others are like
Thorns. Secondly, the situation of the resembled parties. The Church is like
the Lilly among the Thorns.

The style which Christ gives his Church is Love. It comes nearest his own
nature, for God is love, it best resembles his benefits done for her, 1 John
4.16. Ephesians. 5.25.
husbands love your wives as Christ loved his Church, and how he loved it he
expresses in a way beyond humane expression, he gave himself for it, he loved
it better then he loved himself. Dilexistime magis quam te, quando mori
voluisti pro me. August. And it best sets forth the reference she has to him,
as being his Spouse, his Bride. The servant must honor his master, the
Disciple must attend for instruction, the wife must love her husband, Bernard.
amor ab amando, non honorando, says Saint Bernard, and he gives these reasons
for it, una utriusque haereditas, una domus, una mensa, unus etiam thorus, and
there is no fitter a union of these then love.

The original then of the Churches bliss is Christ his love toward her. The
first spring of election is love. Romans 9. John 3.16. Hoseah 11.4.
Jacob have I loved, the maine Conduit or Cisterne of Redemption is love. God
so loved the world, the streams of vocation and sanctification. I drew thee
with the cords of a man, with the bands of love, and the maine Ocean of
eternal glory, In amore haec insunt omnia, all is from love. There neither is
nor can be any in her to move him to love her, much less to deserve his love,
not her beauty, she acknowledges her self black, no Miriam more leprous, Can.
1.
no polluted Thamar more hated in the eyes of an Amnon then she in his eyes,
when he first took liking to her, not her parentage, for her father was an
Amorite, her mother a Hittite, nor her portion, for what was hers naturally,
Ezekiel 16.
but sin and everlasting death the wages of it? nor her parts, for the best
child of grace acknowledges, In me there dwells no manner of thing that is
good; all then was in him free and pure love. Now we say magnes amoris amor,
Romans 7
love has an attractive power to draw love, therefore let every Spouse of
Christ remember to return love to him again, that every heart may plead for
it self, as Peter did, Lord thou know that I love thee. O then let us pitch
and settle our affections upon him, who is as Saint Bernard says, vere amans
and amabilis, one most truly loving us, and most worthy to be beloved of us:
the Apostle pronounces an extreme Anathema to him that fails in the
retribution of it. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22.
let him be Anathema Maranatha, and it should be a double engagement of our
obedience and thank: and let us not only with the inward man love him; but
with the outward also honor and confess him, who pleads for us before his
Father in heaven: it is but a dead heart that has a dumb voice when Christ his
cause is in question: Canes latrare possunt pro Dominis, and non vis me latrare
pro Christo? Hier. Tract. 3. op. 40.
says Saint Jerome to Ruffinus, the Dogs will bark for their masters, and
will thou not have me speak for Christ? and he goes on: si ista causadi
scordiae est, mori possum, tacere non possum: if that be the cause of our
jarres, I may dye before hold my peace, yea let us so far as in us lies, not
suffer him to be blasphemed by others: it was the zealous resolution of that
holy Father. Ego si patrem, si matrem, si uxorem, si filios, si germanos
adversum Christum meum audivissem ista dicentes, quasi rabidus canis
blasphemantia ora lacerassem, and fuisset in primis manus mea super eos: Id,
op. 20.
And lastly it should be a double engagement of our obedience and
thankfulness of our obedience to live unto him who has so dearly loved us,
as to dye for us, and our thankfulness may have that heavenly burden of the
Saints, Rev. 1.5, 6. To him that has loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to
him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

The word is rendered Vicina, my neighbor, adjoining Inhabitant. Themistocles
having a house to sell, commended it, that it had bonum vicinum, a good
neighbor; the Churches bliss is, that Christ is pleased to dwell with them,
yea in them, and make a resolution as in the Psalm, Psalm. 32.
Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein: and not only vicina, but
proxima, my nearest one, both for counsel and comfort, he reveals his
secrets to them, and is ready at all assayes to help them, yea amica my
friend, as Abraham was called the friend of God, Jac. 2.23. He need fear no
enemy who has God to his friend: yet the original word goes further, for it
is taken from feeding or conversing together, and expresses that inward
familiarity and union that is betwixt them. It must teach us all, by no means
to estrange our selves from Christ, but to keep a correspondence with him, to
cherish our familiarity, friendship, to preserve our union, that we professing
him to be ours, he may confess us to be his, as he does his Church here, My
love, which is a term both of propriety, and of possession. Of propriety, he
claims a special interest in his Church, and he has a true right in us all,
both by making us his at the first, and by buying us again, when we had made
away our selves: his dear purchase we are, therefore let us not alienate our
selves from him, either in our affection, for he is the proper and adaequate
object of our love, minus east e te amat, Aug.
qui aliquid praeter te amat, quod non propter te amat, he loves thee amiss
who loves any thing besides thee, which he loves not in and for thee; nor in
our obedience, but wholly devote our selves to him, and him alone, that none
may have the honor of our service but he, that abased himself to save us. Of
possession: he has a special care and custody of his Church, he keeps them
as choycely as his jewels, as the apple of his own eye, he keeps their head
as with a shield, that not a hair of it shall perish: yea their very feet,
that they dash them not against a stone.

By the Daughters are meant either foreign Congregations, as the Daughter of
Babylon, Psalm 137.
or else (as I conceive) such as live within the Pale of the visible Church,
enjoy the same holy Word and Sacraments, which the elect Spouse of Christ does,
yet are they Thorns to his Lily: Spinae propter malignitatem morum, filiae
propter Sacramentorum communionem: Aug. Vincentio Epist. 48. Id, in Ps. 36.
eadem professio, sed non idem cor, says the same Father, they have the same
profession, but not the same heart, therefore the more dangerous, Mali
Christianitanto nocentiores quanto interiores mimici, says Saint August. Tom.
4. De side rerum invisibilium, if that work be his, the more inward enemies
the more hurtful. Saint Bernard descanting of the Churches complaint of her
bitterness, says she was amara prius in nece martyrum, amarior postea in
conflictu haereticorum, amarissima in moribus domesticorum: bitter first in the
death of her Martyrs, more bitter in succeeding ages in her concertation with
Heretics, most bitter in these last times in the corrupt manners of them of
her own household. 2 Cor. 11.26. 1 John 2.19.
Saint Paul speaks of perils among false brethren, and Saint John of some, they
went out from us, Romans 2.
but they were not of us, they are not all Israel which are of Israel, Romans 9
6. And he is a Jew which is one inwardly. Our Savior mentions some that come
in sheeps clothing. Tertul.
Quae nam sunt is it ae pelles ovium, nisi nominis Christiani extrinsecus
superficies, they have the name but not the nature of Christians, their habit
shows them to be Daughters of Jerusalem, but in heart they are but Daughters
of Babylon, therefore Christ leaves them to a common appellation, not gracing
them with his appropriating term, my. Th^se whom Christ ownes not here he will
deny hereafter, and though they be never so nigh him, and enjoy all the outward
privileges of the Church, yet non novi vos, is their doom: depart from me,
Mat. 7.
I know you not.

So I return from the Goats to the Sheep, the Church of Christ here compared
to a Lily, for as the Lily does open her self to receive the bright rays and
influences of the shining Sun: so does the Church open her heart and
affections to admit the heat and spiritual vigor of that Sun of
righteousness; and again as the Lily shuts and closes her self for her
custody and safety so does the Church contract and collect herself close
together in a holy care and vigilance to preserve her self from the rage and
violence of temptations: and further as the Lily is always green, and
changes not her hew: so ought the Christian to be constant and immutable in
holy duties. I will not press the comparison too far, only touch the choice
and most useful parts of the resemblance.

Saint Bernard observes two special qualities wherein the Church does resemble
the Lily, propter candorem and odorem, the whiteness in color and the
sweetness of smell.

1. Whitenes, that is purity, and integrity of conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. Can.
4.7.
Saint Paul styles it simplicity and godly sincerity, in this respect is the
Church said to be all fair, in regard of inward sincerity, that admits not the
stain of black and foul hypocrisy, that let all us the children of the
Church labor to be like our mother in this divine quality. Innocence is the
badge, the true character of Christians. Innocentiam profitetur qui Christum
profitetur, as Erasmus, Christianity is a profession composed of innocence.
Saint Benard observes that a Christian of all beasts is resembled to the Lamb,
of all birds to the Dove, of all trees to the Vine, of all flowers to the Lily,
because the moral predominant quality of them all is innocence, and this
whiteness is the genuine color of our wedding garment in heaven, and in this
life on earth, for the Saints above are described so clad, Rev. 7.9. And holy
David sets them out in the same habit, Psa. 24. He that has clean hands and a
pure heart, and here below our true cognizance is purity and uprightness of
heart, joined with hands as white as snow in Salmon, for innocence, that no
injustice may cleave unto our fingers, then shall we be like Christ our Master,
in whom was no fault found nor guile in his mouth, and the issue shall be
happy, we shall have peace at the last. Psalm. 37.


2. Odor or sweetness, the fragrancy of the Lily is admirable in pleasing the
senses, and with the sweet smell thereof rejoicing the heart, so let there be
in spiritual Lilies the odor of a good life which may smell sweet in the
nostrils of God and man: of God, that he may testify of us, as Isaac did of
Jacob, The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord has
blessed. Genesis 27.27.
Of man, that as Saint Paul says, we may be the savor of Christ his knowledge
in every place, that our name may be unguentum effusum, 2 Cor. 2. Cant. 1.3.
Luc, 4.14.
ointment powered forth, and as Christ his fame went through all the Region
round about, so may the fame of our sanctity and justice be spread in those
coasts where we abide, and as the Box of Spiknard, wherewith Mary anointed
Christ, filled the house with the odor of the ointment: John 12.3
so the savor of our gracious actions may fill the places where we live, then
may be the Lily for sweetness and fragrancy. Zanch. in Hos. 14.
A later Divine notes two other qualities wherein the Church should be like the
Lily.

First, in abundant fertility; for as he out of Pliny, Lilio nihil est
foecundius, nothing is more fruitful then the Lily, nor ought to be then a
Christian, who should be like those sheep whereof every one bears twins, or
like the tree of life, Cant. 4.2. Revel. 22.2.
which bears twelve manner of fruits. Grace admits not of a windy emptiness,
but the wisdom that comes from above is full of mercy and good fruits, Iac,
3.17. Phil. 1.11. Iac. 2.5. 1 Timothy 6.18.
and Saint Paul prays for the Philippians, that they might be filled with the
fruits of righteousness; nor of beggarly poverty, but Christians must be rich
in faith, rich in good works. Barrenness or fruitfulness not answerable to
the bestowed cost, is accursed, there is not the same expectation of the Lily
that grows of it self in the field, without the art and industry of man, and
of ^ha in the Garden which is planted, manured and dressed with kindly
husbandry. Certainly unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required, and they which receive five or two talents, must return a
proportionable advantage: where God sowes a Gomer, he will not be content at
the harvest to re^pe an Ephah. Labor we then (my brethren) to abound in the
work of the Lord, to make accounts agreeable to our receipts, that so we may
answer the blessing, patience, and expectation of our Master: and the fruit
of this abundant fruitfulness shall be, that an ^rance shall be ministered unto
us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. 2 Pet. 1.11.


Secondly, in a mature and seasonable fructification: as soon as the Spring
comes, that the Sun yields a nourishing heat, the sweet influences of the
Pleiades are loosed, the earth opens her womb, and the warm showers and
dewes do distill upon it, that it is the time of vegetation; the Lily stays
not but immediately begins to shoot and show her self in fruitfulness: so must
spiritual Lilies do, take the very first tender and offer of grace, and
readily obey the motions of Gods Spirit: when Gods voice speaks as in the 27.
Psa. seek ye my face, our hearts may echo to it again. Thy face Lord will I
seek, Primitiae Deo, the first fruits are fittest for the oblation of the
Highest, the first borne for his service, his soul desires the first ripe
fruit, the choycest trees of Gods Orchard are Palms and Cedars, Psalm. 91.11.
Palms bring fruit betimes, and flourish abundantly, and Cedars they last very
long. O take we heed of quenching those blessed motions which Gods Spirit
breathes into our souls, of resisting the Holy Ghost, of receiving the grace
of God in vain: 2 Cor. 6.1.
depend not too much upon latter raines, and lateward Springs, but when his
wind blows upon our garden, Cant. 4.16. Psalm 1.3.
let the spices thereof flow out: then shall we be like the tree-planted by the
water side, that brings forth his fruit in due season, yea like the Lily here
in the Text.

And now be pleased to cast but your eye upon the Daughters in the comparative
part, and then we will view them as they are together, the Lily among the
Thorns.

They are like the Thorns,
1. For their noxious quality hurtful to every thing that touches them, they
will wound and tear not only the garment but the flesh it self: I will tear
your flesh with the Thorns of the wilderness: Judges 8.7.
yea they will putrify the flesh where they are hidden: so are wicked men full
of cruelty, rapine, malignity, yea a secret venom they have which empoysons and
corrupts whatsoever they adhere unto. The Prophet describing the general and
desperate pravity of Prince and people, thus seems to aggravate it; The best
of them is a bryar, the most upright is sharper then a thorne-hedge: Micah. 7.4.
and the blessing promised to Israel was this: There shall be no more a
pricking bryar unto the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 28.24.
nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them.

2. For their sterility and barrenness of fruit, they bring forth nothing
immediately profitable unto man. In the ninth Chapter of Judges, there is
mention made of the Olives fatness, the Fig Trees sweetness, the Vines
refreshing and chearing, yet nothing of the thorn and bramble, but
unparallelled ambition, pride, dissension, that ends in utter ruin, and
destruction, yea they are causes of barrenness in others, they make the best
soil and the most fruitful Land barren so are evil men unprofitable
themselves, and make others good for nothing, like the Pharisees who compass
Sea and Land to make a Pros^lite, Mat. 23.15.
and when he is made, they make him twofold more the child of hell then
themselves.

Heb. 6.8. Math. 25.
Lastly, for their end, for as of thorns the end is to be burned; so
everlasting fire is the issue of all sinful courses, where they shall receive
their just and deserved meede in that Lake that burns with fire and brimstone
forever, where we will leave them, and come to speak of the Church her mixture
with them here in this life, as being a Lily among the thorns.

As the Lily among Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters.
1. Saint Jerome expounds it, De Ecclesia Gentium quae vele medio remedio
infidelium and non credentium quasi ex spinis emerserit, Hier. in Cant.
God does select and pick out his Church of the Gentiles from among
unbeleevers, as a Lily out of a great heap of thorns, so in the Prophet, I
found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, Hoseah, 9.10.
where no man expected them, yea God does find us like Lilyes among thorns,
but even when we are very thorns as hurtful, as unfruitful, as fit for the
fire as they, till God of thorns make us Lilyes, therefore let us glorify the
riches of his grace, and set forrh the praise of him who has changed our
disposition, made us innocent, pleasing to himself, profitable to others, and
shall be one day transplanted into his Celestial Paradise.

2. Saint Austin understands it of the mixture of good and bad in the visible
Church, Aug. in Ps. 99.
Lily and Thorns promiscuously growing together, so that the Church is like
Rebeccahs womb, two several Nations are in it, like Noah's Arc, that has
clean and unclean beasts in it, like Saint Peter's net, which gathered fish
and rubbish, like the Samaritans Inn entertaines all manner of guests: wheat
and chafe in one floor, meal and branne in one lump: and Saint Paul says,
in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but of wood
and stone, some to honor, and some to dishonor. Saint Bernard saith^, Tria
sunt loca, 2 Timothy 2.20. Ber. Sent.
there be three places, heaven, hell, and earth, and each of these has his
several Inhabitants: Heaven has none but good, hell none but bad, the earth
has good and bad mixed together. Saint Austin seems to apply it briefly,
thus.

Aug. loc. cit.
1. Quomodo consolaris? how do thou comfort thy Church, (O Lord) against the
multitude of ungodly men? she may seem to despair when she sees such thickets
of thorns, as if all was turned to a wilderness, yet there is hope for her in
this, sunt grana inter paleam, est Lilium inter spinas, There be some grains
of corn amongst the great heaps of chafe, and a Lily among the multitude of
thorns. Thus God cheares up Elijah in his grievous complaint, I have left me
seven thousand that have not bowed the knee to Baal, and the Prophet tells the
people, 1 Kings 19.18. Revel 2.4.
there is a remnant, and there be a few names in Sardis, Matthew and Zachey
among the Publicanes, the Centurion among the Soldiers, Mary Magdalene among
the harlots. Therefore though we do gemere as he says, mourn that the ways
of Sion want passengers, yet let us not mourn as Rachel for her children,
refusing to be comforted because they were not, nor sorrow as they that are
without hope. Doubtless many shall come from the East and from the West, and
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in that blessed Kingdom above, though
we be not privy to the places they have there, nor to their going thither, the
Church herself says, in admiration of her increased number, who has begotten
me these, seeing I have lost my children, Isa. 49.21.
and am desolate, a captive and remooving to and fro? and who has brought up
these? behold I was left alone, these where had they been? And take we heed of
over sullen censures, least we condemn the generation of Gods children, and
take them for thorns which were Lilies, August.
De nullo pronuntiandum est.

2. Quomodo confor^as? How do thou strengthen us against the temptations of
Satan and the seductions of wicked men? when thou tellest us thy Church is and
continues a Lily though amongst never so many thorns, she is (as I have
already said) in a special manner in Christ his care and custody, in his
hands, and none shall be able to pluck her thence, built upon a rock, and
remains like mount Sion immovable. Psalm. 125.


3. Quomodo terres? How do thou affright us with the consideration of our
dangerous and militant condition here on earth, that we are beset with thorns,
plainly in Ezekiels case, briars and thorns are with us, Ezekiel, 2.6.
and we dwell among Scorpions, and as God left the Canaanites to be pricks in
the eyes, and thorns in the sides of Israel to teach them war, Judges 3.2.
So has he left us enemies to train us up in our military profession of
Christianity.

4. That which is opposite to the scope of his exposition, and of the Text it
self, is to persuade us, Tolerare malos, to be content to bear with and
forbear them that be evil, for God himself has said, that the tares shall
not only be, but grow among the wheat, until the Harvest, and the bad shall
be amongst the good in the same net, Math. 13.30. Aug. tom. 4. de Catech. 12.
rud.
until they be drawn to shore at the end of the world, even, he quem nihil
frurorum latet, who knows right well what they are, and what they will be,
suffers them not only to enjoy being, but well being, all manner of outward
blessings, causes his Sun to shine, and his rain to rain upon them, yea
Christ himself in the days of his flesh endured, even the contradiction of
sinners, so that all those furious spirits, that seek an immediate and
uttereradication of the thorns, and if it lay in their power, would command
fire from heaven to consume them, do not imitate these blessed examples, show
a great deal of non-proficiency in Christianity, as Saint Austin, Aug.
decerpt. sen.
Qui ideo neminem vult pati hominum quia ut arbitratur multum proficit, per hoc
^psum quod alios non tolerat, ostendit quod potius non proficit, a great want
of patience, yea of Christian charity, which still hopes the best, judges
nothing till the time come, and has always a mantle ready to cover the
infirmities of others, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
yea, (...) to bear them up as a crouch does a body that is lame, or a beam a
house, that is declining, whereas these are ready to discover the nakedness of
others, and even to thrust their fingers into their wounds to make them
greater; and so in an unjust unchristian way, separate themselves, and while
they relinquish the flock for the Goats sake, crept in amongst them, they
leave the sheep exposed to the rage of the wolf, whereas they ought to bear
with the Goats for the sheeps sake, Aug. Epist. 48. Vicentio.
Non enim propter malos boni deserendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi, The
good are not to be forsaken by reason of those amongst them; which are evil,
but the evil are to be tolerated in regard of those amongst them which are
good, yea in forsaking them that, Aug. tom. 6. contra Faustum, man. l. 13. c.
16.
be good, they relinquish Christ himself, cum isti relinquuntur iste relin
quitur, who accounts himself relinquished, when they are relinquished which he
accounts of: that question of S. Austin, is very fit for every one of them who
precipitate Gods judgment. Tom. 9 Hom. de ^vib. c. 10. li. c. 5.
Hanc tune Angelus eradicans zizania? art thou the Angel which must pluck up
the tares? and in the same Homily, Homo carne septus carnem portans, aut forte
caro totus, id est, caro corpore, carnalis animo, audes usurpate officium
alienum, quod nec in mess erit tuum? Dares thou being perhaps carnal, at
least clothed with flesh, and a man of like passions with others, usurp that
office which shall never belong unto thee but to the Angels, and not be theirs,
till the end of the world? and whereas thou should supplicate for the
further manuring and longer growth of the tree, do thou antevert a commission
to cut it down, that it may comber the ground no longer? rather ^oe thou say
and desire, as he, destroy it not, there is a blessing in it, Isaiah 65.8. I
will close this point wirh that of Saint Cyprian worthy to be written in
letters of gold, Etsi videntur in Ecclesiaesse zizania, non tamen impediri
debet, aut fides aut charitas nostra, Cyp. ep. l. 3. ep 3.
ut quoniam zizania esse i^ Ecclesia cernimus, ipsi de Ecclesia recedamus.
Nobis modo laborandum ut frumentum esse possumus, ut cum caeperit frumentum
Dominicis horreis condi fructum pro opere nostro, and labor capiamus. The
being of tares in the field, the Church ought not to be a hindrance to our
faith or charity, nor is a sufficient cause of our separation from the Church,
we should rather labor to be good corn our selves, that when the Harvest
comes we may be gathered into Gods Barn, and there receive the fruit of our
faith and obedience or further as he goes on, There be in a great house vessels
of wood and earth, made for inferior uses, and others of gold and silver made
for honorable services: thus it is in Gods great house, the Church, we must
labor to be vessels of honor, fit for our Masters use, and leave those of
baser metal to his disposal, who will at his own time break them in pieces
like a Potters vessel.

3. Junius thinks it spoken of the excellency and dignity of the Church in
comparison of other Congregations, Iun. in loc.
and of such as are not truly hers, though mixed with hers. Tantum superat
Ecclesia coeteros omnes caetus quantum Lilium spinas. The Church does as far
excel all other Congregations in worth, as the Lily does thorns. Our Savior
speaks of the Lily, that even Solomon in all his Royalty was not arrayed like
one of them, Mat. 6.29.
if Solomon the most glorious Prince, in the height of his glory attained not
to the luster of the Lily: what a low rank must the burre, bramble, a thorn
be of, to the spiritual Lily? what is Bethaven to Bethel, the house of Ammon
to the house of God? the Tents of Sedar to the Tabernacle of Testimony? Abana
and Pharpar, the puddle waters of Damascus to the clear waters of Israel, the
wells of salvation? glorious things are spoken of the City, the Church of God,
as glorious she is as the Sun when he goes forth in his might, Judges 5.31.
nay, more glorious then the other Sun, for she is clothed with the Sun of
righteousness, Revel. 12.11,
and the Moon under her feet. They say the Pope is greater then any Prince of
the earth, by so many degrees as the Sun is greater then the earth; let
Parasites say what they will, we may truly lay the comparison, that the true
Church of Christ does infinitely excel that Antichristian Synagogue of Satan,
and all profane Congregations, though they assume to themselves never so many
vain titles of honor, as Sancta Ecclesia Catholica Romana, and so forth, and
Musselmanni, as the Turks title themselves true believers, yet are they all
thorns to the pure Lily, the Church. If it be referred to the Daughrers such
as I have mentioned, that live within the pale of the visible Church, yet are
not the peculiar Spouse of Christ. The truly Christian soul as far exceeds
them, as the Lily does the thorns; what comparison is there betwixt the gold
and the dross? the wine and the lees? the faithful Spouse of Christ, and the
filthy harlot of the Devil? surely one little spot of ground Goshen that has
light in it, is worth all Egypt full of darkness, gross and palpable. Learn
we highly to esteem these Lilies, and to prize these choice jewels, and in
whomsoever we see true grace, sanctity and justice, which two are the candor
and odor of the Lily, to value them, though they be beset with never so many
thorns of infirmities or adversities, let us account of them as they are,
indeed the heirs of heaven, the nobles of the world, for Generosa Christi
festa, nobilitat viros cui quisquis servit ille vere est nobilis, and the
pledges of our peace, it may be the fire had been before this time sent into
the thorns, but that there are some Lilies amongst them to be preserved, and
for their sakes God does spare the thorns so long.

Our later Divines have observed many other reasons and respects why the Church
may be said to be a Lily among the thorns: I will only rub some few of their
ears of corn, and leave the harvest to some other choice worke-man his
gathering. A Lily among thorns.

4. In regard of the multitude of afflictions she suffers in this life, for
the Church has ever been like Abraham's Ram held in a thicket of adversity,
Christianus is Crutianus, as Luther was wont to say, a man of crosses. The
servant is not above his master, God had but one only Son, and he was sine
peccato, yet not sine stagello. Aug. in Psa. 31. Luc. 9 23. Beza.
Therefore let us take up our Cross (...) a day by day, ut dies diem sequitur,
ita crux crucem accipiat every day we must expect sufficient travel, and with
patience let us possess our souls for it, resolve that through many
tribulation and afflict ons, we must enter into Gods Kingdom, if we will have
Christ, his Crown of glory, Acts, 14 22.
we must be content to wear a crown of thorns. For the Church is a Lily
among thorns.

5. In regard of the manifold impediments she has to hinder her spiritual
growth, namely,

First, Satan is a black thorn in his temptations, always pricking and
wounding the children of God, yea biting at the very root of the Lily, like the
worm at the root of Jonahs Gourd, and the Lily would as soon wither as that
Gourd did, was there not a sovereign power from above to preserve it, pray we
then unto God to rebuke Satan in all his assaults, that our Lily may flourish
in despite of him.

Secondly, natural corruption which God has left to be pricks in our eyes,
and thorns in our sides. Sa^nt Paul, that choice vessel of grace complains
of them, Rom 7. I carry about me a body of sin and death, he calls it by the
very term in my Text, the thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me, take we his course even to solicit God by frequent prayer, 2 Cor.
12.7.
till we have the same answer which he obtained, my grace shall be sufficient
for thee, and beg of him who comes with healing in his wings to heal our
nature, that it may not be so fruitful in bringing forth these pricking
thorns. S. Bernard particularizeth these to be Amores seculares immoderate,
earthly desires, and worldly cogitations, which brings a barrennes of goodness
to the soul, Math. 13.
and choke the seed of the word. O munde, munde, says St. Austin, Fallax and
proditor, impure world, a traitor to us and a deceiver of us. It glues our
wings, that we cannot soar upwards, and as he that has a thorn in his foot
is utterly unfit for travel, so he that has these thorns of worldly cares
stick in his soul, is unmeet for his journey to heaven. Let us therefore pluck
out this thorn, and if riches increase, set not our heart upon them. Psalm.
62.10.


Thirdly, the perverse and sinful conversation of wicked men, which are
thorns in our way to heaven, the sons of Belial shall be as thorns thrust
away, 2 Samuel 23.67.
because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall touch them
must be fenced with Iron, Cant. 1.6.
and the staff of a Spear. The Church complains that her mothers sons made
her the keeper of the Vineyards, but her own Vineyard she kept not, and has
not every member of the Church cause to complain with David, Psalm 119.61.
Bern. in Cant. Ser. 48.
the bands of wicked men have robbed me? Saint Bernard is seasonable for a
close of this point, Si Lilium est inter spinas videat unaquisque anima quam
vigilem solicit amque esse oporteat super custodia sui, septa undique spinis
hinc inde aculeos intendentibus, The Church is like a Lily beset round about
with thorns, that seek to wound and tear her, therefore let every soul be
watchful and careful for the preservation of it self, that neither the
thorn within do impoison her, nor those other without do pierce her to
hinder her growth in grace here, or to deprive her of glory hereafter.

6. In regard of the small number of those that are the true members of the
Church, in comparison of foreign Congregations without, and false brethren
within, one Lily many thorns. Plures mali, they which are evil, Byas.
are the greatest number. There is much mold whereof earthen vessels are made,
but little dust that gold comes of, 2 Esdras 8.
many trees are planted, but few like that good tree bring forth fruit in their
season: much seed is sown, but three parts thereof miscary, Saint Augustine
gives a good rule, Aug. in Ps. 39.
Noli numerare sed appende, stateram affer aequam non dolosam, Do not take
them by number, but consider well of them, weigh them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, or else thou mistakest, then afterward, Noli imitari, Do not
imitate them that be the most, or in words of holy writ, Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil; the reason is given by one, Seneca.
Est turba semper argumentum pessimi, the worse go by heaps and troops, the
least are oftentimes solitary, of twenty Kings of Israel, not one good that
cleave to the Lord with all his heart, of six hundred thousand Israelites, but
two came into the Land of Canaan. It was a remarkable folly and punishment of
Radbodus King of Frisia, who asking whether there were most in heaven or hell,
and was answered, that in hell was the greatest number, withdrew himself from
holy baptism, and professed plainly that he would go to hell, where the most
company was, but he enjoyed his madness and contempt of Gods Ordinance but a
short space, for the third day after, he dyed suddenly. It is better to be with
Noah and his small family in the Arc, then with the whole world to be drowned
in the deluge, to be planted in Gods garden with the Lily, then to be thrown
into the fire with a whole wilderness of thorns.

7. Lastly, the Church is as the Lily among thorns in respect of her unity and
their divisions and distractions, being torn in more pieces then the Prophet
Ahjiahs garment was, 1 Kings 12. for that was only into twelve, but these are
infinite, parted into as many several conventicles are there be men of deeply
corrupt minds, who do parts facere, as Saint Augustine says of the Donatists,
and gather disciples unto themselves, Aug. de unitate Ecclesiae. c. 3.
Quis possit singulas quasi haereses enumerare gentium singalarem? says Saint
Augustine, who is able to reckon up all the heresies of every several Nation,
Aug. de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 3. Daniel, ^.
yea the several Sects that are in one Nation, these hold not the head Christ,
and are as those beasts of Daniel, diverse one from another, yet all against
the Church, as the enemies to the Lily, and folded together to do more
mischief, as the thorns are, Nahum. 1.10.
they have unitatem contra unitatem, as S. Augustine says, I am sure contra
veritatem, a unity against truth, for our Savior tells us not only of many
false Prophets, but of false Christ's. But there is but one true Christ the
head, and believers are the several members of his mystical body, united by
faith to him their head, and in Christian charity one to another; and though
there be threescore Queens and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number, yet is Christ his Spouse una and unica, Cant. 6.9.
one and the only one of her mother. And S. Paul tells us, that there is but
one body, one spirit, one hope of their spiritual calling, one Lord, one
faith, one baptism, one God and Father, of all who is above all, our through
all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. John, 17.
and in all his children, therefore they ought all to be one, as our Savior
prayed for them five times in one Chapter, the very thorns will lesson us in
this duty; shall they be folded together to do hurt, and shall not the Lilies
hold together to preserve one another? It is unity will make our color more
candid, out odor more fragrant, and fruitfulness, Aug. ep. 15. Hieronymo.
more seasonable and abundant. For omnis pulchritudinis forma unitas, unity is
the form of beauty and uniformity is the form of unity, where there is cor
unum, and viauna, one heart and one way, the carriage of things will be
prosper^us, the end comfortable. I will close then with that prayer of Saint
Paul for the Thessalonians. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
Now the Lord of peace himself give us peace us always, by all means, and
that for Jesus Christ his sake, the Prince of peace, who dearly bought our
peace by his precious blood, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
given all glory, dominion, might, majesty, and thankesgiving from this time
forth and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

