THE PREACHERS PLEA: OR, A Treatise in form of a plain Dialogue, making known
the worth and necessary use of Preaching: showing also how a man may profit by
it, both for the informing of his judgment, and the reforming of his life.

By Samuel Hieron Minister of the Gospel at Modbury in the County of Deuon.

1. Cor. 1.21. Seeing the world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of
God it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Waterson. 1604.

To the honest and wel-disposed Reader.
IT is the usual manner of the most which publish books, to dedicate the same
to some honorable personage, or to some one of special place, partly to show
thankfulness for some received favors, partly to procure credit and
countenance to their writings, that under so good protection, they may the more
boldly pass forth to the common view of all men. If I now vary from this
general received course, think not I pray thee (good Reader) that I do it in
some humor, as if I either affected singularity, or misliked the common
custom: but know for a truth that there are these two causes of my so doing:
The first is, the obscurity of mine own condition, who living here in a
remote part, have wanted either will, or opportunity, or both, to s^rowd my
self under the patronage of some great person: The second is, the nature of
this present Treatise: for howsoever there be (and that not far from the
place of mine abode) some of good quality, upon whose acceptance, I think, I
might have presumed, yet considering, that this which I have framed, is but a
homely and course discourse, meant only for men of the plainest fashion, I
thought I should break the rules of comeliness and correspondence, if I
should advance the inscription of my labor (if I may dare so to call it) to a
person of higher degree, then that mean and middle rank, to the use whereof,
all that these following leaves contain, was alone intended. Therefore
(friendly Reader) whosoever thou be, if thou be a true Nathanael, John. 1.17.
Luke. 8.15.
a man of an honest and good heart, be thy outward condition as it may be,
though thou lie among the pots, Psalm. 68.13.
or art behind the ewes with young, or howsoever else, Psalm. 78.71. Psalm.
107.10.
even as it were bound in outward misery, and of base esteem in the eyes of
men, yet thou art he whose patronage I affect, and in the hope of whose good
allowance I take comfort. I know well that he which offers any thing to the
sight of the world, must make ready his back for the long furrows of every
biting ce^surer. Psalm. 129.3. (...). Clearch^ apud Athen.
It was truly said of him (though but a heathen) that amongst men nothing can
escape without a nippe. But what then? If thy conscience shall give this
testimony of mine endeavors, that thy heart is comforted thereby, in regard
that thy judgment is strengthened in so necessary a point, then let the most
professed and sharpe-toothed carper say what he please: Job 31.35, 36.
nay though (as Job speaks) he should write a book against me, yet I would
take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me. 2. Sam. 6.22.
And as David reckened not of Michols taunts in regard of the honor done unto
him by those religious maidens; so will I also set at naught the malicious
taxings of all gaine-sayers, 2. Cor. 4.2.
if I shall approve my self to thy conscience in the sight of God.

If thou now demand of me, The sum of the Treatise.
what it is which I do here offer unto thee, know this briefly: It is a
Treatise tending to the discovery of the worth and excellency of the word
preached; teaching thee also, which art a continual hearer, how thou may by
hearing edify thy self in thy most holy faith; Jude 20.
as well by establishing thy heart in the soundness of truth, Heb. 13.9.
that so thou may not be carried about with diverse and strange doctrines; Rom
6.17.
as by framing thy self to obey from the heart unto the form of doctrine,
whereunto thou either art or shall be delivered. This is the sum.

The causes of writing it.
If thou demand again, what has moved me to attempt this? I answer in as few
words. There are two questions common in the mouths of many, either ignorant,
or il-disposed persons, by which the beauty of Preaching is and has been much
defaced in the eyes of many not so well settled: the one is, What need all this
preaching? the other is, Who knows whom to believe among these Preachers?
These two demands were first hatched in hell, but since being cherished by
Anabaptisticall and Popish spirits, 2. Pet. 3.16.
and by them buzzed into the heads of unlearned, unstable, and irreligious
people, they are brought unto a devilish perfection. Somewhat I can say out of
mine own experience, that through a conceit that these two questions (as they
are pressed by some ^ly workmen) are unanswerable, our Ministry is drawn
into contempt, and the calling of a Preacher is deemed of al other professions
the most superfluous, and such as may well be spared without any prejudice to
the wel-being of Gods Church. The giving answer to these hellish
interrogatories, as it has many times exercised me in the execution of my
public ministry, so it has at this time drawn me to the compiling of this
present Treatise: both that those of these parts, who to my knowledge have
need, and do desire it also, may have something by them, whereupon advisedly to
deliberate for the settling of their judgments, and that others likewise
elsewhere, who (it may be) have experience of the like Satanicall encounters,
may (in stead of a better help) enjoy the benefit of this that I have labored
in. This is the maine occasion, this is my chief intent in this Tractate:
wherein, as I have freely uttered that which I am persuaded is the truth, so
will I be ready also either to alter or better my judgment, (...). Basil.
Epist. 1. ad Greg. Na^an.
if any man out of the word of God shall offer to instruct me: having learned
this lesson, to teach what I know without grudging, and to learn that wherein
I am ignorant without blushing. And though perhaps many know in this matter as
much as I or any man can tell them, yet I am sure many are ignorant, and
therefore I may well maintain my course with that saying of Augustine, August
de Bap. contra Dona^
It is better to give him that has, then to turn him away which has not. It
is meeter that they which know should be wearied with many repetitions, then
those which are unskillful sent away empire for want of instruction. As for
writers in our times, directly of this subject I know none. If there be none, I
wish there may be; for as the saying is, One man is no man: (...).
and by the more this truth is avouched, the better it is confirmed. If there
be that have labored in this very kind wherein I now do, yet it can be no
prejudice to my endeavor. The ancient proverb is, that One bark cannot bear
all passengers; (...). Theog.
so neither can one author serve all men. Augustine held it profitable, that of
the same questions, Diuerso stylo non diuersa fide Augustine. de Tri^s. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
many books should be made by sundry men in a differing style, though not with
a differing faith. All stomachs we see are not alike; One kind of dressing
pleases one, which has no relish with another: and yet the same meat ordered
after some other fashion, may fit his appetite also. As there is a difference
of stomachs, so of humors and dispositions in men. The same matter diversely
handled, may find entertainment with diverse men; which yet digested after one
only fashion, would have acceptance but with a few.

Touching the manner of writing, I will promise thee nothing more then ordinary:
S^ip s^ laudare va^, v^tup^rare, st^s est. La^rs. de Arist.
It is not for me either to praise or discommend mine own works: the one were
vanity, the other folly. I submit all to thy judgment. Only this I say
somewhat to help my self: Hierom says there are two things requisite for
diuinity-studies, Hieronym. ad Marcellinam.
Silence and Leisure. Of the lack of both these I may well complain. Household
affairs, and the stirs occasioned by those businesses, cannot but breed
distraction: and he which is exercised with the care of a congregation, shall
meet with very seldom intermission. I entreat thee therefore, when thou shall
find me to fail in any thing (from which I account not my self privileged)
impute it to this forenamed want; and hope thus of me, that if I had had more
freedom and more time, all things should have been brought to better
perfection.

I have trodden in an old beaten path, both by old and new writers, by Divines
and Heathen, namely, to frame my matter to the form of a Dialogue, a very good
way (in my seeming) to help the understanding of common men: I confess it to
have have eased me much in writing, I doubt not but it shall turn to thy
benefit in reading also. Well, whatsoever it is, (good Reader) thine it is:
and being thine, I am commanded by him that may command us al, Prou. 3.27.
not to withhold it from thee. Receive it therefore with the same hand with
which it is delivered to thee. Use it to thy comfort; and whatsoever good thou
receiuest by it, let the glory be the Lords. All that I desire of thee by way
of recompense, is that thou be a suter to God on my behalf, Vt pr^nie^ and
subseque^ misericordia, quaecu^que sci^da nescio doceat me, in his quae vera
nous custodiat me, in quibus vt homo fallor corrigat me. Fulgen. ad Mou. l^ 1.
1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
that with his preventing and following mercy in all needful things which I
know not, he would instruct me, in all truth which I do know he would uphold me,
and in those things, wherein as a man I have failed, he would reform me, And
the same God sanctify us both throughout, that our whole spirit, and soul, and
body, may be kept blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Farewell. Modbury in Deuon. 1. September, 1604.

Thine in the Lord, Sam: Hieron.

The Preachers Plea: Or a Treatise in form of a plain Dialogue, making known
the worth and necessity of that which we call Preaching: showing also how a
man may profit by it, both for the informing of his judgment, and the
reforming of his life.
Epaphras a Minister. Nymphas a private man. Nymphas. SIr, unless I do very
much mistake, I have often heard you in your public sermons urge the
sufficiency that ought to be in a Minister, and especially for the clearing of
doubts and cases of conscience among those of who^ the holy Ghost has made him
an ouerseer.


Epaphras. It is not unlike, that among other points delivered in the ordinary
ministry, you have received this also: for I am well advised, that of old it
was the appointment of God, that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge,
and men should seek it at his mouth. Mal. 2.7.
So that we all, as many as tender the good of the Church of Christ, have cause
to bewail our countries estate, in which are so many Wels without water, 2.
Pet. 2.17.
as S. Peter terms them, and that not unfitly: for as a well placed by the
way side, in regard of the outward seeming thereof, puts the poor thirsty
traveler in hope of some refreshing; who repairing to it, and finding nothing
but emptiness, goes on his way with the greater discouragement: so these kind
of men standing in the Church of God, do by reason of their outward habit and
semblance of gravity, make the wearied, distressed and perplexed Christian
conceive, that if he have recourse to them he shall certainly be relieved: but
yet when he makes trial, he finds them to his greater grief, not unlike to
the images of the Heathen, Which have mouths and speak not; Psalm. 115.5.
not having the tongue of the learned, Isa 50.4.
that they should know how to minister a word in time to him that is weary. But
tell me neighbor, I pray you, this being granted, what you would infer
hereupon?


Nymphas. Surely, that which I would infer hereupon is this, that you being
by your calling a Minister, are therefore able, and being also by the
providence of God that Minister, upon whose labors I must especially depend,
are willing also to enter discourse with me, and to afford me your best help
for my better understanding in some points, wherein I have of late days been
very much perplexed.


Epaph. For mine ability in this behalf, what it ought to be I know, and what
I wish I it to be, I know also; yet whatsoever it is, I shall be most willing
(as my duty is) to spend my time, to bestow my labor, and to employ my best
endeavors in so holy a business as is your building up in knowledge, and your
furtherance in the ways of godliness. And I do heartily wish, that both you
and others of our neighbors would more often give me the like occasion, I
should then the better know your doubts, The profit of conference betwixt the
Minister and his people.
and so fit my self to speak in preaching to every man's conscience, and you
also should by that means be resolved in many things, which for lack of
conference must needs breed scruple, Heb 5.14
especially in those which have not yet through long custom exercised wits to
discern both good and evil.


Nymp. I am not a little glad to hear this from you: for to tell you the truth
plainly without flattery, I have heard some complain of a certain
strangeness in you and others of your coat, which they say has discouraged
them from aduenturing to confer with you.


Epaph. That may be but a pretense, and yet it will not altogether excuse
either others or my self herein: happily we be not so tender over the wants of
our people as we ought to be. Howsoever to prevent any such fear in you for
this time, I pray you be bold to speak your mind freely, and you shall find me
far from seeming weary of you, or from giving you any occasion to think that I
am unwilling to seek to resolve you (as I may) in any thing that may trouble
you. And I pray God, the God of all grace, even for Christ's sake, so to bless
this our conference, by giving to us both a right judgment in all things, that
it may be both to his glory, and to our further comfort.


Nymp. Amen. Well then, because I do eue^ long to acquaint you with that which
has (when I have been by my self) much disquieted me, you shall understand,
that the occasion moving me at this time to crave your advice, is this: Since
it pleased God to let the light of the glorious Gospel of his Son, by
preaching to shine in these parts more clearly then in former years, The
occasion of the whole Dialogue.
it has happened that I have fallen into the company, sometime of common men,
sometime of men of better fashion, which in the world we call wise men;
sometime also of men of learning, and by profession Ministers; some of whom to
my grief I have heard speak very disgracefully, some very scornefully, all of
them to the lessening of that reverent estimation which we ought to have of the
preaching of the word, and of the ordinary course thereof which is amongst us.


Epaph. It is not unlike, Resista^ce does ever accompany the preaching of the
truth
neither yet indeed is it to be marvelled at, as though some strange thing were
come unto us. The devil knows by long experience, that the preaching of the
word is ye ruin of his kingdom, and that thereby he is made like lightning to
fall down from heaven. Luke 10.18.
And therefore it has ever been his practice, at the very first entrance of
sincere preaching, ^. Tim. 3.8.
to raise up some men of corrupt minds, to resist the truth, and to stop the
happy proceedings of the Gospel. The first Preacher mentioned in the
Scripture, is Enoch the seventh from Adam, together with the relation of whose
doctrine, the text mentions also the cruel speakings, Inde 14 15.
and violent curses of wicked sinners against him. The next after him was Noah,
^ Pet. 2.5.
which was a Preacher of righteousness: and howsoever the story mentions
expressly no tumults raised up against him, yet it may easily be gathered, in
that he preaching so many years before the coming of the flood, yet all that
while we do not find any one to have been reclaimed, but they all continued in
their accustomed security, and knew nothing till the flood came and took them
all away. Mat. 24.39.
Pass from him to Moses, of whose resistance the story relates many
particulars: at his first undertaking any authority among the people, in
seeking to end a strife betwixt them, he was taken up short with the common
speech, Exodus 2.14
Who made thee a man of authority and a judge over us? After, when he was
sent back into Egypt to deliver the people from the bondage of Pharaoh, Exodus
5.20.
the story is a witness how often and openly he was gainsaid, sometimes by the
people, they murmuring at him; sometimes by Iannes and Iambre, 2 Timothy 3 ^. Numb.
16.
two Egyptians, sometimes by Korah and his accomplices: so that though the Lord
wrought mightily by Moses, yet he had daily experience of the malice of the
wicked against the truth. Now for the times of the Prophets, one Jeremy may be
a sufficient witness: he says, Ierem. 20.^.10
he heard the railing of many, and the word of the Lord which he preached was a
reproach unto him, and in derision daily. If you examine the times after
Christ, at the first spreading of the Gospel, this will be more apparent. Run
through the book of the Acts: Act. 2.13.
the preaching of Peter and John was entertained first with mocking: afterward
more open violence was used, Act. 4.2.
and the men in authority took it grievously that they taught the people, and
by common consent put them to silence. Ver. 18.
Steven was a man full of faith and of the holy Ghost, and they were not able to
resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke, Act 6.5 9.10.12
yet certain arose even of the synagogue, and moved the people against him.
Paul was mightily withstood, Act. 13.8. Act 14 19. Act. 19 24. 1. Tim. 1.15.
and 2.17.
sometimes by Elimas the sorcerer, sometimes by the Jews, sometimes by
Demetrius and those of that faction, sometime by Phygellus and Hermogenes,
otherwhiles by Hymeneus and Philetus. Thus we have even a cloud of witnesses to
confirm this, that it has ever bin the devils course by all means to
withstand the preaching of the truth. And therefore marvel not, good neighbor,
at it, when you see the like in these times: these are Satan's old pranks, and
he will thus bestirre himself to the end.


Nymp. Blessed be God, you have well satisfied me in this: so that I now see
that those which love the truth, have cause to rejoice at it, rather then to be
dismayed when they shall see the outrage of the world, and the fury of carnal
men against the publishing of the Gospel.


Epaph. You are not deceived: for the devil his struggling on this wise, shows
that there is a stronger then he come, to bind him, Lu^ 11.2^.
and to take his armor from him. And though the oppositions of men are at the
first assault something troublesome, yet we have ever cause to rejoice, when we
can say justly, Luke 6.23.
After this manner did they to the Prophets.


Nymp. Yet sir, by your leave, I cannot but marvel, that seeing the preaching
of the word is so excellent a thing as it is, eue^ the power of God unto
salvation, Romans 1.16.
men should notwithstanding so eagerly resist it, and show themselves so great
enemies unto it.


Epaph. You will cease to wonder, when you shall truly understand the causes
moving worldly and unregenerate men to malice and malign that, which indeed as
you say, if the worth thereof were known, they ought rather with all reverence
to embrace: and if you think that it may be helpful unto you in that, wherein
you desire to be resolved, I will open the same unto you something more at large.


Nymp. You cannot content me better, then if you shall undertake to discourse
thereof: for (as I suppose) when I have once learned the true cause why
preaching is so much misliked, I shall the loss fear the pretenced reasons
which I daily hear to be alleged against it.


Epaph. The causes of the dislike of preaching
The true causes why the course of preaching, when it is performed so as it
ought, The first cause
is so much repined at, are these three especially. The first is this. As men
love nothing more then their sins, so they loath nothing more then the
discovery thereof: they can by no means endure to have their secret coruptions
ripped up: it is a death unto them to be thoroughly and directly dealt withal.
Wicked Ahab hated the sincere Prophet of the Lord Michaiah, 1 King. 22.8.
because he never prophesied good unto him, but evil; that is, he never spared
him, but delivered the truth of God unto him plainly without flattery. Now the
preaching of the word, it is as the proverb is, The finger in the bile; Vng^ in
where
it is ever rubbing upon the gall: and being light, Ephesians. 5 13.
it makes all things manifest, and discloseth every man's close and secret
ungodliness. In the days of blindness (that is, in times and places where
there is not a settled course of preaching) many a man seems to himself and
to others also to be unreprovable, who when the light of the word by powerful
application breaks out, is discovered both to others, and especially to his
own conscience, to be nothing else then that which he was supposed to be. Here
is the^ one cause of dislike: the word thus handled, opens that which men of
all other things desire most to be concealed: so that it is true of the word of
Christ, which he witnesses of himself, John 7.7.
The world hates me, because I testify thereof that the works of it are
evil. Tell me now I pray you, what think you of this?


Nymp. Truly I cannot but bear witness to the truth hereof out of mine own
experience. For howsoever, I have now learned, I thank God, to say with David;
Let the righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.5.
for that is a benefit; let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil
that shall not break my head: yet I well remember, when I first heard
preaching, I was many times discontented: me thought the Preacher was too
peremptory, and a great deal more plain then needed; yea I had much ado at
times, not to persuade my self that I was chiefly aimed at in some things, and
that the Preacher had received some secret informations touching me and my
demeanor, which he there opened in the pulpit. So hard a thing is it for flesh
and blood to bear the words of reproof, yea though in the witness of a man's
own conscience he has every way deserved the same. But I heartily beseech God
on the behalf of you and others of your sort, that he would enlarge your
spirits, Ephesians 8 19.
and give utterance unto you, that you may open your mouths boldly to publish
the secret of the Gospel. For I think there were never any days of greater
security, Isa. 58 1
in which it is needful that the men of God should lift up their voice like a
trumpet, to show the people their transgressions and the house of Jacob their
sins: because indeed as it was said of old, Zach 1 11.
All the world sits s^ll and is at rest. And I wish unfeignedly, that the
several watchmen in their particular charges would remember that Item which
the spirit of God gives by the Prophet. Isa. 62 6.
Ye that are mindful of the Lord keep not silence. But sir I am afraid I do
too much interrupt you, therefore I pray you proceed to show the next reason of
dislike.


Epaph. You have said the very truth. We can be content to hear the word
until it rifle us. But as a purging potio^, as long as it is in drinking, is
but as other drink until it work, and then we could be content to cast it up
again: so we can quietly hear the word until it work upon us, but then it
seems a burden unto us. The second cause of the dislike of sincere preaching
But to come to the opening of the second reason of the dislike of preaching: I
have by observation found it to be this, because preaching is (as they suppose)
an enemy unto liberty, a thing which by nature every man desires to enjoy. In
the second Psalm we read what is the opinion that men have of Christian
obedience, Psalm. 2.3.
they call it bands and cords, that is to say, mere seruilitie and slavery, a
base and ignominious thing to be conformable. This is the very right conceit
which worldlings have of yielding them selves unto the doctrine of Christ
Jesus. When Lot admonished the Sodomites, Genesis 19 9.
and began to persuade with the^ to desist from violence against the strangers
that were with him in his house; they cried strait, Shall he judge and rule?
Forthwith they began to repine against his godly advise, as against a matter of
too much tyranny in Lot, and of too great subjection in themselves. It was the
imputation of Korah and his adherents to Moses and Aaron, Number. 16.3.
You take too much upon you: they deemed the government of Moses too
peremptery, as an enemy to their liberty, and therefore not to be endured. When
the Prophet Amos preached, it was said, Amo^ 7.10.
that the land was not able to bear his words: as who should say, his sermons
were too censorious: men that were of a liberal and free disposition were not
able to digest them. One reason which the Jews had against Christ to stir up
themselves to find a means to suppress him, was, because they supposed that
if they let him alone, John 11.48.
the Romans would come and take away both their place and nation. They thought
bondage would follow upon his doctrine. This might easily be enlarged with the
addition of many examples: but our own experience may be a sufficient
confirmation. For even at this day the world maintains the same opinion of
obedience and conformity in Christian duties, that it is an abridgement to
liberty, that it sauoreth of slauishnes and baseness for a man at the words of
a Preacher to be restrained.


Nymph. Truly sir it is even so: for out of my poor experience I am able to
witness thus much, that many men imagine that for them to live without
controlment, following the sway of their own affections, if they may swear
and blaspheme, and be vicious and riotous, and drink with the drunkard, and
profane the Sabbath, and scoff at zeal and sincerity in religion, and run
into all manner of excess, this is liberty. On the other side, they repute
the restraint from any of these things to be the greatest thraldom; a misery
it is to be kept within compass, that a man may not swear, may not spend the
Lords day in sports, or in worldly businesses, or in traveling upon his own
occasions, that he must set such a narrow watch before his mouth, as that there
should be no filthiness nor foolish talking, nor jesting: that he should be tied
to the continual hearing of the word, to often receiving the sacrament, and
the like, this is a misery of all miseries, a thing not to be endured: they
cry when you tell the^ these things, This is a hurd saying, who can abide it?
and determine as those of whom you spoke, Let us break their bands, and cast
their cords from us. But resolve me herin I pray you sir, is this liberty? Are
not men herein altogether mistaken?


Epaph. Yes verily: for howsoever men think themselves jolly fellows, because
they can seem to contemn all government, yet in indeed of all conditions it
is the basest, and of al thraldomes the most slavish for a man to be subject
unto sin, to be given over to his own lusts, to be led wholly by the corrupt
affections of his own heart, and to say the truth, even in reason it must needs
be so: for, as to be a slave and a vassal is in it self very opprobrious, and
such a thing as even the nature of man does abhor: so the more vile he is to
whom a man is in bondage, the more base and odious is it in the eyes of others,
and the more tedious to himself if he be of any ingenious disposition. Now what
more vile thing can there be imagined then sin is? What more abominable
before God, what more dangerous to the soul of him that commits it? so that
sin being a thing so vile, in how servile an estate is he that is a slave and a
vassal thereunto? Do you conceive me in this?


Nymph. I conceive you well. But yet this breeds a further doubt: we may all
complain with the Apostle, that we are even captive unto the law of sin: Rom
7 23.
who then is he that may be called a slave of sin?


Epaph. Our Savior shall make you answer: He that commits sin, John 8.34.
is the servant of sin: to which, to make it more plain, Romans 6.16.
you may add the saying of the Apostle, Know ye not that to whom soever you
give your selves as servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey?
The latter place is an exposition to ye other. He (says Christ) that
commits sin, is the servant of sin: he commits sin (says Paul)
that obeys sin: now he is said to obey sin, that finding his corrupt heart
to provoke him to any thing, sets himself presently to perform the same, or as
the holy Ghost speaks, takes thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Romans 13 14
So the adulterer is a slave to his sin, because he is wholly at the command
thereof, studying how to compass the same, and to satisfy his unclean
desires to the uttermost. The drunkard is a vassal to his sin, because it is
as it were his business, to set himself to the committing of it, to get money
to bestow upon it, to gather company that he may have fellows in it, to rise
early to follow it, to make his body able to bear it. The covetous person is a
drudge to his money: for, for it he will do any thing, he will defeat one, and
defraud another, and oppress a third, and grind the fourth, and take usury of
the fifth, and rake and wring, and extort, and lie and forswear, and whatsoever
else for his money. He is such a servant to it, as the Centurions servants were
to him: If money say to him, Go, he trudgeth by and by: if it say Come, it has
him at a beck: if it bid him do this, be it never so vile, unjust or unlawful,
eftsoons he does it. In like manner the continual gamester, is as it were in the
state of villenage to his humor, he will neglect all other occasions, either of
rest for his body, or of profit for his outward estate, or of religion for his
souls good, to fulfill it: for his life (if company be for him) he is not able
to forbear it. In like sort, the ignorant man is in bondage to his blindness;
for bring all the persuasions you can against it out of the word of God, yet
ignorance shall still have the upper hand, either he will not conceive you, or
he will not believe you, or he will not be directed by you. So again, the
superstitious is in thraldom to his own peevishness; for let God command
what he will, or prescribe what form of worship he thinks good, yet thus and
thus it has been so long, and so it shall be, and so will I do for ever. In a
word, whosoever suffers himself to be led by the corruption of his own
heart in any thing, without making resistance, without desiring the assistance
of Gods spirit to withstand it, whether it be pride, malice, revenge, or
whatsoever else, the same is a slave to his sin, a drudge to his own humor,
and the basest creature under heaven. Nay he is more slavish by degrees, then
those slaves who^ they used in old times (and as they do still in some
countries) to buy with money, and to use at their pleasure. For there is no
such slave, but he keeps a free mind in a servile estate: but men generally
being in this most filthy and wretched thraldom, think themselves to be in
the most happy estate that may be, and have no will nor disposition to be
freed, but are enemies to the means of their delivery. Thus have I showed you,
that though men think themselves at liberty when they may live licenciously,
yet they are much deceived: it may be said of them as Noah said of Canaan: Genesis
9.2^.
servants of servants they be, doing the business of the devil, not
grudgingly or unwillingly as bondslaues usually do, but readily, greedily, and
joyfully.


Nymph. I am (I thank you) well satisfied for this: yet by the way give me
leave to demand of you one thing, does not Paul say to Christians, Brethren
ye have been called into liberty: Gal. 5.13.
so that it seems there is liberty eue^ in Christianity, which what it is
(if any such be) I pray you to instruct me.


Epaph. Certainly the state and calling of a true Christian, is a lovely
calling, a calling that calls men unto it, such a calling as that the beams
thereof are able to ravish the eye. True it is, that ever since Adam did eat
the apple, all the mouths of his posterity are so out of taste, that we can
neither hear nor see, nor taste any thing that good is, so that if we look
upon the estate of a Christian living in obedience, with an eye of flesh, it
looks eue^ like Christ for all the world, even as a withered branch, Isa. 5^.^
and like a root in the dry ground; when we see it, there is no form that we
should desire it. The eye of a natural man can see no good in it, unless it be
good to clean unto the Lord, or it is good to be afflicted, or it is good to
run the way of Gods commandments, and such like, which are like pills, and to
die for it, will not down with a carnal man, yet if it be duly considered, it
is the only estate of liberty. It is not a fleshly liberty, a liberty for
men to do and speak, and live as they themselves please, every man after his
own fashion, as though the reins should be laid on every man's neck, and he
left to his own disposition. It is no such liberty, for then the more
Libertine the better Christian, and then all the world would soon be
religious, for all the world are welneare Libertines. But this liberty which
Christians have, is a spiritual liberty, a heavenly liberty, a liberty of the
soul; not which gives the body liberty from obedience, but which sets the
soul at liberty from destruction: not which makes us free to sin, but which
sets us free to serve God: not which gives a man leave to live as caring
for none, but which makes him by love a servant unto all: a freedom it is
from the bondage of Satan, from the thraldom of sin, from the heavy curse of
Gods law, giving an interest into Gods favor, into the merits of Christ, into
the felicity of the chosen, into the eternal inheritance of Gods kingdom. This
is the liberty of Christians; of which, howsoever worldly men which savor only
of earthly things may judge, yet such it is and so great, and has so many
privileges annexed thereunto, as that all the enfranchisements and freedoms
of this world are not worthy therewith to be compared. For as the new
Jerusalem, which is from above, is of all other cities and incorporations the
most glorious, so it is ye greatest privilege that any man can attain, to be,
of a stranger and a forreiner, admitted to be a citizen and free denizen of
that society. Thus at your request I have given you a taste of the doctrine of
Christian Liberty: the obedient Christian is the true freeman, even the Lords
freeman.


Nymph. Doubtless this is a most excellent point, and to the soul of a
Christian exceeding comfortable: how much therefore are we bound to give
thanks to our heavenly Father, who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, Col. 1.1^ 13.
and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. And I beseech God
give us the grace, that being thus made free from sin, Rom 6.18
we may become the servants of righteousness: that so having our fruit in
holiness, the end may be everlasting life. But now if it please you, Ver ^^
I long to hear the third cause of the small regard of Preaching.


Epaph. The third cause of contemptuous resistance, The (...) cause (...) the
^ke (...) preaching.
is the judging of that which is taught by the outward semblance of the
teacher: as for example: Some great man in the world, that happily is a
Magistrate, or a man of note and special reckoning in the place where he
lives, coming to the Church, and hearing his sin reproved, and such and
such duties persuaded, strait he casts his eye upon the person of the
speaker, and him he sees to be but some ordinary man, one that if he should
come in place where he is, should be served as the poor man in the torn
coat, Iam. 2.
of whom S. James speaks, that should be bidden to stand there aloof off,
or sit here at my footstool; eftsoone he begins to think with himself,
that it would be a shame for him to suffer the words of such a one so far below
him in the world, to carry so great authority with him, as that he should by and
by conform himself to his persuasions. Another perhaps that has had some
good education, and thereby has gotten some taste of learning, or is otherwise
by observation and experience grown to be a man of some reach and capacity:
he when he compares himself with ye teacher, seems to see as much (if not
more) learning, judgment, reading and understanding in himself as in him: and
therefore he says with himself, Why should I yield to his instruction? why
should his opinion sway so far with me, as to draw me from mine own courses?
why should not I be as well able to judge what is meet as he? A third, that is
(it may be) some gallant, a man of spirit, that thinks it a part of his
courage to be without fear even of God himself, he hearing at a sermon
threatenings denounced against sin, and against those very sins whereof his life
is a continual practice, in the greatness of his stomach, and in the
profaneness of his heart begins to set all at naught, imagining that it
cannot stand with that hardiness and undaunted resolution which he professes,
to be strike^ with the words of a silly man, or to have his heart terrified
with a few idle speeches. In a word, the people generally do not consider how
well a thing is spoken, how sufficiently proved, how soundly seconded and made
good by the word, this never enters into their thought: but they see that he
which preaches, what is he but a man of their own sort, one neither armed
with authority to punish them, nor endued with power to constrain them,
neither yet furnished with wealth to contend with them: and that al his force
lies in his tongue, the exercise whereof when it is once past, there is all
that he can do, and therefore they make a Tush at his doctrine, and say of the
Preacher as they did of old, He is but wind, Ierem. 5.13.
and what is he that he should command us? Thus, this also is one cause of
resistance to the holy doctrine taught, men look no higher then the man, and
they value all that is said by the quality of the speaker.


Nymph. This discourse of yours, so fully discovering the proud conceits of an
unreformed heart, calls to my mind the commendation which Paul gives of the
Thessalonians When ye received of us (says he) the word of the preaching of
God, 1 Thessalonians 2.13.
ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God:
for so long as men have no higher a conceit of that which they hear, then
that it is but a man's doctrine, the respect unto it cannot choose but be very
small; so that I must needs yield unto you in this, that this also may well go
among the number of the causes why preaching is of so slender estimation here
amongst us. Yet sir, men that are enemies in this case, do pretend other
reasons, and will not be known of any of these to be the occasion or cause of
their dislike.


Epaph. That is most true, for sin does ever seek shades, and it is a
trick which we have learned of our grandfather Adam, Genesis 3.7.
to sew figge-leaues together to cover our nakedness. For shame men will not
say that they are hereby moved to dislike: yet notwithstanding these be the
true grounds, and men in their consciences know it to be so. If a man had asked
of Pashur why he smote Jeremy the Prophet, and put him in the stocks, Ierem.
20.2.
no doubt but he would tell you a very formal tale, as that, chap. 26.11.
He prophesied against the city: he has not sought the wealth of the people,
but the hurt: chap. 38.4
and that he discouraged the hands of the men of war, in speaking such words
unto them. This would be Pashurs pretense, thus he would plead for his strait
courses against the poor Prophet, yet this is but a color: for the very
matter is, Jeremy was a little too bold, he spoke too plain, his sermons were
like a fire, Ierem. 23.29.
and like a hammer that breaks the stone, he kept not a word back of all that
the Lord commanded him.


Nymph. Indeed I have heard much spoken by many, and diverse exceptions made
against preaching, but I never heard any man acknowledge his dislike to
proceed from any of these causes which you have named: I wish therefore that
you would instruct me how to stop the mouths of gaine-sayers, when I light into
the company of such. They will not perhaps say much to your faces that are
Preachers, but such as I am shall often hear them talk at liberty, and utter
the very bottom of their stomachs, and spend all their powder and shot to the
beating down of that which I hope they shall never be able to overthrow.


Epaph. Assure your self of that: for we may be bold to say in the comfort of
a good conscience, 2 King 6.16.
They that be with us, are more then they that be with them. And when we come on
the same errand with Jeremy, why may we not hope upon the same promise, Ierem.
1.19.
They shall fight against thee but they shall not prevail against thee, for I
am with thee to deliver thee, says the Lord: yet notwithstanding, lest their
conceits should be any hindrance to those that are well affected, or it should
be an encouragement to them in their evil, when they find those that seem
contrary minded, unable to answer them, therefore I do both commend your care
herein, and will be as helpefull to you as I am able in opening the vanity of
their several exceptions, that are enemies unto preaching.


Nymph. I thank you for it: and I trust that he which commanded Peter when he
was himself converted, Luke 22 32.
to strengthen the brethren, will both bless your care to my profit, and
render to you seven fold into your bosom, the comfort that I shall receive by
your advice. I will be bold therefore, as far as I can call to mind, to make
known unto you every thing that I have heard objected in this case.


Epaph. Be so, I pray you, and fail not till you be fully satisfied, to urge
every thing to the uttermost.


Nymph. You know sir that we have in our country, men of diverse humors, The
several excepters against preaching.
and sundry fashions; some grossly ignorant, and mere sottish, chiefly in
matters of religion; some profane, such as Esau was, who care more for a
portion of meat, esteem more of a worldly commodity, then of a heavenly
treasure; some wise and sensible, as the world calls wisdom; some learned
also, and scholars by profession: now it has been my hap at some one time or
other, to fall into conference with every of these sorts, and as communication
draws in one thing after another, so to find out their several opinions: and
though some of them be very simple, and to be called idle surmises, rather then
grounded reasons, yet because you have made me so kind an offer, you shall
therefore have all.


Epaph. Be it so, I am well contented: and because Ignorance is a mother sin,
therefore let us first hear I pray you the ignorant man's exceptions.


Nymph. The ignorant peoples exceptions against preaching.
One thing that I have heard some ignorant men with us allege, is, that they
can see no reason why there should be more use of preaching now, then there
has been in former times. They have lived (they say) some thirty, some
forty, some more years without a settled ministry, having only (unless it
were now or then at times) the ordinary service read among them; and all this
while they felt no want of that which is now called teaching, and therefore
they are minded not to esteem that much for the remainder of their life,
without which they have lived and done well enough hitherto. How like you this
sir? is not this a profound reason? Is not here good Divinity?


Epaph. Indeed you may well call this the ignorant man's reason, it is so
gross, having in it but three errors, which you know is nothing to speak of
in so short an allegation. First of all, they will neglect preaching now,
because they have lived without it hitherto: as though it were wisdom for a
man in his old or middle age, to refuse a kindness offered, because in his
youth or childhood he had no means to enjoy it. Had it been a good reason for
Paul, when Christ called him from heaven, to have said, O sir it is now too
late, I am a man that have spent the best part of my time without the knowledge
of thee and of thy religion, and therefore I pray thee trouble me not now, I
hope to shift out as well for so much of my life as is behind, as I have done so
this day? No man will be so without common sense, as to say, that Paul might
justly have refused upon such a pretense: and yet it had bin as good a reason
as theirs. Secondly they err in this, in that they account the time of their
ignorance to have bin without danger, because they never saw the danger. Alas,
little do they consider the extreme misery of those times. John 12 3.
Christ says that he that walks in the dark, namely without ye bright
shining light of Gods holy word knows not whither he goes: he is even in the
valley of the shadow of death, Ephesians. 4.1^.
a stranger from the life of God, walking after the course of this world, and
after the prince that rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
even the spirit that works in the children of disobedience. A man that has
been in a swound, and is awaked out of it by the pains of his friends, he will
tell you how pleasing the slumber thereof seemed to his senses, and at the first
beginning to be awaked, he will say perhaps, You should have let me alone, why
did you trouble me? But when he is better advised, he will thank them that
brought him again, because he knows that if he had been let alone, it might
have cost him his life. So in this case, a man living in blindness and gross
ignorance, seems to himself for the present to be in a marvelous good
state, and his soul in as good as any man's; and when the Preacher shall cry
unto him, Ephesians. 5 14.
Awake thou that sleep, Ezech. 18.31.
and stand up from the dead: Oh thou ignorant person, Why will thou die save
thy self from this froward generation. Like enough he will say, Act 2 40.
O M. Preacher, trouble me not I pray you, spare your sides, I am well enough,
my soul is in no such danger: but if the Lord once open his eyes, Ezech. 18.3^.
and make him a new heart and a new spirit, then he will bless God for him that
called him, because he will then perceive, that otherwise he had even runned on
to his own destruction. He that trauelleth by night upon the edge and hanging
of a steep hill, from which if he should fall he must needs break his neck,
goes on without fear, because in the dark he sees not the danger: but ^et
him be brought back at light of day, it will make him even quake to think upon
the peril he was in, and wonder that ever he should escape it. In like sort, he
that is in the blindness of ignorance without ye word, the same is hourly
ready to fall into the pit of hell; yet he fears it not, because he sees it
not: but if ever he have any remorce by the light of the Gospel shining in his
heart, it will terrify him to remember his former misery, and make his belly to
tremble to consider it: so that here is the second error in this ignorant
objection. Men conclude there was no danger in the days of blindness, because
they saw no danger, whereas indeed the danger was so much the greater. A third
error there is yet in this exception, and that is, that they consider not how
that the refusal of Gods mercy which is freely offered in the preaching of ye
word, does double their sin, and make their condemnation more just by whom it
is refused. Ioh. 5 32.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin, (says
our Savior) that is, they had not been chargeable with this sin of contempt
of me and of my doctrine: But now have they no cloak for their sin, now they
have nothing to plead for excuse. If this were duly thought upon, that the
neglect of the word, when the means of making the same familiar unto them is
become common among them, did make them guilty of a greater sin before God, men
would then not dare like the deaf Adder to stop their cares, and to suffer the
holy doctrine of God to fall to the ground unregarded. Thus I hope I have showed
the unreasonableness of this first reason.


Nymph. This that you have spoken as it makes me see plainly the idleness o^
this ignorant exception, so it calls to my remembrance a notable place of
scripture which I once heard you allege in one of your sermons to this or the
like purpose: it is a part of Paul his speech at Athens. The time of this
ignorance (says he) God lightly passing over, Act 17.10. (...).
now he admonishes al men every where to repent. It seems to me that this
place may be applied fitly to this matter.


Epaph. It is well remembered: for indeed that speech fitteth well with this
point. Paul there disputing with the heathen that worshipped dumb idols, and
thought the Godhead to be like gold or silver, or stone, graven by the art and
invention of man: least they should object novelty unto him, and should say as
the Papists do at this day, how was it possible that all the world should for
so many years be deceived: he tells them that it seemed good unto God, for
causes best known unto himself, to permit the ignorance of so many thousands
of years, yet so as that time of blindness being now determined, men should
not plead prescription, reckoning more of an old error the^ of newly revealed
truth: but should open their ears and hearts to this his general summons to
repentance. I thank you for minding me of this place; it shows notably what a
fond thing it is, not to take notice of the truth revealed, but to prefer a
long continued ignorance before it. Have you any more exceptions of this
nature, forged in the shop of ignorance? like enough you have; for it is an old
and a true saying, that error is infinite, though truth be but one. If this
that you have named have any more fellows, bring them forth; I doubt not, but
by the grace of Christ to discountenance them.


Nymph. Yes sure: when the multitude hear it taught, that the preaching of the
word is a thing of that nature and necessary use, that without it men
ordinarily can not be saved, they cry out by and by; And what is then become
of our forefathers, they had no preaching, yet they were in their times good
people, honest, and well esteemed in the places where they lived. If we should
then yield to this, that this preaching is with so reverent a regard to be
depended upon, we must needs condemn our progenitors out of whose loins we are
come, which to do were more then inhumanitie. I can tell you sir, this is an
argument that has a general approbation, and therefore I pray you look well
to it that you can answer it.


Epaph. Well, as hard as it is, yet it is not so intricate as was Sampsons
riddle, Judge. 14 12.
that in seven days could not be interpreted, for indeed it is of no value. It
is true, we are both by nature and by religion to honor the memories of our
ancestors, and in all good things to be imitators of them; but in matters of
religion we are not to have an eye to them or to their times, but we must
consider what it is which the Lord requires at our hands. Whether they were
saved or no, it is not for us to enquire: if the Lord have dealt more
mercifully with us then he did with them, we have cause to magnify his holy
name, to look to our selves that we despise not the riches of his bounty, and
to leave them to the Lord to whom they stand or fall. It is a good saying of an
ancient father to this purpose: Cypr. li. 2. ep. 3.
If my predecessors (says he) either by ignorance or by simplicity have not
kept and holden that which our Lord has taught them by his example and
authority, the mercy of our Lord might pardon them. But as the good Doctor
says, We cannot hope for the like, having better means of instruction. When
the outward ordinary means failed, Gods hand was not shortened, but he was
able even in the midst of blindness to save those which belonged to the
election of grace. As for us, Heb. 2.^. 2. Cor. 6.1
it shall not be safe for us to neglect this so great salvation, or to receive
the grace of God in vain, foolishly aduenturing our selves upon the unknown
condition of our forefathers. And this I hope may suffice to take away the edge
of this fancy. It is humanity to think the best of our forefathers, but it
is divinity to look carefully to our selves.


Nymp. I am glad you have furnished me with so sufficient an answer to this
exception which I have been often assaulted with; and indeed because of the
common instinct of nature, it strikes the deeper impression, and is the more
hardly removed But I think this that you have said may prevail there where
obstinate wilfulness has not gotten the mastery and therefore I will lay this
up as safely as ever Goliath his sword was laid up, ^ Sam 21 ^.
that I may ever have it in a readiness for such a purpose. But sir there are
yet more objections of the same stamp, which I must entreat you also to
clear, that so you may make me a perfect scholar in this point.


Epaph. Who would think it possible that men so dull and incapable in matters
which concern their greatest good, should be abounding with arguments
wherewith to plead even against their own souls. But the devil is a cunning
instructor, and laboreth to strengthen men in ignorance (because it is the
scepter of his kingdom) as much as it is possible. Let us hear therefore what
the ignorant, with whom it has been your hap to converse, have yet further to
allege.


Nymphas. They say that the most learned of you all, who are called Preachers,
when you have showed the uttermost of your cunning, can say no more then they
know already; namely, that they must love God above all, and their neighbors
as themselves: and seeing they know this well enough already, what needs (say
they) any more instruction.


Epaphras. This is a conceit scarce worthy the confuting; yet lest my silence
should breed an opinion in you, that there is more in it then indeed there
is; do but consider of it by the like: If a man speaking of husbandry, and
hearing another to discourse of the great skill and long experience that is
requisite to make a man a good husband, should say by and by, Tush, what talk
you so much of skill and knowledge herein? Why? It is nothing but this, to plow,
to sow, and to reap: should not such a one deservedly be laughed at, and be a
scorn to those which hear him? Yes, and not without cause: for every man
knows, that though this be the sum of husbandry, yet there are diverse
particulars belonging to these, which are neither soon learned nor easily
practiced: so that he who desires to be a good husband, and to profit by his
labors, and to make the best of every thing, must not satisfy himself to know
this, that there is nothing in husbandry but to ear the land, and to reap the
fruit, but he must learn also what belongs to the right performance of
these, otherwise he may err in sowing, play the fool in plowing, and come
short in reaping. And even so it is in this case: true it is, that the sum of
all religion consists in this, in loving God above all, and a man's neighbor
as him self: but what then? If a man shall think by and by that he is a good
Christian, and knows enough, because he apprehends these generals, the same
is exceedingly deceived, for there are many other branches belonging to each of
these, which unless a man do know, he can neither love God as he ought, nor
his neighbor as he should: so that to my seeming, even common reason is
sufficient to convince men's ignorance herein. There is not the meanest
profession, the coursest trade, the plainest occupation, but it has (as we
say) a certain mystery in it, there are many rules belonging to it: which
must be known, not in gross only, but even very precisely, before a man can
in any mediocritie practice the duties of the same.


Nymphas. It is true that you say, for mine own part I confess it: but yet
Ignorance will reply and say, Will you then urge upon every common man the
knowledge of every point which in preaching you deliver: that seems very
unreasonable; neither can men that want the helps of learning attain unto it:
and will not a good meaning make a supply for all this?


Epaphras. How unreasonable it may seem in men's eyes to be urged to such exact
knowledge, I cannot tell: this I am sure of, that we that are Ministers, are
charged to show the people the whole counsel of God, Act 20 27. Ier. 6.2.
and not to keep a word back. If we cannot be dispensed with to keep secret
any thing, how shall it be tolerated in the people to neglect the knowledge of
that, which we are bound by virtue of our commission to deliver? It was but an
idle prayer of the Apostle, on the behalf of the Colossians, to beg of God
that they might be fulfilled with knowledge of Gods will, Col. 1.9
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: or for the Philippians, Philip.
1.9 10
that they might abound in all judgment, and discern things that differ. I
say these were but idle wishes, if so be that full measure of knowledge is not
required of every Christian. And if some certain rudiments, and as it were
shreds of knowledge were sufficient, the Hebrews might well have complained of
wrong, in that they were so sharply censured for their being dull of hearing,
Hebr. 5.11.1^
and for that they still after so much teaching needed the first principles of
the word of God. And sure, if it be unreasonable to urge men to know so much,
we must (which were blasphemy) challenge the wise God as an unnecessary
burdener of mankind, who has revealed so much. As it is curiosity to enquire
into that which God has concealed, so it is unthankfulness not to take notice
of whatsoever he has left written for our learning. Romans 15 ^ Deuter. 29.^9.
The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong
to us and to our children for ever, says the Scripture. I confess, that if a
man might attain to the age of Methuselah who lived nine hundred sixty and
nine years, G^
and should in that space equal his diligence in searching the scripture unto
David, who made it his meditation continually, Psalm. 11^
yet many things would escape him, and he should when he had done all, be feign
to confess, that the greatest part of that which he knows, is not the least
part of that which he knows not: but what then? because a man when he has
done best cannot know all, shall he therefore not labor to know any thing? God
forbid. Ignorance by a kind of necessity may seem to have some excuse, but a
voluntary neglect of that which a man may know, cannot have so much as a color
of allowance.


Nymphas. Yet me thinks it is hard for the common people (the greatest part
whereof cannot so much as read) to attain to so much knowledge as you seem to
persuade, especially if withal they be such as live by their labor, and have
charge of children, how shall they spare time for such occasions?


Epaph. Verily it is a woeful thing to consider the dullness that is amongst
men; and they do not know what they want that cannot read (a thing which
notwithstanding of all other the parts of learning is the most easy, and as
soon learned as to be able to play at the cards, if men were as desirous of
the one as of the other): yet howsoever, in this case of knowledge in religion
men do cast many mo perils then they need, and are like the slothful man, of
whom Solomon speaks, Proverb. 22.13
who says, A lion is without, I shall be slain in the street. Proverbs 14.6.
For knowledge is easy to him that will understand: Matthew 11.30
and the yoke of Christ, it is easy, and his burden light: wherefore serves
the scripture but to give unto the simple sharpness of wit, Proverb 14.
and to the child knowledge and discretion? Psalm. 119.130
The entrance into thy words (says David) shows light: as soon as a man in
humility, and in a true desire to know God, does but begin to apply himself
to the means of knowledge, he shall secretly feel such a sudden light cast
in upon his understanding, Psalm 25 14
that he shall be able to apprehend even the very secret of the Lord, and the
great mystery of godliness; 1. Timoth. 3.16 P^al 84.7. Eph^^ 3 19.
and so shall go from strength to strength, until he be filled with all the
fullness of God. And we see by comfortable experience, with what gifts of
judgment and good understanding and speech, yea and of prayer also, the Lord
furnishes many, who notwithstanding have wanted the helps of good education:
wherein the Lord makes good that ancient prophecy touching the kingdom of
Christ, that he would in it pour out his spirit even upon servants and maids,
Joel ^
so that the eyes of the blind should be lightened, and the ears of the deaf
opened, Isay 35.5.6.
and the dumb man's tongue be able to sing. 2 Cor 9.15.
And thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. So that it is a causeless
fear which men have, who imagine the knowledge of the doctrine of salvation,
to be a matter of that exceeding difficulty. Now for the multitude of worldly
businesses, the necessary following whereof men plead partly as a matter
priuiledging them, partly as a thing hindering them from intending these better
occasions: if men had learned what this is, Seek ye first the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you: Math.
16 2^.
or this, What shall it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he
lose his own soul? then they would be ashamed either to think religion a
hindrance to their worldly thriuing it being a furtherance rather, Proverb 1^
22.
because it is the blessing of the Lord which makes rich) or else to mind
only earthly things, Phil. 3.19.
spending all their time about that which is on the earth, Col 3.2. Proverb.
8.18. Ephesians. 3.8
and neglecting that durable riches, even the unsearchable riches of Christ. I
know the business of the world must be followed; ^ Thessal. 3.^0
He that labors not, let him not eat, says Paul: 1. Timoth. 5.8.
and if there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of
his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. Yet I know
too, that he who will walk circumspectly, not as a fool, Ephesians. 5.15 16.
but as a wise Christian, must redeem the time, and in the midst of his
worldly employments remember that one needful thing, Luke 10 42.
which when al other commodities become that which they are, even nothing,
Proverb. 13.5.
will tarry by him, and shall never be taken from him. Moreover, put case a man
be either so tied by the nature and quality of his calling, that he can spare
no time (so as among others, day-laborers and other poorer tradesmen seem to
be) or else is destitute of means to further his knowledge when he is private
and at home, yet if a man would be conscionably careful of profitable spending
the Sabbath day, learning every such day, though but one point, and caring to
keep it and to hide it in the heart, P^e 119.11 Luke 2.19.
and to ponder it in the week following, that he may by that means make it his
own, it is incredible to a man that tries it not, to what store of spiritual
knowledge even a common man shall attain, and what understanding he shall have
in the mystery of Christ. Ephesians. 3.4.
We have a saying touching earthly things, that light gains make heavy
purses: we shall surely find it true in this, he that shall labor to grow
richer every Sabbath but by one point, he shall before he is ware of it grow
to a very comfortable portion of the saving knowledge of Gods truth.


Nymph. I have very carefully attended to this which you have spoken, and I
praise God I find much comfort in it; yet there is one thing behind which I
have still looked for, which I am bold to put you in mind of, lest you should
forget it, and that is touching the good meaning which the common sort so much
trust unto: they say their heart is good though their skill be small, and they
hope that God will accept it. I pray you satisfy me in this also, and then I
shall be reasonably furnished against the plea of the ignorant.


Epaph. You do well to mind me of it, howsoever I was even now of my self
coming to it: Luke 8.15.
An honest and good heart is a thing in the eyes of God much esteemed; and it
is the especial thing he craves of us, to give him our heart: Proverb. 23 26.
yet generally that which men call a good heart to Godward, is nothing less
then that which it is called: for so long as a man's heart is a dull, ignorant,
Ier. 17.9.
unregenerate and unreformed heart, it is wicked above all things. There can be
no goodness in that heart where there dwells gross and blockish ignorance
of God and of his truth: Proverbs 1.22. Psalm 50 17.
It is no good heart which loves foolishnes and hates knowledge, and casts
the word of God behind it. Matthew 12.34.
It is no good heart which makes not the mouth to speak out of the abundance
of it, 1. Pet. 3.15.
and to be able to give a reason of the hope that is in it. Romans 10.2.
There may be a zeal of God, where there is no knowledge of God; but it is but
a blind zeal, and God esteems it not. They which kill and persecute Gods
servants, may have a kind of good meaning, and may think that in so doing they
do God service, John 16 2.
yet this cannot help them, so that men are deceived in their good meaning:
for no meaning is good, but that which is guided by knowledge: yea though the
thing meant be in it own nature good, yet if the meaner be not assured of the
goodness of it from Gods word, his meaning is naught, and that by the the rule
of Scripture, which tells us, Roman. 14.23.
that whatsoever is not of faith is sin.


Nymph. I must needs yield to this that you say, that it is true; and yet me
thinks it is something hard: Pe^ ^ath.
for I remember I have read in a good author (whose judgment I think you will
also approve of) that there are many, who though they are ignorant in many
things, yet they have a meaning of true faith, and that which is wanting in
knowledge is supplied in affection: this is a very comfortable saying, and to
my seeming also it does something favor the conceit which men have of being
excused by their good meaning.


Epaph. I do approve of the author you allege, as of a worthy instrument in
Gods Church: I agree also to that which you have cited out of his writings: for
(as he also says) all men have not that sharpness of conceit, and fastness
of memory, to be able to wade into the depth of every point, and to remember
every particular. Whit de sacra Script. Q^est. 2.
And indeed an exact knowledge of the mysteries of religion, so as to be able
to dispute schollerly of them is not required of every common man: to which end
is the speech of S. Augustine; August. in lib. contra Epistol. and. cap. 4.
It is not (says he) the quickness of understanding, but the simplicity of
believing which is safest for the people: all this is true, but yet it makes
nothing for the defense of that brutish ignorance which men seek to color
with the pretense of a good meaning: for this rule, that good affection
supplieth the want of knowledge, holds only in those who having in some
small measure felt the sweetness of knowledge, do labor to increase in it. In
such it is true, that the sincerity of the heart makes a kind of recompense
for the defect of knowledge: but where there is a settling of a man's self upon
the drogs of ignorance, without grieuing and sorrowing for his own dullness,
without caring and endeavoring to thrive in knowledge, there this rule has no
place, there the pretended good meaning is but sottishness, and that kind of
ignorance makes a man a stranger from the life of God. Ephesians 4 11
And therefore it is well said of a learned man, that whereas God forgiueth
manifold ignorances in his children, Melan^h^n
yet he requires that we be teachable, and not hardened in our own dullness
and sluggishnesse.


Nymphas. You have fully satisfied me touching this doubt: there is only one
thing more behind, which ignorance pretends, and it is common in many men's
mouths: let them (say they) preach and we will pray: they hope their devotion
in praying will do them more good then all your preaching.


Epaph. It is a world to see the cunning of the devil, who goes about to
overthrow one holy duty by another, and to oppose those things which ought to
go as it were hand in hand together. But what thing is there so senseless,
whereto ignorance in the Scripture may not be persuaded? It is our English
proverb, The blind eats many a fly: and so indeed the ignorant in the
book of God embrace many gross and ridiculous absurdities: for if men knew
what the Scripture says in this case, they would never cast out such an idle
speech: Solomon says, Proverb. 28 9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. What think you shall become of their prayers then who resolve not
to afford the use of their ears unto Gods word? Do they not make a fair
hand, when by their contempt of preaching they bring a curse upon their
praying? Add hitherto that Paul says expressly, Romans 10.14.
that as men cannot call on him in whom they have not believed, so neither can
they believe without hearing, nor hear without a Preacher. Can men credit
Paul in this, and yet think to pray well without the help of preaching?
Surely no. How can men pray aright, without knowledge of their own wants,
without the apprehension of the promises of God, upon which to build their
assurance to be heard? and how can they attain to either of these ordinarily,
but by the preaching, expounding, opening and applying of Gods word? That which
men commonly call praying, is but a lip-labor, consisting in the recital of a
few words, the sense and meaning whereof is not understood, and it is mere
babbling in the ears of God; it may be well called the sacrifice of fools:
Eccles. 4.17.
and it may truly be said of such blind devotions and tongue-prayers, which the
heart does not conceive, as it was said of the hypocritical ceremoniousnesse
of the Jews; Isa 1.14.
The soul of the Lord hates them, they are a burden unto him, he is weary to
bear them. I think I have sufficiently discovered the weakness of this silly
objection.


Nymph. I praise God I do also see the vanity of it; and I hope I for my part
shall learn so to esteem of preaching, as that I shall also reverence that
good means which God has in his wisdom ordained for my help in the
performance of that holy duty, that so by often hearing I may learn to pray,
and by praying I may make good use of the things I hear. Well sir, now that
you have armed me against the common pretenses of the ignorant sort, whereby
they make themselves believe, or rather are made believe by the devil, that it
is no danger to contemn preaching. I must challenge your promise, and crave
your help also touching another sort of men, who as they are ignorant in the
matters of God, so are they come to a higher degree of hardness, and have even
almost taken up their seat in the chair of scorners, Psalm. 1.1.
and do not only not regard preaching (which is the fault of those of whom I
have spoken hitherto) but scoff at it, and endeavor by lading it with sundry
reproaches altogether to disgrace it.


Epaph. I am as willing to perform my promise as I was to make it; and yet I
know that in regard of these profane ones themselves, this will be but a
thanklesse piece of service: Proverb. 15 ^2.
for a scorner loves not him that rebukes him, neither will he go unto the
wise. Therefore I will do it rather in desire to satisfy you, then in any great
hope I have to reclaim them.


Nymph. Indeed I have sometimes cast in a word according to my skill, when I
have been in the company of such; and they have for the most part still showed
themselves like the fool, Proverb. 14.9.
who makes a mock of sin, Proverb. 10.23
to whom it is even a pastime to do wickedly: yet it is good to be able
sometimes to answer them according to their foolishness, Proverbs 26.5
least they should be wise in their own conceit. Well then, The objections of
profane men against preaching.
to come to the matter without circumstance, the exceptions of profane men
against preaching are diverse, some against the persons of the preachers, some
against the hearers, some otherwise, as you shall understand in several. First,
touching you that are the preachers, it is common in their mouths: Who be
worse then they? If there be any covetousness, or pride, or ambition, and the
like, where shall you find it but in the Clergy? When they are in the pulpit,
they must needs say somewhat; and therefore, though when they be there, they be
very hot and eager against vice, yet in their own courses they are as bad or
worse then other men. This is one exception.


Epaph. The answer to this wretched exception (not for the weight of argument
yt it carries, but for the variety of leudnes and error which is in it) will
divide it self into many particulars. First of all therefore, touching them
that object this, M. Greenham.
they are very properly by a learned man of our times compared to foul
gamesters, who when they have lost all at the cards, and have the last dealing
in their hands, and perceive that not likely to prove to their mind, rise up in
a chafe and fling down all, and say there has been foul play played, when
indeed the fault is chiefly in themselves: so many being naught them selves,
and being (as the Apostle speaks) damned by their own consciences, T^. 3.11.
when they have no other shift, cry out upon Preachers, thereby to cloak their
own iniquity: therein not much unlike to him that in a throng at a fair or
market, bids men beware of the Cutpurse, that he in the mean time (being a
man of ye trade) may practice his diuing into men's pockets with the less
suspicion. And mark it when you will, you shall never find them any other then
mere sensual men, yea and for the most part openly noted for some one bad
course or other, of drunkenness, oppression, usury, covetousness, adultery, or
the like, that make this objection. Secondly, (because there may be truth in an
objection, though there be little truth or honesty in him that makes it) know
this therefore for the substance of this cavil, that put case it were so,
(which thanks be to God is not so) that all Preachers did confute their own
sermons with their evil life, and had Esaus hands with Jacobs voice, and were
like a file which smootheth other things, it self remaining rough: yet this
could make nothing against preaching. For is Physic naught, because many
Physicians perhaps live contrary to their own rules of physic? Or is law
damnable, because some professors thereof do live lawless, giving rules of
equity to others, themselves keeping none but ill rule? No man will be so
without sense to affirm it: why the^? shall the course of preaching be
condemned, for the supposed misdemeanor of them which preach? God forbid. Is
any man so unwise as to disobey a warrant coming apparently from a man of
authority, because the Constable or Tithingman is a naughty fellow that
brings it? Who then but either a fool or a froward heart will tread the holy
doctrine of God under his feet, because he is a man of no good carriage that
delivers the same? Thirdly, men are to consider this also, that all are not
Ministers which are so called, neither all true Preachers come from God that
stand up in ye pulpit: for in these corrupt times many are crept into the
Church of God by the window, whom God did never set apart to that holy service:
S^ta s^ct^ (...) est duplex (...).
now it is impossible but that such as these (though they may a long time cover
their double iniquity under a dissembled sanctity) yet at last break out into
extremities. Now it is against common reason to turn their miscariage into the
general disgrace of all honest Ministers. There be many counterfeit
dog-leaches and pretenced Surgions, that having gotten a little Rubarbe or
Balsamum, and some few words of art, run about the country and beguile the
people, and cozen them of their money, purging their purses and scouring their
bags under color of clensing their bodies and searching their sores. Shall we
say therefore that al Physicians though they be never so well learned, never so
well experienced, never so conscionable and wary in their courses of
administering, are cozeners, and that it were pity but the country were rid
of them all? it were an indignity once to imagine it. There is no profession,
but it has as it were a certain scumme, and there are some that make show of
it, that are altogether unworthy of it. Shall the vileness and unbeseeming
carriage of those that are but the refue, and as I may so speak the tail of an
honest profession, be cast into the face of all the rest that belong unto it?
Reason it self says it is unmeet. And men would soon yield to this, were it
not that the devil has taught them to be wise in any thing, saving in
religion, to favor any profession saving that of the ministry. Men are herein
like unto many Lawyers, who if you put them a case, without naming the parties,
will tell you truly what is law: but when they understand who they be who^ the
matter concerns, then they change their opinion, and the law is altered. So
in the world, ask you any man of common understanding this question, whether it
be meet that all of a trade or company should be challenged, because some such
or such are worthy to be punished; he will tell you there is no reason for it:
but come to particulars touching preachers, the^ he is of another mind, he will
be ready to say yt al Christ's disciples were naught because Judas was a devil:
John 6.70.
and because he (it may be) knows some two or 3. sir John's or some other
(perhaps of better note in ye eyes of the world, but yet scarcely worthy of
their places) to be climing with Diotrephes, John 9 2. Timoth 4.10.
or embracing this present world with Demas, or carrying themselves insolently
with Pashur, Ierem. 20.1.2.
or otherwise keeping bad rule with him, who imagining that his master does
defer his coming, Luke 12.45.
begins to smite the servants and the maidens, and to eat and drink and to be
drunken: by and by he concludes, that they are all naught, and voweth that he
will never believe any of them, for all their shows of holiness. Fourthly,
for the further clearing of this point, this is also to be considered, that
Ministers and Preachers do not think themselves freed from common infirmities,
or endued with some greater power or larger privilege against sin, then
others: and therefore every slip is not by and by to be taken hold of (as the
manner is) and to be turned to the blemishing of a whole profession. He is said
to be a man of upright conversation, not who slippeth never, (for who is he
that can understand his faults? Psalm. 19.125
) but he who by his seldom slips, and by his not continuing in any one known
evil, shows himself to be a man that unfeignedly desires to have his
carriage such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Lastly, Phil. 1.27.
mark this also and you shall find it true, those who are ever harping upon this
string, touching ye lives of preachers, let the^ be urged to particulars, you
shall perceive yt either their evil speaking is occasioned by such kind of
Ministers as I before named, or else if they have any exception against any of
the better and painfuller sort, it is such, which if it be well examined and
thoroughly looked into, will be found rather to savor of malice in the speaker,
then to argue any great error in the accused. I told you I should be long in
this point, but now I have done, unless you have ought further to urge therein.


Nymph. The most that I have to say, is, that men of the world that shall hear
this Plea of yours, will straightway say, that you can speak well for your
selves, and that though you aggrauate other men's sins upon occasions, yet you
can salve up matters that concern your selves, and help to cover your own
infirmities.


Epaph. The devil does well answer his name; for there is nothing can be so
well spoken, but he and his can cauil at it: for mine own part, I strive with
my self to speak impartially. The profession I must love, because God has
called me unto it; yet were I not of it, God has taught me to honor it,
Romans 10.15
because the feet of them are beautiful which bring glad tidings of peace. And
howsoever many do so far exalt themselves in their birth, in their riches, in
their wisdom, in their personage and blood, that they think it a
disparagement unto them to consecrate all their life to the ministry of the
Gospel: yet as Christ himself disdained not the title of a Minister, Romans
8.
so among all the titles of kingdoms and countries, this was to that great
King the most honorable, Solomon the Preacher. I must therefore as a Minister,
but especially as a Christian, endeavor to maintain the credit of the
ministry. And yet I am not so carried away with a humor of magnifying the
profession, but that I do see and bemone both mine and other men's
imperfections. I know, that though it be true, that we are many times
slaundered by soul mouths, yet we often fail, and give great offense even
unto those that fear God, who depending upon us, 1. Pet. 5^.
are either grieved in heart, or (which is worse) grievously misled, by our
want of watchfulness over our selves. And I heartily beg of God so to stablish
us in every word and good work, 2. Th 2.17. 1. Timoth 4. 1^
that while we live we may be an example to them that believe: and when we have
finished our course, the people may have cause to remember us, Hebr. 3.17.
and to follow our faith, considering what has bin the end of our conversation.


Nymph. My heart says Amen unto your good prayer: and God forgive us our
backwardnes in that we make so seldom mention of you which are our Ministers in
our prayers unto him. But now to the next exception which is against the
hearers; the common saying is, that there are none usually so bad as these
Puritanes (for so in their ignorance, not knowing truly what a Puritan is, and
in their malice seeking to disgrace honest men, they term every man that makes
conscience of hearing the word, for the building of himself in holy faith) they
are nothing but a pack of hypocrites, Jude 20.
men that are not to be trusted for all their fair shows, holy horses, and
the like names of disgrace, which hell can invent: and out of this puddle of
reproachful speeches against the lovers of preaching, they gather up filth to
cast into the face of preaching it self.


Epaph. This exception, and that which went next before, are so well like, yt
they do easily appear to have had one father, even the devil, who was a
slanderer from the beginning: but blessed be God that it is no matter of any
great difficulty to discover, Revel 2 24.
even the deepenesse of Satan to be mere simplicity. First then, for this
touching the hypocrisy of our hearers, it is but a mere slander; for (to the
glory of God be it spoken) there are many of those that reverence this so much
contemned course of preaching, who have not only a show of godliness, Tit.
3.^ Tit. 2 10.
but do also feel the power thereof; and are careful, as they believe in God,
so to show forth good works; so that their lives do adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior, yea and (which is the cause of ye so great malice of the ungodly)
eue^ reprove the leudnes of the irreligious. Ephesians. 5.11.
Secondly, suppose it to be so (as it may well, hypocrites mingling themselves
with the soundest Christians) that some of those which carry a face of holiness
and zeal, and love to the word, Ephesians 5 11.
do notwithstanding hold fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
living after the lusts of men, 1. Pet. 4 2.3.
and running with the wicked to the same excess of riot; yet who is able to
say that ever they received any encorageme^t by preaching so to do? Has that
taught them any such matter, and not rather the clean contrary? Let malice
speak, if it be not constrained for very shame to keep silence. Does the
preacher persuade any man to be an usurer, an oppressor, a hard dealer, a
drunkard, a whoremaster, or the like? Nay it is well known, that it testifies
to one and other, 1. Thessal. 4.16.
that the Lord is auenger of al such things and that for them his wrath comes
upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians 5 6.
These two things, namely the falsehood of the exception, and the bad
consequence of it, if it were true, may stop their mouths which use it: but
you told me (as I remember) that there be sundry arguments of this kind. I pray
you let us hear them: no doubt you shall see them all when they are arraigned
and brought to receive their trial at the Tribunal seat of Gods word, to be
condemned for lying vanities, and to be no more able to stand before it, 1.
Sam. 5.^4.
tha^ the Philistines Dagon could keep his shrine (though no doubt he was fast
nailed to it) when the arc of Jehovah came in place.


Nymph. The next exception is of a larger scope, and fights against you with
the general wretchedness of this last generation. You shall see it in it own
likeness, that you may the better judge of it. It commonly runs thus: in
former times when there was less preaching, and the Scripture was more geason
then now it is, the world (they say) was much better, there was more love, more
hospitality, more truth, more mercy, more good dealing amongst men then is to
be found at this day: so that whereas there is now much lawing, much
contention, much oppressing, much cruelty, and sins of the like nature, all this is laid upon the back of preaching: this is the leaven that has put the
whole world out of taste; this is also a piece of Dagon; stump. I make no doubt
but the Lord has furnished you with weapons mighty through him, to cast down
holds, 2. Corin. 10 4.5
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of Christ Jesus.


Epaph. I perceive the Devil much doubts the ruin of his kingdom: and
therefore though preaching amongst men is thought to be but wind, Ierem 5.13.
yet he feels his state begin to totter with the power of it, so that he
does stretch his wit, and set his policy on work, and spares for no engines
to beat down that which he shall never be able to ouerturne. And that as we
have seen hitherto, so I doubt not but we shall further see it in the
examination of particulars. For those elder times (as men call them) first it
is to be noted, that it is true indeed that many of those who lived in the^,
were in the eyes of men very commendable for those moral virtues (as they are
termed) of hospitality, of bounty, of humanity, of plain dealing, and the
like: the reason was this, Satan let them alone in these things, because he did
hold them captive at his will in the principal. Though he does hate these
specialties in their own nature, being an utter enemy to all goodness, yet
he was content to give way in those lesser things, so long as he could nuzle
them in ignorance of God and of his word, which he well knew was both hold
enough for himself, and sufficient enough also to blemish and disgrace all
those reputed virtues before God. But now the light of knowledge being come
into the world, and spreading it self further by the more common use of
preaching, Satan secretly persuades many, that it is enough for them to have
knowledge, though they neglect practice, and he laboreth also by killing men's
care to show themselves forward in these duties of civility, to lessen the
credit of the Gospel, and to have matter of slander against the knowledge of
Gods truth. Secondly to speak more specially of this last and worst age of the
world: if it be well understood, preaching may be said to be the occasion,
though not the natural cause of the extreme wretchedness thereof: according
as Paul says, that sin took occasion by the commandment, Romans 7.8.9.13.
and when the commandment came, sin revived, and grew out of measure
sinful. Now the preaching and publishing of the truth, may be said to be the
occasion of much evil in these last times, in two respects: first, because of
the fuller discovery of sin: In the days of former ignorance many of the same
gross sins were which now are, but either they were smothered in the darkness
of the times, or if they were a little discried, yet they were reputed nothing
so odious. But althings when they were reproved of the light, Ephesians. 5.13.
became manifest; for it is light that makes all things manifest: so that now
sin being seen more, is thought also to be more; for sin not espied, is in
men's judgments as no sin. So then partly in this respect it may be said, that
since there was so much preaching, the world has bin worse, because the holy
doctrine which is taught, condemns many things for sin, which the blind world
esteemed as no sin, and because the lives of those which are converted by
preaching, do show more evidently the monstrous sins of those which are given
over to ungodliness. Secondly, the preaching of the word is an occasion of
sin, (as also the law of God is) not in it self, or in it own nature; (for it
reproves sin, and sets it self against all manner of ungodliness:) but it
is so, partly through the corruption of our nature, partly thorough the just
judgment of God: the corruption of our nature is always the more furious, the
more it is restrained, striving still to do that most which is most forbidden:
every humor desires that most, whereby it may be most increased. Let a
Physician forbid a melancholic man such and such meats, he shall find
himself to have an appetite to no meat so much, as to that which is
inhibited. I do verily think the other trees in Paradise affoorded fruit as
pleasant to the eye, and as good for meat as the forbidden tree: but when as
Satan had made a little entry, then even that circumstance that it was
forbidden, did set an edge upon the woman's desire, and made her more feign to
eat of that one, then of any of the rest which were allowed. 1. Corint. 15.^
Paul says that the law is the strength of sin, both because it increases
the guilt of sin, and because sin thereupon becomes more outrageous:
according as Jeremy witnesses out of his own experience: I cried out (says
he) of wrong, Ier. 20.8.
and proclaimed desolation, therefore the word of the Lord was made a reproach
unto me: it seems that upon his preaching the people grew to greater
insolency. Besides, there are many points of necessity to be taught, which
though they be delivered with never so great circumspection, yet the lewdness
of man's heart, not being ouer-ruled by the power of Gods spirit, will abuse the
same. So we see, the doctrine of Justification by faith only, breeds
negligence in good works, as appears by the caveat of the Apostle, What shall
we say then? Romans 6.1.
shall we continue still in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. So the
doctrine of our freedom by Christ from the curse of the law, brings forth
carnal liberty: that made Paul so careful to use that restraint, Only use not
your liberty as an occasion to the flesh. Gal. 5.13.
In like manner this point, that we are insufficie^t to keep the law, and that
we cannot so much as think a good thought, but as God works it in us: Satan
works by and by upon a supposed advantage, and draws (as much as he may) to
carelesnes thereupon. And therefore ye spirit of God in his great wisdom,
together with the teaching of that point, P^. 2.12, 13.
that it is God which works in us both the will and the deed, coupleth this
exhortation, Make an end of your own salvation with fear and trembling. The
same might be showed by many other points, which yet notwithstanding is so, not
in the nature of the doctrine, but in ye wretched disposition of man's heart, who
abuses the comfortable doctrine of the Gospel, I^de 4.
and turns the grace of our God into wantonness. Again, as sin through the
corruption of nature takes occasion to multiply it self by the doctrine
preached, so it falls out by the just judgment of God, yt the contempt of
much preaching brings forth abundance of iniquity. Isay. 55.1^.
My word (says God by the Prophet) that goes out of my mouth, shall not
return unto me void. And therefore in the same place it is compared to the
rain; Verse 10.
because as the rain makes ye ground, if not more fruitful, surely then more
unprofitable: so the word of God, either makes men hearts softer, and
themselves more fruitful in good works, or else harder, and their lives more
abominable. And yet is this no fault in the word, 1 Cor ^, ^5.
for that is unto God the sweet savor of Christ, even in them which perish. I
have been longer in this point then I thought; but because it is so much stood
upon by many, I have the rather endeavored to manifest the full truth in this
behalf.


Nymph. Truly for mine own particular, I must needs confess, that you have
taught me more touching this point then I have heretofore observed. Indeed I
have many times wondered how it should come to pass, that there being now (as I
think) much more preaching against sin, then has bin in the days of our
forefathers, yet there should be that abundance of extreme impiety: but now I
see the reason of it. First, ignorance in Gods word, is the supporter of Satan's
kingdom, and he having drowned men in that, gave way to other things, which
being good in their own nature, and approved of in the eyes of men, yet lost
their grace, being done without knowledge. Secondly, man's corrupt nature,
spider-like turns the wholesome doctrine into poison, and strives more when
it feels it self limited. Thirdly, it is just with God, Romans 1.26.
to give them up into vile affections, Psalm. 69.27.
and to lay iniquity upon their iniquity, that they may work all
uncleanness, even with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. 2. Thessal. 2.10
who receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved. This I think
is the sum of all which you have spoken touching this.


Epaph. You have well observed it; that is the very substance of my answer to
that exception, which I think is sufficient to satisfy those whom the truth
of God grounded upon the Scripture may satisfy. I pray you now proceed to the
next, if there be any more of this kind.


Nymph. There is only to my remembrance one more, and that is taken from the
tumults and divisions which accompany your doctrine: they say it many times
breeds difference even among those betwixt whom formerly there was the best
agreement.


Epaph. My good neighbor, marvel not at this: for as I showed you in the
beginning of our conference, that resistance does always accompany the first
publishing of the truth, so also does division of hearts follow it: and to this
end is that speech of Christ to his Disciples; Math. 10.34.
Think not that I am come to send peace into the earth, (that is, such peace
as the world dreameth of) I came not to send peace, but the sword. We read that
when Paul exercised his ministry at Iconium, Act. 14.4.
there was much ado, and the people of the city were divided, and some were
with the Jews, and some with the Apostles. This made him to be accused before
the civil Magistrate, for a pestilent fellow, Acts 24.5.
and a mouer of sedition, according as at this day, factious and humorous is a
common imputation. Now a division cannot choose but follow preaching: for when
as among the hearers, some mock, Acts 17.12 34. Acts 17 4, 5.
some cleave unto the teachers, some believe and others believe not, Acts 28.29.
and men fall to have great reasoning among themselves, there cannot but follow
a kind of division and siding: so that they which in their ignorance accorded
together touching religion, are by the working of the word sundred, and some
become zealous folowers, others malicious oppressors, laboring to stop ye
passage of ye Gospel, Acts 14.10.
and to pervert the strait ways of the Lord; and some neuters neither cold nor
hot, Reu. 3 16. Acts 18.17.
but just of deputy Gallio his religion, who cared nothing for those things.
Matthew 3.12
The preaching of the word is the fan in the hand of Christ by which he parts
his wheat from the chafe; and whereby he makes way for that great day of
separation, Matthew 25.
in which the believing sheep shall be separated from the rebellious and
unbelieving goats. Again, let it not be forgotten that the word in the right
applying of it, Ephesians. 5 13.
is called a light which makes all things manifest. When things lie his in the
darkness, though they al differ each from other in color, yet they seem all ^o
like; but the light approaching, the variety of colors is soon descried. So
though men in the duskishnes of ignorance are reputed to be knit together in
the unity of affection, yet when the bright beams of Gods word break in
among them, the thoughts of many hearts be opened, Luke 1.35.
and then you shall see diverse humors, and variety of dispositions. By these
things it appears, that if it be well understood, division and tumult
(especially at the beginning and first entry of it among an untaught people)
must needs follow the soundnes of settled preaching; though those that are
reclaimed and brought to the knowledge of God, are al of one heart and of one
soul, Acts. 4.32. Phil. 3.16. Ephesians. 4 3.
proceeding by one rule, minding one thing; and endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace.


Nymph. You have (thanks be to God) at least to my judgment, well quit your
self against this sort of men. The next that you have to do withal, are more
dangerous, being such as Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 3.18
which do seem wise in this world, and do both live after a good civil
fashion, and do also make show to be not altogether enemies unto religion.
They have also some insight into the Scripture, and are wont to read it, and
other good books privately: only this their resolution is to keep a certain
temper in matters of Religion, to carry themselves in an allowable
conformity, and not to be ouerforward as many seem to be, whose zeal they
account rash and heady indiscretion.


Epaph. The danger of this kind of people, is most of all in respect of
themselves, becauss this, to be wise in a man's own eyes, Proverbs 3 7.
and to fear God, cannot stand together; otherwise for answering any thing
that they are able to object, it is a matter of no such great difficulty: 1.
Cor. 1.25.
For the foolishness of God is wiser then men: and as wax melts before the
fire, Psalm 68.2
so shall their best framed conceits vanish at the very name and presence of
the Scripture.


Nymph. I am glad you are so confident: for to tell you true, these things
being as they are, very agreeing to man's reason, have much troubled me, and I
have not upon the sudden known well what to answer, when in my presence these
things have been urged by such as are thought in the world to be men of good
discretion. The allegatio^s of worldly wise men against preaching.
First then it is demanded why preaching should be the most excellent means
of spiritual instruction, and wherefore you should take so much upon you, as
that your speaking is able to save men's souls: you be but men as others are,
and it is but your pride, who because you would be thought some body, do thus
endeavor to extol the worth and necessity of your profession.


Epaph. Here is indeed a perilous argument, it sauoreth altogether of the
sauciness of an ignorant and vnhumbled heart. It is come to a proper pass,
when as the son of man, who dwells in a house of clay, Job 49. Job 25.6.
whose foundation is in the dust, and which is but a worm, shall dare to talk
so presumptuously, and so to set his mouth against heaven, Psalm 73.8, 9
as to ask of God a reason of his doings. Is it not enough that ye Lord has
made it known unto us, 1. Cor. 1.2^.
that his will is by the foolishnes of preaching to save those which believe?
Romans 9.1^
O Man, who art thou which pleadest against God? And yet behold a reason,
Proverbs 26.18
though this kind of men generally are wiser in their own conceit then seven
men that can render a reason; and a man may have more hope of a fool then of
them. Verse 12.
Look what reason there was, Io^. 6.^^
why the Lord would have the walls of Jericho beaten down, only with the
sound of Rams horns, and with a shout: look also why the Lord would have no
more circumstance observed, in the cleansing of leprous Naaman but only this,
2. Kings 5.13.
Wash and be clean; the same is the reason why God has sanctified the
ministry of man to so excellent a work, as is, the casting down of the holds
of Satan, 2. Corinthians. 10 4 Ephesians 4.11.
and the gathering together of his Saints. God used no engines of war, no
policies of men, in the overthrow of the walls of Jericho, to the end the
people might have cause to say: Psalm 118 23.
This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. So likewise the
Prophet used so little ceremony about Naaman, that he might see the finger of
God in his recovery. The same may be said of Preaching; the Lord has
sanctified hearing to be the outward means to beget faith, and has imparted
to us the treasure of his word in earthen vessels, 2 Corinthians. 4.7.
to the end that the whole glory of our conversion may be his, 1. Corinthians 1.3^
and that He that rejoices in the renewing of his mind, and the reclaiming of
his soul, may rejoice in the Lord, ^ Corinth. 4.7.
and acknowledge with humility, the excellency of that power, which by so
mean a means could bring so mighty things to pass. It is a general rule,
and holds in the whole course of our salvation, that Gods power is made
perfect (that is, 2 Co^th. 1^
apparent and more conspicuous) through weakness. Great is the pride and
arrogancy of the heart of man; and if it may find it self able, though but by
a thought, to further and help forward it own salvation, it prides it self
forthwith, and to it self secretly it more magnifieth ye little, which it
imagines to be in it own power, then all yt which it receives from the Lord.
For this cause, and for the prevention of this evil, God in his great
wisdom, has so carried the whole Mystery of godliness, 1. Timoth. 3.1^
from the first foundation of it in heaven, 1. Peter 1.^.
(his Election according to his foreknowledge) unto the last perfecting of it
until the day of Jesus Christ, Philip. 1.6.
that when a man shall enter into a deep consideration of it, and withal
mark the order and progress of his own conversion, he may lay his hand upon
his mouth, Proverbs 30 32
and in the truth of his soul may say: Psalm 115.^.
Not unto me o Lord not unto me, but unto thy name give the glory. This is the
sum: the reason why the Lord has thought good to commend the hearing of a
Preacher and teacher, above other courses, Col. 1.^3.
for the calling of us from the power of darkness into the kingdom of his
dear son, is, because it makes most for the setting forth of Gods glory,
which is the thing chiefly respected by him, and for which he made all things,
Proverbs 16.4.
even to this very end, that all being of him, and through him, and for him, to
him might be glory for ever. Romans 11.36 1. Cor. 1.21.
If it were left unto man by his own wisdom to find out God in the wisdom
of God, in the pride of his heart fearing his own disparagement, he would
never make choice of preaching, (for we see how the world in the wisdom
thereof does even scorn it) but he would either drown himself in the puddle
of ignorance, as the most do, or else trust to his own iudustrie, as many do,
upon whom this curse justly falls, Romans 1.21 ^^.
that they become vain in their imaginations, and when they profess themselves
wise, prove mere fools, thinking they know much, 1. Cor. 8.1.
but yet knowing nothing as they ought to know. If this reason cannot satisfy
those, who will needs have a reason of Gods ordinance, I know not what will
satisfy them. Once I am sure, that as many as have learned the first lesson of
Christianity, to deny themselves, Luke 9.2^. Romans 12.3
and to understand according to sobriety, they will yield to this truth, and by
yielding, no doubt they shall have comfort. Now whereas we are thought to take
too much upon us, so often as we endeavor to make known the worth and
excellency of our office, it is a mere slander: for I hope we have learned to
preach not our selves, 2 Cor 4 5
but Christ Jesus, and to account our selves no more then the Ministers by whom
ye believe. 1. Cor. 3.5.
We confess the increase to be ye Lords: Verse 6. Acts 15.9 16.14
we leave the purifying and opening of the heart only to him. God forbid that
we should dare (as it were) to encroch upon the Lords right, Exodus 20 5 Isay
42.8
seeing we know that he is a jealous God and will not give his glory to another.
This is our opinion of our selves herein, and if any man be so suspicious or so
hardly conceited of us, that he will not otherwise be persuaded, let him
remember that Love thinks not evil. 1. Corinthians. 13.5
And yet I must needs add this also, that so is the Lord pleased to bless the
labors of painful Ministers in his Church, 1. Cor. 3 9
that he douchsafeth them the name of Gods laborers, nay which is more,
workers together with his grace, 2. Corinthians. 6.1. 1. Timoth. 4.16
and sauers of them which hear them: The Lord for the gracing and crediting of
the instrument, and to preserve it from contempt, attributes that to it, which
is in his own only power to effect. Tell me now, whether this answer does in
your opinion silence this grand objection.


Nymph. A man would think, that this which you have spoken, should stop their
mouths which are otherwise minded: but yet they do reply and say, that you
do much streighten the grace and power of God, and seem as it were to tie the
working of Gods spirit (which yet blows where it lists) to your tongues:
John 3.^.
as though without preaching, there were no salvation: whereby you seem also
to cut them clean off from any hope of heaven, which either heretofore have
wanted, or now enjoy not the common and ordinary use of preaching.


Epaph. It is no wrong done unto the grace of God, to limit it to those means,
which God in his wisdom has set apart for the conueyance thereof unto us.
When Paul was in his dangerous sea-voyage, Acts 27.23.24.
in the night there stood by him the Angel of God, saying, Lo, God has given
unto thee all that sail with thee: yet notwithstanding, when as afterward,
the mariners were about to fly out of the ship, and had let down the boat
into the sea, purposely to make escape, Verse 30.31.
Paul said to the Centurion and the soldiers: Except these abide in the ship,
ye cannot be safe. Did Paul herein streighten the almighty power of God, in
saying, there could be no safety without the staying of those mariners in the
ship? Was the Lords hand shortened, that he could not deliver, but by the
skill and industry of those men? Surely no: but, because Paul knew, yt God was
not pleased otherwise to give deliverance: therefore he said that unless the
mariners tarried, ye company could not be preserved. (...) Damas. ^. 1. ad
Calcem.
The learned do thus distinguish of the power of God: it is an absolute power,
by with he can do infinite things which he will not do: so John said of him,
Matthew 3.9.
that he was able of the very stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Again,
it is an actual or a working power, Hoc sol^ non potest Deu^, quod non (...)
Aug. (...) lib. do Sy^.
which he executes in the governing of the world and the things therein: now
when we speak of the power of God in this sense, it may be truly said, Dei
posse velle est, ^o posse, nolle. Tert. ^n. Pras.
that he cannot us that which he will do. So touching preaching, we may say
without any restraint of Gods power, that except there be preaching men cannot
be saved: not that God is tied to the voice of man, that without it he cannot
save; but because the Scripture has revealed to us, that these things are
linked together with an indissoluble knot, praying, faith, hearing, preaching,
sending. There is no praying without faith, there is no faith but by hearing,
there is no hearing to beget faith but of a preacher sent, that is furnished
with gifts from above, for the feeding of the flock of Christ depending upon
him with knowledge and understanding. 1. Pet. 1 2. Ier. 3.15.
If it shall be urged (as me thought you also touched it) that we shall by this,
prejudice them who have either lived and died without preaching, or those who
enjoy it not now: I answer, that it is one thing what God can do where the
means is wanting, another thing what he will do where the means is supplied.
When the people of Israel were in the wilderness, and were destitute of the
usual helps of tillage, John 6.31.
the Lord gave them bread from heaven to eat: but as soon as they came into
the promised land the Man ceased, neither had the children of Israel Man any
more. Josh ^ 12
Every man was then to fall to his work, and not to hope by those
extraordinary means to be relieved. To strengthen the faith of Hezekiah, the
Lord said to him, Isay 37.10
Thou shall eat this year such as grows of it self, and the second year
such things as grow without sowing; but in the third year, sow ye, and reap,
and plant etc. He that (those two years being expired) had trusted to the
former courses, neglecting husbandry, out of al doubt he might have been
starued: and yet before, he that had called Gods power, to furnish them with
food without sowing into question, had been worthy to be punished. In the
beginning of the worlds creation, Genesis 1.3.11.1^
God for the manifesting of his own power and glory, made light to be, and the
earth to bud forth: before the Sun (which to us is the fountain of light, and
the cherisher of the vital heat which is in all things) was created: yet now
God having established an orderly course, we cannot hope either for light in
the air, or for life among the creatures upon the earth without the Sun. I do
apply al these things thus: the want of the means of public preaching in
former ages, could not be any hindrance unto God in saving those which he knew
before, Romans 8.29 Acts 13 48.
and who were ordained unto eternal life. And I am out of doubt of it, that in
the days of Popery in this land, when the key of knowledge was utterly taken
away; Luke 11 52. Jeremy 18.18.
and the law perished from the priest, counsel from the wise, and the word
from the Prophet; Amos 8 12.
so that if a man did wander from sea to sea, and did run to and fro from the
North even unto the East to seek the word of the Lord, yet he could not find
it. I say, I am clear in it, that many then in that great darkness, did as ye
proverb is) see day at a very little hole, and very stra^gely came to the
knowledge of the truth, some by the sight of some parcels of scripture, some by
ye writings of good men, some by conference with others, though the same were
both very seldom and very secret, some by knowing little more then the Lords
prayer in English, and yet had they ye assurance of the truth of it, and felt
that comfort, and received ye sweetness by it, that (as the histories of the
church make mention) they were contented to sacrifice their lives, and to spend
their best blood to bear witness unto it: which ye Lord did, both that it might
appear to all ensuing ages, yt he: Is^y 1 4. A^ 3 12
^ed a small remnant, even as the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the lion
two legs, or a piece of an ear: then when as the daugther of Sion was become
as Sodom, and not much unlike unto Gomor^h^ and withal, yt at the day of
Christ's app^e^ng, when he shall consume that man of sin with the breath of his
mouth, 2. Thessal ^ 8.
and abolish him with the brightness of his coming, he may have witnesses
against him out of all ages, both of ye deceiuablenesse of his superstitious
doctrines, and of the cruelty of his tyrannous and bloody proceedings. That
which I say touching the times of the Egyptian darkness of Popery, may be said
also of many part of the Realm, which notwithstanding the long flourishing of
the Gospel in this land, yet I know not through whose default) never enjoyed
the benefit and comfort of settled preaching: for though for the most part it be
true, that where the Lord has much people, there he is not wanting to send
some, Acts 18.10 Ve^e 11.
who may continue with them, and teach the of God among them; yet as he
sometimes vouchsafes a Preacher to impudent and stif-necked children, Ezech.
2.4.5.
who will not hear, to to that end, that in the day of vengeance they may know
there has been a Prophet among them: so also it pleases him by secret and
hidden, yea and very unlikely courses, to afford unto some hearts the blessing
of inward conversion, upon whom he has not bestowed the benefit of outward
instruction by a Preacher. But what then? Yet this remains cercertaine, that
as when the good means is wanting, and cannot by any means be procured, the
power and mercy of God must not be distrusted: so when the means is bestowed,
his bounty cannot without great sin be despised. It is herein, as it is in the
case of ye Sacraments: it is not simply the want of them (when a man cannot,
though feign he would, become partaker of them) but the contempt which is
damnable. As for example, if a father unnecessarily defer the baptism of his
child longer then the time appointed by the order of the Church, it is a sin in
him, if the child die without baptism: so likewise for a man usually to turn
is back from the administration of the Lords Supper, making no reckoning of
the comfort offered therein, it is doubtless a fault, which God will not let to
go away unpunished. The same may be said of the word preached, if a man be
deprived of it through a kind of unavoidable necessity, simply there is no
prejudice to a man's salvation thereby, if so be these things be joined with it:
first, that in this strait, Psalm 42 1.
the soul do pant after that great benefit of which it is deprived: secondly,
that a man do both desire and require that one thing of the Lord, even to
behold the beauty of the Lord, Psalm 27 4. 2. Co^th. 4.4.
namely the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God:
thirdly that he be careful to use all such helps of reading the scripture, and
of other godly treatises, and of conference with men of knowledge, as may
possibly be procured. But if so be a man may by any means enjoy the benefit
and comfort of preaching, though it be with some both charge and travel; if
then he carelessly neglect it, and trust to other means, no doubt the Lord will
curse those means unto him, which for all that in their own nature are good,
and might profit, if they were not used with contempt of the principal. This
is my judgment touching this supposal, that by pressing the worth of preaching,
we do confine as it were Gods grace, and ^e it to our tongues, and do cut them
short of al hope of salvation, which by any occasion have lived or do live
without it.


Nymp. Well sir, this kind of men for all this is not satisfied, but being
beaten by argument and scripture from one fond conceit, they forthwith ^un to
another, and seek not so much how to make a direct reply, as to heap up
diversity of objections. And therefore when they have said all they can, for the
pressing of those particulars* the vanity whereof you have laid open to the
full; then (hoping to obtain that with multitude of words, which with weight
of reason they cannot.) they will needs know a reason why there may not be as
much good gotten by their own private reading in the books of the scripture,
and in other good sermons and treatises which are set forth, as by hearing a
Preacher in the Church.


Epaph. Touching private reading of the scripture, I am so far from disliking
it any way, that with that learned Chrysostom I do always exhort, Chrysostom.
Homil. 3. de Lazaro.
and will not fail in stirring up the people, that they should not only
diligently attend to matters spoken publicly, but endeavor themselves also to
read and peruse ye scriptures privately. God forbid, Alphons. de Cast^ ^b 3 c.
6. de (...). unit. haret*
I or any other of my profession, should maintain that Popish Maxim, that the
common use of the Scripture is the cause of all heresies, and not rather the
contrary taught by Christ, Matthew 22.29. Chrysostom. Homil. 9. in epist. ad Colos.
and seconded by the learned in Gods Church, namely, that the cause of all
evil, whether it be error in judgment, or corruption in manners, is the
ignorance of the Scripture. We might well rejoice in the happiness of our
times, if we might be occasioned by our peoples experience in the book of God,
to say as one said of o^d: Theodoret lib 5. de corrigend. Or^. aff^.
You may (says he) see commonly our opinions and rules of religion to be held
and maintained not only by the masters of the Church and teachers of the
people, but even by Smithes, and Shoo makers, and husbandmen, and hedgers, and
heard-men, yea and by women and seamsters: the comfort which we should take
herein, should make us little to esteem the scoffs of Ismaelitish Papists, who
object it to us as a matter of disgrace, Hosius de sacr^ ver^a. uid legendo.
that we have profaned the Scripture by making it common to artificers and
women. Now that which I say of the private reading of the scripture, I say also
of the perusing of godly treatises, and sermons, and the like. I wish men's care
in this kind increased, and I know that thereby there comes much comfort unto
Gods people. But yet I dare not to ascribe that to private exercises, which by
the doctrine of the Scripture belongs to the public ministry, Romans 1^ 14
Ephesians. 4 12.
namely the begetting of faith, and the gathering together of the Saints of God
into his Church. I find in the holy history, the teaching by the ministry of
man to be preferred before those things to which I suppose no man will dare to
equal his own private industry. When Christ called Paul from heaven, and Paul
demanded, Acts 9.6.
Lord what will thou that I do? a man in reason would have thought that there
could have been no more excellent means for Paul's instruction, then if Christ
should have discoursed to him with his own mouth; yet to maintain the credit
of Gods ordinance, and to make known the blessing that follows it, Paul is
commanded to depend upon the ministry and direction of Ananias. Not much
unlike is that example of Cornelius: it pleased God to send an Angel unto him,
A^. 10.
to testify unto him the remembrance of his alms and prayers with the Lord:
why then did not the same Angel proceed to instruct him in the mystery of
Christ? what credit would the words of so glorious a creature have carried?
says flesh and blood: and yet the Lord in his wisdom thought it ye most
fitting course to put over Cornelius to the ministry of Peter, Verse 5.6.
(Send me^ to Ioppa and call for Simon; he shall tell thee what thou ought to
do:) to the end that it might appear, Calvin upon that place.
that it pleases him to use man's voice as his instrument, and to tie our faith
unto it. Shall any man dare to put his own private courses of reading into the
balance with public preaching, when as it has seemed good to the wisdom of
God to prefer it (in regard of man's use) before the immediate teaching of
Christ, or the instruction of an Angel? Christ a little before his death, among
other things whereby he endeavored to comfort the hearts of his disciples,
delivered to them this promise, Verily, verily, I say unto you, John 14 12
he that believes in me, the works that I do he shall do also, Calvin upon
that place.
and greater then these shall he do. It was a promise made unto the whole
Church, neither peculiar to the Apostles, nor common to every Christian. If any
man demand what be these greater works, Augu Tract. in Joh^ Chrys^ Hom. 12.
in Acta. Apost.
which shall be done by men, which Christ did not: I confess with the learned,
that it was in part verified in the miracles of the Apostles; as namely in that
of Peter, Acts. 5 15.
who cured the diseased with his shadow, which may be thought greater then that
of Christ, who healed with the touch of his garment: Matthew 14.36
yet thereby was chiefly meant the conversion of the world, August. tr^c^.
(...) Ioh 72. Origin. Hom. 6. in Isa. Cyril. li. 9. c. 4^.
by the preaching of the Gosspell, to which it pleased our Savior to depute his
Apostles and their successors: a work indeed far greater then any of those
miracles which he wrought here upon earth by his own immediate power. His
work it is, I confess, the conversion of sinners, 1. Corinthians. 3.7
(for neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters) yet he
thought it most agreeing to man's infirmity and weakness, and the best means
both for the furtherance of his own glory, and the trial of our obedience, to
put men in the service of his Church, that they might pray the people in
Christ's sted to be reconciled unto God. 2. Corinthians. 5.20
Who then can without great presumption, and no less contempt of Gods majesty,
rely upon any other means for his spiritual edification, when as the Lord
has thought it meeter to put his words in the mouth of a man and to be with
it, Jeremy 1.9 Exodus 4.12
the^ to speak from heaven by an immediate voice, or to employ those
ministering spirits in that service, which notwithstanding are sent forth for
their takes which shall be heirs of salvation? Hebrews 1.14
Great is the benefit of private reading, especially of the books of holy
scripture: but yet as giving at endance to reading in a Minister, 1. Timothy
4.13
is to make him the better able to discharge his public duty, in exhortation
and doctrine: so the chief end of private searching the scripture by private
me^, is in respect of the public ministry, that before hand they may be
prepared to it, and afterward may the better know how to profit by it: for the
former of these two (namely preparation by reading to the public hearing); it
is a fit saying of Chrysostom: Chrysostom. Homil. 3. de Lazaro.
We do (says he) oftentimes tell you before hand, the text whereof our purpose
is to entreat, that in the mean while you (taking your book, and weighing
the sum and state of the place) may make your minds fitter to receive those
points which shall after be delivered. As indeed the ignorance of the people in
the language of the scripture, and the general course and story of the Bible
makes preaching to be much less profitable unto them. Now for the latter, to
wit, ye use of private reading for profit after hearing, we have that memorable
example of those worthy gentlemen of Berea, who hearing the Apostles preach,
Acts 17.11.
and receiving the word with all readiness, searched the scriptures daily
whether those things were so.


Nymph. Why, but (may it be said) is not the scripture the ground and
foundation of all your doctrine; and are you able to say more or to speak
better then many both ancient and later learned men, whose excellent sermons
are put in print, and whose godly treatises are extant for the benefit and
comfort of Gods people?


Epaph. If we preach unto you any other doctrine then that which the scripture
will allow, Gal. 1.8. (...) Chrysostom. Homil. 13. ^ 2. Corinthians.
we are worthy of Paul's curse; we know and confess the Bible to be the most
exact rule, and square, and canon, by which all our sermons must be tried: we
acknowledge also that holy me^ which have written touching matters of religion,
and have published their well labored, and zealously delivered sermons, have
(many of them) set down the truth of God soundly, and been the means of much
comfort to well affected people: but yet, though the doctrine be the same in
substance, that is read privately, and which is publicly delivered, yet the
like fruit cannot follow upon both. If you demand a reason, I can give no
better then that which Christ gave of Gods revealing those things to babes,
which he hid from the wise and prudent, Math. 11.26.
Even so it is, because the Lord his good pleasure is such. When the people of
Israel were in their journey to Canaan, and were fed with bread from heaven: we
read that if upon the week days any man had reserved of the Manna til the
morning, it was full of worms and stanke; Exodus 16.20.
but being kept the day before the Sabbath until morning, Verse 24.
it stanke not, neither was there any worm therein. I would feign see who
could give me any other reason, why the Manna should at the one time corrupt,
at the other continue sweet, but only this: God showed his power in
preserving it at ye one time, because it was his own ordinance for the better
sanctifying the Sabbath, and he showed his justice in rotting it at the other
time, because he had forbidden it, to teach them to depend upon his providence.
After the same sort, one man he taking himself to be a wise man, and thinking
himself to be as able to draw good matter out of the books of the scripture,
and other writings, as the best Preacher of them all, either contemns or else
neglects the public Ministry. Another, he in obedience to Gods
commandment, Proverbs 8.33.
Watches daily at the gates of the Lords house, and gives attendance at the
posts of his doors, framing all his private readings and meditations to the
fitting of himself for the assembly exercises. You will ask me, why should
the knowledge of the former rot (as it were) and putrify, and become nothing
worth, he being a man of good capacity and understanding, and reading none but
sound authors: and the other thrive in knowledge and in the power of godliness,
that yet for all that learneth no other doctrine then he finds in his good
books at home? I might happily, but verily for mine own part I will seek no
other answer but this: God has promised to bless the latter course, saying,
Proverbs 2.2.5
If thou cause thine ears to hearken unto wisdom, and incline thine heart to
understanding; then thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. But for the other, because it is a course of man's own
devising, sauouring of inward pride, therefore the Lord turns it (as he
does all humane wisdom) into foolishnes: 1. Corinthians. 1.20
so yt the knowledge so gotten (I mean by another by-way, and not by that old
trode^ path of hearing) either becomes as ye Apostle speaks, vain iangling,
or else if it be sound, 1. Timothy 1^
in regard of the apprehension of truth, yet it swimmeth only in the brain,
and never works to the renewing and seasoning of the heart.


Nymph. There is yet one thing more touching this conceit which men have, to
game more by their own private courses then by the public ministry, and that
is this: men that write, write with great deliberation and advice; as for you
when you preach, you speak many times at adventure, and nothing so iudicially
as do those who commit things to writing. Besides that, 1. Timothy 3.6
many of you are but nouices and young scholars, whom S. Paul seems not so
well to approve of. And for these causes, as they must needs be jealous of your
judgment in many things, so neither can they receive that profit by your
preaching, as they may by private reading.


Epaph. Alas, a poor excuse: it is true, if men write as they ought, they
write with judgment and heedfulnesse: and so do they also preach with good
advice, who have learned to fear him, that has said, Ier. 41 10.
Cursed be he which does the work of the Lord negligently. I will not go
about to patronise the negligence and carelessness of any man: I wish we would
all study to show our selves approved unto God, 2. Timothy 2.1^
workmen that need not be ashamed, dividing the word of God aright: 1. Corin.
3.13, 14
that so when the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is, ours may
abide. Yet this I will say, that if you compare like with like, that is, sound
writers with sound preachers, you shall find the sermons of the one framed with
as good judgment, as the books and writings of the other. And if that be a
commendation (as I see no reason but it should) for a man's labors to smell of
the candle, Olere Lucernam
no doubt you shall perceive even the ordinary exercises of painful and
conscionable Preachers to savor of as much art and industry, as the treatises
of your most judicious and grauest writers. Nevertheless, because as the
Scripture says, In many things we slip all, James 3.2.
both Preachers and writers, both readers of books and hearers of sermons,
therefore there is a necessity of care and judgment in those that seek to
reap benefit by other men's labors, that like bees they may suck out the
best and sweetest, and most wholesome doctrine from them both. Now for the
youth of many Ministers, which men (as you say) plead, and seem also to
ground their conceit upon the scripture: I answer: first, that it is greatly to
be lamented to see the ouerforwardnesse of many young men, who not considering
the weight of that holy calling, do suddenly thrust themselves into it, and
undertake (as the saying is) to teach others, Prim ad docendum, quam ad
discendum.
before they themselves are well instructed; so that I do verily think, there
are not at this day more nouices and punies of any profession, then there are
of the ministry. And for the preventing of this evil, were those decrees of
the ancient Councels, Con. Carth 3. c. 4 Cons. Agat. c. 16 Con. Totes. 4. c 17
which set down a certain age, before which a man was not to be admitted to
the office of a Minister or Bishop in the Church. Secondly, I add this
withal, that the graces of God are not to be limited to any age. It was a good
distinction of the Heathen man, Arist. ^th. lib. 1.
betwixt a young man in years, and a young man in conditions: It is not meet
that young men should say with Elihu, Job 32.7.
The days shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom. And
yet it must be remembered which is also there noted, Verse 8.9.
that it is the inspiration of the Almighty which gives understanding, and
that the aged do not always understand judgment. Young David by the study of
Gods word, Psalm. 119 100
may come to understand more then the ancient. Paul bids Timothy that no
man should despise his youth. 1. Tim. 4 12.
If we shall distinguish the age of man, La^rs. lib. 8. (...) vita Pythag.
according as some Philosophers did, then Timothy could not be above five and
twenty when Paul so wrote unto him. Chrysostom. observes that Paul says not vs^
but(...)
Touching the place it self (that a Bishop must not be a young scholar) it
must not be understood of a young man in years, but of one lately converted to
the Christian faith, and newly planted in the Church. Timothy lived in Asia,
and therefore was necessarily to furnish the Church out of Gentilisme: for this
cause Paul advises him to make choice of such as were settled in the doctrine
of Christianity, and not to advance men to the dignity of a Bishop by and by
after their conversion. So that, howsoever I confess that maturitie of years
is yet to be respected in a Minister, because in the ordinary course it is
accompanied with ripeness of judgment, yet neither does that place of the
Apostle prescribe a law for the debarring of young men from the ministry,
neither does any place of scripture disable that age, or make it incapable of
the ministry, so that it be graced with gifts sufficient for so excellent a
function. And this I think may be answer full enough to this objection.


Nymp. What exception these wise men will make against this your answer, I know
not; you have resolved me to the full: and concerning young Ministers, I heard
once an acquaintance of mine, who was brought up in the University, say, that
he knew many scholars in his time, that when they were young and fresh, were of
very great hope, and were also very zealous, and had a good gift in preaching,
who notwithstanding in time grew cold, and less able for gifts, both of
judgment and zeal, and utterance to do good in Gods Church: but these points
I will not mell with, only your discourse brought that into my mind which I
heard a friend of mine say a good while since. I must crave your judgment yet
a little further, touching these men; besides al these pretended reasons, they
stand much upon two things, which flesh and blood does well approve of: one is,
that few of the great men of the world do esteem preaching; the other is, that
it is not wisdom for a man in matters of religion to be too forward. What say
you to this?


Epaph. I say, it is a hard matter for those men to come to amendment out of
the snare of the devil, 2. Timothy 2.26
which are taken of him at his will: and we had need to beg of that God, who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, 7. Corinth. 4.6.
that he would shine in our hearts, to give the light of his knowledge: for if
a man be once entangled in error, Satan has so many devises to hold him in,
that it is a hard matter for him to get from him: yet if men have any grace, or
will yield to any reason, they may soon see the vanity of these persuasions,
as I will briefly declare unto you. In the former there are two things to be
noted: first, that if the practice of men were a sufficient rule in matters of
Religion, there are (thanks be to God) many honorable personages, many nobles,
many gentlemen, many of good note for worldly respects, who do unfeignedly
reverence and heartily embrace the preaching of Gods word, and no doubt it is
unto them the joy* and rejoicing of their hearts, Jeremy 15 16.
and they esteem of it to be even as it is, Romans 1.16.
The power of God unto salvation: so that if the approbation of men were a
reason of force, it is not wanting unto preaching: but as God has a people out
of all, so that also has friends and favorers among all. Secondly, suppose
that this course of Preaching were utterly despised, and all the great wise men
of the world did even scorn it, and tread it under their feet, yet this were
a poor argument, unless we will say, it was a good reason which they used
against Christ, John 7.48.
Does any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believe in him? The best things
have not commonly the most voices, and many times according to the proverb,
Mayor pars vincit meliorem.
the greater part is too hard for the better part. There was a voice put up for
making a golden calfe, Exodus 32.
and there was not one against it. There was a voice, what should be done with
Jesus, and all cried, Crucify him. Another was, Matthew 27.
whether God should be God, 1. King. 1^.
or Baal should be God: and none held with God but Eliah. S. Augustine says,
Aug in Psalm. 12^ (...). Nava^
that the church was sometimes in one Abel, and in one Enoch: God forbid we
should be in the number of those, who define the church by the multitude; we
are content to leave that absurdity to the Papists: Luke 12.32.
we know that Christ's flock is a little flock; and we must endeavor to grow to
that resolution, to say, Lord, though that all men should be offended by thee,
Matthew 26.33
yet will I never be offended. Now for that other persuasion, that it is not
good to be too eager in matters of religion, I know it to be the common
persuasion of a great many: but yet this is a sure rule, that that man who
thinks himself to have knowledge, and zeal, and religion enough, the same
has no knowledge, no zeal, no religion at all. For wheresoever the graces of
God are in truth, there is (in regard of the sweetness which a man finds in
them) a forgetting that which is behind, Phil. 3.13.
and an endeavoring a man's self to that which is before, Non quid egeris, sed
quid supersit curandum: si dixisti sufficit, defec^sti.
grieuing more for that which is yet wanting, then rejoicing in that which
already is attained. In the parable of the Talents, it is said, that from him
that has not, Matthew 25.29
even that he has shall be taken away: but in another of the Gospels it is
said, Luke 8.18.
From him shall be taken even that which it seems that he has. So that it is
but a conceit and opinion of grace, where there is no desire to increase in
grace. It is a good saying, Vbi incipis nolle f^ri melior, the defi^ esse bonus.
when a man is come to that pass that he has no desire to be better, then he
quite leaves off to be good. And therefore men do but deceive themselves, in
neglecting the benefit of preaching, upon a conceit, that it is best to keep a
temper in matters of religion, and to content themselves with a certain
portion of knowledge, and with a set measure of zeal, and never to proceed
further; for we must desire the sincere milk of the word, 1. Peter 2.2.
Verse 3.
that we may grow thereby. And indeed if so be that we have tasted how
bountiful the Lord is, we shall never be able to satisfy our selves, either
in the laboring after knowledge in religion, or in the zealous profession and
practice of religion.


Nymph. Now that you speak of being too forward and precise in matters of
religion, it puts me in mind of a saying of Salomons, which I well
understand not, Ecclesiast. 7.18
Be not thou (says he) just overmuch. It may seem to agree with their
opinion, which would not have men to be too strait, as they call it.


Epaph. It is a good rule of the learned, Augustine.
that for the finding out the true meaning of a place of scripture, we must
consider what goes before, and what follows: this rule observed will soon
clear this place. In the verse going before, Solomon had spoken of the
confusion (as may seem) which is in the world: Verse 17.
There is (says he) a just man that perishes in his justice, and there is a
wicked man that continues long in his malice. Now to repress the rash
headiness of man's disposition, which is ready to censure Gods courses at
pleasure, the wise man adds this, Be not thou just overmuch; that is, Beware
thou take not upon thee, under pretense of justice, to charge these courses of
Gods providence with injustice. It was an error we know, Psalm 73.
that David by his own confession had welneare fallen into. And Jeremy the
Prophet, craved leave of God that he might talk with him of his judgment:
Jeremy 12.1.
he could hardly at the first satisfy himself in it, how God could be just,
and yet suffer them to be in wealth that rebelliously transgress. This taxing
of Gods proceedings in the governing of the world, is (I take it) chiefly
forbidden in this precept, Be not just overmuch: and this to my seeming is the
meaning of that place: howsoever it be taken (as I know some otherwise
interpret it) yet I am sure it condemns not that wary and zealous course in
the practice of Religion, which though the world is pleased to call
ouerholinesse, Ephesians. 5.15. (...) Gal. 6.16.
yet I am well advised the scripture urges, bidding us to walk circumspectly
or exactly, and by a rule, and to abstain from all appearance of evil. 1.
Thessal. 5.22



Nymph. The Lord in his mercy enable us so to do: for surely the wicked and
ungodly, as they are bold in evil, so that the very trial of their
countenance testifies against them, Isay 3.6. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
so also they do add drunkenness to thirst, laboring to grow to a kind of
perfection in ungodliness. And therefore great shame shall it be for us, who
profess to know God, Tit. 1.16.
to wax cold and faint hearted, and timorous in the duties of piety, Psalm
^4.7.
and not to strive rather to go from strength to strength, and to increase in
holiness, as fast as profane godless men thrive in iniquity.

I have hitherto (as far as my experience in observing, and my memory in
recounting has enabled me) propounded unto you the several objections against
preaching, urged ordinarily by three sorts of men; the grossly ignorant, the
wretchedly profane, and the worldly wise; and you have (I thank you) opened
unto me the blindness of the first, the vileness of the second, and the
vanity of the last. The contentment that I have received by your discourse
hitherto, makes me to presume further upon you, and to request your patience
in hearing, and your skill in resolving some exceptions made by a fourth sort
of men: last in order, but not least in argument, because they are by education
learned, and by profession (some of them) Ministers and Preachers, and yet do
not altogether favor those courses of preaching, which some do magnify so
exceedingly.


Epaph. Non audeu scribore contra Episcopum commu^nis m^a.

Hieronymus ad Augustine. pl^s omnibus and amanda and prafe rendaest veritas.
Dyonis. Alexan.


Neighbor (to say nothing of my duty) I am bound by my promise to endeavor to
satisfy you: and howsoever I am of Hieroms mind, and am unwilling to oppose my
self against any learned men of mine own profession, least I should seem
desirous of contention: yet because the truth is to be preferred before all
other respects, Job 32.22.
and to give titles is a thing so dangerous, therefore I will forget all things
which might hinder me in free speaking that which in my conscience I am verily
persuaded is the truth, and will set before me only the glory of God, and the
common good and benefit of his Church.


Nymph. The exceptio^s of some seeming learned.
Being then assured of your readiness, I will tell you what I have marked
partly out of the speeches, partly out of the sermons of some that are reputed
learned men: I am no scholar, and therefore you must not expect any precise
order at my hands; yet to my seeming their exceptions are either against
preaching it self, or against the manner of it, as by some it is performed.


Epaph. Your method is good enough: But do you know any professing the
ministry, which do utterly mislike and disallow preaching?


Nymph. I do not say so: for they who are the most eager in this matter, if you
fall to reasoning with them, cannot for shame but say, that preaching is the
most ordinary and usual means which God uses to work by in the hearts of
the hearers: and again, that preaching does profit more then reading. And
yet for all that, in their ordinary discourse they make known their opinion
thus, that the word of God is as effectual when it is read, as when it is
preached, and that reading is preaching.


Epaph. Certainly I cannot but marvel, that men of learning and professed
Divines, should undertake the maintenance of such an opinion, yea though it
were but for their credits sake: for put this case, that in ye vacancie of an
Ecclesiastical preferment, there were joint suitors for it, a man of note and
quality, that has spent many years in study, and run through the whole
circle of sciences, and is graced also with degrees of schools, the testimony
of his desert: and another, an ordinary fellow, that has had but reasonable
breeding, and no seasoning but in a country school, and therefore is able to
do little perhaps save only read fair, and go by his Rubricke: think you
that your University scholar would not think himself greatly wronged, and
grow into a marvelous coffeehouse if that other should be preferred before
him? yes doubtless: he would renew that old complaint of Salomons, and say,
Folly is set in great excellency, Eccles. ^0.6.7.
I have seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the
ground. He would say, it were enough for such a one as he, if he were appointed
to some lower office in ye church, 1. Sam. 2.36.
where he might ca^e a morsel of bread: and that if he were so well provided
for, as was Michah his Leuite, Judge. 17.10.
with ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and his meat
and drink, surely then he were as well preferred as he deserves. Like to
these, would be the privy thoughts of a well deserving scholar, being
disappointed of his hoped preferment, by so unworthy a competitor. And for mine
own part, I think him to have very just cause so to complain. But yet this
being held for a truth, that reading is as effectual as preaching, and that an
ordinary man may do as much good, save as many souls, draw as great a
multitude to heaven with his distinct reading, as the other with all his
university learning and long labored for Divinity, surely then the scholar
has no reason to think him self wronged in missing his preferment: for why
should there be a disparitie in reward, where there is no great precede^ce in
respect of the possibility to do good in Gods Church? So that I say, me thinks
if it were for no other cause, yet men of learning and Preachers by profession,
should never go about to equal bare and naked reading unto preaching.


Nymph. This may perhaps be some reason in policy; but I hope you have some
better proof then this for the matter: otherwise I know what the world will
say, (even that which it spares not to speak already) that you Preachers are
so earnest in the extolling of preaching, only for your own private credites
sake, that you may be the better esteemed.


Epaph. God be thanked, variety of sufficient proofs is not wanting in this
cause; but yet this I thought good to observe, as it were by the way, to the
end that men (who it may be have a good opinion of their own well deserving)
may see what an inconvenience is like to follow by the defense of such an
opinion.


Nymph. I am very desirous to hear what may be said in this case touching the
comparison that is made betwixt reading and preaching, and therefore I do even
long til you come unto it.


Epaph. Well then (to cut off all preambles and unnecessary circumstances) for
this point touching the efficacy of preaching above reading, I will stand upon
two reasons chiefly: the one is experience, the other is Gods ordinance, who
has appointed ye ability to preach, as a matter of necessity in every one
that is called to the ministry.

Experience is sometimes called the mistress of fools, but by it in this
point wise men may learn a good lesson: first of all, if there be a view taken
of all the places and parishes where there has been only reading, and of
those which have been furnished with a settled preaching Minister, 2. Tim. 2.15
whose care has been to divide the word of truth aright: the different estate
of the places will soon make known the worth of preaching above reading: for
look into those who have ever rested themselves satisfied with a reading
Minister, neither seeking nor caring for better means of instruction, and you
shall find generally woeful ignorance, lamentable blindness in the matters of
God, men altogether children in understanding, 1. Cor. 14.20.
popish, superstitious, heathenish, in one word, to speak with the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.17.18.
Walking in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitation darkened, and
being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the hardness of their hearts. This is the general condition of such
places. But look again to those, Gal. 6.6.
who have been taught in the word, and have made conscience to profit by the
good means wherewith God has blessed them, there shall you see the seal of
the ministry, 1. Cor. 9.^
even the conversion of souls, comfortable knowledge and conscionable carriage,
the Lords Saboth sanctified, his word accounted precious, the sacraments
reverently used, private families trained up in instruction and informatio^ of
the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Palem 2.
and even a very church in every house. I know indeed that there are many good
people dwelling in parishes wanting preaching, and many ignorant and ungodly
ones in places well furnished with teaching, but yet let these circumstances
noted by me be remembered, of resting well enough satisfied with bare reading,
and of rejoicing in the benefit of an able preacher, and then it will be found
true which I have said, and be a sufficient testimony of the power of preaching
above reading. Secondly, whereas the scripture is a witness of the bad opinion
which the world will have of ye ministry of the word, assuring them that are
called to that office, that the faithful discharge of their duty shall be
rewarded with affliction, 2. Tim. 2.3. John 16.33. John 15.19. Mat. 5.11.
with hatred, with all manner of evil sayings; let any man examine his own
observation, and see in which of the two, the Reader or the Preacher, this is
best verified. It is an old saying, that by the market folks you shall
understand how the market goes. Take me therefore a common man whom you meet
by chance and question with him touching the place where he dwells, and about
his minister; if he be but a Reader, you shall have him say strait, Truly we
have a good honest quiet man, mary indeed he cannot preach, but he lives
peaceably, and medleth with no man, and is very well beloved amongst us; for
why, he is a fellow like man, etc: but put case ye minister be a painful
preacher, one that seeks to draw the people from their godless and
superstitious courses, to the knowledge of God, then you shall hear him in
another tune; he will say the^, there we have a man, some say he is learned, but
sure I am he has troubled us all, a good many of us wish he had never come
amongst us, we were all quiet before, but now all is out of frame, there is
such reproving and finding of fault, and bringing up of new fashions and
orders, that we know not what to do, some of the best of our parish will do
what they can to remove him: these and the like are ye thoughts and speeches of
no small many, and the same no fools in the eyes of the world, who do indeed
justify preaching by condemning it, and show it to be the power of God by
resisting it. Thirdly, for one other specialty drawn from experience: I will
appeal unto men's co^scie^ces, whether they be such as fear God or otherwise.
They which fear God, Isay 66.2. Psalm 25.14.
and tremble at his words, and do in humility desire to know the secret of the
Lord, cannot but acknowledge, that they do much more increase both in the
knowledge of the truth, Tit. 1.^.
which is according to godliness, 2. Tim 3.5.
and in the power of godliness, do find their judgments better strengthened,
their faith more confirmed, their consciences more wrought upon, and their
affections more quickened by the word when it is effectually preached and
applied, then when it is but only read unto them. And no marvel, for indeed it
cannot be, yt a brief clause of holy scripture, wherein in a short tenor of
words (such is the riches of the sacred text) many particulars are comprised,
being only read, should profit so much, as if by preaching it were expounded,
and according to occasions applied unto Gods people. Cic. de Oras. lib. 1
If a man (says the heathen Orator) come into a wardrobe, where many rich
garments are folded up together in a narrow room, it cannot so satisfy him,
as if ye same might severally be laid forth to his view, time being granted
to take notice of every particular; because being lapped up, he cannot see the
whole beauty, and being together, he is not able to observe every specialty:
even so it fares with the scriptures: if a man hear them read, it cannot but
draw him to admire the majesty and riches of them, and it will cast some
glimmering light upon the understanding: but when he hears them laid open by
preaching, it will much more astonish him, it will even ravish him as it were,
casting a cleerer light upon his judgment, and working more mightily upon his
affections. This truth, al which truly fear God are able to justify out of
their own experience. Now for others, I know they also must yield to this, that
they find ye word being urged and pressed by preaching, to be far more
powerful, more piercing, more maiesticall, more awaking the conscience, Heb
4.1^.
more entering through even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the
spirit, more discerning the thoughts and the intents of the heart: and this is
my first reason fetched from experience, against which there can be no
disputing: for it is in vain to go about to persuade a man that ye thing is not
so, with he by observation has still found to be so.


Nymph. I have well marked your speech, and duly considered the course of your
argument: and as I am well strengthened by it in that good opinion which I have
always had of preaching, so I am glad of one thing which I observed in your
discourse, namely that you seem not altogether to condemn reading, nor to
desire the banishing of it out of the Church. I can tell you, it is commonly
said that you and others such as you are, do mislike the reading of the
scriptures.


Epaph. God forbid that I or any man should hold so gross an error, as to
condemn a course of that antiquity: Acts 15.21. Acts 13.15. (...).
Moses was read in the synagogue every Sabbath day; and there was the lecture
of the Law and Prophets. Luke 4.16.
And our Savior Christ coming into ye synagogue on the Saboth day, stood up to
read. B^cer upon Ephesians. ca 4
And for mine own part, I agree to the opinion of a learned man of our later
times, that reading of ye holy scriptures in the congregation is good, to that
end, that the phrase and manner of speaking of ye scripture, and the scripture
it self might be more known and more familiar to the people: and I confess
also with him, that by that means the judgment of the people is confirmed in all points of religion, so that thereby they are made able to judge of the
interpretation of the scriptures, and of the doctrine taught them by their own
teachers or others: all this I willingly acknowledge. And howsoever me^ are
disposed to interpret it, yet yt which is spoken in the praise of preaching,
tends rather to the countenancing then to the disgrace of reading: for he who
observes it shall find, yt none in private examine the scripture more
carefully, none in public hear it read more respectively, then those who^
preaching has taught to see ye excellency of Gods word, and the worth of ye
scripture.


Nymphas. You have done very well to make known your judgment touching the
reading of the scripture; for the conceit that you think basely of the word
read, is a great prejudice to you in many places, and in many men's opinions. If
it please you, come now I pray you to your second reason.


Epap. The second reason which I have for the maintaining the efficacy of
preaching above reading, is grounded upon the ability to preach, which the
Lord requires in every Minister. For this being taken for granted, that the
Lord would both in the riches of his love, and the depth of his wisdom set
down that course which should be most for the behoof of his Church: it must
needs follow that if he have not thought it sufficient for a Minister to be
able to read, but to perform some further duty of instructing, then surely
there is something more in preaching then in reading, and more profit like to
folllow by opening the text, then by bare propounding it.


Nymph. Your reason is good, if you be able to prove it; for it seems to some
a hard doctrine, to say that God requires every Minister in the Church to be
able to preach, and therefore I wish you may be able to make it good.


Epaph. (...). Bas. ep. 80
How hard soever and incredible it may seem to some, yet I doubt not but to
prove it, especially if we will be content to stand to the judgment of the
scripture, 2. Pet. 1.19.
(...). Epip. Hae. 76 (...). Basil. de Spirit^ sancto. cap. 1.
and to that sure word, as S. Peter calls it; endeavoring by a reverent kind
of examination, to search out the secret and hidden meaning of Gods spirit. And
first of all, I will place in the front as it were of this proof, that worthy
place in the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a
Preacher, and how shall they preach except they be sent? The sum of the place
is this: that the hearing of a Preacher which is sent, is the ordinary means
ordained of God to beget faith. From thence arises another point: that he
whose ministry must be the means and instrument to beget faith, must be a man
sent; for How can they preach except they be sent? only that man is a
preacher, which is sent. Now if we shall examine what it is to be sent, it will
appear to be true, that a sufficient minister to call Gods people, must be a
man of better quality then a bare reader of the Scripture. To be sent
therefore is this, to be appointed and deputed of God, and (as the Lord
speaks of Jeremy) sanctified, Jeremy 1.5. (...). Romans 1.1.
or (as Paul says of himself) put apart to that service. Were it not now a
presumptuous and ouerbold imputation of a certain dissolute carelesnes unto
the wisest and most provident God, to say or think that he would put any man
in his service, 1. Tim. 1.12. Ephesians. 4.12.
for the work of the ministry, unless the same were so gifted and qualified,
as is meet for the discharge of so weighty a business? Prouer. 26.6.
Solomon says, that He that sends a message by the hand of a fool (that is,
of a man unable to deliver the tenor of his message, and to open it to him to
whom it is sent) is as he that cutteh off the feet. It is as if he should bid
a man go, and yet chop off his feet wherewith he should travel. A Prince
purposing an embassage to another Prince, thinks it not enough that the man
whom he will employ in that service, be able to carry his errand written in a
paper, and faithfully to deliver it according to directions (for that every
ordinary Currer and common Post may do) but he makes choice of one that has
had the best breeding, a man of good understanding, of good discourse, of good
behauior, and of no less discretion, who is in these respects able to debate
and manage those great affairs, as may be most for the behoof and honorable
advantage of him that sends him. Shall we think God to be less careful for
the business of his church, then earthly Princes be for their State causes?
Shall a man of the best quality be sought out for the carrying of a message
from one man to another? and shall one of the meanest sufficiency have the
ministry of reconciliation betwixt God and man given unto him? 2. Cor 5.18.
God forbid. Let all these things then be put together: First, that he whose
ministry shall be the means to breed faith, is a man sent, which the text
avouches. Secondly, that to be sent, is to be gifted in that measure, as is
agreeing to the weight of so great a calling, which common sense will not
suffer us to deny. Thirdly, that to be able only to read ye scripture, is a
common gift, and a faculty of no great note, which every man well knows. Let
these things I say be put together, Eccles. 4.12.
and you shall find them as a threefold cord, not easily broken, building up
and strengthening this truth, that the man not graced with any more then the
power to read, is not the Minister appointed by God for the working of faith
in the hearts of his people. Again, to press this place yet further, this is
the constant doctrine of the scripture, that no Minister can have comfort in
the day of the Lord, but only he who is able to say with Jeremy, Jeremy.
17.16.
I have not thrust my self in for a Pastor. For woe shall be unto those of whom
the Lord shall say, Jeremy 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran. So that it stands every man
upon, who desires that worthy work, 1. Timothy. 3.1.
the office of an ouerseer in Gods Church, to be well assured of his calling,
least in the day of survey it be said unto him as was said unto the guest
without the wedding garment, Friend how came thou hither? Matthew 22.12
Or as to the wicked in the Psalm, Psalm 50.16.
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? Now, by what means can a man know himself to be sent
and called of God to the service of his church? there is no revelation to be
looked for, neither is it to be expected that God should call by some immediate
voice, as he did yt Prophets, or as he did Paul: Acts 9.
and yet there is a means and course as certain herein, as if the Lord should
say directly by a voice sounding in our ears, Go, behold have not I sent thee?
It is in this matter, as it is in that of election. A man that is careful
(according to the rule of the holy Ghost) to make his calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
must not presume to search the unsearchable counsels of God, neither yet wait
for some special intelligence from heaven, but he must enter into his own
heart, and rise up by degrees from the fruits of sanctification to his being
justified, from justification to his effectual calling, from thence to
election, and from all these conclude eternal glorificatio^ in Gods kingdom:
this is a sure course, to be led by the streams up to the well head. Not much
unlike is the course in judging of a man's calling to the ministry. I may in
some sort apply the speech of Paul in another case to this purpose: Romans 10.6.
Say not thou that affectest the ministry, who shall ascend up into heaven, to
assure me what is Gods purpose touching me: for there is another way, The
testimony of thy being sent (if thou art sent) is near thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart. Inquiry must be made by a man in this behalf, (...).
2 Corinthians. 3.6.
in what measure God has fitted him to be a minister of the new Testament. Now
may a man with a safe conscience, or with any good ground make himself believe
that God has sent him, and called him to the ministry, because he is able to
read distinctly the text of holy scripture? Can this one faculty be a
sufficient testimony to a man's own soul, that he is one of the appointed
laborers for Gods harvest? Mat 9.33.
Shall a man adventure to undertake the cure and care of souls upon so
slender preparation? Surely (for as much as I can conceive) the doctrine of the
Scripture, describing the office of a Minister, is against it. This use I have
made of this place: the sum is this: the ordinary means to beget faith, is
the hearing of a Preacher sent, that is, so furnished with gifts suitable to his
calling, that both in respect of the tenor of his message, and his ability,
^ol. 1 27.
to manifest the riches of the glorious mystery of Christ, Romans 10.15.
his very feet may deserve to be called Beautiful: but neither is bare
reading to be numbered among those gifts which might argue a man to be sent,
neither is it safe for any man to adventure upon no better sufficiency.
Therefore there is more required in him who must be heard for the breeding of
faith, then the naked faculty of delivering to the people out of a book the
letter of the Scripture.


Nymph. But by your leave sir, that which you speak touching sending, I fear
me how it will be well taken: for has not the Church the power of sending and
calling to the Ministry? If then a man able only to read the scripture, be
by the Church appointed to that office, is not that a suffient warrant to him
in this case?


Epaph. The calling by the Church, I acknowledge to be so necessary, that
without it (a settled form of Church government being established) no man is
to be reputed a lawful Minister, though he be otherwise of never so great
sufficiency. God I know calls men extraordinarily sometimes, as namely, in
the first founding and planting of the Church: so were the Apostles and
Evangelists called: and when the Church of God is defaced, and an universal
Apostasy spread over it; so it is thought they were called who restored the
sincerity of religion, after the long night of Popery. But this extraordinary
kind of calling never takes place but when ordinary calling fails. Now
though the calling and allowance of the Church is necessary, yet it is not
sufficient to the being of a minister. The office of the Church is only to
approve, it is God that makes a minister. And therefore the Church is tied to
a law, 1. Timoth. 5 22 1. Timoth. 3.10.
to lay hands suddenly upon no man, but to prove first, and to use a very
precise examination before they separate any man to the office of a minister.
The Churches duty is to search out what men the Lord has chosen, (...). Act.
1.25.
to take a part in the ministration. I know there may be an error committed
herein, and men in their choises and elections may be deceived. It fares many
times with the governors of the Church, as it did with Ioab in the camp. When
Absalom was slain, 2. Sam. 18.
and the army of those which joined with him in the conspiracy was
overthrown, Ioab was purposed by a messenger to inform David of the success
of the battle: hereupon one Ahimaaz offered himself to be the carier of
tidings: Ioab put him back, taking another, one Cushi to be the fitter for
that service. Ahimaaz notwithstanding continued to importune Ioab, What (I pray
thee) if I run also after Cushi? And again, Yet what if I run? and never
left until he had obtained license to run also. Having gotten this leave to
run, he ran by the way of the plain and ouer-went Cushi, and came first to
David, and made wise, as if he could have told great tidings. But when the King
came to particulars, then he was silent, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not
what. The case so stands many times in the church. (...). Heb. 13.7.
The spiritual Ioabs, the leaders of Gods people, intend perhaps to send none
but Cushies, men of whose faithfulness and sufficiency they have good
experience: but yet happily some Ahimaaz or other, some that might well stay to
bear tidings another time, steppeth in and puts forward himself, and by
importunity purchases that which otherwise desert could not obtain, and so
runs by the way of the plain (that common and too much trodden path of
Symony) and ouergoeth the worthier; and being first come into the face of Gods
Church, seems to be able to bring out of his treasure, Matthew 13.52.
things both old and new. But if you grow with him into particulars, you shall
find him like the guest in the Gospel, Matthew 22.12.
even speechless, so that he must be fain to stand aside till Cushi comes to
resolve you. Thus I say an error may happen, and an oversight may be committed
even by the best Overseers. But when this negligence becomes a custom, and
it waxes an ordinary matter, 1. Kings. 13.33.
to make of the lowest of the people Priests of the high places, so that in a
manner who will may consecrate himself, then a man may well cry with David, It
is time for thee Lord to work: Arise, Psalm. 119.126. Psalm. 10.12.
O God, and lift up thine hand. And how fearful a thing it is, for those which
willingly suffer it, may appear by an example not much unlike. 1. Sam. 16.
God sent Samuel to anoint one of Ishai his sons, to be King over Israel:
Samuel seeing Eliab, because of his countenance and the height of his stature,
said, Surely the Lords anointed is before him. The like conceit had he of the
rest of his brethren: but yet he received still a secret information, The Lord
has chosen none of these. Put case that Samuel notwithstanding this direction
given him, had took the horn of oil and anointed some other beside David,
had it not been great contempt to have proceeded contrary to command? So in
this case, they to whom the office and function of laying on of hands belongs
in Gods Church, when the Lord shall say expressly in his word, I have not
chosen this man, he is not gifted for this weighty business: if they for all
that shall give the outward allowance of a Minister to him, whom in their
certain knowledge God has not graced with gifts sufficient for the calling of
a Minister, what punishment in all likelihood ths rashness is liable unto, I
leave it to every man's conscience that fears God to examine. And I pray God
give them whom it concerns hearts to consider it.


Nymph. I join with you in your good desire: and yet perhaps men of place may
plead a kind of necessity, to admit men of no better sufficiency, there
being not that store of learned men and Preachers, to furnish every several
congregation.


Epaph. What is to be borne withal in cases of inevitable necessity is one
thing, and what is to be permitted when the good means is not wanting is
another thing: for this our land, first I think there was never any trial
taken, whether the number of learned men were proportionable to the tale of
several parishes: Secondly the Universities are like to the market place, in
which stand many of good quality, Matthew 20 6, 7
of whom if you demand Why stand ye here? they will answer, Because no man has
hired us. And the several colleges, be (as it is said of the teeth of the
spouse) like a flock of sheep in good order, Canticles 4.2.
which go up from the washing, which every one being out twins, and none is
barren among them. Ephesians. 4.8.
Thirdly, the scripture tells us, that Christ ascended up on high to give
gifts unto men: why then should we think his hand so shortened, as that it
should be deemed impossible to furnish this whole Church with preaching
Ministers? Fourthly, if that be true which some say, that there are more
learned men in England then in all the reformed Churches of Europe besides,
then there is no cause to plead any such necessity. And therefore I account
that as a color rather then any argument.


Nymph. I fear me sir, I have too much interrupted you: I pray you therefore
proceed in your proof of this point, that there is a necessity laid upon
every Minister that shall undertake the cure of souls, to be able to do more
then barely to read the holy scriptures unto the people.


Epaph. The next reason which I have to strengthen this principle, is grounded
upon this, because I find by the scripture that it is a matter of very great
difficulty to be a good Minister. There are two things principally required in
a minister: the one, that he be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine: the
other, Tit. 2.9.
that he have skill to improve them that say against it. Whereto agrees that
saying of Augustine, Ve^tat^ prop^gnator and ^rro^ expugnator. Aug de Doctr.
Chr. lib 4. cap. 4. 1. Corinthians 3.9.
that He must be a maintainer of truth, and a withstander of error. For which
cause the spiritual builders in Gods building, which is his Church, are not
unfitly compared to those who builded the temple in Nehemias his time, N^hem.
4.17.
who did the work with the one hand, and with the other held the sword. It is
a shame for a minister, if it shall fall out with his spiritual work as
Tobias the Ammonite said in scorn of the reedified City and Temple by the
Jews, Nehem. 4.^
Although they build, yet if a Fox go up he shall even break down their
stony wall. So, I say, it shall be a blemish to a teacher in Gods Church, if
he shall build so weakly that those foxes, Canticles 2 15.
those little foxes (of whom the spouse complains) shall be able by and by to
break down the building. Well then, let any man consider either of these two,
and tell me whether it be not a matter of very great difficulty in any good
measure to perform it. Isay 50.4.
The Prophet I say says, that the Lord had given him a tongue of the learned,
for ye one piece of service, that he might know to minister a word in time to
him that is weary: and yet this is but one branch of a Ministers office. If we
shall add to it other particulars, such as are wisdom in admonishing,
courage in reproving, soundness in opening the treasure of the holy text,
discretion in applying according to times and persons, with the like, which are
required of every Minister in his place: then we cannot but yield, that he had
need to be able to do something more then read, 1. Timoth 3.15.
who shall seek to behave him self in the house of God as he ought to do. Now
for that other part, Titus. 1.10.11.
which stands in stopping the mouths of vain talkers and deceivers of men's
minds, which oppose them selves against Gods truth: it is (as Augustine well
says) a matter requiring more painful and plentiful learning, Operosioris,
vberior^que doctrina. Aug. in Euch. ad Laur.
as shall appear to him that shall consider either the multitude of false
opinions, or the quality of those which do defend them. For the multitude, this
is a clear case, that whereas every former age has brought forth some one or
more, to the disturbance of the peace of Gods Church, and to the exercising of
the best learned that each time could afford, all these are flowne together
into this last age as into a common sewer. So that there is not any error which
the former times knew, and withal condemned to the pit of hell, but this our
age has raked it up again, and set (as it were) a new gloss upon it, and
made it by addition much more dangerous. Besides, we have Popery, which is a
fardle of heresies, and the very compound of all the rest. Now for the quality
of those which are the patrons thereof, (of Popery especially) it is well
known that though they have among them, as it was said of old, many wooden
priests, Lignes Sacerdotes. Boniface.
all whose learning hangs at their girdle in their Portuis, yet they which in
these our times have put forth themselves to support the drouping and decaying
kingdom of Antichrist, are no punies, but many of them men of excellent wits,
deep learning, and unwearied industry: by their writings, and books, and
disputations, making good the saying of our Savior Christ, Luke 16.8.
The children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. Now then to discover the force of my intended reason, I draw it to these
heads: first, I know that whosoever should undertake out of the scripture to
describe the office of a Pastor, he cannot without a palpable betraying of the
truth leave out these two things which I have named, the ability to teach the
obedient children of the Church, and the skill to oppose himself against the
enemies of the Church. Secondly, this I know also, that he that shall either by
discourse examine, or by personal eperience try the difficulty of well
performing these duties, will say with S. Paul, (...). 2. Cor. 2.16. On^ est
vel ipsis Angel^ formicandum Ber^.
Who is sufficient for these things? and acknowledge with Bernard, that the
ministry is a burden, which the Angels themselves may well tremble at. Thirdly,
I am as clear in this, as in any of the two former, that there is no such
difficulty in the faculty of reading, which as it is the first step to
learning, so it is of all other things incident to a scholar the most easy.
So that, seeing to hold opinion, that an only reading Minister is a sufficient
Minister, makes that calling of all other the most easy, which in it own
nature, as it is described to us in the scripture, is most laborious, requiring
so studious preparation to it, and so great intention and diligence in the
performance of it, I must needs settle my self upon this point, and persuade
others also to it, that there is more required in a minister of the new
Testament, then to read the scripture, though I still hold that a part of his
duty, and (as I have said before) a matter very behouefull for the spiritual
benefit of Gods Church.


Nymp. I could easily agree to that which you have said, only this doubt
something stays me: if you hold no man a full Minister, except the same be
able to preach, what shall we think then of the sacraments administered by such;
how can they be true sacraments if such be no true Ministers?


Epaph. Colum. Just. lib. 4 ca. 15 sect. 16.
For answer to that doubt, first this is a true and a received rule, that a
sacrament is not to be esteemed by the hand of him which administreth it:
neither does the dignity of the deliverer, add worth to the sacrament, nor
the indignity lessen the true nature of it. Secondly, he which has an outward
calling by the Church, though happily he be unworthy and unmeet for the place
whereto he is called, yet he is to be reputed as more then a private man: and
therefore because by the appointment of the Church he stands in the room of
a right and lawful Minister, if there be no fault in the substance of the
action of administering, the sacraments are true sacraments, though the party
executing that office be not altogether so allowable. The Scribes and
Pharisees, who were the Doctors of the Jews, many of them were of other Tribes
then of the tribe of Leui, and crept in by corruption and bribery into those
places, and were of unsound judgment in many things, as many easily be
gathered by the story of the Gospel; yet our Savior willed his Disciples to
hear them, because they sat in Moses chair. Matthew 23.2.3
Their entrance was naught, yet their ministry was to be esteemed, so long as
they failed not in the substance thereof. And this (I think) may resolve you
for that matter.


Nymphas. I will rest satisfied with this answer, til I shall find either by
mine own private meditation, or by conference with others (better skilled in
these points then I) what further to reply. I desire to hear you yet further
in this matter, touching the necessity of preaching in a Minister.


Epaph. I am very willing to proceed, only I would have you to remember what I
said at my first entrance into this matter, namely, that I would stand only
upon proofs of Scripture. S. Augustine says, Epist. 263.
that that was the ancient order of disputing, to have the books of holy
scripture by, and to stand to the trial thereof. And therefore it was an
excellent and memorable course of Constantine the Emperor, Theodor. (...). 1.
c. 5
who commanded the Fathers met together in the Council of Nice, to refer that
great controversy then in hand, touching the Godhead of Christ, to the
decision of the Scripture. And it is Gods own voice that we should to the law,
Isay 8.20.
and to the testimony. Wherefore wishing you to look for no proofs from me,
but such as are fetched out of the scripture, I set this down as my third
reason, that whereas the Lord made very good provision for the maintenance of
those who were to minister about holy things, I find not either in the old or
new Testament that any were provided for by such allowa^ce, but only such as
were able to instruct the people by opening and expounding the law. The office
of the Levites in the old law, Deuter 33 ^0.
stood upon two things, one was to put incense before the Lords face, and the
burnt offering upon his altar; therein they were the peoples mouth unto God:
the other was to teach Iaakob Gods judgment, and Israel his law: in that they
were Gods mouth unto the people: for this cause it was the ordinance of God
(according as I noted to you the place in the beginning of this conference)
that the Priestslips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7
and they should seek the law at his mouth: for (says the text) he is the
messenger of the Lord of hoasts: that is, one appointed to be the opener and
declarer of the will of God among the people. And lest any man should think,
that the law which the people were to seek at the Priests mouth, was nothing
but the bare letter and written text of the law, we may remember first, that
the people had the free use of the law in their private houses, Deuteron. 6.7.
so that they had no such need to seek that at the Priests hands. Secondly,
that it was the use of the Levites when they did read in the book of the law,
to give the sense also, and to cause the people to understand the reading.
Nehemiah 8.8.
And hence it was, that when our Savior Christ stood up to read on the
Sabbath day, Luke 4 16. etc.
(according to his office, Su^das in dictione. I^.
as some think that he was chosen one of the odinary two and twenty Priests of
the Temple) when he had closed the book, the eyes of all that were in the
synagogue were fastened on him; because it was the order that presently upon
the reading of the law, followed the exposition of the law. Thence also was it
that Paul and Barnabas being at Antioch upon a Sabbath day, After the Lecture
of the Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, to
entreat them, Acts 13.15.
that if they had any word of exhortation, they would be pleased to deliver it.
This their request arose upon the custom of joining still the opening and
interpreting of the law with the public reading thereof; whereto agrees that
saying of James that Moses was of old time in every city, Acts 15.21.
both read and preached every Saboth day. Thirdly, this may be noted also, that
whereas the Lord threatened to refuse them, Hos. 4.6
that they should be no priests to him, who had refused knowledge: by that
refusing of knowledge is to be understood both their ignorance in the doctrine
of the law, and their negligence to inform the people in it: otherwise to
think that there was nothing reproved in them more, then an inability to
read the law, were a very gross conceit. And thus much to prove that for the
times of the old testament, none had the allowance of Priests, but such as were
able to instruct. Now for the times of the Gospel, S. Paul thus declares the
continuance of the equity of that ancient law, that like as of old, They
which did minister about the holy things, did eat of the things of the Temple,
and they which did wait at the altar, were partakers of the altar: so also it
is ordained by the Lord, 1. Cor. 9.13.24.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: none have any
right to live of the Gospel, that is, of the exhibition and salary of the
Church, but those which preach the Gospel. If you demand of me what it is to
preach the Gospel, Paul shall resolve you in another place; namely it is this,
1. Timot. 5.17.
to labor in the word and doctrine: which whether it be not more then to read
the word, I refer it to any man's judgment. Chrysostom says, that these words
require of a Minister, Vt pradicit, doceat and concionetur.
that he do preach, and teach, and make sermons: and the old rule of the law,
which Paul applies to the purpose, requires so much, Thou shall not muzzle
the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. The ox that is allowed to
eat of the corn, is not he only which treads upon the corn, but which
treads it out, that works it out of the husks, that it may be fit for man's
use. So he is to eat of the maintenance of the church who is able to set the
word of God (the spiritual food) before the people, not only in the ear (as
it were) in the words and letter of the scripture, but in the true sense and
interpretation of it. It is an excellent saying of S. Hierome, In Com. 1. cap.
ad Galaias: non in verbu sed in sensu, non in superficie sed in Medu^a.
Let us not think (says he) that the Gospel is in the words of the
scripture, but in the sense, not in the outward face, but in the marrow
thereof: Basil lib. 2. contra E^nomium.
and as Basil speaks, not in the sound of the air, but in the power of the
things meant. Tertull aduersu^ Pra^. ad sensum rei non ad s^um vocabuli.
I would have thee (says Tertullian) exercise thy self to the sense of the
matter, and not to the sound of the word. It is a rule among Lawyers, Sensus
Legis, lex est non nuda verba.
that not the bare words is the law, but the meaning of the law. And in the
scripture, they are said to teach the law, Deuteronomy. 17.10.11.
which show the sentence or substance and matter of the law. So then, he is a
Teacher allowed to live upon the common charge, which treads out (as I may so
speak, alluding to the similitude of the ox) the sense of the scripture out
of the letter of the scripture; and stays not (as Hierome speaks in the
fore-remembred place) in the leaves of words, Jn ser^mum Folijs. Adra^em ra^.
but searches to the root of the understanding thereof. Gal. 6.6 (...).
You may (if you will) add hereto that other place of Paul to this purpose, Let
him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him partaker of all
his goods. He that will have a share in the temporal goods of the people, must
let them receive spiritual good from him. He who looks to eat of the milk
of the flock, Augusti^ in ^. de Paster^.
(that is as it is expounded by Augustine, of that which is given by the people
for the sustenance of their overseers) must in equity not be wanting to afford
them that which may be for the building up of their souls in Christ Jesus:
otherwise there is no proportion. Pastum homin^ quam pastum o^ Ber^ad Eu^gr.
Ezech. 34.3.
And were it not that men did more affect pride then painfulnesse, the fat and
the wool of the flock, then the feeding of the sheep, this doctrine would
never be gainsayd; we should not then have that just cause to lament the state
of so many, Math 9.^6. Sunt qui pastor^ nomine gauden^. pastorum autem officium
impie^ nolunt In lib. de Pastoribus.
whom we see scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd: neither to
complain with Augustine, that there are many who rejoice in the name of
Pastors, but care not to fulfill the office of Pastors. Thus have you my third
reason, which though it has been stretched out by something a large discourse,
yet it may be reduced to this brief: the word of God providing a maintenance
of honor for the Ministers of his church, (...). 1 Timothy 5.17.
has not given allowance to any to live by it, but only to men able to
instruct, by opening the scripture, therefore there is more required in a
Minister then to be able to read the scripture.


Nymph. You have so well and thoroughly satisfied me for this matter by these
your three reasons, that I will not urge you further; only I will pray you to
teach me how to answer some exceptions and pretenced reasons, some against the
necessity of preaching, some for the sufficiency of reading.


Epaph. I am willing to follow you, seeing I entered into this matter for your
sake: and if hereafter any doubt shall arise in your mind upon further
scanning, touching these things which have been said, I hope God will afford
us opportunity further to debate them. If you will therefore let me hear what
you have heard pleaded by those which are of a different opinion. I doubt not
but by the grace of Christ you shall find the truth to be as it is well called,
Veritas eterna victoris. Aug de c^s. Dei l 2. c. 2^. Fab Max apud Liu, li. 22
saep^ Laborare n^mis, ^qu^ng.
An eternal victory: and that (as that worthy Roman said sometime) though it
be often too much withstood, yet it can never be clean extinguished.


Nymph. It is said by some, that this opinion touching the necessity of
expounding and opening the scripture by preaching, does derogate from the
dignity of the scripture, and does seem to favor the doctrine of Popery,
touching the obscurity and darkness of the holy writ, as though there were
such necessity of a Teacher to come to the understanding of it.


Epaph. The answer to this is easy. Psalm. 119.105. Psalm. 19.8.

Paul ascribes to the word both (...) light. and (...) enlightening: 2. Cor.
4.6. Aug de Doctr. Chr. lib. 2. cap. 9. In ijs quae apec posita s^s.


Touching the Scriptures, God forbid but we should acknowledge that they are
both in their own nature light, and such also, which by the beams thereof do
give light unto the eyes. And it is true which S. Austine says, that all
matters necessary to faith and manners, are to be found in those things which
are set down plainly in the Scripture: and therefore, we do both exhort to
the reading of the scriptures privately, and commend the public rehearsing of
them in the congregation. Yet this is no whit contrary to the opinion touching
the necessity of preaching. And so much shall evidently appear, if we
marshall our hearers into three companies. The first sort are grossly
ignorant, and extremely negligent in the matters of God. The second are of some
better both care to look into the scriptures, and capacity to conceive them.
The third are as well able to sound out the truth by the private study of the
scripture, as those who be professed Divines. There is no hearer (I mean among
our people professing the present Religion) but he belongs to one of these
three ranks. Now for the former of these, preaching cannot but be most
necessary: for as in their negligence of themselves they will never seek for
knowledge, but it must even in a kind of violence be put upon them, so in their
ignorance the plain text read will profit them nothing, unless with it be
joined the skillful industry of some painful workman, 2. Timoth. 2 15. Ad
^fantiu^ and ^actenium cap. 1 citatem. Augan Psalm 8. Isay 28.10. Deuteronomy. 6 7.
acute ingeres Tre^.
who by framing himself to the shallow capacity of the silliest, and by
adding precept to precept, line to line, here a little and there a little, may
drop in some knowledge, and thorough often sharpening of the necessary points
of Religion, may make something to enter. Secondly for the next sort, John 5.3^.
which according to Christ's commandment do search the scripture, Spiritus
sanctus fa^ nostra consi^lis in locu apertioribus Augustine. de Doctr. Chr. lib.
2. cap. 6.
though I know they shall find their spiritual hunger to be satisfied by many
plain and comfortable places, yet they shall many times be so plunged and set
as it were, that they shall say with the Eunuch, How can I understand, Acts
8.31.
except I had a guide? It is Gods wisdom, Pascit manisostu, exercit occul^is.
August. Tract. 45 a^ Io^
as well to exercise us with hard places, as to feed us with those which are
perspicuous, both to teach us to pray with David, Psalm. 119 18.
that the Lord would open our eyes that we may see the wonders of his law,
Chrysostom. Him 4 4. in opire impers^to in Matthew. vt alij essent Doctores, alij
Disc^pu^.
and withal to establish the necessity of the public ministry, and to teach
us humility, when we must be feign to depend upon the instruction of others.
As for the third kind, who perhaps are able because of education in good
letters, to search out the mystery of the text by their own private industry,
as well as the most sufficient Preacher, yet as I doubt not but the same shall
even better their judgments by the meanest sermon (if that be a fit term to
be given to a sermon, in which Gods truth is soundly delivered) so I am sure
they shall find hearing to be very behoouefull, (...). Chry^om. 3. (...) 2.
These.
if it be for no other thing, yet (as a learned father well observes it) for
their own sluggishnes, that so they may be quickened up to good duties, we
being all in nature so prove though we know much, 2. Thessal. 3.13.
yet to be weary of well doing, 2. Pet. 1.8.
and to be idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is
an excellent saying of the Apostle Paul writing to the Romans, and well
fitting this purpose: Romans 15.14.15.
I my self (says he) am persuaded of you my brethren that ye are also full of
goodness, and filled with all knowledge, and are able to admonish one another:
what greater commendation could be? these men might seem not to need any
further instruction: but mark what follows, Nevertheless brethren, I have
somewhat boldly after a sort written unto you, as one that puts you in
remembrance, through the grace that is given me of God. Though a man have
attained to never so great perfection in knowledge, yet he stands still in
need of a Preacher, though it be but to be a remembrance^ unto him. Theophilus
was well instructed in ye mystery of Christ, yet Lukes Gospel was needful for
him, Luke 1.4.
that he might acknowledge the certainty of those things. Preaching is not
superfluous, though a man were never so cunning. This brief view of the state
of our several hearers, may serve to make this good, that to urge the
necessity of preaching as the means to beget faith, is no derogation to that
doctrine which we hold, touching the brightness and plainnes of the scripture.
2. Pet. 1.19.
The scripture is as a light shining in a dark place, but neither do all look
into it, neither can all that hear it read publikly conceive it, unless they
be prepared to it by some former familiar instructions, neither do all that
peruse the book of God, so fully understand all that they need no teacher,
neither yet can any man though of never so good parts, attain to that fulness,
as that he shall not (at the least) stand in need of an admonisher. It is a good
observation (in my judgment) of him, Wolph. in N cap. 8.
who says that the word is indeed light, but the preaching Minister is as ye
candlestick, Mat. 5.15.
of which Christ speaks, by which ye word of God gives light unto all that
are in the house. And indeed this similitude may have ye better approbatio^,
Reue^ ^
if we note how by the candlestick which the Lord Jesus threatens to remove
out of the church of Ephesus, is meant especially ye ministry of ye word. God
does all things by means (ordinarily). John 1.9. Luke 1.79.
Christ is the true light, which gives light to them that sit in darkness, yet
the faithful Ministers of several congregations are said to be stairs in his
right hand, Revel. 1.16 10.
by which he gives light unto his church. If this be true, I see not what
inconvenience can follow upon it, if we say, Psalm 119.105
though the word be a lantern, yet it then gives best, and cleerest, and
fullest light when it is lifted up as it were, and the brightness thereof caused
to spread forth into every corner, by the skill and pains of a sufficient
Minister.


Nymp. Another exception used by some, whose endeavor is to equal (if not to
prefer) bare reading unto preaching, is, that there is more certainty in the
word read, then in that which you preach: that which is read, men are sure is
Gods word, but they have not the like assurance of that which is preached.


Epaph. If you desire a short and direct answer to this exception, take it
thus, This allegation touching the certainty of tho word read above the
doctrine preached, is not true. There are in our congregations three sorts of
people especially: first, ignorant persons: secondly, cauillers: and lastly,
judicial and careful hearers. The ignorant are as uncertain touching that
which we call the scripture, whether it be be the word of God, as they be
touching our preaching: they have no assurance of it, but tradition and report,
which is a poor certainty, and they have as good an opinion of the Apocripha
books, as of the other which we call canonical. Besides that, it is buzzed into
many of our common peoples ears, by whispering Papists, and it is thereby
become ordinary in many mouths here in ye country that our Bible is no true
Bible, and that our translation is justly to be doubted of. Secondly, those
that are possessed with a humor of cauilling, may as well demand how they know
the scripture to be scripture, and those things to be true which are written in
it, as how they may be resolved that our preaching is the truth. Thirdly, your
best hearers, which hear as Christ says with a good and an honest heart,
Luke. 8.15.
to them the certainety of the truth in the written text and in the sermon is
both alike: for as they have a certain secret teaching by the spirit of God
(which S. John calls by ye name of an ointment from him that is holy) whereby
they are persuaded of the truth of the scripture, 1. John 2.20.
and do account it the oracle of God, Romans 3.2. (...). 1. These. 4.9 Loquitur
and c^ vn^sc^squ^ nostrum. Ep. 3.
(in respect whereof they are said to be taught by God: and Austine says, God
speaks to our hearts): so also they are enabled by the same spirit to judge
of that doctrine which they hear by the scripture, and equally to embrace
points confirmed by it, and those which are expressly and in so many words
revealed in it. So the^ there is no more certainty of the text, then of the
doctrine preached out of ye text. Those which are ignorant, or dispose to
cavil, are doubtful of both alike: for the one are blockish and know nothing,
the other are humorous and will be satisfied with nothing. Again, those which
are Gods children, are alike assured of both: of the text by the secret
persuasion of Gods spirit: of the doctrine, by trial taken of it by the text.
Epist. 62. ad Theophi^. cap. 2.
I remember a saying of S. Hieromes; I know (says he) that I otherwise esteem
of the Apostles, then of other treatisers: the Apostles I know spoke always ye
truth; the other as men in many things were deceived. The speech may well be
applied to this purpose; S^e ^lla re^usanone. August. de not. and gra. ca. 6.
the books of holy Scripture we must yield consent unto them without refusal,
2. Tim. 3.16.
because it is certain that they are all given by inspiration of God, 2. Pet.
1 20.
so that there is nothing in them of any private motion but as for the writings
and preachings of men, they are not to be credited before they be tried whether
they are of God. 1. John 41.
Thus much willingly is acknowledged: but yet after this trial made, Acts 17
1^.
and by the daily searching of the scriptures, those things which in preaching
are delivered are found to be so; then the doctrines though drawn out of the
text by the art and wit of man, and otherwise amplified, enlarged, and urged by
the helps of learning, are not to be called the opinions of a man, 1. Pet 4.11.
(...). Perinde sunt ea qua ex scrip. colligu^tur atque ea qua scribuntur.
Nazian lib. 5. de Theolog. (...) Acts 17.2.
but the words of God. It is a good rule of the learned, that those points
which are collected out of the scripture, are of like authority with those
which are directly written in it. When Paul being at Thessalonica went into the
synagogue of the Jews, and disputed with them by the scriptures, I hope no man
will say, but that those things which he by argument and discourse drew out of
the written word, were of equal authority with points expressly mentioned. Paul
pleading before Agrippa, stood stiffely to the justifying of his doctrine,
(...). Acts 26.22.
because he had said no other things but those which the Prophets and Moses did
say should come. His doctrine was the same with the doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets, yet not in words, but in sense and substance. And the same Apostle is
not afraid to call his preaching The counsel of God, Acts 20.27.
though it were in regard of the tenor and course of speech, differing from the
express letter of the text. If it shall be said unto me, that there is a
difference betwixt our sermons and Paul's, I willingly confess it; but yet I
say, that even Paul's sermons were subject to the like trial that ours be, as
appears by the practice of the Noblemen of Beraea. Acts 17.11.
And therefore as his preaching was not to be esteemed as the word of God, till
trial, and being tried was equally to be reverenced as the written word it
self: so neither are our sermons to be by and by credited upon our bare word,
but to be thoroughly examined; but being once found to hold at the touchstone,
then they are so to be reputed Gods word, that it may be safely said, 1 Thessalonians
4.^
He that despises them, despises not man but God. And indeed unless we shall
give equal credit and respect to matters soundly proved by scripture, and to
points expressed in it, we shall hazard the truth of many, and the same no
petty principles of Religion, which I know are substantially confirmed by ye
scripture, but yet are not word for word so to be found in the sacred text,
(...).
as we maintain them. And this I think may be a sufficient answer to this
objection. Tell me, I pray you, how you do conceive it?


Nymph. As far as I can conjecture, your answer is this: that when that course
of due trial (which is meet) is taken, touching things taught by preaching,
then the scripture being found to give allowance to the^, there is as great
assurance of the authority of the one as of the other; and that is as much to
be accounted the word of God, which the scripture warranteth, as that which by
name in so many words it expresses.


Epaph. That is indeed the sum of the answer: to which (if you will) you may
add this, that by preaching men come to be better assured of the authority of
the scripture: for, the better they understand it, the more comfort they find
in it, and the more they feel the power and working of it, (all which, by the
blessing of God are the effects of preaching) the more are they assured that
the scripture is the very thing which it is said to be, Psalm. 19 7.8. Psalm.
119.103.
even a perfect, pure and sweet doctrine, converting the soul, rejoicing the
heart, 2. Timoth 3.15. Non in legendo, sed in intelligend^ Hieron. contra Luc.
and able to make a man wise unto salvation. It is truly said, that the
Scripture stands not in reading, but in understanding. What shall it avail
men to carry a kind of conceit of some divine authority to be in the
Scripture, so long as they are ignorant of the mystery of it, and without any
apprehension or taste of the comfort which is intended in it? Rom 15.4.



Nymph. I am sorry that I am constrained to make you tarry so long in this
matter, and that so much the rather, because there are many other things yet
behind, wherein I am as desirous of your help as in these already handled: yet
because I have this good opportunity, and do find you also so willing to
instruct me, I will yet further acquaint you with one other allegatio^, which
being answered, I shall (I think) be well provided, both to satisfy those of
my acquaintance which shall perhaps seek help from me, and also to say
something to those who with their quirkes and shows of reasons, think to put
down such plain men as I am when we come into their company. I named it to
you before (though happily by length of communication it is slipped from you)
and it is this, That even reading it self is preaching: and that they seek to
prove by those reasons: first, they say, to preach is nothing but to publish
the Gospel, and that is done by reading: secondly, in hearing the scriptures
read, we hear the sermons of the Prophets, of Christ, and of his Apostles,
which pass all other sermons which any man now can make. Thirdly, there is
(they say) even in reading that which we so much commend preaching for, namely
expounding and applying; for the new Testament is the expounder of the old, and
the Epistles of Paul and Peter and the rest do apply both unto men's
consciences. Thus, though in our common speech we account reading to be one
thing, and preaching to be another, yet by these devises we are many times
shrewdly puzzled, and know not suddenly what to answer.


Epap. These reasons, what show soever they may make at the first view, yet are
they never able to prove that for which they are alleged, as shall (God
willing) appear in the several examination of them. First, for that which is
said, that preaching is nothing but a publishing of the Gospel, I yield unto
it, if it be well and rightly understood: and when it is so understood as it
ought to be, then it will appear that the reading of the bare context, cannot
properly be termed preaching. I find in the new Testament four words
especially to be used, when preaching so far forth as it is incident to the
office of an ordinary Pastor in Gods Church is mentioned. The first signifies,
1. Cor. 9.16 (...). Luke 2.10. Luke 5.^0 (...). Act 4 2 (...).
to deliver good tidings, because the Gospel is, as it was by the Angels to the
shepherds, tidings of great joy to all Gods people. The second and third words
signify, to make manifest, to discover, to make known, to set forth to open
view, and so to handle a matter, as the Prophet was commanded to deal with a
vision which God had showed him, namely, Hab. 2.2.
to make it plain upon Tables, that he which runs may read it. This shall
appear to be true to any man, that shall take the pains to examine and duly to
ponder those places of the new Testament, Romans 9.17. (...) Act. 17.23. (...)
Act. 26 23 (...) 1. Co. 11 26. (...).
in which these words are used in the Greek, which being applied to the
Minister his office, are translated by the word Preach. And these kinds of
words, do fitly set forth the duty of a Preacher, which is especially that,
which Paul exhorts the Ephesians to beg of God on his behalf, to wit,
Ephe. 6.19. (...).
To make known the secret of the Gospel, which (seeing it must be sought for
as silver, Prou 2.4.
and searched for as for treasure) is not ordinarily to be looked for in the
upper face as it were, but to be with pains and industry dug out of the
very bowels and heart of the Scripture. The fourth word signifies to publish,
2 Timothy 4.2 (...).
and as an herald or a crier, to deliver a matter in open place, in the hearing
of a multitude, that many may take notice of it. For this cause the Prophet
Isaiah was willed to Cry aloude, Isa. 58.2.
and to Lift up his voice like a trumpet; and Jeremiah was commanded to stand
in the gate of the Lords house, Ier. 7.2.
and to cry the word there. And hence also it is, that the wisdom of God,
Pro. 8.2.4.5.11.9.4.
is said to stand in the top of the high places, and to make as it were a
public proclamation: O men! o ye foolish! who so is simple let him come
hither. Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.28.
Ho, every one that thirsts: come unto me al ye that are weary, etc. By this
it may appear what it is to Preach, and in what sense Preaching may be
tolerably defined to be a publishing of the Gospel: What preaching is.
namely, it is an open and comfortable discovery by word of mouth, making
plain unto the people of God, the mystery of godliness, even the secret of
the Gospel. Now, as no man duly considering the nature and use of the
forenamed words, can deny Preaching (by a Minister lawfully called) to be even
such a kind of publishing the Gospel, as is now set down: so neither can he
with any face or color affirm, the action of reading the Scripture to be
answerable to this description. So that though it be granted, that the text of
Scripture is the Gospel, and the very word of God; and withal, that reading
is after a sort a publishing thereof, because thereby the letter of the Text is
recited with a loud voice, from an eminent and conspicuous place, in the
audience of a multitude: yet when we shall enter into a more exact examination
of things, it will then appear, that Reading simply cannot be called a
publishing of the Gospel, in that sense, as it is required of Ministers and
Teachers to be spreaders abroad and proclaimers of Gods truth. Add hereto,
that that which is the principal thing looked for of a Preacher in the
publishing of the word, the bare Reader in the act of Reading, neither can nor
does perform: and that is, 2. Tim. 2.15.
the dividing the word of truth aright: and (to apply Christ's words in a case
not much unlike) a giving to them of the household ( which is the Church, Luke
12.42.
1. Tim. 3.15.) their portion of meat in season. A Minister, is one to who^
the dispensation (or stewardship) is committed in the family of God: and his
office is, (...) 1. Cor. 9.17.
out of the storehouse of the Scripture, to share out to every one, that which
he shall find by his caring to know the state of his flock, Pro. 27.23.
to be best fitting and agreeing to him. As for as example: Milk (that is,
Heb. 5.12.13.
the first principles of the word of God) to those which are inexpert in the
word of righteousness: Verse. 14.
Strong meat (that is, doctrine of greater depth) for them, who are able to
bear it: 1. Cor. 3.2. 2. Tim. 2.25. 1. Cor. 4.21. Tit. 1.12.13. Verse. 9. 11.
Meekness of instructing for those which are contrary minded: a rod and
sharp rebuke of slow bellies, that they may be found in the faith: Improuing
(or conuincing) of Gainesayers, that their mouths may be stopped: admonition
for them that are unruly: 1. These. 5.14.
comfort for the feeble minded: a discreet and respective framing of
exhortation to several ages and degrees, 1. Tim. 5.1.2.
to the Elders, as to fathers, to the younger men as to brethren, to the elder
women as to mothers, to the younger as to sisters. After this sort, every man's
portion must be allotted out unto him: and this ordering of that provision,
which the Lord (as a careful householder) has left for his spiritual family
is committed unto the Minister. The Scripture I confess is profitable for
these purposes, ^. Tim. 3.16.17.
and able to make the man of God absolute and perfect unto all the good works
of his calling, and it is no wholesome food, unless it be delivered out of that
Garner: but yet, unless there be more performed, the^ is done by naked
reading, to wit, a propounding to the household, the whole store, as it were in
gross, it cannot be but whilst every one is left to be his own caruer, the
young ones will be starued, and the riotous and misgouerned surfeit themselves,
with greedy and unbeseeming taking that unto them, which they are neither fit
nor able to receive. And this, I think, may serve to show how little reason
there is in this first Reason, why reading of ye Scripture should deserve the
honorable name of Preaching: when as both our common speech, Act. 46.15
21.(...) and(...)
and which is more) the language of the holy Ghost, has put an apparent
difference betwixt them.


Nymph. Indeed I acknowledge that to be true out of my own experience: for
though by private Reading the Scripture as also by hearing it read, I have
received much comfort: (the memory of things taught thereby renewed, and the
truth of them confirmed) yet I have often been quite set, often been altogether
mistaken, and still afraid of my own judgment even in plainer places, until
I have found the public exposition given by the Minister to iumpe and accord
with my opinion. But what say you to the second reason: namely, that in the
Scriptures read, we hear the worthy sermons of Christ, of the Prophets, and
of his Apostles: and therefore Reading is Preaching?


Epaph. I say it is a very weak argument. That the sermons of Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles were excellent sermons, and that the sum and
abridgement of them is to be found in Scripture, no man goes about to deny:
yet this being granted, will never prove a Reader to be a Preacher. For he is
not a Preacher, who recites publicly things of another man's inditing, but he
which delivers matters (though not invented) yet in respect of art and
industry compiled and framed by himself. If it be said, that ye sermons of
Christ, etc. though they be not of his framing that reads them, yet being
read may turn to the profit of the people, I answer, that the question is
not, whether they may be profitable, but whether the reading of them may be
called preaching. God forbid any man should deny the public reading of them
to be for the behoof of Gods people, (I hope you have not forgotten what I
told you as my judgment in this case) but how it may be said, that he which
has read them to the people, has performed that office of a Minister which we
call preaching, neither can I conceive, neither (as I think) is any man able
to set down. Besides, if the word Sermon, shall be precisely urged, that which
was the sermon of Christ, or Jeremiah, or Paul, when they lived, and the same
uttered by them, cannot be now being recorded in the Bible, and read out by
another, so properly called a Sermon; because in our common speech a Sermon
requires the tongue and voice of him that framed it. And therefore to say (as
some do) that Christ or some one of ye ancient Prophets or Apostles preaches
to us, when we hear the sum of their sermons read unto us, is but a borrowed
kind of speech, usual amongst scholars. Such as that is, Heb. 11.24. Cap. 11.4.
that the blood of Abel speaks; and that he being dead yet speaks; Psalm.
19.1.3.
or which is said of the heavens and firmament, that there is no speech nor
language, where their voice is not heard; and the like, common in the
Scripture. Again, let the nature and estate of those which are called the
Sermons of the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles be a little considered.
First in general this is to be known, that we have but the brief and sum,
and as it were the heads of their sermons related in the Scripture: for if all that every one of these spoke publicly by way of teaching had been written, we
might well say as S. John said, Ioh. 21.25.
touching the ^as and sayings of our Savior Christ, the world could not
contain the books: and therefore (if profit be desired) there must
necessarily be some course taken, by which ye things abridged, by the penmen of
the holy Ghost in their writings, may be enlarged. Secondly, the sermons of
Moses, are so interlaced with judicial ordinances and ceremonial rites,
appertaining only to the policy of those times, that for the peoples
behoof, it is more then convenient, that they should enjoy the benefit of an
able Minister, who may inform them herin, what things be moral, and what be
temporary, what is the substance of every ceremonial shadow, and what the
perpetual and unchangeable equity of every judicial constitution. Thirdly,
touching the preachings of the Prophets; though they be full of comfort and
abounding with sweet consolation, because the maine scope and drift of them
all, is to foreshew the renewing and restoring of the Church by Christ, and
though they do also notably make known the just judgment of God against
sin; yet they are so intermixed with mystical prophecies, with hidden
parables, with historical narrations, and descriptions of countries, with
borrowed speeches, and proprieties of that holy language in which they were
delivered: that, howsoever sometimes a lamb (as the proverb is) may find a
foord easily to be waded through, yet unless there be added the help and
guidance of some learned Ezra, Neh. 8. Job. 33.23.
some Messenger, or Interpreter, as Elihu fitly calls him, and the same no
ordinary man, Mat. 4.17.
but (as the text speaks) one of a thousand, the people cannot possibly reap
that good which God has intended in the revealing of those things. Fourthly,
for the sermons of our Savior, as we have but the very short sum of many of
them (according as I said before) so for those which are reported more largely
by the Evangelists, Luke 4.21.
I persuade my self there is no man, but (if he will speak the truth, out of
his own conscience) he will confess, that he learneth more by them when by
preaching they are explaned, then when they are only read unto him. Fifthly, we
have in the Bible very few copies of the Apostles sermons: those that be, are
in the book of the Acts, Act. 4.2. Act 1.4.5.12.
and yet many times, this is all which is said of them: they preached in Jesus
the resurrection from the dead, they went to and fro preaching the word,
preached Christ, preached the things that concern the kingdom of God, and
many the like speeches: all which are like unto the little cloud, 1. King. 18.44.
which the servant of Elias saw; which though at the first it was but like a
man's hand, yet at last it covered the face of heaven: so these being clauses of
very few words, yet minister just matter of many large discourses, and the same
also very needful for the well understanding of them. If it shall be said that
the Apostles writings were sermons, I answer, they cannot properly be called
their sermons. Paul writing to the Romans, says, that besides this labor of
writing, Romans 1.15.
he was ready also to preach the Gospel unto them: so that he did not account
his writing to be preaching. The Epistles of the Apostles were the sums of
that doctrine which they had taught by word of mouth, and according to the
tenor whereof, their desire was, that the Ministers of the places to whom they
wrote should proceed. I know they were read in the Churches, according as it
was meet, Col. 16.
that a matter written to a whole congregation should be communicated to all in
public: but what then? I doubt not, but the pastors in the several
assemblies, did (as we now do) preach upon those Epistles, and open and apply
them to their auditories: and so much may easily appear, as by other places,
so especially by that speech to the Hebrews, by the author of the Epistle
written to them: I beseech you also brethren, Heb. 13.22.
suffer the words of exhortation: for I have written unto you in few words:
Calvin and Iunius.
which speech (as it is well observed by two learned interpreters of our later
times) the Apostle purposely used, lest his writing should be an occasion to
any, of lessening that due estimation, which the ordinary course of preaching
did deserve. It is all one as if the Apostle had said: Brethren,
notwithstanding all this which I have written unto you, yet I pray you continue
your accustomed reverence to the labors of your own Ministers: I, as the
nature of an Epistle requires, have written briefly, therefore you shall still
need the assistance of your watchful and learned Overseers, who shall enlarge
these points, which I have drawn as it were into a narrow room, and by
powerful exhortations apply them either to your comfort of reproof, as their
knowledge in your estate from time to time shall direct them. This is the
meaning of that place, plainly proving ye necessity of joining the pains of a
preaching Minister, with the writings and Epistles of the Apostles of Christ
Jesus. And thus have you my answer to this second stout reason, why reading
should be preaching, because forsooth, thereby is communicated to us the sum
and substance of the worthy sermons which Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles
have formerly delivered. The weakness of which reason, I hope this short
discourse, has made you to perceive.


Nymph. For these two alleged reasons, you have indifferently satisfied me. I
do now expect, what you will say, touching the last reason, why reading should be
preaching.


Epaph. The third reason (as I remember) was, that reading may therefore truly
be called preaching, because in our Church the reading of ye Scripture is so
ordered, that first, there is a portion of the old Testament read, next of the
new, and thirdly some parcel of ye Epistles: which they will have to be called
preaching, because as the new Testament is an exposition of the old, so ye
Epistles are the applying of both unto Gods people. This I think, is the third
reason, that you told me of.


Nymph. You have hit it right, if you can answer it as fully, as you have
rehearsed it truly, then it shall never be any occasion of scruple to me
hereafter.


Epaph. To make a short answer to a slight reason, this is that I say: It is
true, if we compare ye whole new Testament, with the whole old Testament, that
the latter is an exposition of the former, because it makes known unto us,
that all the ancient promises, 2. Cor. 1.20. Heb. 13.8. Ve^us Testamentum in
nouo reuelatum, no^um in vetere velatum. Aug. in Psalm. 105.
touching the Messiah, are yea and Amen in Christ Jesus: so that the substance
both of old and new is this, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also
is for ever. And hereupon is that saying of Augustine: The old Testament (says
he) is revealed in the new, and the new, was as it were lapped and folded up in
the old: the same may also be acknowledged touching the Epistles, that in the^
the doctrine both of the old and new Testament is applied and pressed upon men's
consciences by wholesome exhortations. But what then? though this hold in
general, that the new Testament is the Co^mentarie to the old, and the
Epistles, the applyers of both, yet it will scarcely be found to hold in
particulars: namely, yt such a parcel of ye new testament which comes in
order to be read, is an exposition of the special doctrine, and matter of that
portion of the old Testament, which was read before it, or that that part of
the Epistles, which follows both, is a direct and express vrger of both. So
that howsoever when we divide ye Scriptures into these three parts, ye old
Testament, the history of the Gospel, and the Epistles, it be true, yt this is
the common nature and state of them, that the second part gives light unto the
first, and the latter raises exhortations out of both, yet when we come to
single out these parts into several portions, we shall not find that precise
and exact correspondence, as that the exposition of the same points, shall be
said to follow one the other. And this is all which I will oppose to this third
reason: which though perhaps it may make a show among those that are of less
judgment, yet it can deceive no man, that has any ordinary skill in the
state of an argument.


Nymph. This point has held us longer then I either wished or imagined: but I
was willing, seeing God had given this opportunity, to mention as much as I
could remember of things which I have heard spoken touching these points;
neither is there now any thing behind, (that I can call to mind) which I may
further propound unto you, concerning this matter.


Epaph. It is no marvel though the examination of this one point, has spent
us so much time: for this is certain, that every short objection, will require
a large confutation. Now for the matter it self, there may perhaps be some
other objections, differing from these in show, but yet they will all in the
end be found to be the same. I remember I have read of a vain glorious boaster,
Athen^us.
who having but one only servant, yet because he would be thought to keep a
great retinue, would call that one servant by many several names, that men
might imagine, he had sundry servants: so, men may set new names, and new
forms upon these allegations which we have examined, that so they might
affright us with the name of multitude, but when they are looked into, they
will prove the same things, varying in color and pretense, but agreeing in
substance.


Nymph. That I may then reap benefit by your advice in respect of that which
follows, I said (if you remember) that the exceptions in which I desired to
be resolved, were some against Preaching it self, some against the manner of
it: the exceptions against preaching it self, I have (as memory would serve)
acquainted you with: Exceptions against the manner of preaching.
there are three things in the manner of your preaching that are much disliked
and discommended: the first is, Rudeness: the second is roughness; the third
is overmuch commonnesse. Touching the first, it is said, that you preach
unlearnedly without eloquence, without allegation of Fathers and of other
authors, and therefore you are accounted but as a company of English Doctors,
which preach upon the sudden what comes in your heads, without study, which
causes your doctrine to be the less regarded.


Epaph. Verily for mine own part I do as much mislike rashness in preaching
without due preparation, and rudeness in handling the word of life, as any
man. Jeremy 48.10.
I know he is cursed that does the work of the Lord negligently. And as it is
meet for every man when he enters into the house of God, Eccles. 4.17.
to take heed to his foot; so it is much more requisite for him that must
enter as it were into the seat of the Lord, and speak unto ye people in
Christ's stead, 2. Corintl. 5.20
to be very well advised before he take the covenant of God in his mouth. And
indeed, Psalm 50.16.
the bold hardiness of many now adays, is greatly to be pitied, who so
ordinarily hand over head (as we say) step up into the pulpit, and when they
are there, do little better then beat the air, 1. Corinthians. 9.26
and behave themselves many times like the mad man of whom Solomon speaks,
who casts firebrands, Proverbs 26.18 (...).
and arrows, and mortal things: and so (as the proverb is) though they
speak much, yet say little, by that means exposing the never enough reverenced
exercise of preaching, unto the reproaches and scoffs of evil speakers.
Besides, for learning, I confess that it is necessarily required in preaching.
S. Paul says, (...) 2. Tim 4 2.
preaching must be discharged in all learning. All liberal arts and sciences
are handmaids to Divinity, and do owe a kind of service unto Gods Church. It
is said, a Minister must be a workman, 2. Timothy 2.15
rightly dividing the word of truth: now if he want his knife, that is, his art
and cunning, well he may tear and rend it, and violently dismember it, but
that he should rightly divide it, that is impossible. Yet withal, this I add,
that if to preach after a popular and familiar fashion, with desire to speak to
the conceit and capacity of the simplest, and to stand most upon allegation of
the holy text, very seldom and very sparingly mentioning other testimonies,
either of profane or divine writers: if I say to preach on this wise be to be
termed rude and unlearned preaching, truly for mine own particular, ^alle^
ag^ster^ cuipa^, quam doprocar^. Pic. ^a^.
I had rather acknowledge that fault, then seek to put it from me.


Nymph. What is then your opinion touching humane learning, and the writings of
the ancient Fathers of the Church, are they not very behouefull for you that
are students and professors of Divinity?


Epap. For the study of humane learning, I would not have you conceive otherwise
of me, but that I hold it very expedient for him that intends the profession
of Divinity: I am of his mind which would have a scholar like the witty Be,
Api agumento a similu. H^y.
which gathers honey out of every flower: and I willingly yield to S.
Augustines conceit. De Doct Chr. l. 2. ca. 14.
who co^pareth the knowledge of humane sciences and profane authors, to ye
spoiling of ye Egyptians by ye Israelites. Howbeit I would also still give my
allowa^ce to these studies with this cautio^, Si praparent ingen^ non de^^ca^
Senec.
namely if they be used to prepare the wit and not to detain it, and keep it
too long from grauer studies: A^s longa vi^ (...).
for seeing as the saying is, Learning is long and our life but short, it must
needs be a preposterous course, to spend the most and best time in those things
which are but as it were circumstances to the principal science. Again, for
the Fathers, this I say in few words, Ego illos venerot and tantu nominibu^
semper assurgo Sen. l. 8. ep 65
I reverence them, and do a kind of homage to their very names, and I am
contented to acknowledge that of them all which was said of two of them,
Augustine was called haereticor^ mall^us, and Ambrose Orbis terrarum oculus.
to wit, that they are even the hammers of heretics, and the eyes of the
world. Our later heretics, as the Antitrinitarians, the Anabaptists, the
Suencfeldians, the Libertines, the Papists, have revived the ancient heresies
of elder times, against which those holy men even spent themselves: and it is
to be reputed as great a blessing of God, and an argument of his especial care
and providence for his Church, that their writings are preserved to this day,
by which we are ye better fitted to grapple with the enemies of Gods truth. And
yet in the study of the fathers, there is many times a double error committed:
the one is, that men begin the study of Divinity with the reading of their
works; which course for the most part breeds both confusion for want of
method, and error also through the lack of knowledge in the rule and
proportion of faith, by which to try all things, 1. Thessal. 5.20.
that so only that which is good may be kept: the other error is, that many
are overmuch devoted to the^, Iura^ in verba^
being ready almost to swear to any thing which is affirmed by them; whereas
indeed they both might and did err in many things, often altering their
judgments, Witness Austins Retractations.
retracting and repealing many things, seeing more in their grauer years, then
at the first they did perceive. Rhetori^atis^mus and in more declamatori^
pa^sper lusimus Co^er a Holuid.
Hierome confesses that he was of one mind in some things when he was a youth,
and of another when he grew more in years. He acknowledges also that in some
things he played the Rhetorician, and did discourse something idly after the
manner of declaimers. Augustine in many things was led more by affection then
by judgment, speaking sometimes that when of he was not fully resolved, as
touching purgatory and prayer for the dead, In Enc ad Lau^.
out of the abundant love to his mother Monica; Ad Janu^um
sometimes forbearing to utter that which he thought, through lothnes to incur
the offense of some, yea and frankly he acknowledges, In ipsis sanctis script.
multo nes^m plura qua sciam. Epist. 119
yt his ignorance in scripture was greater then his knowledge. And Origin was
so jealous of his own judgment, Picu^. Mir^ ex Eusebius.
yt he would never adventure to write any thing till he was lx. years old,
neither would he suffer those things which he had taught publikly, to be taken
by notaries, whose intent was to make them common to the world. And therefore
though it be very profitable and expedient for a Divine to be well studied in
the Fathers, yet it is good to read their works as the works of me^. It was a
good advice which Augustine gave to a friend of his; Nolo author^ mea^ sequaru,
vt (...) p^tes tibi aliquid necesse esse ^redare, quiniam a ma dicitur. Ad
Paulinum.
I would not (says he) have thee follow my authority, as though you should
think your self bound to believe whatsoever I say, because I say it. It is
wisdom to hold that rule in the perusing of them al. But I forget my self,
to enter into this discourse to you, whom it does not so prop^y concern.
Howsoever, by this that I have now said, you may understand my opinion touching
both the Fathers and other (as you call it) prophaner learning.


Nym. But I pray you sir, why may not the testimonies and writings of men be as
lawfully used in the actio^ of preaching, as in the private preparation for it?


Epap. It is no good consequence, to say that they may be alleged in the
pulpit, because they may be perused in the study. When as Solomon made
preparation for the building of ye temple, he had 80000. 1. Kings 5.^5.
Masons in the mountains; and among so many, there could not choose but be much
hewing and knocking, and hammering, yet there was neither hammer, nor axe, 1.
Kings 6.7.
nor any tool of iro^ heard in the house while it was in building. After the
same manner it is in Gods spiritual building: 1. Corinthians. 3.4.
those things may lawfully be used in the making provision for it, which are
not of the like necessity or lawfulnes in the actual performance of it. But
to speak more directly, (because these similitudes serve more to give light
then strength to a matter) if you be desirous to know a reason why we ought to
be very sparing in the use of men's testimonies in our ordinary sermons, this is
(as I think) ye principal, namely, 1. Corinthians. 2.5.
that our faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God:
that is to say, yt our judgment in matters of religion might be grounded not
upon ye opinions and verdicts of me^, but upon ye certain and undoubted truth of
God: what is it to ye conscience of ye hearer yt this is such a man's opinion,
or yt saying of such a Doctor, it being so well known that they might err?
Surely the conscience can never find sure footing until it comes to ye
scripture. It is a good speech of Chrysostom, Si quid dicatur ^ique scriptur:
cudi^oru^ cognitio^ a^dicat. In Psalm. 86.
If any thing (says he) be spoken without scripture, the knowledge of the
hearers halteth: his meaning is, that the judgment is never firm till
scripture has resolved it. It is of no force (says Augustine) to tell the
people, This I say, and this such a one says: only this, No^ valet, ha^ ego
dico, hac it is dicis, haec i^e dicit, sed ^c decit Dominus. Ad Vin^.
thus says the Lord, that strikes the stroke, and does either convince or
confirm the hearers conscience, it makes him either to agree to it, or not to
be able to say against it.


Nymp. Do you then think that it is not at all lawful for a Preacher in a
sermon to allege the Fathers, or to insert the sayings of heathen Poets,
Orators, Philosophers, and such like?


Epaph. I do not say that it is absolutely unlawful to allege a sentence out
of an ancient writer, or out of a Heathen author: for besides that many grave,
godly, and well learned men do sometimes so; there may be as I think some (at
least) tolerable causes to allege the^. As for example; the Papists ordinarily
give out (and it is common in the mouths of our subverted Proselites) that the
ancient Fathers of the Church are all on their side. For this cause, sometimes
in some special points of difference betwixt them and us, I take it not to be
disallowable, if the Preacher for the taking away of that scruple out of ye
minds of me^, do show ye consent of the elder writers, that men may see it is
but a vain brag which our adversaries make when they say that their religion
is suitable to the judgment of the ancient Church: yet withal, I would not
have a man make this ordinary. And besides, I hold it fit for him to admonish
the people that it is done, not to derogate from the sufficiency of the
Scripture, neither to tie them to the opinions of men, but only to remove that
doubt which by the whispering of wandering Papists may arise in the minds of
those that are not so well settled in Religion. So likewise, for the speeches
and sentences of profane authors, to bar them utterly out of sermons, I dare
not, because I find them used by that worthy Paul three several times; Acts
17.28. 1 Corint 15 33 Tit^s 1.12.
yet this I say, yt as Paul's example warranteth, so it limiteth the use of such
testimonies, Prud^ and sobr^. Za^h.
and shows that it must be done wisely and soberly, and that upon two
occasions chiefly: the one is to convince Atheists and irreligious persons,
which esteem not the scripture, that they may be driven to say, We are pierced
with our own quils, P^ pe^ (...) ^mur The^ hist. lib 6. (...)
and by that means may be either converted or silenced. Another occasion is,
by some either actions or speeches of theirs to shame those that profess
themselves Christians. I remember how God threatens to provoke the people of
Israel with a foolish nation: (...) 32 21
according as many times the Prophets to reform the backwardness and
slacknesse of the Jews, preach to them of the forwardnes and zeal that shall
be in the Gentiles after their conversion. The same kind of reasoning no doubt
a Preacher may sometimes profitably use, by the morally good precepts and
actions of the Heathen to check the carelesnes of men professing Christianity.
Thus, now and then I hold a man may tolerably allege a sentence of a profane
writer, and a speech of a heathen author. As for the strange manner of preaching
which is in use in many places, both in the universities and elsewhere, there
is no man well affected, but if he knows it, he does exceedingly pity it.
One, as though the pulpit were but as a scaffold, in which he like a master of
Defense were to play his prizes, and to give testimony of his wit, plays upon
every word, and descanteth upon every letter in his text, Ta^qud Ar^ Crep^
and as though the scripture were but a rattle for children and fools to make
sport withal, he tos^eth it hither and thither, and will not fail to offer it
any violence, to frame it to an imagined conceit, and to draw it to an idle
purpose. Another, as if his purpose were only to amaze the vulgar, (...)
Proc^* ampu^ and se^ verba.
and to affright and astonish the multitude, mounteth aloft, and is all in his
great words, and new coined phrases, more fit for some Mimick or Tragedian,
then a Minister of the Gospel. A third, to gain the opinion of a profound man,
that looks into matters of more depth then ye common sort, rubbeth over the
unsavory writings of some moth-eaten friar, and by an uncouth fashion of
teaching, together with a multitude of allegories and intricate distinctions,
mazeth both himself and all those whose unhappy chance it is to be his
hoarers. A fourth, to be reputed a good linguist and a man of great reading,
s^uffeth his sermon with a legion of allegations, and enterlaceth it with many
shreddings of Latin and Greek, and by that means, though his doctrine
perhaps may be profitable, yet he confounds the memory of the diligent and
attentive hearer. Thus while men being sick of the Pharisaicall disease, John
12 43.
Love the praise of men more then the praise of God, and prefer the ostentation
of their own supposed learning before the edification of Gods Church, the
people is brought either into such an amazedness, as they think that any
thing may be made of the scripture, or to such an unsettledness in judgment, as
that they do rather hunt after variety of teachers for their strange manner of
preaching, then seek for sound instruction for their own better edifying.
Thus have you my judgment touching the use of humane testimonies in the
exercise of preaching.


Nymphas. I willingly agree unto you in that which you have said touching some
men's course of preaching: I have sometimes my self been at some men's sermons
which have had the name of great Clerks and learned men, and yet (it may be
mine own dullness was the cause) such has bin their manner of handling, so
full of schoole-points and terms, and sayings of men, that neither has my
judgment been bettred, nor my conscience any whit comforted thereby. But I do
not yet see how you will make the parts of your own speech to agree: you say
preaching must be learned and eloquent, and yet you are strait in allowing the
use of those things which may testify learning, and garnish and set forth your
sermons: for I tell you, in the country here you are not thought learned, nor
yet eloquent, so long as you speak naught but English, and withal common and
ordinary words, and allege nothing but places of scripture, which every man
can fetch out of the Bible as well as you. I pray you therefore reco^cile these
two, how there shall be that plainness in your sermons, and yet learning too.


Ep. The matter is not what men think, How a sermon may be plain and yet
learned.
but what men ought to think. It is possible for a man to be skilful in ye
tongues, and yet to be far from a learned man: and much reading, though it
argues industry, and may be a witness of a good memory, yet it is no certain
argument of sound judgment. That man is most learned, who by his skill can make
another man learned: (...) Matthew 28.19.
for this is the end of preaching, to make men scholars: and he is most
eloquent, that can make him who hears him, understand yt which he him self
conceiueth. The intent of learning, is not ye men which have it should thereby
breed astonishme^t in their hearers, and gain admiration to themselves, but
that by it they should be profitable and helpful to those which are without it.
So likewise, the use of eloquence is not to be as it were a mist before a man's
speeches, to cause him to be the more hardly understood, but to give luster (as
I may so speak) thereto, and to bring both light and delight to the dull
apprehensio^ of the hearers. And therefore whosoever so preaches, as that
because of the depth of his learning (as men call it) he passes the capacity of
the meanest hearer: again, whosoever so speaks, as that his eloquence (as men
term it) makes him to be as it were an alient to his ordinary audience,
surely the same is neither truly learned, nor truly eloquent, because his
learning not conceived profits not, and his eloquence not understood benefits
not. So that this being considered, that he is most learned whose preaching is
most profitable; and he most eloquent, whose manner of speaking best enters
into every ordinary conceit: it is an easy matter to reconcile these two, that
our preaching must be learned, yet familiar eloquent, and yet so plain, that
it may be truly said of it, that if it be hid, 2. Cor. 4 3.
it is hid to them that are lost.


Nymp. Yet it will be thought that preaching will grow into very great
contempt, and seem but base in the eyes of wise men, if choice speaking and
quaint words, which in other discourses are thought very commendable, shall be
banished from your sermons.


Ep. Why man, did you never hear of this phrase, the foolishnes of Preaching?
1. Cor. ^.21.
When the Gospel was first preached in ye world, the reason why it had so cold
entertainment was this: The Jews they would either have it confirmed by some
extraordinary signs, or else they would not credit it: (The Jews require a
sign:) The Gentiles being men of great learning, as appears, they seeing
Paul and the rest coming after a very mean fashion, men for their personage
silly, for their profession, making show to know nothing but one Christ, and
the same crucified, and for their course and carriage in the ministry, plain,
avoiding purposely the enticing words of man's wisdom, they by and by scorned
it, and deemed it folly to be carried away by a thing of that simplicity: (The
Grecians seek after wisdom): hereupon this Epithete was cast by the
reprochful world upon the best kind of preaching, to call it foolishnes, and al
for this one cause, because as for the substance of it, it is crossing to man's
reason, so for the fashion of it, according to the world, it is clean out of
fashion, only beautiful in this, because it is not beautified with that,
without which the nice and giddy world thinks every thing to be deformed. So
that the opinion of men reputing it to be but foolishness, because it wants
that garish garnishing which men's itching ears are much delighted with, ought
to be no disparagement to it in the sight of those that are truly religious:
and I pray God give us all grace that are called to the Ministry, to be so
set for the glory of God in the conversion of souls, Non ornamenta, sed
documenta Aug. de doctr. Christ lib. 4. c. 19 Magra est ar^ celare artem.
Phae^leratam orationem in theologicis tra^ationibus de reb^ (...) tracta^
pedestris oration necessaria est, non quae ver^or ^ compositione frondescat. ad
Damasum. Atramentales Theolog. Ecki^.
that we may more affect foundnesse of teaching, then finenesse of speech, and
may think it our best art to secret art, and to take heed of that bastard
eloquence, with this worst age of the world, seeks to make legitimate. It is is
a good advice of Jerome, to avoid a pompous kind of speaking in theological
discourses: for a man (says he) that handles holy matters, a low and (as it
were) a foot oration is necessary, and not such as is thickened with
artificial framing of words. It is no matter, though the Papists continue to
call us in scorn Ink Divines, because of our close adhering to the holy text,
so long as the souls of Gods servants shall receive comfort by us: for then I
am right sure, this being sought for, the little flock shall pray for us, and
the great shepherd shall be good to us.


Nymp. You have (at least to my understanding) well removed this imputation of
rude vnlearnednesse: I pray you therefore come to the next, which is that your
manner preaching is too austere: you have nothing in your mouths but hell, and
condemnation, and the judgments of God, which (as some say) is the next way to
bring men unto despair.


Epap. I confess indeed, that there is a great error committed by some, whose
zeal does sometimes so far over carry them, that they forget the Apostles
rule, of suffering the evil men patiently: ^ Tim. 2.24.
and it may not unfitly be said to many such, as Christ said to his disciples,
when they would needs have had leave to command fire to come down from
heaven, Luke 9.54.55.
to consume them which would not receive him; they know not of what spirit they
are. Yet notwithstanding, the conceit of the most, who would have nothing but
peace preached to them, when as it may be truly said to them as Iehu said to
the servant of Iehoram, what have they to do with peace? is not at any hand to
be given way unto. It is meet for a Preacher to take heed, Isa. 42.3.
that he break not the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: so it is
meet also to beware, how he takes the childrens bread and cast it to whelps.
Math. 15.26.
The course warranted to us by the Scripture is this: first, to endeavor the
softening of our hearers hearts by bringing them to the fight and sense of
their own wretchedness, before we adventure to apply the riches of Gods
mercy in Christ Jesus. The preaching of the Gospel is compared by our Savior
himself unto the sowing of seed: Man. 13.
as therefore the ground is first torn up with the plough, before the seed be
committed to it: Ier. 4.4
so the fallow ground of our hearts must first be broken up with the sharpness
of the law, and the very terror of the Lord, 2. Cor. 5 1^.
before we can be fit to entertain the sweet seed of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 2.5.
Ephesians. 2.2^
They who desire as lively stones to be made a spiritual house, even the
habitation of God by the spirit, must yield themselves to be squared and hewne,
and smoothed by the well applying of the law: Verse. 2^.
that so they may become fit to be coupled together with the rest of the
building, and to grow unto an holy temple in the Lord. We must have our mouths
stopped by the law, Romans 3.1^
and in our own feeling, stand culpable before God, Gal. 3.2^.
and even as it were concluded under sin, before we can be admitted to think
our selves to have any the least interest in the glad tidings of the Gospel.
Luke 2.10
To preach mercy and grace unto them, which feel no need of mercy, and know
not the worth of grace is no better then to cast pearls before swine, Mat. 7 6.
and to expose the loving kindness of God unto contempt. Prou. 27.7.
The person that is full despises an honey comb, says Solomon; and what does
a proud Pharsee, or a churlish Nabal, or a scoffing Ismael, or a politic
Gallio, care to hear of the breadth, Ephesians. 3.18.
and length, and depth, and height of the love of God in his son Jesus? Act.
7.51.
The doctrine of that nature, is as unfitting such uncircumcised ears, as the
snow the summer, and the rain the harvest. Pro. 26 1. Verse. 3.
Unto the horse belongs a whip, to the ass a bridle, Psalm. 32.9
and a rod to the fools back. So long as me^ will be like an horse, and a Mule
which understands not, Pro. 1.22.
and manifest their folly by hating knowledge, and by making a mock of sin,
Pro. 14.9.
what other thing should they have, but that which of right belongs to them?
Let the soul be once humbled, Matthew. 5.6.
and brought to hunger and thirst after righteousness, and then a word in
season, Isa. 50.4.
will be as the cold waters to a weary traveler, and as good news from a
far country; Pro. 25 25.
then will mercy be as welcome as the rain upon the mowne grass, Psalm. 72.^.
and as the showers that water the earth. Besides we find it true by common
experience, yt the greatest part are so dead in sin, yt if a Preacher should
deal after some such mild fashion, 1. Sam. 2.23.
as old Eli dealt with his sons, his sermon will be but like a dream when one
awaketh: the hearer happily when he is gone will think he heard something, but
he knows not what, and because he was reproved but softly, he will imagine
that he sinned but slightly, and so will let al slip as easily as it came
gently. So yt a man yt intends to do any good in this frozen generation, he
had need to be rather Boanerges, Mar. 3.17. Mat. 16.17.
one of the sons of thunder, then Bar-Ionah, the son of a dove. In the Prophet
Jeremy we read, Ier. 23 29.
that ye word of the Lord is like an hammer: now if you add that to it wc
Solomon says, Eccl. 12.11.
that the words of the wise, are like nails it will follow thence, yt he which
is a wise maister-builder in ye Lords house, and a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, 2. Tim. 2 15.
when he handles this same hammer of the word, he will be sure to drive the
nails of his exhortations to the head, that they may leave some impression in
the hearts of those which hear him. Well then, this is the substance of my
opinion in this point: I would have a preacher to preach peace, and to aim at
nothing more, then the comfort of the souls of Gods people, yet I would have
him withal frame his course to the manner of Gods appearing to Elijah: 1. kin.
19.11.
The text says, that first a mighty strong wind rent the mountains, and
brake the rocks: then, after that came an earthquake, and after the earthquake
came fire: and after all these, then came a still and a soft voice. After the
same manner, I would not have the still and mild voice of the Gospel come,
till the strong tempest of the law, has rent ye stony hearts of men, Nab. 3.16.
and has made their bellies to tremble, and rottenness to enter into their
bones, and to cry with that good king Hezechiah: Isa. ^8.14.
O Lord it has oppressed me, comfort me: or at the least, because our
auditories are mixed, consisting of men of diverse humors, it shall be good for
him to deliver his doctrine with that caution, that neither the humbled souls
may be affrighted with the severity of Gods judgments, nor the profane and
unrepentant, grow presumptuous by the abundance of Gods mercy.


Nymp. Indeed I am verily persuaded, that this course which you have named is
the best: for to this best agree those properties of the word which the Apostle
makes mention of: to wit, Heb. 4.1^.
Sharpness and entering through, to the dividing asunder of the soul and the
spirit, and discerning of the thoughts and intents of the heart. But yet in the
world this is a course that men like not of.


Epaph. No marvel: for (as I have in part told you before in the beginning of
our Conference) it is the greatest enemy unto that which men love best, and
that is their own sin: until God be pleased to put a new spirit within men's
bowels, Ezec. 11.1^.
and to take the stony heart out of their bodies, there is nothing that they
do hate more, then to be reformed. Psalm. 50.17.
But the truth is, that though no reproof for the present seems to be joyous
but grievous, Heb. 12.11.
yet at the length, when men are better advised, Pro. 28.23.
he that rebukes shall find more favor, then he which flattereth with his
lips. Yea, and the time will come, that those who cannot suffer wholesome
doctrine, 2. Tim. 4 ^
will curse the day, that ever they knew, or heard those sweet-tounged
chaplains, and soothing Zidkijahs, Ier. 2^.31. 1. King. 21. Ezec. 13.18. Ier
23 32.
which have sowed pillowes under their armeholes, and have caused them to err
by their flatteries: and they will also cry shame upon those, who^ they now
think too choleric and censorious, yt they did not speak more thoroughly
unto them: therefore whatsoever men's acceptance is, it is best for us to order
the matter so, by speaking directly to the reproof of sin, Act 20.16
yt we may be pure from the blood of all men; and that no man who lives under
our ministry may have cause in ye day of the Lord to impute his slownes in
repenting, to our too cold, too mild, and covert manner of reproouing.


Nymph. But what say you now, sir, to the third accusation: which is, that you
make your preaching too common, and so by that means draw it into contempt, and
make it to be the less esteemed among men? I can tell you there be many that
are preachers themselves be of that opinion.


Epaph. I am the more sorry: and to tell you what I think plainly, I am of
that mind, that those which blame often preaching as a fault, what color
soever they may set upon it, yet they do it chiefly for the covering of their
own shame, yt their negligence may not be taken notice of. I remember the old
fable of the Fox, who having had a mischance and lost his tail, coming into
the assembly of the beasts of the same kind, fell to persuade them every one to
cut off his tail, pleading the cumbersomnesse and waightinesse of it, with
many the like circumstances: but the matter coming to further scanning, it was
found, that the wily fox did it only to cover his own deformity, which (if
to be without tails had once been a fashion) should never have been espied. I
leave you to apply it. Only I would wish all such so minded, Ne vescenti^
deutibus, edeutulus in^. le a^. Epist. 84.
to follow Hieromes counsel, in which he admonishes one Calphurnius, upon
some such occasion as this, that if he wanted teeth himself, he should not be
envious against those with were able to eat. When one counseled Moses to
silence Eldad and Medad, Number. 11.2^.28.29.
imagining that their Prophesying in the host, might have eclipsed Moses his
credit, Moses liked not the advice, but wished that all the Lords people were
Prophets. But lest I should seem too tart against this kind of me^, of who^
yet there is some hope, I will be content to examine their reasons, because (as I
gather by your speech) they seek (as the Proverb is) to be mad with reason.
C^nra^ i^sandre.


They say, the ouer-commonnesse of preaching, will breed contempt of preaching.
First of all, suppose it fares with some, in respect of preaching, as it did
with the unthankful Israelites, Number. 11.6.
which loathed the Manna, wherewith the Lord so miraculously fed them in the
wilderness, so they also seem to be (as it were) glutted, with the continual
use of the word preached: yet this can be no reason why a diligent and frequent
Preacher should remit any thing of his former industry, and speak more
sparingly, drawing his Sermons into a smaller number, then he was wont. It is
truly said, that there are three very good mothers, which have three very bad
daughters, and they are these: 1. Truth, which yet in ye world breeds hatred.
2. Peace, a great blessing of God, and yet through our corruption it causes
Idleness. 3. Familiarity, and the common use of a good thing, which is
notwithstanding mostly recompensed with Contempt. And yet this is not in the
nature of these things, but only in our corruption. For as the nature of God
is so perfectly good, that he does turn even very evil things, into very good
things: (as he made the malice of the Jews, in putting his Son to death, to
be a mean of our salvation) so our nature is so absolutely evil, that it
turns very good things into evil: as sometimes the grace of God into
wantonness, Iud. 4. Gal. 5.13.
and Christian liberty into an occasion unto the flesh, and so in these
particulars which I have named. Now because truth is generally hated, shall men
therefore banish it from their speeches, and frame their toungs to flattery?
Because many abuse the blessing of peace, shall we therefore voluntarily raise
tumults, or desire God to put an end to our happy days of quietness? There
is in the world no reason for it. Neither is there any just cause, why we
should go about to make our preaching, as it were, something more dainty,
because it may seem to some raw and ill disposed stomachs, to breed a kind of
fullness and satietie. Secondly, if we look better into it, we shall see, that
the true cause of men's contempt of preaching, is not so much the common use of
it, as the ignorance of the worth and excellency of it. The Sun, the water,
the fire, what things more common, and yet what things less despised? and ye
reason is, because we all know, we cannot live without them. Let men be once
persuaded of this, that neither the Sun, nor water, nor fire are more
necessary for the outward man, then preaching is for the soul and spirit, and
that where it is wanting, Prou. 29.18.
there the people decay, the^ they will never be cloyed: or at least, if
satietie through the inbred corruption of our nature creep upon them, by the
remembrance hereof it will quickly be recovered. Thirdly, do but mark, what
course of preaching it is, which pleases some to call ouer-common: namely, a
settled course for every Sabbath, and it may be some week day Lecture, as it is
called usually. Now I would feign see, how any man can say with reason, that
this is over often. Paul commands to preach in season. 2. Tim 4.2.
If this charge carry any weight, what better season can there be, then the
Sabbath, a day of leisure, a day in which men, if not for conscience, yet for
custom and because of the laws assemble themselves in one place, for the
performance of one common duty and service unto God? I remember, it is
premitted as a circumstance to the historical relation of some of Christ's
sermons, Mat. 5.1.13.^. (...).
that when he saw the multitude, and great troops resorted to him, then he
spoke many things to them: and in another place it is said, that beholding the
swarms of people, and considering their spiritual wants, even his very bowels
did work within him, Mar. 6.34. (...).
and he began to teach them. So no doubt it is, and ought to be with every good
Minister: he cannot (as we say) find in his heart, to dismiss a multitude
assembled to worship God, without some word of exhortation. Me thinks, that
when a Pastor of a parish is comen into the church upon the Sabbath day, and
beholds his whole flock gathered together as one man, he should even
imagine, yt the very presence of the people does call to him, Act. 13 15:
as ye Rulers of the synagogue did to Paul and Barnabas) yt if he have any word
of exhortation for them, he should say on. So that if to preach in season, be a
Minister his duty; and the fullness of an assembly upon ye sabbath be a
seasonable occasion, (as no man can deny it) I cannot see how: so seasonable an
exercise, can be charged with ouer-commonnesse, or blamed as a means to make
the word of God less precious amongst men. God requires, that we should call
the Sabbath a delight to consecrate it: Isa. 5^.13.
now, how can that day be hallowed and consecrated as it ought, if so special
a part of Gods spiritual worship, as preaching is, be left out? how must not
the whole other service of the day, be even as a lame and maimed sacrifice
before God? I know indeed it pleases some to say, that the meeting of the
people together to the hearing of the word preached (a phrase scoffed at, 2.
Tim. 4 2. Mark. 2.2.
as though it were not the language of the Scripture) is not the chief
institution of the Lords day. But whatsoever men's idle conceits be, yet the
truth is, that the most excellent part of Gods service, Preaching the
principal exercise of the Sabbath.
consists in the exercise of his word: the faithful dispensing whereof is
the beauty of the Lords house, and the very life of the Sabbath. The other
parts of Gods public worship, do but as it were wait and give attendance upon
this. For, wherefore is prayer, but to prepare us to the word, and to beg of
God to bestow those blessings which are promised in the word? And if we will
credit the Scripture, men cannot pray till by preaching they are taught to
pray. Romans 10 ^
How shall they call on him, upon whom they have not believed, etc. The place
is known well enough. Again, what is the use of the Sacraments, but to be
seals to the word? The preaching of the word is the tenor of the covenant
betwixt God and us: the Sacraments are seals, to assure us of the performance
of the gracious promises, made unto us in the word. So that indeed the other
specialties of Gods worship, are of no use, but only so farforth as they have
reference to the word. In the second of Isaiah his prophecy, where the state
of the Church of the Gospel is described, Isa. 2.3.
the people are brought in, provoking one another to ascend up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: to encourage themselves and
other hereunto, they use this reason, he will teach us his ways: no doubt in
their meetings they were to use both prayer and the Sacraments. But yet, that
there they should be taught, was used as the principal motive; because, as to
be taught the ways of the Lord, is the principal blessing, so obediently to
hear is the principal service. Wherein has the Lord so great pleasure, 1 Samuel 15.22.
as in this, when his voice is obeyed; and how can his voice be obeyed till it
is known, and what other ordinary means of knowledge shall we trust unto
besides preaching? Seeing then the Sabbath day is a fit time in regard of
peoples assombling together, and seeing also the preaching and hearing of the
word, is a main part of the worship of God, and by consequence especially
intended in the first institution of the Sabbath, he that indeuoureth to
entertain his people every Lords day, with the opening and applying the
Scriptures, cannot justly be accused to be one, who by too much familiarity
draws the ordinance of God into contempt.


Nymph. Well, suppose it be yielded unto, that it be good to continue the
exercise of Preaching every Sabbath day, yet it may seem superfluous to draw
the people to hearing upon the week days, when men are otherwise in their
worldly affairs to be employed.


Epaph. That is it which I was now next about to speak of: Of weeke-day
Lectures.
I cannot say it is a matter of necessity for a Minister to ty himself or his
auditors to a weeke-day sermon: yet if a Preacher be willing so to bestow his
pains, and the people, in respect of their dwelling together, as in cities and
greater towns, be ready to redeem some time for so good a purpose, Ephesians.
5.16.
I hold it very commendable. When Paul and Barnabas preached at Antioch, Acts
13 42(...)
we read that the Gentiles besought them that they would preach those words to
them, in the space betwixt that and the Sabbath day. Now though I will not say
that that example is a law, yet I must needs say it is an allowance to such a
course: and that which was commendable in them, cannot deserve blame in others
of Gods children, who are willing to divert some of their time allowed for
outward businesses to spiritual occasions, as namely for the increasing of
their knowledge, Jude 20
and for the edifying themselves in their most holy faith. Neither can such a
course be more an occasion of bringing preaching into contempt, then the
established order for meeting on wednesdayes and fridaies to prayer and reading
of the scriptures, can be or is an occasion to make these good exercises to be
despised.


Nymph. I have heard some say, that it is sound and learned preaching which we
that are the people must wish for, and not often and continual preaching: and
that the word of God is compared to rain, which though it be in measure
profitable, yet in abundance makes the seed rotten under the clods. Joel 1.17.
In like manner they say that preaching in moderation may do much good, but if
it exceed, may be an occasion of barrenness among the hearers.


Epaph. It is a woeful thing, that men should so far stretch their wits to
deceive their own souls, and to beguile others also. I would we had all
learned the Apostles rule, 2. Corinthians. 13.8
not to do any thing against the truth, but for the truth. To satisfy you
touching this yt you have named, having observed it (as you say) out of the
speeches of some: it is worthy the marking, how Satan in his subtlety under the
color of allowing and urging sound preaching, would overthrow diligent
preaching; therein building upon a false ground, namely, that a man cannot
preach often and preach soundly too: which how false it is, ye unreprovable
labors of many industrious ministers in this land, are a sufficient witness. It
is a wise and holy speech of Solomon, and may be well applied to this purpose,
Proverbs. 10.4.
A slothful hand makes poor, but the hand of the diligent makes rich: and
again, Chap. 12.14.
There is that scatters and is more increased, but he that spares more the^
is right, surely comes to poverty. Men of excellent gifts many times, whilst
either in niceness fearing to hurt their bodies, or in pride, being as it were
unwilling to make themselves too common, they are more sparing in this exercise
of preaching (which is the glory of a Minister) through the just judgment of
God loose their former perfection, and as through disuse they grow less
willing, getting a kind of habit of negligence, so also they become less able
to do good in ye Church of God then they were before. Now when preaching
(through defalt of often inuring themselves unto it) becomes more irksom, they
being to seek in many things when they fall to make preparation for it, then
strait because of their own unaptness (ye just punishment of idleness) they
conclude, yt those who preach so often (as they call it) preach carelessly
without study and without learning. On the other side, men (it may be) of
meaner (yet commendable) gifts, who remembering the necessity which is laid
upon them, 1 Corinthians. 9.16
and the woe which shall follow, if they preach not the Gospel, do even deuote
themselves and all their studies and endeavors to the service of the church,
and do so long after their people from the very heart root in Jesus Christ,
Phil. 1.8.
that for their spiritual furtherance they could beteame to deal even their
own souls unto the^: 1 Thessalonians. 28.
such I say, through the blessing of God upon their holy labors, do so
increase in judgment and in zeal, and have such a door of utterance opened
unto them, Colos 4 3.
to speak the mystery of Christ, that as they themselves placing a kind of
felicity in the doing of their duty, find in themselves a certain faculty in
that heavenly exercise, so the Church of God committed to them, is instructed
by their soundness of doctrine, and whetted on by their zealous exhortations.
So that to say, that sound preaching is for the peoples behoof, and not
frequent preaching, is a mere collusion, presupposing that which is most
false, namely, that soundnes of doctrine and oftenesse of teaching cannot go
together. How little I approve of rash aduenturing upon this kind of exercise,
that which I have spoken formerly may witness: and how small reason there is
to separate these two, profitable preaching and often preaching, I refer it
to any indifferent judgment.


Nymph. But because some that are reputed learned, affirm that often preaching
is not so much for the peoples profit; show me I pray you some good reason to
the contrary, that I may be able both to prevail against mine own backwardnes
when I begin to grow weary of diligent hearing, and to provoke others also,
when I shall behold them as it were glutted with multitude of sermons.


Epaphr. There is a certain disease which we are all more or less infected
with: our Savior Christ calls it slownes of heart: Luke 24 25. The necessity
of (...) preaching
this evil sickness being accompanied with a kind of spiritual sleepiness
and lethargy, makes us as it were a very lump of fluggishnesse, slow in
attention, slow in understanding, slow in remembering, slow in practicing. First
for attentio^, we see it by every days experience, how like the most of our
hearers are unto the idols of the heathen, of whom the Psalm says, Psalm.
115.6.
yt they have ears and hear not. It is true that Elihu said to Job, Job 33.14.
God speaks once or twice, and one sees it not: many excellent things are
spoken which we observe not: we hear generally with the hearing of the ear,
Job 4^.5.
so that we have all need to have that of the Prophet often urged, Ezechiel
3.27.
He that hears, let him hear: that so we might endeavor to fetch up our
hearts to our ears, that one sound may at once pierce the^ both: this is our
slownes in attention: there is nothing that is heard more idly, then that which
ought to be listened unto most carefully. Secondly, for conceit and
understanding, our slownes therein equalleth our slothfulnes in the former: many
points are taught, and yt with as much plainnes as is possible; in which
notwithstanding he that speaks seems as it were a Barbarian unto us. 1.
Corint. 14.11
That same natural man which perceives not the things of the spirit of God, 1. Corinthians. 2.14
sometimes bears too great a stroke within us: sometimes also (God permitting
it for our better hu^bling) the god of this world blinds our minds, 2. Corinthians. 4.4
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ cannot shine unto us. The
blind man who^ Christ healed at Bethsaida, when his sight began in some degrees
to be restored, Mark. 8.23.24.
being asked if he saw ought, he looked up and said, I see me^ walking as
trees: he saw at the first not distinctly, but after a confused manner. I apply
it thus: we are all by nature blind in the best things, 1. Corinthians. 2 1^
and because they are spiritually discerned, of our selves we cannot see them:
now when it pleases that God which commands the light to shine out of
darkness, to shine in our hearts, 2. Corinthians. 4.6.
we have at ye first but as it were a certain glimpse of heavenly matters, the
precise and exact knowledge is not by and by attained. Thirdly, touching
memory, how great weakness there is in it, I call every man's conscience to
witness. Indeed we see how surely and how long men can remember matters of the
world. The uncharitable and malicious man will remember an evil turn many a
year, waiting still an opportunity to revenge it. The old man has so fresh an
impression of the toys and vanities of his youth, yt he will make you as
perfect a relation of them with every circumstance, as if they had been done
but yesterday. The covetous worldling, though perhaps he can neither write nor
read, nor has any to keep his reckonings, yet he can remember all his
bargains, all his conditions in bargaining, all his days, and hours, and
places, either for the payment or receipt of any thing. The young man or woman
can soon learn without book many a ballad or idle Loue-song, tending to the
increasing or stirring up of uncleanness: and so it fares in other
particulars. But come now to matters of religion and piety, alas how true is it
that the conceit of them is as soon gone from our minds, as the sound from
our ears? 2. Sam. 18.29.
When David enquired of Ahimaaz coming from the camp, touching Absalom, his
answer was, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what. Like to this will be the
answer of a great many, when at their return from the house of God they are
demanded touching the particulars there delivered; they will say, they saw a
man speaking, and heard the noise of his voice, and beheld his gesture, but
they know not what, they can tell little of that which was uttered by him.
Lastly, for slownesse in practice, it is long before, after long hearing we are
brought to incline to a good duty, and yet after some good disposition to it,
there are so many delays, and so many pul-backes, yea and after a reasonable
beginning so many fallings back, Gal. 6.9.
and so much waxing weary of well doing, that we are too well like Salomons
sluggard, who it may be makes many offers of rising, yet whilst he cries,
Poruerbs 6.10.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, the time steals away, Proverb. 24.31.
and his vineyard is all grown over with thorns for want of husbandry. This
is our drowsy sickness of slownesse of heart: The best ordinary remedy against
this disease, is often preaching, as you shall see if you well examine it.
Continual calling upon, at last through a kind of importunity will win us to
attention. Often repetition of the same points will both clear the
understanding and settle the judgment also. Phili. 3.1.
It grieueth me not (says Paul) to write the same things to you, and for you
it is a sure thing. That which after many times delivery is still committed to
forgetfulness, yet at the last it is laid up in the mids of the heart, Proverb.
4.21.
and by the negligence and backwardnes of many years, Eccles. 12.11.
yet in the end ( the words of the wise Preacher being like goades) is drawn
unto some comfortable perfection. If often preaching may lawfully be
comcomplained of, who have iuster cause to groan under the burden of it, then
we that are Ministers? For besides the wasting of the bodies health, and the
consuming of the vital parts thereof, what a grief is it to a man's soul,
Isay 58 1. Occid^ n^seros crambe rep. 1.1^. magistr^s.
to lift up his voice to them which will not hear? what a death and toil to
make infinite repetitions of the same principles? what a vexation to beat the
air? 1. Corinthians 9.26
what a discouragement and even the killing of a man's heart, to have to do with
those whose neck is an iron sinew, Isay 48 4.
and their brow brass? and yet though these things might make a man to resolve
with Jeremy, Ier. 20.9.
to speak no more in Gods name, yet we have no such commission to give over,
but we are commanded still to be instant, 2. Timothy. 4.2. chap. 2.25.
with all long suffering, proving if God at any time will give repentance. If a
preacher should put forth such a question to Christ touching preaching, as
Peter did touching forgiving, Matthew 18.22.
and should say, Master how long willt thou that I preach unto a stif-necked
and obstinate people? unto seven times? I doubt not but he would return him
the like answer that he did to Peter, I say not to thee, unto seven times, but
unto seventy times seven times. When Peter and his company had traveled in
fishing all night, and had taken nothing, Luke 5.5.
nevertheless at thy word (said he to Christ) I will let down the net: Matthew
4.19.
The Lord has called us to be Fishers of men. And though it be a great
hart-breaking to have labored long to small purpose, yet for our Masters sake
there is further trial to be made, hoping that yet at the length that
long-expected draught will come, and accounting our selves happy, and all our
pains well bestowed, if with all that we can do, we shall gain one soul unto
God. To shut up this point then, if we shall duly weigh our own backwardnes,
and withal the Ministers duty, of whom that instant diligence is required, we
shall then see that it is much and often preaching which we must wish for,
beseeching the Lord to pardon that above all things, if we shall find the word
through the common use of it to grow vile before us.


Nymph. You have said well to this point, only you have forgotten the
similitude of the rain, which may be some oc^n of doubt to us that are common
men ^th because we find in the scripture the word of God to be compared to the
rain, and because also in common experience we feel the inconvenience of too
great abundance of rain.


Epaph. I had not forgotten it, though if I had, it were not much material, it
being indeed (but for the satisfying of your mind) scarce worth the answering.
(...)
We have a rule in schools, that borrowed speeches do make no grounded
arguments; and for scripture similitudes it is certain, that by pressing every
thing that is applied by the spirit of God for some special illustration, a
man shall run into a world of absurdities: according as the Papists in their
violent wringing of many parables, to give some color to their vile opinions,
afford us no small number of examples. It is true, Isay 55.10.11.
the word of God is in the holy Scripture compared to rain, and that very
fitly: because as the rain falling upon the land, makes it either more
fruitful or more barren, according to the nature of the soil upon which it
falls; so the word that goes out of the mouth of the Lord, does not return
unto him vo^le, 2. Corint. 2.16.
but it becomes either the savor (...) life unto life, or of death unto
death to those which hear it: making the thildre^ of God more zeasons of good
works, Titus 2.14.
and the wicked more outrageous. I do not find in the scripture the similitude
of rain when it is applied to the word to have any further meaning: and
therefore to stretch it further according to a man's own private fancy, is to
forget the Apostles rule of understanding according to sobriety; Romans. 12.3
and wilfully to continue in such a practice, 2. Peter 3.16.
is no other but to pervert the Scriptures to a man's own destruction. The Lord
does in the scripture threaten it as a plague, to take away the Prophet, Isa.
3.2.
and to send a famine of hearing the word; Amo^ 8.1^.
and he promises it also as a blessing, Iere. 3.15.
to give pastors which shall feed the people with knowledge and understanding,
Isay 62.6.
and watchmen which all the day and all the night continually shall not cease:
but I do not remember that ever I read, either often preaching threatened as a
curse, or seldom and thin preaching promised as a blessing. And surely, if,
as abundance of rain, so abundance of preaching were a punishment, I doubt not
but the good laws of our Church which have prescribed a prayer against
overmuch rain, might well set down the same course in respect of much
preaching: from which notwithstanding every honest man's ears would abhor.
And therefore I will be bold to conclude, that this reason pressing the
similitude of rain and moisture to the washing away of diligent preaching and
hearing from out of Gods Church, is a very dry reason, which though it may
appear to have some taste of wit, yet has scarcely any smacke of honesty.


Nymp. I pray God therefore we may remember to make the prayer which our Savior
taught us, namely, that the Lord of the harvest would send forth laborers into
his harvest, Matthew 9.38
and that he would so furnish them with gifts of knowledge, of utterance, and
of zeal, that they may urge and call upon us continually: for (as you truly
said) we are so slow and backward, that except we be daily pricked forward and
rouzed up, we shall grow cold and careless, and be even frozen upon the dregs
of our own security. I know sir, that in good manners it is now high time to
forbear troubling you any further, yet I would gladly crave your direction in
one thing more; and that is this: for mine own part I thank God, I both do,
and ever (since I had any taste of goodness) hue loved preaching, only I find
a great defect in my self, that I cannot so profit by it as I would, and as I
see many do. I am bold therefore to entreat you to show me how and by what
means I may hear profitably, both for the settling of my judgment, and for
the increase of holiness in my common conversation. The humors of many men,
are herein very strange: some say that there are such differences of opinions
among you that be learned, that a common man knows not which of you to
believe: others hold opinion, that it is not for private ordinary persons, to
take upon them to judge of the things they hear; so that the resolution of
the greatest part is, that it is the wisest way either not to hear, or else if
for satisfying the laws they must hear, yet not to give credit. Besides,
there are many of us which hear usually, and yet are little bettered by it: 1.
Tim. 1 6.
their knowledge is but vain iangling, and their conversation not much
differing from the irreligious mulitude: they are like the fish in the sea,
which howbeit it lives in the salt water, yet is without all taste of
saltness. Mat. 5.13.
So though they live under a settled ministry (which is the salt of the earth)
yet being tasted, will be found utterly without any true seasoning. Now if it
might be, I would be loath to be in this number: and therefore my last (though
not my least) suite unto you, is to afford me your best counsel in this case.


Epaph. I must needs commend your good care in this matter: for indeed
whatsoever men think, there is nothing so full of danger as is idle and
unprofitable hearing. Those things which are in their own nature best, being
ill used become most hurtful. Hearing is the ordinance of God to draw us unto
himself: but being used carelessly and unprofitably, it turns to our greater
condemnation: and therefore you cannot be too careful herein. It is true that
men pretend many things whereby to shift off the diligence which is required in
this behalf: but their pretenses being examined will become lighter then
vanity it self. They say, we that are Preachers, cannot agree among our
selves; that is not absolutely true; for blessed be God many of us do proceed
by one rule, Phil. 3.16
and do mind one thing. Besides, so long as we live here in the world, our
understanding is mixed with the darkness of ignorance, and by reason thereof,
there cannot choose but be differences of opinions in some things even among the
best. Take me three or four, or half a doozen, which are dim sighted, and
cannot see without spectacles, if you set them to descrie a thing a far off,
they will be of diverse and contrary opinions touching it: now Saint Paul
says, that in this life, we do but see, as in a glass darkely: 1. Cor. 13.12.
and therefore our judgments in all things at all times cannot be the same.
Moreover, it pleases the Lord sometimes for their punishment, which have not
received the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
and for the discovery of those which are satan to be a false spirit in the
mouths of some, 1 Cor. 11 19.
1. King. 22 22.
and to suffer them to come amongst us in sheep clothing, though inwardly
they are ravening wolves. Matthew. 7.15.
Now the possibility of being deceived when we hear, ought rather to increase
our care in hearing, then to be an occasion of unwillingness to hear. This
may be manifested by a plain similitude: Solomon exhorting us to be careful
to obtain the knowledge of Gods truth, Pro. 23 23.
delivers his exhortation in these words, Buy the truth: from this kind of
speech I reason thus: If a man wanting necessaries, as meat and raiment, and
being advised to furnish himself from the market, should make this answer: The
world is so full of deceit, that a man knows not whom to trust, those which
sell, many of them will not stick to beguile their own fathers, and the
tricks and devises that tradesmen have are infinite, so that it is twenty to
one, but a man in chafering with them shall be beguiled, I had rather therefore
go near the wind, and want necessary provision, then put it to the adventure
of buying. If I say, a man plead thus, what would we think of him, but that
either he were very foolish or very froward? And indeed we might well so
esteem him, because we know that the fraud of others must be prevented rather
with care and circumspection, and not used as an occasion of abridging a man's
self of necessaries. Is not he then as much a fool, who wanting the saving
knowledge of the truth, and being called upon to repair unto the house of God,
(which is as it were the Lords market, in which the hid treasures of wisdom
and knowledge are laid open to the view and offered freely to the use of all
men) shall eftsoons plead the deceiueablenesse of false doctrine, the
corruption of many Preachers, the show of some contrarieties among them? Yes
verily, for is he to deprive himself of the necessary food of his soul,
because it may be for lack of care, that in stead of hoping to be fed, he may
be poisoned? Nay rather, he is to become the more wary, the more diligent in
prayer, the more exercised in the Scripture, that when he comes to buy the
truth he may not be deceived.


Nymph. Truly you say well: only it seems you build upon a false ground (at
least in the opinion of some,) namely, that we which are private men, may judge
of that which we hear, and examine it whether it be the truth or no: I desire
therefore that you would prove that point well unto me.


Epaph. Indeed it is the opinion of popery, that it is not for every
particular person of himself, to examine, try or judge, Rhem Testa. upon 1.
Joh. 4.1.
wc is true or false doctrine, who is a true or false doctor: and it is a
principle in that Church, Private men may and ought to judge of that which they
hear.
that it suffiseth a common man to give his consent to the church and to
believe as the Pastors believe. But all the true Ministers of Jesus Christ are
of another judgment: for howsoever we do urge all reverent respect to the
preaching of the word, as to the ordinance of God, yet we take not upon us to
have dominion over the faith of our hearers, 2. Cor. 1.24.
as though we would bind them to give credit to every thing we speak, Ambros.
in 1 Thessalonians. cap. 5.
by the authority of our name (as Ambrose his words are) therefore because we
speak it. And in truth there is nothing more manifest in Scripture then this,
that the people ought iudicially to examine the doctrine taught, before they
dare to entertain it. Paul to the Galathians says thus, Gal 1.8.
Though we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Now if he with preaches contrary
to the revealed truth be accursed, surely the case of him which gives credit
to him must needs be dangerous: and therefore for the auoydance of the danger,
Romans 14.5. (...) Phil. 1.10.
it is meet for every man to be fully persuaded in his own mind, that he may
discern things that differ one from another. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1. Ioh. 4.1.
The Thessalonians are willed to try all things: those to whom Saint John
wrote, are counseled to try the spirits. Solomon has branded him for a
fool, Prou. 14.15.
who will believe every thing. It is a disgrace for men professing religion to
be like children carried with every wind of doctrine. Ephesians. 4 14.
It is an honor to be like ye gentlemen of Beraea, Act. 17.1^.
who searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things wc the Apostles taught
were so. Christ says, Ioh. 10.4.5.
yt his sheep know his voice, and will not follow a stranger. What can be more
express then these testimonies? Let any man consider the places and the
parties to whom these commandments of taking trial of the doctrine were
directed, and he shall find that no one man is exempted from this duty of
examining.


Nymph. Indeed me thinks it stands with some reason, that we should try
the doctrine which we hear before we credit it:for otherwise we may soon be
drawn into many errors: A similitude like to this, in the same case Chrisost.
uses Hom. 13. upon 2. Cor.
we have a Proverb, that a man must tell money eue^ after his own father, not
in distrustfulnesse as though we thought he would deceive, but in wisdom,
because unwittingly he may be deceived. No doubt we ought to be much more
circumspect in matters of doctrine, because even the best that teach, in that
they are men may err, and because also in matters of that nature to be
deceived, is so exceeding dangerous. But all the matter is, how to judge, and
by what means to be able to know truth from falsehood, wholesome from
unwholesome doctrine.


Epaph. The Scripture the only judge of doctrine.
Know this therefore for a truth, that in all cases and controversies of
religion, the Scripture only must be admitted as vmpire, and every thing must
stand or fall at ye determining thereof: for therefore has the Lord commanded
it to be written and to be made common to all, that by it all controversies
might be decided, all doubts resolved, all heresies confuted, all truth
confirmed, every conscience guided, every man's life framed. Nothing is sound
that is disagreeing from it, nothing unsound that is consonant thereunto. We
are well contented to let that absurdity dwell with the parents of it, the
Papists: namely, Commo^toriu^ non regula. Bell. L^na. lib. 1. Pan^p. cap. 9.
that the Scripture is rather to be termed an admonisher then a Judge: let it
be their glory, to think basely of the written word, and to ascribe the
authority of judging to unwritten verities and traditions, rather then to it:
we have learned that the Law which is come forth of Sion, Isa. 2.^4.
and the word of the Lord that has issued from Jerusalem, must be judge
amongst the nations: and we are commanded to appeal still to the Law and to
the testimony, Isa. 8.20
assuring our selves, that there is no light in them, which speak not
according to this word. Job. 5.3^.
We find that our Savior himself stood to the judgment and trial of the
Scripture. Paul submitted his doctrine to the same rule. Act. 17.2. c 17 28.23.
We read the learned in former ages, to give the privilege of judging only to
the Scripture. Augustine disputing with a chief Arrian, Aug. contra Max. Arrian
lib. 3. cap. 14.
says thus: Let us dispute by the authority of the Scriptures, which are
indifferent witnesses to us both. And in another place: The Epistles of Bishops
give place one to another, and Councels are amended one by another, Lib de
Pastor.
but the canonical Scripture, that is the rule of all, Bas. Epist. 8.
and must correct all. Basil the Great demands that against all heretics
the Scripture only be the vmpire. Cyprian. in S^r. de Bapt. Cir.
Cyprian says, that the rules of all doctrines have flowen from the Scripture.
Chrysostom Hom 12. in 2. Cor. (...).
Chrysostom wills his hearers to fetch all things from the Scripture. But
what should we stand upon the testimonies of men, when the fore-alleaged places
out of the written text are so apparent? Therefore to prepare you to the trying
of the doctrines which you hear, hold this firm ground, that all points must
receive their allowance from the Scripture.


Nymp. I could easily agree to you in this that you have said, but that there
is this difficulty therein, namely, how to make use of the Scripture, and to
apply it to this worthy purpose of finding out the truth thereby. You that are
scholars, and have the helps of learning, and of the Arts and tongues, may
make better shift in these cases, then we plain men of the country can. There
is no man that preaches, but he alleges the Scripture, and so carries it,
that it may seem to be absolutely for him in that which he avouches: so that
unless we be taught, how to judge by the Scripture, we shall still be in
suspense.


Epaph. You have made a very needful motion; and therefore, How to make use of
the Scripture for the trying of the truth.
if you will listen to it, I will acquaint you with that course whereof my
self both in my private studies, and in hearing others publicly, have had
very comfortable experience. First of all, when you have occasion and
opportunity to hear, you must remember Salomons advice, Eccles. 4.17.
to take heed to your foot, Psalm. 119.18.
and to use some preparation before hand, praying the Lord to open your eyes,
that you may see the wonders of his law, and that his spirit of truth may be
with you to lead you into all truth. Ioh. 16.11.
Secondly, you must labor by all means, to subdue and suppress the seeming
wisdom of your own heart, resolving to yield up your self to whatsoever ye
Lord reueales, though it be altogether crossing to your own reason, and
displeasing to nature. For as God resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and makes them which profess themselves wise to become fools: Romans 1 22.
so he will guide the meek in judgment, and teach the humble his way, Psalm.
25.9.14.
and reveal his secret to them that fear him. Thirdly, when you have thus
framed and fitted your self by prayer and humility, be sure to remember this
rule especially; namely, that that doctrine is the truest, which makes most
for Gods glory, most for the comfort and relief of a wounded conscience, most
for the restraining and curbing of our corrupt nature, and fleshly affections.
Mark a little, and I will show you the reason of this rule. First of all, the
end why God made all things, was the glory of his own name: Prou. 16.4.
the thing especially aimed at by him, in that great and admirable work the
redemption of mankind, and in all the particulars of it, even from the first
foundation of it, his eternal election, unto the last end hereof, our
glorification in heaven, 2. Cor. 1.29.31. (...).
is: That no flesh might glory in his presence, but that he that glories
might glory in the Lord. This being then the maine end of all Gods courses, to
keep the glory of al things entire unto himself, it must needs be, that
that doctrine is the most sound, which does not admit the least empeachment of
Gods glory. Secondly, one chief end of the Scripture is, as to beat down
man, and to clean strippe him of all goodness and inclination thereunto, for
the keeping of Gods glory whole unto himself, so also to put gladness into
all distressed hearts, Psalm. 51.12.
and to bring the joy of salvation to all afflicted spirits. Psalm. 19.8.
David says it is one property of the word of God to rejoice the heart: and
Paul affirms that the drift of all the Scripture is, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort thereof might have hope. So that, look
what doctrine brings the fullest comfort, to a poor soul when it is even at
the depth of sorrow, that must needs be wholesome doctrine, seeing it
concurreth with the whole scope of the Scripture. Thirdly, one thing
principally intended, in the discovery of that grace of God which brings
salvation unto all men, was, Tit. 2.11.12.
Gal. 5.^4.
that ungodliness and worldly lusts should be denied, that the flesh with the
affections and lusts should be crucified, that the body of sin should be
destroyed, Romans 6.6.
and that mortifying our members which are on the earth, Col. 3 5.
we should serve the Lord all the days of our life in holiness and
righ^eousnesse before him. Luke 1.74 75.
And therefore that doctrine which presses upon men, the most procise and
strict obedience to Gods will, not giving any the least toleration to any the
smallest sin, but still bridling man's natural inclination unto evil, that
is the truth of God which every servant of God ought to entertain. Tell me
now, understand you this direction?


Nymph. Yea truly, I do in some measure understand it; yet if you shall please
by one or two examples to show the use of it, I shall the better perceive it,
and know the rather how and after what sort to apply it.


Epaph. I will not stick with you for that: because I am very willing to
satisfy you in this matter. For ye first branch therefore touching the glory
of God, take this example. We teach at this day, that faith only justifies:
our meaning is, that the very thing, which makes a man stand righteous before
God, and to be accepted to life everlasting, is, the imputed righteousness of
Christ Jesus: which righteousness is appropriated and applied to us only by
faith. Bellarm. de I^stif. lib. 2 cap. 7.
Others (as the Papists) say, that to the justifying of a sinner before God,
two things are required, remission of sins, and the habit of inward
righteousness, that is to say, charity with the fruits thereof. So that we
exclude, they establish the merit of man's works. Well then, in this difference
of opinion, there being learned men on both sides, and Scripture alleged on
both sides, you desire to know which is the truth: bring them both to the
touchstone, and see which of the two makes most for ye glory of God, and the
matter will soon be answered, the doubt will quickly be cleared. Consider
therefore how even the Apostle Paul by this rule decideth this controversy:
Romans 3.25.^.
by what law (says he) that is, by what means of salvation, is boasting
excluded? Not by the law of works, but by the law of faith. Hereupon he
concludes, therefore a man is justified by faith without the works of the
Law. And indeed the reason is excellent: for if man could by any of his own
doings, further his own salvation, or procure the increase of glory in
heaven, he had then some matter of glorying, and might (as it were) account
himself the less beholden unto God. But justification by faith only, takes
all utterly from man, and ascribes his whole salvation, the beginning, middle,
and ending unto the Lord: have you both an example of this rule, and warrant
for it, being used by the Apostle to decide so great a controversy: and I am
sure, that you shall find it of very great use in many main points of our
religion. Secondly, for the second branch of the rule which is about the
comfort and relief of a distressed and distracted conscience; mark this
particular for the manifestation of the force of the rule. It is taught and
maintained in our Church, that a Christian man may be infallibly certain of
his salvation in his own conscience in this life, and that by an ordinary and
special faith. Others there are (both Papists, and some also amongst our
selves) which hold that the certainetie of salvation, which in this life can be
attained to, is only coniecturall and probable, grounded only upon
likelihoods: and this certainty they confess to be uncertain, and such as
many times does deceive. Behold, here is a great controversy, and much is said
on either side: now you that are a private man, would gladly know to which part
you may safely incline, and what to rest upon as the alone truth in this case.
My advise is therefore, that for your full satisfaction herein, you scan the
matter by this rule: suppose a spirit deeply wounded, a conscience set as it
were upon the rack, seeing nothing in God but justice and majesty, and a
consuming fire; finding nothing in it self but sin and corruption, and
infinite matter of despair, so that by this means it is brought to such an
exigent, that it knows not which way to turn, but is even ready to cry out
with Paul, Romans 7.24.
Who shall deliver me? Enquire now which of those two doctrines does afford
the best comfort in this woeful case, that will quickly appear: for the one
holds the conscience in a continual suspense, the other labors to settle
it in the firm assurance of Gods unchangeable love in Christ Jesus: the one
brings a plaster, but much too little for the sore, tells of the riches of
Gods mercy, of the depth of his love, of the unsearchable sufficiency of
Christ's merit, but yet denies the soul to be assured of a particular
interest into it, and by that means rather increases then relieueth the
anguish: the other applies the medicine to every part of the wound, shows
Christ, discovers the riches of Christ, and puts the amazed heart into a
full, assured, and comfortable possession of Christ. So that whatsoever shall
be argued to the contrary, you may be bold to build upon that which brings
the most joyful and welcome tidings to an affrighted conscience: that is best
agreeing to the scope of the Scripture, that comes nearest to the nature of
the Gospel. Come now to the third bra^ch, which is concerning the liberty of
the flesh, and let me give an insta^ce of that also. There is at this day a
doctrine, (almost openly taught, or at least tolerated by many that should teach
otherwise) namely, that a man may do well enough, without so much preaching:
that it is not a matter of that great necessity to frequent the places of Gods
public service, but yt a body may do well enough at home, with some private
devotions: that common men need not trouble themselves greatly with the
scripture, or with knowledge in religion: that the religious spending of the
Sabbath is a thing indifferent: that often communicating at the Lords table is
not of any great importance, but that once or twice in a year is as good as
every day: that it is not good to be too forward in matters of religion,
ouerstrait in conversation: that God will bear with many small matters, etc. On
the other side, there is a doctrine that tells us and proves unto us, that
if we desire to walk and to live so as may please God, and as becomes
Christians, we must make conscience of often hearing the word, we must as new
born babes desire the sincere milk thereof, that we may grow thereby, 1. Pet.
2.2.
never contenting our selves with any measure of knowledge: we must strive and
strain our selves, though sometime it be with some trouble and diseasing of
our bodies, to come to ye places of Gods worship, Prouet. 8.33.
and to give attendance at the posts of the doors of the Lords house: we must
call the Saboth a delight to consecrate it, Isay 58.3.
resting not only from labor, but from al things that may disable us and make
us more unfit for Gods service, either in respect of preparation before it, or
of conference and meditation after it: we must for the strengthening of our
faith, and the solemn remembering of the death of Christ often communicate: we
must in our lives walk circumspectly, with zeal and courage and opennesse in
the practice of religion: we must make conscience of the smallest sin, and
never think we have done enough in the duties of holy obedience. Here is
again a new question, and you perhaps in some of these particulars, through
the diversity of opinions, may be unresolved. If you demand of me, how you may
be stablished, I refer you to this rule; search and consider which of the two
tends most directly to the yoking and hampering and restraining of man's
natural disposition: that will soon appear, if you look out into the world,
and hearken how these doctrines are entertained: for the former, who so shall
teach it, or seem to approve it, no doubt that man shall have many followers
and many favorers: for does not every man almost like it and wish it, that
there should be less preaching? that it should be free to spend the Sabbath,
every one as himself lists? to receive the Communion when men think good? to
neglect knowledge? to banish ye Bible out of their houses, or else to let it ly
like old harness rusting for lack of occupying? will it not by and by be
received, that it is not good for men to be precise, to be over scrupulous, to
stand too nicely upon points? Surely he that should teach this, I might say of
him as the Prophet spoke of old, Micah 2.11
He were a Preacher for the people. But now for the other doctrine, see what an
acceptance it has in the world: fie upon it will one say, what a tedious
thing is this to hear so many sermons, what a trouble to come so often to the
Church, what a misery to be restrained from our sunday-sports, what a dull time
will it be and how long will the day seem if thus we be limited? what need so
many communions? what should men be so hot and earnest in religion? if this once
take place, farewell all mirth, farewell all good company, adieu to all
thriuing, if this be hearkened unto. This is and will be the entertainment of
this doctrine: it will be reputed as the Prophets sermons were of old, even the
Burden of the Lord. So by the general yielding or gainesaying of the
multitude, it may soon appear which of the two is the greatest enemy to the
flesh: and therefore you both may and must conclude with the latter doctrine,
that that is from above, because it meets with our corruption at every turn,
and is still beating it down, laboring to keep it within compass. And by
this rule (to gain it the more credit) Paul took up the question among the
Galathians, touching the use of Christian liberty, setting it down for a
ground, that it is then best used when it is not used as an occasion to the
flesh, Gal. 5.13.
but with a holy respect to become servants each to other by love. Thus I have
(for your better understanding) given you an example of every branch of this
rule, that you may know how to apply it; assuring you out of mine own poor
experience, that there are very few of the fundamental points of religion,
which directly concern the worship of God, or our conversation with men, but
they may receive their trial by this Canon, and may truly be said to stand or
fall, according to the judgment and verdict thereof.


Nymph. I thank you unfeignedly for this direction; yet touching this latter
branch, it seems to me that there may be some doubt made, because the popish
religion is thought to restrain and punish the flesh more then ours: for it
imposes many very strait things and unpleasing, as fasting, penance, going
barefoote, pilgrimage, payings of money, to purchase prayers when men are dead,
and diverse the like: I pray you therefore clear me in this only doubt, and
then I am satisfied.


Epap. I say in one word of all these, as Paul did of things very like, Col
2.23.
They have indeed a show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and humbleness
of mind, and in not sparing the body: but yet another way they give greater
liberty: for when it is taught that these things are meritorious, and of worth
to do away many sins, what will not a man be content to do, for a week or an
hour, or a short time, for the removing of the sins of his whole life? and
who will not be content when he is dying, to give all that away which he must
needs leave behind, for the delivery of his soul from a supposed purgatory?
Who would not go an hundred miles on pilgrimage to the shrine of such or such a
saint, to be assured that it shall be his discharge for the remainder of his
life? So that though these bodily impositions may seem something strait one
way, yet they give trebble liberty another way, and therefore may truly be
said, rather to be an occasion to the flesh, then to li-limit the corruption of
the flesh.


Nymph. It is very true; for what will a man fear to do, so long as he is
taught, and by teaching persuaded, that by almsdeeds and fasting (falsely so
called) and some legacies bequeathed to religious uses (as they term them) or
by conformity to the penal injunctions of a priest, he may make sufficient
satisfaction? therefore I hold this for answer enough to that objection.


Epaph. Well neighbor, to let that pass, and to follow the motion which you
made, I must to ye former rule add one thing, which is this: Take heed by all
means of such ears as the Apostle calls itching ears, 2. Tim. 4.3.
and of delighting to get an heap of teachers. It is a dangerous humor to
affect variety of instructors, and it must needs cause distraction: it fills
men's heads with a world of idle questions, and draws them into vain
iangling. 1 Timothy 1.6.
It is Satan's policy as long as he can to hold men in ignorance, and in the
contempt or neglect of knowledge: when he cannot prevail that way, but men
will listen to instruction, then he will endeavor to busy them with profane
fables and vain bablings, which breed questions, 1. Tim 1 4. Chap 6.20.
rather then that godly edifying which is by faith: that so he may withdraw
their thoughts, and steal away their hearts from those things which ought
principally to be looked unto. Especially remember the advice of Paul to his
son Timotheus, 2 Timoth. 3.14.
Continue thou in the things which thou have learned and art persuaded thereof,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. Note the place. The Apostle presses a
stiff and firm continuance in truths received, when as these two things
concur therewith; a man's own persuasion; and the consideration of those
which first taught us. First, for a man's own persuasion, I pray you to observe
it, lest I should seem in steed of grounded setlednesse, to commend
selfe-willed peeuishnes. By being persuaded, Paul means thus much, as if he
had said to Timothy, If it be an opinion which thou have not suddenly
entertained, but upon good advice, if it has seated it self in thy judgment
then when as thou with care and conscience, with humility, with using the
ordinary means, with prayer unto God, with hearty desire to be guide^ in the
truth have enquired after knowledge, surely thou ought not, being by these
degrees brought unto it, and in this manner persuaded in it, rashly and suddenly
to forgo it. This is that which is meant by persuasion in this place. A
setlednesse of judgment, following upon an orderly course to bring a man
thereunto. The second thing that must concur, is the consideration of the
parties of whom we have learned: as if Paul had said, Observe and mark well
what kind of men they are, by whose ministry thou have been instructed; if
they be men, who by their fidelity in teaching, and by the blessing of God upon
their labors, in using their ministry to convert men's souls, do carry with
them the seal of their ministry; nay if thine own conscience can witness
for them either of these out of thine own feeling, then beware of a contrary
doctrine: though I would not have thee tie thy self to any man's authority,
yet be well advised before thou alter thy judgment confirmed by such a
ministry. This was Paul's meaning: and if you care to follow it, you shall in
experience find it good counsel. Thus I have acquainted you with the best
course I know as yet, both for the first informing, and the after-setling of
your judgment in Gods truth.


Nymph. I pray God to enable me by his holy spirit, both to remember and to
practice this your good advice. I will now make this only request: you know it
is not enough to be a man of knowledge, unless a man do with knowledge join
obedience. If you know these things (says our Savior) blessed are ye if you
do them. John 13.17.
Wherefore as you have taught me how to hear profitably for the gayning of
knowledge, so I pray you direct me how I may make good use of hearing for the
government of my life.


Epaph. How to draw things heard into practice.
In the first place therefore remember, as to pray to be guided into all truth
by the spirit of truth, so to beg of God to direct the Preachers tongue, that
he may speak unto your conscience, and that his sermons may be as a glass, in
which you may behold the very true estate of your own soul. Secondly, labor
to put away from you that which Solomon calls a froward heart, Proverb. 17.^^.
that is, a heart that cannot bear reproof: remember it well, and think
seriously upon it, Prou. 9.8.
that there can be no greater testimony of true wisdom then to love him that
rebukes you: and thereupon resolve with your self beforehand, that whatsoever
is spoken against your sin, be it never so tart or unpleasing, James 1.21.
yet you will receive it with all meekness, and esteem it as a precious oil.
Psalm 141.5.
Thirdly, in hearing, endeavor when the Preacher having laid the grounds of
his doctrine comes to application, to observe what is spoken by way of
exhorting, what by way of reproof, what with an intent to minister comfort:
each point being referred to these heads, shall much the better be remembered.
Fourthly, when you are departed from the sermon, forget not to find a time as
soon as is possible, whilst things heard are most fresh, in which to commune
with your own heart, Psalm. 77 6. Luke. 2.19.
and to ponder, and scanne, and search diligently those things which were
delivered. This is that which we call meditation, an exercise which David
exceedingly delighted in: it is the same to the mind, Psalm. 119.97.
that digestion is to the body: that which we hear is by it made our own, so
that the soul receives nourishment thereby. Now in the practice of this
duty, it is good to consider what things are presently necessary, and what
otherwise. Those things which are of present use, Psalm 119.10^
are eftsoons to be laid hold upon, and a certain secret oath is to be made
between God and a man's own soul, Verse. 16.
to make have and not to delay a speedy and diligent execution: yea though the
duty enjoined be both in show painful, and an enemy to worldly profit, an
abridger of carnal delight, and a means by all likelihood to darken
estimation and credit amongst men. If it be a matter of spiritual consolation,
or of provocation and incoragement to persist in a good duty, it must be
reputed as a chearing from heaven, and heart (as we say) to be taken thereby
against all, either inward assaults or outward discouragements whatsoever. As
for other points, which may seem not to be of so present use, they are not to
be neglected, Psalm 119 11. Proverbs 4.21.
but to be hidden and kept in the midst of the heart, that they may not be to
seek when the Lord shall offer occasion to employ them. You must do in this
case as you do in household matters: if you find an implement which you know
not how forthwith to bestow, you will say, it is pity to cast it away, it will
be no charge to keep it, once in seven years it may serve for a purpose, for
the which you would be loath to lack it: so though some things which you hear,
are not (as may seem) presently needful, yet you must make conscience safely
to preserve them, because a time of use may come hereafter, in which, as it
would be a grief to want direction, so the Lord (it may be) may then in
justice deny that, which formerly being offered was entertained with contempt.
In a word, look to it that you be well furnished for all occasions, and know
it to be the chief duty, and the especial mark of a good Christian, to take
heed, 2. Pet. 1 19. Psalm. 119.^.
and always to have respect unto the holy directions which are soundly
delivered from Gods word; so shall you become wise unto salvation, and perfect
unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3.15.^9.
This is the shortest and most familiar direction that I can give you, for the
religious government of your life by the form of doctrine, Romans 6.17.
which in the ordinary ministry of the word shall be delivered unto you.
Larger directions the many good books which good men have written of that
matter, will ple^tifully afford you. This may serve at this time, and it may
be God will offer us an occasion to talk of this matter more at large
hereafter.


Nymp. I hope so too: and I shall for my part be ready to take any opportunity,
being encouraged both by this your kindness, and by the benefit and comfort
which I must needs confess I have received by this present conference. For
this time therefore I commit you to God, whom I heartily beseech so to bless
your labors in the ministry, that you may turn many to righteousness,
(...). 12.3. 1. Tim. 4 16.
and may take that heed unto your self and unto learning, that you may both
save your self and them that hear you.


Epap. I thank you for your good prayer: I do also desire the same God for his
son Christ's sake, ^. Tim. 2.7.
to give you that good understanding in all things, Colos. 1.9 10.11.
that you may be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, and that he would
also strengthen you with all might through his glorious power, that you may be
fruitful in all good works, Heb. 10.23.
and may keep the profession of your hope without wavering to the end. And so
God be with you.


To him be glory for ever, of whom, and through whom, and for whom are all
things.

Romans 11.36.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the preface, page 1. line 11. read generally. p. 5. l. 17. put o^ have In
the book, p 3. l. 15. put out l. p. 4. l. 13. read l p. 6 l. 10. read
courses p. 8. in margin read 2. Tim. p. 11. l. 1. read less p. 6. in marg.
read 2 Ioh 9. p. 20. in man read 25 p 20 l 23 read forbidden f^ p 43. l 28.
put in his (when a man ha^ done hi^ best. p 47 in marg read Pro. 23. p. 6^. in
marg. read Romans 15.1^ p. 64 in marg read Heb. 13 7 p 66. l. ^ read (...)
marg. read 1. l m 46 p. 59. l. 25. read ref^ p. ^3. l. 8. read men's. p. ^7 l
^. read opposers. p. 77 l. 1. read hearts. In marg. read l ^. 2. p. ^9 in
marg. read Job. 4 19. p. 80 l. 2. read, ^t which he will not do. p. 89. l
vlt. word, left out p. 91 l ^. read his p. 98 l 25 read (it may be) p. 128.
l. 18 read c^rie^. p. 114. l. 26. read may. p. 199. l. vlt. of wants.


