THE LIFE AND DEATH OF DORCAS.

WHEREIN, HE that pleases to read, may find both good direction for the
ordering of his Course: AND A necessary warning to be prepared for his End.

By SAMVEL HIERON.

Psalm. 92. ver. 12. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, and shall
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.

LONDON, Printed by MELCH. BRADWOOD for SAMVEL MACHAM, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bulhead. 1612.

TO MY MVCH Honored Lady, the Lady MARGARET HELE of Weuburie in Deuon.
MAdame, many things, which I have observed in you, do even assure me, that
this small present shall find some favor with you: these two especially; your
reverent estimation of the ordinance of God (the word preached) and your more
particular respect unto my ministry: Other things I could name, but that I do
abhor the very smell and shadow of flattery. It has pleased you some time,
to crave of me the notes of some things which I have (in your hearing) taught
in public: Being much desired by many to commit to printing, that which God
enabled me very lately to deliver, at the funerals of a worthy gentlewoman of
these parts, I thought to inscribe it unto your Ladie-ships name, as a pledge
of my true desire to further you (all I may) in your journey toward Heaven.
The matter is, of a woman, in the Scripture well reported of, both for her holy
profession, and for her gracious fruit, to whom the more like your Ladie-ship
shall become, the better shall your assurance be of entering into rest: I
commend the Sermon to your reading, the person treated of to your Imitation,
and your body and soul to the protection of the Almighty, my self remaining

Your Ladie-ships ready seruitor in any Christian office SAM. HIERON.

Tabitha, or Dorcas of Ioppa, her life: in which her Profession: A Disciple
Fruit: General full of Good works. Alms.
Particular full of Good works. Alms.


death: she was sick. died.



THE LIFE AND DEATH OF DORCAS.
ACTS 9.36. There was also at Ioppa a certain woman, a Disciple named Tabitha,
(which by interpretation is called Dorcas) she was full of good works and
alms which she did.

37. And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick and died.


THis which I have read is the entrance into a very memorable story, The
general state of the place.
touching a testimony which God gave to the word of his grace, by enabling
Peter to restore a dead woman unto life. I am now to treat of it, as an entire
parcel in itself, and being so considered, I may term it, A compendious or
brief report of the life and death of a certain worthy Matron, whose dwelling
was in Ioppa, whose name, in the Syriacke tongue, Tabitha, as much in effect as
that which in Greek is called Dorcas: a name very honorable now because it
was hers, though in it own native signification not so graceful, it being as
much to say as in English, Roe, or Goat: no more prejudice to her who was a
sheep of Christ's, then it was behoouefull to traitorous Abshalom that by the
purport of his name he was the father of peace. I will not spend time about
these circumstances of her name and dwelling, though both might astoord us good
matter of instruction: the one, to show how that (^. God said to Moses) Ex. 33
17.
the relig^ous find that favor in the sight of God, that he knows them by
name, and that, although it be their portion here to have their names put out
as evil Luk 6 22.
, yet still they are written in heaven Luke 1^ 20.
, in the Book of life of the L^e Deu. 13 ^.
, out of which they shall never be razed Re^ 3.5.
, whereas the wicked though they think to get them a name Genesis 11.4.
, and lay plots to keep their name in remembrance 2. Sam. 18.1^.
, and to that end do call their Lands by their names Ps. 49 11.
, yet their name shall not Pro. 10 7.
, and shall be left by them as a curse unto Gods chosen Isa. 65.15.
: the other, of her dwelling might be brought to mind us, that the Lord
knows our dwelling Isa. 27.28. Reu. 2.13.
, and so by consequence is accustomed to all our wates P^. 139.3.
. If we walk in obedience before him, no place can hinder our acceptance with
him: his ere is as well to Ioppa as to Jerusalem* and if we walk stubbornly
against him Leuit. 26.23.
, no place can throud us from his hand. For, Whither shall we flee from his
presence? Ps. 139 7.
And, The e^e of the Lord in every place shall behold the evil and the good
Pro. 15.3.
. Those things I could urge from these circumstances: but because I am now like
to a poor traveler, that has far to go and little to spend, much matter
before me in my text, but not much time before me to deliver it in, I will
therefore select such things as may sort with the purpose of our meeting, which
as it is to solemnize the funeral of a deceased Matrone, so it should be to
take occasion thereby, so to number our days that we apply our hearts to
wisdom Ps. 90.12
, and so to order our days by passing the time of our dwelling here in fear
1 P^t. 1^.
, that (which is the reward of godliness) God may do us good in our latter
end D^u 8.16.
I come therefore to those two general points, the Life, and Death of Dorcas,
the one, The division in the place into 2. parts.
verse. 36. the other, verse. 37. Touching her life, there are two things
considerable: 1. Her profession (a Disciple): 2. The fruits of her profession
(full of good works etc.): The things considerable in the first part.
two things which ought to kiss each other in the life of a Christian. A
profession without fruit, is groste hypocrisy? A kind of fruit (for so there
may be) without a right profession, is boot less formalitie: but both
together, knowledge to guide obedience, and ob^dience to testify the truth of
the knowledge, that is Christianity. In whom I can find these two, of him I
may sa^, Behold indeed an Israelite in whom is no guile Ioh. 1.4^
? This is the man of pure heart, and innocent hands, that shall ascend into the
mountain of the Lord Psalm. 21.^
. Let me speak of both apart, I may divide them in my discourse, but in^o ^r
course, neither you nor I, may sunder them.

1. Her profession, a Disciple. The 1. thing in the ^ part.
Disciple was the customarie name by which those that professed the truth were
called in the prime days of the Gospel. In the beginning it was a title more
pe^uliar to those that gave their ordinary attendance upon our Savior: The
twelve Apostles are called the twelve Disciples Mat. 10 1.
; but yet even then, the name was enlarged, his ordinary hearers are called
his Disciples Ioh 6.66.
and Joseph of Arimathea, is said to have been a Disciple Ioh. 19 38.
. After Christ's ascension, as the number of believers was enlarged, so the name
grew more common: as in this very chapter, the true professors whom Saul did
persecute, are called the Disciples of the Lord Ver. 1.
, Ananias is t^rmed a Disciple Ver. 10.
, and those which were after at Antioch, called Christians (where that name was
first taken up,) were before that time called Disciples Act. 11 2^.
. A Disciple is as much to say in English as a learner, and the believers were
so styled because they were such, as in a desire of saving knowledge had their
dependence upon the ordinary means of instruction, (the preaching of the
word.) So then, Dorcas a Disciple, that is Dorcas a scholar in the school of
Christ, a submitter of herself to the ordinance of God for the saving of her
soul. She was none of those Learners whom the Apostle blames, which learn
to go about from house to house etc. 1. Tim. 5.13.
but such a Learner as Lydia, which attended to those things which were spoken
of Paul Acts. 16.14.
. Her being a Learner, is (as other Scripture) written for our learning Romans 15
4. The 1. Doctrine.
, and the Doctring which it affords to us, is this. That, to be a learner of
religion by the means ordained of God, to teach religion is a part of the very
essence and Being of a Christian. These two words a Disciple, and a Christian,
are as we are wont to say in schools, terms conuertible, as thus; If a
Disciple, surely a Christian: If a Christian, surely a Disciple: If no
Disciple, no Christian: If no Christian, no Disciple. I know there be also many
counterfeit Disciples, and so there be also many counterfeit Christians, and many
seem to be Disciples, which yet are no Christians, and many also take upon
them to be Christians, which by no means will be Disciples: yet still does that
which I have said remain true, that, such as is a man's Disciple-ship, such is
his Christianity: If a true Disciple, a true Christian, if but a formal
Disciple, surely but an hollow Christian. I will appeal to any man's judgment,
be it that he be but (as it were) a man of yesterday Job. 8 9.
in Religion, to tell mo, what other thing is meant, by this, that Dorcas was a
Disciple, then this Dorcas was a belieuer, a woman converted by the Gospel, to
the Christian Faith? So that this observation is just from hence, Either a
Disciple, or else, no Christian. To this for a fuller confirmation we may join
that speech of Christ's to the Apostles, when he sent them out to preach: Go,
and teach all nations, or word for word from the Greek, go make them Disciples
Mat. 28.19. (...) etc.
If you can bring them once to this, to submit themselves to be taught of God
in his own ordinance, you have won them. When our Savior would show what
mark his sheep have, he declares it to be an Eare-marke, my sheep hear my
voice Ioh. 10.27.
, they have the wise and obedient ear Prou. 25.12.
, Now a good Hearer and a good Disciple are all one. Again, No man can be a
Christan indeed, unless he be a believer: for what is a Christian, but a man
in Christ 2. Cor. 5.17.
, and how comes that union betwixt a man and Christ but by Faith Ephesians. 3.17.
? and how shall a man have Faith, but by being a Disciple? Faith is by hearing
Rom 10.17.
, and Hearing is the inseparable quality of a Disciple: Further what Christian
will you call him, that shall not be saved, and what Salvation is there for
him, that forsakes that old beaten path, Hear, and your soul shall live
Isa. 55 3.
. Besides, how is he a Christian, that does not know God, and him whom he has
sent Christ Jesus Ioh. 17, 3.
, and who can know so much unless he be a Disciple? man of himself does not
know it, (for, every man is a beast by his own knowledge Ier. 10.14
, Man of himself cannot know it, (for it is foolishness unto him 1. Cor. 2.14.
: he must attain to it by donation from God, or else he can never understand
it, (for a man can receive nothing except it bes given from above Ioh. 3.27.
: If he must expect it from God, beggars must not choose, and he must fit
himself so to receive it, as God is pleased to bestow it, and he will not
bestow it but by the folly of preaching 1. Cor. 1.21.
: a man must sit him down in the Disciples form, or he shall never obtain
it. I know the world will account him but a fool who tieth himself to this
course, but this is that Foolishness of God, which is wiser then Men 1. Cor.
1.25.
and he who seems to be wise in this world, must be a fool, that he may be
wise 1. Cor. 3.18.
. This briefly, to clear this Doctrine.

Now, for use, if none be Christians but Disciples, and none Disciples, but
such as have chosen Mary's part, to sit at Jesus feet to hear his preaching
Luke 10.39.
, and what Feet are there now left unto us but those beautiful ones, which
bring glad tidings of peace Romans 10.15.
? Tell me then (I pray you) what plenty is there of Christians? Sure I am,
the number of Disciples is not great. I know, Hearers there be many, but not
every Hearer a Disciple. By that t^me the number of Disciples are shoaled out
from the great prease and multitude of common Hearers, I will tell you how it
will be. Israel went out to fight against Aram: Israel pitched on the one side,
Aram on the other side: The children of Israel were like two little flocks of
Kids, but the Aram^tes filled the Country 1 King 2^.^7.
Here is the very true proportion betwixt the great swarms of Hearers, and
the small handful of Disciples. There be many things do make men Hearers,
as, necessity, authority, hypocrisy for^alitie, affectat^on of novelty,
etc. But there is but one thing makes a man a Disciple; a settled persuasion
that, that whereto a man submits himself as a Disciple, is the very Arm of
the Lord (...). 5^.1.
, and the power of God unto salvation R^. 1.16
. And if we bring Disciples to this scantling. I beseech you ask the men in
your own coats, where we shall find them. Surely the men of this generation
are not yet possessed with the necessity of dependence upon that Teaching
course which the Lord has sanctified to the gathering together of his Saints
Ephesians. 4.2
. The multitude passes it over in a kind of carelessness, not so much as ever
putting to the question, what is to be done that they may be saved. They
follow the drone: if it be right, so it is; if not, then God help, if so many
shall be damned. But now the wiser sort, they consent and agree, that somewhat
must be known and believed unto salvation: but to go to school to a
Minister, to give attendance at the pests of the Lords doors, there to hear
instruction Pro ^.^3.
, that is too submisse a course: Why? cannot we inform ourselves? And, Is
there no Christianity, b^ by so servile a conformity as the hanging upon the
mouth of a Preacher? No (beloved) either show the self a Disciple, or never
think thou art a Christian They which were first called Christians, were
Disciples first. Neither is every one a Disciple, which puts his foot into
the School. He that comes with a den all of himself, with an heart
hungring after knowledge, with the spirit of meekness, with submission to the
ordinance of him who is the only Doctor of his Church, this is the Disciple,
he is the Christian indeed; this is he whom the Lord will guide in
judgment, and to whom he will teach his way Psa. 25 9.
. And thus for the first flower which I have plucked from that garland, with
which it has pleased the spirit of God to adorn this Matrones name ( Dorcas a
Disciple.) And albeit the world neglects both this title, and the thing
intended by it as unworthy, yet without it we lay all our honor in the dust.
This title must be a man's glory to the end, as was said of him, Mnason an old
Disciple Act. 23 16 (...) and
. As I grow old, so I learn still, said a wise Heathen. A man must never
think to be preferred out of this School, until he come to be admitted
into that great University, where he which is the Doctor of the Chair,
Christ Jesus, will advance all those that have been good Proficients in the
learners Form, to sit with him upon his own Throne Reu. 3.21.
. So much for her profession.

Now follow the fruits of her profession: The 2 thing in the 1. part.
of which the Holy Ghost speaks first generally (full of good works) and
then some particular good works are made mention of, (Alms, etc.) I will
treat of both sunderly: and first of this (full of good works.) My order must
be thus: First, to show the meaning: Secondly, to set down the doctrine. In
the meaning, first, what those things are which are called Good works:
secondly, what it is to be full of good works.

Good works are of the same wideness with Gods commandments. What be good
works.
For obedience to any branch of Gods commandments, is a good work. Papists
(and from them others) do straiten the largeness of good works, of which
notwithstanding they take upon them to be the chiefest Patrones. They go not
much further, then to Almsdeeds, and Fasting, and such like. The rule of good
works is Gods revealed will Mich. 6.8.
: voluntary services God esteems not Col. 2.23.
: the Fear taught by the precepts of men, he accounts it but hypocrisy Isai.
29.13.
. The particular heads of good works are set down, Tit. 2.12. 1. Sobriety
(in the use of outward things, meat, drink, wealth, apparel, disports. 2.
Righteousness (in dealings with men, that there be no oppressing, no
defrauding) 1. These.
. 3. Godliness (in matters belonging to God, that we worship the true God,
after a true manner, with a true heart.) The credit and trial of good works
stands in these particular: 1. When they are guided by Knowledge Rom 10.^2.
: (blind zeal is with God of no esteem.) 2. When they are directed to Gods
Glory 1. Cor 10.31.
: (to do things to be seen of men is Pharisaicall.) 3. When they are carried
with a joint respect to all Gods commandments Psalm. 119.6.
: (to be precise in some things, and in other to take liberty is gross
hypocrisy) 4. When there is a care chiefly had to those good offices which
concern a man's personal calling Luk 3 12. etc.
: (he that is not good in a calling, is not good at all.) 5. When they are
held out with constancy Reu 2 10.
: (good is not good, if it be not perpetual.) This is in few words the true
state of good Works.

What to be f^ll of good works.
Now to be Full, has reference first to the sincerity of her heart, without
which, be the show to the world-ward never so glorious, yet a man is but an
empty Christian. 2. to the universality of her practice, who like Zachary
and Elizabeth, walked in all the Commandments of God Luke 1 6.
. 3. To the forwardness of her disposition, she was ready to good works. Tit
3 1.
. 4. To the vnweariednesse of her course, she was like Th^atira, her works more
at the last then at the first Reu. 2 19.
. This is the fullness of a Christian, without fraud, without halting, without
grudging, and without tiring. Thus for the meaning. This her Fullness affoords
fullness of matter. But I am forced at this time, in stead of a bill of
particulars, which in this case would be very comfortable, to present all in
one gross sum, thus, That every Disciple of Christ must accompany his holy
profession with good works. The 2. Doctrine.
The spirit of God acquainteth us here what Dorcas was, that from thence we
might learn what we must be. Fullness of good works, was not in her a matter
of supererogation but of duty. If it were duty in her, it is necessity in us.
The Scripture abounds in proof. It was the common charge given by John Baptist
to his hearers, when they began to make a good profession, Bring forth
therefore fruit etc. Mat 3.3.
. The like elsewhere, Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ Phil. 1.27.
, Walk worthy the calling whereunto you are called Ephesians. 4.1.
. It is that which Paul preached to the Gentiles Act. 26.20.
, and he commanded it to be pressed by preachers upon all professors Tit. 3.8.
. This was he suter for to God on their behalf with whom he labored Col.
1.9.10.
. Your conuerts and professors of the new Testament of special note, their
Good works are specified; as Matthew: his general work is mentioned, he
followed Christ Math. 9 9.
: his particulars, as of Bounty (he made Jesus a feast 10.
,) and of Charity, he invited his fellow Publicanes to be guests, that they
also might be saved. Zacheus, Behold Lord, the half of my goods etc. Luke 19.8.
, There were his works. The three thousand brought to be Disciples by Peter's
Ministry, They continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship etc. Act.
2.45.46.47.
, These were there works. Cornelius, his prayers and alms came up into
remembrance with God Act. 10.4.
, Such were his works. The believers at Ephesus came and confessed and showed
their works Act. 10 18.
. Paul commended the Romans for their Holiness Romans 6.22.
, the Corinthians, for their zeal 2 Cor. 7.11
, the Thessalonians for their diligent love etc. 1. Th. 1.3. etc.
: Behold a cloud of witnesses: whatsoever things are honest, and of good report
etc. those do Phil. 4.8.
, If these things were memorable in others, surely they are imitable in us. Why
Good works ought to be coupled with our good profession, there be (as says
the Apostle) certain necessary uses Tit. 3.14.
, as namely, First, the Glory of God Math. 5.16. Ioh. 15.8.
, It is an honor to God, when his servants by profession are as zealous of
good works, as god-lesse people are in wickedness. Secondly, the conversion
of others. 1. Pet 2.12.
. It is possible that they which respect not the word, may without the Word be
won by the pure conversation of believers 1. Pet. 3.1.
. Thirdly, the stopping of the mouths of gainesayers Tit. 2 8.
. The credit of the Gospel must be dear unto us, and woe to him which makes
that worthy name by which he is named to be blasphemed Iam. 2.7.
. Fourthly, the declaration of the Truth of our Faith Iam. 2.18.
. It is no living but a titular Faith, which does not work by Love Gal. 5 6.
. Fifthly, assurance of our own Election to our souls y. Good works are the
Way, which God has ordained us to to walk in Ephesians. 2.10.
Thus you see the truth of this assertion: A true Disciple must not be like the
Tree which Christ cursed, which had leaves but no fruit Math. 21.19
, but like the Tree planted by the rivers side, that will bring forth her
fruit in due season Ps 1.3.
, nay, which brings forth her fruit in the age thereof, and is then fat and
flowrishing Psalm. 92.13. The use.
.

This is an excellent doctrine and a necessary, and if I were as eloquent and
mighty in the Scriptures, as Apollos Act 18.24.
, as full of the holy Ghost, as Barnabas Act. 11.24.
, as abounding in Faith and power, as Steven Act. 6.8.
, or had the best gift in persuading, that God has given unto any, I might
well employ it, in the furthering and promoting of this one point: that we
would make conscience to be suitfull in good works Col. 1.10.
. It is an exhortation which many amongst us do much need. For albeit the
profession of the Gospel in this kingdom has not been unfruitful, so that,
for public evidences of charity, and monuments of zeal to piety and
learning, we need not fear to contest with the greatest opposites to our
Religion, See to this end Willet in his Sy^sis page 960. etc.
besides the blameless and honest conversation of many private Christians,
whose lives no doubt, do adorn the doctrine of God our Savior Tit. 2.10.
, which they profess: Yet put case we here for our parts, who as the Jews of
old, gloried in God Romans 2.17.
, so do also boast in our profession, and in the style and name of
Christianity, put case we (I say) be dealt with in particular, may we not
justly be challenged for our scarcity of good works, what better deeds have
many of us, then the crying sins of Sodom Genesis 18.20.
, then the unfruitful works of Darkness Ephesians. 5 11.
, contempt of Gods sacred word and worship, blaspheming of his glorious and
fearful name Deu 28.58
profanation of his holyday, whoredom, pride, malice, drunkenness,
oppression, sacrilege, and such like. Whom would it not grieve that has in him
the affections of a Christian, that nothing should be in so general a disgrace
as this one thing, to be zealous of good works, and that the working out of
our salvation with fear and trembling Phil. 2.12.
, which is even the pith and marrow of all good works, should be a matter by
profane mouths so much spoken against. I beseech you, let us suffer the words
of exhortation, and let us be even emulous of that praise which is here given
unto Dorcas, to be full of good works. What an happy, and royal exchange
were it, if the fullness of these times, fullness of security, Fullness of
bread Ezekiel. 16 49
, might be turned into Fullness of good works. This would be our comfort in
death, this would give us boldness in the day of judgment. Death is the
worlds strict doore-keeper, and will see that as we brought nothing into the
World, so we carry no thing out 1. Tim. 6.7.
, but yet the concomitance of good Works it cannot hinder, Blessed are they
that die in the Lord, their works follow them Reu. 14 13.
: and for the day of Judgment, our trial there, shall not be by our
profession, but by our Works, and every man shall be remembered there according
to his goodness here. Think not I preach Good-Worke, like a Iusticiarie. I
confess when we have done all we must say, we are unprofitable servants Luke
17.50. Nisi Deus per misericordiam part^et, non haberet. qu^s per iustiti^
coronaret. August in Ps. 100.
, and acknowledge with that ancient Father, that unless God did spare in
mercy, he should find none whom he might crown in justice. It is said of
Manlius Torquatus, that when his son contrary to a martial decree, had
exceeden his course, and slain an enemy, his father, being the commander of
the service, first crowned him for his valor, and then executed him for his
disobedience. So may God deal with us, were it that he should find any thing
in us worthy to be rewarded, he should withal find more then something
deserving to be punished. Now though I the disclaim the merit of Good Works,
and cry with him that said, M^t^ (...) ^iser^ D^^m. B^d.
My men it is the Lords mercy; yet I maintain the necessity of Good Works.
For them, no man shall be saved: but without them, there is no entering into
rest. Follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.14
The way to heaven is an holy way, and the polluted shall not pass by it Isa.
35.8.
. Let us therefore cast away our transgressions ^k. 18.31
, mortify our members, that are on earth Col. 3.5.
, crucify our flesh, with the affections and lusts Gal. 5.24.
, make our ways and our works good Ier. 18.11.
, if we desire in our life to be honored, in our death to be comforted, and
at the last resurrection to be crowned. So much touching the general fruit of
Dorcas profession.

What Alms 1^.
One particular of her Good works, was Alms. Before we come to doctrine, we
must consider something of the nature of Alms. In the general nature, Alms
is a giving unto those that want; but yet not every giving, no not where there
is need, is Alms, unless it be a Giving so conditioned as the word of God
prescribes. The Giving which the Scripture warrants, to the end it may be
called an Alms, must thus be qualified: First, It must be with discretion. A
good man is merciful, etc. and will measure his affairs by judgment Psalm.
112.5
. Many a good duty is marred in the handling. Discretion respects either the
quantity which is given, or the parties to whom: For the quantity, a due
respect must be had to a man's own ability Act. 11.19.
. The Heathen fitly compares giving of Alms, or any the like communicating
o^hee, unto the reaching ^orth of ones candle, that by it another may light
his, wherein care must be had, Nihilominus v^ ^sil^eat.
that a man's own go not out. Charity is bountiful 1. Cor. 13 4.
, but not prodigal: although cases also may be in which this proportion must
be exceeded: according as the Churches of Macedonia, were ^ng beyond their
power 2. Cor. 8.3.
. But this close handed age gives no great cause to press this rule, yet it
must not be omitted. Another branch of discretion is concerning the party, to
whom. For this Giving to all without distinction, is not Alms. Blessed is the
man that judges wisely of the poor Psalm. 41.^.
. There is a generation to which a man ought not to give, unless in a case of
manifest extremity: He that works not, should not eat 2. These 3.10.
. The principal and first respect must be to the Household of Faith Gal 6 10.
, and that the bowels of the poor Saints may be comforted Philem 7. M^ri and
affectu and eff^. Bernard.
To such, a man must give both more affectionately, and more liberally. The
honest poor, the industrious poor, those that fall into poverty, not those
that make a profession of beggerie. This is discretion. Secondly, it must be
with Justice. The word which in Matthew 6. verse 1. See Beza upon that place.
is translated Alms, signifies Justice, because it is not indeed Charity,
if it do not proceed from Equity. Now I call that Justice in giving, when a
man gives of his own. Cast thy bread, etc. Eccl. 11.1.
. I the Lord love judgment: but I hate robbery for burnt offering Isa. 61 8.
: as when men suppose to make a kind of satisfaction for a great deal of
unjust getting, by some largess to the poor. Thirdly, it must be with
compassion: ( as if ye were also afflicted, etc. 2. Heb. 13 3.
). This is that which is called Tender-heartednesse Ephesians 4 31.
, and, a pouring out of the soul to the hungry Isa. 58.10.
. Fourthly, It must be with cheerfulness. God loves a cheerful giver 2.
Co^. 9.7. Beneficentia on beneuolentia ^anare deb^. Affectus tuus n^men imponit
operi t^o Amb. ^ffi^s 1^.^0.
. Well doing must proceed from well-willing: Such as is the affection, such is
the action. Fifthly, It must be with simplicity Romans 12.8. Danda benefi^ (...)
^randa. ^nt.
. It is done in simplicity, when the approouing of our selves unto God is the
principal scope. Alms must be given, not put out to use. The most of that wh^
I have now said touching this Giving Charity, is comprehended in a certain
device or representative picture which I read of, of late, In the Sermon of R.
M. upon. Gen 18.32.
wherein Charity is po^tra^ed in the likeness of a naked child, with a
mer^ie countenance, covered in a lo^d, with a bloody heart in the hand, giving
honey to a Be without wings. First, a child, because the charitable must be
humble as a Child Math. 18.4.
. Secondly, naked, Charity seeks not her own 1. Cor. 13.5.
. Thirdly, looking merrily: Charity reioiceth in the truth Verse. 6.
. Fourthly, covered with a cloud. Charity hunteth not for applause. The right
hand must not know what the left hand does Math 6 3.
. Fifthly, A heart in the hand: Charity is no dissembler; the heart and hand
do agree. Sixthly, It gives honey to a Be without wings. It helps not the
droane, but the Be; not the ideler, but the labourer, whom God has disabled
to be his own supply. So then this is the effect of all touching Dorcas.
She was zealous of Good Works generally; more particularly, she was a
discreet, just, compassionate, cheerful, simple-hearted Almoner. Whatsoever
she did, she did as a Disciple, according to the prescript of that holy
doctrine, wherein she was trained. Other manner of Giving then this, the word
of God could never teach her.

Now come we to the doctrine, which is thus: That, giving to the poor is a
special practice of true Christianity, which we may not neglect. The 3.
Doctrine.
Wherefore are we told of Dorcas Alms, but to bind us to the like virtue? It
is a matter which the Scripture labors to fasten to us with a threefold
cord. First, Precept: Secondly, Example: Thirdly, Benefit. The first, to
enio^ne us: the second, to direct us: the third, to encourage us. First for
Precept: Cast thy bread upon the waters, Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight Eccl. 11.1.2.
. Is not this the fast, that I have chosen, to deal thy bread to the hungry?
etc. Isa. 58.7.
. If one of thy brethren with thee be poor, etc. thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother: but thou shall open thine hand
unto him, etc. Deu. 15.7.8.
. Give to him that asks, etc. Mat. 5.4.2.
. He that has two coats, let him give to him that has none; and he that
has meat, let him do likewise Luke 3.11.
. As ye abound in every thing, in Faith, in word, etc. so see that you abound
in this grace also 2. Cor. 8.7.
. Be ready to distribute 1. Tim. 6.11
. Thus for precept. As for examples, we have the Hospitality of Abraham Genesis
18.1.
, and Lot Genesis 19.1.
, the charity of Obadiah, that kept an hundred Prophets upon his own charge
in the time of persecution under Iezabel 1. ^n. 11.4
, the bounty of Job, I was ^ies to the blind, feet to the lame Job. 19.15 16.
: I have not eat my morsels alone, etc. I have seen none perish for want of
clothing: the lomes of the poor have blessed me, because he was warmed with
the fleece of my sheep Job 31.17. etc.
. The liberality of Zacheus: The half of my goods I give to the poor Luke 19
8.
. The free heartedness of Cornelius: He gave much Alms Act. 10.^.
. The compassionatenesse of Philemon: By thee brother the bowels of the Saints
are comforted Philem. 7.
. The forwardness of Paul: Which thing (speaking of remembering the poor) I
was diligent to do Gal. 2.10.
. Above all, we have the example of examples, the practice of Christ Jesus.
Generally this is noted of him, that being rich, for our sakes he became
poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich 2. Cor. 8 9.
. Particularly, though he himself lived by contribution, yet he gave out a
share to the poor Ioh. 13.29.
. Here are examples. Now for benefit and good that follows herein: First,
we are assured, that whatsoever flesh and blood may imagine, yet that which is
given is not lost: After many days thou shall find it Eccle. 11.1.
. He that has mercy upon the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense, etc. Pro 19.17.
. The liberal person shall have plenty, etc. Pro. 11.25.
. He that sows liberally, shall reap liberally 2. Cor. 9.6.
. So that here is one good turn, a man is sure this way to be no looser,
rather he prouides a stock for himself against the time of need. Secondly,
hereby a man brings upon himself a continual blessing thorowout his whole
life. The Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble: the Lord will keep
him, and preserve him alive, he shall be blessed upon earth, etc. Psalm 41 12.
etc.
. He brings a blessing also upon his posterity. His seed enioteth the
blessing Psalm. 37.26.
. Thirdly, this is a means to bring us to the right use of our wealth. Give
alms and behold all shall be clean unto you Luke 11.41.
. It is like the advice of a Physician to help a surfeit by forbearance, so
(says Christ) you that have been given to oppression and cruelty, if you
shall repent hereof and make known the truth of your repentance by the
fruits of Charity, this will be a good medicine against greediness, and a
means to bring you to the pure use of Gods blessings. Fourthly, it is a good
pledge to a man's soul of his future inheritance. Paul calls it a good
foundation against the time to come 1. Tim. 6.19.
: not that our Salvation is built upon Alms, but the bowels of compassion in
us toward others, is (as it were) a print or stamp of the mercy of God set
upon our hearts. Thus we see how Alms g^g is recommended to us in the
Scripture. I could add the penalty annexed to the contrary. He that
stops his ear, at the cry of the poor, he shall likewise cry, and not
be heard Pro. 11.13.
: Judgment merciless to him that shows no Judgment Iam. 2.13.
. The use and exhortation solloweth.

The Use.
Be pleased I pray you to give entertainment to this point also. It deserves
to be harbored. It is the glory of a Christian, He has distributed and
given to the poor, his horn shall be exalted with honor Psalm. 112.9.
. As it deserves harbor, so we do generally need to be persuaded to open
our doors to so worthy a guest. Fruits of mercy in these days are exceeding
scarce: The contrary evils, oppression, violence, gaping over the heads of the
Poor, devouring widows houses, selling the poor for old shoes, rackings,
enhauncings, gripings, vsu^ies, immoderate takings: these things, depart not
from our streets Psalm. 55 11.
. The portion of the poor is spent away in gaming, in reuelling, in
contending, in gay clothing, in smoke, in dogs, in drinking etc. How much is
vented away by such means, by which many a poor soul might be comforted,
many a prisoner ransomed, many a decayed labourer, and industrious husbandman
restored, many a painful Student in the University maintained, many an
impouerished and spoiled Church re-endowed, many an Hospital for the sick and
aged erected, many an house of correction for the sturdie and incorrigible,
builded. I am even ashamed for our unfruitfulness: but, especially I cannot
but pity that pitiful account, which men will make, when they shall come at
the day of the great Audite, to give in their bills of expense to the Lord
Paramount, to whom for these things we must be countable. Alas, alas, how
shall men look the Lord in the face, when there shall be seen such large
sums, about vanities, about contentions at Law, about buildings, about
belly-cheere, about the furtherance of wicked pleasures, nay (perhaps) so much
to the maintenance of secret whoredoms, so much to the commuting of
punishments, so much to the keeping and shifting of unlawful issues, and so
little, so nothing, to holy uses, to the Church of Christ, and to the Saints of
Christ. Think upon it, I entreat you, and propound this virtuous woman for an
example: and as in other particulars, so remember to follow her in this: That
which you will do in this kind, put it not off until your latter end. These
her Alms, were fruits of her life course, not of her Legacies at her death.
While we have time, let us do good, etc. Gal. 6.10.
. I condemn not funeral beneficence simply: only I prefer the vital
before it. They which do nothing but by way of a testamentarie benevolence,
are rightly said to be men of good wills, but of evil deeds. Thus far of
the life of Dorcas. Now of her death, verse 37. It came to pass, in those
days, that she was sick, The second part.
and died.

I cannot speak at large of every thing I must still (as hitherto) select the
principal; and that in this part is this: The fourth Doctrine.
That even the holiest and most religious among the sons of men are subject
unto death. Dorcas, notwithstanding she was a Disciple, notwithstanding she
was zealous of Good Works, and full of Almes-deedes, yet here in those days
she sickened and was dead. This may easily be instanced by a World of
examples. Righteous Noah, faithful Abraham, zealous Lot, meek Moses,
religious David, innocent Job, painful Paul, penitent Zache, charitable
Cornelius, all the worthies of the first times, and whomsoever else the word of
God has well reported of, where are they? Are they not all dead? Do they not
all see corruption? Are they not all gone down into the slimie Valley? Have
they not long since made their bed in the dark? None of them all was able to
deliver his life from the power of the grave. How is it then true (will some
say) that Christ has destroyed death, since death has still power over Gods
Saints? I answer: Christ did not die to take away death (as yet) but to change
death: not to overthrow the being of death, but to pluck out the sting of
Death 1. Cor. 15 55
: not quite to stop up the grave, but to remove and quell the victory of the
grave. The holiest therefore do still die, but death cannot sting them, the
grave cannot triumph over them. Death in it self is the way to Hell: It is
altered to the children of grace, and become a Portall by which the soul
passes from out of the body into Heaven. Death in it self is as a Sergeant
to arrest, and to bring to judgment: but to the elect of God, it is as the
Angel which guided Peter Act 12.
, and leads them from the vale of Tears into the land of Righteousness.
Thus the Holy die, but not to damnation, for to them which are in Christ, there
is no damnation Romans 8.^.
. It is a piece of their happiness that they die: Except the wheat corn ^all
into the ground, and die, it bideth alone Ioh. 12.24.
, and, oh fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die 1. Cor.
15.35
. A fool or a child seeing a goodly cluster of grapes, thinks it pity to
put them into the press, and to deface them, but he that is wise knows that
by this means, the liquor in them is preserved, and that this timely gathering
is a means of keeping from corruption: So we think sometime, Oh, it is pity
such an one should die so soon; as one might have said of Dorcas, alas so good
a woman, so pitiful a creature can ill be spared: But God in his wisdom
knows it to be good, and if he cut of the life of good Josiah, as it were
in the middle of the stem, doubtless it is, that his eyes may not see the
evil to come 2. King. 22.20. The Use.
.

The special use I will drive this point unto, is to urge upon us all a due
meditation of our end. For surely if even the holiest die, then all must die.
If death seize even upon the house of God, where shall the ungodly and sinners
appear? 1. Pet. 4.17.18
. If Dorcas do die, surely Iezabel shall not escape: If the tender hearted
women that wept for Christ, then the stonie-hearted men, that scoffed at
Christ; if those that embalmed him, then those that buffered him: if she that
poured ointment on his head, then he that spate in his face: there is no
auoidance: It is appointed unto Men that they shall once die Heb. 9.27.
. It is heavens decree, and it cannot be revoked. And what is that to die? to
be no more? No; happy then were Cain, and Judas, and happy you, that now make
a mock of sin; but, to be still for ever either in endlesnesse of bliss,
or perpetuity of woe. What shall we then do? shall we reason as the profane,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die 1. Cor. 15.32
? God forbid: that were to be like the Devil, whose manner is to play reaxe
and to have great wrath when he has but a short time Reu 12.12.
, or shall we gull our own souls, and put far away the evil day Amos 6.3.
, and dream of many years like the Rich Fool in the Gospel Luke 12.19.
? Far be these things from us; let us rather endeavor by this to apply our
hearts to wisdom Psalm 90 12.
: and what wisdom? verily in a word, the skanning of this one point often in
our minds, Hinc ab^dum quo tr^ ^ium?
Hence I must, and whither then? like men that travel, who be no sooner come
to their lodging, but they are talking of their next Inn. The debatement of
this question in the mind would bring forth an excellent fruit, even, a care
to be assured of admission into everlasting habitation Lu^ 1^.9.
. A man would thus reason. I must remove and whither then? Hell is my desert,
how shall I escape it? Heaven is the only place, how shall I come to it: Thus
one good thought would make way for another, and lead us on by degrees to that
which we do most neglect, (the providing for the future estate.) Oh that we
were wise to understand this, and that we would consider our later end Deu.
32.29.
, or that we did conceive the happiness and sweet comfort of a prepared and
long expected end? This promised, the day of death, a godly man may say of it
when it comes, as the people triumphantly sometime spoke of the day of David's
coronation, This is the day which the Lord has made Psa. 11^.24
. The children of God whose care has been to keep themselves unspotted of
the World Iam. 1 2^.
may call death, as Jacob did the place where he came, Mahanaim, because there
the Angels met him Genesis 32.2.
, so there, those Ministering spirits which are sent forth for their good which
be heirs of life Heb. 1.14.
shall receive their souls to bear them into Abraham's bosom Luke 16.22
. Oh that Religion and godliness might be more sweet unto us, which will
bring a man such peace at the last. As for the wicked, it is not so with them
Psalm. 1.4.
. In their death they be like unto him, of whom the Prophet speaks, who did
flee from a Lion and a Bear met him Am. 5 9.
, they escape one misery, and irrecouerably fall into an other. This life has
(it may be) afflicted them with rods, but death shall come upon them with
scorpions. God shall shut them from his tabernacle and not suffer them to come
near the land of the living. Oh that we could make have to break of our
sins Dan. 4.24.
by repentance, which will bring so much woe at the last. This is the use.
Dorcas is dead, the holiest must die: if holiness must yield, profanenes
cannot stand out, whither holy or profane all must die, and come to judgment.
Let him that is holy be holy still Reu 22.11.
, and hold fast that none may take his crown Reu 3.11.
. Let him that is profane, I will not say be profane still, but let him cast
away his transgressions, for why will ye die oh house of Israel ^e. 18 31.
Nullus penitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Cy^r ad Demetrium.
Non Job, non Daniel, non Noe, rogare ^ssunt, etc. Hiero.
? Yet there is hope, but if we be once stepped over the threshold of death,
there is no place for repentance, no use of any Satisfaction: If Job, Noah,
Daniel should entreat for us, God would not hear us. So an end of this
admonition touching our end, which if we suffer it to die in our thoughts, we
shall surely die without comfort

FINIS.

