THE DEFENSE OF the Article: Christ descended into Hell.

With Arguments objected against the truth of the same doctrine: of one
Alexander Humes.

All which reasons are confuted, and the same doctrine clearly defended.

By Adam Hill, D. of Divinity.

Magna est veritas and praeualet.



AT LONDON

Printed for William Ponsonbie. 1592.

To the right reverend Father in God, John by the grace of God Archbishop of
Caunterburye, Adam Hill Minister of the word of God, Wishes grace, peace, and
life everlasting.
Diverse causes (most reverend Father) have moved me to present this tretise
unto your grace. The one because your grace has been charged to defend an
error, maintaining this doctrine that Christ in Soul descended into hell. The
other, for that there is like to be as great strife about the true
understanding of this Article in England, as there was in Germany about the
true meaning of (This is my body.) For the better prevention whereof, I thought
it my part though the vnwoorthiest of all the Ministers of the Church of
England, to set down in this short discourse, a plain demonstration of the
truth, and a refutation of the contrary out of Gods Book and godly
Interpreters. The last reason that has moved me to evulgate these my labors is
this: I see diverse Ministers whom for their learning and life, I do honor,
very often to preach against the true interprutation of this branche of our
Creed, whereby the Papist rejoices, the Atheist is hardened: and the common sort
of people dividing themselves as they affection. The Prechers do upon this
occasion strive more bitterly one against another, then either of both do
against our common aduersarye: and by this means turning our swords into our
own bowels, we are a pray to our enemies, and a scorn to the world. If
therefore this controuercie be not shortly by the providence of almighty God,
and your grace his ministry, decided: there will grow among us envy, strife,
sedition, and al manner of evil works. Since then as there is but one God, so
there is but one truth. My humble suit unto your grace is, that if the doctrine
contained in this book be Apostolical: It may be authorized to proceed, and
they that preach the contrary in this respect may have their mouths stopped:
for if one build and another destroy, how can our building prosper? if one
gather and another scatter, what profit will there be in our gathering? since it
is more easy to destroy and scatter, then to build or gather: Agathon said,
Every Gouerner must learn these 3. lessons, the one that they rule men, the
other that they must rule by the laws, the 3. that they shall not rule forever.
In that under her most excellent Majesty you rule men, you must use continual
care and vigilance. In that you must rule by laws, you may not for fear of
superior or multitude? for love of friends, for hatred of enemy, nor for desire
of reward, leave the laws of your Country unexecuted. In that you shall not
rule for ever, you are put in mind that you shall appear one day before the
God of order, being the Judge of the quick and of the dead, who will severely
punish you for the disorders which are in the Church of England unpunished,
except you endeavor as much as you can to reform the^. Some preach what they
please, some do what they fancy, some live as they list: and the most are
impatient of vniformyty, for some wear surpleases, and they are called, Time
seruers: some gowns, and they are like Citizens: some clokes, and they are
like trauailers: some Coats and they are like fugitives. Nazianzene says in
his oration of moderation to be used in divine matters. Confusion has
engendered thunders in the air, tremblings in the earth, shipwrackes in the
Sea, wars and strifes in Cities and houses, sickness in bodies and sins in
the soul. So that by this learned man's judgment, the air, the sea, the earth,
every house, City, body and soul, is ouerthrown by confusion. For the purest
things as the air is, it infecteth: the calmest things as the sea is, it
troubles: the strongest things as Cities are, it weakneth: the richest
things as the house is, it impouerisheth: the vnitedst things as the body is,
it serves: the holiest things as the soul is, it profaneth. God the giver of
all good gifts, give to our Church a beautiful order, that he may dwell among
us, least our puritye be turned to uncleanness: our stedfastnes to tottering:
our peace to war: our strength to weakness: our riches to poverty: our union
to civil discension: and our religion to Atheism. For the head of this
monster Confusion is the devil, the heart is envy, the ears are evil report,
the eyes are trouble and vexation, the hands are uproar and sedition, the feet
are woe and destruction. From the which God deliver my sweet country, for his
sons sake Christ Jesus. To whom with the holy ghost be all honor and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

Your graces most bounden Orator.

Adam Hill.

Christ descended into Hell.
THat Christ descended into hell, it is an article of our faith, and is to be
believed as the rest of the articles are: for it is proved by many and manifest
Scriptures, as it shall hereafter appear. The first Scripture that proves that
christ went down into hell is the 16. Psalm. 9. 10. and 11. Psalm. 16. 9. 10. 11.
verses, Wherefore my heart is glad and my tung rejoices, and my flesh also
shall rest in hope; for why thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither
suffer thy holy one to see corruption: thou shall show me the path of life, in
thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. They that deny this place to prove the descending of Christ into
hell, say that the word Nephesh or soul, does signify the person of Christ,
and Sheol the grave. But the place it self does confute them, for as in the
11. verse he shows the resurrection of Christ and his ascension, so the 10.
contains his burial and descending into hell, from whence he did arise. Some
there be that deny that Nephesh the Hebrew word dothsignifie the soul
separated from the body, but they are reproved in the 1. of King, 17 1. King.
17. 21. 22.
ver. 21. 22. where Elias thus prays for his Hostess child: O Lord my God I
pray thee let this childs soul come unto him again, then the Lord heard the
voice of Elias, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he
revived: where Npehesh signifies thesoule separated from the body. Carleil
seeing this place to overthrow that which he goes about busily toproue, says
that this child was not dead but in a swoune: but the Son of Sirach says
otherwise, Sir. 48. 4. 5. O Elias how honorable art thou by thy wondrous
deeds, who may make his boast to be like unto thee? which have raised up the
dead from death and by the word of the most high out of the Heb. 11. 35
grave. and Paul says Heb. 11. 35. Their women receued their dead raised to
life. Both these say the child was dead therefore it is untrue that Carleil
affirms in his book fol. 144. that the child was not dead, and as the wise
man says it was a wo^derous deed, but it is no wonder to quicken one that is
in a swoun, and as Nephesh in this place does signify Pro. 23. 14.
the soul, so does it in many other places. Pro. 23. 14. Thou shall smite him
with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell. Farther yt Nephesh
signifies the Soul it is manifest by this, for ye interpreters called
Septuaginta have translated it (...) There were in times past many Heretics,
that did deny that Christ had a soul, of whom Appollinaris Athanas. de aduentu
Christi.
was one, against whom Athanasius thus writes in his book of the wholesome
coming of Christ, neither his body was left in the grave, neither his soul
was left in hell; for this the Prophet writes, Thou shall not leave my soul
in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. And a little after, for if
the Godhead had been separated from the body, and death had showed his force on
him, how could the body deprived of the immortal God show forth incorruption,
or how could the word finish his going down to hell, or arise from hell?
Epiphanius writing against the Epipha^con contra Damaer: haer: 77. Fulgent. ad
Thrasym lib. 3. Cap. 6
Heretics called Damaeritae, uses the same proof haer 77. Fulgentius ad
Thrasymundum, in his 6. Chapter thus writes concerning this matter, whose
flesh neither the divinity forsook in death, neither did it leave the soul in
hell, as the Prophet says, thou shall not leave my soul in Hell. And in his
8. Chapter alleging the 2. of the Acts, and 16. Psalm he adds these words,
there blessed Peter being lightened indeed by the holy Ghost, and made
according to the word of the Lord the light of the world, did show by the
manifest light of preaching how we should understand this place, least any man
in Christ should so understand the true flesh, that he should deny the true
soul. In this therefore the divinity of Christ did show his impossibility,
because he is present always and in all places, and after an unspeakable
manner, and was as concerning his soul in hell without sorrows, and as
concerning his body lay in the Sepulcher without corruption: for he neither
was absent from his flesh, when he did not suffer his soul to be grieved in
Hell: neither did he leave his soul in hell, when he kept his flesh in the
grave without corruption. But most plain of all others Ciril de vera fide, ad
Theodosium Imper. cap. 13. To descend into hell is a miraculous thing.
is Ciril, who in his book of the true faith to Theodosius the Emperor thus
writes, it is not lawful to say that the flesh coupled to the Godhead could
be subject to the corruption at any time, and yt divine soul to be holden
within the gates of hell: for he was not left in hell as S. Peter says. For we
may not say that that nature which cannot be subdued by death, that is the
deitye of the only begotten Son should return from those dens under
earth, neither should this thing have any miracle, unless the Son of God by
the efficacy and nature of the divinity had tarried in hell fulfilling all
things marueilouslye and above the reach of reason, and working in all things
(for God is above measure, place, circumscription and magnitude) he himself is
comprehended of none. This also is wonderful that his body rose again being
corruptible by nature, and his soul being united to the Godhead by the virtue
and power of the Godhead did appear to the souls that were there. In these
places Ciril, Fulgentius, and Athanasius do prove yt Christ had a true body
and a true soul, and to prove that he was a true man in respect both of body
and soul, they allege this text of the 16 Psalm out of S. Peter. If then
Nephosh does not signify the soul, the reasons of those learned Fathers were
of no validitye. And for this cause in the interlineall gloss you shall read
this interpretation, animam quam haheo vt verus homo. My soul which I have as
a true man. And thus M. Hutchinson in his most learned woork of the Image of
God, uses this Scripture against the Arrians, to prove that Christ had a true
soul. As then Athanasius, Epiphanius, Fulgentius, and Hutchinson with all the
rest of the ancient fathers do understand Nephesh here to be the Soul, even
so do I with them, seeing no reason why I should believe otherwise. Peter
Martyr in the 1. Cor. 15. Petrus Mar tir in 1. Cor 15.
teaches us a doubtful place of Scripture must be interpreted: First says
he, it must be conferred with the like places of Scripture: Secondly we must
see what the Fathers especially of the Greek Church, which day and night did
exercise this book of God in their hands and conferred it with all the books
they could, do write of it. So have I done in handling this place: First I
have proved by the word of God that Nephesh signifies ye soul separate from
the body: Secondly by the Greek Fathers, who translated it (...) Mat. 10. 24.
which signifies the soul. Mat. 10. 28. Fear ye not them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the Soul: but fear him that has power to cast
both body and soul into hell, As Nephesh signifies the soul, so Sheol does
in the 16. Psalm signify Hell: this phrase of Scripture Psalm. 86. 13.
is in other Psalms as in the 86. 13. For thy mercy is great toward me, and
thou have delivered my Soul Psalm. 9. 17.
from the nethermost hell, and in the 9. Psalm verse. 17. The wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all the people that forget God. So in Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Job.
21. 13. Psalm. 30. 4. 54. 16, 138. 8. Esa. 5. 14. Ose. 13. 14. Habac. 2. 5. Mat.
11. 23. In these and many other places of Scripture it can not be denied but
Sheol signifies hell, and so does it in this place, as by Gods grace I will
prove. First Sheol com ming of Nephesh which is to ask, signifies such a place
as ne uer is satisfied, but always asks, and this is most properly hell,
which albeit it has received infinite souls, yetas it is in ye 5. of Esaias,
His mouth is always open and gapeth for more. Secondly it is translated by the
Septuaginta (...), which word fignifieth in the Scriptures hell always and
never the grave, as yon may see Mat. 11. 23. Luke. 16. 23. Apoc. 1. 18. 6. 8.
20. 13. 14. And therefore to translate (...) a grave, which signifies a place
where nothing can be seen, is a forced and false translation, for since the
holy Ghost does use it always for hell, I marvel how any man dares to
translate it grave. Theophilact translateth it Theophilact. in act. ^.
thus, Non derelinques animam meam apud orcum, Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell, using the word orcus, which can not be aptlye applied to the grave.
Draconites thus, Non tu derelinques animam meam apud tartarum, Thou, Draconit
in ps. 16.
shall not leave my Soul in hell, using the word tartarus which is a proper
word for hell, and not for the grave. Pomeranus, Westmerus, Lucas Lossius on
the 16. Psalm, and Vrbanus Rhegius in his catechism, all which were singular
learned Ministers in the Churches of Germany, are of this judgment also, and
therefore it is untrue that all the reformed Churches do deny the presentiall
descending of Christ into hell, as appears by these testimonies, and shall
more largely and evidently appear by that which follows. Aepinus
superintendent of Hambrough, being called generally Aepinus in psalm. 16.
for his incomparable knowledge in holy write the Father of divinity, writing
on the 16. Psalm, thus reproves them that translate Sheol to be the grave:
that the wicked Jews the enemies of Christ and his religion, might overthrow
the article of our faith concerning the resurrection of Christ and his
descending into hell, and that they might take away the comfort which the
church has by Christ's resurrection and his descending into hell, the Rabbis
do turn for soul, life: and for hell, the grave. Here we learn who first
devised this translation, that is the Rabbis the special enemies of Christ
and christian religion: why did they it? to take away the comfort which comes
to us by Christ's descending into hell. Felinus a learned man in the tungs
writing Felinus in Psalm. 16.
on the 16. Psalm uses these words, our faith has that Christ went into
hell indeed, and that he dyed and was buried, but neither his soul was left in
hell, neither his body was so detained in the grave, that it could corrupt. To
confirm this truth when this place of this present Psalm is brought, as Peter
and Paul brought it to prove the resurrection, the Jews mock us and say that
here David prays that he might be kept of the Lord, whom he had set before
him to be worshipped and in whom only he hoped, that he might not go down
into the sepulcher, By this learned man's judgment also it appears, that the
Jews translate Sheol to be a grave for the overthrow of Christ's resurrection.
But because the Jews do mock us for this translation of Sheol into hell, we
ought not to leave it, but rather to cleave more steadfastly unto it. And for
this cause the aforenamed Aepinus thus writes on the 16. Psalm: some Divines
there are loving overmuch Jewish fables, do embrace this translation (of Sheol
into a grave) and by their own foolishnes confirm the dreams of the Jews and
increase their error, and do make the article of descending into hell
suspected to the unskillful and weaker sort of people. This then is the opinion
of this reverend man, that whosoever uses this translation, as he discourageth
the ignorant and weak from believing, so he encreseth the old error of the
hardened Jew. Further as the same Author notes, it is more safe to translate
hell for Sheol then grave. First because a soul can not be laid in a grave
but a body: secondly because Peter and Paul have so translated it, whose
authority we ough t to reckon to be holy and inviolable, and therefore we ought
not easily to shrink away from it: thirdly because two great errors do follow
it, the one that the soul may be buried, the other that we maintain the
interpretation of the Rabbis. the enemies of the truth. Those learned men
worthy of eternal memory, which compiled the Centuries, prove that Peter and
Paul did so translate Sheol Cent. 1. li. 2. cap. 4. De doctrina, de inferno seu
loco damnatorum, inferni (...) appellationem Petrus and alij Apostoli vsurpant,
allegantes dictum psalmi, non derelinques animam meam in inferno: and postea
non derelicta est in inferno: Peter and other ye Apostles do translate (...)
hell, alleging the 16. Psalm Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, and
afterward he was not left in hell. Becon in the Sick man's salve Fol. 250.
uses these speeches, Christ after the death of the body went down in his soul
to hell, as it clearly appears by the Scriptures Fulgent ad Thrasy: li. 3.
cap. 8.
quoting the 16. Psalm and other places. Fulgentius in his 8. Chapter to
Thrasimund thus witnesses farther, it remained for the full effecting of our
redemption, that man assumpted to God should descend thither, whither man being
separate from God by the desert of sin had fallen, that is to hell, where the
soul of the sinner was wont to be punished, and to the grave where the flesh
of the sinner was wont to be corrupted: and that so notwithstanding, as
neither his flesh could corrupt in the grave, neither his Soul could be
tormented in the sorrows of hell: for his soul being free from sin was not
to be subjected to punishment, and his flesh being without sin, corruption
ought not to destroy it. Mark the reason of this learned Father: for because
man sinning had deserved to be divided, because he was willing by the gilt of
transgression to be divided from God (which can not be denied) therefore it came
to pass that the death of the sinner did produce sinful flesh to be corrupted
in ye grave, and did mancipate the soul to be tormented in hell: but that the
sinner might be freed by a free gift, it came to pass that the son of God
did suffer unjustly of sinners the death of the body, which man being a sinner
had suffered justly of the just God, and that his flesh should go down so
far as slesh wrapped in sin should come, and that the Soul of the Savior
should descend into hell where the soul of the sinner was to be tormented.
Thus the holy Martirs in times past thought of this matter, and if they had
lived in these days to see so great multitudes which profess the faith, to
deny it after a sort; no doubt they would have written more earnestly against
them. But since their works be extant, I hope they that deny this manner of
descending, will answer their reasons, which in my judgment were framed and
penned by the holy Ghost. Wherefore since Athanasius, Epiphanius, Ciril,
Aepinus, Pomeranus, Vrbanus Rhegius, Lucas Lossius, Beecon, Hutchinson and many
others, some Greek, some Latin, some old, some new writers, but especially
Peter and Paul themselves the pillars of the Church, have thus translated Sheol
to be hell, my resolution in this point is with Aepinus, let him that will hold
this opinion (that Sheol signifies the grave) I like not of it, it is grounded
upon weak, doubtful, uncertain and wrested proofs and conjectures: they that
subscribe unto it do without just and necessary proofs, rashly disagree from
the translation of our Psalter, from the plain words of the Apostles Creed,
and from the consent of the old Church, which always believed that the body
of Christ did three days rest in the grave, and his soul did descend into
hell. And this consent in this point of doctrine to be in the old and pure
Church does M. Calvin on the 16. Psalm himself confess, his words Call. in
16. Psalm.
be these: I confess (says Calvin) that the old Interpreters both Greek and
Latin have drawn those words to another meaning: that the soul of Christ
was brought from hell, but it is better to tarry in the natural simplicity of
the words, that we be not mocked of the Jews. For as much then as Calvin can
not deny that all the old Interpreters both Greek and Latin have consented in
this point of doctrine, I marvel that M, Calvin would draw it to a Jewish
interpretation. In the 10 of the Acts, ver. 43. Luke makes Act. 10. 43.
this a strong argument to prove Christ to be the Savior of the world, Because
all the Prophets did witness it. in like manner because all the Prophets and
Interpreters in the pure Church have concluded this doctrine to be true, I
doubt not but this knot of unity in verity was made by the God of peace and
spirit of truth. Farther as Sheol signifies the soul, and Sheol hell, so
(...) or sanctum signifies the body, as it may be proved out of the 1. of
Luke. ver. 35. And Luke 1. 35.
that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God
And thus does S. Augustine on August. in 16. Psalm
the 16. Psalm truly understand it; his enterpretation is this, neither
shall thou suffer my soul to be possessed in hell, neither shall thou suffer
my holy hody, whereby others are Christ's body is called holy one for 2. causes
sanctified, to see corruption. And the body of Christ is called holy for two
causes, the one because sin was never committed in it: the other because by
it all others are sanctified. And this is made plain also by the word
corruption, which can not have relation but only to the body, for as a learned
man says, death is the separation of the body from the soul, but corruption
is a resolution of the members and other parts into the earth. So Job uses
this word in his 17. Chapter Job. 17. 14.
ver. 14. I have said unto corruption, thou art my Father. Luther in Genesis ca.
21.
Luther in the 2. Chapter of Genesis thus writes: For this is singular in
Christ thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither shall thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption: for neither hell could hold his soul sleeping or
resting, neither the grave his body, that it might corrupt as Martha said of
Lazarus, Lord he stincketh, for he has been buried August. in epist. 57. ad
Dardan.
four days. The like has S. Augustine in his 57. Epistle ad Dardanum: that
was spoken of his soul which came from hell so quickly, this of his body which
could not corrupt by reason of his speedy resurrection. Not unlike has Erasm.
in 2 Act.
Erasmus on the 2. of the Acts, thus his body albeit it was laid in grave and
was without life did not corrupt but God which can not lie, brought his soul
from hell, and restored it August. in 85. Psalm.
to the body. Wherefore thus I end with S. Augustine writing on the 85. Psalm:
wherefore this is his voice in the Psalm not by any man's conjecture but by the
exposition of the Apostle, thou shall not leave my soul in hell neither shall
thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. In this discourse by the word of
God and the ancient Fathers, I have proved Absurdities following the deniing
of the descendiug of Christ into hell.
Nephesh to signify ye soul separate from the body, Sheol to signify hell,
(...) or sanctum to signify the body, and why it is so used. Therefore they
yt deny this place to prove the discending of Christ into hell, must needs
fall into these absurdeties. First that life or person must be in a grave, or
else a dead man's carkas must be accounted life or a person; both which are
absurd in divinity and philosophy. Secondly that the soul of man is in a
grave and so buried, which proves the Soul to be mortal. Thirdly that the
Greek word (...) is translated a grave which properly signifies hell, and so
occasion is given to the Atheists to think there is no hell: For (...) is
compounded of the particle a and (...), because nothing in hell can be seen:
and for this cause in the Evangelists Christ calieth hell utter darkness.
Fourthly we strengthen the error of the Jews by following their
interpretation, which was devised to take away the comfort of this article.
Fifthly it makes void all the arguments of the Fathers against Arrius
Appollinaris, and all other Heretics, which denied Christ to have a true
soul. Lastly it is an introduction to the error of the Saduces, which deny
that there is any Angel, spirit, or any soul. For if there be any, then as
Ciril notes, it was necessary that as he was Ciril. de vera fide ad Theodosin
Imperatorem. ca. 12.
in body and soul with them that then were living; so was it as necessary that
his soul should be present among ye souls, to show that he was a true man.
The falsehoode of the argument of the adversaries of this doctrine, is called
fallatia compositionis, that is, when those things are joined together, which
ought to be sundered. For they that deny this place of the 16. Psalm to prove
the descending of Christ into hell, do affirm animam and sanctum, soul and
holy one, hell and corruption to be one, whereas they are diverse, as in part I
have proved already, and shall (by Gods grace) prove more plainly out of the 2.
chapter of the Acts, where Peter interprets this place in such wise, that
credit must needs be given unto it of all Gods children. Peter's Sermon is thus,
Acts. 2. 29. 30. 31. Men and Brethren I may boldlye Act. 2. 29. 30. 31.
speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and
his sepulcher remains till this day. Therefore seeing he was a Prophet and
knew that God had sworn by an oathe, that of the fruit of his loins he would
raise up Christ concerning the flesh set him upon his throne: he knowing of
this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left
in hell, neither his flesh should see corruption: which August. in Epist 75. ad
Dardan.
words S. Augustine in his 57. epistle ad Dardanum thus expounds: of the
flesh of Christ that it was put into the Sepulcher the Gospel is manifest, but
that his soul went down into hell, the doctrine of the Apostle proves it: For
blessed Peter does prove this out of the Psalm where he shows it was
foretold of him, for why thou shall not August in epist. 99. ad Enodi.
leave my Soul in Hell, neither shall thou suffer thy holy one to see
corruption. And in his 99. Epistle ad Enodium, he has these words: quae ne
quisquam aliter sapere auderet, in actibus Apostolorum Petrus exponit. Of which
words that any man should not be so bold to think otherwise, Peter himself
expounds them: that is Nephesh, (...). 1. soul, and Sheol (...) that is
hell, and holy one, flesh. Rabbi Lebaurish.
Which interpretation who so does peruerte, no doubt he peruerteth the
meaning of the holy Ghost. Rabbi Lebaurish thus opens this text: after that
Peter declared that this could not be spoken of David himself, for that his
grave remained among them, and his body suffers corruption; he adds, for as
much as David was a prophet, and did know that God swear unto him, that Christ
should come of the fruit of his loins touching the flesh; he spoke evidently
of the resurrection of Christ, because his soul should not be left in hell,
nor his flesh see corruption: you see how S. Peter applies this sentence of
the Prophet to set forth Christ his resurrection, and in stead of this word
sanctum eius, his holy one, S. Peter has carnem eius, his flesh, ver. 31. is
not resurrection contrary to death? and what thing is death but the separation
of the body and the soul? and what other thing then can resurrection be, but a
renewing and knitting to gether again of the body and the soul. S. Peter
applying this sentence to the resurrection of Christ, does as it were point out
with his finger to the places from whence these two parts severed must be
brought again, namelye the soul from hell, for hell could not hold it, and the
body from the grave that it should not corrupt. Here it is opened that death
is a separation of the body and the soul, and that the resurrection is a
knitting of both parts together: and because Christ was a true man, and had in
him both a very body and a true soul. S. Peter shows that these two parts
were not only divided, but also where they were during the time of their
separation, and that miraculously neither the flesh did corrupt in the grave,
as all other men's do; nor the soul was left in hell, as the sinners souls
were. For albeit he was accounted amongst sinners, yet he was none. Therefore
wonderfully he came from the grave and from hell: for as every article of our
faith is an unsearchable mystery, so is this. It is miraculous that the world
was made of nothing, that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, that he was
borne of a virgin, that he should suffer and dye for the sins of the whole
world, and that at his death ye sun should be abashed, the earth tremble, the
flints cleue asimder, and the valle of the Temple rent: so in his resurrection
the rolling away of the stone, the appearing of the Angel, the arising of many
of the dead, and especially the rising of Christ himself so mightily,
naturally, speedily, and happily, was most wonderful: so his ascending into
Heaven in a cloud was in like manner to be meruailed at, and likewise his
coming into indgement shall be most wonderful: in like sort his burial and
going down to hell are wonderful Ciril. de vera fide ad Theod.
things as Cirill notes before, whose words are these neither should this
thing have had any miracle, unless ye son of God by the efficacy and nature
of the divinity had tarried in hell, fulfilling all things merueilously and
above the reach of reason, in his treatise of ye right faith to Theodosius* S.
Augustine in his book of the essence of the divinity thus says, August de
essentia diuinitatis.
he came from heaven into ye Uirgins womb, from the virgins womb, as he was
borne, he was laid in a maunger, after he had fulfilled all things, for the
which being sent by his father he came, he was fastened unto the wood of the
cross; but being taken down from the cross, according to the flesh he was
buried, but according to the Soul he descended into hell; and the third day by
the power of his diuinitye he raised his flesh out of the sepulcher, and the
40. day after his resurrection he ascended into heaven the Apostles beholding
him. For my part therefore I admit the counsel of Ambrose, who wills us in
matters of faith to believe the poor Fishermen Peter and his fellows, rather
then the subtle Sophisters, because then Peter affirms in the 2. chapter of
the Acts, that neither his soul was left in hell, neither his flesh did see
corruption; it is therefore manifest that these two parts flesh and soul are
not one, as I said before. These 3. things then would I crave of the
adversaries of this doctrine: the one where they find in the word of God the
conjunction nec to be a conjunction that coupleth and interprets: secondly
where they find in the word of God (...) for a grave: thirdlye that those
things which are separated by nec the conjunction, are one. Lylly in his Latin
grammar handling the use of coniunions, has thus taught: some are conjunctions
copulative, as et, ac, que, atque, quoque, etiam, item, itidem, cum, and tum,
and tum doubled: hither pertain they which are contrary to these, nec, neque,
neu, neue, now if nec do not couple: but as Lylly says is clear contrary,
then it must needs come to pass, that in ye 2. of the Acts, and 16. Psalm,
soul and holy one are diverse things, and that here is a plain demonstration
not only of ye separation of both parts of ye humanity, but also of the
knitting together of the same. In the 13. of the Acts ver. 27. It is Act. 13.
17.
written that they Knew him not, albeit the words of the prophet were read
every day. So now albeit we often read these words, yet we do not understand
the^, and the reason is given after in the 14. verse: Behold you despisers and
wonder and vanish away, for I work a work in your days, a work yt ye shall not
believe, though a man would declare it. So albeit the Apostles prove manifestly
the resurrection of the soul and body of Christ, yet will not they believe
that read the Scriptures very often; but deny the descending of Christ's soul,
and so likewise his resurrection: and by this means make of none effect those
Scriptures, which prove there must be a two fold resurrection in us, as there
was in Christ, a resurrection of the soul and of the Col. 3. 1.
body. In the 3. of the Colossians, ver. 1. S. Paul uses these words: If ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of the Father. Even (as says the Apostle) Christ his soul did
arise as well as his body, so must you have the resurrection of your soul,
as well as the resurrection of your body. And thereupon diverse learned men
interpreting this parcel of Scripture, have noted that there is a two fold
resurrection in us, of soul and of body, and that our bodies shall never arise
to glory, unless our souls do first arise from sin to grace. Hugo Cardinalis
in col. 3.
And therefore this is a general distinction in learned writers, when they
open this text of Scripture, that there is a double resurrection, of our
souls, and bodies: the resurrection of our souls is by the humble coming of
Christ: of our bodies by his glorious coming. And this is made manifest also
in diverse other such like places of Scripture. In the 6. chapter of the Romans
ver. 5. S. Paul thus writes, For Romans 6. 5.
if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be
to the similitude of his resurrection. Where the Apostle thus exhorts us,
that even as ye death of Christ teaches us to separate our selves both in body
and soul from sin; so the resurrection of Christ does teach us to arise from
sin both in soul and body. By these places of Scripture it is to be
considered, that as Christ did arise both in soul and body, so must we: and
therefore as Christ's resurrection is not a full resurrection, unless both
parts did arise (for otherwise he did but arise in body as we do) so these
exhortations grounded upon that doctrine are to no purpose, unless Christ's
soul did arise from hell, as well as his body from the grave: and last of all
there is no more miracle in the burial of Christ, then in any other godly
man's: which as I proved before ought to be in all the personal actions that
Christ wrought for our salvation. Thus much of the primitive place in the 16.
Psalm, as also of the deriuatiue place in the 2. of the Acts, whereby I hope I
have sufficiently proved that Christ's soul descended into hell. But yet for a
farther proof I thought it not unfit to add these that follow: Phil. 2. 5.
6. 7. 8. 9. 13. 1^
namelye in the 2. Chapter to the Phillippians, the 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
verses, Let the same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in
the form of God, thought it no robberye to be equal with God, but he made
himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was
made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto the death, even unto the death of the cross: wherefore
God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, things in
earth, and things under the earth. In which place this I conceive, yt Christ's
death was manifested in heaven, in earth, and in hell: and that the very damned
spirits did confess to the glory of God the Father, that Jesus Christ was Lord
both of heaven and the Angels, of earth and of them that dwell therein, and of
hell and the devils. But some will say, how is it possible that Ob.
the spirits which are damned should confess Christ. To this Sol.
I answer, there is the confession of our faith and of our sins, which is
proper only to the elect: there is an other confession which is called the
confession of experience, which is in the wicked and the damned. In the 5. of
Mark the legions Mark. 5-7.
of devils thus cry in ye 7. ver. What have I to do with thee Jesus the son
of the most high God? Where we see the devil is constrained to confess Jesus
Christ, and yet does rysist him. And in the 8. of Matthew the 29. verse, the
devils Mat. 8. 29.
cry, Jesus thou Son of God what have we to do with thee? art thou come
hither to torment us before the time? By which scriptures we learn that the
devils by experience of the majesty and authority of the Son of God do
confess him to have all power, and as over these, so over all hellish spirits:
and therefore did manifest his death by showing the presence of his soul in
hell. So Father Damascene Damas.
interprets this place of Scripture, the soul of Christ deified, descended
into hell; so that as to the^ which are in earth, there arose the Son of
righteousness: so likewise to them which were under earth in darkness and in the
shadow of death a light did appear: and as in earth he preached peace,
remission to the captives, sight to the blind, and was the cause of salvation
to the^ that did believe, and did vpbraid and reprove the unbelievers of
infidelitye: so did he vpbraide them that are in hell, that every knee may be
bowed unto Rob. Samu el Martyr.
him both in heaven, earth, and in hell. Robert Samuel Martyr is of this
judgment, who giving an account of his faith in the 2. volume of the monuments
of Martirs, Fol. 1206. has left this testimony: the same Christ went down to
the hels, and truly rose again ye third day and ascended into the heavens that
he might there still reign, and have dominion over al creatures: this then is
one end of christ's going down into hell, that ye infernal spirits might be
subjected to him, and Col. 2. 14. 15.
that they might confess him to be the Son of God to their endless shaine,
and everlasting glory of God the father. The like proof to this is in the
Epistle to the Collossians 2 chapter, 14. and 15. verses, He has taken away
the hand writing of ordinances which was against us, which was contrary to us,
he even took it out of the way, and fastened it to the cross, and has spoiled
the principalityes and the powers, and he has made a show of them openly, and
has triumphed over them in his own person. I translate (...) in himself, so
does Hierome, Erasmus, Stephanus, Pellicanus, Pagninus, Iunius and Tremellius,
and M. Fox with many other learned men so translate it: yet I see it otherwise
translated in some Bibles now a days, which greeueth me, for it is a false
translation, as every learned man knows. For in the Greek it is the Masculine
gen Muscul.
der, and they translate it in Latin in ye feminine gender, who^ Musculus a
very good and learned man thus reproves: there be some says he refer it to
(...) and turn it in Illa, these are persuaded it is an incommodity, if it be
said that Christ did triumph over the principalities and powers; But if all
these things be attributed to God the Father, that he did them with Christ and
in Christ, according to the order of all things going before, we may truly
read here, triumphing over them in his own person. And for this cause many
learned men do prove the descending of Christ into hell by this Eusebius. de re
sur. Christi.
place. Eusebius writing of the resurrection of our Savior, thus says: we
must know that in the self same hour wherein our Savior bowing his head gave
up the ghost, his body being left in the grave, his soul with the dignitye
went down to spoil hell. Mollerus a learned Minister of Germany, Mollet. in
psalm. 16.
in his commentaries on the 16. Psalm, has the like Christ would show his
victory over the devils in a certain sort, and would strike perpetual
terrors into them, and take away from us the fear of his tyranny. To this
agreeeth Musc. in psalm. 68.
Musculus on the 68. Psalm: This God which was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself in Christ, First desdescended into the lower parts of the earth,
then he led captivity captive, and not only we are delivered from the captivity
of Satan, sin and damnation: but also Christ triumphing over them as tirants,
has ascended above all heavens to fulfill all things. Uery aptly likewise does
Hemingius Heming.
expound this place: as by his death he conflicted with his enemy on the
cross, so by his glorious descending into hell, resurrection and ascension he
triumphed, as it is Ephesians. 4. leaving his cross lift up as a monument of his
victory. This then is an other end of Christ's descending into hell, to triumph
over the devil, to strike perpetual terrors into the^, and to deliver us from
the fear of their tyranny. I end therefore Fulg. ad Thrasim. li. 3. cap. 8.
with this worthy saying of Fulgentius to Thrasymunde in his 8. chapter, the
true humanity of the son of God, neither was wholly in the sepulcher, neither
wholly in hell; but in the Sepulcher he lay dead according to his true flesh,
but in his soul he descended into hell. In his soul he returned from hell to
the slesh which lay in the sepulcher, but in respect of his divinity, he
neither is holden in place nor lymited by bond: he was wholly in the grave with
his flesh, wholly in hell with his soul; and by this means was fully every
where Christ, because God was not separated from the humanity which he had
assumpted, which was both in soul in hell, that from hell his soul might
return a conqueresse: and was with his flesh that by reason of his speedy
resurrection it might not be corrupted. Therefore the son of God took all man
with all his infirmities without sin for us, and the same Christ was given
wholly for us: in respect of his flesh he was dead, but in respect of his soul
he descended into Hell, It is not unknown therefore that Eusebius, Fulgentius,
Mollerus, Musculus, Hemingius, with many others before by me named, being
accounted lights of the world in their time, have confirmed this article of
our faith, by this Scripture: which thing when we do likewise, we are reckoned
to be deceivers. But God who knows our hearts and intent, knows that both by
prayer and study we travel to know the truth in this controversy, and we are
assured by his holy and eternal word we stand therein. An other place we have
in Scripture to confirm our position, in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 4. verse.
9. 10. Now in that he Ephesians. 4. 9. 10
ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lowest parts
of the earth? he that descended is even the same that ascended far above all
heavens, that he might fulfill all things. For the better understanding of this
place, you must note that in the Hebrew tung there are 7. names of Hell,
Scheol, Auaddon, Bor Schachath, Bor Scheon, Tit Haijauen, Thalmaueth, Erets
Tachtiioth, Erets Tachtiioth then signifying the lowest parts of the earth,
since it is an appellation for hell, this place must needs prove manifestly the
descending of Christ into hell. For as ascend and descend are contrary, so are
heaven and the lowest parts of the earth. I will therefore proceed (by Gods
grace) in the expounding of this place, as I have done in the rest. First I will
prove by conference of Scriptures, that the lowest parts Psalm. 53. 9.
of the earth signifies hell. In the 63. Psalm and 9. verse, the Prophet thus
writes: Therefore they that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the
lowest parts of Ezekiel, 31. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
the earth. And in Ezekiel 31. verse 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. the Prophet
prophesying the destruction of the Assirians says, They shall go down into
hell, which he calls in ye chapter 3. times Ercts tachtiioth, that is the
lower parts of ye earth. The like manner of speech is in the prayer of
Manasses ver. Orat Manas. ver. 12.
12. O Lord condemn me not by reserving evil for me, neither condemn me into
the lower parts of the earth. Ambro, in epist. ad Ephe. cap. 4.
And so is this place understood by Ambrose writing on the same place, in his
exposition of the 4. chapter of the Ephesians: this man therefore coming down
from heaven into the earth, was borne a man: afterward he died and descended
into hell, from whence rising the third day, he ascended into heaven before all
mortal men above all heavens, that he might show death to be vanquished to
every creature. So August. in lib. 5. de trinitate. cap. 19. Chrisost. in cap.
4. ad Ephe. Athanasi. ibidem.
does Augustine interpret this place in his 15. book of the Trinity and 19.
chapter; and Chrisostom on the 4. chapter of the Ephesians. And Athanasius
expounding this parcel of Scripture, thus explaineth the Apostles meaning:
into what place did he descend? into hell truly, which he calls, according
to the common opinion of men, the lowest parts of the earte. For as
Chrysostom says, he went to the parts of the earth, beyond which was nothing
lower: and from thence he ascended into the heavens, then ye which nothing is
higher. And in hell as he bound the devil with the bands of his justice and
power, that he should not herafter hurt any of his members: so from heaven he
gives his Saints gifts, that they may resist the devil, and tread him under
their feet. Those men of worthy memory which com Cent. ia. li 2. ca. 4. Hiero
in ca. 4. ad Ephe.
posed the centuries do avouch ye in fimae parts terrae, that is, the lowest
parts of the earth do signify hell, and prove it out of this text, Ephesians. 4.
And for this cause Hierome in this place thus has concluded, and so do I with
Hierome: that hell is under the earth no man doubts, for he that descended in
soul into hell, ascended with body and soul into heanen. For as much then as
the learned and godly Rabbis, the Fathers both Greek and Latin, have
consented that these words do signify hell, and the circumstances of the
text do prove the same: it must needs be confessed of all godly men, that this
place does prove this article of our faith strongly, and no refutation beerof
can be made by any devise of man. For as ascend and descend are contrary, so
hell and heaven are contrary, and Christ did begin his triumph in hell, make
show of it in earth, and now having all power in heaven, earth and hell, is set
down on the right hand of God not only as a valiant conqueror that has made
his enemies his footstool, but also as a terrible judge that has condemned ye
devils, and as a glorious King that rules all creatures for ever. If any man
will not believe S. Hierome that hell is beneath, let him consider these 2.
Scriptures, the 86. Psalm. ver. 13. and Pro. 15. ver. 24. For great is thy Psalm.
^6. 13. Pro. i^. 24.
mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell.
The Hebrew phrase is Scheol Tachtiioth. The other place is; The way of life is
on high to the prudent, to avoid from hell beneath.

Now let us examine the place of S. Peter, who in his first Epistle and 3.
chapter, the 18. 19. and 20. verses says, 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19 20.
It is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing, then
for ill doing: for as much as Christ has once suffered for sins, the just
for the unjust, to bring us to God, and was killed as pertaining to the flesh,
but was quickened in the spirit: in which spirit he also went and preached to
the spirits that were in prison: which sometime had been disobedient, when the
long suffering of God was once looked for in the days of Noah, while the arc
was a preparing, wherein a few, that is to say, 8. souls were saved by the
water. For the better understanding of this place. because the word spirit is
diversely taken in the word of God, I will first set down the diverse
acceptance of the word spirit, and afterward by many uncontrollable reasons
out of the text, I will by Gods assistance confirm my assertion, that Christ
in soul descended into hell. They that know not the signification of the word
spirit, are often deceived, for sometimes 1. Cor. 5. 3.
it signifies the will and authority of a man, as in the 1. Cor. 5 ver. 3. I
truly as absent in body, but present in spirit, etc. 1. Ioh. 4. 5.
Sometimes it is taken for doctors and Prophets, 1. Ioh. 4. 5. Prove the
spirits whether they are of God or no? Sometimes Luk 24. 37.
for a Ghoast, Luke 24. 37. And they supposed that they had seen a Spirit.
Sometime for wind or breath, Ioh. 3. 8.
as Ioh. 3. 8. the wind blows where it will. Sometime for a voice or word,
1. Cor. 84. 15. I will pray with the spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 1^
I will pray with the understanding. Sometime for the 2 Cor. 3. 17
life of the Law, 2. Cor. 3. 17. Now the Lord is the life. Sometimes it is
taken for a kind of deceipte, whereby any 2 These. 2. ^.
pretends to have a spirit of revelation. 2. These. 2. 2. Be ye not troubled
neither by spirit, neither by word, nor Miche. 2. 11 Psalm. 104. 29 Pro. 25. 2^.
by letter. So is it taken in Micheas 2. 11. Sometimes it is taken for the
animal life, Psalm. 104. 29. If thou take away their spirit they dye. Sometime
for wrath. Pro. 25. and last verse. A man that refraineth not his anger, is
like a City which is broken down and without walls, Sometimes for the gifts of
the spirit, first for joy in the holy ghost. Ephe. 5. 18. But be ye filled with
the spirit. Secondly for spiritual understanding. 1. These. 5. 23. I pray God
that 1 These. 5. 23
your whole spirit soul and body may be kept blameles unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. So it is used Ephe. 2. 22. Thirdly it is used for seruencye
of zeal, sedulity Ephe. 2. 22. 1 Timothy 4. 12
and constancy. 1. Timo. 4. 12. But be thou an ensample in word, in
conversation, in love, in spirit. Fourthly it is taken for the true doctrine of
the Gospel which works effectually in our hearts by the spirit. 2. Cor. 3. 6.
which 2. Cor. 36.
has made us fit Ministers of the new testament, not of the letter, but of the
spirit. Where the letter signifies the utter preaching which touches not the
heart. Fifthly for a spiritual life. Gal. 6. 8. He that sows in the spirit,
shall in Gal. 6. 8.
the spirit reap eternal life. Sixthly it is taken for prophecy. 1. These. 5.
19. quench not the spirit. Which he interprets 1. The. 5. 19
in the verse following, despise not prophesying. It signifies sometime a
thing of nothing. Esa. 26. 18. We have Esa: 26. 18.
conceived, we have borne in pain, as though we should have brought forth
wind. Sometime for every creature that has breath, Psalm. 150. and last verse.
Let every thing Psalm. 150. 6.
that has breath praise the Lord. Sometime it signifies Ephe. 4. 4.
the divine or immortal essence of ye soul, Ephesians. 4. 4. There is Act. 7 59. Ioh
4. 24.
one spirit: and Acts 7. ver. 59. Stephen says, Lord Jesus receive my soul.
Sometime it signifies God, Ioh. 4. 24. God is a spirit. And so the word spirit
is common to the whole 3. persons. Sometime it signifies the holy Ghost, the
3. person in Trinity, whereunto is always put the Greek article. Matthew. 4. 5.
Mark 1. 12. Luke 4. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Act. 8. 29.
Mat. 4. 5. Mar. 1. 12. Luc. 4. 1. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Act. 8. 29. Because then the
word has so many significations, we must prove by the circumstances of ye
text, what is here his proper meaning. They that say that by this place is
meant Christ's preaching in the spirit in ye time of Noah, are many ways
clearly confuted. First because that mortificatus and viuificatus two contrary
particles of one tense are attributed to Christ, so that Christ being dead was
alive, and that at one time, and in respect of his humanity. Secondlye he
shows how he was dead, and how he was alive, by putting to mortificatus
carne, he was killed in the flesh, and viuificatus spiritu, he was quickened in
the spirit or in the soul: for to say Aug. epist. 99.
the Godhead was quickened is a gross error. For as Augustine says in his 99.
Epistle, it is very evident that the Lord killed as concerning the flesh went
into hell. Thirdly in his soul while he was yet dead in the body, he went
down into hell, the Greek word is (...) which word must needs be understood
of the soul of Christ, because it is a motion from us to another place, and
not of the Godhead, and therefore is used again in ye 22. verse, (...) he went
into heaven: and thus proves he the death of Christ, in the 18. verse, the
descending of Christ into hell in the 19. verse, his resurrection in the 21.
verse, and his ascending into heaven in the last verse. Fourthly, the Scripture
does straightlye join together the passion of Christ with this perfection and
preaching, so that Christ went immediately after his passion to preach to the
spirits. Neither does he divide them, as though now he did suffer and preach
long before: for the resurrection and ascension here spoken of succeeded this
passion, so did this journey and going into Hell. Fifthly the Scripture does
plainly attribute the preaching of Noah properly to the holy Ghost, and not
to ye second person, Genesis 6. 3.
as it appears Genesis 6. 3. My spirit shall not always strive with man. As all
the scripture does ascribe the doctrine and ministry of preaching to the 3.
person, and that the 3. person receives it of Christ, and does speak by the
mouth of holy Doctors, inspireth the scripture, and reproves the world or
comfort. Sixthly if the word spirit must be understood of God here, of
whom Christ is quickened as some would have it, it must needs also be
understood of the first person that he preached in hell, for the scripture
attributes the resurrection of Christ to the Father. Last of all that we heap
not to many things in an evident matter, the participle (...), which were
disobedient, does fignifie and plainly show this inobedience to be long before
this preaching: so also the word (...) in times past and all the annotation of
time following, determining and circumscribing the word (...) that is, which
were disobedient, does altogether separate the time of their incredulitye from
the time of this iourneye and preaching. For if the meaning of the enemies of
this doctrine were true, Peter would have joined this annotation of time which
the journey and preaching of Christ: and would have said being quickened in
spirit, in the which in times past, when the patience of God was looked for, in
the days of Noah when the arc was a preparing, he went and preached to the
spirits now holden in prison. But Peter joins the time of disobedience not
with the journey or preaching of Christ, but with the first incredulitye and
preaching of Noah: and on the other side knitteth together the prison with this
journey and preaching: which if he would have disioyned he would have said to
the spirits which are now in prison, but he simply said, he went and preached
to the spirits in prison, that is, which the^ were in prison, when he went and
preached unto them. This also may be added, that it is to no purpose to make
mention of a prison, or to name them the unbelieving spirits or souls of ye
old world; for Noah preached not to spirits or souls only. but to whole and
believing men, and the word (...) cannot be taken for men endewed with bodies,
for Christ proving his resurrection uses these words, Luke 24. 39. Behold my
hands and Luke 24. 39.
my feet, for it is I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones as ye see me have. It was no need also to show where these
unbelievers are, or be holden, for this both makes nothing to the matter, and
also would be understood he holding his peace: unless it was the purpose of
the Apostle to show that ye soul of Christ went down to this prison, that is
to hell: and so shows first that death parted them, as in the 2. of the Acts.
Secondly that the body Act. 2.
was in the grave, and the soul was in hell. Thirdly that it was not in hell
idle, but did manifest his death to them which believed it to be but a fable,
to reprove their incredulity, and to captive them that we should not fear
them. Fourthlye he did rise again triumphing over them in his own person.
Lastly he did ascend into heaven, and there sits Lord of heaven and of the
Angels, of earth and of the inhabitants, of hell, and of the very devils. For
the devils are of him imprisoned and chayned, that they can do no more then
he permits them. Farther where as some do affirm, that there could be no
preaching in hell, because there is no conversion: to this I answer, that this
preaching was not vocal but real, neither was there in this preaching
edification, exhortation, or consolation; but as it is said before of
Damascene, a redargution or vpbrayding of those unbelieving souls in this or
the like manner: behold ye unfaithful and broodes of the serpent, how in
season and out of season my eight preacher of free righteousues and other the
Patriarchs have often preached unto you, that there should come a blessed seed
of the woman according to ye promise made unto Adam, that both should justify
the believers, deliver and save them from the corporal and spiritual deluge,
and also that he should destroy the serpent with the unbelieving seed for
ever: but to you being incredulous that promise was a fable. But now behold (O
ye wretches) me to be exhibited of the true God, and by my passion, the head of
Satan and his unbelieving seed is broken, and the world is overcome; and on
the other side you shall be forced to know by lively experience, that the
faithful are saved. And to conclude, you now do behold me the conqueronr of
Satan and his members against your will, and to your great sorrow in soul, and
shall see me hereafter in the last judgment both in body and soul. And this
manner of speech is used in the Scripture, that a verbal preaching is Heb. 11.
4.
put for the real opperation of a thing: so Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered
unto God a better sacrifice then Cain, by the which he obtained witness that he
was righteous. God testifying of his gifts; by which faith he being Genesis 4. 4.
dead yet speaks. So Genesis 4. 4. God says unto Cain, the voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me out of the earth. Abels blood is said to cry,
while truly by his example of true faith and of the doctrine of salvation, and
of martyrdom, yet daily not verbally but really and effecttually by speaking
he teaches. Last of al, the word prison signifies hell, as we may see in the
names of hell, Cent. 1. li, 2. Cent. 1. li. 2 ca 4.
ca. 4. Now let us see the judgment of the ancient and learned Fathers on
this point, and especially of the Greek Athanasius ad Epictet. Episcop.
corinth.
Fathers. Athanasius words to Epictetus Bishop of Corinth, are cited by
Epiphanius in the heresy of the Dimerites, haer. 77. The body of Christ was
laid in the grave, when he went to preach to the spirits that were in Prison,
as Peter says, and Athanasius in his book of the incarnation Athanas. de
incarnat. verbi.
of the world has thus written. In the death of Christ, his body being carried
into the grave, his soul went into hell, the places being far a sunder: and a
little after he says, for death could not prevail on his human soul to
tie him there, neither corruption by tyranny inuading his body could show his
force on him to putrefaction, as things not well seen unto. For to think so of
him were a wicked thing; and even as Adam had a double punishment inflicted on
him for his disobedience, the one was on his body, earth thou art and to earth
thou shall return again: and so by this decree the body of the Lord departed
to the earth: the other on his soul, thou shall dye the death: heerof it
comes to pass that man is divided into two parts, and is condemned to
depart to two places: and therefore it was necessary that by the self same
judge which had made this decree, that he by himself being under the color of
a condemned man, showing himself uncondemned and sincere from sins, should
free from that sentence all believers. The like he has in his tracte against
Appollinarius of the wholesome coming of Christ, and in his Sermon against all
heresies. You see good Reader, how Athanasius a very ancient Father in the
Greek Church, showing the cause of Christ's descending into hell, proves out of
Genesis that as our body was punished by death for sin, so was our soul: and
for this cause both parts in Christ must descend, that our soul may be
delivered from hell, and our body rise to glory: For Fulgent ad Thrasim* li. 3.
ca. 7.
as Fulgentius writes in his 3. book and 7. chapter to King Thrasimunde, he
did know that God the suscepter of whole man, was wholly with his flesh in the
grave, wholly with his soul in hell, wholly in the world, wholly in heaven, wholly
in the unity of the nature in the Father of whom he came; and wholly by the
omnipotency of his divinity in all ye creatures which he made. The Apostle
keeping this unity of person does thus confirm the Church of Corinth in the
faith of the truth. For first of all I have delivered you that which I have
received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that
he was buried and rose again the third day according to the Scriptures. He
says not that the body of Christ was dead, but Christ that he might keep the
unity of the person of God and man; and that he might show the substantial
propriety of the deity and humanity. In another place he says, for although he
was crucified of infirmie, yet he lives by the power of God. Here we are
taught that the whole humanity was assumpted into the Godhead, and that death
albeit it did sunder the body and the soul, yet it it did not sunder the
Godhead from either part; and for this cause the Godhead being with the flesh
in the grave, it conld not corrupt; and the same Godhead united to the soul,
the soul could not he left in hell: but even as his body was in grave to show
him to be true man, and it rose again without corruption to show him very God:
so his soul was iu hell to show himself a true man, and it came from hell to
show Ciril. de vera fidead Theodosiu^
himself a true God, and a most glorious conqueror of al his enemies both in
earth and in hell. The like has Ciril in his treatise of the right faith to
Theodosius, the soul of Christ being coupled to his Godhead descended into
hell, and using the power of God did appear to the souls that were there. And
writing on John in his 12. book and 36. chapter; and when the time was come
that he should preach to the souls that were in hell (for he came to be Lord
of the living and of the dead) he dyed for us: and this proper passion of our
nature he willingly took on him as concerning this flesh, albeit as God he is
life naturally, that hell being spoiled he might be the first fruits of them
that fleepe, and being made the first Occumenius.
begotten of the dead, as the Scripture calls him, he might give to our
nature a return to life. And of this judgment is Oecumenius interpreting the
Scripture, Christ dyed for the unjust, not only for them which were after him,
but also for them that were before him, and therefore went down into hell. As
the death of Christ was available unto the^ that dyed before him, so the
descension of Christ into hell was profitable to them that lived before Christ,
as well as to those that lived after him. Vigilius also in his 2. book and 3.
chapter, Viglius. li. 2 ca. 3.
thus says, the flesh of Christ was not in Paradise nor in hell, but lay in
the grave without life, the soul for yt 3. days was in hell and not in the
grave, and yet we say well that out Lord Jesus Christ lay in the sepulcher but
in his only flesh: and that our Lord Jesus Christ was not left in hell, but
in his only soul: and albeit Christ is in all these and every one of these,
yet it is but one Christ, whereof one part of his humanity was so in the
grave, and another in hell, that he notwithstanding is one and wholly every
where albeit he has severally divided himself by places, and therefore we say
the Lord lay in the grave but in only flesh, and the Lord went down to hell but
in only soul. Alesius one Alesius in Euang. Ioh.
of the first reformed Ministers of Scotland, in his learned treatise upon the
Gospel of S, John, thus writes concerning this controversy; but this
encourages me that I have a manifest place and text in Peter, that Christ
preached in hell to them which in the days of Noah were unbelievers, that is,
condemned in the nethermost hell: then he alleges the place of Ephe. 4.
before by me alleged, and thereupon thus concludes, I expound therefore this
article simply: and again, I marvel what men mean, that they deny that
Christ descended into hell. Alesius did wonder that any man would deny this
article, because it has so many confirmations, and in every confirmation, in
such order as they are set in the Creed, are proved the death, descending into
hell, resurrection, and ascension of Christ together. For in the 16 Psalm he
begins with the death of Christ in the 10. verse, but in the last verse he
speaks of his resurrection and of his exaltation at the right hand of The
consent of scripture* which prove the descending* into hell. Act. 2. Ephe. 4.
God. So in the Act. 2. chap. First he speaks of the death of Christ in the
29. verse. Secondly of his burial in yt same verse; of his descending into
hell in the 13. verse, of his resurrection in the 32. verse, and of his
ascending and exaltation to glory and his giving of the holy Ghost in the 33.
verse, so in the 4. chapter of the Ephe* there is not only mention made of
Christ descending into the lowest parts of ye earth, but also it is said in
the 10. verse, that he ascended far above all heavens. And also in the 3. chap.
of the Philippians, not Phillip. 2.
only the Apostle declares the humility of Christ's death, but also sets
down his presence in hell, and that every knee did bow unto him, and every
tung did confess him to be the Lord: and thus he shows, first who was highly
exalted? he that has made himself of no reputation: from whence he was
exalted, from those that were under earth: where he was exalted, that is, far
above al heavens: and lastly, who exalted him? that is, God his Father. So in
this place Peter proves in the 18. verse the death of Christ, in the 19. verse
the descending of Christ into hell, in the 20. verse the end of his descending,
that is, to reprove them of there disobedience to the preaching of Noah: in the
21. ver. he speaks of the resurrection of Christ, in the 22. verse he ends
the ascending up into heaven unto the right hand of God, that all Angels powers
and might, might be subject unto him. In all these Scriptures the order of our
Creed being kept, and all these things plainlye proved, very great cause of
marvel is given to Alesius and many learned men, why this article should be
denied which is confirmed by the scriptures, that the death, burial,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ are confirmed: and therefore those that
deny these Scriptures to prove the descending of Christ into hell, may as well
deny the resurrection of Christ, for the resurrction being the joining of both
parts of the manhood of Christ together, cannot clearly be proved unless it
be showed from whence both parts severed came, which is proved before to be
thus, the soul of Christ from hell, and the body from the grave. Ob.
Further where it is here argued by some, why should Peter here dispute of
the spirits or souls detayned in hell, considering he exhorts to suffer
afflictions: I answer that he Sol.
might show to the faithful which then were persecuted very often to death,
that the souls do not perish with the bodies, as the soul of Christ did not
perish, when he descended into hell: but as the soul of Christ did triumph
over the devil, so shall the godly triumph over them that persecute them. But
some will say, how did Christ triumph over the devil Ob.
by descending into hell, since it was the extremest degree of his humility.
To this I reply, that every article of our 1. Tim. 19. Sol.
faith is a misterye, 1. Tim. 1. 9. Having the misterye of the faith in a pure
conscience; And therefore in all the actions of Christ's humility he showed
himself always to be a glorious God, he was borne of a poor Uirgin in a
small town, in an Inn, yea and in a Stable, he was wrapte in cloutes and
laid in a cratch; yet the Shepherds of ye feeld, the noble men of the East,
the star in the firmament, and the Angels from heaven did witness in a
merueilous sort, that he was the son of God. The birds as our Savior
says, have nestes, the foxes holes, but the Son of man has not where to lay
his head: he was called a glutton, a drunkard, a Samaritane, a friend of
Publicanes and sinners, a man possessed with a devil: his Disciples also were
very poor: but yet he gave sight to the blind, hearing to ye deaf, speech to
the dumme, cleansed the Leapars, raised the dead, commanded the winds, the
sea, yea and the very devils, In like manner, when he was humbled to the death
of the cross, albeit he was in the state of dereliction and cried my God my
God why have thou forsaken me: yet at that time the Sun was abashed, the
earth trembled, the veil of the Temple was rent, the stones claue asunder, the
dead arose yea, and upon the cross he forgiueth the thief on the right hand:
and even as in his nativity, in his life and death, he showed himself to be
both God and man, so in his descending into hell he proves the same, and in
this lowest degree of his humility as he proves himself a true man, for that
his soul was among ye souls in hell, so by triumphing over the^ he shows
himself to be a true God. And for this cause it stands well with the mystery
of our faith, that his going down to hell is both the lowest degree of his
humilitye, to show him to be a true man, and also the beginning of his endless
triumph, to prove him a glorious God, in all places and at all times, and over
all persons for ever. Some curious Ob.
body will say, what needed he to manifest his death to those Sol.
in hell? it was needful in respect of the^ yt were in hell, in respect of us
that live now, and in respect of the^ yt have preached in times past, and in
respect of Christ himself. In respect of the^ which were in hell, because that
those which would not hear the vocal preaching of Noah, should see Christ
really present in soul, and so confess that the destruction of their bodies
in the deluge, and ye damnation of their souls in hell was just. In respect of
us which live now, because that when we find by Gods word that he manifested
his death in earth and hell, we should not remain incredulous but believe in
Christ, least hearing of the wondrous works of the Son of God, which he has
wrought for us. and for our salvation both in earth and hell, and despising the
same, we feel by experience with the damned old world, that Christ was in
hell for our deliverance from hell: and denying with the reprobate Jews this
comfortable article of our faith, we be cast into those insufferable torments
of extreme damnation, from which to deliver us Christ in a marvelous manner
descended into hell. It was neednfull in respect of them which preached in
times past, for since David and other prophets have foretold of this going
down of our Savior, and that his soul should not be left in hell, it was I
say most requisite that the Scripture should be fulfilled. It was needful also
in respect of Christ himself, for he came to subdue our enemies, therefore as
David trampled on the face of Goliath, so was it meet that Christ in soul
should triumph over the devil, that he might have all power not only in Ose.
15: 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55.
heaven over Angels, or in earth over all the inhabitants thereof, but also in
hell over the devils. And for this cause as he has said, O death where is thy
sting, O hell where is thy victory? so shall all his members say: and shall
for this their wonderful and glorious deliverance from death, bell and the
devil, sing, rejoice, and give thanks for ever. Moreover, whereas diverse
Scriptures are alleged by Carleil, Vrsinus and others, that Christ descended
not into hell; I will answer them by Gods grace, and prove that it was not the
meaning of the holy Ghost to have them alleged to that purpose. The first
Scripture is that which is written in Ioh. 19. ver. 30. It is finished,
therefore Christ needed not to go down into hell: this is a false kind of
reasoning, a dicto secundum quid, ad simpliciter: for if all had been finished
then christ needed not to have dyed, nor to have shed his blood: for he was
alive when he spoke these words. Therefore these words, It is finished, are
to be referred to all the prophecyes that preceeded the death of Christ: that
is, that all the prophecies of the Jews and Gentiles which should conspire
together against him, either of Judas that should betray him, or of the
Soldiers that should apprehend him, or of ye false witnesses which should
belie him. or of the place where he should dye, or of the time when, or of the
manner how, and of the Judge under whom he should suffer, or of the
transgressors with whom he should be crucified: al scriptures concerning al
these things were fulfilled. And therefore in the 28. verse are these words.
After that Jesus did know that al things were fulfilled, and that the Scripture
might be fulfilled, he says I thirst. It is finished also, signifies the
work of our redemption was finished, and so Paul expounds it: by one
sacrifice once offered he has made perfect for ever those that are sanctified.
Therefore there needs no other sacrifice of the old law, nor no other merit
of any creature in heaven or in earth, therefore the Papists do dishonor God,
which do say they daily offer a sacrifice propitiatory: and do join to the
merits of Christ the merits of all the Saints, Mary, Peter, Paul, and many
other: and in the end of the canon of their Mass, use these words, Quorum
meritis praecibusque concedas, vt in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur
auxilio, By whose merits and prayers we pray thee grant, that we may in all
things be defended by the aid of thy protection. Farther it Luke 4. 18. Act.
10. 38*
is finished as concerning the labor and sorrow he took in the world; for he
was sent to preach the Gospel Luke ^. 18. And therefore he went about doing
good unto al. Act. 10. 38. And when he saw Jerusalem which had killed all the
Prophets and would kill him also, he wept and sorrowed: all this labor and
sorrow was finished. It is finished, also is referred to ye time that Christ
was appointed to be amongst men: It is finished, also is referred to the pains
of the body and the soul, which he suffered on the cross, which both were
finished. And last of all, it is finished, is referred to his obedience, for he
obeyed as Bernard notes gladly without spurning, simply without dissimulation,
cheerfully without grudging, speedily without tarrying, manfully without
estimation of himself, humbly without presuming, and persenerantly in life and
death without ceasing. Al these interpretations I have read and do allow off:
by which it is manifest, that whatsoever was to be done at the death of Christ
was finished. The high Priests had taken their counsel, Judas had betrayed him,
the only sacrifice was offered: all labor was ended, he was entering into rest,
all sorrow was turned into joy, the time of his humilitye was at an end, he
should shortly be exalted, the pains and sorrows of body and soul were
ended, therefore both of them must triumph over death and hell: he fulfilled
every iotte and title of the Law, and has yielded a pure, perfect and
perpetual obedience unto God his Father both in life and in death, therefore
every knee both in heaven, earth and hell, must bow and obey to him. S. Paul
says, Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding Heb* 9. 22.
of blood there is no forgiveness of sins. If all had been finished when
Christ said it is finished, then there needed no 1. Ioh. 1. 7*
shedding of blood, which as John says, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. purges us from all our
sins Therefore this is my resolution with Ferus on this Psalm, there remained
many things to be Ferus in psalm.
fulfilled as yet: namelye his death, the opening of his side, his burial, the
destruction of hell, which also were foretold in the Scriptures: but because
they were now in the work of consumation, therefore he says it is finished.
And a little after, there remained also ye resurrection, ascension of Christ,
and sending of the holy Ghost, but these things pertayne to his victory, not
to his sight, and they are rewards for his fight, not labors. Moreover as ye
read in the birth of Christ, Mat. 1. 22. All this was done that the Scripture
Mat. 1. 22.
might be fulfilled: So likewise something was to be fulfilled in his
ascension, Ephe. 4. 10. He that descended is Ephe. 4. 10.
even the same that ascended far above all heavens, to fulfill all things. So
some things are to be fulfilled in the general judgment, for Paul says, 1.
Cor. 15. 5. 4. then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, O
death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory? And therefore Ferus well
says in the same place, that our salvation is finished spe non re, in hope not
in deed. For Christ did say all things were finished, in such sort as the
Lamb, is said to be flaine from the beginning of the world, not because he
was then manifestly slain, but because the killing of Christ was cast forward
even unto Adam the first man, and was spread backward even unto the
consummation of the world: and thus our salvation is finished not fullye in
deed but in hope. This is to be proved by a plain scripture, and so I will
end; Ioh. 17. 4. Christ says, I have glorified thee on earth, I Ioh. 17. 4.
have finished the work which thou gave me to do. As in this Scripture the
word I have finished, signifies the work to be in finishing, so does it in
19. of John. There is alleged also a place of out of the 2. of the Hebrews and
39. verse: For as much then as the Children were partakers Heb. 3. 39.
of flesh and blood, he also himself took part with them, that he might
destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is the devil. Out
of this place they thus argue: Christ by his death destroyed the devil,
therefore his descending into hell was needless, In this argument is fallacia
aidicto secundum quid ad simpliciter: for it is not meant that the devil is
already destroyed, but that he might be destroyed. For this we read Apoc. 12.
12. Woe to the Apoc. 12. 12.
inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the devil is come down to you,
which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. And in the
Epistle of Jude Inde, 6,
the 6. verse, The Angels which kept not their first estate but left their own
habitation, he has reserved iu everlasting chains unto darkness unto the
judgment of the great day. Therefore S. Paul prays, that we may tread down
Satan under our feet. Romans 16. 20. And in Romans 16. 20
an other place he says, that he is a spirit which now works Ephe. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26
in the children of disobedience. Ephe. 22. in the 2. of Tim. 2. 26. he says,
The wicked are taken in the 2. Cor. 2* 4*
snare of the devil, and holden at his will. In the 2. Cor. 2. 4. he
affirms, That the God of this world has blinded the eyes of the infidels*
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ which is the image of God
should 1. Pet. 5. 6.
not shine unto them. In the. 1. Pet. 5, 6. The devil is a roaring Lion, going
about seeking whom he may devour. Apoc. 12. ^* 10.
In the Revelation 12. 9. 10. verse, the devil is called a dragon, an old
Serpent, Satan, that is a tempter and an accuser. All which phrases show, that
albeit the devil has nothing to do in Christ, yet he snareth, blinds and
deuoureth the wicked: he accuses, slaundereth and tempts Orig.
the godly. Origin says in the person of almighty God, if my servant Job had
not been holy and a worthy man and one that pleased me well, thou would
never have enuyed him: thou have not enuyed Esau, nor Ismael, thou will not
envy Saul or Achitophel, or Doeg, or any of them which have fulfilled thy
perverse will: but thou have from the beginning of the world enuyed all my
servants and Saints, as Abel, Joseph, and now Job himself, and al other
calling on me sincerely. It is manifest therefore that the devil reigns in
the wicked, and assaulteth always the godly. Therefore the utter destruction of
our euemies shall be in the general judgment, now they are destroyed in hope,
then in deed, now they are destroyed in fieri, the^ in facto esse. This is
proved 1 Cor. 15. 1^ Petrus Mar* ibidem.
by S. Paul 1. Cor. 15. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.
Upon which place Peter Martyr shows who are our enemies, 1. the devil, 2.
sin, 3. all the miseries of this life, 4. death: death is vanquished but not
wholly taken away, and again death is unarmed but not extinguished. For albeit
they are not felt, yet they are as a Serpent without poison, and as a Be
without a sting: this he manifests by a prittie similitude. As poison first
infecteth the* veins, 2, the blood, 3. the members, and last of all the heart:
so the Devil and all our enemies are by little and little daily subdued, but
in the day of judgment shall be utterly conquered and cast down for ever, so
that every Saint shall sing: O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy
victory? the Scriptures as Musculus notes, Muscuius.
writing on this place, sometime speaks in the preterperfect tense, sometime
in the present tense, sometime in the future tense: therefore Christ both has
abolished, does abolish, and will abolish death: he has abolished death by
dying for our sins, not that it should be no more, but that it should no more
destroy the faithful: he does abolish it while he does translate his Saints
from death to life; and he will abolish death for ever in the end of the
world. For then shall that saying be fulfilled, Apoc. 21. 4. There shall be no
more death. As by all that has been spoken it is manifest; that Apoc. 21. 4.
the death of Christ does not take away the judgment wherein all our enemies
shall be for ever and utterly overthrow; so it does not take away his
descending into hell, whereby he struck a terror into the devil and all the
hellish Spirits. Therefore as Bude says, then shall there be no contention of
death, which now is, and makes us to sigh for our defect, for the mutability
of things, for the frailtye of man's flesh: temptations strive with us daily,
pleasures strive with us daily, and although we consent not yet are we troubled
by resisting pleasures: the enemy dies not but in the resurrection of the
dead. By all these reasons it is manifest, the Devil is chayned but not cast
out utterly, that the gilt of sin is taken away, but the matter remains:
that as we have many sorrows in this life,so we have greater comfortes, that
death albeit he is unarmed, yet his neck is not broken, and so the destroying
of death does no more take away the descending into hell, then it does the
resurrection* ascenfion, and coming of Christ unto judgment: All which must
needs be in our Savior, to the utter and everlasting overthrow of our enemies.
An other Scripture which they allege is the saying of Christ to the thief on
the cross, Luke 22. 43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Heerupon
Luc. 22. 43.
they frame this argument, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, therefore
the soul of Christ and of the thief went both that day to heaven. They that
so conclude are deceived in two things, the one is, in that they imagine this
word me, to signify the soul of Christ, which signifies the Godhead: the
other in that they take this word to day, to signify the space of 12. or 24.
hours, which indeed signifies for ever: both these shall be strengthened by
Gods grace with proofs. First the circumstances of the place do prove these
things most euidentlye. For what does the thief ask? deliverance from the
gilte of sin, from the curse of the law, from the wrath of God, from the
terrors of death from the torments of hell* and the tirannye of of the devil.
He asks not only forgiveness of his sins, but that he may be a new creature,
that the righteousness of God may be given him, that he may have the adoption
and liberty of Gods children, and so after his death glory, honor, peace and
immortality, that is, familiarity with God; he asks to be an heir with God,
and a joint heir with Christ for ever. In one word he asks a kingdom pure
Mar. 2. 7.
in righteousness, perfect in peace, perpetual in joy. Who can forgive sins
but God only? Mar. 2. 7. Who can give this kingdom but God? and therefore these
words with me signify the Godhead and not the soul of Christ, as some (...)
have it. And so all the Fathers that ever I read understood Hierome in Luc.
22. 43.
it, and the new writers also. Hierome on these words writes thus, Christ
brought the thief from the cross into Paradise, least any man should think
conversion to be too late at any time, he made the punishment of homicide,
martyr dome, the truth being accounted among the wicked: he left the one on the
left hand, and took the other on the right hand, as he will do in the day of
judgment. Where I note that Christ did on the cross, as he will do in the
day of judgment: that is, separate the bad from the good, and cast the wicked
into hell: which is the office of the Godhead, Psalm. 7. 11. God judges the
righteous, and him that contemns God Psalm. 7. 11.
every day. And in the 2. Tim. 4. 8. From hence forth is 2. Tim. 4. 8.
laid up for me the crown of righteousness which the lord the righteous judge
shall give me at that day, and not to me only. but to all them also that love
his appearing. Augustine has ye like saying also upon this place, the cross
Aug. in Luc 22. 24.
if you mark it was the judgment seat, the Judge was set on the middle, the
one thief which believed was delivered, the other which blasphemed was
condemned. To save and condemn is the office of God, and therefore must needs
be understood of the Godhead. So says Ambrose in his Sermon Ambro.
of the holy thief, he saw him hanging on the cross, and prays to him as
though he were sitting in heaven, he sees him condemned and yet he prays to
him as to a king. So Ferus on the 27. of Mat. Thou shall be with me which Ferus
in Mat. 27.
am every where, which am all in all. To be with me therefore is not spoken of
the soul of Christ but of the Godhead. Damascene says, to speak more
expressly he was in the Damasc:
Sepulcre according to his body, and in hell according to his soul; but as God
he was both in Paradise with ye thief, and in the throne with the Father and
the holy Ghost. And as with me signifies the Godhead, so to day fignifieth for
ever. For (as Aristotle notes in his Metaphisicks) in aeternis non est tempus.
In eternal things there is no time: for time is the measure of those things
which are subject to motion: now in hell all shall suffer, in earth all must
labor, so in heaven all must rest. Apoc. 12. 13. Blessed are the dead Apoc.
12. 13.
which dye in the Lord, even so says. the Spirit: for they rest from their
labors and their woorks follow the^. For where no mutation is, there is no
time, and for this cause Apoc. 10. 6. it is said, And he swear by him that
lives Apoc. 10. 6.
for evermore, which created the heavens, and the things that therein are, and
the earth and the things that therein are, and the Sea, and the things which
therein are, that time should be no more. Therefore to day signifies not a
natural or artificial day (for if there be days in heaven, there be weeks,
months, years, and all manner of changes, which is absurd) but to day
signifies for ever, as I will prove by many Scriptures. First in the 2. Psalm.
7. verse, Psalm. 2. 7.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. even so Act. 13. 32. 33.
verses, And we declare unto you, that Act. 13. 32. 33.
touching the promise made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled it in us their
children, in that he raised up Jesus even as it is written in the 2. Psalm,
thou art my son this day have I begotten thee. Here the Apostle proving
Christ to be everlasting alleges these words, thou art my son this day
have I begotten thee. And in the epistle to the Heb. 1. 5. proving Christ to be
higher then the Angels, Heb. 15.
and from everlasting, he says. For to which of the Angels said he, thou art
my son, this day begat I thee? And most plainly Heb. 5. 6. Proving that
Christ lived for Heb. 5. 6.
ever, but the Priests of the Leuiticall order dyed, he proves the eternity of
Christ thus: So likewise Christ took not to himself this honor to be made a
high priest, but he that said unto him thou art my son this day begat I
thee, gave it him. He also in another place speaks, Thou art an high Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Here the Apostle proving Christ to be
an everlasting Priest, and to give eternal redemption, uses this word to
day, which signifies for ever, as it is manifest in the 6. ver, By these
reasons therefore it is proved, that with me, signifies with the Godhead, 1. By
the petition of the thief, for he asked the kingdom of heaven: 2. By that
which was forgiven him, his sins: 3. By that which was given him, that was
glory: 4. By the place where it was given him, that was paradise. 5. By the
time for how long it was given him that is for ever: Lastly by the person that
gives it, that is Christ, who being everlasting as I proved before, forgiueth
infinite sins, gives grace always in his everlasting kingdom and in all
eternity for ever. And of this judgment is S. Augustine, who answering the
like objection Aug.
of the adversaries of this doctrine in his time, this has left in writing:
there is an other meaning also much more free from all ambiguities, if it be
taken to be spoken not in respect that he is man, but in respect that he is
God, to day thou shall be with me in paradise: for the man Christ was in
respect of his flesh in the grave that day, in respect of his soul in hell:
and the same Christ was God every where and at all times. The last place that
is alleged by ye gainsayers of this doctrine, is the last speech which Christ
used Luke 23. 46.
upon the cross. Luc. 23. 46. Into thy hands O Father I commend my spirit.
Out of which place they thus conclude, that the soul of Christ was committed
to his Father in heaven, therefore it went not to hell: which is a false
consequence. For they imagine here that the hands of God signifies heaven,
which cannot be proved out of this place. For this scripture being a deriuatiue
place out of the 31 Psalm and 5. verse, teaches us this: that as the soul of
David being the figure of Christ, did not immediately after this prayer go to
heaven, but was guided by the hand and government of the Lord in all manner of
perils: so it does not follow that the soul of Christ being committed into
the hands of the father (for these words are spoken in respect of the manhood
of Christ) should pass immediately into heaven: but should so be guided by the
Godhead, that it should pass through death and hell mightily without
resistance, naturally with out assistance, speedily without tarying, and
happily without any returning: But for the better understanding of this place,
you must note how many ways this word, (the hand of the Lord) is taken in the
holy book of God: that when we see the diverse acceptance of the word, we may
take that sense which most fitteth this Scripture. First the hand of God
signifies the Son of God, Psalm. 144. 7. Send thy hand Psalm. 144. 7. Psalm.
136. 6.
from above: 2. For his power, Psalm. 136. 6. In a mighty hand and out stretched
arm: 3. The bountifulnes of God, Psalm. 145. 16. Thou openest thy hand, and
fillest with Psalm. 145. 16
thy blessing every living creature: 4. It signifies consolation. Ezekiel. 3. 22.
The hand of the Lord was with me Ezekiel. 3. 22. Psa. 118. 16
comforting me: Sometime it signifies grace. Psalm. 118. 16. The right hand of
the Lord has done valiantly. Sometime it signifies the gift of prophecye,
Ezekiel. 8. 1. Ezekiel. 8. 1.
The hand of the Lord fell there upon me. Sometimes it signifies mercy. Psalm.
37. 24, Though he fall he shall not Psalm. 37. 24.
be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Sometime it signifies the
protection of the Lord. Psalm, 31. 15. my Psalm. 31. 15.
times are in thy hand. Sometime it sigifieth the aid of the Nehe. 2. 8. Psalm.
74. 12.
Lord, Nehe. 2. 8. And the king gave me according to the good hand of my God
upon me. And in ye 74. Psalm. ver. 11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand? Sometime it
signifies Job. 19. 21.
ye punishment of the Lord. Job. 19. 21. Have pity on me, have pity on me,
aye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me. It signifies also the
creation, Psalm. Psa. 102. 25
102. 25. The heavens are the works of thy hands. Last Psalm. 95. 4.
of all it signifies his government, Psalm. 95. 4. In his hands are al ye
corners of the earth. Christ therefore commending his soul into the hands of
the Father, teaches us when we are dying or in any affliction which is
grievous, we must commit our souls to the power, consolation, mercy,
protection, aid, and government of the Lord. For this being a deriuatiue place,
is taken out of the 31. Psalm. and 5. ver. Therefore as the soul of David did
not immediately after go to heaven, so did not the soul of Christ. For if he
went up immediately, then Christ did ascend before he did descend, which is
contrary to the Scriptures in many places. In the Ephe. 4. Ephe. 4. 9.
9. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into
the lowest parts of the earth? But if the soul of Christ went into heaven
before he was buried, or descended into hell, as the gainsayers of the doctrine
stoutly affirm, then he ascended before he descended, which is contrary to
this Scripture: therefore good Reader mark these circumstances, 1. Who must
descend: that is Christ. 2. Whether? into the lowest parts of the earth, which
I have proved before to be hell: for as ascend and descend are contrary, so is
heaven and hell. 3. When must he descend? first before he ascend. And thus as
many learned men before Eras. in 4. ad Ephe.
named have understood this place, so does Erasmus writing on the fourth
Chapter of the Ephe. certainlye this is the thing that the Palsmists by the
inspiration of the holy ghost spoke of so long ago; for Christ having already
conquered the hell, is ascended alive again into the high kingdom of his
Father. And a little after he adds, after most low humbling follows most
high aduauncing; from the most high heavens, then the which nothing is higher,
he dejected himself even into the hell, the which nothing is lower. When Mare
Magdalene came to Christ, Ioh. 20. 17. Christ says Ioh. 20. 17.
to her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but to go to my
brethren, and say unto them, Iascend unto my Father and to your Father, and to
my God and your God. Here the truth it self says, he had not yet ascended
into heaven: whosoever therefore affirms the contrary, affirms an untruth.
They will answer Christ was not ascended in respect of his body: but I reply,
if Christ's soul being the principal part of the humanitye had been in
heaven, as they imagine, then this speech is untrue: mark my reason, for in
death when both parts are sundered, a man is said to be where his soul is,
and not where his body is: for the man takes his name of the principal part.
In this forte Christ says, Mat. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East and West,
and shall sit with Abraham, Mat. 8. 11.
Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. Here you see because the souls
of those Patriarchs are in heaven, they themselves are said to be in heaven.
Even so if Christ's soul were in heaven, Christ was in heaven, and then this
saying can not be verefied, I have not yet ascended to my Father, for Christ
ascended visibly, and for this cause wills Mary to go tell his brethren,
whom he calls to this action as witnesses. For as the time of his ascending
is noted to be forty days after his resurrection, and the place to be
Bethaniel and that on a mountain, that it might the more esily be seen, and ye
manner of his going to be marvelous for he was carried up in a cloud: so his
faithful Disciples and glorious Angels were witnesses of his triumphant
ascension into heaven. Out of these Scriptures this I conclude, as Christ was
borne but once. dyed but once, was buried but once: so he did but once descend
into hell, once arise from the dead, and once ascended into heaven, and but
once shall come into judgment. But if the soul of Christ went presently into
heaven, the^ not only this absurdity follows that he ascended before he
descended, but also that there are two ascendings of Christ into heaven: the
one invisible of his soul, the other visible of his body. Ignatius who died in
the year of our Lord 112. (For he was cast to beasts to be devoured) this
Father living in the time of Policarpus, who was Scholar to John Evangelist,
in his Epistle to the Ignat. epist. ad eccles. Trallis. Athanas. in Symbolo.
Church of Trallis thus writes; Christ descended into hell alone, but he
ascended with a multitude. Athanasius in his Creed says, who suffered for our
salvation and descended into hell: and interpreting the 2. Cor. 6. he says
Satan was enuyous against our Savior, for he killed him not knowing it would
be against himself: for Christ after his cross, going down into hell has
vanquished death, and because he knew no sin he could not be holden of death:
so says Ambrose Ambro. in Gal. 3.
in his exposition on the 3: Chap. of the Galathians, for when they thought yt
he should be slain that he might not teach, they profited nothing, for his
doctrine increased, and he euacuated death in his passion, for descending into
hell he delivered mankind: for that cause he suffered himself to be murdered,
knowing that he was for us against the Devil. And the same Father writing on
the 1. Tim. 2. chap. thus confirms this doctrine: because man now reconciled
to God was subject to infernal death, that he could not ascend to God to whom
he was reconciled, our Savior to bring his will to effect, suffered himself
to dye against law, that descending into hell, he might condemn death for the
impiety it wrought on him: taking away from death those which he hid hold,
that from henceforth whatsoever had the sign thereof, should not be detayned
therewith; of which thing he showed a testimony, when he arose. Therefore to
end these words, into (thy hands I commend my spirit) do not show us the
state of Christ's soul, but shows us how we must pray in all our
tribulations, and in the hour of death. For the soul of Christ no doubt was
in hell: but this consider, that spirit here signifies the soul, which in
S. Peter they will in no wise confess. Farther where it is objected Ob.
that Cyprian says, it is left out of the Creed of the Roman and oriental
Church; I answer, that is not Cyprians Sol.
work, for in that treatise is mention made of the Arryans, who began their
error under Constantine the great, in the year 320. But Cyprian was put to
death under Valerian in the year of our Lord God 249. Therefore Ciprian being
dead almost an hundred years before that heresy spra^g up, could not write of
Arrians: for Cyprian is of my opinion, as it shall appear by this yt follows.
For in his sermon Cypria. de ascensu Chr.
of the ascending of Christ into heaven, he utters his judgment thus: Christ
did once descend into hell, and goes down into hell no more, they shall not see
God no more on the cross, nor those that are damned in hell. And in other
places he proves the descension of Christ into hell by the 16. Psalm, and by
the text of the 1. Pet. 3. Chapter before by me alleged, which here I omit
for breuities sake. It is farther This is Car leils argument.
objected that this article is left out of the Nicene creed, true it is: so
Athanasius creed lacks the burial. Hieroms ad Damas. lacks it also,
Tertullian leaves out in his Creed the catholic Church, the resurrection of
the flesh, and life everlasting. Cirill makes mention only of the trynity, and
leaves out all the rest of the articles, therefore this is the answer: ab
authoritate humana negative non valet argumentum. It is no good reasoning from
the authority of man negatiuely. Seeing then that this article is proved by
many and manifest Scriptures, and by the general consent of the pure and
primitive Church, to believe it is safety, to deny it peruersely is infidelity.
Last of all because it has been confidently avouched, that all the reformed
Churches beyond the Seas allow not this doctrine, I will therefore here
reprove that allegation as most false and untrue, First as before I have proved
that Aepnius, Luther, and the authors of the Centuries confirm this doctrine,
so here I will Pomera. in Psalm. 16.
add to them Pomeranus, who travailed much in the reformation of the Churches
of Germany, who thus in his exposition of the 16. Psalm has left to eternal
memory: Christ not only dyed, but he would also for a little season, that is
until the third day, descend into the darkness of hell, where is the image of
death, and as Job says everlasting horror without any order, and a little
after, for this cause did Christ dye and go down into hell, that thou
should not go thither: so that as they shall return from death, so he
would redeem them from hell, that he might abolish al thy death, by his death,
and that thou may rest in the hope of the glorious resurrection, as all the
Fathers in the seed of Abraham that is Christ. In which faith whosoever dyed,
are said to be received into the bosom of Abraham. For in the faith of Abraham
and of the blessing which should come by Christ, they did rest, and they do
rest to arise with us. All others did dye in desperation and do dye daily
being holden in horrible death, until the everlasting fire shall come upon
them by the last sentence. Aretius a professor of divinity in Areti. in
probemat part. 2.
Berna, approves this doctrine in his Problemes the 2. part: and sets down
it was necessary that Christ should descend into hell for 3. causes: 1. For the
reprobates sake, that it might be known to them that he was come already, whom
they had heard should come so often, but they had despised it greatly: to
these therefore it was necessary that Christ should be known by virtue of
spirit. 2. It was meet also he should be manifested unto Satan, that he might
know the same Christ whom he had tempted in the desarte, and whom by the fraud
of the Jews he had put to death, the same was the Messiah and the seed of the
woman promised. This I say was expedient to be made known to the very devils
in the bottom of hell. 3. It was expedient in respect of the elect, that
Satan might know that he should have no power over the bodies of the Saints
whom he will raise Hiperi. li. 3. de method. diuinitat.
to life everlasting hereafter. Hyperius a man endewed with most excellent
gifts of learning, in his 3. book of his method of diuinitye, writing de
Ecclesia, thus says: as Christ when he was dead and buried and descended into
hell, then he did cheefely conquer death and hell: so the Church does most
increase and multiply, when it seems to be destroyed and extinguished. Pet.
Mar in artic. (...)
Peter Martyr who travailed in this our realm in the most famous university
of Oxford, in planting the Gospelll, in his exposition on the articles of the
faith, thus has left his judgment: the soul of Christ after it departed
from the body remained not idle, but descended into hell. For Denmark we have
Hemingius: for Scotland, Alesius: for Berna, Aretius: for Mapurge, Hipperius:
for Argentorat, Peter Martyr: for Hambrough, Aepnius: and for other parts of
Germany, Luther, Siluerer, Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Vrbanus Rhegius, Musculus,
and the authors of the Centuries, whose works be worthy both of eternal
memory and credit. And for our Realm of England, we have the Catechism of M.
Nowell, a man whom those that know not his face, do love and honor for his
great travails he has bestowed in the Church of God, but Nowel in catechis.
especially for the setting forth of that Catechism for the unity of
doctrine, which is the band of perfection. In which Catechism he has
delivered these words: as Christ in his body descended into the bowels of the
earth, so his soul being severed from his body he descended into hell. And as
this was the judgment of that reverend Father, so was it no doubt the judgment
of the Synod of learned men assembled together in the convocation house at
that time, which was Anno Domini, 1571. who by an iuiunction there made took
this order, that no other Catechism in this Realm should be taught. Which
iniunction if it had been kept, we should not have so many sects in our
Church as we now have, to the great dishonor of God, the joy of our endless
adversaries the Papists, and the bitter grief of all the good Ministers of
this Land. The articles also of the Synod of London in ye time of King Edward
the 6. in ye year of our Lord God 1552* published by the Kings authority
approve Artyc. Syn. Land. tempore Eduardi. 6.
this doctrine: amongst which articles it is thus written; as Christ is dead
and buried for us, so is it also to be believed that he descended into hell:
for his body lay in the grave until his resurrection, and his soul separated
from his body was with the spirits which were detained in prison or hell, and
preached to the^, as witnesses the place of Peter, which I have before
alleged. But because now the judgment of boys is more esteemed then of
reverend Fathers, and every singular schismatique is more esteemed, then a
whole Synod of chosen and expert men in diuinitye. Hereof it comes to
pass, that whatsoever has been most gladlye and learnedly proved by M.
Nowell, and approved by our couuocations, is accounted error: and whatsoever
every fantastical spirit does utter without study rashlye, and without fear
of God presumptuously, is accounted truth, as though it had been merely
reueiled unto them from heaven. For what a rashness and presumption is this, to
say all reformed Churches are of their opinion, whereas the contrary does
appear by their own writings to ye great glory of God, and to the no less
great shame of them, which in the Pulpits affirm most impudently, that all
reformed Churches beyond the seas are of their judgment. But to lie is an
usual thing to all Martinists, as their books in other things can witness
against them as well as in this behalf. To conclude, not only most of the
reformed Churches beyond the Seas approve this doctrine, but even the very
Infidels have acknowledged Aug. de ciuitate dei li. 18. ca. 23.
it. For Sybilla thus prophesied of Christ as Augustine witnesses in his 18.
book of the City of God, the 23. chapter: he shall come into the hands of
Infidels, and they shall strike him with their filthy hands, and with their
unclean mouth shall cast on him their poisoned spittles, he shall give simply
his holy back to strips, and receiving buffets shall hold his peace: for his
meat they gave him gall, for his thirste vinegar, showing this table of
inhospitality: for thou being a foolish nation did not understand thy God
delighting in men's souls, but did crown him with thorns, and did give
him bitter gall. But the veil of the Temple shall be rent, and at noone it
shall be dark for 3. hours: and he dying for three days shall sleep, and
then returning from hell shall come into the clear light, being the first
that showed the beginning of the resurrection. The same verses of Sibilla are
repeated by the same Augustine in a sermon which he August. li. contra Iud.
Pap. and. Arri ca. 16. and 17
writes to those that are catechized, against the Jews, Pagans, and Arrians,
in the 16. Chapter, and in the 17. Chapter of the same book, where he thus
reasons: albeit O ye enuyous Jews ye do with a shameless face say to
Christ, Ioh. 8. 13. Thou do bear witness of thy self, and thy witness is not
true. Yet that the truth of the Majesty of God may apeare, besides so many
excellent consents of witnesses, every creture has seemed to give testimony to
christ their creator. Did not the heaven give witues, when as a new Star in
the new generation of a man did as it were with his tung or hand point, to God
was born a man for all nations? did not the sea give testimony to him, when
forgetting her self after a sort, the liquide humor soliditye being received,
carried the lively steps of their Lord? that it might be fulfilled which is
written Psa. 77. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the deep waters.
When the servant of Christ being wise about himself, that they might show
what difference is between the creature, and the creator, the water had
swallowed up Peter in the floods, unless the Lord of all things had reached
him his hand, being ready to be drowned: did not the earth give him testimonye,
when being mingled with his spittle, he anointing with it the eyes of the
borne blind, restored light to him that saw not? and by his woorkemanship like
an Artificer he repaired that which he had not out of the dyrte of the earth,
which made all men out of the earth before? did not things under earth give
testimony unto Christ, when leesing their right they yielded up Lazarus whole,
whom they had taken to be corrupted, and kept him 4. days, yt they might
render him safe when they heard the voice of the Lord commanding? and in the
end thus concludes, O Iudaei, daemones qui corda vestra possiderunt, dixerunt,
scimus qui sis, quid venisti ante tempus perdere nos? the devils which have
possessed your hearts have said, We know who thou art, why come thou before
thy time to destroy us? Mark. 1. 24 Even as the heaven, the sea, the earth,
things under earth, and the devils did confess him to be the Son of God in
this life, so in his death, as the same Father notes, the heaven was darkened,
the earth did move, the veil of the Temple is rent, the stones did cleave
asunder, the graves are opened, the devils at the presence of Christ do
tremble, and every devil in hell confesses Jesus Christ to be the Lord, to
the glory of God the father, Phil. 2. 10. 1^.
Phil. 2. 10. If then we be led by the word of God as we should be, then I
hope I have sufficientlye proved this article by the blessed word of God, if
Fathers, al, both greek and Latin teach this doctrine to be true. If we esteem
the judgments of the Ministers of the reformed Churches, if the adversaries of
this doctrine have one to stand in their side, we have five on ours: if we
reverence the authority of the Synod or convocation of England, they allow
this ascertion. If we honor reverend antiquity, this doctrine is most
ancient: for it has been delivered not only of late by Nowell, Beecon, Fox,
Hutchinson, Lamier, Peter Martyr, Hipperius, Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Aepnius
and Luther: But in times past by Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, Cyprian,
Fulgentius, Vigilius, Oecumenius, Atha nasius, Epiphanius, Cyrill, Ignatius:
Yea it is delivered by Peter and Paul themselves, and this antiquity joined
with verity is very strong as Cyprian says. All these before named with
infinite others, which for breuities sake I omit, were the devout faithful
learned and zealous defenders of Gods faith, and for this cause were hated,
reviled, persecuted or murdered. And besides all these not only Zacharye,
David, and Esau foretold of this descending into hell, but as you have heard
before, Sybilla being a Prophitesse of the Heathen. And as S, Augustine truly
notes, not only the creatures in heaven, in earth, and in the graves, but also
the very devils have confessed it; which those that are possessed with devils,
as the Jews, Seruetus, and Carleil do deny stubbornlye without relenting,
and desperately without repenting, and obstinately without ceasing,
notwithstanding all those honorable witnesses of Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
and Fathers before by me alleged. Joshua said to Ios. 24. 15.
the Israelites, Ios. 24. 15. And if it seem evil to serve the Lord, choose
you this day whom you will serve, but I and my household will serve the Lord. So
let others believe as they list, I and all those that believe my doctrine, will
believe this article literally as it lies, and as we believe the rest. For if
hell here should be taken metaphorically as some will have it, so may you
allegorise the whole creed as do the Heretics, and so overthrow the whole
substance of our faith. Besides no hell being in our Creed, men will not
believe there is any hell at all, as do the greatest part of the world, as
their blasphemous mouths and abominable lives declare the same every where.
Wherefore I exhort Aug. ad Euodium Epist. 99.
all men with S. Augustine in this sort, epist. 99. ad Euodium, therefore let
us hold most firmelye which our faith has, being confirmed with most grounded
authority, that Christ dyed and was buried and rose again the 3. day, and
all other things which are written of him: amongst which also this one is, that
he was in hell. And again, who but an infidel will deny Christ to have been in
hell? but because I know the Papists does rejoice to see this schism in the
Church of England, therefore let them well understand that Hierome ad August.
Epist. 9.
it has always been so, and so will be unto the worlds end. Theophilus
called Epiphanius an archheretique. Hierom thus writes to S. Augustine in his
9. Epistle, in thy Epistle I have judged somethings to be heriticall. And
Augustine to Hierome writes thus, take upon you the severity of a Christian to
correct and amend your work and to recant. Bonifacius said that Augustine
and other Bishops Clemens Alexand. stromatum li. 7.
of Africa were inspired with the devil, Clemens Alexandrinus. stromatum li. 7.
says, that the Gentiles did thus vpbraid the Christians, ye Christians
disagree among your selves, and you have sects, and albeit all do challenge
unto themselves the title of christianity, yet one of you does curse and
condemn the other. Wherefore your religion is not good, nor came from God: as
the Gentiles did vpbraide the Christians, so now the Papists the Protestants,
saying as Chrisost. in Act hom. ^.
the heathen did say in Chrisostoms time, in Act. homil. 3. the Gentile comes
and says I would gladly be a Christian, but I know not to whom I may cleave,
what opinion I may choose, or what I may prefer: all say, I say the truth. But
as that was no lawful excuse for the heathen in those days, no more is it for
our Papists now in these days: but rather because we have enemies on every
side, they ought to believe that we are the tossed ship of Christ's Church, and
we are the soldiers of our Captain Jesus, which must fight against all
Heretics and schismatiques: we are the pure Corn that are so wynowed, and
the pure gold yt are so tried in the furnace of tribulation, we are in the
house builded upon the rock, who though beaten with the roaring waves of
heresies, or with the turbulent winds of temptations, or with the stormy
tempests of persecutions, yet we stand and the Papists do fall, and therefore
they should strive to come unto us. As Moses refused the kingdom of Egypt for
the rebuke of the Children of God, so should they refuse the damned security of
the papish Synagogue, to enter into this tossed and militant Church, where
great troubles cause great prayer, and great prayer causes a great calm, and
a great admiration of Christ's power is caused by the great calm, and great
admiration causes great thanksgiving for ever. But what is the cause of these
schisms in ye Church? Leo in Epiphania ser. 6. shows the same; the Devil is
grieved with the calling of the Gentiles, and is vexed with the daily ruin
and destruction of his power: sorrowing therefore that he is forsaken and the
true king is woorshipped of all men, he lays snares, and raises discentions.
As here, so in the 13. of Matthew you may learn who is the author of schisms,
Satan: where does he sow this wicked seed? in the feelde and Church of the
Lord: how does he sow it? he turns himself into an Angel of light, and so
do his ministers, alleging the word of God contrary to the meaning of the
holy Ghost: why does he raise discentions? because he sees himself forsaken
and Christ worshipped: when does he sow schisms? while the servants slept.
The sleeping therefore of the Ministers is an occasion that schisms are not
only sown, but are rooted and do grow Chrysostom. in Gal. 3.
and fructify. For this cause says Chrysostom in Gal. 3. are we made
laughing stocks to the Jews and the Gentiles, while the Church is divided
into a thousand parts? our slothfulnes then causes 2. great evils in the
Church of God, that is schisms to grow, and our selves to be scorned at.
Ciprian in his 40. Epistle thus writes, there is one God, and Cypria. Epist. 4.
one Christ, and one Church: an other alter to be made and set up, or a new
preesthoode to be made it is impossible: whosoever geathereth elsewhere,
scatters. It is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacriligious, whatsoever is
instituted by man's fury to the breach of Gods divine disposition: get ye from
the contagion of such men, and flee from their speeches as a cancker and
pestilence, our Lord having premonished and warned before hand, they are blind
leaders of ye blind: where this good Martyr wills us to keep verity in
unity. Hiler. li. ad Constantiu^ Augustum.
And so does Hillary li. ad Constantium Augustum, perilous and miserable it
is, that there are now so many faithes as wills, and so many doctrines as
manners, whiles either faithes are so written as we will, or as we will have
understood. And whereas according to one God, and one Lord, and one baptism,
there is also one faith: we fall away from that which is the only faith, and
whiles more faithes be made they begin to come to that, that there is none at
all. For we know that since the Synod of the Nicene assembly there is nothing
else written but the faith, but while there is contention about the words, and
question of novelties, and while there is occasion of doubts, while there is
complainte of the authors, while there is strife about studies, while there is
a difficulty in one consent, while one begins to cry anathema to another,
almost no body belongs to Christ Jesus. Labor therefore for unity in the
faith, stop the mouths of them that preach falsehoode and lies, and that
will descant one our faith, and bring in as Hillary says new faiths either in
word or understanding; let not one hold of Paul, and another of Peter, but
let us all hold of Jesus Christ, let us have one mouth, mind and faith; then
whatsoever is planted or watered by us, God will increase it: then the Jew by
our schisms shall not be hardened, the Papists shall not be made glad, the
weak shall not be discouraged, the strong shall not be weakened, then it will be
good and joyful for us as blessed brethren to dwell together in perfect unity;
then our house shall stand, our City shall flourishe, our kingdom shall be
invincible, and against our Church the gates of hell shall not prevail for
ever. To all people in general which are not Ministers, this counsel I give
with Paul, to be wise unto sobriety, and that they read the Scriptures of God
not to be authors or arbettours of controversies, but to increase their faith,
confirm their hope, and to inflame their charity, and to imitate the virtues
of the godly: as the chastity of Joseph, the humility of Moses, the zeal of
David, the wisdom of Solomon, the patience of Job, the obedience of Noami,
the repentance of Paul, the renouncing of the world with the apostles. Let them
specially note those places, that breed the hatred of sin, fear of Gods
judgments, and delight in spiritual cogitations. Let not this disorder
continue amongst us, that the wives teach their husbands, Children their
parents, fools wisemen, Hierom ad Paulinum. cap. 6.
the Scholars their Masters, the sheep their pastor, the people their
preacher. Hierome complained in his time in his book to Paulinus the 6.
Chapter, that whereas no man presumed in any occupation to teach that they
never learned, only says he the art of Scripture is that which every man
challenges: this the chatting old wise, this the doting old man, this the
brabling Sophister, this on every hand men presume to teach before they learn
it. And again some with poise of lofty words, devise of Scripture, matters
among women, othersome (fie upon it) learn of women what to teach men, and
least that be not enough, by facilitye of tung, or rather audacity teach that
to others, which they understand never a whit themselves: to say nothing of
such as he of my faculty. Who stepping from secular learning to holy
Scriptures, and able to tickle the ears of the multitude with a smoothe tale,
think all they speak to be the Law of God. In Hieromes time this malady of
arrogancye and presumption Nazians. orat: de moderatione in reb, diui.
in divine matters was grievous, but now it is almost incurable. Nazianzene in
an Oration of his concerning the moderation to be used in diuiue matters thus
writes: order says he has made and bound together al things, order
preserves earthly and heavenly things, order is to be kept in those things
that are endewed with reason and a soul, there is an order in those things
that are subject to our senses, there is order in the Angels, there is order in
the moving of the Stars, their greatness, their mutual relation and
brightness; there is order in the times of the year, coming and going aptly
and distinctly, and mitigating the as: perity of the extremes by the moderate
quality of the middle times: there is order in the Elements whereof our bodies
are made: order has made the firmament roune, has unfolded the air, poured
out the liquid nature and gathered it into one place, and sends out the
winds, but not to the destruction of man has he sent them: order has bound
the waters in the Clouds but does not hold them there, but scatters them
comely and equally upon the face of all the earth. A little after he adds,
order distinguished us from brute beasts, made laws, gives honor to virtue,
punishment to vice, invented arts, made marriages, and by earnest love toward
our Children begotten, brought us from the rude life to humanity, and that
which is greater the^ this terrene and carnal love, it fasteneth in our mind
the love of God. For order is the father and safety of all things. Even so)
says this divine writer) order has appointed in Churches yt some should be
Sheep, some pastors, some shouldrule, others should be under and obey rule, one
is an head, another is a foot, another an hand, another eyes, another some
other member of ye body, to the concynnitie and beauty of the church and to the
vtility both of ye subjects and rulers. And even as in our bodies, though the
members be not abrupt or distracted, one from an other, but all that heap is
one body made of diverse members: yet there is not one force or facultye of all,
although otherwise for the necessity of benevolence and concord, and for the
like reason in their unlike offices al members are equally made others help.
For neither the eye does go but shows the way, neither the foot does see
but goes and changes places; neither the tung does hear, for that is the
office of the ears: neither the ear does speak, for that is the function of
the tung; and the nostrell is the organe of those things that are smelled, but
the throat tastes meat, and the hand is the instruement of giving and
receiving: but the mind rules all, from whence truly the power of sense does
come, and whether all the senses do go and are referred. In like manner
stands the case with us, that is with the common body of Christ: we are all
one body in Christ, and every one of us are Christ's, and all of us members
together. Some have dominion and rule, some obey and are ruled: and albeit
there is not the same action of both, unless a man will say it is all one to
rule and to obey, yet both of them are made and joined together in ye same
Christ. and again as among them that are under, there is found a great
difference, for they differ one from another in learning and experience,
exercise and age: so there is no small difference also among the rulers: and
since the spirits of the prophets are subject to the Prophets, as Paul himself
does affirm. 1. Cor. 14. 32. There is no cause why any man should doubt of
it. For he says Ephe. 4. 11. He gave some to be Apostles, secondly Prophets,
thirdly pastors and doctors: first for the truth, secondly for a shadow and
obscurithy, last of all for the measure and action of divine vtilitye and
illumination. And the spirit is one truly, but the graces are diverse, even
as the conceptacles of the spirit are not alike. For. 1. Cor. 12. 8. To one is
given the spirit of wisdom and speculation, to another the word of
knowledge and reuealation, to another a sure and undoubted faith, to an other
workinges of high miracles, to another the gifts of healings opitulations,
that is defenses patrocinices and gouerments, that is castigation of the flesh,
languages, interpretations of tungs: to some more excellent gifts, to others
inferior gifts according to the quality and proportion of their faith. This
order my brethren let us reverence, defend and observe: let one be an ear,
let another be a tung, an other some other thing: let one teach, another
learn, an other woork with his own hands that he may have to give to the
needy: let one rule and govern the people, let another by his dutiful
ministry obtain the praise of justice: he that teaches let him teach in
modesty, for let two or three Prophets speak and that by course, and let one
interpret, and if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the
first hold his peace. 1. Cor. 1^. 29. 30. He that learneth in obedience, he
that gives in redines, he that ministers in cheerfulnes. Let us not all use
the function of the tung, which is most ready and prompt in all: for we be not
all Apostles, we be not al prophets, we be not al interpreters. For albeit it
is an honorable thing to talk of God, yet is it more honorable to keep our
selves pure unto God. It is a great and worthy thing to be a teacher, I hear
thee: but it is with out danger to be a learner. Why do thou being a Sheep
take upon thee the office of a Pastor? Why do thou being a foot, take upon
thee to be a head? why do thou being a Soldier take upon thee to be a
leader of an army? why do thou seek for those great, but doubtful and
dangerous gains of the sea, while thou may keep thy self in safety in the
land, albeit with less gain? If thou be a man according unto Christ, and have
thy senses exercised, and do shine in the bright light of knowledge, go to
speak the wiseof God, I say that wisdom which is preached among the perfect,
and which is hidden in mystery, and that in such sort at length, as if thou
shall get a fit opportunitye, and have it committed to thy faith. For what have
thou of thy self, that thou have not received it? but if thou be tender of
age, or of a base or abject mind, or of weaker strength then that thou art
able to wade in higher matters, follow the Corinthians, be content with milk.
Why do thou desire strong meat, which thy members for weakness can not
consume and turn into nourishment? tell me if thou have any thing better then
silence? therefore where it is better to hold thy peace then to speak, be
silent. And a little after he says, if thou do resemble Moses in virtues,
enter also into the Cloud it self, and speak to God and hear his voice, and
promulgate the Law: if thou also be Aaron, ascend together truly, but stand
without the Cloud, somewhat nigh. But if thou be Ithamar or Eleazar, or some
third from Moses, of the order of the Senators, and of their number, stand
farther off and be content with the third place. But if thou be a lay man or of
the basest sort, let the hill it self keep thee back, which also if any beast
touch, he shall be stoned: tarry beneath and hear the voice only, and that
after thou have purified thy self, and that I may more plentifully instruct
thee, who did consecrate the Priest? Moses. Who was the first that was
consecrated? Aaron, who did care for the things that pertained unto God, who
was in steed of the voice? Moreover in the holy places, who might enter but
one, and that not ever but once a year. Heb. 9. Who might carry the arc but
the Leuytes? 1. Leuit. 15. And they as they were appointed, for some were of a
high office, some of a lower as every one was worthy, and because that ought
to be kept, it was appointed also, who should keep it every way: for some
should keep one side, some an other side, neither should any thing remain
indistincted or disordered in their smallest matters. Mark good Reader, what
is ye conclusion of this sweet discourse, for it touches most neerelye our
disordered Martinists, but we if we have gotten a little glory and excellency
of name, and have learned two or three words of Scripture, not often but by
chance, and these unskillfully and ill couched together; by and by we furiously
rebel against Moses, and follow the importune contumelye and impiety of
Dathan and Abiram: whose contumelye I beceech you let us flee, and let us flee
their madness, least we be overthrown with the same punishments. Nazianzene
affirms that order is beautiful in natural things in sensible and in
reasonable, but more beautiful in houses, Cities and commonweals, but most
beautiful in the house and Church of God. For God is not the God of confusion
but of order. 1. Cor. 14. 33. And for this cause all things in the Church must
be done in order. 1, Cor. 14. 40. Take away 1. Cor. 14. 33. 1. Cor 14. 40.
order from natural things, all things would come to annihilation, take away
order from men and we become brutish: but take away order from Christian men,
and they become very devils. In these last and dangerous times like beasts
void of reason we despise government, and like devils that have come out of the
horrible pit of shameless confusion, we overthrow all the orders which are
established in the Church of England. Obedience by the word of God is a
sacrifice, but we hold it to be a superstitious yoke. S. Paul says we should
obey, not for fear of wrath but for conscience: but now a days they are
accounted the holiest men, which have no conscience, and do stubbornlye resist
all the orders of the Church, and desperately continue in their confused
disobedience, every man will be a head, no man a foot, every man a tung, no
man a ear: S. James says we should be slow to speak and swift to hear: but
we have perverted his words in our deeds, and are slow to hear and swifte to
speak against Prince and Ministers. And even as the Donatists wrote against
Augustine in his time, and the Catharoi against Ciprian in his time, and as the
Pharasies withstoode our Savior and his Apostles in their time: so are the
Martinistes now bent against the Church of God and Ministers in our time. For
as their heart is full of envy, so their tung is as keen as a rasour, as sharp
as a Sword, as hot as coals, asvenymous as vipers, and as they are swift to
speak, without number, weight or measure of their words, so are they slow to
hear: for they will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never of
wiselye. Of these men Gregory Nazianzene in the place before quoted says very
well: it is a shame truly when thou do embrace not magnificence but
baseness in thy apparel and diet, and to pretend humilitye in the hardness of
thy knees, in thy fastings and watchings, and in the asperitye of thy bed being
laid in the ground, and in thy labors, and in all manner of pyning and
subduing thy body: and to challenge to thy self a principalitye and tirannye
in divine disputations, neither to yield to any man, but to advance your self
above the Preachers of the Law, where humility has not only glory but also
securitye. What then? will some of them which are of a hot spirit object:
do thou by this Oration forbid to talk of God? what shall we talk off? or
how think Ob.
you of this place? his praise shall ever be in his mouth. Psalm. 33. I will
bless the Lord always. Psalm. 29. My throat shall meditate on his truth, and
behold I have not forbid my lips: and so will bring many testimonies
meditated and quoted to that purpose. To whom I answer gentlye and Sol.
without bitterness of mind, that hereby we may teach also the moderation of
the mind. I do not exhort a wise man to silence. but I study to fear thee
from stubborn contention: neither do I bid thee to suppress or hide the
truth, but I forbid thee that thou teach not besides Law. For I my self do
profess my self to be a chief man among them which praise wisdom and
learning, and either do spend or desire to spend their times in holy Sermons
and sacred studies, and God grant that I never be turned aways from this
business, least of wisdom it self I be pronounced a wretch and an unhappy
man, because I have despised learning and wisdom. In the mean season I avoid
the excess and do bridle the insatiable desire of man and am so minded, that
if I could not avoid both faults and keep a mediocrity, I had leyffer be too
slow then a busy body, or too fearful rather then too bold or rash. He
adds shortly after, hold fast those words, in the which thou have been
instructed in thy infancy, commit the care of reasoning and disputation to the
learned: it is enough for thee to hold fast the foundation, let a wise master
builder build upon it: it is sufficient for thee to strengthen thy heart with
bread, leave dainty dishes to the rich and wealthye. No sober or wise man will
accuse thee if thou furnish not thy supper with liberal and bountiful fare.
But if thou will not set bread, or give a cup of water to the Disciple of
Christ. Mat. 10. Or to any other when thou art able, then art thon justly and
worthily condemned also. Be not swift in thy words says the wise man. Eccle.
5. And being poor compare not thy self with the rich, and affect not to be
wiser the^ the wise. It is a point of wisdom to know thy self, and not to be
immoderately proud: and so to be affected as the voices who when they are
strained too high, by reason of the immoderatio^ they do altogether faint. Thus
this auntie^t father persuaded the people of God to a moderation in his time,
that knowledge might not make them proud: for pride is the cause of
singularitye, singularitye breeds schisms, schisms disorder, disorder
confusion. God says in the 4. Ephe. that he has made us Pastors and Doctors:
hereby it is manifest that we are not the ordering or appointment of man, nor
of angel, but of God himself. How dare every man then being scarce skillful in
his own mystery, take upon him our office being in dignety the highest, in
labors the painefullest, in disposing the wisest, and in abusing the most
dangerous function of the world. Meat is common unto all, but none can
dress it so well as Cooks: Cloth is common unto all, but none know good and
bad cloth so well as the Cloth maker: a sword is necessary, but none can use
it so well, as a skillful master of defense: so yt word of God is to be read
of all, but the desciding of controversies pertain to the learned ministers.
If the unlearned attempt to do this, with the good meat of the word of God
they may surfeyte, and taking this swoorde by the point foolishlye, when they
should discreetely take hold by the hyltes, they may hurt themselves
unrecoverably. For languishing about questions, 1. Tim. 4. They are ever
learning and never coming to knowledge. 2. Tim. 3. 7. And as Peter says, 2.
Pet. 3. 16. Being unlearned and unstable pervert the Scriptures to their own
damnation. The Lord grant we may read the Scriptures to our edification and
amendment of life. And touching the unsearchable mysteries of our faith, to
believe them without questioning or doubting. For as Athanasius Athana. de in
carnat: verbi.
says in his Book of the incarnation of the word, to teach all things exactly
few men can, but to keep the faith all men are bound. To the adversaries of
this doctrine, I say with Gregory Nazianzene in the place so often alleged;
and peradventure some of us (which is lamentable) do not understand, how of
God comes every good cogitation, word and action, and not only of good men,
but also almost of all men, who being slow Judges of our own affairs, yet
notwithstanding in other men's matters we speedilye take a sharp censure, and
rather we impute great faults to others, then small to our selves: and albeit
they themselves are more rude and unlearned then we are, yet rather will they
lay upon us the fault of impiety, then to accuse their own ignorance. This I
know will be my reward for this work, which the knower of all hearts knows
I have compiled for his glory, and for the unity of the Church. I shall rather
be judged of adversaries impious, and with me Fox, Beecon, Nowell, Martyr, and
all the Fathers before alleged, then they will account themselves ignorant.
Therefore to stay their rash judgment, Gregory thus counsaileth them; Greg.
If thou burn in such an immoderate and insatiable desire of disputation, that
thou can not stay or repress thy disease, meditate those things, be
conversant in these things, pour out thy ambition on these things wherein is
no danger: and if thou refuse this and cannot bridle thy tung, nor break or
suppress the violence of thy mind, but thou mindest to rage and to be mad,
and wilt not give place to the angels, and wilt arise higher then it is for thy
profit: at the least command thy self this, that thou condemn not thy
brother, but rather show here a token of humility; here to thy no detriment
prefer thy brother before thee, where to condemn and despise thy brother, is
nothing else but to eiect and cast him out from Christ and only hope, and to
root out the secret wheat, wheat better then thy self with the cockle. This I
say is Nazianzenes Counsel, and not only his but Paul's. Romans 14. 10. And
Christ's counsel, Luke 6. 37. If the counsel Romans 14. 10 Luke 6. 37.
of these cannot stay rash censuring, but some as they have boasted will
answer this treatise, and that within fourteen days: if they will leave
lying to the Papists, railing to scoldes jesting to Stagers, and cursed
speaking to the Devil; I will be the man which by the aid of my God will be
ready with all moderation to answer them, and that in such time also, as I hope
they shall have no just cause to complain of any slacknes. The almighty God the
giver of all grace so lighten us in the reading of his word, that we may
understand it, and so understand it, that we may love it; and so love it, that
we may keep it; and so keep the word, that we may keep the faith: and
steadfastly believe that Christ was borne for our purification, taught us for
our edification, dyed for Calvin defide. ca. 7.
our purgation, was buried for our mortification, descended into hell for our
reconciliation, rose again for our justification, and ascended into heaueu for
our sanctification, and shall come again in power for our glorification, and
therefore blessing, glory, wisdom, thanke-sgiuing, honor, might and power, be
ascribed unto our God for ever. Amen.

THis Sermon being preached at Chippingham in Wiltesse, the 28. of February
1589. And delivered up in writing to M. Wisdom Minister: was answered by one
Alexander Huns Schoolemaister of Bath, whose answer wholly follows, with a
replye of the Author, whereby the truth of this controversy does more plainly
appeer.

The reply of Adam Hill Minister, to an answer made by Alexander Humes, to a
Sermon preached at Chippenham* in Wiltes the 28. day of February, 1589. of the
descending of Christ into Hell.
Humes. Sectio prima.
IT fell out upon some occasions, that I was with a friend not far from
Chippenham, the day before you preached there. As I was preparing to return,
word came to my friend that you had certified M. Chalfoult of your intent the
day following, to defend that which he had spoken against M. Wisdom that day
sennight before, concerning the descension of Christ into hell: wherefore my
friend wrought me to stay, to hear what could be said for a matter, that both
he and I did think to have no great probability. I did so, and it repents
me not, for there I heard some thing which otherwise I might not have thought
upon. And I was strengthened in the truth, because I proved that which I many
times heard, that wit and eloquence was not able to shake it. Wherefore I have
not thought it amiss to write these few lines unto you, either to win you to
us, or to win some better reasons from you, to bring me to you. I am not
married to mine opinion, but if any man can bring me better proof, I am content
to yield. I hope the same of you, for you told me so in the pulpit, where the
tongue should wait upon the heart, and speak his affections. As yet your reasons
confirmed me and the rest of mine opinion, rather then confuted us.

Hill.
In the entrance of your answer, you have told two untruths upon untrue
report. The one, that I certified M. Chalfoult of mine intent, which is not so,
for neither by messenger nor letter did I ever send to M. Chalfoult. The other
is, where you avouch that I would make an Apology of M. Chalfoults sayings
against M. Wisdom, which God knows was never my meaning: for first, I never
knew what he had said in that controversy, till the morning I preached.
Secondly, I did always love and honor M. Wisdom, but M. Chalfoult till that
morning I was not acquainted withal. Thirdly, hearing a strife revived of that
matter which was not long before quieted in Sarum by the last Bishop, now
Archbishop of York, and being requested to deliver my judgment in the matter,
not by M. Chalfoult, but by one Richard Woodlands, to set unity betwixt my
brethren, and not to war against M. Wisdom: in the fear of God, and not to
please you or your friend or any other man, I laid down my judgment, and gave
up my Sermon in writing to M. Wisdom, craving an answer to the whole, and
not to some part of it. Now you have made an answer to some, how truly it
shall appear: and, other things you have left unanswered, for what cause, let
the reader judge. In the end, you charge me with wit, which is small, with
eloquence, which is none, and with my promise, which I will keep most
willingly, hoping that you will keep yours.

Humes. Sectio. 2.
Wherefore to grow to the matter, I see no cause why you should think better
of Augustine and Jerome, then of Beza and Calvin, for they were all but men,
and they which now are old, were sometimes new. They had no better warrant of
Gods spirit than these: and errors in those days were so thick sown, that
there grew darnell in the best fields, even of them whom we most admire. I
speak not this to discredit the Fathers, but to prove that they were no Gods.
They were no doubt the good instruments of our loving God, to maintain his
truth against his enemies, but they were but men: you can not deny, but the
best of them had his steynes, and must confess, that God is infinitely wise,
who did before hand ordain it, least we might honor them for Gods, and set
their writings in the place of his eternal word, whereof one jot shall not
pass, though heaven and earth perish.

Hill.
Two arguments you make against Augustine and Jerome. The one is, they had
errors, and therefore their interpretation not to be admitted. The other is,
the time wherein they lived was corrupt, and for that cause they are not to be
alleged in a controversy of Divinity. The same argument I make against all
new writers. All new writers have errors, and they live in a most corrupt time,
wherein (as Christ says) shall be many false Prophets, and many false Christ's,
to deceive the very elect if it were possible, Math. 24. 24. Therefore because
men are vain, and the time corrupt, we must believe no man. You argue ab
accidente ad subiectum. For Augustine and Jerome to err it is an accident, but
the substance of all Fathers is to beget men in the word of truth, 1. Cor. 4.
15. And for this cause Augustine himself wills us not to believe him,
unless he bring the word of God. Truly (says Augustine) I do desire not only
a godly reader, but a free corrector in all my writings, especially in those
things where there is great doubt: but as I will not have him to be given unto
me, so I will not have him to be given to himself: let him not love me more
then the Catholic faith. As I say to him, believe not my sayings as Canonical
Scriptures, but believe steadfastly when thou have found that which thou
beleeuedst not, but believe not firmly that which thou have not seen out of
Gods word. So I say to him, do not correct my writings by thine own opinion,
or of contention, but by the word of God, and by the reason thereof
uncontrollable. And against Cresconius the Grammarian he thus writes, lib. 2.
cap. 32. I am not moved with the authority of this epistle, but I cousider
them out of the Canonical books, and if they agree with the word of God, I
receive them with praise, if they disagree, I refuse them with peace. The like
he has Epist. 3. and Epist. 112. And Jerome ad Theoph. is of the same
judgment. I know that I esteem otherwise the Apostles, and otherwise other
interpreters: these men speak truth always, these men in some things do err
sometime. These Fathers themselves confess themselves to be but men, and will
us to believe them no farther then they agree with Gods word. Therefore they
building upon Christ as well as your new, ought to be believed rather in this
point than they: for what they wrote in this controversy, the same did all
other godly Interpreters both Greek and Latin, having a good warrant from Gods
word. But those of your side write contrary to Gods word, to the ancient
Fathers, yea and contrary to the new Fathers, namely, Luther, Selueccer,
Chytraeus, Pomeran, Aepinus, Lucas Lossius, Alesius, Aretius, Peter Martyr, M.
Fox, and M. Nowell. Therefore because Augustine and Jerome agree both with the
old and new writers, and especially with the word of God, I like better of
them, teaching the affirmative, then of any other laboring to prove the
negative. To end therefore, you must note this, that all sayings of the
Fathers, either they are demonstratiue out of the Scriptures, and then they are
the voice of God: or else probable, and these are the voice of man: or else
false, and then they are the voice of the Serpent.

Humes. Sectio tertia.
Their weakness is no where more apparent, then in this matter that we have now
in hand: for Jerome joins his opinion herein with a palpable error, that
Christ descended to deliver the Fathers which to that day had bin in prison.
Augustine is not far behind him, who though he confesses that the Fathers
were in joy with Abraham and Lazarus, yet after some long disputation whether
he did deliver all or some, and why these more then those? at length he
concludes, that he did deliver whom he himself thought good. For after that
they had once conceived that he descended into Hell, there followed (which
could not choose) many inconveniences. There was not one of them dreamed that
which you avouch, that he descended into hell, there to triumph or bind the
devils, or to augme^t their sorrows, by showing them from what grace they had
fallen.

Hill.
You write that Jerome and Augustine did hold a palpable error, that is, that
Christ descended to deliver the Fathers. I hope you will not deny, but the
Fathers have their deliverance by Christ from hell, therefore by the merits and
works of Christ, who I am sure conquered both death and hell. Therefore where
you prove that Augustine and Jerome do err, I will leave them as I said
before, but wherein they speak the truth, I will praise God for them. But let
us see how many ways the scripture may be corrupted, that is, by adding,
altring, and diminishing. Eve in the third The scripture is corrupted by 3.
means
Chap. of Genesis taught all her children so to do: for in the 3. verse thus
she says, But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
God has said ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it least ye dye.
First, she changes the word of God, for God says Genesis 2. 17. of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat. Those words (of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil) she changes, and puts in for them (in the
midst of the garden.) Farther God said, they should not eat of it, she added
(that they might not touch it.) God said they should surely dye, Eve said
(least we dye) here she diminished the scriptures. If then the Fathers have
added to the scriptures, that the Fathers were set out of hell, there I leave
them. And if you change hell into grave, as you do in the 16. Psalm, and Act.
2. I will leave you also: for I stand not upon men's sayings, but upon the word
of God. But where you boldly affirm that not one of the Fathers have deemed
that which I say, you show your self either to be malicious in hiding the
truth, or else so ignorant, that you have not read the Fathers: for diverse both
old and new are of my judgment. Ambrose on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians
thus writes. Christ therefore coming down from heaven into the earth, was
borne a man, afterward he died, and descended into hell, from whence rising the
third day, he showed death vanquished to every creature. Augustine de tempore
in his 137. sermon, and in his third sermon of the resurrection, thus says:
Hell did restore him as a conqueror, and the Heavens did receive him as a
triumpher. And in his second sermon he says thus. Behold, you have heard what
our defender the God of vengeance is said to have done freely. For after that
he was exalted, that is, was hanged of the Jews on the cross, that I may
touch these things briefly, as soon as he had given up the ghost, the soul
united to the deuinitie, descended into the bottom of hell: and when he had
touched the band of darkness as a fearful and glorious spoyler, the wicked
and hellish Legions were afraid, and trembling, began to enquire, saying, Who
is this dreadful and glorious man? Eusebius writing of the resurrection of our
Savior, has the like: We must know that in the self same hour wherein our
Savior bowing his head gave up the ghost, his body being left, in the grave,
his Soul with the Divinity went down, to triumph over Hell. Fulgentius
writing to King Thrasymund in his third book and eight Chapter, not dreaming
but well advised, thus writes: The true humanity of the Son of God neither
was wholly in the grave, nor wholly in Hell, but in the Sepulcher he lay dead
according to his true flesh, but in his Soul descended into Hell. In his
Soul he returned to the flesh which lay in the Sepulcher, but in respect of
the Deuinitie, which neither is holden in place, nor limited by bond, he was
wholly in the grave with his flesh, and wholly with his Soul in Hell. And by
this means was fully every where Christ, because God was not separated from
the humanity which he had assumpted, which was both with his Soul in Hell,
that from Hell his Soul might return a Conqueresse, and was with his flesh,
that by reason of his speedy resurrection, it might not be corrupted. I have
here alleged the old which disprooue your assertion, for all these accord
with me. Now to these will I add also the judgments of some new Writers.
Mollerus a very learned Minister of Germany, on the 16. Psalm, thus teaches:
Christ would show his victory in a certain sort over the Devils to strike
perpetual terrors into them, and to take away from us the fear of their
tyranny. To this agrees Musculus on the sixty and eight Psalm. This GOD
which was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, first descended into
the lowest parts of the earth, then he led captivity captive, and not only
we are delivered from the captivity of Satan, sin, and damnation, but also
triumphing over them as Tyrants, he has ascended above all heavens to fulfill
all things. The same learned Father interpreting the second Chapter of the
Colossians, thus has: There are some that be persuaded it is an absurdity, if
it be said that Christ did triumph over the principalities and powers, but if
all these things be attributed to God the Father, that he did them with Christ,
and in Christ, we may truly read here, triumphing over them in his own
person. In like sort does Hemingius expound this place in the second Chapter
of the Colossians: As by his death he conflicted with the Devil on the Cross,
so by his glorious descending into Hell, Resurrection, and Ascension, he
triumphed, as it is Ephesians. 4. leaving his Cross lift up as a monument of his
victory. So does M. Fox understand this place in a book which he has
written, entitled, Christus triumphans. Therefore in this behalf you have
told a manifest untruth, wherefore I shall think you will scarce have care to
set forth the truth of God, when you will presumptuously utter such an untruth,
which may be reproved by so many and honorable witnesses. Farther, here you
leave out at your pleasure two other ends of Christ's descending into Hell,
which I taught in my Sermon: the one is, the manifestation of his death, the
other is, our deliverance from Hell. Plain dealing ought to be in this case,
and therefore I exspect it at your hands.

Humes. Sectio. 4.
But if you will see how doubtful Augustine was in this point, I pray you
read his 99. Epistle to Euodius, where you shall find many his doubts and
almost no other thing affyrmed for certainty, but only that he doubts not
that Christ went to Hell, building upon the words of the Prophet David, and
the Apostle Saint Peter: Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. Where I can not choose but wonder what should move
so worthy a wit, and so learned followers of him, seeing it is apparent that the
word does signify as well the sorrows of hell, as the place of hell in the
scripture to pass by that signification of the word, which the whole church of
Christ confesses to be true, that our Savior did suffer upon the Cross whole
torments of hell for our redemption, and to fall upon that signification which
has slender proof, and led them iuto such streites as Augustine himself
cannot escape. Whosoever doubts that the name of hell is used in the
Scripture, for those sorrows let him read that of 1. Samuel 2. 6. The Lord
kills and makaeth alive, he casts down to hell and brings up again. Or
that of David Psalm. 30. 3. Thou have brought my soul out of Hell. Or that of
Jonas 2. 2. I have called to thee out of the bowels of hell. And many other
places, where the word can not signify the pit of hell, whence there is no
redemption, but the sorrows of hell which the Saints of God did suffer in
this life. Now seeing this is so, I would fain know of you (good M. Hill) why
we may not more safely take the word Hell in that signification, which you
cannot deny, then you in that signification, which the better part of
Christians do take to be false. For that Christ descended into the pit of the
damned, it has no other warrant out of the word, but such as is builded upon
a word of a double signification, which stands at the courtesy of the reader
to take it as to him shall seem probable.

Hill.
Here you confess that Augustine doubts, and yet you say that in the matter
in controversy between you and me he doubts not, but proves it by the
Apostolical and prophetical testimonies: for he wills us to hold it
firmissima fide, with a most firm faith, and says that none but an Infidel
will dony it. He doubts whether the Fathers were in hell, or whether they
were converted in hell by Christ's preaching, as some did affirm untruly, and
many such like things, little or nothing appertaining to the question we have
in hand. But ad Dardanu^. he doubts not. Fo. 3. col. 272. Fo. 10. col. 1410.
Fo. 3. col. 213. and 702. Fo. 6. 788. Fo. 10. 899. 989. In all these places and
in many other he tells without doubting, that he descended into hell, and the
end why. To strike a terror into the devils, and to triumph over them: It
pleases you to make your self merry with S. Augustines infirmity, I pray God
you will with Saint Augustine acknowledge your own, which by and by shall be
laid before you. You wonder at S. Augustine, but we wonder at your teachers
and you, for you confess S. Augustine to build upon David and Peter, and yet
you labor to overthrow this building, how deceitfullye it shall now appear.
You say that hell signifies the sorrows of hell, sometime I grant it does:
Hereupon you make this argument: sometime it signifies the sorrows of hell,
therefore it does so in the 16. Psalm. I deny your argument, and that you have
spoken an untruth, the holy Ghost by Peter's mouth shall be a witness against you.
For you say it is spoken of the sorrows which Christ suffered upon the cross,
Peter says it is spoken of the resurrection: and in the resurrection I am sure
Christ suffered no torments or sorrows. Peter's interpretation is thus, Act. 2.
32. He knowing this before spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul
should not be left in hell, neither his flesh to see corruption. Now then here
is an answer to your demand: these words are spoken of the resurrection, a
matter of joy and not of torments, for David says in the person of Christ,
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tung was glad. And moreover also my flesh
shall rest in hope. If Christ at this time did rejoice, how was he sorrowful?
if he were glad, how was he tormented? if he did rest in hope, how was it true
also that he was afflicted with torments? And here you utter another untruth,
that Christ did svffer his whole torments on the cross, which is most untrue:
for he suffered some in the Garden, when he said, Math. 26. 38. My soul is
heavy unto death. And some in Caiphas house, and some under Pilat: but all his
torments and sorrows were ended on the cross, which I think you would have
said. Last of all the words of the text that comes after, as well as the
words going before do prove, that it cannot be spoken of Christ's sorrows, for
they are these. Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is the
fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Since then
David both before and after makes mention of joy and pleasures for evermore,
and as Peter says these words prove the resurrection of Christ: I marvel
how you dare to contradict the meaning of the holy Ghost. You speak not now
contrary to Augustine, or Ambrose, or Hill, but contrary to David and Peter
themselves: you boast your selves to be the best Christians, but I shall hardly
believe you are better Christians then David and Peter, In the conclusion you
utter blasphemy, for Sheol being taken sometime for the sorrows of hell, and
sometime for the place of hell, you say it stands at the courtesy of the
reader, to take it as to him shall seem probable. Are Gods words to be
interpreted after our pleasure? Hillary was of a better mind: he said as God
was the author of the Scriptures, so God must be the Interpreter: he opened the
wits of the Desciples going to Emaus, so let us pray that he may open our
wits that we may perfectlye understand the Scriptures.

Humes Sectio 5.
That he never was there, what better proof would a man ask then Christ's own
words? Luc. 23. 46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. And in another
place Luke 23. 43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Where it is a
world to see how men of your side do trouble themselves to put out this candle.
First you say that the place Into thy hands I commend my spirit, was borrowed
of David, and must be spoken of Christ in that sense as David did use it before
him. This we confess and gather hereupon, that Christ's soul did no more
descend into hell then David's did: but say you his soul did not strait way
ascend into heaven, for he lived many years after. That makes not to the
question when his soul went to heaven, but whether his soul which was still
in the hands of God, ever went to hell, prove this and we will give you the
goal. As for David he having devoured heaven in hope, did not doubt to speak
that in the present time which he was sure would come to pass shortly.
Furthermore seeing David was a figure of Christ, and spoke many things of
himself in Christ's person, (which were more agreeable with the thing figured
then with the figure) you must think that these words were spoken of Christ,
who was strait way to commend his soul with these words unto his Father.
Wherefore if you will answer this place, you must bring proof out of the
Scriptures, that he which means to go to hell, does use to commend his soul
into the hands of God, or else you shall never be able to darken the light of
this Son without any cloud of Sophistry.

Hill.
Indeed if these words were spoken in the present time, some show of truth
were in your words, but in the Greek they are in ye future tence, (...)
Father into thy hands I will commit my spirit. Now your argument is thus:
Christ commended his soul unto his Father, ergo immediatlye he went not down
to hell. Here is more in your conclusion then is in your premises. You may
conclude his soul went to heaven. But not immedlatly: for it went to hell as I
have proved before, for hell in the 16. Psalm, does not signify the sorrows
of hell, but the place as I have confirmed already. Therefore it is better to
translate I will commend, then I do commend, as Stepanus on this place notes.
Paul says Ephesians. 4. and 10. verse, Now in that he ascended, what is it but that
he first descended into the lowest parts of the earth. He that descended is
even the same that ascended far above all heavens, to fulfill all things. Now
if the same Christ did first descend which did ascend, then he descended in
soul and body, as he ascended in soul and body. For both these must be
effected in a wonderful manner, for they are reconed by Solomon amongst the
most stupendous works of the Son of God. Prou. 30. 4. Who has ascended up
to heaven, and descended? who has gathered the wind together in his fyst? who
has established all the ends of the world? By this scripture I infer, that
to ascend and descend are as miraculous works as to create and govern the
world. But if the soul of Christ did go to heaven immediately as you affirm
contrary to this text, then the descending of Christ had not bin so marvelous
as his ascending. Besides, as you after allege, there is but one ascending,
but if Christ's soul first went to heaven, and then his body, then were there
two ascensions. But even as Christ was but once borne and once dyed and was
once buried and once rose from the dead, and but once comes into judgment:
so as Cyprian says in his Sermon of the ascending of Christ, Christ did once
descend into hell, they shall see God no more on the cross, nor they that are
damned in hell. Wherefore may it please you to accept the judgment of
Athanasius a Greek Father, and a man persecuted for the truths sake by the
Arrians, he in his Creed says thus, who suffered for our salvation, and
descended into hell. And interpreting the third Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, he writes, Satan was envious against our Savior, for he
killed him, not knowing that it would make against himself, for Christ after
his cross going down into hell, has vanquished death, and because he knew
not sin, he could not be holden of death. Thus you see, that not only Hill,
Augustine and Jerome do say, that Christ after he had vtterd these words (into
thy hands I will commend my spirit) but Athanasius a greek father, who better
then you, understood the meaning of these words. Therefore it is a wonder to see
how those of your side labor to extinguish this everlasting light of Gods
truth, and set up a consuming candle of your own making. Where you teach that
Christ's Soul did no more descend into hell then David's did, therein you are
deceived, for Christ was to deliver us from hell and David also: wherefore if
Christ's soul had not gone to hell, David's must, and mine and yours. And for
this cause as you say they are true in Christ figured, but not in David the
figure. And heerevpon Peter thus reasons, that they could not be true in
David. For Christ's soul was in hell, and yet not tormented, and his body in
the grave, but not corrupted. Whereas David's body saw corruption, and if his
soul had gone to hell it had found no redemption. Therefore to be in grave and
return without corruption, and to be in hell and return with conquest of the
devil, were two peculiar things to the Son of God, and not to any other of
the sons of men. And here you utter an other blasphemy that Christ's soul
had no other prerogative then David's soul, for by ye same reason you may argue
that Christ's body had no greater prerogative then David's body, for as this is
false, so is the other. For as Athanasius says in his book of the incarnation
of the word, Death could not prevail on the humane soul of Christ to tie him
there, neither corruption inuading his body by tyranny could show her force on
him to putrefaction, as things not well seen unto, for to think so of him,
so, were a wicked thing: for even as Adam had a double punishment inflicted on
him for his disobedience, the one was on his body, earth thou art, and to earth
thou shall return, and so by this decree the body of the Lord departed unto
the earth: but to the soul he said, Thou shall dye the death. Hereof it
comes to pass that man is divided into 2. parts, and is condemned to depart
to 2. places, and therefore it was necessary that the selfsame Judge which had
made this decree, that he by himself being under the color of a condemned
man, should free from that sentence all believers. Here you see by this
learned Father, that Christ's soul went to hell to deliver our souls from
hell, and his body to the grave to deliver us from death, and by this means
both body and soul personally and not potentially (as you teach) working our
deliverance from death and hell, have those prerogatives which David's soul and
body had not. And for this consideration though the one was in the grave, and
the other in hell, yet both were in the hands of the Lord. Here then we must
learn what the hands of the Lord do signify. Sometime the hand of God does
signify the Son of God, Psalm. 144. 7. Send thy hand from above. Sometime it
signifies the power of God, Psalm. 136. 12. With a mighty hand, and
outstretched arm. Thirdly the bountifulnes of God, Psalm. 145. Thou openest thy
hand, and fillest every living thing with thy blessing. Fourthly it signifies
consolation, Ezec. 3. 22. The hand of the Lord was with me comforting me.
Fifthly grace, Psalm. 118. 16. The right hand of the Lord has done valiantly.
Sixthly it signifies the gift of prophecy, Ezec. 8. 1. The hand of the Lord
fell there upon me. Seventhly mercy, Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall he shall not
be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Eighthly the protection of the
Lord, Psalm. 31. 15. My times are in thy hand. Ninthly the aid of the Lord,
Psalm. 74. 11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand. Tenthly the punishment of the
Lord, Job. 19. 21. Have pity on me (o ye my friends) for the hand of the Lord
has touched me. Lastly it signifies the government of the Lord, Psalm. 95. 4.
In his hand are all the corners of the earth. This place therefore must needs
have this construction, into thy consolation, mercy, protection and government,
I will commend my soul. I hope you your self commend your soul into the
hands of God every day, but yet you mind not to go to heaven immediately. So
said David, Psalm. 30. 5. Into thine hands I commend my spirit, but he went not
to heaven in many years after, neither did Christ ascend into heaven in many
days after, but went down to hell, where it was in the protection and
government of the Godhead, which as you confess descended into hell. For as we
being in the damned world, are in the protection and hand of the highest, so
Christ being in the place of the damned, after a wonderful manner was also in
the Lords aid and protection, by means whereof he has wrought our
deliverance from hell. Therefore prove you that Christ went straitway to
heaven, and you shall effect that which many of your side have attempted, but
never yet any could bring to pass. It is written of Procustes that if any were
too short for his bed, he would stretch them out, and make them fit for his
lodging: so you, this place being too short to fit your waste, will enlarge it
with a word (immediately) which is not in the place primitive or deriuatiue,
expressly, or by way of implication. Moreover where you say, if I will
answer this place I must prove that he that minds to go to hell, does use
these words. I wonder that you dare use such blasphemous speeches, for hereby
you insinuate that Christ was but a mere man, and that other men have a part
in the work of our redemption as well as Christ. For as he is our only Savior,
so as Luther says on Genesis 21. Chapter. This was singular in Christ (Thou shall
not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption,) for his
soul could not be detained in hell, nor his body in the grave. For as this was
singular in Christ that he did give up his ghost, so was it singular in him to
go to hell and return again. Ambrose says, Tradidit spiritum suum quia non
inuitus amisit, quod enim emittitur voluntarium est, quod amittitur
necessarium. He gave up the ghost because he lost not his soul against his
will: for that which is emitted is voluntary, but that which is amitted is
necessary. Theophilact says, he cried out with a loud voice and gave up the
ghost, for he had power to lay down his life, and take it up again. Now when
you can prove that you or any of your side have this power in you to dye when
he will, and live again when he will, then will I prove that he that speaks
these words (Into thy hands I commend my spirit) has an intent to go to
Hell. But as Christ his birth was a singular thing in him, so was his death
burial, descending into hell, resurrection, and ascension into heaven. Eccle.
8. 8. Man is not Lord over the spirit, to retain the spirit. And John 10.
18. Christ says, No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my
self: I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up again. By these
two places it is evident, that no man can lay down his own spirit, but the
only Son of God had that prerogative, and therefore as the laying down of
his spirit and the taking up of his spirit again was wonderful: so was the
state of the soul and body during the time of the separation of the parts of
the humanity, singular and wonderful.

Humes Sectio. 6*
For the other place you bring a ready answer out of M. Hills answer to the
place, This day shall thou be with me in paradise.
Augustine, of that which is God, but not of that which is man: how ready
soever this construction be, I am well assured it can not stand with the words
of Christ. Luke 23. 43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. For what I
pray you could the Godhead of Christ go to heaven in the future time, which
was still in heaven from all eternity? For this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise is al one, as if he had said: this day shall thou and I be in Paradise:
which no man that has one drop of brain in his head dare avouch of Christ who
was never thence. But here you tell me that the future verb is attributed to
the thief only, and that which is given to Christ (with me) is limited with
no bound of time. I told you even now, that thou shall be with me, is all one
with, I and thou shall be together. But to let this pass, what say you to the
thief then that said Luke 23. 42. Remember me Master when thou come into
thy kingdom, This thief was not sure of your mind, for he did suppose that
Christ to whom he spoke was not yet in his kingdom, and I am sure that Christ
was so good a Doctor that if the poor thief had mist his footing, he would
have set him up again. Thus you see that these two places are to strong for
your ordinance, if you have no better shot then this, we will spread our banner
with Magnaest inuicta veritas.

Hill.
Here you condemn S. Augustins answer. Well, because S. Augustine is dead,
and in your margin you say that it is M. Hills answer, by Gods grace and his
word M. Hill will defend it. First I note a falsification of the text by you
alleged. for whereas it is in the text Luke 23. 42. Remember me Lord when
thou comst into thy kingdom. You for (Lord) say (Master) I told you in the
beginning Eve did change the words of the Scripture to her overthrow.
Therefore I pray you leave it, for otherwlse I must tell you of it: if a boy in
the Grammar school construe (...) Master, he is worthy to be beaten: and if a
schoolemaister teach so, he is worthy to be controlled: for this word (...)
written by Stephanus with a capital letter, will cashire your banner of
boasting, and bring your glory to shame. I preached in my sermon at
Chippenham, that (to day) did signify for ever, and (with me) did signify the
Godhead. I will not only affirm it, but confirm it, that (to day) does
signify for ever in this place, first I prove it by this philosophical reason
out of Aristotle, which says: In aeternis non est tempus, In eternal things
there is no time. For time is the measure of motion, therefore if there be time
then is there motion. Now as in hell all men do suffer torments, and in earth
all labor: so in Heaven all do rest. Apoc. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors.
Therefore where there is no mutation from day to night, nor from summer to
winter, there is no day natural or artificial, as you suppose. And this is
proved Apoc. 10. 6. And the Angel swear by him that lives for evermore, which
created heaven and the things that are therein, that time shall be no more. And
this word (...) to day, is used for (ever) in many Scriptures. Psalm. 2. 7.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. Act. 13. 33. And we declare
unto you touching the promises made unto the Fathers God has fulfilled it unto
you their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus, even as it is written in
the second Psalm: Thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee. And in ye
epistle to the Hebr. 1. 5. And to which of the Angels said he Thou art my
Son, to day have I begotten thee. And again, Hebr. 5. 6. He proving Christ
to be a priest for ever, thus says. Christ took not to himself this honor, to
be made an high Priest: but he that said to him, Thou art my Son to day have
I begotten thee, as he also in another place speaks. Thou a priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech. Here David and the Apostle do take this
word (to day) to signify (for ever). And so does S. Augustine and M. Hill
against all the gainsaiers of it in the world: For the circumstances of the
place do strongly convince it. For what does the thief ask? forgiveness of
his sins: who can forgive sins? God only. He asks for grace, who is the
giver of all Grace? God only? he desires glory, who gives glory and life
everlasting? God only. That God only forgiueth sins, it is proved Mar. 2. 7.
That he is the giver of all grace, it is manifest 1. Pet. 5. 10. That God only
gives glory and life everlasting, it is evident 2. Tim. 48. Romans 6. and last
verse. Secondly where shall he receive this glory? in Paradise. For as much
then as the thing that is given is eternal, the person that gives it is
perpetual, the place where it is given is everlasting: it must of necessity
follow that the time also be world without end. And that (with me) signifies
as I do teach the Godhaad: it is constantlye avouched by all the Fathers.
Jerome on this place notes. Christ brought the thief from the cross to
Paradise, least any man should think conversion to be too late at any time: he
made the punishment of homicide Martyrdom: the truth being counted among the
wicked, he left the one in the left hand, and took the other in the right
hand, as he will do in the day of judgment. It were an absurd thing to say
the soul of Christ only shall give judgment in the last day. Augustine has
the like on this place, The cross if you mark it was the judgment seat, the
Judge was set in the middle, the one thief which believed was delivered, the
other which blasphemed was condemned. To save and condemn is the office of the
deity, and therefore (with me) signifies the Godhead, as the other thief no
doubt was with ye Devil. Ambrose in his Sermon of the holy thief writes
thus: He saw him hanging on the cross and prays to him as though he were
sitting in heaven: he sees him condemned, and yet he prays unto him as to a
king. To this accords Damascene handling this place. In respect of his body
he was in grave, in respect of his soul in hell: and as God he was both in
Paradise with the thief, and in the throne with the Father and the holy
Ghost. Therefore Ferus a writer not to be contemned, interprets these
words thus. Mecum eris qui sum vbiqus omnia in omnibus. Thou shall be with me
which am every where all in all. In Exodus 34, 6. 7. verses, be set down the
13. names of God, and Lord is one of the first of them. Therefore when the
thief calls Christ Lord, he acknowledges him to be God, and desires to
dwell with the Godhead, in whose presence is the fulness of joy. Where you afke
me how the Godhead can go to heaven, the word is (...): Even as God came down
from heaven, so is he said to go up to heaven. If you will read Augustine in
his book of the essence of the Deuinitie he will teach you. Psa. 68. 24. They
have seen o God thy goings, the goings of my god and king, which art in thy
sanctuary. From heaven he camo into the virgins womb, from ye virgins womb
after his birth he was laid in the cratch, after that he had fulfilled all for
the which he was sent of his father, he was fastened to the cross, he was taken
down from the Cross, he was buried in respect of his flesh, but in soul he
descended into hell: the third day by the power of the Deuinitie he raised his
flesh out of the grave, and after the days of his resurrection, the fortith
day, his Apostles seeing it, he ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of the Father, that is, in his glory. The thief then prays to Christ,
that as he should sit at the right hand of his Father in glory, so he might be
partaker of that glory, and that he might have his perfect consummation and
bliss in heaven as Christ should have after his ascension: and that his vile
body which was partaker of the sufferings of Christ, might also be partaker of
his glory, and made like to the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Twice you have
told me that (thou shall be with me) is as much as (I and thou) but you bring
neither scripture nor father to confirm it in that sense that you mean it.
But if you mean thus I and thou shall be together, that is, thou shall be
pertaker of the glory of the deity, as thou have bin pertaker of the sufferings
with the humanity it is true. For what need had the thief to pray for the
presence of Christ's soul, when he had the presence both of body and soul. But
it is the presence and fellowship of the divine nature that he prays for,
wherein as David says, is the fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore, Psalm.
16. 11. In Luke. 13. 26. The Jews say, We have eaten and drunken in thy
presence, and thou taught in our streets. Christ thus answers in the 27.
and 28. verses. I tell you I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see
Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of God, and your selves cast out of
doors. Therefore it is clear, they are not all blessed which were present with
Christ's humanity, but they of whom Saint Peter says, 2. Pet. 1. 4. Whereby
most great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them we should be
pertakers of the nature of God. For therefore did Christ take upon him our
nature, that we might be pertakers of the nature of God, and be one with
Christ, as he is one with his Father. Christ's prayer is to this end, Ioh. 17.
21. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me
through their word, that they all be one, as thou O Father art in me and I in
thee, even that they also may be one in us.

Humes. Sectio. 7.
But now to come to your reasons. First, you make much adoo about the Hebrew
names of Hell, against almost all the learned of this age. It will cost you a
great deal of eloquence to persuade the world that Tremellius and Iunius, men
that have spent their age in that study, did not know these words as well as
you. For my part, neither am I minded to stand with you upon that point, and I
see no inconvenience to hurt us, nor vantage given you, if I grant you that
Sheol is Hell. Only I stand upon this which I have said, that this word Hell
does signify the torments of the soul, and must needs in these places which
you allege be so taken, for in the place of Psalm. 16. 10. Thou will not leave
my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. The very order of
the words do overthrow your conceit: for seeing in these words the hell which
his soul should not be left in, goes before Christ's burial, wherein that
holy one should not see corruption, tell you me what hell should go before
Christ's burial but that of the passion, wherein he paid the full ransom of
our salvation, and nailed the hand writing that was against us to the Cross.

Hill.
Two untruths are in these few words. First you say I make much adoo about
Sheol against almost all the learned men of this age. There are on my side
Luther, Aepinus, Felinus, Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Selueccer, Vrbanus Rhegius,
The authors of the Centuries, Erasmus, Chytraeus, Mollerus, Peter Martyr,
Lauaterus, Proverb. 27. In England Lambert, Robert Samuel, Latimer, Becon,
Hutchinson, Fox, and Nowell. Here are 20. most learned men of these latter
times, as I can show you in my poor Library, besides that most learned and
reverend Father M. Allen, and besides the advised judgment of the learned
Conuocations of England not only in King Edwards reign, Anno Domini. 1552. but
also since the reign of her Majesty. 1571. In the which Conuocations I am
persuaded were as learned men as any were either in England or Europe.
Therefore the learned reader must either think you a man of little reading,
and that you never saw these learned men's works, or else of great malice,
that you will disable all these for learning, who left a better testimony
behind them then ever you will, unless you have more then you have showed in
this answer. The other untruth is, that Sheol in the 16. Psalm does signifye
the torments of hell, which Christ suffered in his passion on the cross. That
this is untrue it is manifest M. Humes disagreeth with Saint Peter.
not by conceit, but by Peter's Sermon, Act 2, 31. He knowing this before spoke
of the resurrection, that his soul was not left in hell, nor his flesh saw
corruption: You say it is spoken of the passion, Peter says it is spoken of
the resurrection: and good cause has he so to say, for the words going before
and coming after do prove it. The words going before are these, Psalm. 16,
9. Wherefore my heart was glad, my glory reioyseth, my flesh also shall rest in
hope: The words following in the 11. verse are these: Thou shall show me the
path of life, in thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. Where can you find your torments, in the word (glad)
or in the word (reioiseth) or in the word (rest) or in these words (fullness of
joy) or in these (pleasures for evermore.) Was Christ glad of his torments? Did
he reioise or weep in them? Who would deliver this doctrine but he that
wants either science or conscience, or both. To lie once is a fault, but to
affirm it twice is a greater fault. To speak a lie is hurtful, but to write
a lie advisedly is more hurtful. To lie in a matter political is dangerous,
but to lie in divine matters without speedy repentance is damnable. You say no
vantage is given to me nor inconvenience to you, if you grant Sheol to be
Hell: Let your friends judge what vantage you have given to the truth, and
shame to your self by gainsaying Saint Peter, and by affirming, that in the
resurrection are torments, where David and Peter say are fulness of joy and
pleasures for evermore. Therefore it is the saying of Peter, that Christ's soul
was not left in hell, and not my conceit, and it is deceit in you to affirm
the contrary. Further where you say that Tremellius and Iunius are better
learned in the Hebrew language then my self, I confess it, so are the Jews
themselves then Tremellius and Iunius, shall I therefore believe the Jews? no
more will I believe the Translation of any other learned man, if he disagree
with David and Saint Peter. Finally, to answer your curious question, you
ask me in what hell was Christ's soul before his burial? To this I answer,
in that hell whither all Infidels go for their unbelief. I read but of one
Hell, if you know any more let me see your proof, and then will I tell you
into what hell Christ descended. But who but you does think it an impossible
thing for a soul to descend into hell before the body be buried? The soul in
an instant passes to heaven or hell, but the body I am sure must have time to
be buried: for bodies are in places circumscriptiuely, Angels and souls
definitiuely, and God is in all places universally. And the soul came out of
hell into the body, before the body could come out of the grave: therefore most
aptly it is said Acts 12. 31. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nor
suffer my flesh to see corruptiou. For as Augustine says in his 57. epistle ad
Dardanum, That was spoken of his soul which came from hell so quickly, this of
his body which could not corrupt by reason of his speedy resurrection: and
writing on the 85. Psalm he says: wherefore this is his voice in the Psalm
not by any man's conjecture, but by the expasition of the apostle, Thou shall not
leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

Humes. Sectio 8.
Therefore to let this pass, your next reason is from that place of Paul
Ephe. 4. 9. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that descended first into
the lowermost parts of the earth. Where you hold out of the Hebrew, that the
lowermost parts of the earth must needs signify the pit of hell: which thing
if it were so sure as you bear us in hand, then were it a wonder that no
divine (I speak of the modester sort) did ever yet gather upon that place
hell, which they dare not dispute, where it were in the very center of the
earth. But whereas you avouch so confidently, that Erets tacthioth does
signify hell, as commonly in the Hebrew tung, as our English name Hell is
usual for that place among us: though I mean not to stand with you for the
tung, give me leave to dissent from you in this, for in some of the places
which you cite, in my simple understanding it cannot carrye that sense. You
quote the 63. Psalm. They which seek my soul, shall go into the lowermost
parts of the earth. This I think cannot be hell, for first it were a
presumption for the Prophet to enter so far into Gods secrets, as to judge
his enemies. 2. It stands not (me thinks) with the affection of a godly
mind to assign that place to his enemies, out of the horror whereof there is
no redemption, for the children of God do rather pray for their enemies and
wish their amendment. This place may well be construed of the grave, and in my
simple judgment it is an argument to lay the pride of them which sought his
soul, and a comfort to himself, that their enmitye must needs have an end one
day, when the grave shall devour them. The words following confirm this
sense. They shall fall on the edge of the Sword. Psalm. 63. which cannot be
spoken but of temporal death.

Hill.
Indeed I brought this place Ephe. 49* to prove that Christ descended into
Hell. And whereas you charge me with immodesty for so alleging of it, I must
needs charge you with two untruths in answering this allegation. The one is,
that I called it the pit of Hell, which phrase I never used: The other is, you
have impudently avouched, that none of the modester sort of deuines have ever
alleged this place to prove the descending of Christ into hell. For many, and
those both learned and modest have alleged this* place to this purpose.
Athanasius interpreting this Epistle and text thus writes* Into what place did
he descend? Into hell truly, which he calls according to the common opinion
of men, the lowest parts of the earth. Ambrose on this place says thus. This
Christ therefore coming down from heaven into the earth was borne a man,
afterward he dyed and descended into hell, from whence rising the third day, he
went up to heaven before all mortal men, that he might show death to be
vanquished to every creature. Chrysostom on this place says. He went to those
parts of the earth, then the which nothing is lower, and from thence he
ascended into heaven, then the which nothing is higher. The like has Augustine
li. de Trin. cap. 19. Jerome on this text thus notes. That Hell is under the
earth no man doubts, for he that descended in soul into hell, ascended both
body and soul into heaven. Mollerus a learned Minister of Germany on the
sixteen Psalm says: that the descending into hell is plainly proved out of
the Ephesians the fourth chapter. Musculus on the 68. Psalm. thus writes. This
God which was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, first descended
into the lowest parts of the earth, then he led captivity captive, and not
only we are delivered from the captivity of Satan, sin, death and damnation:
but also Christ triumphing over them as tirants, has ascended above all
heavens, to fulfill all things: Hemingius on the 2. Chapter to the Colossians
thus also teaches. As by his death he conflicted with the enemy on the
cross, so by his glorious descending into hell, resurrection and ascension, he
triumphed as it is Ephe 4. Leaving his cross lift up as a monument of his
victory. To conclude, Alesius a very learned preacher of Scotland, on the 19.
chapter of John, affirms that the 1. Pet. 3. and Ephesians. 4. do manifestly prove
the descending of Christ into hell, if Athanasius, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Augustine and Jerome, of the old fathers, and Mollerus, Musculus, Hemingius
and Alesius of the new writers: be all immodest divines, then have you truly
said: but if in the judgment of the learned, all these were most reverend
men, then most shameless are you to accuse them of the want of modesty. Moreover
where you say no divine dares to dispute where hell is: it is true in some
sort, for no divine can circumscribe the place of hell which is infinite, nor
yet of heaven: only the word of God affirms that heaven is above, Gal. 4.
26. And hell is beneath, Proverbs 15. 24. Therefore the lowest parts of the
earth may well be taken for hell: Then you go farther and say, that Erets
tachthioth does not signify hell, Psalm. 63. and for this you bring two reasons:
the one is, that it were a presumption in the Prophet to judge his enemies: 2,
that it stands not with the affection of a godly mind, to assign hell to
his enemies, but to pray for them: to your first reason this I answer. In the
Psalm 9. 18. David uses the like speech: The wicked shall be turned to hell,
and all the people that forget God: which text Calvin thus expounds, the
Hebrewe word Sheolah which was doubtful, I have not doubted to translate
hell, for though it does not displease me that others turn it (Sepulcher) yet
it is sure here is something noted besides common death, otherwise he should
speak nothing of the reprobate, but that which did generally happen to all
believers. In the hnndred and ninth Psalm also David thus prays: Let Satan
stand at his right hand, let his prayer be turned iuto sin, let the wickedness
of his Father be had in remembrance in the sight of the Lord, and let not the
sin of his mother be done away. Do you think this to be spoken
presumptuously? Many such texts could I allege to prove that David inspired
with the spirit of prophecye, did foretell not only of the tragical
destruction of bodies of his enemies, but also of the extreme damnation of
their souls. This then is my replye to your second reason: these enemies were
not private enemies, but public, and did hate David for his religions sake:
David therefore by the gift of prophecye does foretell, that their souls
should go to hell to be tormented, and their bodies should be the portion of
Foxes, that is, should never come to the grave, for what need David tell us
they should dye, which we know is common to all? or how can that betrue which
you say, that they should be in grave, when David himself says they were not
in any grave, but were the portion of Foxes. And Humes disa greeth with David
and Calvin.
so M. Calvin (whom I hope you will believe) teaches you, writing upon this
Psalm and verse. To be the portion of Foxes, is as much as to be devoured and
torn of wicked beasts: for God (says Calvin) does threaten this: punishment
to the reprobate, that they shall be a pray to Wolves and dogs, because he
would deprive them of the honor of their grave. Here you see M. Calvin says
they came not into their grave, you say they did. How M. Calvin and you may be
reconciled I know not: for Calvin adds this reason. It happens sometime that
we know the same temporal punishments to be common to the good and the bad:
but this is the difference, the bones of the godly are gathered together and
kept in safety, that not one of them shall perish, but the scattring of the
bones of the reprobate is a sign of their eternal destruction. Therefore how
can the lower parts of the earth signify the grave as you say, since (as M.
Calvin truly says) they were in no grave: Answer me this (good M. Humes)
plainly. Psalm. 63, 9. The lower parts of ye earth signify (not the grave) but
hell. Christ descended into the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4. 9. Ergo
Christ descended into hell.

Humes. Sectio. 9.
Next, you quote Ecclesiasticus 24, 37. I will pearce through all the lowest
parts of the earth, and look upon them that be asleep. Also the 31. of
Ezechiel the 18. verse. Thou shall be cast down into the lower parts of the
earth, and shall sleep in the midst of the uncircumcised. These two places by
your leave can not be well meant of hell. The text does show plainly that
here is rest and quietness in the place that here is spoken of: but I hope you
will not say that there is any great rest or quietness in hell. In all these
places Erets Tacthioth cannot signifye any thing but the grave. The same word
is used also in the 139. Psalm. 14. verse. My bones are not hid from thee though
I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth. Here the
Prophet I believe does not say of himself that he was fashioned in hell,
which must needs be if your assertion were true, that those Hebrew words do
signify hell, as commonly as hell in the english does note that place. Here
Beza does well observe, that the place of the Apostle which you allege may
fitly be applied to the sense of this place, and does note unto us the
descension of Christ into the womb of the virgin: for Erets Tachioth out of all
question does signifye his mothers womb.

Hill.
First you say, the place quoted by me Syrac. 24. 37. makes not for the proof
of my assertion. If you had considered what went before, and what follows,
you would have bin of another mind. For before in the 8. verse it is said, I
alone have gone round about all the compass of heaven, and have walked in the
bottom of the depth. Which depth Pellicanus a learned writer does interpret
abyssum mortis and inferorum, the depth of death and hell. Yea the whole
Chapter speaks of the Son of God, and of his wondrous works in saving
mankind: of the which this is one, that he was not only alive among the
living, but after death his body was among the dead bodies, and his soul among
the souls in hell, which he calls the lower parts. The like scripture to
this is in Job. 38. 16, 17. Have thou entered into the bottom of the sea? or
have thou walked to seek out the depth? have the gates of death bin opened unto
thee? or have thou seen the gates of the shadow of death. These words are
thus opened by Martin Borrhauius in his learned Commentaries upon Job. I have
dwelled in the highest places, and my throne is in the pillar of the clouds: I
have gone round about the compass of heaven above, and have walked in the
floods of the sea. I pearce through all the lower parts of the earth. Have
those in hell or the dead bin searched out of thee? and do thou know their
state and condition, and what shall happen to their bodies hereafter? and what
does happen to their souls now? The force of death and of hell he makes
manifest by the name of gates, as it is manifest in that scripture, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against thee. By these words it is evident
that the nethermost parts of the earth, Syrac. 24, 37. and Zalmaueth the Hebrew
word, Job. 38, 17. do signifye hell, and that none but the Son of God above
has personally showed himself in all these places. For the place in Ezechiel
that it makes most significantly for my purpose, I will prove it by Esaias,
Ezechiel, and diverse other both learned and modest writers. Esaias handling the
same matter, says 14, 9. Hell beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy
coming. And Ezechiel in the 15. and 16. verses Humes disagreeth with Esaias,
Ezechiel, Munster, Lauater, and Pelican.
calls it hell plainly. Since then both the prophets call it hell, how dare
you to interpret it grave. But that the nethermost parts of the earth do
signify hell, I prove it out of the 12. ver. of Ezechiel. And the strangers
have destroyed him even the terrible nations, and they have left him upon the
mountains, and in all the valleis his branches are broken. Munster on this
place says, that by the branches are understood the carcasses of his host
which the beasts of the field did devour. Lauaterus the Minister of Tigurine
agrees with him. All the beasts of the field shall dwell upon his ruin: the
kings carkas shall not be laid up into the sepulcher of his elders, but shall be
a pray to crows, griphins, and to other carniuorous birds. So does Pelican a
learned Linguist interpret this place. At the last there is an auersion or
apostrophe to Pharao himself, or to the Assyrian King. To whom art thou
likened O thou noble and high among the trees of pleasure, thou have passed all
other in power, and yet with other kings that were in thy company they were
brought to the lowermost parts of the earth (that is) to hell, among the
abominable heathen shall thou sleep, and lie as a wretched and miserable man.
Now because you take hold of the word sleep, you must remember that these
words are spoken ironically, as it is noted in the contents of the 14. Chap. of
Esaias. The derision of the king of Babylon. Moreover Lauaterus on this place of
Ezekiel says: These things may be better understood out of the 14. Chap. of
Esaias, which prophesying of the destruction of the king of Babylon Baltassar,
describes with what bitter scoffs he is entertained in hell. To end,
Lauaterus on this place proves these four things, first, that there is an
hell, secondly, that hell in this chapter is called by three names, that is, 1.
Sheol, 2. Erets Tacthioth, 3. and Bor. Hell, the lowest parts of the earth, and
a pit: thirdly, that this hell is beneath us: and lastly, that the tyrants and
wicked of the world do descend into it, and this he proves out of Numb. the
16, 33. Psalm 55, 15. And adds also that Tertullian and Jerome do prove hell
to be beneath in the earth. The conclusion then is thus, forasmuch then as the
Assyrians dyed with the sword, and were devoured of the beasts and birds of the
field, I pray tell me how that can be true that you affirm that the lowest
parts of the earth does signifye the grave: for how were they in the grave
that were never buried: therefore they were in hell as both Esaias and Ezechiel
do affirm, and as Pelican, Munster, and Lauater, three notable learned men
in the holy tongue do interpret it. I think your own friends when they read
this will confess you either to be ignorant of the word of God, or else to
wrest it contrary to the meaning of the holy ghost. Moreover, where you
mislike with me because I said that Erets Tacthioth, that is, the lowermost
parts of the earth does signifye hell generally in the Hebrew tongue, and you
bring an instance out of the 139. Psalm. and 14. verse, where you prove that
the lower parts of ye earth does signify the mothers womb, and therefore it
does not signify hell always: this is a childish reason. In a metaphorical
signification it signifies the mothers womb, therefore in his proper
signification it can not signify hell. Argumentum a metaphora ductum non
valet, an argument drawn from a metaphore is of no force. And that here is a
metaphor, M. Calvin shall be the judge. He compares (says Calvin) the mothers
womb to the lowest and inward dens of the earth: and a little after, for no
doubt David would express metaphorically that inestimable cunning which
appears in the figure of ma^s body. The mothers womb is compared to hell for
the darkness of it: for as Calvin says, that artificer which makes a cunning
piece of work in a dark place is more to be commended then he which does the
like in the light. David also is here said to be made in the nethermost parts
of the earth, because he was by nature the child of wrath and of hell, if he
had not bin delivered therehence by Jesus Christ. Breefely, where you say that
he descended into the Uirgins womb, and that it is the true meaning of the
place Ephesians. 4. 9. both you and your Master B. are deceived. For Paul reproves
you Ephe. 4. 10. He that descended is even the same that ascended. Now the body
and soul of Christ ascended into heaven, therefore the body and soul of
Christ descended into the virgins womb: if the body did descend into the
virgins womb, then Christ took not flesh of the virgin. Thus that you may
contradict me, you are not afraid ignorantly or wittinglye to deny the
incarnation of our Savior: Theophilact says well of these words, when you
read that the Son of man came down from heaven, you may not think that his
flesh came down from heaven, for this is the opinion of Heretics, which did
teach that Christ brought his body from heaven, and did pass through the
virgin, I hope you hold not this opinion, but if you hold this interpretation
you must needs fall into it, For he that descended, is even the same that
ascended. Ephesians. 4. 10.

Humes Sectio 10.
But here to let you alone with your Hebrew, these words can no ways be
taken as you bear us in hand, for hell: but do purporte to us the same that
John told us in other words, Ioh. 16. 18. I came from my Father into the
world, again I leave the world and go to my father. For seeing the Apostle in
this place brings his ascension as an argument of his descension, which John
the Evangelist did before: it must needs follow by necessary consequence, that
his discense was rather thither whence he ascended. Now I trust you will not
say he ascended into heaven from hell: but rather from the earth in the sight
of his desciples. 2. If the place whence he descended was heaven, hell could
not be the place whether he descended. For if he were there at all, he went not
thither 30. years and more after he descended: if you will say, that he
descended first into the earth and afterward into hell, then that descense
could not be one motion, which was so many years intermitted, but needs must
be two. First from heaven into the earth, and next from the earth to hell.
Lastly if hell were the place whither he descended, it must needs be also the
place from whence he ascended, which cannot be: for his returning thence (if
ever he was there) was when his soul returning into his body, he came again to
his Disciples, from whom he was separated before by death, which in the
Scripture is called his resurrection, and not his ascension. For his
resurrection (as it has been heertofore taught) is no part of his ascension.
If it were so as you bear us in hand. that thence his ascension begins,
then his returning again to his Disciples was but a proceeding so far in his
way, and his abode with them but a resting place, which was never hard of to
this day.

Hill.
Where you say you will let me alone with my Hebrew words, and yet deny they
signify hell, I hope because I have proved that they signify not the grave (as
you have ignorant ly or against your conscience affirmed) at your next
aunswering you will say they signify hell, and confess your disagree meant
with David, Esaias, and Ezechiel. Now you conclude with certain pregnant reasons
as you imagine: your first is this: These words do purporte unto us that which
John told us in other words, I came from my Father into the world, and
again, I leave the world and go to my Father. Ioh. 16. 18. This is nothing
pertaining to the matter we have in hand, unless this be your argument. Christ
came into the world, ergo he went not into hell. Heerof I thus argue, Christ
descended into the virgins womb (as your self say) ergo he came not into the
world. Or thus, Christ descended into the world, ergo he descended not into
the grave. Christ was borne of the virgin, and came into the world to reconcile
us to his Father by his death, taking away our sins, and triumphing in his
own person over death and hell, therefore not only Christ came down into the
world, but as our body for sin lies in the grave, so his body went into the
grave: and because our soul was mancipate unto hell, his soul went into hell,
that by his discending our souls might be freed from hell. In your next reason
you say that Christ descended thither whence he ascended: Now that is merely
false, as appears Math. 12. 40. For as Jonas M. Humes disagreeth with Matthew.
was in the whales belly 3 days and 3. nights, so shall the Son of man be 3.
days and 3. nights in the heart of the earth. Now Christ ascended from the
superficies of the earth, but he descended into the heart of the earth.
Therefore as this is no good argument, Christ ascended from the mount ergo he
ascended not from the grave, so this is also a weak argument, Christ ascended
from the world, ergo he went not into hell: M. Humes lies in his bed and early
arises, afterward many seeing him he rides toward Bromham, ergo M. Humes
came from Bath and not from his bed. Then you add this reason, if Christ
descended into hell, then it was 30. years after his birth, and so it was not
one motion: you charge me with clouds of sophistry, but here is a thick mist
of sophisications: what you mean by this motion I know not, but all the actions
of our Savior are aptly divided into humility and glory: of his humilitye
there are 4. degrees. First he came into the virgins womb, secondly into the
world: thirdly to the grave: fourthly to hell. Of his glory and exaltation
likewise there are four degrees. First he came out of hell and the grave:
secondly he conuersed in the earth: thirdly he was carried in the air in a
cloud, and then entered the heavens with glory. Also where you say, that if hell
were the place whether he descended, it must needs be the place from whence he
ascended. This as I have said before is utterly false, if you mean the
immediate place from whence he ascended, for it is known to all believers, that
Christ did descend into the grave, but he did not ascend immediatlye from the
grave, therefore your reason is against Scripture, where you make a distinction
between the resurrection and the ascension: you may understand if it please
you, yt Ephesians. 4. 9. The word (ascend) contains in it all the degrees of
Christ's exaltation, and therefore the resurrection also: as the word descend
does comprehend all the degrees of Christ's humilitye.

Humes. Sectio 11.
Your next argument is taken from the words of our Savior to Mary Magdalen,
Ioh. 20. 17. Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. Whereupon
you ga there, that seeing the whole man is said to be there where the soul is,
that Christ's soul was not yet with his Father, seeing he does say that he was
not there himself. Here truly it is strange that a man of your learning and
judgment, sees not so apparent a fallacy: an argument you know negative a
toto ad parts deuisas, was never good among the learned: as for example, the
whole race of Mankind is not in England, ergo there is no man in England. Or
Edmund Campions whole body is not over Newgate, therefore no part thereof
hangs there. That these words are meant of the whole, it is manifest by the
text, for that which had not been with the Father, was the same that Mary was
forbidden to touch: That I trow you will not say was his soul, but his soul
and his body joined together, that is to say, the whole man Christ: wherefore
it was the whole man that he says here was not with his Father, and not his
soul alone.

Hill.
My next place was not this, but a text out of Syrac. 17. 21. At the last shall
he arise and reward them, and shall repay their reward upon their heads, and
shall turn them into the lower parts of the earth. In the margin is noted
Math. 25. 35. So that this place shows that after judgment, the wicked
shall be turned into the lower parts of the earth, that is, hell. This place,
because you nor your Sinod can answer, you have passed it over and said
nothing to it, but are now come to your scholepoints, the which when I use you
call sophistry: and so it were indeed if I did use them as you do. You say an
argument drawn negatiuely from the whole to the parts does not hold. True it
is if by (parts) you mean integrall parts, but not essential parts. My
instance was this, Math. 8, 11. Many shall come from the East and the West, and
shall rest with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Out of this
place I prove that where the soul of man is after death, there is the man said
to be, as we usually say that these Patriarchs and all the saints are in heaven
though their bodies be in the earth and are dust and ashes. If then the soul
of Christ were in heaven until his resurrection, then could not these words of
Christ be true John. 20. 17. Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended unto my
father, for it is the preterperfectense (...). Therefore as this is untrue to
say that Abraham is not in heaven because his body is not in heaven: so this is
false to say Christ was not in heaven, because his body was not in heaven. Our
body is governed by the soul, and man takes his appellation of a reasonable
creature not of ye body but of ye soul: and therefore if Christ's soul went up
into heaven as you say, this can not be true (I have not yet ascended to my
father) Besides if Christ's soul went first to heaven and afterward his soul
and body together, then were there 2. ascensions: prove this, and I will give
you the goal. You dally also with my argument in this manner. The whole race
of mankind is not in England, ergo there are no men in England. Do you think
there is no more union betwixt Christ and his soul, then between all the men
of the world? then by this reason the body and soul of Christ were never
united together. Your next resemblance is this: Edmund Campions whole body is
not over Newgate, Ergo no part of him. Here is a foul error to think Christ's
soul to be an integrall or diuisible part, which is an essential or
indivisible: for by your reason Christ's soul is mortal and may perish as the
integrall parts of Campion does. You utter also in an other error in these
words (the whole man Christ) for the whole man does not make Christ, but God
and man as you may see in Athanasius Creed: As the reasonable soul and flesh
is one man, so God and man is one Christ. I will end therefore with this
saying of Irynaeus who lived under Marcus Antonius in the year of our Lord God
125. which thus proves the descending of Christ into hell. For he writing
against Heretics that said hell was in this world (as many do now adays)
thus reproves them in his fifth book and last Chapter. As Jonas tarried in the
whales belly three days and three nights, so shall the Son of man be in the
heart of the earth. And the Apostle says, what is it that he ascended, but that
he first descended into the lowest parts of the earth? and David prophesying
of this, said: Thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell: and
rising again the third day he said to Mary which he saw first and worshipped
him: Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my
Desciples and tell them I will go to my Father and to your Father. If then the
Lord kept the law of the dead that he might be the first begotten of the dead,
how are they ashamed that say hell is in this world. Thus you see it is no
strange thing to see this scripture alleged to prove that Christ's soul was
not in heaven until his visible and glorious ascension. Irinaeus a man of more
learning and judgment then I am of, alleged it to the same end above 1300.
years ago, and then it was accounted a current argument among the learned.

Humes. Sectio. 12.
Now let us come to the great bulwark of your defense you choose to be your
foundation and text. Peter says that Christ was put to death in the flesh and
quickened in the spirit, by the which he went and preached to the spirits that
are in prison which were in times past disobedient, etc. Here following the
Geneua translation, I leave some vantage that the Greek does offer me, but I
hope to find here matter enough to defend the truth. Beza here (whom we
also follow because he grows nearest to the meaning of the Apostle) by this
word spirit does give us to understand the deity of Christ, following John that
calls God a spirit, John. 4. 24. and by this word flesh his manhood
containing both his body and soul as he finds the word used both of Paul,
1. Tim. 3. 16. God was manifested in the flesh, and also of Peter himself, 1.
Pet. 4. 1. Christ suffered for us in the flesh. Which antithesis of the divine
and humane nature Paul does also express in the same terms speaking of
Christ, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and
declared mightily to be the Son of God according to the spirit. Romans 1. 3. 4.
where you see he uses the words no otherwise then he finds them used in the
scriptures. Now that this can not be the sense of them you reason thus. First
you say that this participle (...) that is, going does signifye motion from
some place which can not stand with the divine Essence, which can not possibly
leave any place, being at all times in all places. To this I answer, that it
is spoken of the same spirit or divine essence in Genesis 18. 21. I will go down
and see whether the Sodomites do altogether according to the cry that is come
unto me. And in Exodus 3. 8. I am come down to deliver them, that is the
Israelites, out of the hand of the Aegiptians. You can not be ignorant ( M.
Hill) that the holy ghost speaks oftentimes of the divine Essence by a
figure called (...), when God declares his presence in one place more then in
another by some notable effect, which in this place was most necessary to
express the continual presence of Christ in his Church in those days of
Noah, and so in all ages either past or to come, departing as it were from all
other places (which indeed he can not) and sitting as it were a perpetual
moderator and ruler thereof. Next you allege the other participle (...), that
is quickened, that because it is passive, it can not stand with the divine
essence which can not suffer. This we deny not, for we attribute not this
participle to the divine essence, but to the whole Christ God and man: for we
say not Christ the spirit was quickened, but Christ was quickened in spirit.
Thirdly you tell us that mortified and quickened were both participles, and both
attributed to Christ at one time. We confess they were attributed to one
Christ, but we see no matter to lead us to refer them both to one time. But by
the contrary (me thinks) that the order of the words have sufficient matter in
them to prove that he was first mortified and then quickened. As for the
distinction of time, the distance was not to great as to require it. To this
you add how he was dead, and how he was alive, by putting to killed flesh and
to quickened spirit. The very text as I take it will deny you this, for it says
not that the flesh was killed and the spirit quickened, but that Christ was
killed in the flesh and quickened in the spirit, which is all one, as if he had
said that Christ dyed as he was man, and overcame death as he was God. Which
thing also Paul does express in other words, 2. Cor. 13, 4. He was crucified
concerning his infirmity, yet lives he through the power of God. Fourthly,
you say that the scriptures do ioyn together this going and preaching close to
his passion, as if he had said, as soon as he had suffered he went and preached.
This (as if) concludes no necessary matter. We expect demonstrations, and
cannot be carried with as, and if. Fifthly, you add out of Genesis 6. that the
preching of Noah is attributed to the 3. person, and not to the second, which
putting on man's flesh redeemed us. We confess that ability to preach was given
Noah by the holy ghost, but he was stirred up and sent by the whole Trinity.
The actions whereof seeing they are common to all three, he erreth not that
attributes them to any of the three. Where you say that Christ was raised
from the dead by the first person, and not by the second: I see not how that
can stand with the truth of the Scriptures, which tells me that the second
person did put on man, and did never forsake him in all his distresses.
Afterward you tell me that (...) that is disobedient, and sometime do separate
the time of their disobedience and Christ's going to the^. But I can not take it
at your word, for (...) is, not as you seem to take it a Verb but a
Participle, greeing with (...) that is spirits in the verse before: and the
Aduerb (...) sometimes belongs to the principal Verb, (...) that is,
preached, so that the sense must needs be, he preached sometimes to the
spirits that are in prison, and were disobedient in the days of Noah. Whereas
you argue this can not be spoken of the preaching of Noah, because he preached
to men and to spirits: it is strange to me how he can preach to men and not to
spirits, seeing that whosoever does instruct men does also instruct their
souls. Lastly. you charge this construction to do violence to the text,
taking the word spirit for the divinity in one place, and for the power
thereof in another: where you do us great wrong, for Beza himself refuses
it, and proves it is not taken for the power of the deitye in this place at
all. Hitherto have I answered all that you can say against us, now will I
prove that your sense which you make of this place, can not stand with the
truth of the text. You take this word (flesh) only for the body of Christ,
which dyed and was buried: and the word (spirit) for his soul, which you
bear us in hand descended into hell, preached to the souls which had been
rebellious in the days of Noah: if this your construction shall go for
current, then the apostle speaks nothing here of Christ, which may not be
verified of any man. For though our bodies dye, yet our souls live as well as
his. The spirit here (as it appears by the text) does signify that which
gave life, to that which was dead: that I trust was not his soul, but his
deity: thirdly this participle (...) killed, does signify not only the death
of the body, but also whatsoever Christ did suffer either in body or soul for
the redemption of our bodies and souls: and does comprise his whole passion
which the Spriptures does many times term death, which if it be so (as it is
so indeed) then the word flesh notes unto us the whole subject of his
passion, that is, the whole man Christ, for it was expedient that he did as well
If this be true, then Christ was not dead as Peter says.
suffer in soul for our souls, as in body for our bodies: or else he had been
but half a redemer. Fourthly seeing his body was quickened, that is, restored
from the grave as well as his soul from the sorrows of hell, if you take
spirit there for the humane soul, then you confound those things which the
Apostle does distinguish, attributing that to the soul alone, which is also
common to the body. Fifthly, seeing (...) is to give life, and (...) to receive
life, this cannot be understood of the soul, which never lost life after that
it had once lived with the body, and therefore could never receive it again.
Here you tell us that to be quickened is to be delivered from miseries: how the
English word may be taken I leave it to the wise, but in the Greek word (...)
or the Latin word vi^ificari, I am sure it were strange and seldom seen to
find that sense. Furthermore, I am sure that if this devise may stand, that
then you will overthrow the antithesis between (...) and (...) dead and
quickened, for if quickened does not signify a restitution to life, what
antithesis can it have with death or dead. Lastly, add to those if it please
you that infallible reason of Beza, taken from the scope and drifte of the
Apostle, to whose greater notes I refer you, being not able to handle his
reason so effectually as he does himself.

Hill.
Here you play the Captain, and will beat down bulwarks, and therefore you
should have these 4. properties in you: virtue, knowledge, authority and
felicity: for the first two they are in you (God grant you use them to his
glory) but what authority you have to interpret the word I know not,
therefore in this case (I hope) you shall have no felicity. Where you say that
this word (spirit) does signify the deity: and this word (flesh) the
humanity of Christ, and that there is an antithesis between the divine and
humane nature: I confess that (spirit) sometime does signify the Godhead,
and (flesh) the humanity of Christ. But they do not so signify in this place:
as I prove by the circumstances of the text and the words themselves. For
where you say (...) killed or put to death, does signify the whole passion of
Christ, and (...) signifies the resurrection of Christ that cannot be: for of
the passion of Christ is mention made before in the same 18. verse, Christ
suffered for us, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God. Now after his
sufferings ended as Peter says, he was both killed and made alive. Now of his
resurrection is mention made in the 21. verse, as of his ascension in the 22.
verse. Therefore seeing the sufferings of Christ are mentioned before, and his
resurrection is namelye set down after: whereof can these words be
understood, but of the separation of the body and the soul, and of the state
of them during their separation, for an antithesis as you know is of contrary,
or diverse things, as in this place you see, in (killed and quickened.) Now how
both these were true at one time, S. Peter does show, for at the same time he
was dead as concerning his body, he was alive in spirit, that is in soul: for
the soul separate from ye body is aptly called in spirit. Eccle. 12. 7. And
dust return to earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave it. So
is it taken Heb. 12. 23. Act. 7. 59. and so does this word signify in this
place: for Christ was not killed both in body and soul, but only in body and
in flesh, for if the soul of Christ had been killed, then had it been
mortal. Therfeore Athanasius, Epiphanius, and all the Fathers which did
confute the Heretics called Damoerite and Appolinaris, which denied Christ to
have a soul, do confute them by this place, proving that his spitite was
among the spirits, that his soul separate from his body, was among the souls
separate from their bodies. This interpretation you see is gathered out of Gods
word, and is made more manifest by the words following: (...), which we
translate. In which spirit he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
First you translate (...) by the which. But in the 1. Pet. 16. you do not so
translate it, nor in the 2. Chap. and 12. ver. the same words (...) are Ephesians.
1. 13. 2. 22. 5. 18. and so could I cite at the least an hundredth texts in the
new testament, where if you translate (...) by the which, or by whom, you shall
overthrow the meaning of the holy ghost. The next word in construing, is
(...) which as I have said before, so I auouche still, is spoken not of the
deity never in all the Scriptures, and therefore must needs be spoken of the
soul of Christ. To confute this, you allege Genesis 18. 21. Exodus 3. 8. First I
must tell you these books were written in the Hebrewe tongue, and not in the
Greek, I craved an instance out of the new testament. Secondly, in those
places that you have named the interpreters do translate Iarad by the greek
word (...) or (...), and not by (...). And this I prove, Ioh. 16, 7. (...). For
if I shall not depart the co^forter will not come unto you, but if I shall depart
I will send him unto you. Here you see when he speaks of the descending of
the deity, he uses the word (...), but when he speaks of the humanity
(...). And in the same Chap. verse the 28. (...). I came out from the Father
and came into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to my father. And
this propriety of speech which ye holy ghost uses ought to be observed. I
confess the scripture uses the figure (...), but when God is said to come
down, there is used the verb (...), or some one of the forenamed, and when
mention is made of (...), it is always spoken of the humanity, as it is to be
seen Luke 4. 30. 9. 51. 52. 56. 57. Luke 13. 22. Ioh. 8. 1. And in this place
of Peter the last verse is used the same word (...). He went up into heaven.
Therefore if you can quote but one text in the new Testament that (...) is
figuratively applied to the deity, your interpretation may seem tolerable:
but if you can not (as I know it is impossible) then can you never prove your
interpretation to be agreeable to faith, because it is not agreeable to the
word. Out of the next word (...) this I note: he that was killed and quickened
did preach, but Christ was killed and quickened, ergo Christ and not the deity
preached. He preached not vocally for he was killed, ergo he preached really in
soul: for here is noted. First, who preached? Christ. To whom? to the
spirits. Where? in hell. When? after his death, and before his resurrection.
This is the order of Peter and of our Creed, which can not be by man
overthrown. The word (...), that is spirits also is not as you take it, for
you say it signifies the men in Noah's time, but you can not bring one
scripture to prove it. Therefore I say as I said before it signifies souls
separated from the body. That my exposition is true, I have proved by three
scriptures, Eccle. 12, 7. Heb. 12, 23. Act. 7, 59. Now as mine is true, so will
I prove yours to be false and impossible by Christ's own words. Luke 24, 59.
where our Savior to prove himself Humes disagreeth with the words of our
Savior Luke 24, 39
to be no ghost, but to have a true body after his resurrection, thus
reasons: behold my hands and my feet that I am the same, handle me, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. This was Christ's argument,
I have a body, therefore I am not a spirit, and so I reason against you and
your teachers. The men in Noah's time had bodies, ergo they could not be called
spirits. Every boy can tell you in Oxford that Substantia is divided into
corpus and spiritum, and that one of these opposite species can not be affirmed
of an other. And therefore to be short when you can prove out of the new
testament, that (...) that is, mournying is spoken figuratively of the deity,
or (...) that is spirit, signifies a man that has a boy. I will give you the
goal, but if you will run on this course until you have proved these two
points (which you must do if you will have me to recant) then take heed least
you run your self out of breath. Lastly, the word (...), that is prison, does
signifye hell, as it is to be seen Apoc. 20. 7. When a thousand years shall
be fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison. Thus thou see (good
reader) how I have proved my interpretation out of the word of God for every
word, which our adversaries can not do for their interpretation: therefore thou
may safely assure thy self ours to be good, and theirs to be false. And that
this word prison does signify hell, you may see Epiphanius, Athanasius,
Fulgentius centuria 1. lib. 2. cap. 14. Peter Martyr on the Creed, Nowell in
his Catechisine, Beacon in the sick man's salve, and Crowley in his answer to
the reasons of Pound the Papist. All these old and new writers have alleged
this Scripture as I have done with good warrant and conscience. Now that I
have proved this my own interpretation, I will (by Gods grace) prove your
answer to be friuilous. First you confess that killed and quickened are
Participles of one tense, and yet you say they are not referred to Christ at
one time, this is meerlye false, as I thus prove: Christ was after his passion
dead and alive, or never; if he were never M. Humes disagreeth with Peter Paul
and himself.
dead and alive at one time, then Peter says not truly, if he were dead and
alive at one time then you speak falsely. Now you your self confessed that he
was dead and alive at one time a little before, and proved it out of the 2.
Cor. 13. 4. He was crucified concerning his infirmity, yet lives he by the
power of God. Here by your own words Christ was alive when he was
crucified: so may I say with Peter, he was alive when he was dead, and at one
time, Then you say the (flesh) signifies the manhood, and (spirit) the
deitye: this also is untrue, for the body may be killed, but the soul cannot.
Again, show me any Scripture where one and the same word in one sentence and
period, is taken for diverse things: for in this sentence, In which spirit he
went and preached to the spirits that are in prison. Here ye word spirit in
the beginning of the sentence signifies the deity, in the latter end the same
word signifies the men that lived in Noah's time by your interpretation: but
by my interpretation it signifies the soul seperat from the body in both
places. For as Cirill says, as Christ was with the living in body and soul,
so to show himself a true man, his body was among the dead bodies, and his
soul among the souls. Then you avouch the preching of Noah is attributed to
the whole Trinity, be it so, but can you prove that Christ after he was killed
did preach in Noah, for this preaching was after Christ's death, which is
mentioned in the 18. verse, and before his resurrection, which is spoken of in
the 21. verse. You go forward and tell me, that (...) does not determine the
Participle (...), that is, disobedient, but (...), that is, preached. I must
tell you plain you speak neither like a Divine, nor a Gramarian. For an
Aduerd is sometime put to a Participle, as Matthew. 2. 7. (...). Then Herod
calling priuilye the wise men. Sometime to a Noune, as Homo egregie impudens.
Sometime to an Aduerb, as Parum honest se gerit. Therefore the Aduerb (...)
coming after (...) next and immediately, and being distinguished from (...) by
a Comma, cannot by any example in diuinitye, or by any rule of Grammar be
coupled with the Uerbe (...) Now to answer your infallible reasons. First you
reason against me, that if my construction be true, then nothing did happen to
Christ which might not be verified of any man. And did you not blush when you
wrote these things? Can any man's soul go to hell, and return again? For his
going down to hell I prove in the 19. verse, and his return from hell in the
21. verse. Seconly, you say the word spirit does signify that which gave
life, what then? as God gives life to the body effectually, so the soul
gives life to the body formally. Your Geneua translation which you follow,
says, he was quickened in the spirit, not of the spirit. And this I note
against your side (...) in the 18. verse you translate (In) But in the next
verse as though you had not done well in the former, you translate it (by) Now
you know the preposition (...) signifies (by) and not (...) as it appears in
the 21. verse and in many places mo: (...) that is, by the resurrection.
Moreover if you had said quickened of the spirit* then had you made a probable
answer: but no divine is able to prove this exposition, that Christ was
quickened in the spirit, that is, in the deity, for the deity is life it self.
Your third pregnant reason is, that (...) signifies not only the death of the
body, but also the whole passion of Christ. This cannot be, for the sufferings
of Christ are set down before in the same verse: then in this word (...) is
showed the manner of the death that Christ suffered, that is, he was killed and
suffered a violent death. For (...) being derived of (...), must needs signify
put to death. Now I hope you will not say Christ was put to death in soul and
body, but in body only. And where you say that Christ suffered in soul as well
as in body, that is true, and that is gathered not of (...), that is killed,
but out of these words antecedent (for Christ suffered the just for the
unjust.) No reasonable man but he will say, that the sufferings of Christ are
comprised rather in the word (suffered) then in the word (killed.) To your
fourth reason I reply, that Christ was raised from the dead, but it is
specially signified in the word resurrection, verse 21. and therefore I do not
confound those things that are distinguished, but your self: for you make
suffered and killed all one, and quickened and the resurrection all one, and so
make not only a confusion, but a fantology and needelesse repetition which
never was read in the word of God. To your fifth argument, where you say (...)
is to receive life, I confess it is to be made alive. Then you urge it can not
be spoken of the soul which never lost life: Then by the same reason more
strongly it can not be spoken of the Godhead, which has, does, and shall live
for ever: for God can not receive life, but the soul is said to live when he
is out of the body, not because he lived not before, but because the body does
hinder the actions of the soul, John. 11, 25. He that believes in me though
he were dead yet shall he live. Sap. 9, 15. The corruptible body is heavy unto
the soul, and the earthie mansion keeps down the mind that is full of
cares. 2. Cor. 4, 16. Therefore we faint not, but though our outward man
perish, yet our inward man is daily renewed. Here Paul says, the weaker the
body is, the stronger is the soul, therefore the death of the body is the life
of the soul. To draw to an end, your Antithesis of the Deuinitie and
humanity is Fortissimum argume^tum
answered before. For your Antithesis must be of things contrary or at the
least diverse and separate, but as you affirm truly the Godhead was never
separated from the humanity: therefore this antithesis is of the body and
soul which at this time were divided, and not between the deity and humanity
which were always united: wherefore this bulwark I can assure you will stand,
and you have ouershot both it and your self in attempting to overthrow it.
For the very scope of the Apostle is this, All Christians must suffer
afflictions for well doing, for Christ did not only suffer both in body and
soul, but also was put to a shameful death in his body, and in his soul went
down to the souls in hell, which were unbelievers in the days of Noah: but
Christ did arise again from hell and the grave, and ascended both in body and
soul to heaven: therefore shall you that suffer for well doing be delivered
from death and hell by his merits, and go up into heaven, and be partakers of
his glory as you have bin partakers of his afflictions. Moreover, as you
refer me to read Bezas great notes on this text, so I pray you to read
Aretius handling this place, whose words are these. Generally (says Arctius)
Peter repeateth three effects of Christ's death if you mark it well. The first
pertains to the damned. The second to the elect. The third to the person of
Christ. The first was declared in his descending into hell. The second in his
resurrection. The third in his ascension into heaven. This is the true and
natural meaning of this place which we will follow, leaving the intrications
of other interpretations. I willingly confess this place is very hard, for
Augustine doubts of it, and Luther doubts of it how it is to be
understood, but this obscurity arises not of the place, but of the variety
of Interpretations. If thou mark the plainness of the place, the matter will
be easy, but that pleases not all men: therefore that every one may establish
his own sense, they apply the words of the Apostle Peter to their own
conceit. But leaving these, let us embrace that which the words do teach us: in
the which, if we attain to the truth it is well, if not, yet they shall be
probable, because they have warrant out of the scripture, and leave to the very
letter (...), otherwise it is certain the knowledge of man to be imperfect in
many questions of holy scripture, of the which the Apostle does warn us 1.
Corin. 15. For now we know vnperfectlie. I have said here is declared three
effects of Christ's death which differ in time, and are set in order in the
Creed. The first effect is, that Christ being dead, denounced eternal pains
to the wicked in hell. The words of the Apostle are these. In which spirit he
went and preached to the spirits detained in prison. I take the place simply of
the descence into hell, for so the words do plainly sound, and I see all the
Fathers so to interpret them: see Augustine Epist. 99. and Cyprian does
manifestly interpret this place of the descending into Hell. Neither does the
word prison hinder this Interpretation, which in the Apocal. 20. 5. is taken
for hell. When a thousand years shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed out
of his prison. Therefore the prison that Peter here speaks of, is the place
deputed to the damned. Hither came Christ, as we confess in the Creed, he
went down into Hell. Where Hell is, it is a foolish and curious question to
enquire, since no man coming to that place ever returned but only Christ.
Furthermore, what Christ did there, Peter expresses, he preached to the
spirits, that is, he declared that he showed himself manifestly to the world,
and made that dire and mournful sermon namely to the wicked, that the merit
of his death did nothing pertain unto them, but by his presence were confirmed
those punishments of the which Noah and other Prophets had forewarned them. And
the time of this Preaching I refer not to the times of Noah, but to the time
of his descending into Hell. Whereunto agrees the word (...), that is,
spirits, for he preached to the spirits, that is, to dead, and not to living
men. Thus far Aretius. I could here allege many other new Writers, which
are of my judgment, but because you yield them no credit, therefore of
purpose I will omit them.

Humes. Sectio. 13.
These things being thus, I pray you (good M. Hill) seeing you would have us
undoubtedly to believe that Christ descended into hell. Tell us undoubtedly to
what end he should descend thither. I trust you will not teach us neither
Augustine neither Ieroms lesson, that he went thither to deliver prisoners. As
for that new lesson that he went thither to triumph, that is a base devise to
send him thither to triumph, who had conquered hell on the cross. For my own
part, I have oftentimes read the name of hell joined with shame and ignominy,
but to this day I never hard it joined with triumph He joins it himself a
little after with triumph.
and glory. But be it so, and tell me if you can, how Christ who was yet in the
grave and bands of death could triumph over hell. Is it likely that he could
triumph before the victory? You add two other causes to bind the devil and
to deliver us from hell. You bring us many places of scripture to confirm this
gear Genesis 3, 15. The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. Osee.
13, 15. O death I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy victory. 1. Cor. 15,
55. O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory. In all which
places there is not a syllable sounding that Christ descended into hell. A
little before he says he never read hell, with triumph.
As for his triumphing over hell, we never denied it, and do avouch that he
performed, that most gloriouslye by the power of his Godhead, which did
present his most noble victory over his enemies, hell, and death, both in
heaven, earth and hell, without his bodily presence.

Hill.
You ask me why Christ descended into hell, and yet you confess I noted 3.
ends of Christ's descending into hell, the one to triumph over the Devils: the
other to bind the Devils, and to take away their power over mankind: the 3.
to deliver us from hell. There was also set down a fourth end, that is, to
manifest his death unto those in hell and to reprove them of their incredulity:
and here laboring to catch me in a snare, you are fallen into it your self:
for first you say Christ conquered hell on the cross, then as having
forgotten Humes is contrary to himself.
your self you ask this question with admiration. How could he conquer being
in the grave? Is it likely that he would triumph before the victory? First you
stoutlye affirm that he had conquered, then you boldly deny it. Conuenit
nulli qui secum dissidet ipse. Next you say you have not read the name of
hell, but joined with shame and infamy: why do you write then that the Godhead
did triumph over hell? Did you not read your own writing, I am sure in this
place. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory?
The name of hell is joined with triumph, but you answer these places with a
flat negative. Here is not a syllable to prove the descending of Christ into
hell. I am sure Paul proves here the resurrection of Christ and of our
selves, and how can he prove the resurrection, unless he prove the knitting
together of the body and soul? for as death is the parting of body and soul,
so resurrection is the reuniting of them together again, and here Paul
shows that the body coming out of ye grave and the soul from hell, Christ
did conquer both. And therefore it is not the deity as you say, but the humane
nature of Christ did vanquish death and Hell. Heb. 2. 14. For as much then as
the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had power
of death, that is the Devil. Therefore Hemingius on the Col. 2. says. As on
the Cross he conflicted with the devil, so by his glorious descending into
hell, resurrection and ascension he did triumph. Therefore these places prove
the descending into hell as well as the burial, for the reason of the apostle
is this. Christ came out of the grave, ergo he conquered death, and Christ came
out of hell, ergo he overcame hell. Therefore thus I reason against you, that
did conquer which did fight, but the humane nature of Christ did fight, Humes
disagreeth with Peter and Paul, 1. Pet. 3. 22. Phil. 2. 9. 10 Ephesians. 1. 20. 21.
22.
ergo it did also conquer, and is gone up into heeuen, to whom the Angels,
powers and mightes be subject. 1. Pet. 3. 22. Col. 2. 15. Phil. 2. 9. 10. Ephesians.
1. 20. 21. 22. Therefore since all these Scriptures do witness that Christ as
man did trivmph, and is exalted, and has all power, I doubt not but in your
next answer you will reform your judgment.

Humes. Sectio 14*
You allege for his descending into hell to bind the devils this, how can a
man enter into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, unless he first bind
the strong man, Here is not that you took upon you to prove that he descended
into hell to bind the Devil. The house of this strong man which is here
spoken off, by the circumstances of the place is apparently to any man of
judgment (not hell) but this world whereof the devil had taken possession,
and had polluted many hearts, out of the which he was cast by Christ, who
thereby proves himself to be stronger then he.

Hill.
Your interpretation is true, and the other is true also, for Christ did not
only overcome the devil in the world, but also in hell. For as Cyrill notes
on this place, there was before the coming of Christ much violence, taking
away the flock of God, and carrying them to his own house, wherefore before
the coming of Christ, the heathen and people of the world went into eternal
death: but Christ has delivered both their bodies from the grave, and their
souls from hell: by his death and personal descending into hell. This place
is alleged by one Georgius Princeps Anhaltinus, in his learned commentaries
on the 16. Psalm, which you may read it if you please, for as David trampled
on the face of Goliath, so did the soul of Christ trample on Satan in hell, and
trod on his face: and this is noted by the Prophetess Sibilla, as also by the
Heathen Poets, whose words I have set down in my Sermon at large. And
therefore Clenard in his grammar gives this observation, (...) id est (...).
he went down into hell, that is, into the house of hell.

Humes Sectio. 15.
Now one thing remained wherein you seemed to run beyond your self, and most
men do wonder what you meant thereby, whereas Christ upon the Cross did utter
to the hearers then, and to all ages after, that he had finished the woork of
our redemption in these words, It is finished: you take on you to prove that
he meant not so, alleging these places. Ioh. 17. 4. I have finished the
work which thou gave me. Act. 13. 29, And when they had fulfilled all
things that were written of him. Ioh. 19 28. Seeing all things were finished
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Out of al these places say you it may
be seen that there remained somewhat to do. Good M. Hill remember your self
and you shall find no man of our side that will deny you so much. When our
Savior cried out It is finished, he had not yet given up the ghost, which was
the end of his work: but I trust you will grant us this, that the meaning
was this work there should be at end, when he had breathed his last breath
for you know it is a common manner to speak that in the time past, which is
meant presentlye to come. So Christ himself speaks in another place. Behold
the time comes, and it is already come, that you shall be scattered. You
brought us here a distinction of Consummatum re, and Consummatum spe, out of
the Dunces. I pray you to send it again to those thick skummes whence you had
it. It will not serve our turn, for it seems no otherwise in our ears then
that our Savior should tell us that he had done, and had not done. And tell
those Harpyae quae tactu suo optimas dapes foedarunt: that a thing may be
consummatum spe, which a man means not to begin twentye years hence, and
perhaps never finish. Such ware will yield but little money and less thanks
in these days: here we wonder what you meant by denying that he had finished
al things on the cross, would you send him to hell to suffer there too? then
his woork was so far from any end, it was scarce begun. He that will hold
that must needs condemn truth it self for an untruth: for if he had but only
passed the death of the body, they which feel hell, and we also should know
that he had scarsely yet been fleabitten, in respect of that which is to come.
This truly (M. Hill) was ware not worthy your wit.

Hill.
Here you have spoken much and proved nothing, for of those reasons which I
have laid down in my Sermon concerning this point, not one is answered. Only
as you told me before I was immodest, so now you tell me I am a mad man, and
the wonder of the world. I must answer you with David, I am become as a
monster unto many, but my trust is in thy law. But what will men judge of you,
that in one and the same matter affirm and deny. You confess in the
beginning, that there remained somewhat to do, and in the end you wonder at me
because I said all things were not finished in the cross. Your next words are
these, when our Savior cried it is finished, he had not given up the ghost
which was the end of his work. It is true that after the speaking of
Consummatum est, it is finished, he gave up the ghost, but that was not the
finishing of his work, for he must also shead his blood. Heb. 9. 22. Without
sheading of blood there is no forgeuenes of sins. 1. Pet. 1. 19. John. 1. 7.
Apoc. 1. 5. In all which scriptures it is set down, that we are redeemed with
the precious blood of Christ. The blood of Christ does purge us from all sin:
he has loved us, and washed away our sins in his blood. Therefore the giving
up of the ghost was not the end of his work. Here is a fault committed by
you, but I will not wonder at you, nor say you are runn besides your self,
but you runn against your self, and resist also the holy ghost. Then you
scornefully reject my destinition of Consummatum re, and Consummatum spe, that
is, finished in hope, and finished in deed. I will defend it, for it comes
not out of the Dunces, but out of Gods sacred word. Romans 8. 24. it is said, We
are saved by hope. Gal. 5. 5. for we through the spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness through faith. Luc. 21. 24. Lift up your heads (says Christ to
his Disciples) for your redemption draws nigh. Romans 8. 23. And not only the
creature but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit do sigh, even
we do sigh in our selves waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our
bodies. Musculus on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians thus writes, the
places are these, That we are called in hope not in deed, and that the hope of
future blessings is the stay of our faith as long as we are in this flesh, for
we are saved nondum in re sed in spe, not yet in deed but in hope. By all
these scriptures it is manifest that our consummation is in hope and not in
deed (as Musculus notes) neither shall be actually perfited until the day of
judgment. Therefore I did with this distinction refute the argument which is
made of those that are on your side, who thus conclude. Christ said on the
cross It is finished, Ergo he went not down to hell. By the same reason I
thus argue. Christ said on the cross It is finished, Ergo he did not shead his
blood, nor was buried, nor rose again, nor ascended into heaven to fulfill all
things. Ephesians. 4. 10. for if all things were then fulfilled on the cross, what
need he to ascend to fulfill all things. Therefore I did prove that this
argument of yours did make no more against the descending into hell, then
against the sheading of his blood, burial, resurrection, ascension or
judgment, all which are necessary to our weal and perfect consummation.
Farther, to prove my distinction to be true, I did then quote that as Christ is
said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, so the death of
Christ did reach to the first believers, and shall do to the last. Which
consummation by hope is so enjoyed as if we possessed it already: for all the
promises of Christ are ye ye and amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. Therefore I told you
this argument It is finished, ergo Christ went not down to hell was a fallary
a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter. Also I noted how these words were to be
understood. First, that all the scriptures and prophecies were fulfilled, for
so the text notes. Secondly, it is finished does signifye, there is no other
sacrifice for sin: for by one sacrifice once offered, he has made perfect all
that shall be sanctified, Hebr. 10, 14. And therefore the Papists joining the
merits of Saints with the merits of Christ, do err most shamefully. Thirdly
it was finished as concerning all his labors and sorrows. Fourthly all his
sufferings both of body and soul were ended, which he finished on the cross.
Briefly his obedience to his Father was ended, for he yielded a pure, perfect,
and perpetual obedience to his Father, and therefore had all power given him
in heaven earth and hell. Moreover I did prove this interpretation by this
text, 1. Cor. 15. 54. Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory, and did
allege Beda, Peter Martyr, and Musculus upon this place, all which were of my
judgment, and therefore you had no more cause to wonder at me, then at these
learned men, whom all the reformed Churches of England do reverence. Last of
all, you seem to charge me as though I had said that Christ went down to
suffer, which thing I never mentioned, but that he went down to manifest his
death, to triumph in his own person over the Devil, and personally to redeem
us from hell. Then you call them dunces whence I had that distinction. I had it
from Musculus, and Musculus from the word of God, and therefore you must
embrace these distinctions, or else you will speak erroneously. Omnia probate
quod bonum est tenete. Try all things, hold that which is best. This word is
worthy my wit or any other Interpreters. Neither will I leave the ware that is
in my poor pack for all the treasures of Egypt.

Humes. Sectio. 16.
In the end of your Sermon you bring us two inconveniences if this article be
not believed. First, that men would doubt whether there were an hell. Secondly
whether Christ had redeemed us thence. In deed you take the way to make men
doubt thereof, to see learned men to strive about that which all the world does
know to be true. If you be remembered you told the people in the beginning of
your Sermon that neither M. Wisdom, nor M. Chalfort did doubt of this article,
and why are you now contrary to your self. Why would you have it seen that
these inconveniences would follow. If you should not be believed and bear the
world in hand that we take away both hell, and the benefit of Christ's death.
This is good Rhetorique, but it is ill Divinity. It was your part to have dealt
plainly, and to have told the people. If you would needs speak thereof, that
neither you nor we did do either of these points, and that thereof they had no
matter to doubt, but to walk as the children of God, if they would either
avoid the one, or possess the other.

Hill.
I brought two inconveniences if this article were denied, to move the people
not to leave out any. It is not unknown to you that Seruetus and Carliell deny
it, and diverse others now living among us (by reason of the negative doctrine
which is preached of your side) will not repeat this branch of the Creed he
descended into hell. And some have said to my face that Thomas Aquinas did
insert it into the Creed. Of these men I know too many, against whom I did
direct my speech, for fear least some might be in that populous assembly. Bad
do they that deny the personal descending, but worse do they which deny both
personal and potentiall. Therefore I was not contrary to my self, but
contrary to those which have given occasion that so comfortable an article of
our Christian faith, should be put out of the Creed. You say it was my part
to deal plainly. I hope I did deal plainly, for I preached the truth.
Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flatterye gets sreends, truth gets
hatred. I know the ears of that Auditory did itche for other matter, but I am
Gods Minister, and I have preached Gods truth, which I will (by the he^he of my
God) defend against all gainsayers whatsoever.

Humes Sectio. 17.
We hear that you have preached since at Leecock and condemned al your
adversaries in this matter of ignorance, fury and madness, as denying so
commodious and comfortable, so wholesome and needful a doctrine as you think
yours to be. Here I appeal to your conscience, show us what commodity or
comfort, what wholesome or necessary matter we deny, that you do teach. If all
your comfort and commodite consists in our redemption from hell and death to
heaven and health, there to behold the glorious face of our immortal God and
to sing amongst the Angels Osanna in the highest: do not we teach this as
diligent as you? what comfort or commodity can it bring us to send Christ the
Son of the everliving God, (who has borne all the torments of hell on his
tender body for our sakes, and paid a full ransom of our redemption) down
to the pit of hell, without warrant of his word, neither to redeem us thence,
nor them that were there* I refer to the godly considerations of all good
Christians. As for you M. Hill, the world is sorry to see a man so learned and
so eloquent, to bestow his wit and eloquence in so weak a cause. As for
Chalfout the world does condemn him as a man without judgment or discretion,
that so impudently and unadvisedly as some suppose (I pray God they be
deceived) enuiouslie did set his face against the truth, and did so
irreuerently use the diligent and meek labourer in the Lords harvest M.
Wisdom, I speak not this for any favor of him, in respect of his own
person more then M. Chalfouts: for I have some great causes to esteem of the
other, but truth is truth, I will not be carried for any private considerations
against it, you promised if any man could answer your reasons, to recant them
in the same place. I pray God you meant as you said, God open our eyes, and
give us understanding hearts and wills obedient to his known truth.

Hill.
Truth it is, I did preach at Leicocke, and because I heard that M. Wisdom had
set that opinion of yours abroche again at Cosham, I did here also confirm
mine. Not because I am desirous to be contentious, but because I would have no
Christian man to doubt of the articles of his Faith, you ask me what
comfortable or necessary matter you deem, that we do preach? I answer: and
I pray you consider of it, we are borne in sin: how are we delivered from
sin, but by Christ, which was conceived by the holy Ghost: we have the
magnitude of sins with Peter, the multitude of sins with Mary Magdalen: the
turpitude of sins with the woman taken in adultery, the infamy of sins with
the Publican: the diuturnity of sins with the thief on the gallows: the
cruelty of sins with Paul, and the recidiuation into sins with diverse of
the Sainies: yet if we repent we are pardoned for Christ's sake, who purely,
perfectly, and perpetually obeyed the law of God. By reason of our sins we
are subject to all punishments, both corporal and spiritual, and to the wrath
of God: All these punishments due to us, did Christ suffer upon ye cross, both
in body and soul, and therefore it is called his Passion. He suffered in the
Garden, in Annas and Caiphas house, in Pilats hall, but upon the cross as you
say truly he suffered the agonies of death and torments of hell. Further by
reason of sin this was laid upon our first Parents, Thou shall dye the
death: so by reason of this sentence not only the body was condemned to
death, but the soul to damnation. To deliver us from these two punishments,
the soul of Christ went to hell and returned, and the body of Christ that lay
dead in the grave rose again mightily, naturallye, speedily and happily.
Besides Christ arose in deed, he gave himself to be felt and handled,
hereupon we are assured that he conquered death and hell. He ascended into
Heaven and therefore our prayers are hard, when we pray unto him and he gives
us gifts for our ministry, and so he shall come to judgment at the last day to
give us perfect blessedness. You confess that Christ was borne in deed, lived
and fulfilled the law in the likeness of our flesh (sin excepted) he dyed in
deed, he was buried indeed, he arose and ascended indeed, and yet you will
not confess that he personallye descended. How can all these articles going
before and coming after be understood of the person of Christ, and of his
humanity, and not this. Therefore you denying this personal descending of
Christ into hell, take away the great comfort of our deliverance from hell. You
say we are delivered from hell by Christ's death: so are we too by his birth.
For if Christ had not been borne he had not dyed: so if there had not been a
separation of the body and soul of Christ, he could never have conquered
death or hell for by descending into ye grave, and that personally, he
conquered death, and has delivered us from death, and by going down into hell
personallye, he has conquered hell. And for this cause the Scripture applies
it to the death of Christ, because death was (as Paul says, Phil. 3. A
dissolution of body and soul, and these 2. parts being dissolved, Christ came
from the grave and from hell, and so Christ did conquer both, and triumph over
them in him self, as it is Col. 2. 15. These Jews do ask a sign from
heaven, Math. 22, 38. Luke. 11. 29. to whom Christ said, A wicked and
aduoulterous Generation does ask a sign, but no sign shall be given the^, but
the sign of Jonas the Prophet, for as Jonas was in the whales belly three
days and three nights: so shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth,
three days and three nights. Which words Basilius Magnus interprets very
well. These words (a sign) is a matter made manifest containing the
declaration of some thing that was hidden, as the sign of Jonas represents
the descending of Christ into hell, and the resurrection of Christ, and as Bede
says and Rhabanus also, he gave them a sign but not from heaven, because they
were unworthy to see it but from the deapth of hell.. Therefore (M. Humes) this
is a most comfortable doctrine that Christ does deliver us from hell, which
albeit you agnise as well as we, yet because you deny the mean whereby it was
purchased, you deny a most comfortable doctrine: for not only the body of
Christ was in the heart of the earth, but the Son of man, which signifies the
whole humanity, that is, the soul and the body. Jonas was in the whales belly
alive and yet came forth, Christ was in the grave dead in flesh, and alive in
hell and yet came forth. Therefore to take away this manner of descending,
takes away from the Church a singular comfort, and opens a gapp to many
errors confuted already by the Fathers. For if Christ did conquer hell by the
power of the Godhead only and not as he is man, what need had he to take upon
him our nature? but because as man he might be Lord not of heaven and the
Angels, but of the earth and the inhabitants therofand of hell and the
devils. You say the world is sorry for me. In the world says Christ you
shall have affliction. And he tells me the world will hate me. I way not
these things, for I am no man-pleaser, nor lover of the world. But if in my
Sermon I had disagreed with David, Ezechiel, Esaias, Peter, Paul, and Christ
himself as you have done in your answer, I hope I should be both sorry and
ashamed. Touching M. Chalfoult whom you term a man without judgment, and that
he spoke impudently and enuiously, I never saw him before that time and but
ouce since, but by that speech and conference which I had with him I find him
to be learned and void of gall. Such of his neighbors as I have talked with,
did give him the deserved praise of a learned and honest man. And forasmuch as
he has preached sound doctrine in preaching the affirmative, and that doctrine
which is allowed by the learned convocation of this land, it does not become
you to libell against him, for in speaking against him you traduce all those
reverend and learued men, which made an Iniunction for keeping of unity, that
no other Catechism should be taught of any Schoolemaister then M. Nowels.
Therefore because you are a strauger you ought not be (...), and speak evil
of those Ministers which uphold the doctrine established: and because you are
a Schoolemaister, you ought to teach and not to gainsaye it. Qui pergit dicere
ea que vult, audiet ea que non vult. As you revile at M. Chalfoult, so do you
and your friends privily against me, calling me a Bishoppling and a timeseruer.
Indeed I was brought up under Bishop Jewel, who catechized me in this faith,
and therefore I will not easily or rashly depart from it. I confess my self
also to be a timeseruer, for it is the day and time of salvation accepted. Let
them murmr with Martin that list, I pray God my days may end with this
time, and my time may continue no longer then these days of the state of our
Church that now is do continue. I have seen the beginning, I have seen the
propagation of the Gospel, I have seen God has defended our Church
mercifully and miraculously from heaven, God grant that I and all my Auditors
may walk worthy of our calling, Godly, justly, and soberly. Therefore I end
with this saying of S. Paul 1. Cor. 4. 3. As touching me I pass very little
to be judged of you, or of man's judgment. And in the 5. verse, Therefore judge
nothing before the time until the Lord come, who shall lighten things that are
hidden in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest, and then shall
every man have praise of God.

The conclusion to M. Humes.
M. Humes in the latter end of your answer you request me to recant: if your
answer did please me as it does you, I would be as willing to recant as you
and your friends would be glad to hear it. But I will plainly set down my
reasons why I do not recant: The first is: I alleged Act. 2. and proved out
of Peter's sermon my assertion, and to the reasons I drew out of that place you
have answered nothing. Secondly I alleged Syrach 17. 21. To prove that this
phrase the nethermost parts of the earth does signify hell, to this you have
in like manner said nothing. Thirdly in all your answers to my allegations,
you have disagreeed with the word of God. In answering of the 16. Psalm, you
say my allegation is to be understood of the passion of Christ: And Peter Act.
2. says it is spoken of ye resurrection, whether is to be believed of Peter or
you, I refer it to the indifferent Reader. Then I proved that Erets tacthioth
that is, the nethermost parts of the earth did signify hell, out of 63.
Psalm and 9. verse: In answering of this you dissent from David and M. Calvin.
Now whether it be more safe to foliow David or you, let my enemies judge. I
alleged Ezechiel to prove that point also 31. Chapter, 5. 16, 17, 18, 19. In
answering to that place you have gainsaide Ezechiel, Esaias in his 14. chapter.
Lauaterus, Munster, and Pellicane. Now whether it be more fit for me to believe
you or Esaias, or Ezechiel, let your own favorites judge. Then I alleged the
known place of Peter, you travailed much about this place, yet in your
interpretation of this word (...) that is spirits, which you interpret the
souls of the men that lived in Noah's time, you contradict the words of our
Savior Luke 24. 39. For Christ says a spirit has not flesh and bones as you
see me have. And yet you and your Masters say that this word spirit may
signify a man living. Now whether it be more expedient for me to believe you
or Christ, I refer it to your own judgment. You said my Sermon at
Chippenham did confirm you and your friends, but I hope your own answers
will not confute me but your self, and cause your self and them both to
recant. You say you seek to know the truth, so do I, as knows the knower of
al hearts wherefore whether you or I have taught the truth, let not Humes nor
Hill judge, but the learned of the universities. For as Paul says, 1. Cor,
14. 32. Yhe spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets. That is, the
labors of learned men are to be judged of the learned. The God of patience and
consolation give us grace that we may be like minded one toward another
according to Christ Jesus, that we may with one mind and with one mouth,
glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 15. 5. 6. To whom be
all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

(...).
Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iouis ira nec ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum nec edax abolere vetustas.

