A TREATISE AGAINST VVITCHCRAFT: OR A Dialogue, wherein the greatest doubts
concerning that sin, are briefly answered: a Sathanicall operation in the
Witchcraft of all times is truly proved: the most precious preservatives
against such evils are showed: very needful to be known of all men, but
chiefly of the Masters and Fathers of families, that they may learn the best
means to purge their houses of all unclean spirits, and wisely to avoid the
dreadful impieties and great dangers which come by such abominations.

HEREUNTO IS ALSO ADDED a short discourse, containing the most certain means
ordained of God, to discover, expel, and to confound all the Sathanicall
inventions of Witchcraft and sorcerie.

He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God and he
shall be my son: but the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Rev. 21. 7, 8. and 22. 14, 15. CAMBRIDGE Printed by John Legatt,
Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD Robert Devorax, Earl of Essex and EWE, Vicount
of Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horse, and Knight of the most Honorable order
of the Garter. H. H. wishes with his heart, grace from God the Father by Jesus
Christ, increase of al virtues, and constancy in the truth of the Gospel to
the end.
THE Scriptures of God (right Honorable) in sundry places, do most evidently
teach us, that there are two spiritual kingdoms in this world, which have
continual hatred and bloody wars, without hope of truce for ever The Lord and
king of the one, is our Lord Jesus, the tyrannical usurper of the other, is
Satan, Again, this also we are as clearly taught, that all men living without
exception, are either true subjects of the one, or slaves unto the other. For
albeit, the Neuters of this world, dream that they may indifferently view
the scarres and wounds of other men, and never approach near those bloody
skirmishes: yet the truth is, they are fowlie deceived: for the great Lord and
King has said with his own mouth, Matthew. 12. 30.
He that is not with me, is against me. Wherefore, all that build not up, as
much as in them lies, the kingdom and City of God, and batter down the
holds of Satan, must be numbered with the rebels and enemies of our Lord
Christ, when the warrefare shall be ended. The enemies of Christ have ever been
many, some open, cruel, foes without: some subtle, close conspirators within
the house of God, most dangerous underminers of the City of God, if they be
not discovered. In this secret conspiracy, albeit Satan have many Champions,
and many arts, mill arts, mill nocendi modos: there is no art more
effectual and dreadful in my judgment, then those his wicked faculties in
Witchcrafte. I have indeauoured (right Honorable) in this small Treatise,
according to my poor strength, to show the principal means ordained of God
for to confound and to discover them. I do here therefore humbly ask your
Honorable protection, for the defense of the truth and the glory of God,
against all the patrones of all such vile arts, and horrible abominations.
Thus doing, your Honor shall not only encourage me, but also, imbolden
others, which are better able, and will be willing also, to lay open the secret
delusions and practices of Satan's inventions. Nobility without godliness and
virtue (as your Honor well knows) is blood indeed, as a learned man
speaks, but blood without bones and sinews. I know therefore that to
increase in your Honor true Nobility, you are well assured, that it
principally stands in purchasing unto Christ and his Church, true honor and
glory, and in beating down (as much as in your Honor lies) all the holds
of Satan's kingdom. God increase in your heart (right Honorable) all his good
graces to his glory, your own salvation, and the benefit of his Church. Amen.
The year of our salvation. 1590.

Your good Lordships ever to use and command in the Lord, Henr. Holland.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, GRACE, MERCY AND PEACE BE multiplied in Jesus Christ.
THE holy Apostle laboring 2. Cor. 10. ^.
to set forth the divine majesty and powerful might of the ministry of the
Gospel, shows how that a man must be, Theoplilact.
as it were conquered thereby, before he do yield sincere and sound obedience
unto Christ. And certain it is, that before men be brought down to that
subjection, they fall often into dangerous errors in mind, and sundry
fearful sins in life. In this question of Witchcraft, some have preferred
the wicked folly of man, before the holy wisdom of God, and would have us to
credit their own practice, Discovery. 16. book. p. 478.
the knowledge also and experience of Cornelius Agrippa, John Wyerus, Nero,
Julian Apostata, and such like: Their experience, to say no more, was
insufficient, most wicked and detestable. Let us then humble our selves before
the wisdom of God, and see what direction we have in this controversy by the
holy Scripture. First for the being of this abomination, the holy word of god
most clearly confirms it. For if there were no such sin, wherefore then
are there so many kinds named and distinguished, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. Mecasephim,
kozemim, etc. Al which, Com in Gal.
Gal. 5. 20. the Apostle comprehends (as Jerome says) in that one word,
(...), Witchcraft? Secondly, wherefore have we so many examples of the
practitioners of this profession, pointed at so often unto us? as the
inchaunters Exodus 17.
of Egypt, the Witch of Sam. 28.
Endor, the witches of Dan. 2.
Persia, Simon Magus Act. 8.
of Samaria, Elymas Act. 13. 6.
the sorcerer at Paphus, the Pythonist Act. 16. 16. Dialog. c. 2. P. 30.
at Philippi? etc. Thirdly, what means the Lord to give such laws against
this sin, as may be seen. Exodus 22. 18. Lev. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 18, 10, 11. For
this is Maxim in Law, as Danaeus says, and the lawyers grant it, De ijs
rebus quae non sunt, leges non promulgantur, There are no laws made of things
which have no being: If this be true of the laws of men, how much more of the
blessed Laws of God, wherein we must not imagine a want or superfluity: and
therefore Hemingius says, De superstios. magic.
Sapientissimus Deus non potest leges far, de rebus quae vel non sunt, vel
esse non possunt: The most wise God can not give laws of things which have no
being, or can have no being. Wherefore I conclude that witchcraft is a
sin, and a filthy work of the flesh, (as Paul speaks) and therefore an
abominable work of the devil, as John John. 3. 8.
says, and consequently, not so lightly (as it is made of some) to be
regarded. The adversaries here are glad to betake the selves to the first
refuge: Discov. p. 472.
Witchcraft is but coozening or poisening art, practiced by humane industry,
whereunto Satan communicates no real conference, or communication. What may
be said out of the book of God, against this bold (...)? what were Pharaos
coniurers in the court of Egypt, and Nebuchadue (...) wise men in Babylon, but
coozeners and porseners? poiseners of all others have no place nor free access
unto princes, and coozeners are most unfit to be their counselors, so as all
those Egiptian and Babilonian witches were, as lerome writes: Habuisse
Babylonem omnemque Chaldaeam incantatorum, Ierom. Com. in Esaias. 57.
etc. studium, etc. Danielis Prophetae lectio probat qui ad eorum consilia,
cunctareges Babilonios fecisse Comm^^^rat: The kings of Babylon, etc. (says
he) did all things after the advice and councels of there inchanters. Again,
what was the Pythonist Act. 16. 16.
at Philippi, had not she a real conference with Satan? for she got her
master great advantage with her continual practice of divination? To be short,
Com. in 1. Sam. 28.
I can not see but he that can do the greater, may do the less: Non mirum
est (says P. Martyr) si exteriores hominum oculos perstringat, cum antea
occupauit oculos mentis. It is no marvel, that he hold fast shut the eyes of
the body, which so blinds the eyes of the mind. He that can work so
mightily by suggestion 1. King. 22. 22. Ephesians. 2. 2.
in the children of disobedience, may also have both a real possession of the^,
and conference with the^. Angelus pol. pan. epist. p. 473.
Lastly, we must not so fondly confound diabolical and natural magic,
which so many learned men in all ages, have clearly distinguished. Ioh. Bap.
Nea. ma. 1. l. 11. c. 1. Caelius Rhodignius. l. 9. c. 23. lectionum antiquarum.
Discov. p. 317.
This shift being thus uncovered, they shelter themselves under a second
refuge, which is this: The witches of our time can work at no hand, so as the
witches mentioned in the Scripture have done. Against this conclusion, we may
reason on this manner. If our Witches, Coniurers, etc. can not work the like as
Iannes and Iambres did, the witch of Endor, etc. the defect must be either in
Satan, or the witch, or both: first for Satan, 160. 162. 163.
be wants at this day, neither will nor might, to do the like. First, no
will, for he see^ his kingdom will not last long, and therefore now toward
the end of the world, he is, and will be more and more envious, and deceitful,
working all the wonders that ever he can, to blind infidels, 2. These. 2. 9.
10. and to deceive if it were possible, the very elect, us our Savior has
forewarned us. Secondly, no strength: he is elder indeed but not weaker. The
God, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13.
the princes, and governors of this world, with whom we wrestle, wax not
weaker as we do, nor the red dragon will Rev. 12. 17.
not cease to make war with the Saints, as long as the world endures.
Again, he is rather more wise in experience, and knowledge of all natural
causes, and therefore more ready in his arts then ever he has been. And
wherefore then Satan for his part, will not, or can not practice those former
arts, it is impossible to be proved, and do not we know, that Satan has
multiplied, rather then shortened the number of his arts? for we read and
understand, that before and since the Gospel was published, he has had great
variety in all ages, of false arts for the practices of his sciences. See
Bodin. de Daemonoaninia. l. 2. c. 1. 2. Cicero de divinat. lib. 1.
Secondly, for his copartner the witch, Man or Woman, I would learn what
wantes they have at this day, more then in former times, that by Satan's help,
they can not produce the like lying woonders. I am sure the wicked also in the
world, and the reprobates toward the end, wax worse and worse, and
therefore in any wise ma^^ judgment, are more fit for this sin, for the
more unclean. Matthew. 12. 43. Discov. 13. book. p. 305. p. 302.
a man is, the more apt is he for Satan's service. But they object, they can
not have at this day, such knowledge in natural causes as Iannes and Iambres
had, etc. I answer, that Satan as he regardes not characters, figures, words,
periapts, etc. so does he not a man's knowledge, to make him his vassale to
work his woonders, unless it be for this end, to veil and cover his
delusions, as sundry Sathanicall Astrologers in Chalde and Egypt have done.
And in very truth there are in this age, as wise in knowledge of all tongues,
Philosophy, liberal arts, etc. (as the learned know) since the Gospel was
preached, as ever was in any age in Christendom. Wherefore if there was by
means of natural knowledge, and humane industry, a Sathanicall operation in
witchcraft in elder times, I say, there may be the like at this day, and unto
the worlds end. The last, and most miserable refuge is this. Disco. epist. to
the Reader.
Our witches, strigae, lamiae, our witches are not once mentioned in Scripture:
our old woman, etc. you shall not read in the Bible of any such Witches. P.
100.
This if they could have granted, that God word might not fight against them,
they know then, they might easily triumph, for the weapons of God are so
mighty, to cast down these holds, that no art nor power of Satan, or
invention of man, may withstand the^: but where they strike, down must all
high proud things, the proud reason of man, Satan 2. Cor. 10. 5, 6. 2. 3. Law.
himself and al his kingdom. Albeit the Scripture gives us no such
historical relations of the witches of our time: yet are they mentioned there
both in general and special manner: in general, where all the sins of
idolatry Es. 47. 2. and 21. 6. and 23. 24.
and blasphemy are condemned; in special, where the like sins are named. M.
Cicero disputes in his book of Divination, of the being of the old Auguries
and magical divinations of his time: where after he has distinguished them
into two kinds: natural, and artificial: (Unto the natural, belong all
those divinations which we may call mere diabolical, as coniurations, and all the practice of Pythonistes, which have an express league and confederacy
with Satan: unto the artificial appertain all those arts, which men (says
he) have learned by long observation, Astrology, Palmistrie, and such like:
these we say, are mixed diabolical, and belong unto the secret covenant and
confederacy, which Satan has with witches.) In the end he concludes on
this manner: Quid est igitur cur dubitandum sit, De Divin. L. 1.
quin sint ea quae disputaui verissima, si ratio mecum facit, si eventa, si
populi, si nationes, si graeci, si barbari, si maiores etiam nostri, si denique
hoc semperita putatum est, si summi philosophi, si poetae, si sapientissimi
viri, qui res publicas constituerunt, qui vrbes condiderunt? an dum bestiae
loquantur expectamus, hominum consentiente authoritate contenti non sumus? If
this Heathen could confirm by such reasons this conclusion, how much more
boldly may we do the same, having not only all these his arguments with us:
but also the heavenly Oracles of God, the light, the laws, the examples, and
the judgments in Gods word, denounced against these sins, which the
Scripture has recorded for our instruction. Wherefore I conclude with Master
Calvine, Certe sacrilega esset Audacia negare vnquam in vsu fuisse arts
magicas, Com. in Deuteronomy. 18.
quia hoc modo Deus incogitantiae argueretur, ac silegem tulisset de rebus quae
nullae sunt. Surely it were graceless boldness, to deny that the arts of
magic have ever been practiced, for so God might be argued to want
judgment, as if he had given a Law of things which have no being. Now to be
short, concerning this treatise which here I offer thee (good Reader) albeit I
cannot teach thee, as I would, to discover and to avoid the Sathanicall
delusions of witchcraft: so variable, so strange, and so secret are Satan's
practices: yet that good which I purposed, I have, I trust, in some part
performed. Whatsoever I have written, in all humble submission, I offer it to
the Censure and judgment of all the godly learned in the Church of God. I was
the more bold to publish this discourse, for that but few have written to any
purpose any thing, which may give light in this argument, in the english
tongue, master George Gifford only excepted unto whom we are much bound in the
Lord. An other cause which moved me is the continual traffic and market
which the rude people have with witches. For like as the old heathen (as Tulli
says) de reb. maiorib, semper aut delphis oraculum, De Divinat. Lib. 1.
aut ab Hammone, aut a Dodona petebant, that is, in their greatest affairs
sought always after the master witches: and in common affairs hid their
common auguries: so likewise our blockish Christians, they have their common
base witches, and their master coniurers, unto whom they ride and go in all
their need, some twenty, some thirty, some forty miles, and what is most
lamentable, such is their brutish ignorance, they think it not unlawful for
them so to do. Wherefore I do here also humbly request all those, whom God
has blessed with knowledge and gifts to discern, in any measure these hid
and horrible abominations, that they would with all their might help to
uncover them. The ministers of Christ must both in doctrine and conversation
oppose themselves unto the ministers of Antichrist. The doctrine of the
Gospel, which we profess, is flat contrary (we know) unto all the
principles of popery: so let our conversation also be unto the practice of all
the Romish prelates. The monks, the friars, and all of the shaven ministry,
were not in any account for learning, which made not an open profession of
these sciences: and of the Popes themselves sundry of them attained their
popedom by these holy means: as Sylvester the 2. Benedictus the 8. Geegorie
the seventh. John. 20. 21. Act. and m. p. 167.
Alexander the 6. if we may credit their own Platina and others. Our enemies
then worshipping the beast and his image and bearing these brandes of sorcery,
Rev. 21. 8.
vvitchcraft, idolatry, and all impiety in their hands and foreheads: let us
with all might avoid them, for without repentance, (the scripture has
forewarned) they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
into the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented in fire and brim stone
which is the second death. Accept what I have written (good reader) or of thy
courtesy give it free passage unto others.

FAREWELL. Thine in Christ Jesus. HENRY HOLLAND.

CHAP. I.
Of the witches mentioned in Scripture, where is showed by evident
demonstrations, how they had a real conference and confederacy with Satan
himself, by whom they practiced and wrought their abominatio^s.

Theophilus. Mysodaemon. WHat say thou Mysodaemon, is it not strange, that
men at this day make so small account to discover, and avoid the most horrible
and dreadful sins of witchcraft.


Mysodaemon. I would gladly hear somewhat of you concerning this argument, for
the common sort of men, indeed, do lightly regard this sin, and the rather
because some men (as they say) of learning and reputation, affirm, that this
art being rightly discovered, contains nothing but cousenage and secret
practices of wicked men, and foolish women which are full of restles
melancholic imaginations.


Theoph. True it is, they say so indeed: but how prove they all such strong
affirmations? they speak much and fill volumes of many books, but prove
little soundly of that which they have vainly and wickedly conceived: for when
their proof is out of the Scripture, they never fail to wrest and bend that
blessed word most profanely to their own purpose. And as for other learned
men, which have written painefulle of this argument, they are all without
difference scorned, rejected, and Dis. p. 17.
railed upon in most vile manner. Their best proof is from their own brain,
and most wicked experience, and yet some wise men (as they say) believe them.


Mysodaemon. Surely Theophilus I can not myself be any way persuaded that the
common sort of our witches work by the devil, or have any conference with
him, for so I remember Bodin De Daemonomania. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and others define a witch to be one that wittingly and willingly uses deuilish
arts to atteine that he purposes, and therefore (...) women are no witches,
for they have no such arts, alack^ poor fools they are no seducers, Dis. p.
71.
but rather poor seduced souls.


Theoph. I see Mysodaemon you have read over some of their great volumes, can
you so pretely bemone our old witches? true it is, many of the common sort (I
believe well) are not right witches indeed, notwithstanding they are guilty of
other most vile sins, and most worthy of death.


Mysodaemon. As for other sins, as coosnage, poisoning, and such like, I will
not cover them, our witches are full of such practices, but that these seely
women, have any arts to conjure the devil, or to convey him into a box (as
they say) to raise tempests, to kill and make alive, I think all these are but
vain surmises of credulous and foolish people.


Theoph. Satan is full of delusions, ^. These. 2.
and fills the minds, eyes, and ears of such as the Lord has justly
given over unto his hands for the contempt of the truth to believe lies, he is
a flying serpent and not so narrowly enclosed, albeit he persuades his
vassals by such vain delusions least (wanting his presence) they should be
discouraged in his service. But let us come unto the purpose, that there have
been, are, and may be such Sathanicall witches, which work indeed many wonders
by the help and ministry of Satan.


Mysodaemon. I know not where to turn me in this controversy, for they say
the scripture has not answered this question, we have Dis. p. 110.
no scripture against our witches or which can discover them.


Theoph. If the scripture will not suffice and serve us for this purpose, let
us impute that to our weakness, and not to the want of that most perfect book
of God, which is said to be so sufficient that it is able to make the man of
God 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.
absolute. And has not the Scripture prophesied of the change of Empyres, of
the variable state of the Church before and after Christ's incarnation, of
Antichrist his coming, ^. These. 2.
his miracles, etc. And do we not find all those divine and prophetical
predictions true? Shall we then imagine that there are some sins crept into
the world which the Lord did not foresee, or has not forewarned us of: no,
no, let Satan turn his coat as often as he list, yet will that blessed word
bewraye him and his practices. The Apostle tells us that whatsoever is
written, is written for our learning: Romans 15. 4.
the Lord therefore having so manifestly taught us and revealed his will, and
what is necessary to be known in this argument, let us be content with his
word, and suffer our selves to be taught by it.


Myso-daemon. I remember one learne'd man Danaeus in Dialog.
faith so: And surely it behooves us Christians to rest our selves upon the
words of Christ: but I think, Theophilus, thou can not find this sin
spoken of in all the Dis. praesae.
new Testament.


Theoph. Yea truly: for it is numbered among those works of the flesh, which
(without repentance) seclude us from the kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5. 20. upon
which place Ierom. com. in Gal. 5.
Jerome says thus: Ne forsitan veneficia, and malificae arts non viderentur
in Novo prohibitae testamento, ipsae quoque inter carnis opera numerantur:
Least peradventure witchcraft, and other magical arts (mentioned in the old
Testament) should not seem to be forbidden in the New Testament, they are
also counted among the works of the flesh.


Miso-daemon. But our witches are properly those whom the Poets call sagae,
Thessalae, Magae, Lamiae: I say this then, and that boldly, that these Dis.
praef.
words are not once found, neither in the New nor Old Testament: I pray you
show me any of them if you can.


Theo. The scripture has no such words in the original tongue for it is Hebrew
and Greek, and these words are poetical Latin words. Again one thing may
have many and diverse improper names. Satan him self is sometime called a 2.
Cor. 4. 4. ephesians. 2. 2. and 6. 12. 13. 2. cor. 11.
god, sometimes a Prince, sometimes an Angel, a governor, a dragon, a serpent,
etc. and yet is he in very truth, but a wicked lying spirit, the executioner
of Gods justice upon the children of disobedience: the witches are sometimes in
Poets improperlie also called Thessalae, Horac. Ovid.
Thessalian witches, Sagae, Wise women, Magae, Persian witches, Lamiae, Ladies
of the fayrie, Striges, Hegges: and yet a witch is but a wicked man or woman
that works with the devil. But as for the matter it self, which by those
borrowed words the Poets and other authors meant, the Scripture is mostrich
and plentiful for our instruction. Let us then attend with reverence what the
Lord says, and not doat on that manner about questions and strife of words:
for thus the Apostle writes: l If any man consent not to the wholesome words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
he is puffed up and knows nothing, but doteth about questions and strife of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, Or, forward.
vain disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of truth: how
say thou now Miso-daemon, is it not best counsel to lean upon the
Scriptures?


Myso-daemon. Truly the Apostles words are most certain, for these sins
have overtaken some men that have written of this argument, as may be seen in
their works: let me hear then first Theophilus, what thou can say of those
witches which are mentioned in scripture.


Theoph. First this I say, that the Lord in Scripture has clearelie numbered
and distinguished 7. or 8. special arts of the devil, practiced by wicked
men and women, Deuteronomy 18. 10. 11. v. for albeit most agree in the interpretation,
yet some vary in the number, The place is commonly translated on this manner:
Let none be found among you that makes his son or his daughter to go through
the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the
flying of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counsels with
spirits, or a sooth sayer, or that asks counsel at the dead.


Myso-daemon. What was the occasion of this great charge of God unto his
people, and where had these arts their beginning?


Theoph. Hemingius writes on this manner: Admonit. de superst. magic.
Like, as Satan used the serpent in the beginning to seduce our first parents
from the obedience of Gods word unto his service: so it is not to be doubted
that after that fall, he used man him self his instrument by magical arts to
withdraw men from faith in the promise of their redemption by Christ. Methodius
says thus: Methodius.
In the 340. year of Iered, there arose some of the posterity of Cain,
inventers of evil arts, as Ibbeth and Tholuscal, the sons of blind Lamech,
who yealding themselves to the dominion of the devil, became practisers of all
magical sciences. After the flood, Ludov. Viu. Tom. 2. p. 4.
Zoroastres in the days of Ninus King of Babylon, and is thought to be that
cursed Cham, the son of Noah; this wicked man, as most writers affirm,
practiced also all these arts, and commended them to his posterity; for
Misraim was his son, of whom came the Egiptians, Babylonians, Persians,
Cicer. de divinat.
which nations of al others were most famous in the world for these Sathanical
sciences. Hereby it may most manifestly appear, for what cause the Lord gives
this great charge unto his people, concerning these arts, that they might not
be found among them. Exodus 7.
First, for that they were lately come from that Idolatrous nation, where this
horrible impiety was continually professed, practiced, Es. 47.
and maintained Secondly, least afterward they should learn these exercises of
other nations round about them, Daniel 2.
or of the Babylonians and Persians (among whom also they should soiourne for a
time) by wicked acquaintance and conversation.


Myso-daem. Now teach me briefly what those arts were, so distinctly nu^bred
in that place, and let me see where any examples of their practice is
mentioned, that so we may the better understand whether they were practiced by
man only, or by Satan him self by the ministry of man.


Theoph. Let us then begin with that kind first whereof the law is given, exo.
22. 18. for under this says M. Calvin and Gaellasius, Gallas. in Exodus 22.
all the rest are understood in that place: the witch there named is
Mecasephath, in Hebrew: Dialog. p. 19.
Tremel. and Pagnin. translate it praestigiatricem, a witch working devilish
delusions. Heming. Danaeus, and Bodin De demo.
do the same, Annot. in Deuteronomy. 18.
Luther turns the word maleficam, but in the same sense, and to the same
purpose.


Mys. Yea, but I remember Andreas Massius the Dis. p. 109.
most famous hebritian in the world, says this word signifies a poisoner,
because the Greek Septuagint translate it (...), and therefore this law is
given directly against poysoners.


Th. The Greek translators might well name a witch by that name, for all
writers agree that their greatest practice is by poison and powders, which the
devil teaches them to hurt withal. Bodin faith, Pars magoru^ maximamedicos
solet and exorcist as agere: the most part of witches play the phisicia^s and
are exorcists. And it is known De Them. p. 472.
true by common experience. Danaeus faith, Dial. c. 4. p. 55.
Alijs venena confecta and parata praebet, alios docet nova conficere and
miscere: The devil ministers unto some witches poison ready made, and he
teaches others to cenfect and compound new. Again, the Apostle uses the greek
word, (...), not for poisoning, but for almagical arts, as both Ierom and
Musculus Ierom. and Muscul. in Gal. 5.
testify in their Comment. upon this place: the same word is used in the same
sense. Rev. 22. 15. and 21. 8. 9. 21. And surely it appears plainly, this
kind of witch was not one that dealt with poison, Dan. 2. 2, 3. for
Nebuchadnezzer calls for these Mecasephim to interpret his dream. And
Hierome says, Com. in Esa. 57.
Rages Babilonios fecisse cuncta ad eorum consilia, They were then belike the
Kings wise counselors, and therefore no poysoners or coozeners. The cause why
the Lewe is given of a woman witch, is (says Bodin) because women commonly
practice these arts, according to the Hebrewe proverb, Quo^ plus mulierum co^
plus magorumest, The more women the more witches. The same says M. Calvin,
Borrahus, Com. in Exodus 22.
Gellasius, and others.


Myso-daemon. Now tell me, are there any examples which have practiced this
kind of witchcraft mentioned in the scripture?


Theoph. That there are: for the witches of Egypt, Exodus 7. 11. and the witches
of Babylon, Dan. 2. 2. are called by these names mecasephim, and chartummim.


Myso-daemon. And what can you find in the sorcerers of Egypt, more then
iagling, legerdemaine, couzenage, natural D. p. ^9. 8.
magic, etc.


Theoph. The circumstances of that story, and al interpretors say plainly
they wrought by the devil. For the Scripture Exodus 7. says plainly they
wrought their wonders in the presence of Pharaoh and his nobles: v. 10. and
before Moses and Aaron. If these witches then could have showed but the fears
of natural magic, etc. they had been soon discovered. Pharaoh himself
thought verelie they wrought the same way that Moses and Aaron did: forthus
one says, Jacob. Ziegle. com in. cap. 8. Exodus
Pharaoh arbitrabatur istud inter vtrosque differ: quod hi amplius illis in
magicis artibus profecissent: Pharaoh thought this was the difference between
both, that the one had more profited in the arts of magic then the other*
and not in iugling, coosenage, natural magic, etc. And surely Hierome and
others think they were in great reputation with their Kings both in Egypt and
Babylon, and therefore it is like they professed a more deep science, then
any rude faculty of coozenage, and practiced greater matters then the iollie
feats of leger-demaine.

And that thou may understand, Myso-daemon, that others also are of the same
judgment concerning these magicians: one says of them, Procopius Gaz. soph.
in Exodus 7.
Has machinas apponit Diabolus, etc. It is the devil that uses these engines:
meaning that Iannes and Iambres did use diabolical arts against Moses and
Aaron. M. Calvin writes thus: Calvin. com. in Exodus 7.
Quum ex genuina philosophia prolapsi essent magi Egyptij, retinent sapientum
nomen v^ fidem illusionibus acquirerent: when the magitians of Egypt had fallen
from the true philosophy (whereby he means natural philosophy and natural
magic) they would still be called wisemen, to win credit to their delusions:
and then he adds, est horribile exemplum laxat as magis habenas: this is a
horrible example, that magitians should have this liberty. Again, he says,
Deum Com. in c. 8. 15.
arti suae hostem opponunt: they oppose God as an enemy to their art: by
these few words, it may soon be understood, what magitia^s these were, in this
learned man's judgment. Brentius Com. in Exodus 7.
says, Miracula Eg^ptiorum erant ludibria Sathanae: The Egiptians miracles
were the delusions of Satan. Gellasius Com. in Exodus 7. 11.
writes on this manner: Ist^ astrologiae and physicae, magiam ac divinationem,
inuocationem demonum, etc. adiunxerat. These Egiptians added to their
astrology and natural philosophy, magic and divination, invocation of
devils, etc. Musculus, Com. in Genes. 41. 8. says plainly, these had their
arts of Satan. All these (as thou see My sodaemon) testify, that the
magitians of Egypt, wrought by the devil.


Mysodaemon. Now let me hear what is the second kind of witches, mentioned in
Scripture.


Theoph. The witches of the second kind, are called in the original tongue,
Aob, Aoboth: by this word, the holy Ghost understands certain familiar
spirits, which whisper with their witches, at it were, out of a tubbe or
bottle, says Danaeus, Heming. Calv Luth. Bodin, and others: for the word
properly signifies a bottle; as Job. 32. 19. Ceoboth cadashim, as new bottles.
But whatsoever is the cause of that borrowed name, for this witches devil,
this must be observed diligently, that this witch and her spirit, are always
clearly distinguished. For the witch, 1. Sam. 28. v. 6, 7. is not called Aob,
but Bagnalath, married to Aob, for so the word signifies, Aob, or possessing
Aob. Predita pythone, says Tremel. and Shoel Aob, Deu. 18. 10. one which
enquireth, or saluteth prays, and entreats Aob, if therefore here be but
coosenage, there must be two cooseners at the lest, so there are, and the witch
is one, the deuilan other. Again, Lev. 20. 27. Ciijh^eh bahem Aob, if Aob,
that is, the devil, be in them.


Mysodaemon. If this Aob, was but a pythonist, as Tremel* and others say, then
I prove it to be but coosenage, on this manner. Apollo the pythonist, and the
oracles at Delphos were of this kind, and were most famous indeed, yet but
mere coosenage, and therefore this was the like. I prove mine Antecedent. Dis.
p. 137. 138.
Gregori Neocaesariensis, soiouruing with Apollos priest one night, after his
departure the oracle ceased: the priest sought after him and requested him not
to hinder his wonted revelations: Dis. p. 137. 138.
Gregory yielded and said to the oracle, permit to tibi redire in locum tuum
and agere quae consuevisti, I permit thee to return to thy place, and do as
thou wast wont. If there had been a devil there, it is not like this holy man
would have given him that liberty. Eusebius. has this story in his 7. book
chap. 25.


Theoph. I assure thee Mysodaemon, I can find no such thing in all that
history. See Grinaeus last edition and Christopherson.
See Grinaeus last edition, and Christophersons, and Grinaeus marginall note
upon Ruffinus translation. I think this be but some legends fable, for it
savors much like such stuff: as for the Gregory's, Socr. li. 4. ca. 22.
Socrates says there were four of them in number: one was Origens scholar,
and that was this Neocaesariensis, the 2. was Basils brother, the 3. was
Gregor. Nazianzen, the 4. was Gregor. Alexandrius. And as for this Gregor.
Neocaesar. he was a faithful pastor of a Church in Pontus as Eusebius. Lib. 6.
ca. 29. etc.
writes, Gregorius and Athenodorus fra^res, paraeciarum quae in Ponto sunt
pastores. Gregory and Athenodore brethren, were pastors of parishes in Pontus.
It is not like then that this man (being so excellent for learning and godliness
as Socrates reports him to be in the forenamed place) would permit the devils
oracle that liberty, if he could restrain it. Wherefore Mysodaemon, I think
thou groundest thy reason upon a fable. And as for this oracle of Apollo, if it
were but cousenage, wherefore did this cousenage cease when the gospel shined,
for cousening hypocrites are in the Church, and will be forever where the
gospel is preached. And wherefore must the devil in Constantines time creep
(as it were) into some hollow caves, was it be cause cousenage creeps in
corners? for Eusebius. says, Apollinem autem id temporis, De vita Constable. lib. 2.
cap. 49.
ex antro quodam and tenebricoso recessu, non ex sacerdotis ore, hoc or aculum
aedidisse ferunt.


Mysodaemon. Well I am content to yield, I know not what strength my reason
has, if that story be not there to be found. What have you a nie examples
which has practiced this kind of witchcraft?


Theoph. The witch of Endor is said to be one of this sort: for she is called
1. Sam. 28. v. 7. Bagnalah Aob, married to Aob, or possessing Aob, or (as the
common translation is) having Aob, that is, a familiar spirit. And here My
sodaemon, before I do any further answer thee, note what observations that
place of scripture offers unto us, in this question of witchcraft for our
instruction. First observe there, the great fear this vile kind of witches are
in, for she was very loath, least her practice should be publicly noted,
espied, and known. v. 9. 10. Secondly, how the devil persuades witches, he must
be coniured out of hell, and out of the earth from among the dead, by
characters, figures, Heming. de superst. mag. c. 1.
pe^iaptes, etc. that his vassals might be the more studious to serve him on
that manner, and that me^ might have his witches for their art in the more
estimation. v. 11. 12. Thirdly how Satan can transfrome himself before his
witch as he please: for v. 13. she says I saw gods, or an excellent person,
which the^ appears forth with in the form of old Samuel himself. Fourthly,
what Satan desires most of his witches and such as consult with them: namely
to adore him as a God, as Saul did the devil in the presence of the witch, v.
14. Lastly how bold Satan is sometimes in predictions, either when he has some
warrant of gods word, or is sent of God to execute his justice upon in sidels.
For this devil speaking thus boldly of Saules death, it is like he knew gods
purpose concerning him: for where he wants knowledge, he is commonly most
doubtful in his prophesies, as those latin rimes of Apollos oracle can teach
us.


Misodaemon. But Ecclesiasticus says, it was very Samuel himself which did
appear in that place. Dis. p. 39.
Chap. 46. v. 19. 20.


Theoph. So does Antiq. lib. 6. cap. 15.
Josephus also in his antiquities, for the most Jews of those times did imagine
there might be had some conference with spirits and souls of men: but both have
erred in this point.


Myso-daemon. It is most unlikely of all that God would answer Saul by a devil,
Dis. pa. 140.
that denied to do it by a Prophet.


Theo. Not so Mysodaemon, I can return this weapon upon thine own head. For
therefore was it more like to be Satan, because God had denied to answer him
by dreams, by Vrim, and by the Prophets, 1. Sam. 28. 6. again Saul was now
fast bound in Satan's snares for his disobedience against the 1. Sam. 15. 15. 23.
word of God: therefore no marvel though Satan was bold to visit him on that
manner.


Mysodaemon. When Saul had told her that he would have Samuel brought up, she
departed from his presence into her closet, Dis. pa. 146.
where doubtless she had her familiar spirit, towit, some lewdcraftie priest:
ergo, all that play was but a priestly cousenage.


Theoph. I tell the truly Mysodaemon, this doubtless of the crafty preeste, is
a magical gloss out of thine own brain, and clean beside the text.


Mysodaemon. The counsel Dis. p. 149.
given to Saul, by that Samuel, greatly disagreeth from Satan's nature and
purpose.


Theoph. If you will advisedly consider all the circumstances of this text, you
shall soon epsy that all that Samuels counsels and words were wicked and
devilish, and tended most to persuade Saul and his company to idolatre, True
Samuel would not have done this.
and for the confirmation of these arts. Again it is certain, the devil can
speak sugared words, and mean Sathanically, as the devil in the Gospel, the
Pythonist at Philippi, at Ephesus, and else where.


Myso-daemon. This is strange Theophilus, and yet for all thou can say of
this place, there are some (as I hear) that cha^lenge Dis. p. 151.
all the learned men in the world, upon the adventure of their lives, to prove
either here in this witch or in any other, one piece of a miracle, such as
Christ did.


Theoph. There challenge, is but a bold, indiscreet, and witles brag. And as
for witches miracles, Danaeus Dialog. 4. 4. p. 78, 79, 80. 81.
and others say right well: that they may more properly be called, Sathanicall
Mira non miracula.
woonders, which the devil can with greater facility effect (says he) then
the cunningest man, because he excels in nature, in swiftnes of motion, and
in knowledge. Of these wicked wonders, the Scripture speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Revel. 16. 14. Satan's woonders are produced of natural causes, and not
supernatural, as Christ's were.


Myso-daemon. Now, do but show me the judgment of some learned Authors, which
will testify also, that this witch has a real conference with Satan
himself, and I shall be satisfied and resolved in one point, wherein Theophilus
I have a long time greatly doubted.


Theoph. 1. Brentius Brentius in 1. Sam. 28.
on this manner, writes upon this place: Aperte significat Scriptura, quod
Satan no^ perse tantu^, verumetiam per organa suae, quae sunt incantatores,
and malificae, hominib. malefaciat. The Scripture speaks plainly that Satan
does not only hurt himself, but works also by his instruments, such as
inchaunters and witches are. And then he adds: Colloquium ipsum cum Saul,
perspicue testatur, non fuisse verum Samuelem, sed Sathanam effigy Samuelis
apparentem. The conference which Saul plainly testifies, that this was not
the true Samuel, but Satan himself who appeared in Samuels likeness.

2. Another says thus. Victor Strigel.
Saul consulit venificam seupithonissam, manes ex orco educentem. i. confugit
ad Diabolum. Saul asked counsel of a witch, which coniured spirits out of
hell, that is, he fled for help to the Devil.

3. To be short, and that one may speak for many, Peter Martyr upon that
place, having showed many men's judgments, adds in the end his own, and
says manifestly it was a devil. Then he concldeth in these words, Scio istas
rations non adeo firmas esse, vt possint persuadere, homini pertinaci. I know
(says he) these arguments are not so strong, that they ca^ persuade a stubborn
wit.

4 De superst. mag.
Hemingius is of the same judgment.

5 Dialog.
Danaeus is of the same judgment.

6 Tremellius writes of this kind thus: Lev. 20. 27. Pythones diabolicis
artibus reliquos a dei cultu and sui sanctificatione avocant. Pythonists seduce
others by Sathanicall arts, etc.


Mysodaemon. I pray you have you ever heard, read, or ever seen any one
example, of this kind in these times?


Theoph. I read and hear of many: but I come not yet to speak of the
witchcraft in our time: notwithstanding to satisfy thy request, Mysodaemon, I
will show the one example, which I find in a learned credible writer of this
age. Lectionum antiquarum. lib. 8. c. 10.
Ludovicus Caelius Rhodigius, writing of Pythonistes, he adds this which
follows, for confirmation of his purpose. Idne quis vt fabulosum, risu
excipiendumputet, testatum volumus, tempestate hac, imo vero haec prodente me,
fuisse in patria mea, multerculam humili loco, Iocobam nomine, ex cuius ventre
immundi spiritus vocem, praetenuem quidem, sed tamen vbi vellet dearti^ulatam,
and prorsus intelligibilem, audivi ipse: verum and innumeri alij, non Rhodigij
modo, sed in tota fere Italia: quando futuri avida potentum men's, saepe
accersitam ventriloquam, ac omni exutam amictu, ne quidfraudis occultaelateret,
inspectare ac audire co^cupiuit, Cincinnatulus daemoni nomen erat, hac ille
appellatione gestiens, ac clamanti sub^nde respondebat. Si de preteritis aut de
praesentibus sciscitareris, quae reconditissima forent, responsadabat saepe
mirifica, si de futuris semper mendacissimus. Sed and inscitiam suam nonnunquam
murmr incerto, velbombo verius ignorabili retegebat. Least any should account
this (meaning what he had written of pythonistes) as fabulous, we will add
this confirmation. There was at this time, even when I was a writing hereof, a
poor woman in my country named Iacoba, out of whose belly, I my self, heard
the voice of an unclean spirit, It was but small indeed, but yet as often as it
listed, it was both a distinct voice and very intelligible. Many others also
heard the same not at Rhodigium only, but in a manner through out all Italy.
For noble men affecting praedictions greatly desired to hear, and to behold
this pythonist, whom therefore they sent for often, and stripped her of all her
apparel, that no secret fraud might be hidden. The devils name was
Cincinnatulus, Mark here you curle pated Gentlemen that glory so much in your
vilde excrements, the devil is your brother.
he delighted much to be thus named, and gave answer otherwhiles to him that so
called unto him. If a man did ask him of the most secret things past or
present, he answered often times most straungely, but concerning future events,
he always erred. He covered also his ignorance with a secret muttering, or to
speak more plainly, with an obscure kind of buzzing.


Mysodaemon. And what is the third kind of witches mentioned in the Scripture?


Theophilus. The third sort of witches are they, which in Hebrew are called
kosemim of kasam, divinours or soothsayers, as all writers agree. These
witches, says Chap. 1. p. 17.
Danaeus, would feign seem to work by some inspiration, and instinct of Gods
spirit, and therefore they are more subtle, secret, and close in their works,
then all the rest. This kind is cunning in praedictions, says Heming. q. de
Divinat. mag.
Hemingius, because God permits their devil often to infect the aier,
water, earth, fruits, etc. and to work mightily in the children of
disobedience. They are also well seen in natural causes, and therefore have a
great foresight in natural events. Again, he says, that in praedictions they
are sometimes helped also by the written word of God, wherein they have great
knowledge. By all these means they persuade their ministers that they are 1.
Sam. 28. 13.
gods, and there vassals likewise persuade infidels, that they forsooth, are
wise men, and worthy of great honor and estimation, as may be seen by these
examples which practiced this kind of sorcerie.


Mysodaemon. Have we any examples then of this kind in Scripture?


Theophilus. Yea truly: for Balaam that famous false prophet, is called by
this name, Josh. 13. verse. 22. Bilgnam ben begnor hakosem. Billham the son of
Beor the diviner.


Mysodaemon. Shall we think that Balaam wrouglit magically, or that he was
prompted (as they say) of the devil, when Balak sent messengers with Number. 22.
7.
gifts unto him? surely the story seems altogether to say the contrary, for
God is said to have met him, and he is said to bless and not to curse the
people of God.


Theophilus. It is most apparent by many places of Scripture, that he was the
devils prophet, albeit the Lord made him speak what he would not at that time,
as he did Caiphas at the death of Christ, Ioh. 18. 14.
for the text there says, that he bad the messengers stay all night, ver. 8.
that he might go whisper in the night time, and seek some magical
revelations. For so it is written of him, Chap. 24. 1. His custom was to go,
likrath nechashim, to fetch inchauntments. Again, how feign he would have
wrought the devils will appears in it, albeit God had forbidden him to go to
Balak, ver. 12. yet he purposed still in heart to go, and went indeed.
Again, having his tongue tied from cursing, yet for lucre and vain glories
sake, he invented and taught Balak in what sort he might best annoy the
Israelites, and that was by causing them to commit whoredom and idolatry.
Which wicked counsel had also that effect which he foreshewed: for as soon as
occasion was offered, the children of Israel fell into those impieties,
whereupon there dyed in Number. 25. 9.
a plague four and twenty thousand. Saint Jude also, verse. 11. speaks of
the deceit of Balaam wages: and Saint John says, that this was the doctrine of
Balaam. He taught to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel,
that they should eat of things sacrificed to idols and commit whoredom. To be
short, it is to be seen in his own words, what little hope he has of Gods
favor and grace (for all magitians have renounced Danae. Dial.
God and there salvation) being tormented in conscience, he bursteth out into
this exclamation: Oh that I might (...) the death of the righteous, Number. 23. 10.
and that my last end might be like his. And the Lord tells us afterward,
that his vengeance failed not to overtake this witch, for his wicked doctrine
and counsel against the Church of god, for he was slain also by the Israelites
in the great slaughter of the Moabites. Josh. 13.
By all these places of the Scripture and circumstances of that story, it is
to be thought none otherwise, but that this divinor, wrought by the devil.


Mysodaemon. But where find you a real prompting, Dis. p. 170.
the real conference, etc. of a devil in Scripture.


Theophilus. What was the Pythonist at Philippi, had not she a real
conference with Satan? for does not the Scripture speak plainly that she
was possessed Act. 16. 16, 17.
of a devil, and the Apostle bids him come out of her, and she spoke those
holy words, these are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the
way of salvation, by a mere diabolical revelation. And least we should any
way doubt in this matter, S. Luke says manifestly that she practiced
Sathanicall divination, for he adds, This Pythonist gate her masters much
advantage with divining. And had not Satan also a real communication with Eve
and many others? To be short, I can not see, but he that can do the greater,
may do the less: Non mirum est (says P. Martyr) Com. in 1. Sam. 28.
siexteriores hominum oculos perstringat, cum antea occupauit oculos mentis: It
is no marvel that he hold fast shut the eyes of the body which so blinds
the eyes of the mind. He then that can work so mightily by suggestions (as
may appear in the prompting 1. King. 22. 22.
of Achabs prophets) and prevail also because God gives him leave, I can not
see, but that he may have a real possession of them, when God permits, and
conference with them.


Mysodaemon. By what words of the story, and other testimonies can that be
showed, that he used any deuelish arts?


Theophilus. This witch says thus of himself and his arts, Number. 23. 27.
Lonachash beiagnakob ve lokesem: No enchantment or soothsaying can prevail
against Jacob. Upon which words, Tremellius says, Ipse suis fascinis and
incantationibus nihil illis nocere poterat: He confesses (says Tremellius)
that he could not hurt them by his witchcrafts and enchantments. Again, it is
said, Chap. 24. 1. He went certain times before Likrath nechashim to fet
inchantme^ts: by which words, I doubt not, but the holy Ghost means to show
us that he was the devils minister indeed. Master Calvine writes of this
witch, saying, Figmenta hinc inde mutuatus est, quae diaboli tantumpraestigias
saperent: He borrowed here and there certain forger^es, which sauoured only of
the devils illusions. And then he adds: Deus omnem cum daemonibus societatem
detestatur. God abhors all society with devils. Tremel, he says plainly
that Balaam wrought by the devil: for upon these words, Chr. 24. 22. then
strength is as an Unicorn, he says, nec plus v^lent adue^ sus eum arts
diabolicae, quam venena contra monocerotem. Balaams Sathan^call arts can hurt
the people of God, no more then poison can hurt the Unicorn, Cha. 22. 6. curse
me this people, that is, says he* fasc^naeum vt may pere^t, ^ewitch them that
they may perish. See more of him 2. Es. 6. Trem. Annot. Ioh. Fr. P^cus Mirand.
writes of him thus: primigeneris habitus est Balaam, cut dominus di^^tur
fu^sse locutus, quanquam Prophetaesset daemonum and artolus. Bala^m was one of
the first kind, unto whom the Lord is said to have spoken, Lib. 4. de prenot.
c. 5.
albeit he were the devils ^rophet, and a soothsayer.


Mysodaemon. Now let us hear what may be found of the fourth kind of
witches mentioned in the Scripture.


Theophilus. The witches of the fourth kind are called megnonim, Com. in Deu.
18.
from what root it is not certainly known: C. 1. p. 18.
Master Calvine, Danaeus, and others here understand, judicial astrologers,
and deuilish mathematicians, which under color of false arts work many evils
by means of Satan, that instructs and prompteth them.


Mysodaemon. And have we any examples or practisioners of this kind of
witchcraft in Scripture.


Theoph. We have examples also of this kind, There these are called ashaphim,
which word the be^^ Hebricia^s translate astro^ogers.
Dan. 22. for this sort is mentioned in that counsel which was gathered for
Nebuchadnezzars consultation. These therefore were no doubt of no less
estimation, then Mecasephim and Chartummim were. For these professed great
knowledge in predictions by the position of stars, constellations, etc. as
may be seen, Esa. 47. where it is apparent how these witches used to publish
their prophesies and prognostications concerning the prosperity of that
kingdom: yet were they deceived for the Persians soon after spoiled Babylon
and enjoyed all that Empire, so that the devil often bewraies himself and his
prophets in predictions, for the Lord hides from Satan most commonly the
knowledge of future events. Notwithstanding the Babylonians (as may be seen in
that chapter, verse 12. 13. 14.) had these men in an especial reputation.
Wherefore I conclude, There they are called Hobrei shamaijm*
if the former magitians wrought by Satan, as by probable and credible reasons
we have before showed, certainly these iollie companions also must not come one
foot he hind the^: albeit we find not their covenant with the devil so
manifestly expressed, as in the former practices, for this kind of wizards and
some which follow have many shadows to vale and cover their diabolical
confederacy with Satan.


Mysodaemon. And by what other argument can you show the abomination of this
kind of witchcraft.


Theoph. How detestable and deuilish this kind also is, may appear by the
fearful judgments and wrath of God, which fell upon the Jews for the
practice of this sorcerie: as may be seen, Esa. 6. for there it is said:
surely thou have for saken thy people, the house of Jacob, Cim^lu mikedem Here
that very word is used.
vegnonim, because they are full of the east manners and astrologers as the
Philistims, and abound with strange children. We must not imagine it then a
light cousenage that causes the Lord so to forsake his people. And this was
one of Here that very word is used. 2. K. 12. 6. Vegnonim venichesh.
a Manasses witches, which caused destruction upon his kingdom.


Mysodaemon. What was the 5. witch named in Scripture?


Theophilus. The 5. the Hebrews call chober, chobarim, of the ^oote Chabar, to
join together, to bind together, or to associate, say the interpreters. And
so does Commen. in Deuteronomy. 18.
Master Calvin, De Demo^. lib. 1. c. 6. p. 89.
Bodin, Dialog. ca. 1. p. 19.
Danaeus take it, because (as most think) these have often familiarity and
society with the devil. Trem. Psalm. 58. verse. 6. Fafcinatoresisti hebraea
appellatione, nominantur, consociantes societatem, quia diaboli societatem ad
arts suas adhibent: that is, this hebrewe name is given them because of their
familiarity with Satan in the use of their arts. This kind we commonly call
a chamer and a sorcerer, of the rude Latin word ortiarius, which is come in
use by custom (says Danaeus) and has the place of a better word sortilegus.


My. Have we any example in Scripture of charms or charmers.


Theoph. Of both: for these are named also among the Babilonian witches, Es. 4.
7. where it is said, that this kind of sorceres swarmed in all that nation,
for they were far more common belike then (as they be now) then the great
master witches, the highest doctors of the devils divinity. And that they did
so abound then, the Prophets own words do testify: for he says, v. 9. that
the Chaldeans and the babilonians had Gnatsmath chobareimeod, that is, a
wonderful multitude, or as it were a strong army of enchanters or charmers,
or (as we commonly say) sorcerers.


Mysodaemon. I think the devil would not debase him self, or vouchsafe to
communicate his presence and conference with this vile sort of witches?


Theo. Yea most of all: for this kind has most need of his presence and help,
because of the great wants this ragged sort of wizards have in the world.


Mysodaemon. But these wretches can gain him no credit, nor add one inch of
estimation unto him or his arts.


Theophilus. These common sort may serve well to delude, blind, and besot the
common sort of infidels, like as his greater masters, serve in high places. And
what these can work among the doting multitude of infidels, Es. 4. 7.
may be well observed also in that Chapter: V.^, 9, 10.
for it is there said that this sorcerie and diuinations had filled that people
full of carnal security, pride, and rebellion against God, and his poor
Church. And the same sins accompany this witchcraft to this day.


My. Is there mention also made of charms in Scripture?


Theophilus. There is a charm of serpents mentioned in the 58. Psalm. ver. 6.
where it is thus written asher to ijsmagn lecol melacheshim chober chabarim
mechencam, that is, which hears not the voice of charmers, albeit he be most
expert in muttering charms. For Lachash does signify a secret muttering of
charms: by which words we may well observe, that the sorcerers also of our
time vary not much from the old charmers, for they ever (as De Demon. 2. c. 1.
Bodin says) are mumbling to themselves some holy words, full of prayers,
crossing themselves at each word, etc.


Mysodaemon. But here, Theophilus, I must by your good leave dissent from you
somewhat. This place must be expounded by Jeremy. Chapter 8. verse 18. and
then this Psalm (whereupon your authors ground so much for charming, shall
make most against you. for Tremell. expounds this place but by a shifte, and
others by Ovid and Virgil: D. p. 249. 250.
but Jeremy says plainly that serpents can not be charmed.


Theoph. You are over bold now Mysodaemon with good writers, and I could
somewhat bear with this boldness, but take heed lest you be found insolent also
against God in the abuse of his blessed word, for that kind of pride is most
dangerous. I will answer to all your doubts in order. But first mark here
where Master Calvine writes upon that place. Si nullae Call. com. in Ps. 58. 6.
essent incantationes, pueril^ and absurdum foret, quod hic dicitur: if there
were no charms or s^rcerie this were but a childish and absurd thing which is
here spoken: And again in the same place: Certe si nullae essent incantationes
frustra lege ^Dei prohibitae ac damnatae essent. Surely if there were no
charms then were they vainelie forbidden, and condemned in the law of God.
And as for other authors using the help of Poets, I answer, albeit they
despise not the good experience of witty poets, yet do they not expound
Scripture by them. But they remember what August. has well said for this
point, quis quis bonus verusque Chri^tianus est domini sui esse intelligat.
vbicunque inveneri^ veritatem quam co^ferens and a noscens etia in liter^s
sacr^s, etc. De doct. Chr. Lib. 2. cap. 18.
Again as for Trem. he expounds not this place by a shift nor by any poetry,
but she with three learned men's judgments upon that place in these words:
aurem Trem. in Ps. 58. 6.
vtramque ab e^ obturari, alteram in terram defigendo, alteram extrema sui
part contege^do, atque occludendo, testes sunt in ^unc locum, Ieronimus,
Augustinus, Casidorus, and alij. The aspe shuts both her ears by laying the
one side close to the ground, and by covering and stopping the other ear with
her hinder parts, so says Jerome, Augustine, Casidore, and others: and this
was Tremell shift. Now let us come unto the Scripture, and see briefly how
you use or rather abuse the holy word of God. For you sound the Prophets words
thus: I will send serpents among you that cannot be charmed. The Geneua
translation is, which will not be charmed. And Tremell better, contra quos
nulla prodest mussitatio. Massius belike has taught you Mysodaemon, (to please
your own vain fantasy) to say that serpents can not be charmed, and to found
the words as if serpents could not be charmed. And wherers the words are
borrowed, and by serpents there are meant the Babilonians whom the Lord
affirms shall so come upon the Jews for their sins, 2. King. 17. 17.
as no sugared words or charms shall be able to skare them away: your masters
use them as if they were spoken in proper and natural signification.


Mysodaemon. And what was the sixth kind of witches spoken of in the Scripture?


Theoph. The witches of the sixth kind are called Menacheshim of Nachash, which
signifies to conjecture by sundry figures, Characters, rods, observations of
days and hours, say some Hebrews, and so say P. 18.
Danaeus and P. 89.
Bodin also.


Mysodaemon. Have we any examples of this kind of witches in the scripture?


Theophilus. The witches which Manasses favored and caused to multiply in his
time, were named by this name. 2. King. 21. 6. and surely these were not
inferior in practice of Sathanicall arts, unto the rest before named, for we
find Gods wrath wonderfully kindled against both the kingdoms of Israel and
Judah, for seeking after this kind, and that other of divination, which is
before named in the third place: The words of God are 2. King. 17. 17.
vaijkesnin kesamim, vainacheshu, they diuined diuinations, and used to
conjecture by sundry means: therefore the Lord was wroth, and put them out of
his sight. Again, 2. King. 21. 6. Manasses used vegnoven, astrology, and
venichesh, magical co^^ecturings. Then the judgments which followed, are
added, Chap. 24. 3. The kingdom was destroyed for the sins of Manasses,
according to all that he did: or rather as Tremellius says: Propter peccata
similia ijs quae fecerat Manasche, for sins like unto those which Manasses
committed, that is, the aforenamed arts of the devil. This kind of
witchcraft then having such strong cords to pull down the wrath of God also
upon that noble kingdom, where the Church of God had only her visible aboade
here on earth at that time, must not be thought to be a light coosenage, or an
experienced knowledge in natural magic, neither must it be colored or
conveyed under any other such like veil of witchcraft. The popish relics of
this kind are left amongst us, for men for want of faith in Gods providence,
are too credulous and ready most vainly and wickedly, to depend upon the
flying, crooking and chattering of each bird, observation also of sundry
days, hours, and times, etc. The Lord illuminate his Saints with the true
knowledge of his providence, Brentius in Lev. 19.
and to this end grant them in all places a true ministry, that such
Sathanicall and popish delusions may be packing.


Mys. But who will say with you, that Manasses arts were sathanicall, or that
he consulted with Satan, when he sought after and favored these witches?


Theophilus. Ioh. Wolph. says plainly thus: Ioh. Wolph. com. in 2. reg. 21.
Manasses relicto Deo confugit ad malos spiritus: Manasses forsook God, and
sought after evil spirits. And least thou should deem Mys. that Satan can
have no such arts, by such observations of the chattering and flying of
birds, etc. Mark here what an Precop. in Lev. 19.
other says: Operationes Daemonum quibus nos ludificantur and decipiunt se
quoque extendunt in aves. The works of the devil whereby they delude and
deceive us, are extended also to the observation of birds, etc.


Mysodaemon. Now let us hear something of the seventh kind.


Theophilus. The witches of the 7. kind, are in Hebrew called I^dgnonim of a
common usual root iadang: which signifies to know, to understand. Danaeus P.
19.
says, that Palmisters are here understood, and such magitians as did divine
by the entrals of beasts, etc. Bodin P. 89.
differs not much in judgment. Master Calvin calls them cognitores, gnostae;
and we may name them not unfitly, wise men or wizards.


Mys. And what example have we in Scripture, which practiced this kind of
witchcraft?


Theoph. This kind also is one of the four diabolical sciences, which
Manasses favored and set up in his time, and multiplied in the land, until
the noble King Josiah came, who is said to have found among the dunghill gods,
(sterchoreos deos, says Tremel.) these two kind of witches, pythones,
pythonists and ijdgnonim, wise men, and he caused their brains to be beaten
out with stones, 2. King. 23. 24 Lev. 20. 27. Genesis 41. 8.
according to the words of the law of God.


Mys. And what, Theoph. do you think that these witches had any sight in the
secret myste^ies of Satan's sciences? Palmisters and expounders of dreams are
but poor simple fellows, our common Egyptian vagabonds (as we call them) can
tell us some points of this profession. Surely then those witches were like to
be but plain cooseners.


Theoph. That these witches and some also of the former practiced more then
common coosenage, etc. I can show it by sufficient proof out of the Scripture
on this manner. 1. All sins which the Scripture calls abominations, Note
these Arg. and apply them to all those kind of withcrafts which Manasses
favored, and Josiah punishes with death.
are greater and more dreadful then any sleights of iugling, or common
coosenage: but this kind is so named, 2. King. 23. 24. therefore this sin is
not coosenage, etc. 2. That sin against the which the holy Ghost shows
like, or greater detestation, then against the vilest idolatry, is far more
dreadful and more wicked then common coosenage, etc. The Lord shows such
detestation against this sin in that place. Ergo. 3. That sin which is one
great cause of the destruction of a whole kingdom, is a most dreadful
impiety. This kind of witchcraft was one of the four which Manasses liked and
2. King. 21. 6.
favored, and for the which that kingdom 2. King. 24. 3.
was destroyed: therefore it is one most dreadful sin. 4. That kind of
witchcraft which the law of God so abhors, and against the which it
pronounces death without mercy, is no doubt, a most deuelish and as
Sathanicall a practice, as all the rest: but the law of stoning to death (which
was the cruellest death among the Jews) was directly given against this kind.
If a man Lev. 20. 27. and v. 6. and chap. 19. 31.
or woman be pytho, or ijdgnoni, a wise man, they shall die the death, they
shall stone them to death, there blood shall be upon them. 5. That sin which
the noble prince Josiah, by the advice of his wise Judges and Magistrates, etc.
directed by the law of God, so sharply punished, and sought after so
dilligently, that his Church might be clean purged, etc. must not be thought a
light impiety, but rather the contrary: and that Josiah did so, against these
witches and others, it is 2. King. 23. 24.
recorded by the holy Ghost for his everlasting praise. God put into the hearts
of our Honorable Judges to do the like in these times, where and when
occasion is offered. And to this end, Strilegius writes against these witches,
and to the commendation of Josias on this manner. Victor Strigel. com. in reg.
23.
His seuerissimis mandatis Josias obtemperans non tantum exscindit, sed etiam
evellit omnes vates and incantatores diabolicos, ne rursus fruticentur: eandem
severitatem omnes magistratus sequantur in tollendis emedio magis, etc. and
alijs qui se ministros diabolorum praebent. Josiah obeying the most severe
rules of Gods law (Lev. 20. 27.) did not only cut down, but rooted up all
diviners and deuelish enchanters, least they should bud or seed any more: let
all magistrates (says he) use the like severitie, to take away witches, and
all such as give them selves to the ministry of Satan.


Mysodaemon. And what was the last kind of witches named in that place of
Deuteronomy. 1 8. v. 11.


Th. The last words there are, doreshel hammuthim, one that enquireth or
seeks counsel at the dead, but it is to be doubted whether the Lord means
in these words an other special kind, or rather shows by the^, 1. Sam 28. Es.
8. 19.
by what means some of the rest there nu^bred practiced these arts, namly, by
co^sultation with the spirits of dead me^ (as was thought) but with devils
indeed, howbeit some affirm, that Necromancie, another and special kind of
witchcraft, is here to be understood: but Samuel and Esaias say plainly that
Aobooth, pythonistes, and ijdgnomim wizards, practiced this Necromansie: for
Esaias says, that such as consult with Aobooth and ^dgnonim, go from the living
elh^mmuth^m, that is, to ask counsel of dead souls (as some supposed) but of
the devils indeed, Master Luth. says, that Necromantici spiritus nocturnos
and obamb^lantes consulunt. Necromancers co^sult with night walking spirits,
Annot. in Deuteronomy. 18.
etc. or as Esaias says, They lie and remain among the graves, Chap. 65. 4.
Howsoever it be, whether these words contei^e an other special kind, or no, I
know not, but one thing we are sure of, that these witches also had there
merchandise with Satan him self: for the spirit of the righteous return unto
God that gave them, Eccles. 12. 7. and the souls of the unrighteous, Luke 16.
23.
are (as our Savior Christ says) in hell torments. Wherefore they must be
Sathanicall spirits, and not souls departed, which come to conference and to
traffic with witches here upon earth. But some intending Io. Fr. p. mirandula
de prae. lib. 4. c. 55.
to find an essential difference, have thought it best to call that practice
of pythonistes, Sciomant^a, to discern it from this last kind of witchcraft,
as if there did appear but shadows only in the one, but real bodies in the
other. Wherefore this difference is but to small purpose, in my judgment.


CHAPTER II.
Of the witches of our time, and of their bargains, society, and acquaintance
with Satan.

Theophilus Mysodaemon. SVrely, Theophilus, I love not sophistically to cavil
in this controversy, but soberly to come (if God so please) unto the knowledge
of the truth. Seeing that the light of Gods word is so manifest, that these
magical arts mentioned in the Scripture, were such horrible impieties,
abominations, etc. and so detestable before almighty God, that they caused
his wrath to be kindled in such manner against his people, for favoring,
following, and practicing them: I must and will willingly subscribe,
Theophilus, that these arts were more indeed then coosenage, poisoning,
natural magike, or any other such like invention, only practiced by humane
industry.


Theophilus. Never doubt of it, they were Sathanicivenefici, and Sathanicimagi,
Sathanicall magitians and Sathanicall poisoners indede: and so call them,
Mysodaemon, as Dan. c. 1. p. 20.
learned men have done, and thus I trust thou see what the witches were which
are mentioned in Scripture.


Mys. I do so, Theophilus, I thank you. But shall we imagine that our poor
doting old women (which are commonly called witches) at this day, are like in
any point unto those 7. which are mentioned in Scripture. Surely I have no
light of reason, or Scripture, as yet wherefore we should so think.


Theophilus. Thou art here also carried away with some fabulous volumes of
withcraft, or thou markest the folly of the multitude, or both. For what,
Mysodaemon? shall Satan in this age be less cruel, or infidels more holy
then they have been? some are not ashamed to say indeed, says Hemingius,
that there is great difference between heathenish and Christian magike. Ill^
daemones, Hem. admonit. de sup. mag.
hi sanctos invocant, illi prophanis, hi sacris verbis vtuntur, illi
characteres ignotos, hi signaculum crucis vsurpant. The heathens called upon
devils the Christians pray unto Saints, they used profane terms, but these use
holy words, they practiced unknown characters, but these are full of crosses
in there witchcraft. Therefore the witches in the Church are more wicked then
the Heathen Witches, for these abuse the Word and Sacraments of God.


Mys. I say not so, but I reason thus: Miracles D. p. 156.
are ceased: Ergo: All the miraculous works of witchcraft are ceased, and
consequently, I say, that our witches can in no wise work so as those witches
mentioned in Scripture have done.


Theophilus. I answer thee first: For thine argument, the consequent follows
nine miles behind the Antecedent. For as thou have hard partly before, the
witches spoken of in Scripture wrought no miracles, but, as the Scripture
says, 2. These. 2. Read Danaeus dial. c. 4. p. 78. 79. 80.
lying wonders. For all true miracles have supernatural causes, and so have not
the deceitful delusions of the devil.


Mysodaemon. You have not heard all that I can say, for I tell you, my reason
stands upon good ground, and has great strength. Dis. p. 160.
Oracles (as you know) are ceased, and no doubt whatsoever has affinity with
such miraculous actions, as witchcraft, coniuration, etc. it is knocked on the
head, and nailed on the cross with Christ, who has broken the power of the
devils. What say you to this, Theophilus.


Theophilus. Surely I can but wonder, Mysodaemon, that any should teach you by
speech or by writing, such black divinity in this bright shining light of the
Gospel. For babes in Christianity, understand that Christ on his cross, has
so farrefoorth broken the power of sin, as that it shall never have strength
to the condemnation Romans 8. 1.
of his elect. But he never meant so to take away sin, as that it should have
no being in the world, much less to knock in the head (as thine Author
says) the sins of Satan and reprobates, for they are predestinate al to
burn in that lake which is prepared for the devil and his angels. And
wherefore does he not reason thus. Sin is brayned and nailed on the cross
with Christ: Ergo: witchcraft, murder, theft, etc. is ceased. It is because
then his argument should appear before the son, to be a most impious and
Anabaptisticall reason, as it is indeed, howsoever he colors it.


Mysodaemon. Wherefore then have Oracles ceased, as Plutarch, and Eusebius, and
others write, and it is known true by experience, for there temples are
fallen, and there is no more mention made of them.


Theophilus. True it is indeed, Eusebius says they fell in Constantines time,
and before when, the Gospel began to be published, and the word of God had free
passage among the Gentiles, but think not albeit at this day, these Oracles
are not heard, nor these arts so publicly professed and maintained, as among
the old Gentiles they have been: that therefore Satan is dead or his wonders
ceased: but the rather thus we are to judge, because Satan can not have such
Temples now erected for his service, since the Gospel came unto the Gentiles,
that he is more besturring him self in another more secret manner, wheresoever
the light of Christ is wanting, for so he does indeed, as afterward shall be
showed.


Mysodaemon. Again, Theophilus, I pray you give me leave to speak what I can
for our old women, for I am greatly agreeued to see the rude multitude so
cruel against them, and some Judges so merciless, as to put these poor
innocents to death. I reason thus by law against this unjust cruelty: I say
she is injuriously dealt withal if she be the devils Dis. in epist.
instrument, in practicing his will, my reasons are. 1. She is put to death
for an others offense. 2. Actions are not judged by isntrumental causes: and
therefore I conclude these old women may not dye for Witchcraft. This is
Lawyers Logic I tell you, Rostoch. disp. prop. 46.
Theophilus. What can you say to this?


Theophilus. First, as for the ignorant people, they are carried away in deed
with many fond opinions concerning witches, the Lord grant his Saints his
Word and Spirit, that they may truly discern the delusions of Satan, and
avoid them: and as for thine argument, if it be lawyers inventions, I tell the
truly, they be bad advocates in an evil cause. They reason as if they would
have the Honorable Judges to hang the devil, and to suffer the witches to
escape. The same reason may serve anabaptisticallie applied for a liberty unto
all finne, for why may not the Thief and the Adulterour say the like: the
Witch therefore must dye as accessarie to the cause, for the Judges can not
apprehende the head master of this evil, the flying serpent?


Mysodaemon. I will see what may be said in their behalf, before we entreat
any further of them: what if I reason thus: Christ did Dis. p. 39. A gross
error.
clearly remit Peter, though his offense were committed both against his
divine and humane Divine and humane nature he would have said.
Person: yet afterward he did put him in trust to feed his sheep, etc. and
therefore we see not but we may show compassion upon these poor souls, if
they show them selves sorrowful for their misconceites and wicked imaginations.


Theophilus. This reason is insufficient and very anabaptisticall, for it
wrings out of the civil Magistrates hand all his power and jurisdiction.
Shall every penitent malefactor be delivered from a temporal punishment,
farewell then all execution of justice. But understand here, Mysodaemon, that
where God remitteth his secret justice, and pardons sins in Christ, there
must not the civil Magistrate be remiss in bodily punishment and justice,
except he have an extraordinary warrant and revelation from God, for his
direction. The law is, Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, unless the
judge have warrant to repeal this law from Jesus Christ (as Peter had) all
witches lawfully convicted must have their punishments answerable to their
demerits. Again, thou do not well to call our witchcraft misconceite and
wicked imagination, for I tell thee, it is more. But thou art over hasty to
make as yet, such apologies for witches, for these points should be discussed
in the end of our conference. But go on, demand what thou will, and I will
answer thee as I can.


Mysodaemon. Pardon me this disorder, Theophilus, I will be as brief as I can,
I pray you answer me but a few questions. C. 5. p. 87.
Danaeus, Lib. 4. c. 2. 3.
Bodin, De supest. mag.
Hemingius, and others, would have witches punished (if the evidence against
them for ^sorcerie be not manifest) for their known idolatry, blasphemy,
apostasy, seducing of others, etc. I say the Magistrates ought not to yield to
this counsel.


Theophilus. Wherefore Mysodaemon.


Mysodaemon. First, I prove they are no idolators, for this is a true
definition of idolatry: They are D. p. 70.
idolators which do external worship to idols or strange gods. Now the
witches have no such visible sight of Satan that they can so adore him.


Theophilus. No rather, Mysodaemon, he is an idolater also which worshippeth
God otherwise inwardly or outwardly, then God has reueiled in his holy word
that he should be worshipped: again, suppose not so, Mysodaemon, but that
Satan can show himself in a visible form, fair or foul, Dan. 4. c. p. 55.
l. 17. Idola sunt similitudines vel ad deum vertum* vel falsos, vel eorum
virtutes reprae sentandas, prohominis arbitrio sine Dei mandato factae. Fen
Theolog. lib. 5. p. 120.
(as many places of Scripture can testify) and so offer him self visiblie to
be adored. And is not Saul's Idolatry so manifest, as none but a stubborn
wit (as P. Martyrsaith) can deny it?


Mysodaemon. Let me hear then what you can say to my second reason: they are
no Apostates, because they want sound judgment, for they have but a poor
deal of any religion, and most of them seem to want very sense. What Apostacy
the^ can such have?


Theophilus. I answer, indeed the more graces men receive, if they fall from
grace, the greater is there Apostacy, as in Julian and others: but count you
their baptism, wherein they have offered unto them all the benefits of their
redemption, their visible incorporation into the society of the Saints: their
outward profession in the face of the Church nothing? and to renounce and
abjure all these gifts and graces, and to betroth them selves with Satan, is
all this no Apostacy?


Mysodaemon. But all these things want proof as yet.


Theophilus. Thou shall see these points proved, and some more which seem so
incredible unto thee, when thy doubts are answered: have thou any more to say?


Mysodaemon. Again, I can not see how they can be seducers, for they have no
Rhetoric, nor any such arts, to seduce men by any coosenage.


Theophilus. Albeit, Mysodaemon, they never read Tullie nor Quintillians
Rhetoric, yet are they deuelish deceivers, for Simon the sorcerer had but a
small fight, I think, in these arts, yet could he seduce the people of
Samaria for many years, until they received Act. 8. 8, 9, 10
the Gospel, and then he fled to Room and seduced many others, as Eusebius.
writes. So could Elimas his companion, who would have likewise seduced and
Act. 13. 7. 8.
turned Sergius Paulus from the faith.


Mysodaemon. But what say you, if our witches are but carried away in their
fond practices, with the humors of melancholy? may they not then poor fools
be pardoned?


Theophilus. As for this fig leaf, Bodin blows it away with Confurat.
Wyeri. p. 431. 432. 433.
one breath.


Mysodaemon. Well, I rest my self, Theophilus, until I see what you can speak
of our witches. Let me hear then briefly what you can say. There are many
things which are said to be in the witches of our time, which were never heard
of in these old witches, mentioned in Scripture, as namely these points: there
transportations, there bargain with the Devil, there Sathanicall sabaoths,
there ointments of the fat of young children, their transformations, and such
like miracles or wonders (as you say, Theophilus.) now prove all these, or any
of these points true in our witches, by Scripture, or any good reason, or
authority, and I will believe that we have also in our time right diabolical
witches indeed.


Theophilus. I will assay to prove them true, ask of them in order as thou
have even now propounded them.


Mysodaemon. What say you then to transportations? for our witches are said to
fly in the air, and in the night season to be carried to places far distant,
to mere with Herodias, Diana, and Minerva, and the same night to return
again: incredible wonders.


Theophilus. I will not deny, Mysodaemon, but the devil may delude his
witches many ways in these transportations, and that many fabulous pamphelets
Faustus. Drunken Dunstan. art. and in p. 156.
are published, which give little light and less proof unto this point in
controversy. This first understand, that whatsoever is said of
transportations, contrary to the nature of our bodies, as to ride on the moon
to meet Herodias, etc. all such things are indeed but mere delusions: but
this that learned men affirm of the transportations of witches by Satan, it
has no such impossibility in nature, but that it may be performed. Peter
Martyr I. c. cl. 1. c. 10. s. 29.
writes thus. Cumque tantae sint daemonum vires, quantas antea descripsimus,
nihil obstat quin homines interdum tollere possint, atque auferre in nemora.
Seeing the Devils have such strength as we have before showed, nothing can
let them, to take up, and carry men sometimes into vvoddes. Then he adds
Simon Magus example, who was so famous for such flying in the aier, and other
magical tricks, that he was adored (as Eusebius Eccles. hist. 2. l. b. c.
13. 14.
writes) in Samaria and at Room also, and his picture was set up with this
title, Simoni deo sancto, To Simon the holy god. But Eusebius adds, Art. and
in p. 34.
that the Gospel did discover him and wrought his discredit in all places.
Bodin Lib. 2. c. 4. de Demon.
says, De exportatione autem post vnctionem transvehi magos legimus, vel sine
unction saepe, hirco, pegaso, scopis, baculo, vel sine baculo and iumento
vllo. And as for transportation (says he) we read that after their
anointing, they are carried away, and sometimes without ointments, upon a
goat, or winged horse, or a broom, or a staff, and sometimes without a
staff or any beast. And we must not imagine that all are but fables, which
learned Authors in elder times also have written, as Plutarch of Romulus,
Philostrates of Appolonius Tyanaeus and others of Pythagoras transportations.
Neither must we reject all the late Inquisitors, which by the accusations,
confessions, condemnations and executions of innumerable magitians, have
learned and gotten some credible experience of the truth of transportations.
Lib. 2. c. 4.
Bodin and Dial. c. 4.
Danaeus have also sundry late examples, when thou have opportunity,
Mysodaemon, thou may read them.


Mysodaemon. But I can not so like, Theophilus, of all these, as of one
probable argument of Scripture.


Theophilus. What say thou, Mysodaemon, to the transportation of our Savior
mentioned, Math. 4. 8. Luke 4. 9. If Satan durst touch so pure and so blessed
a body, as our Lord Christ had (when God gave him leave) whereon he had no
dominion, by reason of sin: if that he could also take up and carry Christ
through the aier unto the pinnacle of the Temple; no doubt, that bold champion
fears not to handle, and to carry these unclean and unsavory bodies of
sorcerers and witches, for that he knows before that both their souls and
bodies belong unto him. If God has given Satan power over the souls of
sorcerers to seduce them from the faith: it is much more like that he gives
him leave both to touch and to bear their bodies: for God gives him less
authority and dominion over men's souls, then he does over men's bodies: as may
be seen in Jobs example, Chap. 2. v. 6.


Mysodaemon. But I remember M. Calvin D. p. 103. 104.
says, this transportation of Christ was in a vision only.


Theoph. As I can in no wise abide the abuse of holy Scripture, so can I not
bear with any, which force good writers to speak that which they would not.
For M. Calvin does not say resolutely, that the translation of our Savior was
in a vision only: his own words are, In re dubia and quam absque periculo
nescire licet, malo iudicium suspendere, quam contentiosis praebere litigandi
ansam. In a doubtful matter wherein I may be ignorant without danger, I had
rather suspend my judgment, then offer any occasion unto contentious men of
strife. And then he adds, that other interpretors affirm boldly that it was
a real transportation. And so much for the first point of our witches wonders.


Mysodaemon. I dare not reject all the authorities, Theophilus, albeit I am not
througly resolved. And what can you say for their bargain with the devil, or
there Sathanicall sabbath, for we never read of such things mentioned in
Scripture?


Theophilus. I will not be long in the confirmation of these points, for that
other writers have written much of this matter. First, for the witches bargain
and obligation with the devil, The witches bargain with the devil.
answer me a few questions, Mysodaemon: are you resolved that there were ever
any witches in the world?


Mysodaemon. That I am, those mentioned in the Scripture: and peradventure some
other beside.


Theophilus. And can thou imagine that Satan would bind him self to any of
them (as the witch of Endor for example) to be present when they would, and to
minister unto their necessities, as we read he did, before such time as the
witch also for her part do renounce God and all religion, 1. Sam. 28.
and adore him as her God: yea and bind her self in some evident manner, to
persist in this profession, and continually to perform these points, and all
other articles contained in his obligation.


Mysodaemon. If there be such a bargain, the devil, no doubt, will be sure
enough for his part: and I think he will not greatly bind him self before the
witch also do the same.


Theophilus. It is most like to be true, Mysodaemon, for sometimes there Lib.
2. c. 4.
obligations are found written with their own blood, as Bodin reports of one,
Theophilus, to have done.


Mysodaemon. I will not hear, I tell you, neither of Bodins * Dis. in the
praeface.
bables, nor Sprengeus fables: I pray you show me one example out of some
credible Author, if you can.


Theophilus. Master Fox in the story of M. Luther, has one singular example
for this purpose. There was (says he) a young man about Wittemberge, who
being kept bare and needy by his father, was tempted by way of sorcerie, to
bargain with the Devil, or a familiar (as they call him) to yield him self
body and soul into the devils power, upon condition to have his wish
satisfied with money: so that upon the same, an obligation was made by the
young man, written with his own blood, and given to the devil. This case you
see how horrible it was, and how damnable: now hear what followed. Upon this
sudden wealth and alteration of this young man, the matter first being noted,
began afterwaerdes more and more to be suspected, and at length after long and
great admiration, was brought to M. Luther to be examined. The young man
whether for shame or fear long denied to confess, and would be known of
nothing. Yet God so wrought being stronger then the devil, that be uttered
unto Luther the whole substance of the case, as well touching the money as the
obligation, Luther understanding the matter, and pitying the lamentable state
of the man, willed the whole congregation to pray: and he himself ceased not
with prayers to labor, so that the devil was compelled at the last to throw
in his obligation at the window, and bad him take it again unto him. Thus
far Master Luther.


Mysodaemon. Surely this is a not able example: and it may be this is not so
incredible a matter, as some have marvelous boldly and confidently avouched:
but where make they such bargains?


Theophilus. At their common meetings, which they call their sabbath, for there
the devil has many witnesses, and there these obligations are autentically
sealed. For thou must understand, Sathanical sabbothes.
Misodaemon, that as thou know Satan's purpose is ever most to rebel
against God: so his drift in all the arts of magike principally is, to use
all the mockery that ever he can invent against God, and his Word and all the
parts of true religion. And to this end, he has ordained his sabbothes for
his service. In these horrible meetings, Satan himself appears sometime in
one form, sometime in another: (for ^o he can as the Scripture Cor. 11.
testifies) for sometimes his ministers behold him in the likeness of a man,
but most commonly of a foul stinking goat. There they have sundry suites
unto him: and he ministers and teaches them to confect poisons and pouders,
and many things for the destruction of man and beast, and in the end he adds
(when his congregation is to be dismissed) with a terrible thundering voice,
this speech, or something to the like effect. Vlciscimini vos, aut mortem
oppetetis. Revenge your selves, or else die the death.


Mysodaemon. Well, Theophilus, these things may be true, yet some have doubted
how there can be any firm bargain Dis. p. 45.
between a carnal body and a spiritual.


Theophilus. The Scripture tells us plainly that he can transform him self
into many shapes; the Apostle says, he can change himself into an 2. Cor. 11.
14.
angel of light.


Mysodaemon. But I cannot hear, Theophilus, any wise man, Dis. p. 45.
or honest man tell us any thing, which has been himself either a party, or
a witness of such horrible bargains.


Theophilus. There is no man, I think, of learning or godlynes, that would
require this testimony at an honest man's hands, to be an eye witness of such
dreadful abominations: thou speak therefore, Mysodaemon, of a thing
impossible: for honest men have no such conuenticles: notwithstanding to
satisfy in some sort thy desire, see I pray thee, the examinations,
confessions, and practice of M. A. of Barking, and M. B. of Rochester,
confirmed by sufficient credible witnesses. Ann. 1584. And to end this question
of these Sathanicall bargains: Danaeus Dialog. 3. chap. p. 45.
and other grave authors say, That it is the uniform consent of the witches of
all nations and of all times: for there confessions all agree, and have many
hundredth years so agreed. Quae Ioh. Fr. P. Mir. de Praenotion. l. 1. c. 2.
fuisse affirmantur ab omnibus, ea non fuisse qui contendit, calumniatur.


Mysodaemon. It may be some of our Master witches frequent such public
assemblies, and have some open bargain and confederacy with Satan: but it is
not like that al deal so openly with him, for many of them with one consent
constantly affirm in their death, that they never saw the devil in their
lives.


Theophilus. Therefore some learned men have distinguished these Sathanicall
covenants into their Ioh. Fr. P. Mir. de Praenotion. l. 4 c 5. Bodin. lib. 2.
de Demonom. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.
sorts; for some have an open, express, and evident league and confederacy
with Satan: some a more hid and secret: some a mixed and mean between both.
Unto the open and express confederacy, belong all manifest coniurations and
practices of Pythonistes: unto the secret kind, all close and secret
operations by Satan, in divining, astrology, palmistrie, and such like: unto
the third kind, apperteine all the practices of superstitious magic in all
sorceries whatsoever. And following this distinction of diabolical
confederacies: we may not unfitly distinguish also their arts, for the better
manifestation of the truth on this manner. Some be Feneri Theolog l. 5. p. 121.
mere diabolical, some mixed diabolical: mere diabolical as of Pythonists,
and all such as are of the open league: mixed, as all other which use any other
means appointed by Satan for their practice, and are of the second and third
kind of confederacy.


Mysodaemon. I pray you then unto which league belong the common sort of our
witches, which seem indeed to work by the devil (so wicked are their lives,
so deuelish are their inventions, and such dreadful events follow them) and
yet have no manifest operation by Satan to their own knowledge, as most of
them say in the very hour of death.


Theophilus. They do belong therefore, no doubt, to the second or third kind
of confederacy: and they work secretly by the devil, ^. Fr. P. M. de
Praenot. l. 4.
Quanquam haec ipsinon advertant and norint. c. 5.
Albeit they neither perceive nor know this thing.


Mysodaemon. But you have not one syllable in all the Scriptures of God, to
prove any such league or covenant between Satan and witches.


Theophilus. We have not indeed any such words or phrases, and yet may we
truly conclude, that there are such things, by Scripture; for the Scripture
showing us the great readiness and acquaintance of Satan, with the enchaunters
of Egypt, the Pythonist of Endor and Philippi: do therein significantly give
us to understand, that there was some precontract and confederacy between
them: for Satan will never work in such manner, but with whom he has some
league and acquaintance.


Mysodaemon. And what can you say of our witches ointments, Witches ointments.
for I remember Ioh. Bap. Neap. did prove by his own experience, that this
was but mere coosenage and a fable in witchcraft, as we may read in his little
book of natural magic, lib. 2. cap. 26.


Theophilus. First, as for the strength of any oyntmentes to work any magical
inventions, I answer, Mysodaemon, it is none at all. For ointments can move
Satan, no more then figures, crosses, circles, periaptes, the superstitious
mutterings of holy words, and such like abominations. Secondly, that they
have notwithstanding such stuff in their practice, I am induced to believe,
for that Satan wants not in his service (as is before said) all the Nonne
manifested abolus morositatem illam Iudaeorum imitatus est?
apish imitations of Gods religion, Tert. de Praes. haeret.
that can be devised by new found and forged sacraments. Again, Mysodaemon, if
this making of oyntementes, of the fat of young children, seem so strange
unto thee, understand this, that albeit the devil little regards such
oyntementes, yet is he right glad to behold and see the murder and
bloodshedding of young infantes: for wherefore else did the Heathen kill and
sacrifice their children unto Moloche? and that thou may understand also,
what that abominable practice was, David shows that, complaining because
this horrible idolatry crept into the Church: for he says, They offered their
sons and daughters unto devils. And that the devil stirs Sathanicall
magitians, to offer these bloody sacrifices unto him, the ecclesiastical
stories of Maxentius and Julian, and others, can testify unto us. For of
Maxent. Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 8. c. 15. and de vita Constable. lib. 1. c. 30.
the one, it is said, Contulit se magicis studijs ad incantationem and iam
mulieres praegnantes discidit, iam infantium recens natorum viscera inquisiuit,
and arcano quodammodo daemones advocauit. He gave himself to the study of
magic for enchantment, and then he ripped women with child, and sought
diuinations in the entrals of young infants, and called or coniured devils
secretly. And of the sul. Theod. lib. 4. c. 26. 27, 25.
other it is written: Antiochiae vero, aiunt, multas arcas in regia, refertas
humanis capitibus, inventas esse, multisque in puteis cadavera humana. There
were found at Antioche (as they say) many chestes full of dead men's sculles,
and many dead corses were found in wells: and a little before his death in the
Persian war, it is said in the same place, that he ripped an other woman with
child to practice upon her his diuinations, and then he hung her by the hear,
purposing to learn more by her dead body at his return, but therein he
failed, albeit his devils told him the contrary. Again, Pliny writing of
Nero and his magic, says thus of him, Homines etiam immolare gratissimum ei
fuit: He was most delighted to sacrifice men unto devils. Apollo taught his
witches to sacrifice a noble Virgin, to stay the plague among the
Lacedaemonians. Polyxena Priamus daughter, and Iphigenia Agamemnons, were both
sacrificed to Satan in like manner. Tertullian in suo Scorpiaco.
The witches of Scithia offered men in sacrifice unto Diana: The witches of
France unto Mercury: The witches of Africa unto Saturn, And what was Diana,
Mercury, and Saturn, but Satan and his fellows, which colored and shrouded
them selves under such names and titles (as Mirandula De praenot.
says rightwell) among the blind and profane Gentiles? The Roman witches
taught the old Romans to sacrifice two men yearly, to appease the Gods, and
to cast them into Tyber. In Cyprus also, they sacrificed a man unto Apollo. To
conclude, Baals witches show plainly how greatly Satan delights himself, to
see men's blood shed in his service, 1. King. 18. 28.
for it is written of them, They cried loud, and cut them selves, as the manner
was, with knives and lances, till the blood gushed out upon them. And this
has, is, and ever will be the end of all spiritual whoredom with Satan in
witchcraft. Read of the story of yofng infants murdered in Lenton Abbey, and
found in the 8. year of Q. Elizabeth. Act. and Mon. p. 1947.
The like effects could I show by examples of corporal whoredom also: for
these two kinds of pollutions, What sacrifices, witchcraft and whordome, the
two eldest daughters of popery have ever offered unto Satan.
as they have great affinity in nature, and in filthy practices accompany
one the other: so for this end in murder and bloodshedding, they have not much
varied, but ever in all ages offered Satan these bloody sacrifices under
sundry and diverse pretenses, as it is by the continual observation of wise
men truly testified unto us.


Mysodaemon. No doubt, Theophilus, if Satan have that bloody purpose in
witches ointments, he will use all the means he can, to work his wonders by
such ointments indeed: for the scripture tells us, that he is a roaring lion
seeking without rest whom he may devour and destroy both in body and soul.
But least I weary you, Theophilus, in these things wherein I know you be not
greatly delighted: I pray you let me hear in a word what can be said of
lycanthropeia, transformation of men and women into wolfes and cattes, etc. for
these things are clean contrary against nature, and must be mere poetical
fables, if the truth be tried.


Theophilus. Truly my greatest delight in this conference, Mysodaemon, is to
help thee what I can to come unto the knowledge of the truth, and to make
thee more able to avoid (if God so please) all the dangers of these
Sathanicall delusions: for I may speak truly as another Danaeus Dial.
does, for mine own part: Equidem de diabolis eorumque ministris sortiarijs
lubenter disputare non soleo, etc. eatenus mihi nota sunt eorum studia and
arts quatenus de ijs verbo Dei sacrosancto omnes edocemur. Surely I list not
willingly to dispute of devils and there ministers the witches, etc. and I am
so far acquainted with their studies, as we are all taught by the word of
God. And as for transformations, I warned thee before to look for no
supernatural works in witchcraft. I answer thee therefore this question, with
Danaeus also: C. 3. p. 49.
Quare illa etiam falsissima censenda sunt, quae de lycanthropis quibusdam
narrantur: These things are to be thought most fabulous, which are reported of
transformations. Content thy self, Mysodaemon, I pray thee with this answer,
for these things be not the great grounds of witchcraft. Howbeit I deny not,
but witches may have also sundry such Sathanicall delusions I. Fernelius de
partium morbis and symptomatis. 5. c. 2.
in many, which abound in melancholy, but no real transformations indeed.


Myso-daemon. But before we end our conference, Theophilus, I must be bold to
ask you yet a few more questions: wherein I would most gladly be resolved,
both for mine own instruction, and the benefit of some of my friends.


Theophilus. If thy questions be needful and necessary for thy self or any
friend to know, I will answer them: but as for 2. Tim. 2. 23.
foolish and unlearned questions (the Apostle has forewarned us) they do but
engender strife.


Myso-daemon. I promise you, Theophilus, I will no more cumber you, but only
with a few points which shall be good for the use of edifying First, I would
know what your judgment is of some big volumes of witchcraft, which (as
far as I can see) contain sundry intolerable profane and wicked Treatises
and forms of idle and vain iuglings and blasphemous coniurations.


Theophilus. Surely this I think, Myso-daemon, all the godly learned men, who
tenderly regard the good state of the Saints of God, are no doubt agrieued in
heart to see such horrible impieties suffered to be broched in the open face of
the Church of God: for young wits are more apt to practice these wares of
Satan which are thus put to sale, then to search for any good purpose in
them, which is most hard to be found. Again, this in a word I add, that the
Lawyers tell us such authors are overtaken by Law: for the Law says: Libros
magicae artis apudse nemini habere licet, The Dis. must be commended to Vulcan.
et si penes quoscunque reperti sunt, bonis ademptis, ambustisque ijs public,
in insulam deportantur, humiliores capite puniuntur. It is lawful for no man
to have the books of Magic, and with whom soever they are found, their
goods confiscate, and their books openly burnt, they are banished, and the
poorer sort are punished with death. Avoid therefore, Myso-daemon, such
dreadful impieties, I warn thee.


Myso-daemon. Well then, I will (if God assist me) follow your counsel, and
redeem also the time (if I can) in better studies, which I have so vainly and
wickedly lost* my next question is, whether there may be in very truth at
this day such coniuration, and calling up of deuilles (which they call
Necromancie) so as the witch of Endor did? for albeit it be not unlike but
that Satan practices with witches in these days as in former times, as you
have partly showed: yet in my judgment it is a thing impossible to call up, or
to conjure devils by any at out of hell: for the D. p. 431.
Scripture says that all passages are stopped concerning the egresse out of
hell, in the 16. Chap. of Saint Lukes Gospel.


Theophilus. I counsel thee, Myso-damon, never to credit any more such
magical glosses upon holy Scripture: for albeit the reprobates departed are
tormented for ever with devils in hell: yet the prince, the 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians.
2. 2. chap. 6. 13, 14.
god, and the governors of this world are in the air also, round about us,
and may be coniured Myso-daemon, as well from above as from below: for the
Apostle says, They are not in hell only, but in high places also.


CHAP. III.
What a dreadful and fearful sin it is to consult at any time or need,
with witches and sorcerers.

Mysodaemon, Theophilus. I Would gladly be resolved in another doubt,
Theophilus: most men are wont to seek after these wise men, and cunning women,
such as they call witches, in sickness, in losses, and in all extremities:
what think you of this, Theophilus?


Theophilus. I am assured, Mysodaemon, that such miserable people commit a most
horrible and dreadful sin, that they are justly brought into Satha^s snares,
for the contempt of God and his word, that they seek help of the same serpent
that stung them, that against the known principle of the Gospel they would
have Satan to drive out Satan: and to be short, that they are in very truth,
but mere Gentiles, and Pagans in religion* blind in their minds, hardened in
their hearts, strangers from the life of God, and that if God give them not
speedy repentance, they will become past feeling by custom and continuance in
their sins.


Mysodaemon. What reason have you to prove this custom so unlawful and so
vile, as you would have it to appear to be: for those sins which God would
have us most to dread, to fear, and to avoid, he warns us of them many
ways, by his Word, by examples, and by his judgments from heaven against
them.


Theophilus. It is well observed, Mysodaemon, and surely God warns us all
these ways of the greatness of this sin; wherefore it is, no doubt, a most
dreadful abomination.


Mysodaemon. How, First by his Word?


Theophilus. First, thou know, Mysodaemon, how the Lord in his Word
charge us to renounce the works of the Gentiles: the Apostle says, This
Ephesians. 4. 18. Lev. 18. 26, 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 14, 1, 2.
I say and testify in the Lord, that you henceforth walk not as other
Gentiles walk in vanity of their mind: think not that henceforth every thing
is lawful unto them, that the rest of the Nations (which are without God in
the world) think it not unlawful for them to do. The same charge Moses
gives often. Now this practice was most rife among all those idolatrous
Gentiles: for the Genesis 41. 8. Exodus 7. and 8. chap.
Egyptianes in all their need called for their wise men: so did the Number. 22.
23. 24.
Moabites, so did the Petsians, and Dan. 22. Esd. 47. 12, 13.
Babylonians. So did the Romans, as there histories record, even there
Emperors, Romulus, Nero, Maxentius, Julian, and others: and the great Chame of
Tartary and the Persians (as Dial. c. 6. p. 89.
Danaeus says) seek after these helps of the devil in all their
necessities, even to this day.


Mysodaemon. What manifest and clear testimonies of Scripture have you against
this practice?


Theophilus. There is nothing clear and manifest, Mysodaemon, unto those in
loh. 2. 14.
whom the word of God abides not, and which have not overcome that wicked
one, which is the devil: for Satan so amazeth them, that they are more ready
to reele into every sin, though it be never so monstrous, then to see the
greatest light that God offers them. Are not those prohibitions of God in his
Law and in his Prophets so plain and so evident, that (as the Prophet says)
he that runs, may read and understand them? the Law of God is this, Lev.
19. 31. 20. 6. Deu. 18. 10, 15
You shall not regard them that work with spirits, neither soothsayers, yea
shall not seek them to be defiled by them, I am the Lord the God. Again, anon
after, to make the greatness of this sin the better to appear, he repeateth
the same words in more fearful manner: If any turn after such as work with
spirits, and after soothsayers to go a whoaring after them, then will I set
my face against, that person, and will cut him of from his people. And again,
that God people might be sufficiently warned, they have a third charge against
this sin in Deuteronomy. 18. where they are commanded in all there necessities to
seek unto God, and the ministry of his word: which place Es. commends to
the Church of his time, on this manner: When they shall say unto you, Es. 8.
18.
enquire at them that have a spirit of divination, and at the soothsaiers
which whisper and murmur, should not a people enquire at their God? from the
living to the dead? to the law and to the testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. And thus,
Mysodaemon, the Lord has most lovingly warned, and most sharply charged his
people to avoid this sin.


Mysodaemon. But some understand the Law of God, Theophilus, as the Emperors
civil Law expounds it. Codic. Just. lib. 9. tit. 8. l. 4.
Eorum est scientia punienda, etc. qui magicis artibus contra salutem hominum,
etc. nullis vero criminibus implicanda suntremedia humanis quaesita corporibus.
Hereby it is manifest, that hurtful magitians and witches which kill and hurt
men's bodies and goods, are only to be avoided, and so they do amongst us, but
such of these practitioners, as can and will cure the sick, find things
lost, have a good near guess in praedictions, are not in any wise to be
blamed, says this Law, and therefore these are often sought after in
necessities unto this day, and they seem to do no man harm, but much good,
and they speak the very truth often, and men will do much, Theophilus, in
extremities.


Theophilus. First for that Law, it is a most wicked and profane law, and if
it be one of Constantines constitutions, it was published, no doubt, before his
conversion to the faith: and as for the good that miserable men receive of the
sorcerers, assure thy self, Mysodaemon, the more they seem to benefit men's
bodies, the more harm they do both soul and body: for who would receive
gold at an enemies hand without fear, and good assurance for his safety? and
is not Satan the bloodiest enemy that man has living? and lastly, where as
they would be credited for their truth: one counsels us in these words. Si
vera quandoque dixerint non ideo credendum eis, sed imitare Christum, qui
reprehendebat damones, quamvis vocitarent ipsum filium Dei. Albeit witches
speak truth now and then, we must not therefore believe them, but follow
thou Christ (says he) who reprehended the devils, when they named him often
the very Son of God. And because we be impatient in extremities: he adds.
St non illico sentis auxilium divinum, quid tum? patientia opus est. If in thy
great necessities thou find not present help from God, what then? thou
must use patience.


Mysodaemon. And how does God wame us of this sin by examples?


Theophilus. Thou may find a multitude of examples, which God lays before
us in the Scripture, 2. King. 1. 3, 16. and 17. 17. and 21. 6. etc.
by them to reclaim us from this sin, but I will here name but Saul only,
he alone can teach all men with what coardes of sin all these witchmakers
are fettered about, and how that they are in truth, most profane in life,
and Athistes in religion: for first, he had rejected the word of God in
heart, and all sincere obedience thereunto. 1. Sam. 15. 23. Again, he was a
very murderer, for how often sought he to murder David, and rested not till
he had slain a great number of the most religious and innocent Priests of
the land. 1. Sam. 22. 18. And he was also a very hypocrite in profession. 1.
Sam. 26. 21. Unto all these sins, he added this fearful contempt of GOD,
1. Chron. 10. 13. He asked counsel of a familiar spirit, and in the end in
great desperation he murdered him self. 1. Sam. 31. 4.


Mysodaemon. But think you that al these sinners, are as wicked, or any thing
like that desperate Saul?


Theophilus. I will not say that the measure of their sins is grown to that
height that his was, but that they be most blind in their minds, and wicked
in their lives, experience deilie tellethvs. For who but Papists and
rebellious Athistes ride and go daily to this market? And unto such God does
justly send strong delusions, that they should believe lies, 2. These. 2. 11.
22.
that they might be damned, because they believed not the truth, but had such
pleasure in unrighteousness.


Mysodaemon. Surely the greater part of them which make this traffic with
witches, have in deed but a small deal of any good religion: but these were
Gentiles, and therefore were worthelie plagued for infinite more sins: let me
hear how God punished this sin among his own people.


Theophilus. Far more fearfully: for whereas the Lord loved them above all
nations under heaven: this sin was one of the principal causes of that long
diuorcement which was between him and that people, for the Prophet says: Es.
2. 6. again Es. 8. 21* 22.
Surely thou have for saken thy people the house of Jacob, because they are
full of the East manners and are sorcerers as the Philistines, and abound with
strange children. And of the destruction of both the kingdoms of Israel and
Judah. 1. Of Israel, 2. King. 17. 17. They made their sons and daughters to
pass through the fire, and used witchcraft and inchauntments, etc. therefore
the Lord was wroth with Israel, and put them out of his sight. 2. Of Judah, 2.
King. 24. 3. Surely the commandment of the Lord came upon Judah, that he
might put them out of his sight: Propter peccata similia ijs quae fecerat
Manasche. For sins like unto those which Manasses committed, and his sins
are numbered, 2. King. 21. 6. He caused his sons to pass through the fire, he
gave him self to witchcraft and used them that had familiar spirits, and were
soothsayers, etc. Achaziah would not enquire of Gods word, but sought after the
god of Ekron in his extremities, 2. King. 13. 16. Maxentius in like manner, the
Roman Emperor, consulted with his witches before his destruction, and so did
the unhappy Julian, and they had both an unhappy end.


Mysodaemon. Surely the Lord, I see, has given us in these days more
testimonies of his hatred against this sin, then he did the old Church, Romans
15. 4.
for all these examples and judgments are written (as the Apostle speaks)
for our learning: and therefore such in these times as commit spiritual
whoredom with Satan, are worthy to drink more deeply of the cup of the
Lords wrath.


Theoph. That they are: for the greater light offered men do reject, the
greater shall be their condemnation.


Mysodaemon. But alas, it greeueth me to think, how these witches children,
Esa. 57. 3.
(as the Prophet calls them) of our time believe not, that sorcerers and
coniurers are so evil.


Theophilus. They err greeuouslie, because God has given them over in his
justice for the contempt of his word: for they consider but their figures,
glasses, circles, periapts, and other vayles of witches profession: and so did
Saul, he looked upon the woman, and was carried away with a strong imagination
and liking of her arts, he vewed Samuels old mantle, gray hear, and listened
unto his iollie grave speeches, etc. And yet it is said the Lord slew him for
this sin. 1. Chr. 10. 13.
The people therefore of our time, having the same drift and purpose with
Saul, that is, with full sail seeking after Satan if he may be found, must
be subject to the like (if God give not repentance) or the greater condemnation.


Mysodaemon. And may not the Magistrate provide against this evil?


Theophilus. The Almighty God charge him so to do, Deu. 18. 9, 10, 11. Lev.
20. 6, 27. for ^. King. 1. 16.
these sins are said to go a whoaring from God, and fall into a most
dreadful apostacy, and therefore the Lord will have them cut off from among
his people. The Apostle says, Romans 1.
That evil doers are not only worthy of death, but as many also as consent
unto them or favor them. Whereupon one writes thus. Heming. de superst. mag.
Iuxta Pauli doctrinam, eiusdem impietatis reus peragitur, and eisdem paenis
obnoxious est apud Deum, and qui artem exercet magicam, and qui ex ea remedium
petit: that is, According to Saint Paul's doctrine, he which practices
witchcraft, and he that seeks help thereby, are both alike guilty of the
same impiety, and before God subject to the same punishment.


CHAP. IIII.
Wherefore the Lord does permit the sins of witchcraft in our time: who are
in most danger thereby, and what are the most sovereign preservatiues against
witchcraft?

Mysodaemon. Theophilus. THE people say, Theophilus, that witches can kill and
make alive whom they please: wherefore does Almighty God suffer witches to
hurt and to destroy man and beast on this manner, for surely I think they can
do much indeed?


Theophilus. The multitude is in this gross error* Mysedaem, that witches
have power to turn the world vpside down at their pleasure: but the truth is,
it is nothing so. for, as I taught thee before, they are but Satan's
instruments, and can not work these wonders without him, and as for Satan's
power also, it is limited by the Lord. for he can do nothing, but where, and
when the Lord sends him: when therefore he is sent for the execution of Gods
justice, he persuades his witches, that he can drive heaven and earth together
at his pleasure, and they persuade the wicked world, that they can likewise
work wonders, whereas neither they, nor Satan him self by them can take away
the least hair from the greatest sinner upon earth, but when God permits them:
for as the Lord by his Psalm. 147. 11, 19, 20.
special love, mercy, and providence does embrace all his Saints, so
likewise his general providence and mercy (says the Prophet) Psalm. 145. 9,
15. Com. in Job. cap. 1. v. 16.
is over all his works. Thus much in effect has M. Beza written the last
year in his commentary upon Job, in these words: Caeterum ostendit etiam hic
locus impuros illos spiritus non temere ab Apostolo vocari aeris principes,
sicuti summum illum lovem horum daemonum principem, Graeci and Latini multis
propterea epithet is cognominarunt, (...), fulguratorem, tonantem vocantes: qui
tamen vel minimum quiddam in caelo, vel in terra movere nisi Deo concedente non
possunt, sed Dominu^ quiddem illorum opera, quoties ipsi libuit, in huiusmodi
excitandis tempestatibus vti, ipsos vero donec in abissum mittantur, in aere
and in alijs mundi partibus versantes, and nulla remagis, quam omni rerum
confusione, and hominum praesertim exitio gaudentes; Add etiam omnium
naturalium causarum ad excitandas omnes eius generis impressiones requisitarum
sum peritos, quam facillime and quam libentissime, Deo concedenti, vel etiam
imperanti, suam in his rebus operam praestare constat, sagarum etiam and
magorum omnis generis adhibito interventu. And then he adds a confirmation of
his assertion concerning witches, and a great complaint against negligent
Magistrates on this manner. Quadere cum tam aperte tam multis, tam certis and
sacraru^ literarum testimonijs, and omnium seculorum apud omnes gentes
historijs co^stet, miru^ est ac pene incredibile adhuc inter Christianos,
praesertim magistratus ac Iudices inveniri, qui vana and futilia haec esse
omnia existiment. Which thing (says he, speaking of witchcraft) seeing that it
is so apparently known, by so many and so certain testimonies of holy
Scripture, and by the histories of all times, among all nations: it is to be
wondered, and in a manner incredible, that as yet there are found among
Christians, and especially among magistrates and judges, which do suppose all
these things to be but vain and fabulous. But to return again to thy demand,
Mysodaemon, wherefore God permits witchcraft in these our days? as for the
causes of this permission, if thou would know them, they are many in
number, but I will commend unto thee four principally for thine instruction.


Myso-daemon. What then is the first cause of this permission?


Theophilus. The evil arts and works of Satan by witchcraft, are for a
sign of the contempt and fall of men from the Gospel and sincere profession
of religion, wheresoever they be either suffered or maintained, we see and
know by daily experience, that men have but small measure of the pure light of
God in that place.


Mysodaemon. This is to be seen most true in popery, where all superstition
and magical arts are bred, professed, and maintained: and what is the second
cause?


Theophilus. The second cause why God suffers Satan thus to triumph by his
arts, and to rule over infidels, is, that he might fatherly forewarne his
Saints to 1. Pet. 1. 17.
pass their dwelling here in fear and with all diligence, to avoyde the
contagion of the wicked* with whom they have any conversation.


Mysodaemon. And what is the third?


Theophilus. The third cause of this permission is, that by these delusions of
the devil, God might in justice punish them which would not receive his
truth: for the Apostle says, that they which will not 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11
believe the truth: God will send them strong delusions that they may believe
lies.


Myso-daemon. It is most true we see: for such as hunt after our doting
witches are most sottish idiottes of all the people, who when they be stung by
Satan, run forthwith to be cured by him: what now is the fourth cause?


Theophilus. The trial of Gods Saints: for GOD permits all heresies and
superstitions to spring in his Church, that those that are his, might be
known, as the Lord teaches 1. Cor. 11. 19 deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
us.


Myso-daemon. How far then may Satan's power reach, when God so permits
him, or sends him for the execution of his justice?


Theophilus. Almighty God does use Satan for to work his signs and
judgments in the heavens, in the air, and in the earth, and to execute his
justice upon all the children of disobedience: yea and to afflict his Saints,
as ofter as the Lord knows it expedient for his glory, and their salvation.
For the Scripture speaks plainly, that he can drive down lightnings and
flames of Job. 1. 10.
fire from heaven, to hurt the creatures upon earth. Again, that he can infect
and poison the air and water with pestiferous exhalations when God sendes him,
as in the plagues of Egypt, which were wrought by the ministry of Satan: for
it is written, that God cast forth his indignation and wrath upon them in all
those plagues, Psalm. 78. 49.
By sending out evil angels among them. He can destroy also the other
creatures, and man him self, by Job. 1. Judge. 9. 23. Esd. 19. 14. 1. Tim. 4.
12.
fyers, by winds and tempests, when he is let loose against them.


Myso-daemon. The witches boast indeed that Satan can do much, and they
likewise by their acquaintance with him; but some think that all this is but
to fray men, and many men often hurt themselves and others by fond imaginations.


Theophilus. As for Satan's might, it is but weak: if the Lord grant him not
strength to execute his will, he can not do it: and whereas some suppose that
all these arts are but strong fantasies, they be greatly deceived, for albeit
that some do hurt themselves with evil imaginations, etc. yet let a witch or
any other imagine what he will against thee, his imagination can neither kill
thee, Myso-daemon: nor take away one hair from thy head, but we know and see,
that Satan by witches can do both, and this is the confession of the witches
of all times, nations and people, even at the very point of death.


Myso-daemon. If Satan can hurt the bodies and souls of men, I will never
doubt he may soon hurt the other creatures, tell me therefore first, what can
he do to infidels and wicked profane people?


Theophilus. As for the wicked the Scripture says
1 Satan is their God. 1. Cor. 4. 4. 2 Satan is their father. Ioh. 8. 44.
act. 13. 10. 3 Satan has the use of their bodies and souls. Ephesians. 2. 2. Matt.
12. 43
4 Satan works his own works in them. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. Ephesians. 2. 2.
5 Satan blyndes their minds, and makes them fools in understanding. 2. Cor.
4. 4. Ephesians. 4. 18. 1. Cor. 2. 14
6 Satan robs them of the good use of Gods word by many delusions, Luke 8. 12.
and makes them storm and fret against it, Prou. 14. 16.
Now then seeing that Satan has this dominion over the souls, which are
far more precious then their bodies, he may no doubt and does often toss
their bodies, when God permits him, at his pleasure.


Myso-daemon. My heart trembles and quakes, Theophilus, when I understand by
the holy Scripture, how all profane and wicked men in the Church even among
us, are thus fast bound in Satan's snares and chains, and what is more
miserable, they are so blind, they know it not.


Theophilus. Yea, and what is most dreadful in these days, God has given
over sundry men (for the contempt of his word) so far into Satan's power, and
into a reprobate sense, that men reject the very natural Romans 1. 30. prove. 11.
23.
course of civil life, that men sport themselves in doing wickedly, that men
work all Ephesians. 4. 19.
uncleanness, even with greedines. And such is the impudent boldness, and grouth
of sin in these times, that if any one man refrain from evil, he is a
monster among men, a gazing flock, and as the Es. 59. 15. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 2.
Prophet says, makes himself a pray. S. Cyprian complains of his time,
Esse iam inter nocentes innoxium cr^men est, malos quisquis non imitatur
offendit. And the Milesians proverb was, men think there ought to be no place
for any honest man among them.


Mys. The Lord defend us from them, and grant us that we may so live by them,
that we be not hurt of them: but may not Satan and his witches hinder and hurt
the Saints of God also?


Theophilus. No doubt they may: for Satan sought to winnow, even the very Luke
22. 23. 1. these. 2. 18.
Apostles, and prevailed somewhat, and hindered them often in the course of
their ministry.


Mysodaemon. How show you that Satan can hurt their bodies?


Theoph. The Apostle had the messenger of Satan 2. Cor. 12. 7. job. 2.
to buffet him, and as for Job, Satan so poisoned his body all over, that
there was no part of him whole, from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot: yea and what is more fearful, it may be seen by Luke 8. 2, 3.
Mary Magdalens example, that (if god permit) he may not only hurt the bodies
of the Saints, but before grace also have a real possession of them. Again,
our continual warfare is against him, and if we want any part of our armor
described, Ephesians. 6. he may soon hurt us.


Mys. Teach me two things more, Theophilus, and then I cease to molest you.
First, how I may be cured, if witches do hurt me: and secondly, how I may best
avoid them: for I see well we be in danger all by them.


Theoph. First, as for the cure of any man, poisoned by Satan, Fernel. de
Abdit. rerum causis.
it is known by the experience of many learned physicians, a thing most
difficult: the reason is, satan uses poisons that have hidden, unknown, and
strange operations in the bodies of men, for he is an Empiricke of many years
experience; notwithstanding we ought to use all good means that Physic
offers us, continually entreating the Lord so to bless the^, as they may be
for our health, if it shall seem expedient for his glory and our salvation:
and if by these means we can not receive health, we must wait patiently upon
God, commit and commend our bodies and souls unto his hands, for he says, The
Ps. 37. 18. Eccl. 8. 8.
Lord knows the days of upright men, and their inheritance shall be
perpetual. Again: man is not Lord over the spirit, to retain the spirit,
neither has he power in the day of death nor deliverance in the battle,
neither shall wickedness deliver the possessors thereof.


Mysodaemon. I hear often that many great men's houses are troubled with
strange visions: What think you, Theophilus, are these unclean spirits, and
how may such evils be avoided?


Theoph. It is well you speak of great men's houses: for there commonly are the
greater sins. Nero could hardly rest for fearful and strange apparitions:
Suetonius De vita Neronis.
says, Saepe confessus exagitari se materna specie, verberibus furiarum, ac
taedis ardentibus. The like say the stories of Brutus, Pysistratus, and others.
The greater sins defile any place, the greater liberty is given Satan, and
the more it is Math. 12. 43.
swept and garnished for his continual habitation. To expel all such evils,
these rules following in all such families must be carefully practiced. 1. The
lords, masters, and fathers of families, must draw nere unto God themselves by
unfeigned repentance, that their own bodies and souls may be truly sanctified:
so must the strong man be first conquered, Luke 11. 21, 22. 2. Their families
also, with like diligence often purged, Genesis 35. 2 Ps. 101. 7. Epist. to
Philemon, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 21. 3. In Gods most holy word faithfully instructed,
Genesis 18. 19. 1. Cor. 14. 34, 35. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 4. They
must also go before, and direct their household in prayer and thanksgiving,
when they be present: 10. 6. 11. Ps. 55. 17. 127. 1. Tim. 4. 4. that the
servants may do the like, when they be absent: Genesis 24. 12, 13. without
interruption, 1. Pet. 3. 7. 5. They must dwell with their wives as men of
knowledge, 1. Pet. 5. 7. not bitter unto them, Col. 3. 19. contract with the
faithful only, Genesis 6. 2, 3. in the Lord, 1. Cor. 7. 39. the marriage bed
sanctified with prayers. 1. Tim. 4. 3, 4. used to bridle and assuage, and not
to feed and stir up lust, To. 13. 14. abstaining it at certain times appointed
for fasting and prayer, 1. Cor. 7. 5. and in the time of women's separation,
Ezec. 18. 6. and 22. 10. Lev. 20. 18. 6. The wifes subject to their husbands,
Col. 3. 19. in pure conversation which is with fear, 1. Pet. 3. 1, 2. 7. The
children brought up in the information of the lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. obeying in all
things their parents, Col. 3. 20. in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1. 8. The masters must
do that which is just and equal to servants, Col. 4. 1. without threatenings,
Ephesians. 6. 9. 9. The servants avoid eye service, do their duties in Gods fear
as unto the Lord, Col. 3. 21, 23. with fear and trembling. Ephesians. 6. 5. 10. They
must also direct, and command their family to a private fast, when public or
private calamity, or such like needful occasion so requires. Hest. 4. 16.
Neh. 1. 4. Act. 10. 30. 11. Conduct them to the public ministry where it
may be found, Amos 8. 11. 12. 2. King. 4. 23. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 13. 7, 17. and
by private conference, Mal. 3. 16. Act. 17. 11. see how they profit, asse^bling
their family at certain times appointed. Act. 10. 24. Neh. 8. 13. Job. 1. 5.
12. A godly domestic all discipline must be used: 1. admonition, Math. 18. 15,
19. 2. penalties ordained answerable to the offense committed, lighter for the
less, Prove. 23. 13, 14. sharper for the greater, Epist. to Phil. 3. and if
need require, the Church must be told, Math. 18. 17. 4. the last refuge is,
the civil Magistrate, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 21.


Mys. These rules I grant are right good indeed, and the practice and
obedience you speak of, is to be wished, but to speak as I think, Theophilus,
such families as you require, are as hard to be found, as black swans, or the
families of Europia.


Theoph. Not so, Mys. your eyes be to dim, I know my self where (God be
blessed) some such may be found in our land: and yet if they were never so few,
yet must the men that will avoid the dangers which have bin before mentioned,
carefully observe this order prescribed of God, Josh. 24. 13.
and say with Joshua: Albeit others, yea all the world, choose the gods of the
Amorites: yet I and my house will serve the Lord. Now for the 2. point, how a
man may best be preserved from the poison of witchcraft, I will show thee,
Misodaemon, only by Jobs example, how thou may best be preserved.


Mys. I love greatly to view often the examples of the holy fathers: for no
dout they are Gods glasses for our instruction, and I remember we are charged
not to be slothful, but followers of them which through faith and patience
inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 12. But I pray you, what preservatives had Job,
Learn here all Fathers and Masters of families, how to purge your houses, and
how to attain the best preservatives against witches.
for we read all failed him, and Satan brought him unto a wonderful misery?


Theophilus. His preservatives were most sovereign, and they failed him not,
albeit he fainted often, being long wearied in that conflict with Satan: his
precious preservatives were these. First, faith, 2. prayer, 3. arighteous life,
4. the word of God, 5. repentance, and sixtlie the continual most gracious
providence of God over him.


Mysodaemon. How did faith preserve him?


Theophilus. S. John says, that faith is the victory 1. Ioh. 5. 4. ^. Pet. 5.
9. Ephesians. 6. 16.
that overcomes the world: and S. Peter charge us to resist the devil,
steadfast in faith: and S. Paul bids us above all things (to avoid the
fiery darts of Satan) to take the shield of faith. By these few places it
appears, that faith is a most sure shield against Satan. Now that Job had
faith, many rare virtues in him do testify: his innocent life, his fear and
reverence of God, his godly repentance and singular patience, Iam. 5. 11. Heb.
10. 36, 37, 38.
which can never be without faith, for patience is a quiet waiting and
exspectation of the promises, which faith assures us shall be performed. His
own words are in his most bitter temptations: Job. 13. 15. Lo though he slay
me yet will I trust in him, and I will reprove my ways in his sight.
Wherefore, Misodaemon, if thou will follow Job, call upon God earnestly for
this precious Ioh. 6. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8.
gift of faith, and thou shall have one most strong target to avoid safely all
Sathanicall darts of witchcraft.


Mysodaemon. And what is the second preservative?


Theophilus. Jobs second preservative was Prayer: of this the Apostle says,
that when the Saints have on their complete armor against Satan, yet they
can not be safe, unless they Ephesians. 6. 18. Job. 1. 5.
pray always. Job had this, for it is written that Job offered burnt offerings,
early in the morning for him self and all his children: and it is added, Iame.
5. 16.
Thus did Job every day. Prayer is a comfortable conference and talk with the
Lord, and is most strong if it be fervent, and being offered by a righteous
man, such as Job was, it is a sweet sacrifice unto God. Wherefore use also,
Misodaemon, Cyp. l. 2. epi. 2.
this preservative and thou shall be free from many evils: sit tibi veloratio
assidua, vellectio, nunc cum Deo loquere, nunc Deus tecum: Either read or pray
always, one while talk thou with God, another while let God talk with thee.


Mysodaemon. So I will, and purpose Theophilus, for we are often charged so to
do: what was the third preservatiue?


Theophilus. A righteous, sober, and upright conversation is a most sure
brestplate against Satan: for when he finds our faith and profession to have
the seal of a righteous life, he will flee from us: as appears notably in
Jobs example, for he being an Job. 1. 8, 9, 10.
upright and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, Satan might
well spurn at him, but could not annoy him, nor justly accuse him before his
God of any evil.


Myso-daemon. And what is the fourth preservatiue?


Theophilus. The word of God: and that mighty word is a most strong two
edged Heb. 4. 12. Ephesians. 6. 17. Matthew. 4.
sword, and notably preserves us from Satan if we can wisely handle it, as
our Savior has taught us by his own example. As for Jobs time, it is
undoubtedly to be thought that he lived before the Law, because of his long
life, Chap. 42. 16. Psalm. 90. 10. and sacrifices in a strange land, which by
the Law were commanded to be done before the Arc, or in the tabernacle of
God. Some think that he was about the time the Church was in Egypt. All the
Patriarchs and holy fathers of that time and before, had great knowledge and
many years experience, and were preachers of the word of God in their
families, Gene. 18. 19. and received it partly by their fathers instruction,
Psalm. 78. 3. partly by visions and sundry other means from God him self,
Hebr. 1. 1. And as for Job he had both instruction by man, Chap. 42. 5. and
revelations from God, Chap. 38. and 42. 5. and taught the same unto his people,
Chap. 1. 5. and 29. 22. and 22. 22.


Myso-daemon. Now tell me, what was the 5. preservatiue?


Theophilus. Repentance: the life of Gods saints is a continual repentance;
because of their continual infirmities and offenses. The penitent has two
good properties: One is, he fears God truly, and so is humbled: the other
is, he rests upon God Job. 13. 15. Psalm. 147. 11.
faithfully, and so is strengthened. The Lord is greatly delighted in them that
fear him, and attend upon his mercy, but if any proud rebellious sins have
snared them, the Lord leaves them as naked, and as it were in Satan's
jurisdiction, as Psalm. 22. 1, 2, 77. 10, 69.
David often, and Cant. 5. 6.
others. And as for Job, he walked Job. 1. 20, 21, 22. 42. 6.
most circumspectly within the bounds of true repentance before the Lord his
God. Whefore Mysodaemon call mightily upon God for this great blessing also:
for repentance is the precious gift 2. Tim. 2. 25. 26.
and work of God. Act. 5. 30.



Myso-daemon. And what was his 6. and last preservative?


Theophilus. The providence of almighty God was his most strong to wre and
most sovereign preservative against all evil. Of this David glories and
sings often sweetly in his Psalms: as in the 91. v. 9, 10, 11, 12. on this
manner. Because (thou have said) the Lord is mine help, and have set the most
high for thy refuge: there shall none evil come unto thee, neither shall any
plague come near thy tabernacle: for he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, they shall bear thee in their hands,
that thou shall not hurt thy foot against a stone: thou shall walk upon the
lion and aspe, the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under thy foot.
Now that Job was most safe under this shelter and could not be anoied by
Satan, the devil confesses it himself. For he says, he can not come near
him by reason of a certain hedge wherewith he and all his were compassed about:
the words are these: Then Satan said, does Job fear God for naught? Job. 1.
9, 10.
have thou not made an hedge about him and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? And thus thou see, Mysodaemon, how Job was preserved
from Satan and all his arts: wherefore if thou can purchase these
preservatives for any price, or by any means come by them, I will assure thee
for thy safety in all dangers of body and soul.


Myso-daemon. But I see not yet how he was preserved: for the devil overcame
him, and most fearfully consumed him and al his goods.


Theophilus. The devil overcame him not, nor could not work his will and
purpose upon him. For Satan's chief purpose against Job was to cause him to
blaspheme God, to renounce God and religion, to fall from the faith, from
repentance, and from the grace of God. And to this end when the Lord V. 12.
gave him entrance, he destroyed his goods with strange fire and thieves, he
murdered his children with a tempest, Chapter 2. 9.
he consumed his body with byles, and moved also his friends and his own
wife to revile and to scorn him and his profession. Chapter 1. 22.
Notwithstanding all these engines of Satan, Jobs preservatives were so good
and precious, that the devil was utterly unable to bring any of those evils he
most desired upon him; for the Lord witnesses of him, saying, In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishlie. And to be short, when Satan had
assaulted him with all extremities that could be devised, albeit his faith Job.
7. 15. and 13. 15.
fainted, yet it failed him not: for he continued in faithful repentance Job
42. 5, 6. and 16. 17.
and grace of God unto the end. And thus have I taught thee, Mysodaemon, what
things I thought expedient for thee, and most needful concerning witchcraft. I
doubt not but many of our friends could say more. Wherefore give them no rest,
but cause them by all good means to communicate unto us both their knowledge
and experience in this argument. Farewell Mysodaemon, I must now leave thee.


Mysodaemon. Farewell good Theophilus, and I most hartelie thank you: I do
not now far dissent from your judgment: but because (I so hate the devil
and all his delusions as you know) I will stir up all the friends I can (as
you desire) to impart unto us their knowledge and experience in these points.


Theophilus. Farewell in Christ, Mysodaemon, and do so.


FINIS.
A SHORT DISCOVRSE SHOWING THE MOST CERTAIN AND PRINCIPAL MEANS Ordained of God
to discover, expel, and to confound all the Sathanicall inventions of
witchcraft and Sorcerie.

What communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Beliall. 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15. CHAP. I.
THAT THE MINISTRY OF GODS WORD IS THE most certain and principal good
means ordained of God, for the discovery and confusion of Witchcraft.

Look what means the Lord principally commends unto us, for the discovery
and confusion of Satan and his arts, that may best effect his discovery, and
ought most to be practiced.

God has commended principally for this purpose, the ministry of his word:

Therefore this ministry may best discover Satan and his arts, and ought of
us most to be practiced.

1. Proposition or Major.
THE first Proposition is most certain, and because the World seeks many
unlawful means to discover and avoid the evil arts and harms of Satan,
after the brain of man, and the invention of the devil him self: therefore
it comes to pass, that such men be more and more blinded in their minds,
benumbed in their sins, besotted of Satan: yea, tumbled and tossed in the
world at his pleasure, the Lord in his justice because of the contempt of his
glorious Majesty, and will revealed in his word, giving them over to their
own ignorance and hardness of heart, Therefore have men used to scare away the
devils, and arts of magic, in the thick mist of popery, with holy water,
certain number of masses, hallowed bells, consultation with wizards, and says De
Daemonomania. 2. c. 1.
Bodin: Ne quem circumueniant magi ipsorum carmina abundant pulchris
orationibus: That none be circumvented with magic or witchcraft, their
charms are full of godly prayers, psalms, and have often the name of Jesus,
and of the holy Trinity, they cross themselves at each word, they use also
certain words of the Cannon of the mass, Gloria in excelsis, omnis spiritus
laudet Dominum, I. Jacob. Weker. de Secret. lib. 15. c. 16.
a porta inferi, credo videre bona Domini, etc. so far Bodin. They have used
also exorcists, scratchings, and many other means, etc. but all in vain: for
it is most certain, that so seeking to scare away the devil and his arts from
their bodies and their goods, he had greater hold and possession of their
souls: for so doing, they proved his vassals themselves, and instruments for
the execution of his own will and pleasure.

2. Proposition or Minor.
That the holy ministry of Gods word is ordained of God for this purpose, we
may see it, if advisedly we consider the Lords words: Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 19,
etc. Let none be among you that makes his son or his daughter to go through
the fire, etc. (and the^ he adds) the Lord God will raise thee up a Prophet
like unto me, Verse. 5. 13.
from among you, even of thy brethren, unto him shall ye hearken: verse. 19.
Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him. Here, I say, the Lord has appointed a remedy for the
sins of witchcraft and sorcerie, Luth. annot. in Deuteronomy. 18.
the ordinary ministry of Gods word published by his Prophets, whereunto as
many as did hearken, that is, received it with true faith and obedience, they
were freed from those Sathanicall inventions, named in that place: for Satan's
rotten mist is so scattered and discovered by the bright beaines and glorious
light of Gods word, that he can not long lurk or abide the light of that
place, and therefore we read that in the dark countries where his arts were
professed, there did inhabit the most idolatrous nations of all the Cic. de
Diuinat. lib. 1.
Gentiles, as the Egiptians, Chaldeans, Indians, Persians, Cananites, Esaias. 19.
3.
as profane histories together with the book Dan. 2. 2.
of God, Psalm. 47. 12.
plentifully do testify and record unto us.

2 Esaias makes the ministry of Gods word, and of Satan's arts two
professions, so opposite that he that forsakes the one and leans unto the
other, forsakes God, embraces the devil, refuses the living seeking the
dead, rejects the law and testimony of god, and rests upon sathanical
inue^tions: and lastly, has no light in him, but is full of darkness: his words
are these: When they shall say unto you, Chap. 8. 19, 20.
enquire at them that have a spirit of divination, and at the soothsayers,
which whisper and murmr, should not a people enquire at their God? from the
living to the dead? to the law and to the testimony, Tremel.
(or rather as another says) against the law and the testimony? if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

3 The Lord God promises his Church by the Prophet Zachary, that as soon as
the glorious ministry of the gospel should shine forth among men, he would
thereby dispel the clouds of ignorance, Zach. 13. 2.
and cut off the names of Idols out of the land, that they should no more be
remembered, and cause the false prophets and the unclean spirit to depart out
of the land. And that this was performed generally in all places, wheresoever
the powerful ministry of the glorious Gospel was purely received,
Ecclesiastical histories do testify for times past, and common experience
can prove for time present, as afterward shall be showed.

2. Argument.
Look by what means all unclean Math. 12. 43.
spirits are driven out of natural men, by the same good means; may the
spirits of sorcerie be descried, confounded, and cast forth.

But Jesus Christ the great Lord that is stronger then that Luke 11. 21.
strong man, works the first by his blessed word and spirit.

Ergo, the second

2. Proposition or Assumption.
THe Apostle co^firming the Authority of his ministry, against false teachers
in Corinth, shows it to be glorious. First, from the efficient cause thereof,
which was God himself. 2. from the effects thereof, which were these. First,
for that it was able to cast down 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
holds, Eus. eccles. hist. l. 2. 14.
meaning all the munitions of Satan and carnal men. 2. all carnal wisdom,
3. all high things that are exalted against the knowledge of God, 4 for that
it is able to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
5. and lastly, from a vengeance that is an ordinary consequent forever, unto
the contempt of that ministry. If that ministry be so powerful therefore to
cast out Satan out of natural men, and to work in them the greatest work
under heaven, the work of regeneration by the immortal 1. Pet. 1. 23.
seed that it sows abroad into men's hearts: it is most certain that it may
confound all arts and delusions of devils in all sorts of men, but some will
not believe what the Scripture speaks most clearly, that Satan so
possesses naturally men, and works in them, as Paul speaks: Ephesians. 2. 2.
let such therefore listen what an ancient learned man speaks of this point,
on this manner. Daemonibus est super Orig. Number. Hom. 27.
omnia genera tormentorum, and super omnes poenas, si quem videant verbo Die
operam dare, scientiam diuinae legis and mysteria Scripturarum intentis studijs
per quirentem, in hoc eorum omnis flamma est, in hoc vruntur incendio,
possident enim omnes qui versantur in ignorantia. Unto the devils it is a
torment above all kinds of torments, and a pain above all pains, if they see
any man reading the word of God, and with fervent study searching the
knowledge of Gods law and the mysteries and secrets of Scriptures, herein
stands all the flame of the devils, in this fire they are tormented: for
they are seized and possessed of all them that remain in ignorance.

3. Argument.
That thing which Satan most dreadeth, most repugneth, most persecuteth with
all his arts and instruments, works, no dout, most his overthrow,
discovery, and confusion in all this world.

Satan has ever withstood and feared the ministry of the Gospel, and
persecuted all the ministers and professors thereof with all his might, etc.

Therefore this is an especial means and gift of God, for to discover his
arts, to cast down his kingdom, and to confound him and all his practices.

The 2. Proposition or Assumption.
Satan desires to winnow you as wheat: this he did because the saw they were
called and ordained for the great work of the Gospel, the overthrow of his
kingdom, and the enlarging of Christ's kingdom.

We would have come unto you (I Paul at least once or twice) but Satan
hindered us. Wherefore did Satan hinder Paul, Syluanus, and Tymotheus from
coming to Thessalonica, by the Jews his Limbs, and those wicked Act. 17. 5.
vagabonds of that city? because he feared by their ministry some
overthrow of his kingdom, and some grouth of Christ's Church.

so wise in natural causes and holds the blind in matters of religion? The
Apostle answers: 2. Corin. 4. 4.
because he would not that Gods glorious gospel should shine unto them: for
then he should be discovered.

Acts the 13. 8. mention is made of one of these Sathanicall wizards Paul and
Barnabas in the conversion of the deputy Sergius Paulus a prudent man. For
thus it is written, that great man desired to hear the word of God, but
Elimas that sorcerer withstood 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. read the 9. 10. 11. ver.
them, and sought to turn away the deputy from the faith: for by the
conversion of such a man, Satan's kingdom should have been sore weakened.

Satan has his synagogue wherein his ministers continually

In Theodosius the Emperors time, the year of our L. 396. the Valentinian
Emperor of Rome was strangled, and one Engenius an enemy to Christian religion
sought the Empire, who was persuaded thereunto by one of these wizardly
prophets: for he was promised faithfully by a great professor of these arts,
Sozonn. lib. 7. cap. 22.
that he should both get the victory against Theodosius, and extinguish all
the light of Christian religion: Object.
but both praedictions proved false to his confusion.

But Satan sometimes would preach the gospel him self, and he seems to love
it, and to delight to hear it sounding: else wherefore would his wicked
exorcistes, and coniurers so often chatter it unto him: And by the maid which
had the spirit of divination at Philippi, he cried, or made her speak: these
men are the servants of the most high Godwhich show unto us the way of Act.
16. 17.
salvation: And in the Gospel it is written they do most honorably speak of
Christ; thou art Christ the very son of God.

I answer, those wicked exorcists and coniurers delight Satan much in abusing
with their profane lips, Answ.
the holy word of God: for the truth is, he nothing regards the outward
letter of the word, no more then their characters, signs, crosses, figures,
etc. but this he will have them do, the more to blind them and others, and to
keep men in the external lip service, least men should understand the
powerful working virtue of that holy word and the graces of true religion.
Therefore our savior and the Apostle in the forenamed place, knowing right
well his purpose, charge him to keep silence, for he must not fight or
minister in that camp which is ordained of God, to batter and beat down all
the houldes and corners of his kingdom.

The devil in the oracle of Apollo would give Julian the Apostata no answer,
when he sacrificed unto him, until he had given him occasion to persecute the
christians: and to abuse the sepulchers of the Saints and martyrs. Ruff. 1.
book. cha. 35. of the fall of this oracle, De praeparat. Euang.
these verses were thus written.

Ve, ve, mihi tripodes lugete perijt Apollo:
Perijt quoniam ardens mihi vim infert caeleste numen.
And Eusebius the Historigrapher mentions alike cause: for he writes that
many sailors as they passed by the Isles called Echinades, heard a voice in the
air crying often, Thamans, Thamans, (this was the pilots name) and saying unto
him, that when he did pass by Pelodis he should sound these words the great
Pan is dead: whereupon the words being so spoken in that place, there followed
a hideous noise without the visible appearance of any thing. q. cur oracula
filuerunt.
The same story is in Plutarch. Now what that caeleste numen, that is, magnus
Pan did signify, diverse men have diversely coniectured: Cicero likewise, as
all heathen writers) speaks great and glorious words in the commendation of
this oarcle, but is utterly ignorant what should be the cause of that silence
which it came unto in his time. He coniectureth only with Plutarch, Dedivin.
li. 1.
that those exhalations wherewith it was thought Apollo inspired his priests
and oracle, were by age consumed. Zach. 13. 2.
Potest autem vis illa terrae quae mentem pythiae diuino afflatu concitabat
euanuisse vetustate. But the holy Prophet Zachary will teach us the true cause
of the confusion of these oracles as it is before showed.

4. Arg.
Bodin the ciuilian seeing that the gospel published and preached after
Christ's institution, has this strong arm and continual might against Satan
and all his inventions; writes on this manner: De Daem. 30. cap. 1. pa. 233.
quam^brem vt mala haec vitari possint, legem Dei, s^^pe oportet praedicari,
metum eius, summis, medijs, infimis inculcari, and ante omnia fidem in cum
imprimi. Wherefore (says be) to avoid these evils (meaning Sathanicall arts
of magic and witchcraft) the law of God must be often preached, and the fear
of god beaten into men's minds, of high, mean, and low estate, and above all
things they must have faith in good wrought in them. Again in the same page he
commends this good means in these words: Hic maximus, hic pulcherrimus, hic
facillimus omnino modus eijciendie rep. magos, arts magicas, maleficia, and
malignos spiritus: tantisper enim dum hic blasphemia, illic (...) obtinet,
nulla plane spes ostenditur, malignos spiritus, magos, pestem, bella famem que
depellendi: that is, this is the greatest (speaking of the preaching of the
gospel) the fairest, the easiest means to cast out magitians, the arts of
magic, sorceries and evil spirits out of the common wealth, for as long as
blasphemy and Atheism reigns here and there, there is no hope to drive away
evil spirits, coniurers, plagues, war and famine out of the land.

5. Arg.
That good means whereby God wrought the subversion of the temples and all the
devils arts at Ephesus. Acts Chap. 19. verse 20. 26. at Corinthus, the 1. Corinthians. Chap. 10 verse. 20. and else where, is the best means left us also for
the same end and purpose, namely the confusion of Sathanicall men, and the
discovery of their abmhominable practices.

But that first conquest against Satan and his ministers etc. was by the
Lords good ministry. ergo.

The Assumption.
THe ministry of the gospel gave the devil and his oracles a great fall in
Dioclesius time, and therefore Satan stirred that tyrant by all means to
persecute the Christians: This writes Eusebius De vita Cont. 49. and 50. chapter
The oracle of Apollo in Dioclesius time gave answer out of a hollow cave, and
not out of any temple by the ministry of his priests after the old wonted
manner: for the devil said that iusti homines in terris, certain just men on
the earth were such lets unto him, that he could not speak as in former times.
Then began this tyrant to enquire who those men were, and his priests
answering that they were the Christians, he sought after them with all his
persecutions: much like to this was the persecution of Petrus Flistedius, and
Adolphus, and Larebachus, by the popish divines of Colen to stay the sweating
sickness. Acts and monum. page 885.

The Persians were full of professed magitians and coniurers, who fearing the
overthrow of their kingdom, by Maruthus a godly B. of Mesopotamia, who was
sent indeed to Persia for that purpose from the Emperor of Rome, as writes
Lib. 7. cap. 8.
Socrates. They How the magitians were the archenemies of the gospel in Persia,
read act. and m. 10. perseq. p. 98.
labored with all their arts against the preaching of the gospel, persuading
their king Isdigerdes not to receive the Christian religion, and the faith
which was preached unto him. Notwithstanding the gospel consumed them and beat
down their kingdom in that kings days. And therefore in the next kings
Bartanes or Varranes.
reign they were so envious against the professors of the gospel, that (as
says the same Chapter 18.
author) they murdered the Christians with all the Persian torments that could
be devised. They continued also the same fury against the Christians in that
land in Sosom. 2. Chapter 8.
Sapors time another king of that kingdom, who was in like manner provoked unto
his sauadge and furious cruelty by the same vile enemies of the gospel.

6. Arg. experience.
Look by what means the magic, the witchcraft of elder time, the
diuinations, the sorcerie, the faries, the goblins, the hegges, etc. which came
unto the Church with the rotten mist of popery, were discovered and put to
flight from amongst us, not many year past: by the same good means may the
remnants of these diabolical delusions be discovered and cut off, at this time
present.

But it is known by the good experience of all countries round about us, where
the beams of the gospel have shined in this latter age, togitherwith our
own, that this glorious ministry of God, the publishing and preaching, I
say, of the gospel of Jesus Christ has scattered that unsavory miste of
Satan, wherein he covered all his delusions, etc. therefore the conclusion
follows.

Assumption.
Eusebius for elder times writes, that Simon magus the sorcerer of Samaria was
a great adversary to the faith, and withstoode the Apostles and their
doctrine, and how that he was discovered with his arts and confounded by the
ministry of Gods word. For the says, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 14.
Verum diuina and supra caelestis gratia ministris suis opem ferens, per
illorum apparitionem ac praesentiam, accensam malislammam confestim extinxit,
humiliata per eos ac deturbata quavis sublimitate, quae secontra scientian Dei
ext^llebat, quapropter nec Sir^^^s obluctatio, nec cuiusquam alterius eorum,
qui tunc prodbant Apostolicis illis temporibus subsistere potuit. veritatis
enim splendour ac diuinus ille sermo qui iampridem hominibus divinitus
illuxeratinque terra obtinebat, 2. Cor. 10. 5.
and in Apostolis suis agebat, cuncta vincebat ac superabat. But the divine and
celestial grace gave strength unto his ministers, and by their appearing and
presence, quenched that flame so wickedly kindled, for by them were brought
low and cast down all high things, which did lift up themselves against the
knowledge of God. Therefore neither Simons rebellion, nor any other which did
appear in these Apostolical times, could stand: for the brightness of the
truth, and that divine word which not long before had shined from heaven, and
ruled upon earth, and wrought in his Apostles, conquered and subdued all things.

2 Bodin says for his experience, on this manner: Sed De Demo* 3. c. 1. p. 229.
legis divinae promulgatio vires Sathanae plurimum ener vavit, and quicunque
populi manserunt diu infideles, aut adhuc permanent, ij grauissime fuerunt
infestati a spiritibus, malignis, and adhuc dies noctesque infestantur: vt fit
in Norvegia, Finlandia, Lapenlandia, and alijs regionibus, ad Boream sitis. The
publishing of Gods word (says he) has greatly weakened Satan's power, and
what people soever have long continued in infidelity, or soremaine as yet,
they have been and are grievously vexed of evil spirits, as it is to be seen
in Norway, Finland, Lapenland, and other regions which are in the North parts.

Heming ius for his country of Denmark, can testify sufficiently, who
writes of his experience also on this wise: Cum primum ante annos plus minus,
40. doctrina Evangelij caepit in hoc regnoper pios ministros dei repurgari, and
a tenebris pontificijs vindicari, cessauere omnes istae diabolicae impostura.
Lucente etenim Evangelij clarissima luce, tenebrae superstitionum evanuerunt,
siquidem luxillamagn^ verbi coelestis fulgore suo omnes superstitiones dispulit
and discussit, non secus atque sol oriens in Horizonte nostro tenebras noctis
depellit: that is: when first heretofore, 40. years past or there abouts, the
Gospel began by the godly ministers of God, to be diligently purged, freed and
restored from the darkness of popery, all these deceits of the devil ceased:
for when the light of the Gospel shind, the clouds of superstition vanished
away: for that great light of the heavenly word drove away and beat down with
his beams, all superstition, like as the sun rising in our Horizon, chaseth
away the dark clouds of the night. And then lest any should say, that there
remained yet great store of this sin in that kingdom, as there do^th also
remain some relics of the (...) amongst us in England: he adds presently
and answers, that because men contemn and refuse the good ministry of Gods
word, therefore such sins can not be avoided: his words are these. Cum ergo
and audimus and videmus augeri quotidie eorum numerum, qui seistis imposturis
magicis dedunt, scia^mus signum certissimum obscurati Evangelij, and
deficientis fidei in plurimis hominibus diuina permissione nobis propositum
esse: that is: Forasmuch as we hear and see daily, that their number is
increased which give themselves to the practice of magical delusions, let us
understand that we have given unto us a most sure token of the corruption of
the Gospel, and of faith decreasing in most men by Gods permission. Thus far
Hemingius for Denmark.

a worthy writer, speaks of his knowledge and experience in this cause, on
this manner. Notabimus verum Deum explodere solere commentitios: vnde statim
cum effet natus Christus, omnia deorum oracula conticuerunt, quae antea fuerant
celeberima: etenim cum lux ipsa qui est Christus, venisset in mundum,
tenebraenecesse fuit vt evanescerent: In iudie. 5. in initio.
that is: Let us observe, how the true God chaseth away the false gods: and
therefore when Christ was borne, all the oracles of the gods ceased, which were
in former times most famous. For when that light, which is Christ, came into
the world, darkness must of necessity have vanished away. And then rejecting
Plutarchs reasons of the silence of those oracles, and disliking them, he
says: est igitur huius eventialia causa, quam Plutarchus videre non potuit,
nimirum aduersarias potestates a Christo fraenatas, (that is) there is therefore
of this event another cause, which Plutarch could not see: that is, that the
adversary powers were curbed by Christ: then he adds his own experience, in
these words. Quod etiam hodie videmus in regionib amplect entibus Evangeliu^
euenire, vbi non tantum Idololatriae, verum diuinationes and ficta miracula
statim facessunt: We see also (says he) this to come to pass in those
countries which receive the Gospel, where not only Idolatry, but all
diuinations also or inchauntments, and feigned miracles are presently packing
away.

also, that learned divine of Berne, he writes thus after his knowledge and
experience. Loc. Com. 176.
Nullibi enim efficatius hic spiritus erroris dominatur, quam vbi fidem non
reperit, vbi carent homines Christivera cognitione, vt apud septentrionales
populos, quod certissimum est argumentum Christianismum vehementer esse passim
in (...) corruptum, cum tot magi and incantat ores reperiantur: apud nos
similiter licet ex doctis nemo reperiatur: tame^ in plebe, and inter medicos
non rara sunt, quae arguunt non satis firmiter eos Christo credere. Idem dici
poterat de his qui tales consulunt, etc. rogandus est sedulo dominus vt talia
scandala aliq^ ando exterpet ab Ecclesia sua. This spirit of error (says he,
speaking of magic and witchcraft) bears rule no where with greater
efficacy, then where he finds no faith, and where men want the true
knowledge of Christ, as among the people of the north parts, which is a sure
argument, that Christianity is every where corrupted in popery, for that so
many magitians and forcerers are found among them: and with us also, albeit of
the learned there is none such, yet of the people and of the Physicians, there
are not a few, which is a true token that they believe not truly in Christ.
The like may be said of those men also which consult with such divmers, etc.
we must therefore earnestly call upon God to root out in time such scandals
out of his Church.

Conclusion.
I Conclude then of all the former premises, that seeing God has so ordained
his holy ministry as our best refuge against these evils: so opposite to
Satan's arts, and promised to be of great strength under the Gospel, for the
confusion of these most detestable enormities: The promise also performed in
the great fall of Satan's temples, and oracles by this holy work of God:
Again, for that natural men are thus purged and freed from Satan, and
restored to grace in Christ, and that the devil has evermore resisted this
holy ordinance with all his might: and lastly that the common experience of the
reformed Churches round about us testify the same: I conclude, therefore, I
say, that Gods pure ministry is one principal means, and good gift of God,
for the discovery, confusion, and extirpation of the most horrible and
detestable sins of witchcraft and sorcerie.

CHAP. II.
How carefully, wisely, and discreetly, the godly minister of the Gospel is to
use and bend all his strength, labor and wisdom for the discovery of
witchcraft, and the conversion of such fearful sinners, if God give grace,
unto true repentance.

IF the kingdom of Satan be so mighty, as the holy word of God testifies
unto us in sundry places: then it stands men in hand which undertake to
warfare against him, that they be welprouided of armor, wisdom, courage,
experience, and many good graces of Gods spirit. And as for Satan's strength,
first what reasons may better persuade us thereof, then for that the lord
calls him sometimes the god of this 2. Cor. 4. 3.
world, the prince Ioh. 12. 31.
of this world, the princes Ephesians. 6. 12.
of the darkness of this world, him and his ministers, the prince Ephesians. 2. 2.
that rules in the air, angels, Math. 25. 41.
governors, etc. for certainly he wants no might, courage, or will, to destroy
any thing in this world, when the hedge Job. 1. 10.
of God his providence, is broken before him. Secondly his knowledge is
wonderful, as the name (...) imports unto us, for he has now 5000. years
experience and more. Again, he is seen into the causes of most natural
things, his ministers are most swift, and can in a moment descry things far
distant, and he is placed in the air, whence he has a most free prospect,
to view most things here upon earth. Again, he is singulerly seen in the
history Iam. 2. 19.
of the holy Scripture. Lastly he is often called for the execution of Gods
justice; wherefore it is certain, that this old serpent is most strong also in
respect of his knowledge as for his arts The Poet says, Tibi nomina mill,
mill nocendi arts.
they are infinite in number, and have varied in all ages of this world, as
they might best serve his purpose: as these which follow, Divination by fire.
Pyromantiam, by the air.
aeromantiam, by water.
hydromantiam, by the earth.
geomantiam, by the dead.
necromantiam, by a sieve.
coscinomantiam, by a cock.
alectryomantiam, by a twibble or an axe.
axinomantiam, by a ring.
dactuliomantiam, by Ise.
pagomantiam, by meal.
alphitomantia^, alenromantiam, by a stone.
lithomantia^, by a laurel.
daphnomantiam, by an asses head,
kephaleonomantia^, by smoke.
kipnomantia^, by a rod.
rabdomantiam, by pieces of wood.
xulomantiam, by a basen of water.
lekanomantia^, by certain round vessels of glass full of water.
gastromantiam, by rubbing of the nails, etc.
omimanteia, and such like: among the Egyptians, Chaldees, Babilonians,
Archadians, Indians, etc. of late years, they commonly leave the most of the
former specials, and practice their Christolomantia^, by crystal, and
Catoptromantiam by glasses and such like inventions. If Satan then be so
mighty, so strong, so full of knowledge, so full of arts, then have the
ministers of Gods word that will encounter with him, great need of many good
graces, and great strength of Gods spirit, if they will work the confusion of
Satan, the discovery of his arts, and the conversion of such sinners unto
true repentance. My poor advise and counsel, according to Gods word, I humbly
offer unto them on this manner.

(...) that in their pastoral charge and Church of God they be most diligent
to publish and preach the word of God (as the Apostle teaches, 2. Tim. 4. 2.)
for this is that light that this enemy most dreadeth, as is before showed:
instructing 2. Tim. 2. 25, 26.
with patience, and proouing if God will at any time give this (vile kind of
men also) repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to
amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his will.

Secondly, they must take beed, that the same Word, the same Christ, and holy
Spirit (whose graces they labor to minister and give unto others) be found
also working in Ephesians. 3. 20. 1. These. 2. 13.
themselves. For he that has experience of his own regeneration can best
tell, what things are most needful for the conversion of others.

Thirdly: they must be carefully bent, to beautify and adorn their
profession with a godly, sober, and innocent life, and heedfullie watch that
they fall not into any presumptuous sins of disobedience. For such men Satan
has Ephesians. 2. 2.
entrance into them, and if they be possessed of Satan themselves in soul or
body or both, then have they but small strength to cast forth the Mat. 12. 43.
unclean spirits out of others. Here may that sweet martyr of God M. Tindall,
give us a most worthy president for our imitation: for that religious and holy
man of God, with his presence, discovered and confounded a famous magitian in
Antwerpe in his time there: M. In the story of M. Tindall. p. 1053.
Fox has recorded it as follows. There was at Answerpe on a time, amongst a
company of merchants, as they were at supper, a certain Iugler, which through
his diabolical enchantments, or art magical, would fetch all kinds of
viands and wine from any place they would, and set it upon the table
incontinent before them with many other such like things: the fame of this
Iuggler being much talked of, it chanced that as M. Tindall heard of it, he
desired certain of the merchants that he might be also present at supper to
see him play his parts: to be brief, the supper was appointed and the
merchants with Tyndall were there present. Then the Iuggler being required to
play his feats and to show his cunning: after his wonted boldness, began to
utter all that he could do, but all was in vain, at the last with his labor
sweating and toyling, when he saw that nothing would go forward, but that all
his enchantments were void, he was compelled openly to confess, that there
was some man present, which disturbed and let all his doings. So far
Master Fox.

Job. 22. 21. 22.
acquainted with God) in their prayers. For prayer is an especial means
appointed of Christ for this Mat. 17. 21.
purpose. And S. James says that the prayer of a Iam. 5. 16. Eusebius. eccles.
hist. l. 7. ca. 16.
righteous man (such as the minister of god must be) avails much if it be
fervent. By prayer Astirius a noble Christian at Caesarea Philippi bewraied and
confounded Satan with all his magical delusions. Anno Christi. 261.

Ephesians. 6. 18. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
our conflict with Satan: and S. Paul charge ministers by his example, that
they beat 1. Cor. 9. 27.
down their bodies, and bring them to subjection, least by any means after
they have preached to others, they themselves should be reproved.



Inst. 4. c. 12. s. 5. hom. in Mat. 3* Ezech. 4. 18. and 33. 10.
whom he might lawfully put back, is as guilty of sacrilege, as if he did
give abroad the Lords body to dogs. Wherefore Chrysostom griuouslie inu^ieth
against those Pastors, which while they fear the power of great men dare
debar no man: The blood, says he, shall be required at your hands: if
ye fear man ye shall be laughed to scrorne, but if ye fear God, ye shall be
reverenced also among men: let us not fearemaces, nor purple, nor crowns: we
have here a greater power.

Inst. 4. c. 12. s. 6.
but are committed openly, and with the offense of the whole Church: private or
secret are these, not which are altogether hidden from men, as the sins of
hipocrites, for these come not into the judgment of the Church, but those of
the mean kind, which are not without witnesses, and yet are not public.

In this dutiful vigilancie and examination, if he find out in his

And among this sort of sinners he must also wisely distinguish Heming. Admon.
and those which use their in chantments for the hurt and damage of others, as
they profess and confess.

The weaker sort and the first kind, the Pastors must labor with we must not
do evil, that good may come of it: and that no action that wants the
warrant of Gods word can have any godliness or goodness in it, and that nothing
can profit the body that kills or destroieth the soul, so as all these
execrable arts do: and they must be told also what a horrible abomination
their sin is before god, what a profanation of his blessed name, what an
Apostacy from God, and how they have utterly renounced God and betaken
themselves slaves and vassals to the devil, how lightly soever they do regard
it.

If any such be sorry and begin to show any tokens of true repentance, Rev. 9.
20, 21.
they must be wisely informed and comforted, for that Jesus Christ can and will
cast forth the unclean Mat. 12. 43. Luke 11.
spirit, if in truth of heart with weeping, fasting, and mourning, he be
sought unto, by repentance. And such must be also by the vigilant pastor
warchfullie ouerseene: for if he fall again to his old vomit, let him
remember the words of our Lord Jesus, Mat. 12. 45.
the end of that man is worse then the beginning. And of the holy Apostle:
for if 2. Pet. 2. 20.
they after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ; are yet entangled
again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning.

shall 2. Tim. 4. 4.
make their ministry fully known, as the Apostle comma^deth: and shall be
seen that they profit among all men, and continuing Negligent pastors, non
residents, blind guides, etc. cause the arts of witchcraft to breed and
continue in our land.
in this blessed state, shall so doing, both save themselves, and them that
hear them. And so much for the discovery and confutation of witchcraft by the
ministry of the gospel.

CHAP. III.
Of the Christian Magistrate, the 2. good means ordained of God for the
discovery and confusion of witchcraft.

THe godly Kings, Princes, Judges, and all Magistrates fearing God of the
old Church before Christ and the Christian princes etc. under the gospel,
were most careful at all times to banish this sin out of their kingdoms and
common wealths: And like as they were most diligent in this point, so the
wicked kings, princes, etc. in all countries and nations etc. were bent to the
contrary practice, as to nourish, to provide, and to maintain as it were
seminaries for such professors as practiced the arts and inventions of the
devil. I will show this to be true by examples and reasons out of the holy
book of God on this manner.

Moses (a most wise and godly magistrate, a singular president for all others)
was most sharply bent against this sin, as may be seen by his conflict with
this vile sort of men in Egypt, Exodus 7. and 8. for it is thought these were
those Iannes and ^ambres which withstood him, 2. Tim. 3. 8. and God by him gave
most sharp laws Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11.
against these sins, and that holy man, no doubt, practiced them in his time
most carefully.

2 Saul, Exodus 12. 18.
as long as he followed the word of God by the ministry of Samuel, Lev. 20.
27.
was sharply set against these evils, and so exactly and diligently searched
and sought out by his Judges and Magistrates these witches and wizards, that he
left few or none in all his land: as may be seen by the words of the witch her
self unto him, when he came unto her after his fall from God, 1. Sam. 28. 9.
the words are these. The woman said, behold, thou know what Saul has
done, how he destroyed the sorcerers and soothsaiers, out of the land,
wherefore then seek thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to dye? Where
we may see, 1. how that the wicked Saul was very forward during the time of
his good ministry, to execute Gods will against this sin: and 2. how that
as soon as the light of Gods word was darkened, the holy priests and prophets
murdered, these horrible abominations began to spring up, and to creep into
the Church again.

3 David was the next King, and carefully provided for a good ministry: in
his time prophesied Nathan 1. Sam. 2. 4. 11. 2. 12.
and Gad, 2. Chr. 29. 35.
and his religious priests Zadock 2. Sam. 15. 27.
and Abiathar: and many others, no doubt, godly priests and prophets, by whose
good ministry together with the industry and diligence of his wise Judges
and Magistrates in the execution of justice, this sin appeared not greatly in
his kingdom during his time: for we read nothing of this sin (that I can
remember) in that long history which the holy Ghost has commended unto us,
concerning his life and kingdom.

4 Hezekiah was a right wise, godly, zealous prince, and religigiouslie
provided a good ministry: he reformed many evils which had crept into the
Church in Vriah, Iotham, and Achas days: for as for Idolatry (whereof the
sin of witchcraft is an inseparable companion, as the wise and godly learned
have observed) it is said, He brake the images, 2. Chr. 31. 1.
cut down the groves, and brake down the high places and the altars
throughout Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh until he had made
an end. It is certain therefore that he searched most carefully for this
sin, and provided watchfully that his wise Judges should proceed in justice
against the same: for in his time prophesied the holy Prophets, Esaias, Hosea,
Micah: who preached most vehemently against these evils, as may be seen in
their Esa. 44. 25. 47. 9. 12. 13. Mich. 5. 12.
Prophecies.

Josiah also took 2. King. 23. 24
away them that had familiar spirits, and the soothsayers, and the images, and
the Idols, and all the abominations that were espied in the land of Judah and
in Jerusalem, to perform the word of the law, etc.

Of the Emperors, Lib. 3. c. 1. de Daemono. p. 224.
Kings, Princes, etc. under the Gospel. Bodin writes on this manner. Itaque
sortilegi, cum sortilegijs fuerunt damnati, and iudicijs infesti, primum
Tiberio imperante, vt apud Tacitum legitur: post Domitiano long acrius, and
diligentius quaestionem etc. tum etiam Diocletiano: Sed omniu^ seuerissime cum
imperatores fidei Christi sese adiunxerunt. tune enim euersa sunt templa and
oracula, sacrificia gentium, totaque aruspicina illicita pronunciata, and
auguralis scientia, eorumque inte^a^ctus vsus, indicta in auruspices mortis
poena, deportationes in eos qui augures and auruspices consulerent. Sorceries
(says he) began to be sought after under the heathen Emperors, Tiberius,
Domitian, and Dioclesian: But as soon as the Emperors which followed,
professed the faith of Christ, they did most severely search out these
practices of Satan. For then their Temples were cast down and their oracles,
heathenish sacrifices, and all the arts of magic were proclaimed unlawful,
and the use of them was forbidden, and death was ordained for the punishment of
sorcerie, and banishment for all those which consulted with soothsaiers,
sorcerers, and the rest of that Sathanicall order. And thus far of good
magistrates. The contrary practice of evil Princes and Judges follows.

they Genesis 47. 22. Exodus 7. 11.
were not constrained to sell their lands, as others were. In this land was
magic notably professed, as all writers of histories have testified. Hence
came that famous Nectanebus, who by his inchauntments so bewitched Olympias,
the Queen of Macedonie, that he begat on her Alexander the great Monarch,
making Phillip the King and the world to believe, that Alexander was Jupiters
son, as Curtius and others have recorded. Q. Curtius.
Such provision for this hellish profession there was, no doubt, also in all
other kingdoms and countries, where these artificers were fostered, as in
Chaldei, Cic. de Divin. Lib. 1.
Archadia, India, and in Persia, as I have before showed out of the
Ecclesiastical stories of Socrates and Sozomenes.

When the kingdom of Israel fell from the true God, from his Priests which
were the very dregs and rags, 1. Kin. 12. 31,
or lowest or basest of the people. When the ministry was thus polluted, and
the word of God put under a bushel and contemned, immediately Satan thrust
into the kingdom idolatry and witchcraft, which continued in that land unto
Hosheas time, under whom these sins brought destruction unto the kingdom of
Israel: as it is written, 2. King. 17. where the holy Ghost rehearsing the
sins of Jeroboam and his successors unto Hosheas time, and showing the just
causes of the destruction of that kingdom, he concludes on this manner. 1.
Finally they left all the commandments of the Lord their God. 2. they made
them molten images, even two calves, 2. Hos. 17. v. 16, 17.
and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served Baal, 3.
They made their sons and daughters pass through the fire and used witchcraft
and inchauntments, yea sold them selves to do evil in the sight of the Lord
to anger him.

The same evils came in like manner upon the kingdom of 2. Kin. 21. 3.
he went back, that is, from all good things which his father did, and then
follows this sin, verse. 6. He caused his sons to pass through fire, and
gave him self to witchcrafte and ^orcerie, and he used them that bad familiar
spirits, and were soothsaiers, and did much evil in the sight of the Lord to
anger him. And the lord assures us that these sins of this man, were the
cause of the destruction also of this kingdom of Judah: for thus it is written.
2. King. 24. 3. Ier 19. and 15. v. 4.
Surely by the commandment of the Lord came upon this Judah, that he might put
them out of his sight for the sins 50. years after his death.
of Manasseth according to all that he did.

And thus like as we have seen that when good kings, Judges, and Magistrates
governed the Church of the Jews, and were careful to preserve a pure
ministry, pure religion, and the sacred Scriptures among them: these
Sathanical arts of magic, sorcerie, and such like abominations, Conclus.
were soon banished that land, so likewise in all Christendom, both before
popery began to darken the face of Gods Church, and after that rotten mist in
sundry places had vanished, and was scattered by the beams of the Gospel, this
Sathanicall kinigdome was cast down, his ministers confounded, and his
delusions were continually discovered. Wherefore I conclude thus with Bodin. p.
234. de Dae ^onom.
Beatus est populus cui sapientes moderatores, boni magistratus, and
bonipastores p^aesunt, qui been institunnt ipsum: non sunt in eomalign^
spiritus diu habituri sedem. Blessedis that people over whom wise governors,
good magistrates, and godly pastors are placed, which do well instruct and
govern them: evil spirits are not like to have any long abode or continuance
in that place.

CHAP. IIII.
What the Christian Judges and Magistrates have done, and may do for the
discovery and extirpation of Witchcraft.

and unacquainted with their profession. Notwithstanding it may be in some sort
lawful for me, and most expedient for this cause in hand, to teach others in
sober manner (rudely as I can) what magistrates are, and wherefore ordained of
God, and how they have done and may do to prevent, discover and confound these
abominations: wherefore I hope I shall give no just cause of offense unto any,
but an occasion rather unto some to remember in what place the Lord has set
over us these honorable judges and magistrates, to batter and beat down our
common enemy his kingdom and all his Inventions and munition, which he daily
practices for the destruction of our bodies and souls: and therefore I offer
to al men good cause to commend the^ to God, most earnestly in their prayers.

The magistrates (says the Lord) must Exodus 18. 21.
be men of courage, men for they supply after a sort Gods own place, Inst. 4.
20. chapter sect. 4.
and resemble his majesty, and therefore are often called Gods Exodus 22. 8.
Psalm. 82. 1, 6.
in scripture, a name of great importance, and Fathers and Pastors in the
Prophets in sundry places. And Solomon says, Prove. 8. 15.
that when kings reign, and counselors decree righteouslie, when Princes
bear principality and the judges of the earth execute judgment: it is Gods
good will, his own work and good pleasure. And for this cause Moses and
Iehosaphat said to the judges (whom they appointed in every several city) that
they Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 1. Chro. 16. 6.
should sit in judgment not for man but for God.

Again all authors ecclesiastical and profane agree with the Heming. adm.
q. de offic. magift.
affirming that their office is extended to both the tables of the law: and
most ecclesiastical writers call them cust odes vtriusque tabulae, Inst. 4.
chapter 20. s. 9.
preseruers and keepers of hoth the tables of Gods law: and the very heathens
(for nulla gens sine lege, sine rege, sine Deo: all nations have their king,
their law, and their God) the heathens, I say, in making laws, they have always
begone at religion and the worship of god, and so proceed to politic laws, and
lastly commend all their laws and religion to the care and custody of their
Princes, Judges, magistrates and governors.

And the good gouerners, kings, princes, and magistrates in the Church of God,
have ever had their first and principal care to maintain and defend the laws
of the first table of God: that is the religion, the service, the word, the
honor and glory of God: for so God commands, and the forenamed holy princes,
Moses, David, Hezekiah, Josiah, lehosaphat and others have so done as we have
partly before showed: for they accounted themselves Gods vicegerents here on
earth, and thereefore they were most mindful of his glory.



(when he desired to hear the word of God) from the faith; let them understand
that Paul may thunder more justly against them professing Christianity in the
Church, as he did against that vile Pagan sorcerer in this manner: O Act. 17. 10.
full of all subtlety and all mischief, the child of the devil and enemy of
all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord?

The ground and the mother of all good laws is the law of god, The most
fearful death as the Hebrews write.
Exodus 20. 18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Again Lev. 20. 27. and
if a man or a woman have a spirit of divination; or sooth saying in them, they
shall dye the death: they shall stone them to death, their blood shall be upon
them. Again, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. many kinds of magitians are numbered which the
Lord straightly charge should not be left to live in the land. These laws
of God did the forenamed godly kings, their judges, rulers, and magistrates
most religiousllie and zealouslie obey and put in practice, and wherefore
Christian princes, Com. in lob. 1. c. v, 16.
judges, etc. ought not with greater care, love, zeal, and religion, do the
same under the gospel: no man living shall ever be able with any sensible reason
to prove unto us. Wherefore such judges, as are so sharp sighted in the lighter
sins of the 2. table, and as it were blind in the disobedience of the first,
are (as M. Beza, Danaeus, De sorti. c. 5.
and Bodin Lib. 4. c. 1.
say truly) great conte^ners of God themselves: and therefore the greater
account shall they make. Bodin co^plaineth in these words: Equidem saepe
miratus sum, cur a multis principib. quaestiones institutae, and iudices extra
ordinem dati, delegatique fierent, in fures, quaestores aerarios, faeneratores,
and viaru^ obsessores, per quos tamen turpissima, First treatise chapter 4.
and sum horrenda, impiaque magoru^ facta manserunt impunita. This lawyer (as
you see) wondreth at the custom of some countries, M. Beza. com. in lob. c. 1.
v. 16.
where he knows the judges and magistrates are very sharp against thieves,
robbers, usurers, and such like common sins, but to pass over the most
horrible sins of sorcerie unpunished. M. Beza also complains against this
negligence in magistrates, as we have before showed.

Danaeus says, that to make laws does belong and appertain to C. 5.
of sin, which they do impiously commit. Bodin numbreth their sins in this
order. First they renounce Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
God and all true religion. 2. they blaspheme Lev. 14. 14.
and provoke his divine majesty with unspeakable contempt. 3. they believe in
the devil, adore him, and Exodus 32. 4, 27.
sacrifice unto him. 4. they offer their children Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
unto devils. 5. they swear unto Satan and promise to bring Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
as many as they can unto his service and profession. 6. they invoke Satan in
their prayers, and swear ler. 5. 7. and 12. 16.
by his name. 7. they commit incestuous adulteries, for Satan tells the^ that
none can prove a perfect magitian or sorcerer, but such a one as is of the
father and the daughter, or the mother and the son: whereupon Catullus wrote
these verses.

Nam magus ex matre and gnato gignatur oportet,
Si vera est Persarum, impia religio.
The right magitian by the son, of mother is begotte,
Says Persian faith, if that be true, it is Satan's bird I wotte.
8. They commit horrible murders Lev. 24. 21. Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12.
and kill young infants. 9. al sorcerers for the most part exercise poison, De
civ. Dei. 15. in cubos peragere mulierum concubitus etc. hoc negare impudentiae
esse videatur.
and to kill with poison is far more heinous then simple murder: for so the law
speaks: grauius est occidere veneno quam ferro: 10. they kill men's cattle,
etc. 11. and lastly the witches (as themselves confess) commit abominatio^s
and filthiness with their devils when they ly with their husbands: Aug. says
that to deny this is great impudency. These sins here named, every one eue^
the lest deserves a most exquisite death, as can be devised: for all such
sinners are commanded to be stoned to death: which kind of death was a most
dreadful death among the Jews. And surely it is well known by common experience
that al professed sorcerers, etc. are guilty of many most monstrous impieties:
and for this cause the law says simply, Mechasephath, Lo tichieth, let not a
witch live: expressing unto us how expedient it is that justice be speedily
exercised against these vile kind of men.

And thus far I thought good to show, how wise and religious magistrates, have,
do, and may proceed against the discovery of the most horrible and detestable
sins of witchcraft or ^^^ery: not for that I can or would teach any our
honorable, wise, and learne^ magistrates their duties in this point: but to
let the common sort of Christians see, what the law of God commands, and
what diligence good Magistrates have used in elder times against these evils.
Wherefore if we, which profess Christ Jesus in this clear Sun shine of the
gospel, be found more remiss, cold, and backward in performing these duties
to God and his Church: that I may say more, we seem to come to far behind
those noble presidents, in the love of (...) hatred of sin, and behind (I
fear) if we so persist, shall we come unto the kingdom efheauen. To
conclude therefore, let us all as many as have the place of inferiors in this
Christian common wealth, pray mightily unto God, so to illuminate our
superiors, the wise and honorable magistrates, our godly learned ministers,
with his holy word to know his will: and so to inflame their hearts with his
holy spirit, that they may most diligently put the same in practice, as for
the discovery, confusion, and extirpation of al sins, so more particularly,
and most carefully of these most horrible, dreadful, and detestable sins of
witchcraft and sorcery, etc. that so God may be purely worshipped, his saints
comforted, his greatest enemies either converted to their good, or confounded
with their devils to their endless shame and confusion. So be it.

Unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible; unto God only wise be
honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

