A SERMON PREACHED At Paul's Cross, August the 5. 1623.

BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Now Archdeacon of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold
at his Shop at Saint Austines Gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE UNFEIGNED EXAMPLE OF GOODNESS EVEN IN THIS AGE, THE HONOR OF
NOBILITY, THE DELIGHT AND DEFENDER OF THE ARTS, THE FRIEND OF PERPETVALL
HOLDERNESSE, THE REVIVER OF NOTINGHAM AND DRAKE, THE HONORABLE SIR FRANCIS
STVART, HIS MOST DEVOTED BARTEN HOLYDAY WISHES THE GLORIOUS EXTREMITY OF HIS
MERIT.
Most Noble Sir,
WHen I see you peremptory to be good; I judge your unhappiness no less then
your Virtue; and I think most men have my thought, though not my way. They
judge you unhappy, because your Honor is not as large as your goodness; and
they think kindly, though not exactly: that being no part of your
unhappiness, because no part of your desire. But I judge you most unhappy, in
that, being a rare example of Virtue in our Age, you want the comfort of that
example, which other good men enjoy in the direct contemplation of you; and you
enjoy not, through your own modesty: which denies you the reflectiue
contemplation of your self. And since it has been your favor (and my
blessing) to admit me to the prospect of your fair actions, I knew not how to
return a more cunning thanks unto you, then to present unto you another
prospect; the grateful prospect of our late Sovereign, and of your loved
Holdernesse; who may very well stand thus near in fame, having been as much
united in danger and deliverance. And still it is so far from being an
untruth, that it is not so much as a paradoxe to affirm, that They both live;
and, by their preservation, outliue not only the Gowries, but also their own
Funerals. By the Sword of the Gowries they could have been but proved to be
mortal: but by the execution of the Gowries they are proved to be immortal,
and because they did not die then, they shall never die; nay, they are able to
give life to their Epitaphs. And, only by this advantage of the argument,
perchance even this trifle may steal into Posterity: though, alas, my desire
is, that it may only last, till this story be delivered to Fame and Envy, by
some nobler pen, then this rude one of

Your Honor's most faithful Barten Holyday.

PSALM. 18. Verse 48, 49. -- Thou have delivered me from the violent man.

Therefore will J give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Heathen; and sing
praises unto thy name.


IF the voice of joy were not as loud as the voice of Treason, we could not
upon this day hear the news of our own deliverance. But gratitude and
Majesty command the ear; and when the King preaches, Attention is Loyalty.
My Text is King Dauid's Sermon, and his Text is his preservation. God saues
him; and he by an imitating thankfulness saues the story of God's mercy. His
speech testifies his safety; but his confession his goodness: which the Lord
protects and increases; And it increases like the protection, as if by a devout
emulation it would as much requite as acknowledge the favor. Which being above
the faint thanks of prose, he aduances by the art and courage of a Song. His
soul could no other way ascend, but by death or triumph: in which, his just
exilience is so great, that one may fear he ought after treason to fear a
nearer violence from his own joy. Yet he venters this grateful trance; as if
he were content to have a disease for his sake that had freed him from death.
His Song is of deliverance, an act by which God repeates his creation, and
makes the same creature, without death, revive. It is the friendship of his
power; whereby he makes our safety as eminent as his love: which by this
unfeigned Commentary upon our Creed, works in us an easy faith, that God is
the Father Almighty. If we view the purchases of men we may observe, that
they, who have laid out most labor upon opinion of mightiness, have had their
greatest Fame take life from Ruin, and with a lamentable happiness made the
epitaphs of nations the best annals of their immortality and fury. But the
Almighty does not spend a creature in unmerciful vanity, the height of his
glory being the humility of his compassion. And though the Jew in his
grammatical devotion trembles more at the found then the majesty of his name
of majesty, Jehovah; yet God himself has taught us by a more canonical
Catechism to pay our best adoration without precise sophistry to his name of
salvation, his best name, Jesus. And if you would see, how he delights to save,
you may with delight see his variety of saluations. Sometimes you may see him
save an infant; when he must stay for thanks, till by the leisure of nature,
the understanding be made as capable of the blessing, as the body was.
Sometimes you may see him save a mother; and as if he would make himself like
his own work, be as tender over her, as she over her babe. Sometimes you may
see him save the mighty; It was he that delivered Sampson from the captivity
of the cords: which he did not break by his own strength. The strength of
his body lay in his hair: but the strength of his hair lay in his Vow; The
Nazarite was stronger then Sampson. Sometimes you may see him save a family: It
was he that prepared Esau for Jacob and his pilgrim-houshold* Esau that before
lost his birthright, and now his malice. Nature vainly thought to make him
Jacob's brother, but this was a task, that God kept for himself. Sometimes
you may see him save a tribe; It was he, that in revenge of his abused Leuite,
made Israel so ouer-act victory upon Benjamin, that they put six hundred of
them to a happy flight: whereby they preserved the tribe, and conquered it.
They delivered them from the Sword, by bestowing upon them too much fear of
it. Sometimes you may see him save a nation: It was he that led Moses as well
as Israel through the Sea, which was more obedient then Pharaoh to let them
go, and hurried on each side into such reverent tumults to get out of the way,
that Israel scarce trembled more at the Egyptian, then at their own
deliverance. Sometimes you may see him save a King, and then he shows the
supremacy of his mercy; whiles he makes him perceive, that he is less then
God, by making him only less then God. Majesty is a deputy-diuinity; and to
deny Royalty is civil Atheism: God having proposed to man the visible Godhead
of a King, as his own proportional and lawful image. A King is as sacred as
sublime, and as great a part of God's jealousy, as of his love. God therefore
often confounds the treason, but almost always the traitor. He places a King
on high, to make us understand how near he is unto protection; He places a
King on high, to make us understand how far he is above the hand of the
subject; which is to be employed, not to touch a King, but to defend him from
being touched. The knee is a better subject then the hand; this may be always
loyal, that always is safe; this may protect with a shield, that with a
prayer: which the Lord does more often prevent, then hear: the secret
expedition of violence provoking as secret an expedition of deliverance. The
deliverance of a King is the greatest Epoch in the Chronicle of Gods mercies,
and releeues the curiosity of expectation with a grateful period. Thus though
in the Eternal there be properly no distinction of times, yet there is of
wonders: which most prefer themselves to observation, when by a courteous
almightinesse they command us to rejoice, as much as to admire, and are
indulgent to our necessary ingratitude, which looks more upon the benefit,
then on the wonder. Yet is there one degree more of deliverance, when God makes
himself rejoice as much as us; when he deliuer's a good King; by the same act
of mercy protecting innocence with as much joy, as he does majesty with
indignation. He was content to deliver Manasses; but he did delight to deliver
Ezechias; the repetition of the deliverance being the profession of the
delight; as if it had not been enough to save him but once, Disease laid a
nearer siege unto him then Sennacherib; yet disease fled like Sennacherib,
who ought to have fled more from his own blasphemy, then from the Angel.
Against the Assyrian an Angel was made a soldier; but against death God
himself came to the rescue. And yet has honorable mercy no higher degree to
bestow upon a superlatiue friend, upon God's David? Yes. God did visit others,
but lived with him. He was with him when he tore the Lion, as the Lion would
have torn the Lamb, making the destruction as famous as the strength. He
provided the peeble for his sling; whose active prevention gave not the
Philistine the respite of fear or anger; but making his strength, as vain as
it was great, with triumph committed him to death and scorn. Now these were
Dauid's deliverances, when he was a shepherd; (yet when God was his
shepherd) but will you see his protections in his royalty, as illustrious, as
his royalty? So peradventure we may find out, among his many traitors, his
violent man, from whom he had equal glory and fear. If we look upon
Abner, we may observe more power, then violence. Strengthened he was with
Readiness army and son: but an easy quarrel between him and his Lord
bestowed him upon David: who receiving at once peace and strength from his
enemy, by a rare felicity saw his danger made his safety, And thus we have not
yet found out Dauid's violent man. If we look upon Absalom, we may observe
more subtilty, then violence. Armed he was with Achitophel, against whose
wisdom David had nothing equal, but his innocence, which invited God's mercy
to such revenge, that by a compendious justice it made the wise traitor become
his own executioner, and vain Absalom was only happy by being advanced to a
deliberate destruction; And thus we have not yet sound out David's violent man.
If we look upon Sheba the son of Bichri, we may observe more vanity, then
violence. He fought more with the trumpet, then the sword; and raising rather
a tumult, then a rebellion, almost as soon lost his head, as his loyalty. And
thus we have not as yet found out David's violent man. We will not look upon
Adoniah, and yet he was a goodly person; in whom we may observe more desire,
then violence. But notwithstanding if we would look upon him, he will take
sanctuary before we can see him; and from the horns of the altar make his
pardon as soon known as his offense. And thus we have not as yet found out
David's violent man. But if we will look back in story, we shall find an
enemy of David's before all these both in time and fury. We shall behold Saul
beginning a persecution with his own hand, which throws a iauelin at him; but
it is guided by a better hand to a merciful error. We shall behold him
sending messengers to kill him in the morning; as if they expected the light
only to guide them to the certainty of the execution; least peradventure by an
unpardonable mistake they should commit a less villainy. But David's wife by a
better light foreseeing the intent, shows that the night is as convenient for
an escape as for a murder, and letting him down at a window makes the same
darkness conceal their treachery; and delude it. We shall behold Saul
himself hunting after him, as if he would drive him out of his country and
wits: but David in the extremity of wit and banishment disguises himself in a
safe madness, making it the best use of his reason to seem to have lost the
use of his reason. We shall behold this violent man driving him again after
his return, into caves and deserts; by a new cruelty banishing him thus in
his own country. We shall behold him at last so out-runne his own fury and
company that he is left alone to his mercy, whom he teaches to be
unmerciful. We shall see him become rather David's armor-bearer, then his
enemy, losing unto him the spear, that he hunts him with; arming him thus at
once with the opportunity and instrument of revenge. And might not David at
this rare leisure of affliction justly cry out unto violent Saul, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Thus have you seen David's violent man: but now will
you see his violent God? Behold the art of divine vengeance! The loss of
Readiness life must not cost David the loss of his innocence. He has for a long
time persecuted David, and now he returns to persecute himself. David found
a wilderness to hide himself from Saul; but Saul can find no wilderness to
hide himself from himself. His own fear and his sword quickly dispatch him.
It had been too much glory to fall by the riotorious hand of David; it had
been too much content to fall by the commanded hand of his own servant. David
was revenged, when Saul was slain: but God was revenged when Saul slew
himself. The heart of the King is in the hand of God; and is not the hand of
the King in the hand of God? Saul fell by his own hand, and by Gods; His own
hand acts the murder, but God's the revenge. Thus God delivers David from Saul
by Saul. A deliverance almost as admirable for the instrument, as for the
Author. You see then what God has done for David, now hear what David will
do for God. And I may justly bid you hear, because he will give thanks unto
the Lord; because he does give thanks unto the Lord. He does give thanks,
whiles he does promise them, and whiles he confesses his debt, he pays it.
Which payment by words is not more easy then true; it being a gift which
accompanied a blessing, and is one. God never gives unto a good man a single
blessing, but at the same time makes him both happy and graceful. And it is
society of blessings our understanding may observe in those creatures that are
without understanding: each good tree giving thanks for his goodness by his
fruitfulness. Goodness is the looking glass, and gratitude the reflection;
whereby the Creator beholds and applaudes his own work. Which work was in
David so unfeignedly exact, that God's goodness seemed to be reflected with as
much similitude as delight; and with as much expedition as similitude. God
delivers him from death, and straight he delivers himself from ingratitude.
He does not give thanks unto his spear, or rather unto Readiness spear: which
he used not unto victory, yet unto triumph. His happiness made Saul his
captive, but his mercy did only take his spear captive. The spear in holy
reverence did not touch Saul; but the dutiful mercy gave him a loyal wound.
He does not give thanks to the swiftness of his beast, which might make his
flight more speedy then his danger. We know of no horse he had, but his fear.
He does not give thanks unto his sword. He fled without one, till he came to
Ahimelech the Priest; of whom he was feign to borrow one that was his one, the
sword, which he formerly won from Goliath. Yet David did no more hurt to Saul
with it, then Goliath did to David with it. He does not give thanks unto his
wit; which without strength may put a man in hope, but seldom in safety. He
does give thanks unto the Lord, that in his flight affoorded him direction and
defense; and he delights to disgrace himself to thankfulness, whiles he
makes himself no more part of the deliverance, then the argument. If some
politic Discourser were to censure this business, he would invade it with
the license of fancy; and deliver unto us a new story of the same actions,
making David as great a Politician as himself. He would tell us of his
courtship with Ahimelech, by whom he was both sed and armed: He would tell us
of his judicious and wel-expressed madness before Achish the King of Gath: He
would tell us of his four hundred Bankcrupts and discontents, whole despair
he raised into courage, by making himself Captain over them at Adullam: He
would tell us how he wrought upon the King by nothing upon his children
Jonathan and Michel, making him his friend and her his wife, by whom he made a
discovery and advantage of the King's hate and fear: He would tell us that
he spared Saul, not for Readiness sake, but his own since he might expect most
certain (...) from the guilt, and as certain pardon by the loyalty: Lastly,
he would draw out such a necessity of deliverance in all his troubles from the
united causes, circumstances and dependances of the actions, that both the
danger and the glory would be all Dauid's; and he would tell us that to oppose
this, were to deny the principles of the great Patriarch Achitophel, and Saint
Machiauel; and thus would make God almighty so unacquainted with the business,
as if he were wholly employed about some other piece of providence. But Dauid's
gratitude does abhor this guilty wisdom and he is so far from not
rendering thanks unto God, that he proclaims them; making them of as great
extent as the liberty God brings him into. He counts it an ingratitude to
praise God without witness; and he makes himself more thankful, whiles he
makes others thankful. Their silence is a part and an increase of his speech,
which is pointed by the respites of their admiration. No less then the whole
people can be an auditor equal to Dauid's joy; wherein you may behold a happy
contradiction of Philosophy, extending an accident beyond a subject; Dauid's
joy is larger then his heart, and yet his heart is larger then all the
people's; and his thanks likewise must not have the same bounds with his
Dominions. He will commit his Psalms to fame and devotion, which shall
faithfully deliver them unto the Nations; And the Nations shall rejoice to
study God in David; and God shall rejoice to hear David in the Nations: and
David shall rejoice to foreknow the joy of God and the Nations. This day in
the Christian posterity of the Heathen, Dauid's Prophecy is made story; and
his Psalm is made our Psalm: whiles David gives us the words, wherewith we
give thanks for him unto the Lord. But David cannot rest content with the tame
thanks of words. He is not made more active by his fear, then by his joy;
which sometimes moves his hand unto his Harp, as if it would make the soul by
the finger impart harmony to the instrument, and by art not adulterate, yet
multiply thanks. Sometimes it moves his whole body, which by the obedience of
a devout Dance keeps time with the excitations of his soul: And sometimes it
moves his voice by a song, by which the soul, whiles in the body seems to
mount higher then the body. David could not always carry the pleasant burden
of his Harp with him; but his voice was an easy and faithful companion. The
most instructed pensill, that can express all passions, cannot yet express a
voice; but the voice by a natural cunning can without the pensill express all
passions. It can prolong it self into the slow not of sorrow, and teach the
ear to suffer with the heart; It can sharpen it self into the clear accent
of joy, and by purifying motion seem to make the spirits of the heart as light
as the soul. When we sing, we commit an innocent flattery of our selves, our
own melody being the grateful coozenage of our minds without abuse. But when
we sing a Psalm, we chastize the error of delight, and so please our selves,
that we please God. To sing Psalms is to prevent the joys of Heaven; but to
sing Psalms of praise is to increase the joys in Heaven. The Angels rejoice
at out godly sorrow; how much more do they rejoice at our godly joy! The
Church triumphant makes up the antheme of the Church militant. Yet all our
songs do not make God more great, but more gracious. He makes his praises our
blessings. Thus we can then only with a modest and lawful wisdom praise our
selves, when we praise God. And this was an art, wherein David was no less
skillful then happy: his whole life was but a blessing and a Psalm. If he kill
a Lion or a Bear, he will straight be as thankful, as strong; and confess
that though it were by the arm of David, yet it was by the strength of God. If
he kill a Giant with the weapons of a shepherd, he will straight confess
that God was the shepherd, which gave the weight and course unto the
sling-stone. If in the Wilderness he lie hid from Saul by the protection of a
rock, he will straight confess that God is the rock; and rather want an
auditory, then a Psalm. If your devout wit will but mix his Psalms with his
story, you shall scarce ever find him but fighting and singing, or flying and
singing, or mourning and singing, or triumphing and singing; but you shall
never find him in a Psalmelesse action; as if the faculty of laughter were not
more the property of a man, then a Psalm the property of a godly man; and it
is as easily tuned as his affections, nay, it is tuned by his affections. These
made up the quite in Dauid's soul; and made the harmony of the soul descend
to the sense by the artificial courtesy of the voice. His voice neither knew
nor desired any other song, then the learned repetition of the name of the
Lord, which was his only way of art, by which he should never be afraid to
sing out of tune. The name of the Lord is the Grammar of his nature; which he
suffers us to express rather by the alphabet, then the pensill. In this life
God reueales himself more to our ear, then our eye; and in the next more to
our eye, then our ear. Our sight is a sense not more clear, then bold, and as
near to idolatry, as to curiosity. God therefore more often imparts himself
by his voice, but most often by our voice; whiles he permits our mouths to
be filled with his name, as our hearts with his love. And is there any heart
or mouth more full of God, then Dauid's? Is he not full both of his mercies and
his praises? Were not all his deliverances advanced by the Chronicle and
Trophie of a Psalm? Is not Jerusalem as full of his voice, as of his victory?
And is he not himself as weary, as glorious? Now therefore this royal
Prophet may reign in peace, and now enjoy his thrifty deliverance. Deliverance
is cheap, when purchased without blood. Saul's persecuting hand is grown as
weary as his foot; and with his life he has lost his kingdom and his fury.
Absalom is no more, and has left no more of his treason, then the shame: Sheba
is cut off, and has neither a head, nor a follower; and in delivered Jerusalem
is a noise of great joy, as free as the deliverance: and God vouchsafes to
rejoice for his Dauid's deliverance; and David is glad of the treason for the
deliverance. And shall so great a triumph envy to impart it self beyond
Jerusalem? Or shall the noise more affect us, then the joy? Or shall not the
happiness be as far extended, as the danger? Surely without travel we may
find as much fear and deliverance; we have not only Dauid's Psalm, but
himself and his God. The first David was persecuted to a prepared destruction;
and our second David is invited to it. The story of which is the Psalm of is
And it ought to be custom, as much as conscience to repeat this comfortable
state homily; and to point out to posterius the many deliverances in this one
deliverance which not to perform were to lose this solemnity, or to confound
it with others. You shall see violence armed with secrecy; you shall see gold
by the alchymy of treason changed into steel: You shall see a pair of
brothers as firmly united by disloyalty, as by nature. Yet, did I say, you
should see brothers? You shall scarce see the elder, who almost hides himself
as cunningly as his intent; and by the speed of divine judgment is as soon
beheld executed, as guilty. But the younger shall present and reveal himself
to you. You shall see his bold heat venture at once upon majesty and wisdom:
He is not daunted with the name or person of a King, no, not of his own. He
is not suspicious of the circumstances of his own plot; But with blunt
humility like his pretended affection he imparts unto his Sovereign a Legend
of a solitary man, that he met burdened with melancholy, and a pot full of
coined gold: He tell's how he suspected, examined, and with profitable
secrecy imprisoned both; beseeching him with a like secrecy and speed to
prevent a second discovery; the man and gold being not more strangers to him,
then his own brother was as yet unto the happiness. The beginning of the
temptation, you see, was from gold: but the metal was better then the
invention* For, what a dull thought was that, to inuit him with wealth, whom
neither want nor avarice could ever seize on? But you may be hold this
temptation as easily overcome as resisted; and that made as low as the scorn
of a King, which was as high as the desire of a traitor: who was abated by an
answer not unlike that of our Savior to the Devil. The Devil tempts him to
throw himself down from the pinnacle; when our Savior straight examines not
the danger of the action, but the lawfulness; telling him, it was written,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: And in effect thus was this tempter
answered. Thou shall not tempt thy Lord, the King. For straight it was replied
justly by the Law, and skilfully by the Lawgiver, that treasure belongs not to
the King, except it be found hid under the earth; so that new treasure only
is the new subject of a King. But see the subtilty of desire! This tempter
vrges the intention of his secret man, who would have made his gold as secret.
And again behold how he is corrected by royal modesty, and taught the
difference between humane and divine Majesty! This is the judge of thoughts,
but that, but of actions. But such importunity might justly move the seuerest
wisdom to curiosity, and search: And as the greatest understanding is
sometimes the cause of the greatest danger: so his Royal person could never
have been persuaded into this hazard by the ill-framed Poetry of the gold; but
by his own deep apprehension. For knowing by inquiry both the coin and the
man to be unknown, judiciously he suspected from the harsh instruction of
experience, that it might be some practicing gold hopefully put to use by a
Forreigner with the expectation of interest from the commodity of a sedition.
Yet his Heroique disposition deals with his golden messenger, as with a
temptation; he ouercomes him by flight. For being prepared for recreation he
gets to horse, leaving his Informer with a halfe-answere between suspicion and
neglect: showing himself covetous of nothing, but of his innocent sport. Yet a
wise jealousy accompanying his delight moved him a little to retire, rather
to find out the treason, then the gold. And with the courage of innocence be
sends for his traitor; who with officious disloyalty attends his Sovereign;
and by a wild mixture shows, that treason and sport are not incompatible. But
this being ended, with most suspicious and unmannerly importunity, he mooues
his Majesty to his new journey, without the respite of taking a fresh horse.
He had before by a pretended necessity of secrecy deprived him of counsel,
and now he would not willingly let him have so much as a serviceable beast. But
the glory of deliverance does not admit increase, but by increase of danger.
His Majesty yields unto his request and haste, when the man straight makes a
new request. For observing the Nobles to follow with a faithful and
inconvenient speed, he desires, they should be sent back for a time, from
this their duty, and the mystery: Gold was a Cordial, that would raise
appetite; and his thrifty love would have the King have it all. But here his
wit was a little too young for his treason: desiring both too openly and speedily
to disfurnish his Majesty of his Counsel, his Horse, and his Attendance: who
increasing by this, his suspicion with his danger, provided himself of all
three. Of all which notwithstanding he was afterward again disfurnished upon
entreaty; which ought not to have failed, least it had made less the wonder.
When the High Priest's Officers that came to apprehend our Savior, were to be
struck down backward, the Miracle did scorn the help and disgrace of a
weapon. But his Majesty being as yet provided thus, proceeds on; his wisdom
and suspicion making up a censure upon the man: whose visage was more beholding
to nature, then to melancholy, which did disfigure it with variety of
passions. The wildness of his eye and tongue seemed to accuse him rather of
distraction then treason, and without art to argue, that his displeased spirit
had a less Enemy, then a King. A severe brother might peradventure by striving
to make him tame, make him wild, and as much raise his fury as depresse his
delight. His Majesty was attended with this conjecture and the subject of it:
who does solicit him to such mystical secrecy, as if he mistook his own
Religion, and had revealed it not to a King, but to a Priest. And being almost
at the end of his journey, though not of his purpose, he rides before with as
much haste as care to prepare and accompany his brother; with whom, that he
might not fail on any side of dissimulation, be quickly returns to meet his
Majesty. Who being entertained with some delay and excuse was feasted by a
traitor without poison. It was a rare dullness in one that had been an
Italian traveler! But it seems his Lordship was there so wholly employed in
the study of the Magique Character, that he could not intend the drudgerie of
poison. But this great Politician being by his own reciprocal plot sent out
by the King to entertain the guests; the King is by his familiar traitor
admonished of the opportunity as precious, as the gold. Wherefore only with
his attendance and direction he passes through a Labyrinth of rooms, as
intricate as the heart of a Villain. All which, as they passed through, his
attendant locks with most accurate fear. At last they enter a small Study;
and this he likewise locks with equal jealousy. Oh, he would feign have
shutout God and protection! But can contraries rest long together? Or can
Majesty be so patient of treason? The Cloud must break, and the battle of
the Thunder must be reported. Thus long you have beheld the man; but now you
shall see the violence of the man. And that you may behold the contexture of
his treason, now ye shall see the prisoner that he promised, changed into an
Executioner. You shall see a man and a Dagger; weapon enough to make a
traitor; and yet you shall behold him almost made innocent by fear. But with
as much, though a better fear, you will behold the violent man: who now
changes his countenance, when he should change his heart; and increases his
treason, by laying aside a great part of it, dissimulation. He now couers his
head, when he deserves rather to lose it; and shows it to want as much wit,
as Loyalty, that did not understand, in what presence it was. After he had
armed himself thus with his haste and irreuerence, he spoils his servant of
his dagger, who would as willingly have been rid of his master, as of his
weapon: which when he has, (see a danger fit for a deliverance!) he holds the
point of it to the breast of his King; when the point of his conscience ought to
have wounded his own breast. And now, alas, the weakness of fury! What can
thy violence do now, O violent man? Think thou by thy wild hand to move
the fixed purpose of the Almighty? Think thou by thy rashness to frustrate
the divine deliberations of our wisest Henry? Think thou by thy folly to
confound the greatest heir of his wisdom, in whom was to be accomplished the
marriage and glory of two Nations? Alas, vain hand, that was no more able to
change the Successor, then the succcession! But you shall see what he does, or
rather hear, what he says. His fury begins already to faint into words;
yet so execrable, as if he would change his treason into blasphemy, and now
threaten God in stead of the King; who must not upon pain of death open a
window, or but his lips to proclaim the traitor. O the perverse folly of
villainy, that would give Laws to the Lawgiver, and make Majesty as dumb, as
Treason ought to be! But see more folly yet! This traitor would change
himself into a judge, and seem as just as he is ridiculous. He will not
have him die without sentence; and yet he will sentence him without witness:
and so at once accuses him, and pronounces him guilty of the death of his
father. He had before violated his Majesty, but now his innocence. But, O
now, to see the power of a King armed with God! He tries if he can tame his
fury into sleep by awaking his conscience; or else to make the point of his
Dagger as dull as this. He tells him of the violent eloquence of blood; which
will cry out as loud as conscience: He tells him of the necessary inheritance
of revenge; which will as certainly find an heir, as his Crown: He proves
himself innocent from the execution of his father by the most innocent
argument of Law and Nature; it being done by public act, which may err
ignorantly, but never boldly; and at that age, which had not manned him to the
exercise of his right; so that he was then more his King, then his judge: He
calls to mind his religion, which might move some fear: He unwillingly repeates
some favors, which might move love, He offers secrecy and pardon, which
might raise his hope: When behold a tame Traitor! His body has forgot the
bargain of his mind, and begins again to uncover the head; as if he would
confess his understanding were convinced. But it had been happy if this
loyalty had descended from his head to his heart. And yet he vows, he will
not be such an execrable Traitor as he thought to have been: now he will
vouchsafe not to murder him. You see the degrees of amendment; he seems
already to have reformed his head and his hand. But he will not as yet leave
off to be King; wherefore leaving his Majesty confined to silence and
expectation, he does appoint him, whom first he appointed to kill him, now to
keep him. Out he goes, and locks them up together; perchance to make good
his first story of the man imprisoned with a great treasure; though rather the
true prisoner was the treasure. And can any man imagine now, that in this den
of treason a King should find reverence, where his Majesty had no guard but his
innocence; nor any subject but a traitor? Yet, behold this traitor
tremble-downe upon his knees: He had no other way, but this descent of posture,
to make the King seem to be in a Throne. Prostrate thus he pleades more for
his own innocence, then for the King's Pardon, protesting himself not to
know, for what intent he was put there. He had sworn a truth, though he had
not sworn truly; For though he had known, for what purpose his master put
him there: yet he little knew, for what purpose god put him there: which was,
without violence to confound violence; and by a dutiful fear to correct and
amaze his master. Who speedily returning from his brother with a double fury is
vexed with the danger and delay of opening the door. O how he could have
wished here for our Sauiour's Miracle, to have entered now the door being shut!
But being entered, his fury is so forward, that he forgets to shut the door,
which he feared to open. Now he comes no more to give sentence, but to execute
it; and to begin, offers to bind his Royal hands. But the violent man
mistook the degree of the execution; This was not to begin it, but ouer-act
it: To bind a King, is to murder Majesty. Which his high Majesty as highly
conceiving, arms himself with the magnanimity of innocence and indignation;
and scorning the Traitor as much as death and bondage, grapples with them all.
When be hold the earnest Villain being about to mis-vse his hand to his
sword, the right hand of the King forceably instructs both his hand and his
sword to a better deliberation, his left hand arresting him by the throat:
When the violent man, like the Devil (that sometimes imitates God) practices
and enlarges the imitation of the King, clasping him so with his left hand by
the throat, that part of his fingers did violate his sacred mouth. He would by
no means have God hear the voice of the King: he was himself afraid now to
hear the voice of the King: But that which should have been his least fear,
was his greatest; He was more afraid of some loyal subject, then either of
God, or the King. Who dragging him from his more retired and guilty side of
the room, presented part of his Majesty at the window. His Keeper had
obediently prepared him this liberty of air, and now he recouers the like
liberty of voice, proclayming the treason, though not the traitor. The Nobles
were by this time both feasted and deluded: for missing the King, it was as
hard to find direction to find him, as to find him; the elder traitor, as if
he would add Magique to his treason, causing them to wander in the error of
his circle. And indeed it proved an error more to himself, then to them; who
find the King, by going the wrong way to find him, by going astray under this
window. This was the nearest way to his voice, though not to his person: to
which they now do likewise seek the nearest way with divided haste. The most
go the most known way, and err again; not because it was not the right way,
but because it was not the ready way; the door being locked with a double
key, the one of treason, the other of Divine Providence, which would thus
increase the glory of the deliverance. Which seeming to come slowly, the King
strives to meet it, drawing the violent traitor out of the dungeon of the
study to execution. And first to get this stiff-necked man under the yoke of
subjection, he gets his violent head under his arm; then to make him cry God
and his King mercy, he victoriously brings him upon his knees; and that he
might still press nearer to deliverance, he drives this perverse man
backward to destruction; and being about to execute him himself with the
traitors own sword, (that he might perish by his own sin and weapon)
behold a more easy deliverance and judgment come in the faithful and happy
hand of immortal Ramsay; by whose repeated strokes his treason fainting-out
with his blood, he is no longer the combatant, but the scorn of a King: who
taking him by the shoulder dishonours him headlong down the stairs; upon
which he is received with new wounds; as if after punishment for his treason,
they would make him suffer a second death for his fury, and in one brother
execute both the traitors. And thus you see, tempted justice can be as
violent as violence; and make treason as accursed in the success as it is in
the guilt. Behold the King in safety already; and are not we already in a
Psalm? No, we must stay a little; we have the cause of joy; but not as yet
the leisure of it. For by the same by-way that deliverance came in, behold new
fury marches in, as fierce as despair, or its own last agony. Behold Gowry
entering with a drawn sword in each hand; as if the madman would have lent one
to his brothers fury: Upon his head he has a steel bonnet, belike to defend
the fine plot that was in it. His attendants were seven, a number here as
execrable, as elsewhere mystical; every one has one drawn sword, and is as
much as half his leader; who with the preface of death and blasphemy enters
the presence of a King: when the King, that had no weapon but his courage, is
by the faithful violence of his few servants shut-backe into the little study;
which, to purchase pardon for its former guilt, that it might not be ruined
with its master, is reformed into a place of as unexpected deliverance, as it
was of danger. And these few Protectors with valor equal to their necessity,
receiving many traitors and wounds did by rare victory Chastize them to
example, the compendious hand of happy Ramsay striking Gowry and the Treason
through the heart. You see what God has done for his anointed; now hear what
his anointed does for him. And you will marvel at the Royal wit of his
piety: which makes God's blessing the thanks for it self. God blessed him
highly, when he first anointed him: and when he delivered him, did he not
anoint him again? Yes, now he is anointed with an oil of gladness; and this
gladness is the thanks for the anointing. Behold what he does: Having
collected himself and his dispersed Nobles, he falls on his knees, paying his
thanks unto God with that body, which he had preserved; and in that mindful
manner of humility, to which by divine help he had forced his enemy. And now
encircled by his Servants with loyalty and joy, he is the first Evangelist of
his own deliverance; as willingly professing the miracle as the victory. The
King gives thanks, and God is both his argument and his auditor; He lead him
about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle
stirs up the nest, flutters over her young, spreades abroad her wings, takes
them, bears them on her wings: so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was
no strange God with him. And now let the blasphemous Stoicke predestinate God,
ungratefully abusing his ftee mercy by the bondage of Fate. Let the Epicure
conceive a Providence more delicate then his own fancy, and with ridiculous
impiety busy himself about his lazy God, who lies retired from the prospect
and fable of the world. Let the patrones of treason with impotent malice still
deny this treason, and be guilty of it. Let them for ever envy, and increase
our joy. Let them be angry with God's mercy and his King: And thy King, O Lord,
shall prove his deliverance by his thankfulness; and thy King, O Lord, shall
prove the integrity of his thankfulness by thy jealousy; and thy King, O
Lord, shall prove himself safe from thy angry jealousy by the continuance of
thy mercy. Hear an argument as hard to be deluded as the Almighty. The jealous
God has since delivered his anointed from the admirable danger of the
Powder Treason; therefore he does delight in the grateful institution of this
days unfeigned thankfulness. And this thankfulness shall be told, no doubt,
in time unto the Heathen, unto our Heathen, who are ordained to conversion and
this joy by the instruction of our Virginian Apostles. And we ought to rejoice
with a great joy, as confident as the fury of this treason. And we ought to
understand the greatness of this joy, without which we had heard no more
noise of the Powder Plot, then by rare mercy we did of the Powder. Besides here
the Dagger was at the breast of a King, and there was bloodshed in this
wonderful deliverance; but in that, though most wonderful, the Powder did not
desperately betray it self into a flame. And we ought not to leave out our
thanks and honor unto him, whom God's choice brought-in as the honorable
instrument of this deliverance. But what monument shall we provide for him?
Should we lay-vp his sword, like the sword of Goliath? Alas, that were to
preserve rust as well as fame. Should we erect a Statue? Why, that will prove
as mortal as his body. Sure then, we will fasten this labell to the mouth of
fame, wheresoever the Gospel of the deliverance from Gowry shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall also this, that Ramsay has done, be told for a
memorial of him. And for our Lord the King, what glory shall we give unto
him? Surely, we must acknowledge him the friend of God, the fauovrite of the
Almighty; whom God has reserved as the great example, wherewith he will
instruct this later World! Whom he has proposed as the proof and subject of
his Almighty mercy! Whom he preserved for the uniting of the Britainies, a
work that required no less preface then this Miracle! We have heard the
lamentations of our neighbors, the blood of whose King was suffered to be
shed like their tears; whiles we have enjoyed our King and our selves! Happy
art thou, O Israel; who is like unto thee, O people? saved by the Lord, the
shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency. The King lives,
and his people must rejoice! and every street must profess the flaming emblem
of this affection! and the loudest music of our Temples must recompense their
inarticulate thanks by repetition! The King lives and his people must rejoice:
Awake Psalterie and Harp; awake, Deborah, awake, utter a Song: Arise, Barak,
and lead thy captivity captive. The King lives, and we must rejoice. His God
did not let his enemy exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness afflict
him: But has exalted his horn like the horn of an Unicorn; he has anointed
him with fresh oil. His enemy bowed at his feet, he fell, he lay down; at
his feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed, there he fell down destroyed. The
friends of Gowrie whispered among themselves, why is he so long in coming? Why
is the report of his triumph so slow? His wise Counsailours answered, yea,
their fear returned answer to them; Have they not killed? Have they not
divided to every man a Province? To Gowrie a Crown set with royal Diamonds;
with royal Diamonds set with curious work, to be fitted for the brow of him
that takes the spoil? So let all the enemies of the King perish, O Lord! and
let the treason of this day be the triumph and instruction of our Nephews!
And let the deliverance of this day be made as glorious as the Conspiracy was
secret! To the God of this day, the God of our David be ascribed the joy and
glory of this day.

The end.

