NEVVES OVT OF HOLLAND, OF THE EAST INDIE TRADE THERE.

CONTAINING A TRVE Copy of a Dutch Treatise there published, of the gross
Abuses of their MAJORS, the Managers of their TRADE.

SHOWING. That notwithstanding the extreme wrongs they do to the English
Nation, Trading in the INDIES, yet it is the justice of GOD, they thrive not
with it themselves.

Printed this 26. of JUNE. 1622.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their shops at the Exchange, and in Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

The Translators Epistle to the Indifferent Reader.
GEntle Reader, This Pamphlet following, came by means of a friend to my
hand, in Dutch language out of Holland from the City of Amsterdam, which when I
had thoroughly perused, I suppose my labor could not be lost in translating it
into our English tongue, because the English my Countrie-men, may understand 2.
especial considerations thereby: First the small gain the Hollanders make by
trading into the East Indies. Secondly the misse-governement and injurious
dealing of the Majors, and such as are appointed Governors for the trade of
the East Indies by the Hollanders. If the Majors and Governors be those, who
Substitute under them Committies and Commissioners for the government of the
Trade. They being in this Pamphlet touched by their own Countrie-men, of
dishonest and unconscionable dealing themselves, what Substitutes, Majors etc,
will they appoint? but such who shall correspond with them in little Honesty
and less Conscience: so that it is to be considered. in how dangerous an
estate our English Merchants of the East Indian Company remain, to stand to
the courtesy of such persons, against whom their own Countrie-men do so
heavily complain, it is apparent generally, that the English are wronged
extremely by the Hollanders in the East Indies; and there is small hope of any
redress in Holland, for where Covetousnes at home, make choice of Officers in
foreign parts abroad, Covetousnes will rather maintain the extortions and
oppressions committed by his Officers, then either redress them or correct
them: As by this Translation following may plainly appear, which I leave to
the reading and consideration of the indifferent Reader.

THE RELATION FROM THE HOLLANDERS, ACCORDING TO THE DVTCH COPY.
WHereas at this present, there is much speech, and may censures, concerning
the profits and Government of the East Indie Company, as well by the Majors on
their part, as by the Adventurers on theirs, the one making boast of great
profits; and to have governed the same so worthily as that they conceive to
have deserved still to continue and be confirmed in their places. Other
maintaining to the contrary, that neither the profit, nor the Majors
government, to have been such, as that either praise or thanks is due to
them; but that the Adventurers, have rather just cause to petition to the Lords
the States General, for redress of better ordering thereof in the now next
intended Patent, that thereby the profits may be advanced and more increased.

Now the better to explain this mystery, and diversity of opinions, we will
first set down what has been the profits, and next what has been the
manner of government, to the end that every man may judge, what praise and
thanks the Majors have deserved.

As concerning the profits, first is to be known, at what time the Adventurers
did bring in and make up their Stock, viz. in Annis. 1604. 1605. and 1606.
which being received together faleth to be in Anno. 1605 -- 100. the Interest
whereof reckoned to the year 1622. which is for 17. years after 6 per Cent.
per An. with Interest upon Interest amounts to little more or less then --
180.

Now considering the Majors from the year 1604. to the year 1621. have every
year sent from hence to the East Indies, a fleet to a certain number of
Ships, which are in all 18. fleetes of Ships, sometimes more some times less;
which one with the other I reckon about half a capital: whereof the assurance
simply going and coming amounts to 24. per Cent. though more must be given
if one will ensure the trade which passes from Port to Port in the East
Indies, which duties for going and coming amounts unto -- 2^6.

Hereof the Interest reckoned at 6 per Cent. per An. from Anno 1605. to the
year 1621. until the money be yearly paid, which amounts with Interest
upon Interest, to little more or less then -- 199.

Whereby appears that the Capital with the Interest and Assurance amounts
unto -- 695.

Against this, is to be reckoned what the Company receives of the Ensurers,
for loss sustained by Sea as well in going as coming, which ought to be
valued as it cost the Company here, which taken at the highest will hardly
amount unto 150. which being deducted out of the above said 695. the Capital
comes to stand in with the Interest and assurance 5. Capitals, 45. per Cent.
Now the Mayor have at several times delivered to the Adventurers: 2. Capitals,
viz.

Anno 1610 -- 57. 1615 -- 42. 1618 -- 62. 1620 -- 37.
Sum-200

From which the Interest being reckoned to the year 1622. after 6 per Cent.
Ann. with interest upon interest which amounts unto -- 117.

The rest of the Account or Adventure, prised in March 1622. taken at the
highest is worth -- 190

In Sum, the Capital with the profits from the beginning unto this present
which the Adventurers have received, 5. Capitals. 7. per Cent. And the Capital
comes to stand in here, with the interest and assurance, as above appears,
5. Capitals and 45. per Cent. So as the Adventurers have gained nothing near
the simple interest of 6 per Cent. per Ann. and ordinary assurance. By this may
be gathered what profits the Adventurers have enjoyed, and how thankful they
ought to be to the Majors,

Now as concerning the Government, it is a thing certain that be it good or
bad, the profits arise accordingly, for we daily see and find that by
negligence all ill government, a great estate is soon brought to naught: and
on the contrary through a good dilligent and provident governing, great gains
arise out of a small stock or means: whereas during all this Patent, so
little profit arises, though great gain is ordinarily to be made in the East
Indies, so as hereby may well be concluded that the same must be so, by reason
of the directing or governing the same.

Now as concerning the well governing: First of all is required a good
understanding and experience, which I persuade swade my self has been and is
in many of the Majors without all doubt, but that is not enough, except there
be care and diligence withal, but what care and diligence can be expected from
them, who are so continually employed in their public Offices and functions,
besides their particular affairs, that they can scarce once or twice in a
week, spend a few hours in this weighty business, which indeed has need
of a constant and continuing sale according as the greatness and importancy
thereof requires.

For if a Merchant here in Town, finds so much to do in his private
affairs, that to do the same well, he has very small time besides to spare:
how much more time then does so great business require? when not only here
within the Land, but also in the Indies, in so many far remo^te parts, so
great in Trade is driven from Port to Port, and much more may be, were it well
ordered: when upon any advise coming thence, good regard is to be had, as also
good information to be taken from any committie or other person coming thence,
that so thereby good advise may likewise been sent back from hence upon sure
ground, and to settle so good an order for redress of ought that is amiss
there, that the Trade may flourish, and that those places which the Company
have conquered there, may be to us and our posteritite in all obedience without
prejudice. How great and continual a diligence this may require, and how
little has bin used, those that have any understanding may easily gather by
the small profits, which have bin made.

Further, is required in very Mayor, that he by all means seek to procure the
common good of that which is committed to his charge, and not his particular:
but how or wherein have they hitherto fought the common good of the Company, so
long as they take a liberty to sell the Companies goods unto themselves, in
which sale no doubt they seek their own particular profit, and not the
Companies. At sometimes one Mayor buying the Companies goods of another Mayor;
and at another time it happens quite contrary, viz. that he which was at
first the buyer, is now become the seller to him that formerly was the seller
himself: one may well conjecture how these things are thus carried, by such,
who it may be are not so honest as they should be; what hinderance hereby
befalls the Adventurers, and what profits to the Majors, one may well
conjecture by the small profits which the Adventurers have made, and the great
wealth which the Majors have attained unto.

When as the Majors have bought great quantity of the Companies goods for
themselves, is to be imagined what kind of advise they will send to the Indies
concerning such goods as themselves have bought, and whether their advise shall
not ^end to their particular profits.

Further may well be judged, in what manner the Majors seek to procure the
profit of the Adventurers, who make it a business to sell their adventure for
long days of payment, yea, oft-times more themselves have in the Company,
which is the cause that they may wish ill success to the Company, to the end
that they may buy it in, the better cheap against the time of payment
befalls, and so to make their profit out of the Companies losses: how much
such Majors do affect that the Company may prosper, may be imagined?

And whether they have not sometime set out great and unnecessary Fleets (for
many of them have quite sold at their adventures) whereby they could not be
able to deliver out any shares to the Adventurers: whereunto notwithstanding,
the Majors are by the Patent enjoined, so often as 5 per centum, profits may be
made. All which they do to cause the adventure to fall in prise, to the end
that they may buy it again good cheap. But what hinderance hereby is befallen
many Adventurers, yea, some utterly undone, is too apparent, and they ought to
examine their consciences, how free they are, and clean herein. For might one
pervse their Books, no doubt thereby would be found, that many amongst them
have little or no adventure) at all with the Company, and it would plainly
appear, that their provision or factorie concerns them nearer then the profit
of the stooke they have there to exspect, and therefore do readily resolve to
the setting forth of great shipping or fleets, when as fewer and smaller would
have been sufficient for Conquest, and fewer for trade from Port to Port:
whereof that fleet which went through the straight of Magellane was one, which
fleet alone did charge the Company with more then a Capital.

It is likewise the practice of these kind of Majors, (knowing the choice to
be in their own powers) to prefer their friends and kindred to the
government, and excluding those that are great Adventurers, take ofttimes such
as are none, but such as when then stand in nomination to be; do then begin to
buy conditionally so they are chosen, then their buying to stand: but if not,
then the bargain to be void: what good service the Company is to exspect by
such nimbling may well be coniectured. Besides they often times prefer their
friends, to be sent as Committies and other Offices to the Indies, although
very unfit thereto, whereas it highly concerns the Company, to have both
honest and fit persons there, for hardly can it be imagined the great wrong
which the Company have sustained, through the having so basely vilde, and
proudly insolent Committies in the Indies.

Further, what loss the Company is put unto, by the building of so great and
costly Ships (each Chamber striving which shall make the greatest Ship, and
all for great stowage, to cause the greater return to be brought into their
chamber, thereby to procure to themselves the greater factorie or provision)
cannot well be imagined: for as well might it be done with lesser, and Ships
not so costly, and so the more stock to be employed in Trade, or otherwise to
free themselves of their interest money, which great Ships, are partly used to
carry wood and stone in the Indies, for the building of the Fort Iacatra, some
being worn and spent there, so as indeed one might have done as well between
this and the Indies, with half as many great ships.

Also many Sums of Gold have bin spent in the making of diverse costly Forts
and Castles in the Indies, the walls being all of stone, being King-like
works, whereas to have made them of Earth, as they are here in our Country
the Netherlands, had been as useful for keeping the Trade, from other
Committies of foreign Lands: so had this needeles charge been employed in
Trade, might have advanced the Company more then a Capital.

Also the Company has freely endured some loss, by reason of the complaint
of those persons who having done the Company good service, could obtain
little or no Salary for the same. Whereby is befallen that some have put
themselves into the service of other Companies of foreign Lands, to the no
small hinderance of this Company, and by reason of their complaints, many
other honest young men have been discouraged from coming into the Companies
service, whereas the having of good and sufficient courses, does very much
import the Company. For which cause wise and provident Merchants do both
recompense and prefer their faithful servants, to the end that thereby they
may the longer make use of their good service, which example so the Majors
would imitate in requiting their faithful sevants, and prefer some of them
to the Maiorship, it would do the Company much good, for that they being well
experimented in the course of trade in the Indies, might serve the Majors (who
were never there) upon all occasions, with sound and well grounded advise and
directions, and this would be an inducement for other honest young men to put
themselves into the Companies service there, and being in hope of further
preferment, to perform it faithfully.

By these aboue-mentioned, and other reasons that may be annexed hereto, is
easy to judge, whence it proceeds that hitherto so little profit has been
made.

And that therefore the Adventurers as Petitioners, have just cause and reason
to entreat the Lords the States, for better order and Patent, and that they
are not to be blamed, as some have gone about to do.

For Conclusion; Considering the Trade to the Indies, does so much concern the
Land in general, and the Adventurers each in his particular, to the end that
through the well ordering thereof, it may not fall to the ground, but stand
firm to us, and to our posterity. It is not to be doubted, but that the Lords
the States General, and the Prince his Excellency, will take this so important
a business to heart, and not only be inclineable to the request of the
Adventurers, but add thereunto other more necessary points, such as they in
their great Wisdoms shall find fit and necessary.

FINIS

