A devout treatise called the tree and xii. fruits of the holy ghost.



The tree of the holy ghost. Folio. ij.
Grace in this world, and joy withouten end.
RElygyous sister, for as much as ye art now planted in the gardyn of holy
relygyon, if thou wylt at the last be a tree of ye heavenly paradyse, thou must
virtuously grow here, and bring forth good goostly fruit. For as our lord
says. Omnes arbor bona, fructus bonos facit. Every good tree (he says)
brings forth good fruit. if a tree materyall should bring forth good fruit,
it must be first depely roted, afterward^ well watered, than sprede his branches
abroad, and at last to wax hye. In the same wise, if y^ wylt be a good tree,
and bring forth virtuous fruit. first thou must be verily, and depely roted in
meekness, which is the keeper, and very true ground and foundement of all
virtues. For as saint Gregory says. He ye gadreth virtues without meekness,
is lykened to such one that bears blasyngly precious powdre in the wind. It
is euydently known, the deper a tree is roted, the hyer it waxes. In the same
wise the more meke thou art for Christ love, ye hyer thou shall increase in
grace in this life, and at the last to be enhaunced in joy as our blyssed
lord says. Quise humiliat exaltabitur. He that is beray meke here, shall at
last be enhaunced in joy. If thou wylt learn very meekness, for to be a
relygious plant, behold the meekness of our blyssed lord Jesus, how he lowed
himself for us in his incarnation, in his natyuyte, and in all his conuersacyon
both in lowly wasshyng of his dysciples fete. And also in his bitter passion
he lowed himself, so that he was for us obedyent unto the death. For the which
lowly obedyence almighty god the father enhaunced him, and gave him a name
above al names And that is for us that we in relygion should mekely obey unto
our death. Behold also very meekness in his blyssed mother our lady saint Mary
the holy vyrgyn, which next unto him in earth was most mekest, for she was
chosen of him specially therefore, as it is written, Quia respexit humilitatem
ancille sue. (...) Behold also very meekness in all ye holy apostles,
euangelystes, martyrs, co^fessours, and vergyns / and many other chosen souls,
which worthyly thereby pleased our lord. And think that they were meke both
in heart, speech, and in deed, to give us that been in relygion exsample to be
meke, both in heart, speech, and deed. In heart hold thy self most vile,
most abject, and most sinner / and most wretch of all. And than think yt
if our blyssed lord had given to the most sinner in earth that grace yt which
he has given to the, that the same sinner would be more meker than thou art,
and more love him than thou do. Thus to think quenches pride of all
relygious folk. In this wise thou may think every body in earth better than
thy self. And if thou may not overcome pride of heart in this wise / think
than that in this vice of pride thou passest all other, bringing to thy mind
the words of saint James the holy apostle, where he says of our lord thus.
Qeus superbis resistit, humilibus dat gratiam. That is. Our lord withstandeth
proud hertes, and gives great graces to all meke hertes. Sister such
knowledge of thine own pride shall be cause of wynnyng of very meekness. But
now for as much that it is right hard to escape the first styringes of pride,
namely of thoughts which do crepe right pryuely into the heart. Therefore as
soon as you perceyuest such proud thoughts, anon throw them upon ye meke
stone Christ Jesus. that is. Ren^e to the meekness of Christ Jesus, and there
all to breast thy proud thoughts, and also show the^ in confession to thy
confessor. For our lord by the prophet Dauyd, blysseth all such / where he
says thus. Beatus qui tenebit et allidet peruuios suos ad petrain. Blyssed be
he (says our lord) yt shall keep well in mind his proud thoughts, and all
to break them at the stone, yt is Christ, consyderyng his meekness. Suffer
never good sister, pride to rest within the / workyng after ye council of
Thoby, which taught his sone very meekness in heart, saying thus. Fili
superbiam nunque in tuo sensu, aut i^ tuo verbo dn^ari permittas, ab ea enim
sumpsit initiu^ ois perditio. Sone (he says) suffer never pride have
domynacion in thy wits, and in thy feeling, ne in thy word. For thereof
every myschefe has his begyn^yng. Believe it well sister the beginning of all
sin is pride. Beware thereof I pray the, specially now thou art in relygion.
Make no parties / mayntene no querels. I said also, thou must have meekness in
mouth. In mouth you must be meke, as in answering mekely, and reverently, to
thy souerayns and elders. I said also, thou must be meke in all thy works:
fulfillyng all manner low service, in relygyon and works. And than have mind
of our lords lowlynesse / how he being souerayn god, and lord of all,
dysdayned not to wasshe his disciples fere. Show therefore meke service to thy
sisters, and devoutly obey them, having in mind the words of our savior,
where he says thus. Non veni ministrarised ministrate. That is, I come not
(says he) for to be served, as a master, but for to mynystre, as a servant.
And for as much as meekness gooth never alone in relygion, without the felawe of
obedyence, therefore obey mekely to all, and namely to thy souerayns and elders.
Thus do all thy business and dyligence, I pray the for the love of our lord
and his holy mother, to put away all thyn own wylles: which sometime thou used
in the world / and obey gladly to thy souerayns, both in indyfferent things,
and generally in all things which is not against god and thy holy rule.
Behold before thyn eye a good ensample of our lord, thy spouse Jesus, yt was
subject and obedyent to his own handy work, both to Joseph and Mary. For he
says himself. Non vem facere volu^tatem meam. That is, I come not (says he)
in to this earth for to do mine own will. Than should every relygious person
be sore abashed, and ashamed of himself, if he do any part of his own will,
sith the maker came not for to do his will, but yt will of his fader, obeyng to
creatures in earth in ye name of his fader. Trust right well sister, that if
thou obey lowly to thy souerayns, thou obeyest to god. At the beginning of thy
obedyence you yeldest thyn hands in to thy souerayns hands, in token that she
might led the virtuously whyder she will. Saint Bernard says a very obedyent
yeldeth to his souerayns hands both his will and his nyll, in his obedience
making, so that such one excludes himself of ever either for evermore, and
will do utterly as his souerayn will. It is not right great merit for to obey
always in such things as pleases, but rather in such things that dyspleaseth
/ therein lies great merit, yt is when any hard thing or grievous thing is
commanded for to be done, which an obedyencer does gladly with great
repugnaunce of ye self will. There is no sacry fyce that man does, be it in
watching / fasting / and other goostly and bodyly exercyses so acceptable to
our lord, as is such obedyence. Nor there is nothing that so displeases our
lord, and deserves tourment, as does self will and vnobedyence, for it
dishonoreth our lord, and withdraws from him yt is his, that is self will. as
saint Austyn says. None ought to have self will but god. To him it longs
proprely. As for the second thing which longs to a relygious tree that is
planted in relygion is watrynge. Sister you must be moysted and watered, if the
rote of meekness should virtuously increase, that is with the holy water of
co^pu^ccion reducyng and bryngyng to thy mind mekely sins that thou have
done, good deeds yt thou have left undone, time that thou have lost, and pain
that thou have deserved. Thus after the council of saint Gregory
consider.iiij. thnnges. which.iiij. if they be holly considered may gendre in
the very compunction, and gracyous moisture, for the watring of the very rote
of meekness. First is, think where thou have ben / where thou art now /
where thou shall be / and where thou art not yet. where thou have ben, think
thou have ben conceived in sin / borne in sin / and after / ward grievously
fallen in sin, where you art now. Think that thou art in this wretched vale
of mournyng living but a little time, co^syderynge the time that ever shall
last in joy. And than think that this vale is full of mysery and
wretchedness, which is proved better by experyence than I can tell it / where
you shalt think that within a few days happily thou shall be deed, and than be
brought before thy judge, yeldyng account to him there of al thy works: deeds:
and thoughts, which were never by confession counted here, or in will to be
confessed thereof. And think also the styryng words oftentimes of saint
Anselme, which may styre the much to compunction, saying thus to thy self as
he says. Thou vnfruytfull tree where be now thy fruytes of virtue? O dry tree
and unprofitable, worthy to be cast in to the fire. How shall thou answer at
the day of judgment, where shall be ared of all the space and time of thy life?
how it has benspent / yea unto the leest twynkling of thyn eye. Than shall be
demed and condemned that is found in the of any idle work, idle word, or
unprofitable scylence, unto the leest thought of thyn heart / but if it be
amended here, and satysfyed by in ward sorrow and compunction. Lo sister this
is a hard sentence. therefore I pray you wasshe all thy defautes away, whiles
thou art here, by water of compu^ction, The third is / to have in mind where
thou art not yet. Think sister by the mercy of our lord thou shall come unto
his bliss, where thou art not yet / to the which he made the. For the which
with his precious blood he bought the* and for ye which I hope thou have
forsaken all the false delytes of this wretched world / and have closed up
perpetually thy self in religion. O sister it were right merry often to have in
mind the sweet words of the prophet Dauyd, which saint Austyn expounds,
and ben these. Mei^us est dies vna in atrijs tuis et super milia. O, says
saint Austyn, good lord better is one day in thy heavenly halle, than a thousand
here. There is so great plenty of fayrnesse, of swetnesse, of gladness, of
goostly mirth, and haboundau^ce of shynyng light endlesly. That if it were
lefull no longer to dwell there than one hour in a day, for that hour alone
all the years of this wretched life / though they were as full of all manner
wretched delyces, pleasures, or delytes, and haboundaunce of temporal goods,
they may lawfully be despised, and set at naught. For our lord himself is
there all joy and bliss. And he it is, that gloryously there shall fulfill
all ye capacyte of a soul, by clear knowy^g of troth, by joyful fruycion of
his sovereign goodness / and by su^e beholding of his endless felycyte. He
also it is, that shall there gloryfy the body, in four manner of goostly
clothes / that is with the stool of mine ^cayle, never after to deye. with the
stool of vnpalsibylite / never after to suffer passion nor pain. with the
stool of agylyte / ever to be swyfter than a thought. And with ye stool of
subtylyte / ever to be as subtle as a soul without po^derosyte. Lo sister what
mirth and joy is in yt place ordained for clean souls, and bodies undefiled.
Thither I pray the cast thy goostly eye, and think on the first stool of
imortalyte, sorowynge for thy sins in place where thou have ben. Think on ye
second stool of vnpassy bylyte / sorowynge for thy myseryes, and wretchedness
that thou suffered in this present life where thou art now.

Think also on the third stole of agylyte or swyftnesse, and sorrow lamentably
for the dread of strayt ingement in place where thou shall be. And thynkyng on
the fourth stole of subtyly^e, sorrow for the long delay of eternal felycyte
and joy of heaven, where you shall be. And doubt not sister if thou inwardly
desire these things thou shall rather have lust to weep than to do any thing
else. Believe it well thou shall have more conforte in such weeping, than ever
thou had in laughyng, so that thou may say to our lord god with the
prophet Dauyd thus. (...) ^eundum multitudinem dolo in cord meo consolationis
tue letificauerunt animam mea^. That is. Lo lord Jesus the multitude of my so
^^wes were never so great many heart, but that (...) great heavenly confortes
has much more gladded my soul. Think this verily sister yt we neuerred that
our lord laughed, but many times he wept we read not for hiself he wept, but
for us, in tokening that as long as we be in this woeful vale of tears, we
should ever be sorrowful for wepyngly we came into this world, and with pain
we live, and at last with pain the soul shall depart from the body. If thou
moist thus sister) the rotes of meekness with water of compunction, thou shall
have ye merry blyssyng which our blyssed lord granted in his testament to all
such compuncte hertes, where he says thus. Beati qui nu^c fletis quia
ridebitis. Blissed be ye yt now weep here, for ye shall after this be full merry
with me.

Now the third thing that I spoke of is ye spredyng abroad of the branches of
a relygyous tree planted in our lords gardin / by ye which thou shall
understand charity. For like as branches in a tree spreden abroad, so should
charity in relygion. So sister must thou do after ye deep rotes of meekness,
and after the water of very compunction, thou must extend thy branches of
charity, that both in deed and will you love all creatures in our lord, or for
our lord. For he that has charity has all goodness, and makes all others
goodness his goodness, as saint Austyn says. Such one presumes never proudely
against other / for he holds all other better than himself. Such one has
none envy to other. for if he lack goodness, he fyndeth it by charity in
other. Such ont keeps neither ire nor hate in his heart / for chary tably he
forgyueth lightly. Thus by charity sins benhyd, as the apostle says. Caritas
operit multitudmem peccatorum. That is. such charity hydeth the multitude of
sins / for it destroys them. Sister such charity thou must have in
relygion to all, and namely to thy systers, in laboryng for them, in supportyng
of their charges / and if thou may not, than pray for them. for without such
charity there is nothing so acceptablene merytoryous to god, which makes
heavenly children to be known fro worldly children, as doctors say en upon the
text, where our lord says to his dyseyples. In hoc cognosce^t omnes quoth mei
discipuli estis: si dilectionem habueritis ad inuicem. In that says our lord,
ye shall be known for my dyscyples and for my children if ye have love and
charity each with other. For as saint Austyn says, he that keeps charity in
his own living, he it is that has fully the law within him, both the
mysteryall felyng thereof, and also the plain understanding. But now for
because saint Paul says. Caritas non agit perperam. Charity does nothing
frowardly, nor wyckedly he says, but ryghtwysly, and ordynatly. I council the
beware (as much as thou may) that thou offend none in earth. And if thou
offend any person, anon lowely meke thy self, and ask forgyuenesse. Be no
stryuer in words in any congregacyon. Nor use thy tongue to speak words of
folly, or folyshly, ne falls words. for as saint Austyn says. what so ever is
said or done against conscience, it edytyeth and buyldeth to hell ward.
Sometime it is lefull to hyde truth / but it was never lefull to say falls. If
it happen the sometime of lyghtnes to here of any person any evil tale, be
well ware among other co^munycacion it pass the not / ne in no wise thou break
not out withal. To here and little to speak it is a good toke^, and namely of
young folk. If thou have benacustomed to here or to speak evil before the time
that thou entrest in to relygion, thou art now more bound to keep thy tongue.
What is relygion without resteynyng of the tongue? The sentence of ye holy
apostle James is this. Si qs pit tat se religiosu^ esse non reserua^s lingua^
sua^, sed seducens cor suu^, huius vana est religio. That is. He that weneth he
be a religious man or woman / and refreyneth not his tongue, his religion is
naught worth. for such one deceyueth his own heart, which should be occupied
with virtuous scylence. If you wylt be a true relygious woman speak scantly in
thyn own cause. as Salomo^ says. Adolescens vix i^ tua causa loq^re. That is
to say. Thou young man scantly speak in thy own cause. Therefore it is that our
lord has given a man and a woman two ears, and one tongue, yt they should be
ready to here, and loathe to speak. Be therefore seld rare in words, neither
dysputer, nor defender of matters. If thou be blamed ryghtfully or wrongfully /
be it of thy systers, or of thy souerayns. if thou wylt be a very ouercomer of
the heart, learn for to suffer mekely. and all this is for keeping of charity.
Charity is better kept in scylence than in speech. I pray the therefore keep
virtuously scile^ce in cloister / frater / dorter / and quere, and in all times
and places. After complyn above all thyngrs look that thou keep specially than
scilence, but if ^^be for great ineuytable need, and yet with leave if you
may. And as soon as thy need is done than cease. Be never pryuely money place
with any person, whereof might arise obloquye. eschew this as much as thou
can. Be well ware in any wise that no manner deformyte in thy living, neither
of carnalite nor of worldlynes blot or dymynys she charity, which is the very
ornament or arayment of all relygyous lynyng. No carnal love should be among
you, but spyrituall, or for spyritual love. Of carnal and flesshely love it
needs me not much to speak of at this time / for it should be to all relygious
folk much abhomynable, and loathsome to here. But there is one manner of love,
which is covered under color of charity, and feyneth him for to have zeal of
virtue, as is love affectionate, not fully spyrituall, but it is myngled or
myxte with carnalite. All such lovers do delight to speak often together / which
always is not of goostly things. And if it be so^tymes of goostly things a
little in the beginning, anon or soon after it is changed in to worldly
things. God grant it be no wors / that is into carnal things. What evil
has come of such affectionate love, god knows / which knows all pryue
things, and to whom nothing is hid. This love, for as much as it has his
first beginning of the assent of the flesh by affection, it is more flesshely
than goostly. And it is well known of such that have had this manner of love
in experyence, how much a soul is distracte, which is encombred in such
carnal affection. Great sclau^dre aryseth thereof, though thou be enclosed.
Thou have need to be well ware of sclaundre, for yt crepeth out of an unclosed
house meruelously. I say not this for to let the of thy goostly co^munycacion,
as much as longs to co^fessyon / nor to be relygyously merry with thy systers
/ namely with such ye morn every day after our lord / and sing mornyngly in
their hertes thus. Ubi cubas, vbi pascis in meridie. That is. Lord where is
thy resting place, and where do you feed at noone time. As though they might
say thus. Good lord I desire to wite in what hertes / and in whose hertes of
fervent love and charity have thou thy restyng place? and in what place art
thou fed with sweetness and devotion. with such co^myn often, for they may set
the on fire, and brenne the all in love. All such desire for to be departed out
of this world, and be with their forde Jesus. with all such I would thou had
thy special co^munycation. with all other thou may speak by the way of
charity, though thou keep co^munycation, not with them so specially as thou
do with other / so it be done measurably after the place and time without
offense and evil suspytion. Therefore it is that saint Jerome says in a pystle
that he writes to Nepotianum, where he says thus. Beware he says of all
manner suspicio^ that may be feyned on the, erthan it be feyned eschew it. Thy
sweetness / thy light / and thy desire should be thy spouse Jesus christ. On
holy days when folk desire to speak with the eschew al manner idle tales, or
soon charitably take thy leave. For I assure the it is full perilous to co^myn
much with any, specially with seculer people, and namely of men / but it be
for goostly instruction. and yet look it be of no long tarieng, but in short
wise speak as is best to ye health of soul, and honest of living. What should
need maidens of religion to have often communycacion with men. but it be only
when goostli counsel is required, or confession. And yet I con^cell the sith
thou shall be often confessed, use no long abydinge in confession / rather come
the ofter. Presume never to much of thy clean conscience* nor of thy chastyte.
For trust me right well presumpcion of chastyte and oportunyte has turned
many a clean soul to evil. Trust never so much to thy self, weuing that thou
have overcome all manner of styringes of fleshly sins, though our lord of his
great mercy has keptthe unto this time. For if thou have no styrynge now,
dread to have in time for to come.

Saint Gregory says. Every chosen soul either in his beginning, or in his
myddle aege, or in his last days shall suffer temptacyon. In his beginning
such shall suffer temptacion easily. In his mydell co^uersacyon such one
shall suffer temptacion more grievously but in his last days such shall
suffer temptacio^ most grievously. Therefore beware of communicacion. For such
things do let the branches of charity to be spredde abroad. If thou wylt also
sprede abroad thy charity, I would thou sholdest gladly fulfill and stop
fawtes in dyuyne service, for ease of thy systers, as much as in the is
possible. Desire never therefore any praysyng nor favor of any creature, but
only of almighty god. For one thing I shall tell the that what soever he be
that desires for to becommended and praised of other persons, Sometime he
shall be much made of. sometime little / sometime naught. And where that such one
for his charytable deeds should receive of our lord great reward in heaven, al
is blown away with the blast of a man^es mouth. Alas ye such dysceyuable
worldly praise or favor shall so deceive a soul, and defraude him from
heavenly, and perpetual graces. It is not all without cause that Solomon calls
all worldly favor deceyuable graces. For who that trusts sore upon such
graces, it may stand a while / but at last it shall fall, because his ground is
feeble. Therefore sister when thou art either praised or blamed ever run to thy
conscience, having in mind the words of saint Austyn / were he says that a
true conscience may neither be hurt by wrongs, ne be helped by falls
praysynges. Also as for thy meat and drink show thy charity of such that is
set before the. Hold the content without grudgyng, and feed the thereof without
superfluyte, thankyng our lord. For as saint Gregory says. Meat and drink
should be taken as a medicine, only for need, and not in superfluyte or in
voluptuosyte. Therefore be not so gredy upon thy meat and drink, but that
ever our lord be thanked therefore. And more set thy heart to give attendau^ce
to ye lesson which is red among you, than to thy bodyly meat. So that with
refresshing of thy body, thy soul may also be refresshed. Think also that
thou eatest sins of thy founder / god rest his soul, and other benefactours,
which have endued your monastery, or by whose goods ye be endued to pray for
them. thou art bound so to pray for their souls. Also in places of solace and
recreacyon, show thy charity and sprede thy branches abroad when thou take
(in the gardyn with thy systers) bodyly recreacyon, co^myn there of some manner
of edyficacyon. or here some good thing which may edyfy thy soul. And because
oftentimes after meat many ben dysposed to lyghtnesse, and to vnrelygious
myrthes, I pray the as much as thou may eschew that. And if thou here any
bachytyng or dyshonest communycation, (as I hope there is no such things used
among mayde^s) do thy dylygence, or do that lies in the to turn such matters
unto better co^munycacyons. And if thou may not, relygyously go thens / lest
thou be pertyner of their sins. All by shonest plays I forbid the, for much
evil comes of such dysportes. Nevertheless holy disportes for recreation both
of body and of soul is need full, sometime for to be had / so that it be done
so brely, sadly, and relygiously. And that ye herers and seers may rather be
edifyed than sclaundre in it. For our lords love sister, spend thy time
profytably and devoutly. There is none so great a loss, as is the loss of
time. Another thing if it be lost, may be founden again / but time wha^ it
is lost, may never be found again. Think therefore why thou come to
relygion. I tro we for the profit of thyn own soul, and of thin order. It is
not enough for the only to enter religion for thyn own profit, except thou
do thy dyligence in learning that thou may be able to further thine order by
connyng, as other of thy sisters done. And though thou may not come to
connyng anon, leave not therefore, though you sholdest every day learn right
little. For hasty co^nyng wexeth soon dry, but easily and sokingly won^e
increases, and abides. Look thou be in any wise ever well occupied, in some
charytable occupacion, that the goostly enmy the fend find the not idle.
Idleness is the most hyndrynge that thou may have to thy soul. much
sorrow comes thereof. If thou be weary in redyng, refresshe thy soul by prayer,
or meditacion, or in some other virtuous and charitable works. Now read, now
pray / now labor besily. and so shall thy hour be short, and thy labor
light. Thus much sister I have spoken of the spredinge abroad of the branches
of charity. I said also of the fourth properte which lo^geth to a tree, that is
how it grows on hye. After time thou art mekely roted in relygion / and
graciously watered by compunction, and than spread abroad by branches of
charity, thou have need, or it is expedyent for the to be enhaunced in devotion
by contemplacion un to heaven, But first if a tree should grow hye the water
bows is nothing else, but cuttynge away the superfluite of temporal goods in
dyspising them. Therefore sister, like as thou have forsaken all outward
worldly goods, for the love of heavenly goods. so now put them out of thy
mind, as much as thou may / and have mind of the vow of pouerte, not to
have one pynne mo to thy heed than is taxed in thy holy rule. Be none other in
thy soul, than you apperest outward in thyn habyte. For of al sins ypocrisy
is a peryllous sin / namely among relygious folk. Good sister be well ware
of that cursed sin ypocrisy / and keep the from al manner curyosite, and
superfluyte, which ben very deedly enmyes to the holy pouerte of relygigion.
when any manner temptacyon of worldely covetousness is at any time presented
unto thy soul, anon have mind of the most blissed pouerte of our worthy
savior Jesus christ thy chosen spouse, and of the most holy virgin his mother,
in worship of whom thy relygion is grounded. Of the pouerte of Christ and his
blyssed mother, beryth witness the poor cryb and few clothes which he was
wrapped in at his birth. Se now what pouerte he suffered in his beginning / and
also all the time of his being in this life. who was ever poorer tha^ he? For
he says himself in his holy gospel. Uulpes foueas habent, et volucres celi
nidos: filius autem homims non habet vbi caput suum reclinet. That is. Foxes
(he says) have dens and holes to hyde them in. and birds have nestes, but
the sone of the vyrgyn is so poor in earth that he has not wherein he maylye
his heed. Also that he loved pouerte at his ending, that is in his passion /
the blyssed cross which he hyng upon bears witness. where herd ever any
man or woman that any body in his death (what passion soever he shall suffer)*
should be denied his clothes for to cover them with. Or if he axed drink, should
it not be given to him? yes rather than fail water. But our lord Christ Jesus
in his holy passion hong naked upon the cross. And when he was athyrst tasted
galle with eysell for his drynk. Lo sister where herdest thou ever an hyer
pouerte. Of this pouerte and other such thou must have mind, yt thou may
suffer the better pouerte of relygyon. If thou have meat and drink and
clothyng, and a book to look upon / it is enough to the. And if thou have more
than these, and namely more than is assigned in thy rule. or more than you have
leave of thy sovereign to have, think that thou art right far from our
lords blyssed pouerte / and his holy mother. Good sister follow this holy
pouerte, that thou may deserve for to have that kingdom which is ordained
for poor in spyryte / as our blyssed lord promyseth himself, where he says.
Bearti pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum celorum.

Blyssed be tho (he says) that be poor in spyryte, for theyrs of right is the
kingdom of heaven, for their heritage. If thus thy water bows be lopped away,
thou may grow right hye in devotion, and contemplation. what should be thy
hye growyng? Truly but devotion in prayers. For as doctors sayen, prayer is
no thing else, but ascension or lyftyng up of ye soul to god by devotion. which
is divided and parted in two parts / that is in to vocal prayer, and mental
prayer. Vocal prayer is prayer made by mouth, according with the soul.
Mental prayer is all only of the soul or mind, with sylde spekyng of the
mouth. To vocal prayer yt is every day to serve our lord Jesus, and his
blyssed mother. in sayng matyns, pryme, tierce sext, none, euensong, and
complyn, thou art bound by thy relygion, but if thou be lawfully let. And
therefore to these, I council the to have a zeal and a love to say them
distinctly and apertly, with a pronou^cyng of thy words, gyuing thereto the
intent of thyn heart / so that thy tongue be not in the quere, and thyn heart in
the town. In such sayenges (as much as thou may) eschew distraction. And
that thou may so do, make there die before, after the council of Solomon where
he says thus. Fili accede^s ad seruitutem dei sta in timore and prepara animam
tuam ad temptatione^. That is* when thou go to the service of god, stand
there in dread, and make ready thy soul for to withstand temptacion. For than
wicked spirits ben right besy for to let devout souls from the good speed of
prayer by immyssions of their subtle temptacyons. we have never so many
temptatyo^s when we be out of the quere, as when we be in the quere of gods
service. Therefore I council the for eschewyng of all euagacions, cast down
thyn eyes unto a certain place all the time of dyuine service, be it night be
it day, ymaginyng in thy heart as though you se lyeng before the Christ Jesus
streyned upon the cross. And he with the cross together lift upon high with
wounds bledyng. And in that lifting, than lift up thyn ties suynge after, and
run from wound to wound, and so sigh and sob pryuely. Now for the nails,
now for the thorns, now for the spete, now for the crown, now for the fete,
now for the hands / and so thank him for his passion which he suffered for
the. And among all such goostly medytacions, look in (ones or ofter if thou
may) and enter in to his heart by the wound of his side, wherein thou shall
find all manner treasour of pity. There are harbo towe for charity, and in the
name of god enter a gods behalf. Quench thy thirst there with plente of
haboundaunce of his most blissed blood. For he says himself. Quiscitit
veniat ad me et bibat. He that thursteth, come to me and drynk, Of such
devotion in dyuine service our lord is hyghly pleased. Blyssed aungelles nygh
at hand to such a soul / and not only angels, but also our lord himself
speaks to such a soul thus occupied, and says. Daughter ask what thou
will, and thou shall have it. O, now is this a voice of great joy and
gladness. Answer again, and say to him in thy thought. Lord I desire
nothing else, but that I and all tho which trusten, and shall trust upon thy
great mercy, may be admytted among thy chosen people in thy heavenly bliss.
And as the holy prophet Dauyd says.

Ad let andum in leticia gentes tue.

For to joy in gladness among thy chosen people. Lo sister such thoughts
(while thou stand indyuyne service) should fill thy heart with so much
gladness, love, and sweetness / that thou shall be loathe to think on any
other thing under god. Also if thou myghtest have medytacion than of his
blissed mother Mary entryng in to the quere, beryng Jesus her blyssed sone in her
holy arms / vysytig now one, now another, ye syngen devoutly and corageously
in dyuine service, without dulnes or slepynes. ouerpassing all such that been
sluggisshe and stepy, or slothful, without confortable vysitacyon, it should
cause the to be the more quycker, and deuouter. For before fervent syngers with
glad hertes praysyng and loving their maker Jesus her blyssed sone with
devotion, she stands long still and beholds them face to face. And so
gladly to the maid, and to al thy maydenly systers will offer her blyssed
sone, yt ye may joyfully clyppe ye child, kiss that child, enbrace that
child to your clean breasts. O now is this a merry medytacyon for maidens. when
thou have long had this holy child in thyn arms, behold now and se how
devoutly the mother receives her blyssed sone again. Knele down in thy soul
sister I pray the than, and deliver ye blyssed child to his blyssed mother, for
she must now goo for to chere other of thy systers, Be not sorry though other be
gladded as well as thou. Se now how she gooth full maydenly for to vysite other
of thy systers. And this is not ones, but oftentimes, whiles ye be at matyns,
and at all other times and hours. And when she has so done, se now how the
child by the prayers of his blyssed mother lyfteth up his holy hand and
blysseth you all namely such as singen with a courage, sauourly and devoutly.
Lo sister, I trow verily that such medytacyons (if they be devoutly conceived
in thy soul) should put away dulnes in psalmody / euagacyons, and dystractions
/ slepynesse / sloth / and such other temptacions indyuyne service. Al so
when any manner of carnal thoughts crepe in to thyn heart in time of gods
service, anon cry in thyn heart, knockyng and crossyng pryuely thy breast. and
say thus. Cor mundu^ crea in me deus. Lord I pray the form in me a clean
heart. I doubt not sister if it be a fleshly thought with such great cryeng
and crossyng it will right soon avoid. Also if thou wylt eschew laughyng in
dyuine service, I pray the keep well thy sight. And if it hap sometime that you
be weary by long abiding in gods service, think that for every verse our lord
will reward the in heaven a thousand year and m^o.

Myghtyly therefore and dyligently labor in the service of almighty god after
thy might and say to our lord in thyn heart thus. If I more might, more I
would. That I have lord I give the. Believe verily sister, our blissed lord
Jesus crist thy chosen spouse acceptyth this gift for a worthy gift and a
great. In this wise sister thou may ascend up unto god by devotion in
vocal prayers, and also in mental prayers, that is by such holy meditacion
in time of divine saruice, both in redyng and syngyng. I mean not to be an
high synger, but for to be a devout synger and a herty synger. For in our
lords care sowneth not the cry, but the love. not the voice, but the heart and
will for to labor in his service for his love. Lo sister, thus may thou be a
good singer, though thou be no high synger. He syngeth high whom our lord
hereth. Also sister when thou art at our lady mass, there behave the devoutly
and reverently. And think how sometime when thou were in the world, with what
reverence, and what dyligence thou seruedest an erthly lord, or an erthly
lady, only for to eschew their dyspleasure, and for to win their
benyuolence. So now do thy dylyge^ce or endeavor with much more reverence, and
more dylygence for to serve our heavenly lord, and our heavenly lady, in hery^g
of her holy mass, and of all other masses. For to such holy service thou have
now fully committed the, wherefore thou shall have a great reward. what reward
is that wenest thou? Truly Jesus himself shall be thy mede, and thy reward. O,
now is this a great reward, for so little a labor. Above all things therefore
I pray the, in time of herynge of thy masses, refreyne the from all manner
irreverence and dissolucion. For be right sure if thou have more devotion in
heryng of that mass than the priest has that sings or says the mass, thou
shall receive more grace of that blyssed sacrament than he On saterdayes, or on
other solemn days when thou shall be co^muned, than do all thyn inward and
outward dylyge^ce goostly and bodily to receive that blyssed sacrament with
all manner sadness and deuocio^. But above all things make first a clean
conscience by confession. Be often co^fessyd and mekely, and in such wise that
thy confessor may most clearly understand the. So that by often using of
both these sacraments of penance and howselyng, purete, clennes, and
devotion may ever increase and be kept in the In what wise you may best and
most devoutly dispose the to that most holy sacrament after pure confession,
I would thou axed it of our lord god, and than ye holy ghost shall teach the.
But yet so^what shall I say to styre the for to receive that blyssed sacrament
devoutly, and it shall be but a short lesson. First think how little thou art
in his sight, which holds up both the and all the world. In this thought
as much as you may set thy self at naught. Have in mind also how every day
thou synnest, and therefore think thy self right vile and wretched, and all
unworthy for to receive that blyssed sacrament. And in this thought think that
though thou had be about to make the ready a thousand year before, it had been
little enough, as for so worthy a sacrament. Think also that thou art unworthy
for to look up into heaven, and to them that live in heaven, or heavenly. Therefore
co^sydering thy unworthiness, long before or thou receive that blyssed
sacrament, cast down thyn eye in to purgatory, where pains be ordained for
to purge sinners. Among all think on some pain there ordained for thy sins,
and for thy trespaces / where peradventure thou art worthy to lie unto the day
of dome / were not the great mercy of our lord god. Therefore think thus, and
say always in thyn heart before thou go to receive that holy sacrament. O lord
if a thousand year suffyse not a soul to be worthyly ready to receive this
blyssed body and blood, good lord have mercy on me that so unworthily and
vnredyly come thereto, which am a right wretched creature, daily synnyng, and
not ame^dyng. O. good lord Jesus there is no stynkyng fylthe fouler than my
soul is, for to receive thy blyssed body and blood. I beseech the lord make
some river of compunction first to renew by that foul stynking pyt of my soul
to wasshe away the fylth or that thou enter. O lord, I dare not else put the
there. Now blyssed be thou good lord, I find great confort in thy mercy, I
wot well now without any comparyson thyn infynyte mercy is more than all my
wickedness. And therefore through the felyng of that heavenly grace, which thou
have now endued my soul trustyng only upon thy benygne mercy, I go to receive
it as a seek body to a leache, that thy blyssed goostly medycin may make my
seek soul hole. The seker that I am lord, the more need have I to come to
the, that thy great pity and mercy may be showed in me, by delyueraunce of my
sins. Upon this trust lord I come to the. for thy mercyes (I wot well) be
infynite. There lord I shall find heavenly delycates, in the which delycates I
purpose ever to dwell, in the lord and in none other So fervently I will set
my heart as I will of the ever for to have joy with the withouten end. Lo
sister by such short meditacions, and other like these, thou may cleanse thy
heart and thy soul with rennyng ryuers of very compunction. Before you go to
receive that blyssed sacrament, say also in thy heart (if you have leyser in thy
going thus.) O, I that am powdre and ashes, shall I now go to my lord? Than
answer again, and say with a reverent meekness. yea, that shall I, as an
unprofitable servant gooth to his benygne master. And as an hongry soul
gooth to his meat. And as a seek man gooth to his leache. Say also as saint
Austyn says. My lord, my mercy, my refuge, my desire. to the I come, for I
may not help my self with mine own works. And therefore lord releue me /
socour me / and have mercy on me. I mystrust of my merytes / but I trust in thy
great mercyes more, than I mystrust of mine evil deeds. Lord thou art my hope.
To the alone I have syn^ed. mercy lord. Many folk use to say, long before
they be houseled, the.vij. psalms of penance, with a ^etany. Prayeng to all
those saints for help. which psalms saint Austyn took out of ye psalter, and
set them together. And named the^ psalms of penance. It is a good deuocio^ for
to say. I will not charge the withal, considering the contynual labor that
thou have in thyn order. Think also on the great charity which he shows to
sinners / in gyuyng his blyssed body to them for their goostly health, and
goostly meat. And that it is very goostly meat, he proves it well himself,
where he says thus. Caromea, vere est cibus, et sanguis meus, vere est potus
My flesh, says he, is very meat / and my blood is very drynk. This is ye
meat which is fygured by that manna in the old testament, which had all manner
of delyce, and all manner savor of sweetness. yt at the last shall be given to
thy great mede and reward of everlasting bliss. as he says himself thus.
Qui manducat meam caruem and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam eternam. That
is. He that receives my flesh and dry^keth my blood, shall have for his hye
reward everlasting life, here by grace, and after this life by joy. Now
sister after ye gracious receyuynge of his blyssed sacrament / thank our lord
for ye great benefit, and say thus in thy heart. Inuem que^ diligit aia mea
tenebo eu^ et no^ dimitta^. ye is. I have found whom my soul loves, now shall
I keep him. and never shall I leave him. And for because it is called a
sacrament of love. I would thou prouydysted some manner of prayers of love,
which might styre ye point of thy love, as is this oryso^. Dulees jesus
memoria. or such other. and than I dread not but thou shall feel great
devotion. O, good sister, sometime my goostly daughter, I pray the than for to
desire of thy spouse for me one drop of that devotion. I would also thou should
desire of him such devotion for all my goostly friends. Among all other of thy
devotion and vocal prayers, it were a medefull saying for to say. Placebo,
and Dirige. at leest with three psalms, three lessons, and lauds. thynkyng that
thou have thy lyuelode of them yt peradventure lain in pains of purgatory.
which pains as some doctors done say, passes all the pains of the world,
and is more grievous. This thou myghtest use well at after none, when thou
walk in the gardyn. And think that he were an unkind friend, and a right
cruel, which might se the in a brennynge fire, and were in his power for to
deliver the, and will not. Truly right so our lord has granted ye one
friend in earth may deliver his friend in purgatory, by devout prayers and other
goostly means / If such one be neclyge^t, his friend in purgatory may well
think yt such one is rather a cruel enmy than a friend. Send therefore in
spare times thy prayers to our lord for them that been in purgatory /
recommendyng to him thy kynne, thy founders, benefactours of thy monastery, and
all other which ben passed out of this world. Lo sister all this before is
said much of bocall prayer, and little of mental prayers. For ever among
all goostly exercyses prayer is a holy mean. Vocal prayer and mental prayer
they two ben so nygh of kynne that the one is never found without the other.
If vocal prayer have chief occupacion, medytacion medleth somewhat with him.
And if medytacion have chief occupacion, than prayer breketh out among. And
therefore in as much as it is longyng to prayer, somewhat shall I say of mental
prayer, which is called medytacion. And also for to styre the when thou art
alone, how thou shalt be occupied in medytacion.

Sister, such mental prayer by medytacion is right sweet, merytorious, and
precious to a devout soul / but right few use it, and that is pity. And as
saint Hue says in a book which he makes of the manner of such medytatyue
prayer, that such prayers is called deuocio^, purely of the soul, which is a
very tornyng in to god, by meke and mylde affection, By this you may know
that medytacion should be meke, by consyderacyon of him that so prays. Of
this we find a good example by the publycane in the gospel, which in his
heart prayed. submyttyng thy self (mekely to god) a very syn^er. saying outward
by right few words. as for vocal prayers, when he said thus. Deus propicius
esto michi peccatori. For all his prayers were inward for the most part. All
such that pray by medytacion, they speak few words. In other properte
meditatiue prayer has: yt is short, as short words of love or of mercy, and
sendith out his flames and beams Such a short medytatyf prayer sister perceth
heaven. For all such souls that so ben occupied in meditacions, done rest in
god, as in the beginning and endyng of his medytacyon. And thus such
medytatife prayer is short. Not for the shortness of devotion, but for the
shortness of the length in words. Another properte that longs unto
medytatyue prayer, that is desirous by waylyng, sobbyng, and syghing, to be
with our lord. So that such one may say with the prophet Dauyd. thus. Sitiuit
anima mea ad deum fontem viuum qua^do veniam et apparabo ante faciem det
fueru^t micht lactime me paries die ac nocte. That is. my soul thursteth to
our lord, which is ye quick gracious well ye refressheth every mourning
soul. O. when shall I come and appear before thy glorious face blissed lord.
Every day my soul is fed with tears, as my bodi is with breades. for they be
the loves of my soul, unto the time yt I may se the face to face. Sister is
not this avery good mourning myrthe. If thou wylt come come to such merry
mourning of medytacion thou must as much as thou may sequester thy self
from all manner outward noyses and distractions, and so enter into the pryue
chamber of thyn heart and there exclude all things under god, and than assende
up unto him by such devout medytacions. In the which medytacions, first thou
shall bethynk the of thyn own fraylte. How ready thou art to evil., and how
dull and slow to good. After this think upon ye great cruelte of thy goostly
enmies. How day and night they lie in awayte by many wicked suggestions and
falls subtyltees how they might deceive thy soul, and draw it to synue. And
after this think upon ye great goodness of god how much grace he has wrought
for yt, First in making the of naught. And than how he with his precious blood
bought the. Departing and disceueryng the from all mysbeleuyng people,
paynyms, and heretykes. Gyuyng the a christen name, by receyuyng of the
sacrament of baptysme. And also abiding mercy ably and beny gnely thy tornyng
out of sin. Delyuerynge the out from the fendes mouth, and from ye vanyte of
this false world, by entryng into relygion. And so gyuynge the many other
virtues and graces without nombre. The first me dytacion will styre the to
compu^ction and sorrow. The second to dread. And the third to love.

Of this me seems saint Hue in a book that he made (De arra amme,) says a
right sweet word, and it is this. I am says he hyghly bound to love my
lord Jesus, of whom I have received many benefytes of love. For first he
says, has given me my essensiall being in him, not only with all vnse^sible
creatures, but effectual, being of fayrnesse above essensyble creatures. But
effectual being of fayrnesse he has given me also life in him. not only with
beestes, beestly / but for to live by grace heavenly. He has given me a body with
wits. A soul with strengthes. Earth with that which is contained therein, for
my sustenau^ce. Gifts of grace, with holy sacraments of the church. And
himself with his torments, which he suffered in his passion. After these three
manner medycacions, ascend up with an hye trust to our lor^e Jesus. And if thou
may, with habundaunce of tears. and say with meke boldness as saint Austyn
says thus. I shall now surely go to my lord Jesus, and cry upon him mekely,
to move him for to help me / consyderyng by his mercy full goodness both my
fraylte, and the great cruelte of my goostly e^myes. Than after this rest a
while by medytacyon / and be right sure he will fulfill thy desire, and grant
the thyn askyng. And though you find no sweetness anon, leave not therefore /
but cry unto hy^mekely, and importunely. sayng thus in thy soul. Non dimittam
te donec benedixeris michi. Lord I shall not leave the, unto the time thou
have give me thy blissynge. yea, though he put the to scylence. Or put the from
him with his hand. Or shoue the away with his foot. yet leave not, but cry
upon him mekely always. And I tell the for a truth, if thou continue thus in
such importunyte, it shall increase thy devotion right much. And yet thereto
thou shall have thyn askyng, and be sped of thy desire. Which I find well
proved by example of the holy writynge of Thoby, to whom the angel said
thus. Quando orabas cum lacrimis ego optuli orationem tuam deo. when thou
dydest pray with weeping, than I offered thy prayers to god. Lo sister set
never little by prayers which holy auugels don offer to our lord god, and
namely there as it is continued with Christ. In all such medytatyue prayers, I
would thou had a special insyght unto our blyssed lady mother of mercy, and
pray her to be a tender mean to her dear sone for the. namely at her mass,
and other times also. And great her with Auees, and other special deuocyons
made of her. And I pray the if thou may, use often for to say yt blyssed
sweet word of saint Anselme, in the end of thy medyta tyue prayer to our
blyssed lady, which is this. Glorious vyrgin gods mother / as thou verily
louedest thy sone, and verily would that he were loved* get me that grace of
thy sone, that I may verily love him. Truly I hope yt thou sholdest find
great confort in such devout words. And if thou may, I would thou saydest to
her among, her psalters of Auees, called our ladies psalter. Also I would thou
were occupied, namely on holy days, with redyng of devout books. as is
Stimulis amoris. or such other. In the which specially I recommend to thy
medytacyon ye holy passion of our lord Jesus, and namely after complyn, and
after matins. And believe it right well it shall inflame thy soul ferue^tly in
his love / and teache the for to dispyse this wretched world. And also it will
teache the for to win great pacyence in all manner aduersiters. And it will arm
the against thy gostly enmyes. and give the might and strength to overcome the^
worthyly. For as saint Bernard says. Be a man never so delycate, if he
consider inwardly the bitter passion of Christ / he must needs absteyn him, be
he never so wrath full he must needs forgive, be he never so malycious, he must
be both full of pity and compassion. Say therefore with the same holy Bernarde,
and say it inwardly and intentyfly thus. O good Jesus, how myghtyly have thou
called me and enbraced me to the with thyn holy arms of thy holy passion,
where thy soul passed out of thy body, and water out of thy side, and blood
out of thy heart. O, mercyful Jesus, you louedest me tha^ full hot / and full
fervently, good lord forsake me not now. Thus may thou grow on high by
devotion, both in vocal prayers, and in mental prayers. It is necessary for
the also sister if thou wylt increase and grow devoutly incongregacion, for to
eschew syngularite in all thin own outward obseruaunces, and myngle or tempre
dyscrecyon with all thy deeds, lest it be said of the, as our lord said in his
gospel. Ecce homo q cepit edificare, et non potuit consummare. Lo says our
lord, this man has begone to buyld, but he can make no end. Therefore do so
discretly as you may continue. Take no specialites on the without leave / but
keep a common form of living. For by dyscretion and judgment of all good folk
it is the surest life. I say not yt thou sholdest keep a common form of living
with voluptuous lyuers, or idle lyuers, or of proud lyuers. For yt is called a
common life among worldly lyuers, and not of the relygious lyuers. But I mean
yt thou sholdest keep such a common living which is ordained and approved of
holy fathers and assigned in thy holy rule. Is it not enough to the to do as
they did, and as ye perfection of thy h^ly rule techeth, without syngularite,
And if thou wylt needs cost be synguler, than I would thou were synguler in
keeping better than any other) thyn obedyence / thy chastyte / thy pouerte and
deuocio^, and love both to god and man. In this wise be synguler. And if I
should say as saint Bernard says, than I would thou keptest well three words,
which he taught his dyscyples. And they ben these. I would he says in
congregation thou lyuedest ordynately, felawly, and mekely. Ordynately to thy
self felawly to thy systers, and mekely to god.

O now is this a short charitable rule. Thou lyuest sister in congregation
ordynately when thou do thy business in relygion, for to keep thyn
obseruaunce, both in gods sight, and in presence of thy systers so that thou
keep thy self from sin, and thy relygyon from sclaunder. Thou lyuest in
congregation felawly, when you do thy dylygence for to love all creatures in
our lord. and for to be loved for our lord. Showing thy self obsequious and
seruysable to all thy systers. Louyngly in supportyng of their bodyly charges,
and also goostly charges, And to have pity and ruthe of all their if yrmytees.
Thou lyuest also in congregation mekely to god when thou do all thy
business to put away vaynglory and vanyte in all thy deeds. Lo sister, in this
wise thou may increase and grow in relygyon as a virtuous tree. And at last
by gods grace be able to bear the worthy heavenly fruytes. Of the which saint
Paul sp^keth and says. Fructus autem spiritus est, caritas, gaudium, pax,
pacientia. In the which auctoryte he speaks of. xii. manner of fruytes. Of the
which I would speak and declare, but I have no leyser. Therefore I leave of at
this time, and make an end. Besechynge our blyssed lord, the tender and very
spouse, and keeper of chaste souls. which has planted the in the gardyn of holy
relygion, give the grace to be roted in very mekenes. to be moysted and watered
by very compunction. to be extended and spread abroad by very charity. And at
last to be raised upon hye by very devotion. that sometime after this life thou
may be co^pted or nombred endlesly among the holy trees of his heavenly
paradyse, by the help and means, or intercessyon of our blyssed lady. Amen.
And pray for me good sister, which am yet but an unprofitable brau^che, and
vnfruytfull of relygion. That at last I may be such a tree, as our lord would
I were.

Amen. Benedictus deus.
Here ends the tree of ye holy ghost, Enprynted at London in the Fletestrete,
at the sign of the rose Garlande. by Robert Coplande. Anno dn^i. M. CCCCC.
xxxiiij.

Robert Coplande.

printer's device of Robert Copland

The. xij. fruytes of the holy ghost.

The table of this present book.
The first fruit of the tree of goostly living is called Charity. Ca. i. folio.
ii. The second fruit of ye tree of goostly living is called Joy. Ca. ii. fo.
xi. The third fruit of the tree of goostly living is called Peace. Ca. iii. fo.
xx. The fourth fruit of the tree of goostly living is called Pacyence. Ca.
iiii. fo. xxv. The fyfth fruit of the tree of goostly living is called
Suffraunce. Ca. v. fo. xxxiii. The syxt fruit of the tree of goostly living is
called. Goodness. Ca. vi. fo. xxxix. The seventh fruit of ye tree of goostly
living is Benyguyte. Ca. vii. fo. xliiii. The eight fruit of the tree of
goostly living is called Myldnesse. Ca. viii. fo. xlix. The nynth fruit of the
tree of goostly living is called faith. Ca ix. fo. liii. The tenth fruit of the
tree of goostly living is called Good living Ca. x. fo. lvii. The enleuenth
fruit of the tree of goostly living is called Contynence. Ca. xi. fo. lxi. The
twelfth fruit of ye tree of goostly lyuy^g is called Chastyte. Ca. xii. fo.
lxvi.
Explicit tabula.

Here begins an epistle sent to a relygious woman, of the.xii. fruytes of
the holy ghost.
RElygious sister it is not long a goo that I wrote to the a pystle of
relygious exhortacyon, how thou sholdest grow in relygyon virtuously as a
goostly tree. Which tree I said should be first depely roted in meekness, than
watered and moysted in co^punccyon. After yt extended abroad by charity. And
than to grow on high by devout co^templacion. In the which pystel at ye last
end I made mencio^ of.xii. sweet fruytes of the holy ghost, which all goostly
trees in relygion should bring forth. Therefore now to fulfill the end of that
pystel. I send the written what those.xii. fruytes ben, whereby thou may know
how thou sholdest live in relygion. Of whom the holy apostel saint Paul speaks
and says thus. Galat.v. Fructus autem spu^s est caritas, gaudiu^, pax,
pacientia, long nanimitas. Bonitas, beniguitas, ma^suetudo, fides, modestia,
continencia, castitas. That is. The fruytes of the holy ghost in goostly trees
of relygyon is charity / joy / peace / patience* sufferau^ce / or long abydyng.
Goodness / beningnite / or gentylnes of he^rt / myldenes / faith in true loving
/ manner of good leuyng / co^tinence / and chastity.

The first fruit of ye tree of goostly living is Charity. Ca.i.
Of Charity.
THe first fruit of this holy tree is called Charity. Charity is a coupling of
the soul with god, which is the life of the soul. For like as a natural
death departs the soul from the body, so goostly death bysyfie departs the
soul from god. The holy doctor saint Augustyn says that there is a very death
which that mendrede but little, and that is the departing of the soul fro
almighty god. God is the blyssed life of souls, for by charity be loved all
that ought to be loved as virtue, and all that ought to be hated as vices. Good
sister eat often of this precious fruit of charity, for it is right precious, in
as much as it is the price for to have the kingdom of heaven. And it is so
precious a fruit that without that, man is of no price in the sight of god, as
saint Paul says. i. Cor xiii. Si charitatem aute^ non habeo, nihil sum. Also
(he says) all the works that we done without it be of no value. Saint Gregory
says. As the branches of a tree come out of ye rote, so all virtues
spryngeth out of Charity, She is mother of all virtues, and norse. For before
her was no virtue, and without her is no virtue merytoryous. She informs and
gives strength to all virtues, that they may be acceptable to god. without
charity may no soul be safe nor please god. Charity longs to all folk, and
namely to relygious. which should be more parfyte than the common people. what
profit is it sister to profess high living, and in habyte to show parfeccyon
if we endeavor us not to learn virtue and exercise it in deed? It is a great
shame to us (and rather worthy pain than mede) to profess or promyt great
things, and do the leest. Therefore if we be in charity we shall think hard
things light and easy. Now peradventure thou would wit what is this worthy
fruit of charity, that I speak of? To this I answer and say ye charity is an
ordynate and well dysposed will to serve god, to please god, and to have
fruycion and use of god. Charity and love is all one. Charity is such a
sovereign virtue that it joins and coupleth togider the lover and the loved.
For meekness makes us sweet unto almighty god. Pouerte joins, and blyssed
charity makes us one with god. Charity is fairest of all virtues. Charity is a
thing by the which god loves us, and we god, and eueryche of us other. Charity
is a desire of the heart, ever thynkyng on that, ye it loves. And when it has
that it loves than it ioyeth, and nothing may make it sorry. Charity is an holy
desire between two with lasting of thoughts. Charity is a strength of the soul
to love god for him self, and other things for god, and in god. which charity
when it is so set in god, it does away all inordynate love. And so charity
puts away deedly syn^e, for it is the richest affection of man's soul.
Charity is the fruit of truth, stablynge of wits and of conning. Se how
good charity is. who would forsake that blissed fruit which is so good? If we
suffer to be slain, if we give all that we have if we know as much as men
may in earth, all this without charity is nothing else but sorrow and torment.
Charity is a very true turnynge from all erthly things, and a ioynynge to god
without departing, kyndled with the fire of the holy ghost, fer from the
fylthy fire of carnal corrupcyon, subject to no deedly vices, but areysed up
above all flesshely lusts, ever ready and gredy to contemplacyon. Charity is
also the fone of all good affeccyons, health of good manners, death of sins,
life of virtues, without which may no man please god. with it man devoutly
seruethgod. Very charity cleanses the soul and delyuereth it from the pains
of hell, and out of the felawshyppes of deuylles, and soon makes it the
servant of god, part takers of the heritage of heaven. Lo sister, in such
love and charity thou must enforce the to be arrayed and clothed, as iron and
stele is clothed in fire when it brenneth as fire. And as the air or the
fyrmament is clothed in the son^e when it shyneth as light. O blyssed be all
they yt be so turned all in to fire and shynynge heat of charity in every
prosperyte, and in all aduersyte. Such charity makes a devout soul for to
desire for to be losed out of this wretched life, and be endlesly with god. All
such live in great patience by tedious abydyng of the death every day and
every hour desyryng a departing of the body and the soul by natural death, ye
though they were hard torments and passions. Such charity made saint Andrew
for to halse desyrously the death of the cross. And saint Steven to pray
devoutly for them the which stoned him to death, by the which he se into heaven
that he had long before desired. It made also saint Laure^ce to scorn his
tormentours, saint Vincent to haste his tormentors fast, for to put him to his
death. Saint Agate gladly and joyfully to go to her passion, as though she had
benbyd and desired to a great feast, and other glorious martyrs to joy in their
tribulacions, and to love their enemies which pursued them, by the which they
were styrred to desire most hastyly heavenly joy and bliss which they loved
here in earth. Nethelesse though charity be so fervent, that it makes a soul
to desire departy^g out of this world, yet the same charity is so kyndled
with the love of goo that it styryth us to abide here after his will though it
be paynfull to us, in asmoche we may not here have copyouse plente in use of
that blyssed well of life Jesus christ, yet by his blyssed grace in the mean
time of all our desirous abydyng here after his will, he norysheth us and
conforteth us with in great confortes, as it were by the.iii. heavenly drops
of goostly graces. One is, by inwardely recreacyon of the blyssed sacrament of
the aultre, when we receive ye blissed body, which is to all devout folk a
synguler confort for releuyng of the tedious desire of this wretched exyle, for
therein they receive verily and holsomly him, whom they best love, our lord
Jesus Christ. Another is by multyplyeng of goostly fruit, that is in sekyng the
increase of other for to multyply the nombre of saved souls to the worship
of god. By such goostly multyplyyng, they suffer more easily the euyls of this
present exyle. The third is for ye presence of gods children with whom they
be in a manner conforted of the bliss of heaven here in earth, for as much as
they se such increase in charity and love of virtue, though such a soul by
fervent charity mourn for the bliss of heaven in desire for to be losed out of
this wretched exyle and be with her spouse Jesus, yet some gladness she has for
to abide, namely for the swetnes that she fyndeth in receyuynge here of our
lords blessid body. In the turnyng of sinners to virtue, and in the profyt and
increase of lyuers and so this exyle is the more tolerable, in that it is more
fruytfull. For albe it yt such a mournyng soul in charity come late to her
spouse Jesus, yet she hopith to come and bring many with her. Thus by such
charity was saint Paul coarted for to abide in this wretched world between
desire of losyng for to be with god, and profitable increase of his subjects.
Of such profitable increase he comforted him self between whiles against his
tedyous delay from the kingdom of heaven, saying thus. Philip.i. Coartor enim
eduobus desideriu^ habens dissolui, et esse cum christo multo melius permanere
in carne necessarium est propter vos. That is. I am coarted and anguysshed in
my self of two thyuges. One is, I desire to be unloosed out of my deadly body
and be with christ, and that were right passing good to me. An other is. I wot
well yt is right necessary to abide in my bodily life only for you, of these
two I know not which I may rather chose. Lo sister what sweet fruit charity is.
Thus fruit of charity should ever be in thy heart, and in thy will, not only in
thy deeds, but also in thy soul. Many spekith charitably and does charitably,
but yet they love another god nor be in charity, as ypocrytes which suffren
great penance and seem holy to the sight outward, but by cause thy seek
outward worship and praysyng, and favor, they have lost their mede, when a man
gyuith him to penance and to pouerte, and does great alms deeds, it is a
token he is in charity, yet he is never ye more in charity for that alone,
without more. But when he forsakyth the world only for gods love, and
settyth all his thought to good, and is in charity with all folk, and all
good deeds that he may do, he does the^ in that intent for to please our lord
Jesus, and to com to the bliss of heaven, than he is in very charity, and that
charity is in the soul, for so his deeds shewith outward. If thou therefore
sister speak good, and do good, folk that herith ye so speak and do, wene ye
thou art in charity, for they wene thy words and thy deeds accordyth with thy
soul in god, else thou art a deceyuer of the people and dampnest thy soul. Lo
sister thus charity is in will verily, not in work only, for in work only it
is a token of charity, but he that says that he is in charity, and will not do
in deed that in him is for to show love, truly he is not in charity as saint
John^ says. For charity is never ydel, it is evermore workyng some good. And if
it cease of workynge know right well it wastyth a way, what is very workyng of
love and charity? Truly very love and charity, is to love god with all thy
strength myghtyly, with all thy heart wisely, with all thy soul devoutly and
swetly, wylt thou be in love and charity myghtely. Than must thou be meke, for
all goostly strength comes of mekeneesse. Our lord says. Esa. lxvi. Super
quem requiescet spu^s meus nisi super humile^. On whom shall the holy ghost
rest says our lord, but in the make soul. Mekenes kepith us and gouernith us
in all our te^ptacio^s, so yt they may not overcome us. But many be overthrown
by ye fend in their meekness by tribulacions, reproues, and bacbytynges. if
thou be wroth and lose thy charity for any anguysshes of this casual world,
or for any word that men say to the, thou art not yet very meke, ne in mighty
charity, for if thou be in parfyt charity, it shall not grieve the what shame or
anguisshe that thou suffer, but thou shalt have delight and joy in such
reproues and shames, and glad for to suffer al manner reproues for the love of
Jesus, and fare as a dead body, which answerith not, what so ever ye people
says or does to him. Right so, if thou be in parfyt charity, thou wylt not
be sterid for no word that may be said to the. Trewly sister it is a very
token that thou canste not love (...) be in very charity if you may not suffer
pain or anger for thy fre^des love Jesus. For it is wry^en thus. Charitas penam
non habet. Very ^harite has no pain of all such outward things. All
vnmeke people in relygion be not in mighty charity, for they be so feeble and
weyke that they fall at every steryng of the wynd of temptacion. And why is
that? Truly for they will have their will done, and not their soue rayns will,
which is gods will. Therefore sister be very meke, that thou may be in mighty
charity, and do not thy will in this world. that thou may have it more
plenteously in the other world, and so thou shall overcome thyn enemy the
fend. Thou must also have charity and love god wisely with all thy heart, and
that thou may not do, but if thou be wise. when art thou wise? Truly when
thou art poor without couetyse, and despysest thy self for the love of Jesus,
and despendyst all thy wits and thy will in his service. They that seem most
wysest in this world, be most fools which done spend in covetousness and in
besynes all their wysdom, and forsake that thou haste taken pouerte / penance
/ and gostly travail. For thy pouerte thou shall have riches without end. For
thy penance and sorrow for thy sins, and that thou art so long in this exyle
from thy country heaven bliss, thou shalt have the endless joy of heaven.
And for thy travail of relygion for wakyng / fasting / prayers / medytacions /
hunger / thrust / heat and cold / mysease and anguysshe that thou suffrest
for the love of Jesus, thou shall come to rest which lasts endlesly. Thus
may thou se that if thou be wisely in love and charity, thou must love
lastyng thing lastingly, passing thing passyngly / so that thy heart be set and
fastened in nothing but in god, or for god charitably. Thou must also not only
be in love and charity myghtely and wisely, but also swetly and devoutly. Sweet
love and charity is when thy body is chaste, and thy thought clean. Of ye which
chastity by the grace of god I purpose to write in the last end of this
treatise, as for the.xii. fruit of every goostly soul. For as I begin with the
sweet fruit of charity, so shall I end with the sweet fruit of chastyte.
Devout love and charity is when thou offrest thy prayers and thoughts to god
with goostly Joys in the holy ghost. Of this goostly joy I purpose for to
write in the next goostly fruit of every goostly soul. Now wylt thou know
when thou art in love and charity. Truly sister there is none in earth yt
knows when he is in charity, but such yt be inspyred or have any special
grace which god has given to him for to know it by, of ye which all other
may take example. All blyssed lyuers trust and hope yt they be in charity / and
in that do as well as they may for to increase in virtue, and trust verily
that they should be saved / they know it not anon. For if they knew it their
merit were the less / so yt it is kept uncertain unto another world with
hope. Nevertheless certain tokens there be, by the which thou may know if
you be in charity. First is when all couetyse of erthly things is quenched in
the. For where yt couetyse is, there is no charity nor love of god. the love of
yt one puts out the other. The second token is hertely desiring in all
times eating and drynkyng, wakyng and sleping of heaven bliss. If thou be set
in love and charity sister, that thou can find no joy in this life, it is a
token that thou art in charity. And the more thou sauourest of heaven the more
thou desyrest it. The third token is chaungynge of thy tongue. For if thy
tongue be changed which was wont (peradventure) to speak of erthly things,
now speaks of god and of heavenly things, it is a token that you art in
charity. The fourth token is exercise of goostly profit / as it is to be given
entyerly to gods service and intermyt nothing of no erthly business, but it
be under obedience. And yet than ever cast up thyn heart to heaven in all such
business. The fyfth is when all hard things seem light to the / and yt
makes charity. The syxte is, when thou suffrest all a^guysshes and hurtes
mekely. For if thou be in very charity thou hate nothing but syn^e. thou
love nothing but god, or for god. and thou dredest nothing but to dysplease
god. The.vii. is when thou have joy of all trybulacions / and praysest god in
every a^guysshe that you suffrest. This shows well ye thou art in charity.
Many there be sister that can love god, and be in charity when they be in rest
and ease, but in aduersyte they do grudge, and be sorrowful. and be thrown
down so low that uneaths any man may conforte the^, and so sclau^der they god
in grudging against his domes. That is a great wretchedness, that any aduersite
should make him for to grudge against gods will. But that is a blessed charity
that no violence of sorrow may put away. Good sister love well charity and these
tokens of charity. Sister thou art called to relygion for to be a lover of
charity. Four manner ky^des of lovers of charity be there in relygion. The
first is a begyn^yng lover, the second is a growyng lover, the third is a
parfyt lover, and the fourth is a most parfyt lover. The first love is new
borne, the second love is norysshed in growyng, the third love is mighty and
well strengthed, and the fourth is lowly abiding his departing out of this
wretched world. Of these four degres of charity our lord speaks in holy
scripture, where as he makyth a symylytude of corn sown in the ground. First
he says, corn apperyth grene and tender as an herb. Afterward it apperith
as an ear. After that it appears as full corn in the ear, and than it
abydyth nothing else but harvest, for to be led into the barn. If thou be
yet but tender in love and charity, so that often times thou fyndest thy self
frail to fall out thereof lightly by the least blast of temptacyon or
styrynge of other, thou art yet but an herb which nedyth much keeping that it
be not destroyed by beasts, that is by beastly living, more after the body
then after yt soul, and so with sad goostly living it will grow man ear of
myghtier strength that thou may suffer to be wedin by sharp rebukyng and
reproues, if it need. After such virtuous patience in wedyng of thy corn of
charity it will grow parfitly into full corn and ripe in the ear, nothing
feryng ne dredyng than of any disease, of any anguysshe, of any aduersite how
so ever ye wind blow, but only dredyng for to displease god, desiryng every
hour the time of harvest, which is the departing of the hody by the
thresshyng of yt flayle of death, that it may become charitable corn and clear
without chafe, and brought within the garner of bliss there to be herboured
without end. This garner desired ye charytable corn saint Paul when he said.
Cupio dissolui et essecum xp^o. Phi.i. I desire he said to be unloosed out of my
wretch edbody and be with my love Christ Jesus. Lo sister he that has such most
parfyte charity, he lotheth all wordly delytes. He sets no more store by all
temporal goods than he does by foul stynkyng fylth, but he is glad to
suffer for ye love of Jesus al manner trybulacions, and desires to be endlesly
with Christ. Such charity is strong as death as Salomo^ says. Cant.viii.
Fortis est vt mors dilectio. For right as death does to the body, so does
love to ye soul. Death departs a man fro bodyly lusts, and fro worldly
bytternesse. It makes him neither feel cryenges nor wepynges, nor beatynges.
Right so does ye love to the soul. It departs the soul fro ye lykyng of all
erthly things, and makes it heavenly. And what ever it hereth in earth of
worldsly noyses it is so rauysshed in love yt it hereth nor felyth it not. Now
is such charity (sister) an wholesome fruit for to use, and namely for
relygious folk / for it has.iiii. virtues. One is, who so eats thereof it
heals his goostly infyrmyte. For he yt is in charity he is dysposed to all
godliness. Every thing sauoreth to such one as it ought for to savor, erthly
thing vile, and goostly thing fair / worshypes / riches / and worldly power
and such other that seem worthy and precious in the sight of worldly people,
seem in the syghte of goostly souls right foul. And if relygious people
which should be goostly, set much by such dignityes, they have a great
goostly syckenes, for they lack charity, which should hyde and put away all
fylthynes. Also such charity puts away and hydeth our offenses to god. Of
the which hydyng speaks Solomon. Prouer.x. Uniuersa delicta operit caritas.
All trespaces and all offenses charity puts away, as it had never ben he
says. For as saint Bernarde says. when our lord forgyueth our sins he
forgyueth them fully and mercyfully, not dampuyng by vengeance / not shamyng
us by reproues / nor less loving us by vpbraydynge. And if our lord never
vpbrayde us of our sins that we have done. it is as it never had be in his
sight. Lo sister how this fruit of charity hydeth both our inward goostly
sins and our outward bodyly sins, as they had never ben. The second virtue
of this fruit of charity is, that it makes man wise as Solomon says. Eccl.
i. Dilectio dei honorabilis sapie^tia. The love of god (he says) is a
worshipful wisdom. Thou art not very wise but if you cherish derely all goostly
good things. For right as he were no wise merchant ye would give gold for
fylth, and put it in his chest as gold. right so is he unwise yt loves better
te^porall goods yt be but as fylthe, than goostly goods. Keep well this fruit
of charity sister, and it shall teach the to set little by all worldly
things. The third virtue of this fruit of charity is, yt it makes a man
rich. For charity is so precious that it is lykened in holy write to pure
proved gold in the fire, as I find written in the apocalypse. Apoc.iii. Suadeo
tibi emere a me aurum ignitum et probatum vt locuples fias. I council the
says our lord for to bye of me pure gold and well tried that thou may be
made rich. that is all that ever thou do do it for the love of pure charity
and thou shall be rich, that is, you shall have part of all the good deeds of
holy church, and at the last be rich with heaven bliss. The fourth virtue is
that it makes a man lykyng and pleasant to god. For when a soul loves our
lord, our blyssed lord will love him again, which passes al other love. As
our lord says by Solomon. Proverb.viii. Ego dilige^tes me diligo. I love the^
ye love me he says. And in another place our lord says thus. Io.xiiii. Qui
diligit me diligetur a patre meo et manifestabo meipsum. He that loves me (he
says) shall be loved of my father, and I shall love him, and make me all open
to him in showing me to him as a loving father. Thus sister charity is
pleasant and lykyng to god. I pray the keep well this fruit, and often eat
thereof both late and erly, full and fasting. For it is as good after meat as
a fore meat. in the night as in the day. and part with thy systers, but eat
it never cold. Roste it well and make it right hot in the fire of Christ's
love which sent among his dystyples bre^nyng tongues of charity, that both
they and all his folowers in earth should speak brennyngly of love and charity
each to other, and so to live ever in love, our blyssed lord grant us all for
his blyssed charity. Amen.

The second fruit of the tree of goostly living is Joy. Ca. ij.
THe second fruit of the holy ghost in holy lyuers is called Joy. Truly Joy
in the holy ghost, that is goostly joy / not erthly joy, but for to joy in
god and in hope of endless goods / and in the great benefytes of our lord.
All such joy is for to be glad and joyful of the increase of virtue of
other, and for to thank god for them / and for to loathe all vanytees, and for
to be quycke and merry goostly in dyuyne service. This is that fruit of joy
which I would thou eat of, wha^ worldly wretched gladness is about to change
thy soul in to dyssolucion and banyte. That is when it would make the to joy
in affluence of temporal goods / of laughing and scornyng of idle tales and
dyshouest plays. And also would make unsavory to the all that longs to
godward / as is to be dulle in dyuyne service, in business of devotion and
virtue, and such other. All this is no goostly joy but worldly joys. It is
no very joy, but vain joy. Gostly joy is very joy, though it be no full
joy. This joy may none have. but such yt be in charity, and eat thereof
swetely, as I said before in the first fruit of charity. Very charity axeth
very joy. Of this joy speaks Solomon thus. Eccl.xxx. Non est oblectamentum
super cordis gaudiu^. That is, there is no joy to ye joy of the heart. In
three things joy of heart yt is goostly joy passes all carnal joys. First
is that it is contynuall. An erthly man though he sit at a delycate bodyly
feast, yet at the last he shall iothe it, be the feast never so delycate. But
a sure joyful soul set in virtue, is ever as it were at a contynuall feast
without lothynge. The second is, that goostly joy is more pure than erthely
or carnal joy. Aglotonous man fyndeth many bitternesses annexed to his joy.
One is afflyction and torment within himself of long delay from his delycates
that he desires. Another is defaut that he finds in the^ when that they be
set before him / which is not made to his liking. And if that they be made to
his liking, than he receives them so lustyly joy / the more it is had, the
gladder is the hauer. Never weary, nor seek of you use thereof. The third is,
that carnal joy is of vile things, and not lastyng. But joy of heart is of
very good things everlasting. Many things I find that causes a man to be
glad in heart and also in godstly joy. One is parfyte purete and clennesse of
conscience. A very gentle soul rests much rather in the bed of a clean
conscience, than of an unclean conscience. For kyndely the the pure and clean
soul abhors, and has abhomynacyon of vnclenesse / and has right great
joy of clennesse. As often as the soul is syke, so often it is unclean.
Sykenesse of the soul is uncleanness. when you soul is hole, that is when it
is in clennesse / than it is in rest and joy, as Solomon says in his
proverbs. Prouerbiorum.xvi. Dulcedo anime samtas ossiu^. That is. The
sweetness of the soul (he says) that is the clennesse of the soul is health
of the boones. By these bones be understand gifts of graces of the holy
ghost, which be mighty and strong as bones, and keeps the soul in strength
and vygour. It is not so with worldly lovers which have erthely joy. For
their joy is not lasting, in as much as they lack clennesse of their
conscience. The second is the dyschargynge of the burden of everlasting
death. which all wretched sinners be charged with. As the holy prophet Dauyd
said. Ps.xxxvii. Iniquitates me supergresse sunt capud meum, sicut onus grave
grauate su^t super me. The wickedness (he says) of sinners have ouerpassed
their heed, for as a grievous burden they be passing grievous above him. Of this
all clean souls be dyscharged, for asmoche as they have cleansed their
conscience by often co^trycion, so that they feel an herty joy in god. The
third is Fredome of soul, for they be not bound in the bo^des of the fend.
Who that has the holy ghost has fredome as saint* Paul says it. Cor.iii.
Ubi spiritus du^i ibi libertas. Where the holy ghost is there is fredome out of
ye deuylles danger, which causes in a clean soul great gladness. This
fredome has not wretched sinners, for they be so bound in ye deuyls bonds
that they may not do as they should do, after the higher part of reason. Of
this bond speaks Solomon and says. prouer.v. Iniquitates sue capiunt ipium,
et funibus peccatorum suorum vnusquisque co^stringitur. with wickedness a
sinner is taken, and so with ye bonds of sins every sinner is bound. Our
sins be the bonds wherewith we be bound. let us break these bonds, and
than may we have fredome of spyrite and be in great gladness. The fourth is
rest of torments from all evil affections, by the which all wretched sinners
be often times tormented in heart / that is with richesses, with delytes, and with
worshypp. And so they be tormented with such things that they perysshe and
spyll withal. They be also tormented sometime with dread, as it shows well in
a coueytous man. For though there be peace enough, yet he supposes ever yt he
shall be deceived by thieves. Sometime also they be tormented with wrath and
such other passions. All these evil affections and wretched passions cease in
them yt live well, and therefore they feel right great rest and great joy in
heart. The fyfth is rest from ye worm of conscience. A sinner as long as he is
in sin, so long he is prycked of the worm of conscience, that he has no
rest. And this is ye first vengeance that our lord takes of a sinner, for he
will not suffer shame of sin be in man's heart, which should be his
divellyng place without shame of vengeance, as saint Austyn says. Inclene
souls it is not so, for when sin is put out by contrycion and co^fessyon,
than cease their worm of conscience, that is the freatyng and the remors of
conscience, and so they be in good rest. For like as a man has better rest in
a sweet bed full of fluores, than in a sharp or hard bed full of thorns.
So such a joyful soul rests more swetely in such a vedde of cle^nesse than
in a bed of syn^e. Of this sweet bed of flowers speaks Solomon in the book
of love in the person of all merry souls in clennesse. Canr.i. Lectus noster
floridus. Our bed (he says) of our conscience smells sweet with flowers of
virtue wherein we rest without torments of remors. The.vi. is the presence of
our lords grace which lyghtneth a clean soul by knowledge, and sprynkleth it
with the dew of grace, of the which ye soul is in great gladness and joy.
It is not so with sinners, for they be in derkenesse of syn^e. what joy may
such have in their conscience, which live in such derkenesse of sin, and may
not se for derkenesse of syn^e the light of heaven? This light I call the joy
of heaven as Dauyd says. Ps.lrxxviii. One in lumme vultus tui a^bula^imus.
Lord (he says) we shall walk, that is we shall iyue in ye joy of the,
which is ye light of thy blyssed face. Also al clean souls have gre^^ cause
of joy. For all the virtues yt they have ^^meth from the well of heavenly
swetnesse, and ^e sprynkled in their hertes, which causes h^ to be glad. Saint
Austyu says, where he speaks of the rauysshyng of saint Paul in to heaven,
that in that blyssed kingdom of heaven where blyssed living is fully soped up
in his ^wue well, from thens some dropes of virtue and of grace be sprynkled
down on earth to mankyno^, that in the te^ptacyons of this wretched world
they may live more temperatly, more myghtyly, more ryghtwysly, and more
prude^tly and wisely. And how that virtue in soul causes a man to be glad
shows well saint Bernarde saying thus. Every virtue naturally is good / there
is no vicekyndly, nor natural. therefore virtue sith it is natural and kyndly
when it comes in to the soul, though he come not always without labor, yet
when he comes, he comes as in to his own natural place, where he sytteth
full truly, and accords well with ye soul, as with his own nature and
kind. Lo how grace and virtue (sister) gladdeth the soul, which gladness
all sinners lack. The.vii. is the witness of the holy ghost which is win a
clean soul, yt makes it so glad. Of the which gladness saint Paul says
thus. To.viii. Spiritus sctu^s testumoniu^ reddit spu^m nostro quod sumus fili^
dei. The holy ghost (he says) bears witness to all clean souls, yt they be
the joyful children of god. This wyn^esse is that gladsome oil which the wise
maidens took in their vessels as our lord says. And it is also ye joy ye
saint Paul speaks of, where he says thus it. cor.1. Gloria nostra he est
testunoniu^ conscientiente. Our joy he says is the witness of our
conscience. This joy brigeth forth in a clean soul true co^punction, sweet
devotion, wholesome labom of penance, works of pity, business of prayer, very
obedyence, fullness of love, and high contemplacyon in god. The.viii. is good
^^pa^y. All gladsome souls have god in their ^elawshyp, and all good folk
which ben full with ^^d. For among such a company rests ye ho^^ ghost gyuyng
to such true confelawes and ho^^ for to dwell together in peace and duyte. O how
(...) such a company right gladsome to dwell a^^^^nge? as ^auyd says. Ps.
C.xxxii. Ecce (...) and qu^ to^^^dum habitare fres in (...) Lo (he sath) how
good and how merry it (...) todwell all together in love and ^hye of the (...)
ghost. The.ix. is gladness of good works. (...) they that live in holy works
and deeds, (...) be greatly reward* do^ god, as Dauyd (...). ^^^custodied is
^^^^s retributio (...). A greece reward shall be in at yt keep wor^^^ good
works, not ^nely ^^che at the last, (...) also here in th^^^ys^ for their
keeping they (...) fraue great joy in soul, as doctors say^^^ that is so
great ^^ye yt it may not be said. (...) ^eiter be felt than spoken. for all
good wer^^^^ be kyndly ye children of the soul. And eight (...) a good wise
has joy in the bringyng forth (...) well shapen child, and great dread and
co^fusyo^ if she brought forth rather a serpent or a (...) wor^ne than a
child. Right so a soul^^s is glad when she brings forth good works, as
fruit which is best according to ye soul. and should be sorry if that she
bring forth instead of good works ye bad fruyete of evil works, for that is
against kind of the soul. Look how sorry a wife should be if she brought forth
rather a foul serpent than a child / so should we be of sin. The.x. is
sykernesse of ye soul. Clean souls be so syker that of outward pains they
be not hyng afterde, for they wot well they should do them no harm, but purge
them and make them clean. All their business is for to keep them from inward
euylles, that is frosynnes. And therefore they feel great gladness wtin, in
the soul. The.xi. is, that our lord spares a clean soul from many great
laborous and peryllous works, as saint Gregory says. Our merciful lord
hydeth his true lovers (which he loves tendrely) from all laborous and
peryllous works, whom rather he calls his servants than his children.
Them he spares for tendrenesse, and will not yt such be occupied in such
outward occupacyons, but keeps them without vexacion and in fayrenesse. There
he will ye his servants be not put to out ward labor, and foul their fere
only in ye duste of out ward business. Lo sister all such yt be not
dysposed to gladness of soul with sweetness of our lord in contemplacyon, he
will that su^he be put to outward business. And yet he of his great mercy
keeps them from fylthynesse ^aut of the fere, that is of the affections, which
way not escape some manner of dust, which our lord himself will wasshe away with
his own hands as he did to saint Peter and all his dy^^yples when he said.
Io.xiii. Qui let us est ^on indiget (...) ^t p^des lauet. He that is cle^^
(saythour lord ^edeth not to be purged but (...) of his affections which I my
self will ^hasshe away for their great meekness yt they (...) ^^^ynystryng to
my swear lovers whi^^ (...) joy of me. The.xii. is that ye hertes (...) souls
be lyffe by from erthly things. (...) may (...) such a soul to the
fyrmament. (...) is (...) clear for there in such clerenesse (...) all such
souls build their ne^^^ (...) all erthly things by holy medyta^^^. The.xiii.
is that al clean souls ben often^^ (...), either in redyng or in heryng (...)
good (...) of wisdom, or else in swet^^^yers, or in such other goostly
exercyses. Such can not syue blissedly and joyfully with out such holy
contr^nplacyon, for they have ^eyther but ^rnesse nor heaviness, but joy and
^^adnesse. Solomon says. Ecclesia.xxiii. Ni^^^^^ dul^r^^s quam inspicere in
mandatis dei. There is nothing so sweet (he says) as it is to behold in the
wisdom of our lord, and in his commandments. Therefore it was that Moses
when he had talked with our lord and received his commandments, that he
neither did eat nor dry^ke afterward for joy of that holy presence forty
days and.xl. nyghtes. It was a great feast to him, him thought, for many days
the confor^e of our lords presence and his speech. O sister there be many
far fro such Joyful sweetness, that be loathe to here our lord speak to
them. Anon they wax dulle in soul, and have no savor of his speech. when
speaks our lord to us: Truly when we read such things that be wholesome to
the soul. Ex here other say to us by preaching or exhortacy o^. I pray the be
none of tho. The.xiiii. is, that all such clean souls govern dyscretely
their bodies from excess of mysrule in eating and drinking and stepynge.
They have not such hodyly dyseases as have mysruled folkem excess, nor they
dye not so soon as other, but live longer to gods worship, out take such yt
our lord withdraws out of this world by his preuy domes. The.xv is, the
greatness of dyuyne love that such clean souls do feel in within them
selfs. Love is a very easy yoke and what some ever thing is drawn with such
an easy yoke is made very easy and soft. Saint Bernard says. O thou yoke of
holy love how graciously drawest thou to the such as thou wylt draw to the.
All hard things and great things love makes light, and uneath of any charge
The.xvi. is, that al such gladsome ^lene souls make their wylles ever to
accord to the will of god. For right as the will of god is fulfilled in them,
so the will of the^ is fulfyl^ed in other as though god bade it. The.xvii. is
that such joyful and clean souls have joy up (...) joy. yt is, they have
double joy here in earth. ^^ere is, they have joy in Christ and all his
wer^^s. Another is, they have joy of his body, yt is (...) saints that be in
heaven, and of holy lyuers ^^^erthe. The greatenesse of this joy upon joy ^ay
be fully considered in such that have gr^^^ ^^^arite win them, and great
goostly gladness. (...) right as a mother has great joy of her (...) when
he is made a bishop, or sings his (...) mass, or has any great dygnyte,
which (...) rekeneth for her own worship / so all such ^^^full souls thynkes
that it is their worship that saints be worshypped in heaven, and also (...)
christen men increase in virtue here in earth. which may also be understand by
all ye lymes of a man's bodi. if one part of his bodi is well (...) case, it
is joyful and glad of the ease of every other lym^e, so clean and joyful
souls in god have joy of each other, both of good that be in earth, and also
of all holy that be in heaven. The xviii. is that causes a clean soul to be in
joy, is the long use of them that have long continued in goodness. Lo sister
ye long contynuaunce of good living brings in gladness of soul. The.xix.
is hope of mede for our long abydyng in good living. As saint Paul says. To.
xii. Spe gaudentes. They that hope of endless reward, such souls wax
ioyefull. The.xx. is joy of contemplacion that such clean and joyful souls
feel sometime, with the which contemplacio^ a soul is much illumined and
lyghtned Such a soul seyth in his joyful co^templacio^ ryuers flowyng both
honey and butter. As says Job.xx. Vidit riunios stu^^eris torrentis inellis et
butirs. Saint Gregory says upon the same text, that these ryuers be called
of ye holy ghost, and they be re^nyng ryuers, for they be right plenteously
gathered together in a contemplatyue soul, which blyssed spiryt, with all his
holy gifts fyllyth a conte^platyue soul both with the sweet honey of the
godhed, and also with the sweet butter of passion that was thristed out upon
the cherne of the cross. Right as honey is gathered of flowers and of the air
and butter of the body, so contemplacion is gotten of the godheed of our lord,
and of sweet heuely things, and of the bitter pains of our lords body. And
so by the gentle be of clennesse that honey of contemplacyon is brought to the
hyue of the soul. And by tender compu^ction the buc^er of Christ's passion is
brought in to ye cher^e of the heart, for to souple it, and make it soft
against all manner anguysshes. Oh, well were (...) soul at ease that might
joyfully souke of this ^hony, and eat of this sweet butter. Such a
con^eplatyue soul should then feel great rest / great ^^^ernesse / great
delight / great joy / great love and ^^uour in Jesus ye lasts ever, little
having my^de of joy of this life. Also such one though it ^ray little with
the mouth, yet it is full with ^od, and sees oftymes into heaven, and
beholds there the sayrnesse of angels, and of holy sou^es. O sister now is
this joyful contemplacyo^ (...) wonderful joy of love, which joy canno
to^^^^ tell. And though that wonderful beholdi^g (...) all the soul, yet for
habundaunce of joy and ^^^^enesse which ascends in to the mouth, ^^the
body and soul ioyeth in god. There is none that has this grace of
contemplacyon, but such that our lord first inspyreth to forsake this world
and alwordly vanytees, and the couetyse of ye byle lust thereof. And than after
that heledeth such a soul by herself alone, and speaks him self to her
heart, and there gives her souke of his sweetness of love, and than he
styreth her to holy prayers, medytacion and tears. At last he makes her
gather her heart together, and set it in him. And than he opens to the eye of
the soul the gates of heaven, so that the eye may look in to heaven. And than
the fire of love is verily in her heart, and brenneth therein, and makes it
clear from all erthly fylthe, and from all noyous thoughts. All such so set
be called contemplatyue souls, and be rauysshed in the love of god. For
contemplacion is nothing else to mean but a sight, by the which a soul sees
in to heaven, as I said before. And yet perfyte sight of heaven may not be had
here in this life, for the cloud of ye body that lets our goostly sight.
But as soon as they dye such are brought before god, and sees him there face
to face, and eye to eye / and so dwell with him without end, whom they
sought, desired, and loved, whiles they lived in earth. Oh. whyder saint
Augustyn felt not this joyful co^templacion when he said thus? Lord Jesus thou
have led me in to a wondrefull and an vncustomable sweetness, which if it were
fulfilled in me ye I feel, tha^ I can not tell what I might be, but it were
endless bliss. Also I find of saint Bernard how he said when he felt
contemplacyon. (...) (he says) suddenly unawares haboun^^^ in are so much
trust and goostly gladness (...) ye when I self of thy dutyne swetnesse that
^^^yst never what it might be, but it were (...) self, O good Jesus continue it
mine, and v^ (...) in the, that I may of the last se y^ (...) in bliss. Such
contempla^^^^ (...) Jesus, becomyth well christ's (...) the love of Jesus than
brenneth (...) soul. There may no ma^^^^ (...) be of vanyte, where such
occupa^^^^^ (...) of love and joyful charity Thus ^epe (...) and thou shall
thou fe^^^^ (...) as Solomon says. Proverb.iii. (...) says (...)
contemplacyon, and that. (...) right sweet. The most (...) good folk is for
to be in the sight of god^ (...) him face to face which sight som^^ (...) she
(...) to some clean souls he^ (...) their ver^^, to make them kno^^^ (...) to
what joy they shall come when (...) be pa^^ed hens. Such a sight saw saint
(...) when he was rauysshed. Of this sight (...) saint Bernarde and says. who
so (...) be able so for to se Jesus it is full necessary (...) heart be clean.
As it is written. Math.v. (...) vndebunt, Blyssed be all they that have clean
hertes, for they shall se god contemplacyon. O now is this (sister) a sweet
fruit, for it has four virtues. First is yt the use of this sweet fruit of
goostly joy makes a soul godly, lyuying by the life of grace, as Solomon
says. Eccl.xxx. Iocunditas cordis he est vita hominis et thesaurus sine
defectione sactitatis. Joy of heart (he says) is the life of a soul, and ye
treasou^ of holiness which shall never fail. The contrary does unwholesome
sorrow of herre, which sometime is ye cause and occasyon of goostly death.
Therefore who so will be long of life in grace^ be joyful goostly in heart, and
put away vnhol^ some sorrow. of the which speaks Solomon in another place and
says. Eccl. xxx. Vristician^ long repelle ate, multos enim occidit tristicra^
Put away (he says) fer fro the all vnholsom^ sorrows. For such sorrows sleeth
oftentyme^ many goostly souls, and brings them out of the life of grace in
to a goostly death / and makes them dry from the humor of grace, as Solomon
says. proverb.xvii. Spiritus tristis exsicat ossa. An unwholesome sorrow in the
soul dries the bones. That is the strengthes of ye soul fro the moisture of
grace, so that such a soul so dried up fro grace often times is all to broken
by impacience. A tree that is dried will rather break than bow. The second
virtue of goostly gladness is, ye makes a soul to live well and felowly
among other, as Solomon says. proverb.xv. Cor gaudens exhilarat faciem. A
joyful heart gladdeth ye sight of other. Uneath may a body be gladsome and
astable to another, but if he have a joyful heart in god. The third virtue of
goostly gladness is, that makes a soul for to despise all erthly things, as
saint Austyn says. who so has an inward savor of the holy ghost, all erthly
things is to him unsavory. Of this dispysynge of erthly things says Solomon.
Eccl. i. Vbi multa sapientia multa indignatio. That is. where as is much
savor and goostly gladness, there is much in dygnacyon and contempt of
erthly things. The fourth virtue of goostly gladness is, that it makes a
soul to have the vyctory of the fend, as I read in the life of saint Anthony
ye he taught his disciple saint Paul the hermyte, and said thus. There is one
thing sone (he said) by the which you may myghtily overcome thy goostly enmy.
and that is goostly gladness. when ye fend sees much goostly gladness in a
soul, than he is sorry, for he woteth well god is there. Of this I find also a
figure in holy write to prove that it is sothe. when the Phylysiees by whom be
understand the multitude of fe^des se the children of Israel make great joy
among themself. they said. Alas, alas, god is amo^ that host.i. l^x. iiii.
No^ enim fuit tanta exultacio ab heri enudius tercius. There was not so much
joy yesterday and three days agone as it is now, they said. Lo sister, by this
ye may know by witness of holy write, that ye life of good folk is more merry
than the life of evil folk. Eeate often therefore I pray the of this sweet fruit
of goostly gladness, and part it with thy systers, which be heavy in heart, and
make them glad in god, that ye may al come to heaven bliss, where is joy
without end. Amen.

The third fruit of the tree of goostly living is Peace. Ca. iii.
The third fruit of the holy ghost.
THe third fruit of the holy ghost in holy lyuers is called Peace. This is a
precious fruit, in as much as I find that our lord Jesus had often this fruit
in his mouth, and angels, and his dyscyples also. That our lord loved well
this fruit I find well, for he had it in his mouth when he said often to his
disciples thus. Ioh. xx. Pax vobis. yt is. peace be among you. And this he said
to the more tha^ ones, because (...) he would they should often receive this fruit.
And ^n another place also I find thus that he said to the. ioh. xiiii. Pace^
relinquo vobis, pace^ mea^ do vobis. Peace (he says) I leave with you, and
^equeathe you. And peace at the last I shall give you, yfye keep well the peace
that I have b^quearhed you. It seems also ye it is a precious ^ruyte / for
angels had it in their mouths at our lords birth, when they said and song.
Luc. (...). In terra pax homnibus bone voluntatis. (...) It seems well also ye
it is a precious fruy^^ for he would that his dyscyples had it often in (...)
mouths, when he bad them say in ye en^^^^^ of every house ye they e^tred in to.
Math.x (...). Peace be ever in this house. (...) precious a fruit is this? which
fruy^^ (...) synde fygured in holy write, long before (...) lords
incarnacyon, of ye culuer which was ^^nt out of Noes ship, and brought home in
her mouth a branch of an olyue tree. By ye olyue is understand Peace, and by
the culuer ye holy ghost. which betokens that all goostly folk in whom the
holy ghost dwells, should ever bear peace, both in their breast and in their
mouth, and styre other to peace, as saint Martyn oyde, whose mouth was ever in
speaking either of Christ / or mercy / or peace, and so made peace among other.
Also it seems well yt peace is a precious fruit in that, yt our lord bought ye
fruit with his dear precious blood / so that he made peace thereby throughout
all the world. Also it is well proved that it is a precious fruit, for all
martyrs took their death to bring peace among us. Therefore sorry may al they be
that refuse so precious a fruit, which our lord and his angels, all his
apostles, all his dyscyples, and all his martyrs and saints set so much
thereby. This precious fruit our lord Jesus has left to his spouse holy
church, that all her children may take enough thereof if they will. But now to
know verily peace, thou shall understand that there is two manner of peace of
good folk. One is peace of hertes here i^ this life, and peace everlasting in
another life. By ye first peace we may come to ye second peace Therefore true it
is ye our lord says. Math.v. Beati pacifici qm^ filij dei vocabunt. Blyssed
be they that be peasyble, for they be called gods children. All such be
called peasyble that be lovers of peace / which always besy them to reform peace
and keep peace, first in himself / and seconds ryly in other. Peace in himself is
for to make ye flesh subject to the spyrite, and for to make the styrynges of
the soul subject to the over part of reason. Be therefore sister first a
maker of peace with in thyself, making thy body subject to thy soul, and than
a maker of peace of other. For you can not be a very maker of peace of other but
if thou be first in peace within thy self. This first peace lies in repressing
of all carnal lusts and desires, and that the law of the flesh repugne not
the law of the soul, but that ye body serve ye soul under trybute, that is
for to serve the soul as a servant serves the body, and else there shall no
peace be. The body is as a servant to whom it longs for to serve, the sou^e
is as a lady to whom it lo^geth for to have ye soueraynte. when the servant
takes away from y^ lady her heritage, than is there a great erthquake, as
Solomon says. proverb.xxx. Vnum est per quod terra mouetur, quando an cilla
here is fuerit domine sue. There is one great thing he says, which causes ye
erthquake, and that is when the servant is heir of the lady. The body which
is the servant, is than ye ladies neyre, when he by fleshly lyuy^g ^ereth away
the heritage of the soul, and so myspendeth it, by the which the soul that
is lady is depryued from spyrytuall and endless delytes. And this causes an
erthquake, that is, the earth which is thy flesh may not suffer virtues to grow
in the soul, but ouertorneth all ye edyfyenge and buyldyng of virtue up and
down. Alas that such a wretched servant should overcome such a gentle lady
of our lords kynne. if there should be very peace between them two, needs the
servant must come and low herself to her lady. That is, she must be compelled
to obey to the soul, and to all the profytes ye long to the soul for to be
dylygent. who so can make the flesh to low he shall have peace enough in
himself, and be able to make peace among other Though thou feel sometime
styri^ges of thy flesh to sin, (if reason follow not) deem it not consent,
but only a feeling, which is called but a tourneyment between the soul and
the body, Trowest thou that therefore, that thou have lost peace. Nay sister, as
long as thou never consentest for to be overcome. There is no manner of thing
forboden the in all such tourney me^tes between the soul and the body, but
only consent in the feeling of any such temptacyons. Plain not and say that
thou have lost peace, because that thou do feel great temptacions of thy
flesh. For as long as thou co^sentest not to such temptacyons thy peace is
not broken. The second peace that I did make mencyon of is peace of heart. and
that is when all the styringes and moueinges of the soul be made subject and
obedye^t unto the over part of reason. This peace is all inward, and it comes
of affection and of a right intent. if thyn affection be clean and thine intent
be right for to profit in virtue, anon without any delay our lord will
deliver the from all unquietness of heart, and make thy conscience a peasyble
dwelling place of right wysnesse. This peace of conscience, which is called
peace of heart, is nothing else but a manner of ernest, and a taste of that joy
and peace which is everlasting in heaven. And ye we shall have at the last, if
we keep very peace and rest. Also they that have rested them here from wicked
works, there shall they rest from endless trybulacion. Of these both peases
that is of conscience and of joy our blyssed lord made his testament. The
first peace which is called peace of heart, he bequethed here to his dysciples
wha^ he said. Io. xiiii. Pacem, relinquo vobis. My peace I bequethe to you. The
second peace which is peace of endless bliss he bequethed to such that keep
ye first peace, when he said. Ioh. xiiii. Pacem mea^ do vobis. My peace endlesly
I give to you. The first is not now in this earth to virtuous folk full,
stable, namely for troubles and unquietness, which many virtuous folk feel
sometime among. And no wonder, for all such peace is but the relyef and alms
of heavenly peace, which is given to the poor in spyryte syttyng at ye gates of
Jerusalem, abiding there some peace sent from our lords table. The alms that
comes fro a lords table is not always able to be eaten. For sometime among in
such alms be found bones bare from flesh and other fragmentes, which be
not able for to be eaten. So such peace that is granted of our lord to clean
hertes here in earth is sometime full barayne from rest and quietness, as is a
bone fro flesh. And yet all such manner unquietness comes from our lords
table of heaven, for to prove a soul. Lo sister, blyssed be all such yt be thus
peasyble, which both make peace between the soul and body, and also keep peace
in heart. For they be made our lords chambrelayns, in as much as they make
ready for him, (in their own hertes and souls) a resting place as Dauyd says.
Ps. lxxv. In pace factus est locus eius. His place (he says) is made in peace,
when ye ever therefore ye this lord of peace comes and brings with him his sweet
peace. or gooth away and withdraws his peace, leaving the in trouble as the
seems, change never thy heart fro him, lest he pass for ever away fro the.
But peasibi bide in prayer his coming again, and so thou shall keep rest of
heart. wylt you keep well peace? than conformethy will to gods will, and so
shall thou keep peace. For so said the angels in christ's birth. Pax hominibus
bone voluntatis. Peace they said be to al people of good will. If thy will with
stand our lords will, thou shall find no rest, for he will at the last have
his will done. will thou, nyl thou, wylt thou also keep well thy peace, than
withdraw thy heart from all erthly loves, For you shall never have peace, if you
set thy heart in sekyng of such things. Saint Gregory says. What is more
laboryous, than to set our heart sore on worldly things. And what is more
restful then nothing for to desire of worldly things, but only our bare
necessaris. Thou may also keep this peace, if thou keep dylygently thy.v.
wits, for when the gates were shet and the disciples with in, our lord sent
in peace among them, and said Ioh. xx. Pax vobis. what is it else for to close
thy gates, but to refrain al thy.v. wits from unlawful desires which
dryueth away peace. Thus sister keep peace within thy self and than shall thou
be a good maker of peace among other, and yet will they never hertly be
reconsyled to such that are them forgyuenesse, what be such scorners of peace,
and not lovers of peace, for they be no verilouers of peace. but if they be as
ready to seek peace of those that have trespaced to them, as such that have
trespased to them, be glad to offer them peace. As David says. Ps. xxxiii.
Inquire pacem et persequerecam. That is for to say. Seek peace and sue to have
it parfitly. There be also many which be ready for to receive peace of other that
have trespaced to the^, but not so ready for to offer it first to other to whom
they have offended. It is more glorious in the sight of god for to seek peace
before thou be called to peace, than when you art called. For it is more curtesy
to give a gift before it be axed, than to grant it when it is axed. All
such that seek no peace, but refuse it when it is offered, they understand not
ye peace is the heritage of christen people. For if they understood verily that
peace were the heritage of christen men. which Christ did bequethe them in his
testament they would never abide for to recover their heritage till they were
prayed thereto, but they would sue thereafter with all manner of haste for to have
it. Also all they be called peasyble that labor and do their business for to
break strife and debate among other. For that was the office of our lord
Jesus, which labored to his lives end, and shed his blood for christian peace,
And in token ye he labored sore for our peace, after his resurrection he
appeared to his dyscyples, and showed them his hands and his fete, and also his
body all wounded, ye they might understand thereby what costs and expenses he
had done for to purchase peace for them. as though he had said to them thus. Set
not little by peace, for it has cost me my life. Now sister this is a deynte
fruit, for uneath it may be found, it has so many lettynges for to grow.
which ben they yt lets peace of heart? Truly sister wrath / hatred / strife
/ debate / worldly business / and outward noise. Therefore if thou wylt have
very peace in heart, beware of all these. This fruit sister has.iiii. great
eertues and fair. One is, that all they yt have peace be made gods children
in earth. as our lord says himself. Beati pacifi qm^ fili dei vocabuntur.
Blyssed be they that be peasfull, for they shall be called gods children. His
children by following his steps. For the office of our lord was in earth to
make peace, and so do all such. The second virtue of peace is this / ye it
cleanses the eye of ye soul. For peace is of such clennesse that it cleanses a
soul so clearly that it may se god, as the holy apostle says. Heb. xii.
Pacem sequimini et sanctimoniam cum omni bus, sine qua nemo videbit deu^. That
is. Show peace and holiness with all folk. without which peace may no man se god.
The third virtue of peace is that it makes ready a place to our lord. There is
no place so pleasant to our lord, as is the place of the heart when it is in
rest. Do well thy dyligence for to love well this fruit, and pray our lord
to take part with the of his own fruit of peace. And than shall thou have god
at thy feast, as saint Paul says.ii. co xiii Pacem habete et dominus pacis
erit vobiscu^. Have peace with you, and the lord of peace shall be with you. The
fourth virtue of peace is that our lord gives for our erthly peace here, peace
everlasting without end. For they that have peace, and keep peace and love peace
here they may be sure of endless peace, as the prophet Esaias says. Esa. xxxii.
In pacis pulchritudine co^qui esces. In fayrnesse of peace all such shall rest.
Here thou sholdest sleep in peace, and there thou shall rest in peace, as Dauyd
says. Ps. iiii. In pace in idipsu^, dormiam et requiescam. In peace (he says)
with my self I shall sleep and rest. That is. I shall so sleep here in rest
and peace with in my self, which peace and rest is in me vnchasigeable and
vnuaryable that I may at the last partytely rest in blyssed peace without end.
O how merry (sister) y^ may be in kepi^g of peace. For very peace (where it is
had) brings the soul into great clerenesse (...) tranquylyte. what is peace
but tranquylite of soul, symplenesse of ^erte, the bond of love, and y^
felawshyp of charity? Such peace puts away dyscorde / reoresseth wrath /
destroys pride / and louerh mekenes / it seeks god / it loves god / it
cannot hate / it teaches to love / it cannot be proud. He that has such
peace keep it will. And he that has lost it hye him fast that he may wyn^e it
again. Lo sister if thou be thus peacyable and in peace sue after such peace
with clennesse. Thou may be meke and mylde, and simple in heart, pure in thy
words, innocent in thy will, according with god in thyn affec^ion, that thou
may at last be with the^ in bliss that have fruycyon, and use of this fruit of
peace without end.

AMEN The fourth fruit of the tree of goostly living is Pacyence. Ca. iiii.
Of the fruit of pacyence.
THe fourth fruit of the holy ghost in holy lyuers is called patience This
fruit is a right necessary fruit, namely for us that be here i^ this wretched
vale of mysery, among so many passions of evil. Pacyence is such a virtue
that it ordeyneth us to the fruicion and use of endless peace. which pacyence
is brought forth of charity and meekness. For charity and meekness be the
father and mother of pacye^ce. When we suffer no manner heaviness nor disease,
than be we not called pacyent, but peasyble. For patience is in suffryng of all
manner wrongs, and not to be troubled with no manner passions thereof. Some there
be which be pacyent for need, and some for symulacyon. Pacyence of need is wha^
we would revenge us of our adversaries, and may not, nor dare not, dredynge
more harm. This Pa^^ence is nothing virtuous. The other pacyence which is
called symulacyon or ppocrysy is when only for vaynglory we show us pacyent
in aduersyte, for to be praised therefore here in earth. this pacyence is also
vycyous and nothing virtuous. There is also an other feigned pacyence, of the
which saint Eregory speaks. that is when we feign pacyence in wrongs to ye
intent we may be reue^ged another time, when we have oportunyte and leyser.
This pacyence is also vycyous and not virtuous. There be.v. kinds of virtuous
patience ye comes in suffri^g of.v. wrongs, wherein very pacyence is proved.
The first is, not for to be impacyent, for hurtyng of thy body. The se^ond, not
to be impacyent, for losing or withdrawynge, or for scrarcenesse of temporal
goods. The third is, not for to be impacyent for any offenses or harms done
to thy kyn^e or any of thy friends. The fourth is, not for to be impatient for
lesyng of thy worship. The.v. is, not for to be impatient for no trouble of
tranquylite lyte of soul. This last conteyneth all the other iiii. within him,
though it so be that sornty me it may be understand partyculerly by it self
without other. As when peradventure we be troubled and impatient for the rain,
or such other dystemperate wether, that lets us from our b^ dyly dysporte,
or erthly gladness. In all these pacyence is proved and known for pacyice.
But when soever we be troubled for defaut of right wysnesse, or for decay of ye
gostly health of other. This trouble should not be called vnpacye^ce, but zeal
of ryghtwysnesse, and of virtue. but if i^ be out of measure and indiscreet,
than it is called impacience. So than by this it seems that every passion that
is had to prove our pacye^ce, either it is of such things that we desire and
love and is denied us and withdrawn from us, or else of such things that we
hate and d^ noyous to us, and yet be put to us, and also be threatened withal.
In all such things it is a necessary virtue, namely for telygyous persons to
be pacyent. For right as for these.v. causes it is and great virtue of pacyence
not for to be troubled, right so for defaut of ryghtwysnesse not for to be
troubled, it is a vice of slouthe and obstynacy. Eueryche of us for our self
should be sorry for our de^^^^tes which we have done, namely of rightwysnesse
and than is this paceience called a virtue of penance. We should also be sorry
for our defautes that we do, and than is such pacye^ce called a fe^^^ou^ of
encreas^ in virtue. We should also be sorry for our sins that we may do, and
than is such patience called a sleyght of dread. Also we should be sorry with
pacyence for ye harms and loss of our even christen, but measurably for the
Iosse of their temporal goods / and much more for the loss of their
spyrytual goods / and of such things as lo^geth to their health. To this last
pacient sorrow, be souerayns most bound. For it they be pacient in sufferyng of
yt vicious lyuinges of their subjects, not correcting ting the^ after their
power as they should, they shall have no mede for such patience, but rather
they wyn thereby the wrath of god, as Hely the high pre^st had, for because he
would not sharply chastise his children for their great defautes, with the
which our low was displeased, therefore he self pain with the wrath of god.
Thus than pacyence is a right necessary fruit, namely for rely gious persons.
Lo sister, if thou wylt be very relygyouse you must be pacyent and suffer easyly
all sorrows and dyseases Which patience must be strong yt no temptacion over
come it. It must also be steadfast that neither dredes ^elabours make it no co
ward. It must also be of a mighty will, that thou he not afraid to do the
most hard things that is commanded to the, for the health of thy soul. It
must also be a long abydyng will, that ye long delay of mede break not thy hope
of desy^e. It must also be mylde, that thou be not chaufed and styred for no
manner of hate of other for to give evil for evil, but rather good for evil.
It must also be easy that thou caust or may in all such che wrongs be without
hastynesse of heart, souple and treatable. So to be pacient thou shall find
great ease. Is it not a great ease trowest thou to suffer all thing easyly?
For aduersyte without pacyence hurts in three manner of wise. Oue is that it
tormenteth us outward. Another yt it makes us tesly or froward inward by
impacyence. And the third is, that such an impatient conseyence freateth the
soul within. If thou be very pacyent thou shall find a great refresshyng to
thy soul. For right as the body is fed with dylycate feasts, so is the soul
fed with precious virtues, and namely with this virtue of patience it is made
fat, as with one of the most deynty morcelles of our lords disshe. In such
pacyice is great edyfication to other. For many takes head rather of that
virtue in other than of any other virtue. Many we find chaste / abstynent poor
/ full of abnesse / besy in prayers / and steadfast in the faith. but few in
manner mekely pacient in reproues, detractio^s, and other (...). For in such
things anon we will excuse (...) ^efende us, lest other be s^laundred thereby,
sup^^^^ not we be gylty if we hold our ^eas. And y^^^^e ^^^th (...) we do
show our self more reproueble in that we venge our self by such impaciency.
It were more praise or commendacyon worth to us if yt we would follow our lord
for to suffes such wrongs pacyently, than by ausweryng for to overcome other,
as saint Gregory says. For to suffer it purges both our sysies that we have
done, and also it keeps us warely that we fall no more in them. It gives us
both grace of virtue and goostly gifts in this life, and also a great joy in
heaven when we come thither, as our lord says himself to all such as suffer
for his love. Math.v. ^^udete ex exultate ^in^ snerces vestramulta est i^
eelis. yt Be joyful and glad (He says) for your mede is great in haven.
Pa^y^^e^ is also fe^^ we to Christ's passion, and (...) of kynne. Se now how by
pacyence you peldest to our lord such things as our lord suffered for the
grievous anguysshes and discases, so to suffer withour lord in ioyeng of
trybula^yon should be the delight of all christen folk. O now it may be a great
confusyon and shame to all them yt nothing has suffered for him, wha^ our lord
shall come at the day of dome and show his wounds of his passion, and great
joy to all such that for his love have suffered pacye^tly many grievous
iniuryes, in as much as they be lykened and co^formed to Christ's passion.
Patience is also a great token of goostly sweetness. For to them that our
lord sends aduersitees, wotsauf of his goodness for to make them here some
part of his cross. This is a great gentylnesse of hy^ that he will make us
felawes of his passion, and parteners of his charge. This is to them a great
token of trust, that our lord trusts them well and loves them so, yt he will
deuyde with them his charge. For like as a man beryng a burden which he would
were not lost, having many felawes going with him in his journey, rather will
pray such one for to help him to bear it ye will not lose it, but keep it
saul, tha^ and there that will lose it. So our blyssed lord which is with us all the days of our lyfein our ways that we walk, being weary for the great
labor of his passion, that he yet suffers in his spouse holy church, that is
in his mysly call body, axeth whyther any will have co^passyon on him to help
to bear the burden of trybulacyon that he yet suffers in his members of holy
church. For the passion Which he suffered when he was in earth he distry buted
it to all his members of christen people. that right as he entered in to bliss
by pains and passions, so he would that all his members should enter in to joy
by pains and passions. Let us therefore have compassyon of his pains, and
help to bear his cross of his passion in our self, and than shall we be
perteyners of his joy, And he yt has most compasson thereof by very pacyence
he shall be most next to our lord in joy. Three degrees I find of patience.
The first degree is yt a man besy him to learn to repress by battle all manner
styrynges of wrath and impactence, lest it break out by unlawful words and
deeds, but let it be quenched as fire in his own smoke, for but if it be
restreyned it will encresse and grow and brenne all that comes nygh. In.iiii.
manner wise I find that fire is quenched. One is by water, another is by
stopping, the third is by wastyng, and the fourth is for faut of matter. In the
same wise the fire of impacyence must be quenched. First by shedynge of water,
that is by wise council, for to be aduysed what we say. And thynk how much
profit is in pacyence, and how much harm comes of impacyence. The second is
by stopping that is by keeping and stoppyng of thy mouth and thy hands, lest
thy tongue in speking do break out in to words of falsnesse, and thy hands in
to deeds of fury and hastynesse. The third is by wastyng, that is by tournyng
matters of pre and wrath in to other matters. For as fire is quenched by
withdrawing of wood each from other, so matters of wrath by withdrawyng of the
matters wisely into other matters that may help to peace. The fourth is by
defaute of matters, that is, if all pryue rownynges be put away, than all
occasyons of impacyence should cease. Preuy rownyng is a subtle suggestyon
which is the greatest cause of debate, if there be no herers there shall no
rowners be. The second degree of pacyence is, that a man by long use of pacyence
/ and in refrynynge of impacye^ce has so learned yt he is not afraid nor
trobled for any aduersyte, but him seems yt he is in a place of such great
sykernesse and rest, where be sees his adversaries go besyly about him for to
disease him, and yet he trusts verily yt they shall do him no harm, for
because he feleth so great sweetness in pacyence. Lo sister, so long is a
man aferde of aduersyte, as long as he loves te^porall things, either in
hiself or out of him self, which he dredeth to lose, or else has sorrow in ye
loss, as is in hurting or losyng of his own body, his worship, his gods, his
fre^des, and his own will. If he love not these things inordynatly, nor have
no great delight in them, than he has no great sorrow in the loss of them. What
harm may our adversary do to us? wherefore should we be sorry? If he hate us,
his own evil is enclosed in his own heart, yt it may not touch us, nor do us no
harm. it is his own pain alone, be we in peace wtin our self, and pray for him.
A fire enclosed in another mafies bosom bren^eth him and not us. If he say any
word that should be against us, it is but a wynd that passes by ye air, it
hurts us not. For like as you would not be sorry, but well apayd if a darte
were pycked or thrown to the and touched the not, but rafie in to the air, so
do of such cursed words. for it is but a barkyng and no bytyng. If he bacbyte
the in thy absence, yet be you not troubled, he hurts himself and not the. In
that he shows himself an enuyous man and a detractour, and makes himself
odyble to other, and not for to be set by. Therefore be thou still and hold thy
peace, and than our lord and other shall defend the against him, and have
compassyon on the. And if thou begin to strugle and strive against him by
answering or defending thyselfe by some manner of excusing, than all they that
first had compassion on the shall stand and behold you both as two cocks
fyghtyng, and set right naught by you both, but reprove you both for your
envy and impacy ence. If thou dread suspycyon that might fall to the by such
detraction, yet suffer mekely and give place, and than shall thy pacyence put
away suspyycon out of other men's hertes, that they should not deem none evil
of the. If thy heart be anguysshed and brent sore wtin thy self for ra^cour, yet
labor pryuely without showing of outward tokens, and put it away with easy
suffraunce, considering ye great profit that follows thereof. For right as a
man having an impostume must suffer a little while both brennyng and cuttyng in
hope to have sooner health of his sickness. Right so must you fight and strive
within thy self, in dystroye^g of such brennyng and rancour. And so thou
shall within short while find health and rest. Suffer bachyters as thou must do
the bytyng of a fle. In this degree of pacyence (if thou be well learned therein)
thou wylt not be troubled with aduersyte, but suffer and be still. The third
degree of pacyence is to be joyful in try bulacyo^s, and glad when thou felest
them, and desire the^ when thou lackest them. Right as a famous and a worthy
knight would be glad when he might prove his knighthode with another knight as
he is. Such gladness had that worthy knight of god saint Paul wha^ he said
thus.ii. Co. xii Placebo mihi in infirmitatibus: in contumelijs: in
necessitatibus: in angustijs: in persecutionibus pro Christo. It lyketh me well
(he says) and it is pleasant to me for to be in sickness, in reproues, in
necessitees, in anguysshes, and in persecucyo^s for Christ's love. I read also
that our lord taught how that the children of Israel should do sacryfyce,
when he said thus. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. Immolabunt victimas iusticie, and quasi
iundationem maris lac suge^t. They shall souke the waves of ye see as they
would souke milk, (he says) and so they shall sacryfice to me ye sacryfyce of
rightwysnesse. What is this for to mean sister? Thou shall understand that ye
see is right bitter, how may tha^ a man souke out milk of such bytternesse? I
shall tell the. Thou soukest well milk out of the waves of the bitter see when
thou art glad, as it were by ye sweet milk of goostly conforte of every
aduersyte, which increases and haboundeth in ye bitter see of this wretched
world, and than thou sacryfyest the sacryfyce of ryghtwysnesse to our lord
god. For as says saint Gregory. It is more mede for to suffer patiently
aduersytes than for to do all the good works that may be done without that.
For if thou sometime in desire for to please god do put to thyn own body
some manner of affiction and torment wilfully in chasty sing of it. or else
tormentest thy self for gods love by compu^ction and mournyng. why than art
thou not as well willing gladly for to suffer outward occasyons of patience
proffered by other. Good sister be as glad for to suffer the one as ye other.
For it is more mede for the to suffer of another than of thy self. If thou
settestly tell by thy self, why art thou not well apayd to be little set by of
other? For right as very meekness is as joyful to be set little by of
another, as he is of himself. so very patience suffers as gladly aduersyte of
other as he would of hiself. Lo sister he that is most pacyent in wrongs
most shall be set by in the kingdom of heaven. O sister, now is this virtue of
pacyence a necessary virtue, which causes a man to love them that hurt him,
and not to hurt them again. And forgyueth them which do him wrong, and not
does wrong again. And spares the^ that noyeth him, and not noyeth again.
Therefore patience is called by doctors the root and the keeper of all virtues.
For our lord says. Luc. xxi. In pacientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras.
In your pacyence (he says) ye shall keep in true possessyo^ your souls, that
is in rest and peace. The fruit of such pacyence has.iiii. fair virtues. One
is yt a pacyent soul is stronger than yt myghtyest man that lives in earth.
For a pacyent soul suffers all euylles and wrongs more myghtyly, than the
strongest man in all the myghtyest deeds ye ever he did, though he had won^e
both towns and castles, as Solomon says. Proverb. xvi. Melior est vir
paciens viro forti and qui dominatur animo suo expugnatore vrbium. More
stronger and better in ye sight of god is a pacyent soul in suffrynge of
wro^ges, than the myghtyest man in earth. For he that ouercometh and wyn^eth
his own will, is more commendable than he that wyn^eth castelles and towns.
we find many such great conquerours of towns, but few conquerours of their
wylles. He that ouercometh himself is stronger than any other. Such wyn^eth
not a town or a cite in ouercomyng himself, but ye kingdom of heaven. Math.xi.
Regnum celoru^ vim patitur et violenti rapiunt illud. The kingdom of heaven
must be won^e with such a vyolent strength. For all vyolent ouercomers of
the^self bereue it. It is more maystry to overcome al a regyo^ than for to
overcome thyn own wylfull soul. The second virtue of this fruit of patience
is, that it makes a man right wise. as Salomo^ says. proverb. xiiii. Qui
pacie^s est multa gubernat^ sapie^tia. He yt is pacient is governed with much
wisdom. (he says) In three manner of wise a wise man is pacyent. One is that
such one purchaceth him full wisely by his pacye^ce as it were in manner
without great labor many great jewels of gold and silver, and of precious
stones, to make him therewith an endless crown in the bliss of heaven. The
contrary does he that is impatient, as saint Bernarde says. For he with his
cruelte depryueth his crown from all such precious it wels. Another is that
he is wise in keeping. For though somewhat he leseth by fraylte, yet he waxes
wise afterward that he will keep the remeynant well and wisely, so that he will
not lose all. The contrary does he that is i^pacyent. if he lose his land he
will for anger so strive therefore that he will lose also the kingdom of god.
Lo for a little erthly thing he casts away from him for anger all his goostly
goods. The third is that he amendeth such things as he wyn^eth, as is when he
torneth to good all the evil yt he suffers, as saint Paul says. To. viii.
Diligentibus deum omnia cooperautur in bonum. To them that love god all things
turn to good. So it fares not with them yt be impacyent. For if they have
wrong with their a^gre they put more to, and so make it wors. The third virtue
of this fruit of pacyence is that it keeps a man from goostly venym, as our
lord says. Math. vlt. Simor^ferrum ^d biberint no^ eis nocebit. Though a
pacient soul drink venym of dyspytful and veny mous words, it shall do him
no harm, but it is wholesome to him, and ye makes the virtue of patience. Saint
Gregory says in his dialogues yt the virtue of pacyence is more worth than for
to do bodyly miracles. The fourth virtue of the fruit of patience is, that it
crowns endlefly a soul in heaven. Saint Iherom says, what saint in heaven is
crowned without pacyence? And holy church from the beginning unto this time
wanted never persecucion no. suffre^s of persecucyo^s And therefore all pacyent
souls of persecucyo^s have for to show for them our lords patent lettres,
that the kyngd^me of heaven is theyrs. which patent lettres begin in this wise.
Math.v. Beati qui persecutionem paciuntur propter iusticiam: qm^ ipsorum est
regnum celorum. Blyssed be all them (he says) that suffer persecucyon for
rightwysnesse, for the kingdom of heaven is theyrs of right. Lo sister what
virtue may be found in this necessary fruit of patience that thus commends
us to god, and keeps us from al euyls? For it te^pereth ire, it refeeyneth the
congue, it governs ye soul, it keeps peace, it breketh hasty lykyng, and
swageth the vyolence thereof. it quenches stryle and debate, it makes us meke
in perrosperite, strong in aduersyte, mylde against iniuryes and wrongs, it
ouercometh te^ptacyous, it suffers persecucyons, it wardeth myghtyly the
ground of our faith, it increases worthyly our hope, it governs wisely all
our deeds, it dyrecteth us sadly in Christ's way, and confyrmeth us surely that
we may be gods children. This virtue (sister) should be beloved with great
joy, and be cleped and enbraced with all our myghtes. So to eat of this
fruit w thy systers unto thy lives end, our lord Jesus grant it, yt ye all
may in bliss receive the crown of pacyence which is endless. AMEN

The fyfth fruit of the tree of goostly living is suffraunce. Ca. v.
THe fyft fruit of the holy ghost in all goostly lyuers is called suffrau^ce
or long abydyng. This is a good fruit and a hard, But it is profitable, which
lies in suffrau^ce and abydyng of our lord as David says. ps. xxvi. Expecta
dn^m and viriliter age. If ye ask our lord ouy thing in thy prayer ye is
longyng to thy health, abide our lord in mighty suffrau^ce, and than shall thy
heart be comforted. Three causes there be why we would abide and suffer our lord
till he will grant us yt we ask. One is, for a great reward is prepared to
such long abydyng. And there is nothing better to be abyden and tarried for,
than our lord with his medes and rewards. Another is. for he deceyueth never a
suffering abyder from his desire, as Dauyd says. Ps. xxiiii. Vniuersi qui te
expectant no^ confu^dent^. All they which abide mekely the lord (he says) you
shamest never nor deceyuest. Think it not says saint Augustine ye our lord
deceyueth the, and iapeth with the though you have not anon that thou would
have of him. For though he defer it he will not utterly put it away from the.
Though you be not herd anon of the court of heaven says saint Gregory, think
not yt they have forgoten the. The third is that he deferreth such things
which we desire of him for our profit. For ye longer that we desire such
things, the more we be tormented in meke mournyng. And the more that we be
tormented in meke mourning, the more we be purged and cleansed. And than we be
able for to receive such things as we desire of our lord. Thus says saint
Gregory. Our lord in deferryng of desires of chosen souls he tourmenteth
the^, and in ye tourment he purges the^. The second cause why we should abide
and suffer our lord is ye our desire should icrease. For the more that our lord
deferreth yt we ask. And though it seem that our asking is not taken head to
the more deper in ye root of our foul be our desires fastened, though we can
not feel it. For right as the sede of corn is hyd long under earth by hard
frost and come late up, and at the last encreas in manyfolde corns. so holy
desires with delay grows and increases. And if they sail by such delay
from increas, trust right well that they were never holy desires. Saint Austyn
says. Though our lord give sometime late that thou desyrest, yet his gifts be
nevertheless commendable. But therefore he does it, that it should swetely be
kept which is long desired. That yt is soon given and granted is set little
by. Our lord therefore keeps it safe to the, the which he will not anon
grant the. that thou may learn thereby to desire great things worthyly. The
third cause is why we should abide and suffer our lord, although he grant us
not that we ask him is, that we should keep wisely that he has given us. And
saint Gregory says. A thing that is found and has belong desired, is kept
more warely. Therefore they that sometime be chose^ souls seem yt their desires
be not herd of god. there ryseth much wynnyng of virtue in such pacyent
abiding. O now is this a merueylous dyspensacyon of pity, that where they wene
their purpose of desire is adnulled, there they arise more rather in virtue than
they were. And yet that same thing which they have desired with long abydyng,
(though they have it not anon as they would by such long delay) they shall
have it more larger tha^ they could desire it. And so that which might by
importune desire be little, our lord by his merciful disposition orde^neth
that it is made right plenteous. Of this I find that Solomon speaks in ye
name of our lords spouse thus. Cant. iii. Quesiui quem diligit anima mea,
quesiui et non inueni. I have sought (she says) him ye my soul loves, I
sought him and have not found him. Our lord hydeth him in manner when he is
sought, that he should fervently be sought, before that he be found. And a
chosen soul which is his spouse is delayed in her seeking of her desire, that
by such taryenge she may be made ye more able to receive manyfold that she
has sought. Therefore sister our holy desires by delays in such meke suffryng
and long abydyng be made more larger to us than we could desire, and so they
be increased to our profit. It is a sweet conflyct and a merytoryous battle
so for to mekely abide our holy desires of our lord, for the which meke
conflyet we shall hope for to have a great reward of mede, by which labor and
conflict increases a crown of victori. Be not loath therefore for to long abide
our lord in thy prayers or in thy syknes. For though our lord hear the not
anon, yet in such repulsyon he draws the to him full loau^gly, albeit thou
can not espy it. He fares as a wise leche. A leche though a sick man which
is infected with a sore and contagious disease cry upon him never so much for
to cease of his cuttyng, he will cease never the more unto the time he be hole.
So fares our lord with us, when we pray him of any thing yt we would have our
self, he denies us, why, for paradue^ture he aspyeth in us some defaut that is
reprouable the which we can not espy our self, and that he cutteth a way, for
unto the time that it he cut away with the yren of some tribulation, be will not
grant us that we ask, so that he will have us all hole woue such grievous
sickness, before that he grant yt we desire. Other causes there be why we be
not herd anon of our lord in our prayers. One is, for our systes which be not
yet fully forsaken in will as I have rehearsed. Another is, for because we pray
not and ask not in our prayers fervently and devoutly that we desire. Of this
the prophet says thus. Hie. xxix. Orabitis et exaudiam vos cu^quesicritis me
in toto cord vf^o. ye shall pray (says our lord) and I shall here you,
namely when you seek me in all your heart, and not else The third is for because
we persevere not and contynew in our prayers till we have that we desire. Of
this our lord says thus. Luc. xi Si perseueraueris pulsans propter
inprobitatem surget and dabit. If thou co^tynew in prayers be sely knockyng, at
the last he says I must needs grant thine askyng for thy great importunite
that thou make to me. The fourth why we be not herd anon is, for because we
pray doubty^g and without any great trust. Of the which ye holy apostle saint
James says. Jacob. i. Si quis vestrum hesitat non estimet quod aliquid
accipiat. He that doubts in his prayers, let none such suppose that he
shall have his asking. Therefore we should not tempre our lord to our wylles,
for to wit whyther he will grant us that we demand or not. But we should
tempre our souls unto his will before we do pray that whyther he will grant
us or not. His will be fulfilled and not ours. The fyfth why we be not herd
is, for it is not dyscretely, and wisely asked that we pray for, but hurtful
to us. As the children of zebedee, which asked nothing for their health and
therefore it was not grauuted unto them. The blyssed apostle saint James says.
Iaco. iiii. Detitis et non accipietis eo quoth male petatis. Ye ask and ye shall
not have that ye ask for as much as ye ask not well. In such askynges
sister though thou weep and sobbe for to have thyn asking, as is for to ask
to be fair / semly / worldely wise / and such other, our lord will not here
the, for it is not for thy health The.vi. cause why we be not herd in our
prayers anon, is that when we have our desire, we should keep yt wisely, that so
long and with so great hardness has be desired. Lo here may thou se two
great profytes in long abydyng. One is that wanton pride should be repressed in
that that we be humbled and made meke in our tarye^g, and another that the gift
which our lord gives us better than we can desire should be made much of, and
not to be set little by. The seventh cause why we be not herd anon in our
prayers of our lord, is because our lord will delay and defer our desire and
peticion unto a more convenient time, for our profyt, than if we had it anon.
So Moses when he desired ye joy of god to be showed unto him, he had not anon
his desire, but it was delayed that he se it afterward. The eight cause why we
be not anon herd in our prayers of our lord is, for because our lord would be
sought help of other to pray for us, and help us in our prayer, for
paraduenture that we ask is a hard thing, or else it is done for to put away
our pride and foul presu^pcyon that we should have if we thought that our lord
did so much for us without help of other. So prayed that holy king Ezechie to
the holy prophet ysay for to pray for him and all his people. So prayed also
that devout king Josias to a holy woman ye was a prophetess, for to pray for
hy^. So also prayed saint Paul. To. xv. Obsecro vos vt adiuuetis me in or^ous
vr^is vt liberet ab infidelibus qui sunt in judea. I pray you (he said) help
me in your prayers that I may be delivered from the unfaithful people that been
in Jury. Thus sister in all our needs we should ren^e to the remedy of prayers,
not only for our self but by help of other, trusting more to the prayers of
other than to our own. The.ix. cause is why we have not that we ask in our
prayers of our lord. For peradventure that we ask is not so profitable for us
as some other thing that were more needful for us which we ask not, which was
well proved by saint Paul that asked one thing of our lord, and he had another.
He asked for to be delivered from the styringes of his flesh, for he thought
it was foul and not maydenly for to suffer such foul temptacyon, and yet was
he not delivered thereof. But our lord gave him another better than that which
was more profitable to him and that was strength of virtue and grace of
wtstondyng.ii. Cor. xii. Or virtus i^ infirmitate perficitur. For virtue is made
parfit in with standing of such temptacion of infirmite. So than it is more
profitable for us for to have exercise of trybulacions, than for to be in rest
and quietness of prosperyte, though we often desire more the one than the other,
Loo sister by this thou may know which things they be that let us to be
herd of god in our prayers. Therefore if thou wylt be herd in thy prayers of
god, first be clean fro syn^e asmoche as it is in thy power. Be fervent and
besy in prayer. Have great trust in prayer. Be meke, and seek help of other.
Keep ye graces that our lord gives the, and thank him for them. And ask
nothing of him but such thing that he knows is best and most spedefull for
the. Now will I tell the of the great virtue of this blyssed fruit of long
abiding. Four virtues I find of this fruit. One is, that it keeps al other
goodness. For in one hour long or perseueraunt abydyng, does as much as
other virtues have done.xxx. years, or many years before. why trowest thou?
Truly for if that perseueraunce in abydyng keep not well in that is gadred
before, all our labor in virtue were lost. what profit were it for us all our
life for to wyn^e virtues and lose them at last? Saloman says. Eccl. ii. Ce
hijs qui perdiderint sustinentiam. woe be to them (he says) that have lost all
their sustenaunce. What is the sustenau^ce of the soul? but virtues which be
gathred in to the barn of the conscience, there the soul to be fed with them,
unto the time that it be departed from ye body. Therefore if such virtues of
long time gathred be lost for defaut of perseueraunce, sorry may that soul be
that so lacks her sustenaunce for defaut of her houswife Perseueraunce or
long abiding. The second virtue of this fruit is, that it makes a soul true
to god. For only all perseueraunt souls in long abiding forsake never our
lord in their trybulacyons, but ever be true to him. And therefore they aloue
worthyly shall here that sweet word where our lord says thus to all
perseueraunt souls. Luc. xxii. Vos estis qui permansistis me cu^ in
tribulationibus meis: et ided ego dispono vobis sicut disposuit mihi pater meus
regnum vt edatis et bibatis supermensam meam. Lo says our blyssed lord Jesus
christ to al perseueraunt souls, ye be those that have parfytely continued
with me in my trybulacyons and in my temptacio^s, and therefore I dyspose for
you as my father has ordained for me a kingdom there to eat and drink at my
table without end. This meat and this drink on our lords table sister is
nothing else but joy and fruycyon and use of endless bliss for the sorrows yt
w^ ^uffre here. The third virtue of this fruit is, that though all virtues
deserve high reward of god. This virtue of perseueraunce and long abydyng
receives the felyng and very possessyon for them all, for there shall no
virtue receive the bliss of heaven without yt perseuerau^ce or long abydyng
take possessyos before them all. All they ren^e to heaven, but one has ye mede.
and that is perseuerau^ce. why is that trowest you sister: Truly for
perseueraunce in long abiding is the most specyal daughter yt our lord has.
Of al virtues she alone is the very heir of heaven. The fourth virtue of this
fruit is that it increases our crown in bliss, as Solomon says. Eccl. ii.
Coniungere deo et sustinent crescat in nouissimo vita tua. Be coupled and knyt
to god (he says) by virtue, and persevere contynually, and long abide therein,
that thy reward in life everlasting may encreas at last. Thus sister to be fed
of this fruit of perseuerau^ce or of long abiding in virtue. It ke^peth al
goodness. It makes a soul faithful and true to god. It receives possessyon
of heaven bliss, and inereaseth our mede therein. Keep well therefore this
virtuous fruit, so that it may last all the year without rotyng, that is all
thy life time without grudgyng and repentyng that you may come where that
virtue shall be herboured without end. AMEN

The.vi. fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers is goodness. Ca. vi.
Of Goodness.
THe syxt fruit of ye hole ghost in all gostly lyuers is called Godnes. what is
this fruit of goodness (sister) but sweetness of soul, as doctors says
wha^ a soul rejoices in good living. what it sweter than good living? Truly
nothing, what is more bitter than vycious living? Certainly nothing. O now is
this than swear fruit of good living right precious, and not only a sweet
fruit, but also it is called swetnesse it self. For it makes us sweet in our
thoughts / sweet in our word / and sweet in our deeds, both to god and man.
And it is so sweet that it turns to a clean soul all the bitter trybulacyons
and aduersytees of the sea of this world in to sweetness. Saint Bernard
says. what thing is it that this swetnes of good living may not tempre, the
which makes death sweet? what asperyte and sharpness is there which may
withstand this sweetness? Truly none. For all manner of sharpnes is turned in
to the swetenes of good living in a good soul. Thou art sweet in good living
sister if thou hate this world, and set only thy medytacions in god and in
his goodness. Thou art sweet in good living if thou avoid and fle from syn^e of
malice, and love our lord that is both benygne and meke. And if thou have
often in thy mind chaste thoughts and holy. Thou art also sweet in good
living when thou think often times of the most dredefull day of judgment,
the which thought does cleanse the from all foul thoughts, and keeps the
fre to god from all manner of vain besynesses. Thou art also sweet in good
living when thou do thy dylygence and indeuer for to wasshe away the wounds
of thy soul with the river of tears. Blyssed be all such good sweet souls
the which ben made of our lords grace as a cloud for to rain and bedewe
water of tears, by the which they may quench and put out the heat of vices.
Thou art also sweet in good living if thou walk ever in the way of our lords
commandments, and do dylygently holy works, and do keep thy soul clean
from all vices. Thou art in sweetness of good living, if thou every day by
holy obseruaunce of thy relygion increacest in goodness, having a sure and
parfyte trust in god that thou shall se him at ye last in his glorious kingdom
and joy. Thou art sweet in good living, if thou keep thy tongue, and be right
well ware that thou speak no words of dyscorde or malice. Thou art sweet in
good living if thou be poor in worldly substance and meke in spyrite. Thou
art sweet in good living if thou be mylde in heart. Thou art sweet in good
living, if thou be full of pity and of mercy. Thou art sweet in good living
if thou ho^gre and thurst more virtue than either meat or drink. Thou art sweet
in good living if thou be clean in heart and peaceable. Thou art sweet in good
living, if thou be pacyent, and suffer for gods love all manner of aduersytees,
persecucio^s and wrongs. Thou art sweet in good living if thou oftentimes have
mind of thy last end, that thou may be found than ready without dread of
syn^e or of any wicked grudge of thy conscience. Thou art sweet in good living
if thou plant in thy soul holy plants of holy virtues and the life of
fathers. Thou art also sweet in good living, if thou so moist and water thy
plants with tears, that they may grow and increas and bring forth to god
acceptable fruit. Thou art sweet in good living if thou bren^e so in the fire
of charity that you consumest, thereby all foul thoughts in thy soul. Thou
art sweet in good living if thou be made so good on earth that thou bring
forth yt houdredfolde ftuyt, which longs to maydenhode and vyrgynyte. Thou
art sweet in good living when thou so west ever good sede in the field of thy
heart, and castest away therfro all erthely things for to have yt. Thou art
sweet in good living if thou keep virtuously thy scylence. Thou art sweet also
generally in good living if thou keep virtue and leave vices. And think it
not hard to lerue virtue, for it begins in every devout soul with
swetnesse, the myddle is myxt with labor, and it ends with rest. The
beginning is sweet as milk, the myddle is sour as the crab, and the end is
dulcet as honey. Love well sister the beginning of good living, dread not the
myddle, but suffer and pray and our lord will make a good endyng. In thy
beginning thou shall find little temptacio^s, in the mids thou shall fight
with temptacion, and in thy endyng thou shall have a crown of victory, leave
not of though thou be vexed in such temptacion, but hold forth battle, for ye
reward of the mede syttyth on high and beholds the battle for to reward the
if thou have the victori. It is no wondre though thou catch or take some spot of
fylth in feyghtyng against syn^e, for syn^e is foul, and the more thou have
knowledge of god and of virtues, the more besy is the fend to impungne and let
the by i^myssio^ and putti^g of vicious thoughts in to thy mind, and for to
let the of such knowledge of god and of good living. That was well known by
the children of Israel, for the more that Moses told them and taught them of
the will of god, the more sorrow they sufferd of the Egipcians. Before a man be
turned from vices to god, vices be in peace with him as it seems, and a sleep.
And when he begyneth to love virtue, and put out vices, than vices begin to
feyght with him sharply, and where as they first flateryd him, afterward for
his turnyng from them they be his enemies. O, what conflict there is between a
servant of god and syn^e, and namely of the mind of old sins, which
tormenteth sore a true turned soul. Some there be ye after their turnyng and
conversation to god, feel many stirynges of syn^e, and namely of fleshly sins
wenyng thereby that they feel such styryng for their dampnacion for asmoche as
they can not verily know in such conflict whether they consent or not, because
they feel sometime delectacion, but it abides not / and yet they wene other
wise, let them not dread of syn^e dampnable in such battle, though
delectacion sometime appear. It is right needful that such a new turned soul
and faithful from syn^e have an enemy for to withstond, so they consent not to
him, for to put away sluggy shnes. wylt thou wit when you co^sentest to thyn
enemy? Truly when thou withstondest him not, but suffrest him to do his will
with the, and syttest still as a sluggard and lystith not to defend the for
dread that he should ouercom the (do not so, for holy scripture says. Job. ^.
Qilitia^ vita hoi^s super terra^. That is, knyghthod is a man^es life in earth,
fight we must needs, know we therefore right well sister thou art never the
fouler in such felyng, but rather the clener, for ye fear that thou have of
falling to syste. Before that a man is turned from vice to virtue and good
living the company of sins go before him, and after that a man is turned to
god verily, than ye company of temptacyons follows him, and comes behind,
that is, sins which go before us in our conversion be about to let us that we
should not turn to god. Temptacyons that follow us when we be turned be about
to let us that we should not freely se god. The noise both of the one and of
the other lets oftentimes by their manyfolde wyles our purpose and intent of
good living. Such temptacyons is right profitable to gods servants. For it
keeps them from dullness and neclygence, that they be not sluggysshe in their
goostly battle. All good folk in as much as they desire nothing of ye world
therefore oftentimes in their hertes they be assailed with te^ptacions and
noyses of ye world, but yet they labor to throw out of their herts all such
inordynat styrynges of desires with the hand of holy living, so that they will
in no wise suffer long to abide within them such wanton thoughts. These be
in the sight of god sweet and good in living. For they only desire the heavenly
country, and not this worldly country. And therefore all such be in great
rest and ease of heart. Is it not a great rest of heart trowest thou sister to
put out from the pryuyte of our heart all noyses of erthly desires. and by an
holy intent for to asspyre upward to the love of endless rest. I trow yes.
For such noyses of erthly business, Dauyd the holy prophet desired to be
departed and taken from, when he said thus. Psalm. xxvi. Vnam petii a domino
hanc requiram inhabitatem in domo domini. One thing (he said) I have asked of
god, and that shall I besyly seek, for to dwell in his house of endless bliss.
Lo sister how sweet a soul this prophet was, which sought besyly in this life
rest and contemplacyon from all outward things, that he might have at ye last
therefore but one thing, that is endless bliss. This is that wilderness
which the same prophet desired when he said. Ps. liiii. Piece elongam fugiens
and mansi in solitudines. Lo (says he) I have fled far away that I dwell in
wilderness. Thou fleest far away sister if thou es^^ue and void from all
manner noyses of erthly ^^ynges, and rennest to the wysdernesse of con^^^^ (...)
in god. Thou dwell also in wyl^^^nesse when thou dwell far in thyn intent
(...) all worldlynesse. Lo sister all this is ^alled good living and swetnesse
of soul. A swe^^^ life to god also know I none than to sing in heart to Jesus
soges of love, songs of praising and to feel in thy soul ye sweet fernour of
love. What is sweter than Jesus? Truly nothing. if thou can thus look inward to
Jesus tha^ felest thou swetnesse in good living, when thou brekest out sometime
in swetnesse of lovely tears with a sweet mournyng for desire of Jesus than you
art in sweetness of good living. Such sweet tears do goo before and led the
dance of love. Thus tha^ begin in such sweet tears gladly to joy in good
living, and thou shall feel great rest. Keep an holy intent to god and a
redynesse of will, and a fervent desire, and a true turnyng to god by contynuall
myndyng and thynkyng of him, and thou shall never syn^e deedly. And though you
syn^e by fraylte or by ygnorau^ce venyally, anon such sweet fervor conceived
in god shall styre the to very penance, for it will not suffer the to lie long
in syn^e. yea, though thou feltest there in delectacion. yet al is consumed in
the fervor of good living, so it be not oppresed with such neclygence that
thou wenest such light sins is no syn^e, as god it forbid yt thou sholdest
thy^k so. Else it is consumed with such fervor though it come not to thy mind
when thou art confessed. if it come to thy mind than she we it, and continue
in such desire of swetnesse and of good living. Lo what good living is, what
rest and what sweetness of soul comes thereof. Now shall I tell ye virtue of
this sweet fruit of good living. Four virtues I find of this sweet fruit.
First is that it heals the corrupcio^ of our body, as Solomon says.
Proverb.xviii Pulcedo anime sanitas ossu^. Sweetness of soul is health of
bones (he says) that such sweetness of soul in contynuyng of good living
causes the body to be without corrupcion of syn^e. the body is lykened to a
bone, for it is barayne from virtue as is a bare bone from flesh, but if it
be holy and conforted by sweetness and good living of the soul, which keeps
the barayne body from syn^e. The second virtue is, that it saves a man in the
fire of trybulacyon, so ye the least hear of his good thoughts and purpose
shall not perysh therein. This was well fygugured by the.iii. children which
were cast in to ye fire by Danyels days, where I read thus, that the fire
touched them in no wise, nor did them any harm. In so much that ye least hear
of their heads were not brenned. why was this trowest thou? Truly for their
sweetness of good living made ye oven as the wynd that blows with the dew
of grace, which quenches the fire of trybulacion. The third virtue is, that it
makes such a sweet soul mekely to receive blames and correction of relygion.
This is well fygured by that sweet Manna which was put in our lord's ark. with
ye which Manna also among other things was put specially Moses rod. By this
rod sister thou shall understand correction and blame of thy sovereign for thy
defautes. And by this Manna which is sweet thou shall understand swetnes of
good living, that causes the rod of correction to be borne pacyently. When
thou suffrest it grudgyngly, thou have not yet this Manna of sweet living. Keep
well in the ark of god that is in thy heart which is called gods hutche, or
god's ark Meekness. and than shall thou find great swetnesse in correccio^ of
relygion, which rubbeth away so thy sins that thou shall at the last appear
before thy spouse Jesus without oni spot. The forth virtue is, that it makes the
to speak swetly and gentylly of virtue, for to multyply many sweet souls to god
as Solomon says. Pro. xvi. Qui dulcis est eloquio maiora reperiet. He that is
sweet in spekyng (he says) shall wyn^e many souls to god, and at the last for
his wynnyng shall receive great rewards. So a precher and a souerayn in
exhorting of their subjects should swetely show their exhortacyon. And so
should they multyply ye friends of god, as Solomon says in another place. Eccl.
vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat amicos. A sweet exhortacyon or prechynge (he
says) multyplyeth the friends of god. Thus to eat (sister) of this sweet
fruit of good lyui^g that thou may thereby grow to heuenward, and also multyply
many lovers our lord grant the.

AMEN
The seventh fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers is Benygnyte. Ca. vii.
Of Benygnyte.
THe seventh fruit of the holy ghost in goostly lyuers is called Benygnyte, or
gentylnesse of heart. This is a gentle fruit, for it makes a soul
communycable, and not strange by solyennesse. The more co^munycable that thou
art in virtue, the more gentyl thou art in the sight of god. Be not strange
therefore to comen or to here of virtue. there show gentylnesse and benygnyte
of spyrite. All bodyly gentylnesse (be we never so nobly borne) is but
thraldom in comparyson of goostly gentylnesse and benygnyte. The higher that
thou art in good living, the more benygne and gentle thou sholdest be in
virtuous co^munycacyon. Example we have of the son^e and the moon, and of all
the heavenly bodies which appear to man here in earth, how ge^tyll and
co^munycable they be of their light. Therefore sister the more heavenly thou art,
the more gentle thou stoldest be. Many there be which ben given to perfection
and they be right strange and soleyn in co^munycacyon of virtue. Do not thou
so, but show gentylnesse and largeness of heart to all. So to be benygne in
heart will make the affable, compassyble, treatable, easy to be bowed to
council, communycable in goodness, glad, mylde, and iocund, true, felawly,
dyspysing none, denyeng none, kind, wellwyllyng. and gracyous to all. Therefore
when thou shall show benygnyte of heart in speking speak easily, and a^swere
mekely without bitterness or sharp rebukyng or scornynge. Form so thy words
to other that what soever is said to the of other thou be not grieved with them.
and speak so of them that be absent, as though they were present and might here
it. for it is a great vice to a relygious person to say any thing in abse^ce
that he would be ashamed to speak in presence. In all thy co^munycacyon here no
bachytings, but either take thy leave and go thy way, or else if thou may
cease such matter. It is no profit to the for to here such things, but for to
make the grieved against him of whom it is said, or upon him or her that says
it. Therefore in all such communycacyon find up some other manner matter of
edyficacion for to speak of that might both edyfy the and him, or else take thy
leave and go thy way. In all thy benygne co^munycacyon beware also of hearing of
tydy^ges, for they unquiet thy heart and put it out of rest, and dystract thy
mind, and dystrop devotion, and wastes the time without profit, nor speak
not all that you know, though they be good things. Be not as a vessel that
lacks his coueryng, or his lyd, or is not stopped, that as soon as it is
bowed down it pours out all that is therein, and is made open for to receive
all manner fylth and dust. But open the vessel of thy heart dyscretly, and close
it again when time is. Be never in such company gladly where is no
co^munycacion of god or edyficacion of soul. Cry not when thou speak be not
to hasty in thy speech for to show out all that is closed win. And beware also
in all thy co^munycacyon that right as thou sholdest be loathe to here
bacbyters, so never tell him or her that is so spoken of, what thou have herd
of another lest they be grieved against him. but if thou coudest turn it into
such kind that it be thelesse suspecyous for thy words. For peradventure it
might so be that he that said it meant not so as it is taken. Or else if it were
evil said and suspeciously, yet thou can not tell how sone paraduenture he
or she repented them of that sayng, purposyng him ever after to beware of such
speking. if it be so that such things be said of another that thou hear,
which were needful that he were admonysshed and warned of, tha^ say it so and
in such wise that the teller be not accused, and that the person of whom
that is said of be in will to amend them of such things. For to that intent
lightly it was said to the in great symplenesse, not in way of detraccyon. In
all thy co^munycacyon also beware of bostynge of any good deeds that thou have
done, make never other to perceive by thy words any thing of co^mendacion or
praysyng in the. For though thou never spoke thereof, uneath shall there any
thing be in the commendable, but it shall be known to the worship of god,
though thou hyde it, and speak it never. For if thou hyde it and speak not
thereof, our lord and they shall be pleased with the. if thou speak it and show
it, folk wylderide and scorn the, and set naught by the. So that all they
which were first edyfied by the shall afterward scorn the, and set little by
the. In all thy co^munycacyon also beware of idle speech, exchue at all times.
And though they be not rekened among great sins, yet ye contynuall custom of
them causes great sins. For oftentimes if we gladly open our tongue largely
to speak idle words or we be ware we fall into noyous words, whereof spryngeth
so^time trobles, dissolucio^s or other greuocon fretynges of the conscience. In
all thy co^munycacyon also beware of much speky^g leest you fall by such long
dalyaunce into lesynges or oaths. Of dyshonest words I hope thou wylt beware
well enough, for that is very poison to maidens. In all thy co^munycacion also
be rather a herer than a speker, Here mekely and patiently good things which
be said of other. Dyspute not against it as some do yt heryng good things
anon lest they should be taken or counted lewd and vnconuyng begin to dyspute
thereof, that other should know they can some skyl thereof. All those seek not
their edyficacion in such co^munycacion, but their ostentacyon and bostynge,
yt they should be known connyng. And therefore many good co^munycacyons be left
among relygyous persons because of such proud dysputacyons. In all thy
co^munycacion also be not in nothing contencious and full of stryuing words,
but rather soon give it up. For if it be good and true that the other has
said, thou sholdest not say there against. And if it be not good nor true yt
is said, thou sholdest rather amend him pacie^tly by turnyng away, and by meke
showing of ye truth than by sharp informyng. In all thy co^munycacion also
when thou shall speak, speak with a meke voice, with a glad chere, with
quietness of spyrite, and than what soever thou speak of good it shall be
more profitable and more of auctorite than it should be otherwise. Be never bold
for to speak before thine eldres, but shamefaste. And lysten rather to here
other speak than for to speak thy self. For it longs to old folk for to
teach, and to young for to here and lern. In all thy co^munycacion also beware
of much laughing. I mean not that thou sholdest not laugh, but I would that
thy laughyng be not to much, but right selde and soft, without great noise. And
in all thy co^munycacyon be glad for to speak of god and of good edyficacion.
For all such speech intyceth the heart to virtue and the soul to devotion.
There is no membre of ye body that is so nedeful to be kept as is the tongue.
For in the tongue we may offend in many manners, in spekyng falls things
wytyngly, true things trecherously, sharp things hastyly, foul things
uncleanly, good things bostyngly, and profitable things unwisely. Senow sister
how by the speech of the tongue our lord may be offended and pleased. Therefore
I find that the holy ghost appeared rather in likeness of tongues than in any
other membre of man^es body. For a tongue is the most profitable part of man
if it be well ruled. But why appeared ye holy ghost in fyry tongues? Truly for
because he would that our tongues were ever speaking of god and of goostly
things in brennyng love. So speak sister that thou may set all thy systers
afyre in love. Have such a new tongue as our lords dysciples had that you may
speak benyguely and graciously, that in thy speech may be both honey and milk.
that is, that it be sweet and benign in speaking, have also such a new tongue,
that it may be fervent and bre^nyng in charity, and medcinable by confortyng,
than is thy tongue made the pen^e of the holy ghost, for thereby he writes in
the hertes of good people holy words, holy deeds, and holy virtues, but
among all things be never so ready for to speak but that thou have ever a
love to scilence, for taciturnite and scilence is the virtue of meekness and
token of sadness, noryssher of virtue and keeper of souls. As Solomon says.
Prouer. xxi Qui custodit os suu^ et linguam suam, custodit ab angustijs animam
sua^. He that keeps his mouth and his tongue (he says) keeps his soul from
anguysshe, that is, delyuereth his soul from anguysh of endless pain. He
that loves much stylnesse, his tongue must needs be kept from evil speaking,
from all folysh and dayne speaking. Four fair virtues I find of this fruit
of benygne spekyng, and of gentle co^munycacyon of things by the mouth. The
first virtue is, that such gentle co^munycacyon makes us to be loved, and it
is so expedyent that it makes of enmyes friends, for good co^munycacyon
brings them into frendshyp again that were enemies before, as Solomon says.
Ecclesiastic. vi. Uerbum dulce multiplicat amicos et mitigat inimicos. Agentyll
and a sweet virtuous co^munycacyon multyplyeth friends (he says) and swageth
enemies.

The second virtue is that it makes our mouths our lords oratory, wherein he
is prayed and praised by such virtuous co^munycacion. For likewise as the
church which is ordained to praise god in, to pray to god, and to preach. so a
mouth is ordened to praise god, to please god and to teach virtues by good
co^munycacyon. Thus a man^es mouth is made our lords or a tory, and therefore
it should be of great clennesse and holiness, and without all uncleanness, The
third virtue is, that it makes our mouths our lords fertour or his arc,
wherein be put holy relykes. For if clothes or any other thing which touch holy
relykes be hold for relykes, why than the good words which come out of a
virtuous mouth should not be hold for relykes? That good words be as relykes it
is well proved by goostly miracles which be all day done by such good words.
For goostly blind be made to se by such comfortable words, and for to know
their co^scye^ce, as Dauyd says. ps. xviii. Preceptu^ dn^ilucidu^ illumina^s
oclos. The holy words of our lord showed out by a devout mouth, which is
bright and shyning makes goostly blind to se. Also goostly dead be areysed to
life, as our lord says. Io. v. Ueuit hora et nunc est quandomortui audient
voce^ fili dei, et q^ audierint viuent. An hour shall come (he says) and that
is now in these days when goostly dead shall here the voice of gods child.
that is good co^munycacyon of gods children. And they yt here such co^muncacyon
shall be raised from their goostly death and live virtuously. The fourth virtue
is that it makes our mouths gods cup or his chalyce, wheri^ is put and laid
his blyssed body. And therefore it must needs be holy and clean. For right as it
were great syn^e to throw in a chalyce fylth wherein should be put ye holy body
of our lord, So it were right great syn^e for to defoule the mouth by foul
spekyng or idle spekyng, where it should ever bring forth holy words, and
words of blyssed co^munycacyon. Lo sister thus thou may know how swear this
fruit of gentle co^munycacion is meddled with sad scylence. Of yt which fruit
Jesus fulfill the, that thou may speak wisely, soberly, sadly, and virtuously
among thy systers.

AMEN
The.viii. fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers is Myldnesse. Ca. viii.
Of Myldnesse.
THe.viii. fruit of ye holy ghost in gostly lyuers is called Myldnesse. Of ye
which fruit our lord says thus. Math. v. Beati mites quoniam ip^i
possidebunt terram. Blyssed be all they that be mylde in heart, for they shall
have for their heritage the land of life, that is the blyssed land of heaven.
This is also sister a precious fruit and a delycate, for it grows out of our
lords heart, which must be fetched there he says himself. Math. xi. Discite a
me quia mitis su^ et humilis cord. Learn of me (he says) For I am both meke
and mylde in heart Thus it seems well that it is a delicate fruit. For all such
mylde hertes should se that same land that it grows in. And there may none
felt the virtue of that fruit, but such that be mylde. If thou wylt be very
mylde, keep not in mind but forgete what is said against the for to make the
wroth. And that thou may never do, but if you arm the before by quietness of
heart, that what soever is said to the for to styre the, thou wylt not be
vnmylde, and than it shall not grieve the. For like as a man that should make
battle and fight with another, first he assayeth his armure, and so proves
how he coud defend him by his target in avoiding of strokes, lest he be
wounded. So must thou do. Think every hour (thou wotest not how soon) thou
shall be assayed by some sharp words, which peradventure should make the vnmyl^
in here but thou were ware before. I say not impacyent, though it be almoost
like. For impacience is called such a thing that will suffer and not love. But
myldnesse is that, that will both suffer and love, and also do good in deed
for evil, as our lord faith, Luc. vi. Benefacete hijs qui oderunt vos. Do ye
good to them that hate you (he says). To myldnesse of heart also longs
shamefastness. As when thou art assailed, or supposest to be assailed, than
think of thy virtuous state of relygio^, that you hurt not that nor cause other
to sclaundre, that in the thynkyng that in thine enter of relygyon thou
offredest the to all manner of myldnesse, with love of virtue. Much uncase
comes of such vnmyldnesse of heart It puts away devotion, and it troubles
ye conscience, Wylt thou well keep thine heart in myldnesse? than absteyn thy
self from co^tencion and striui^g. Strive never in no matter but it be against
vices in thy self. And if thou have charge of other, than so tempre thy
stryuyng ye thy heart lose not thereby this myldnesse, how so ever it is taken of
other. This teaches us saint Paul saying.ii. Ti. ii. Seruum dei non oportet
ligitare, sed mansuetum esse ad omnes. It besemeth not (he says) gods servant
for to be a stryuer, but for to be mylde unto all folk. For right as if thou
felt within the an inordynate heat by the which thy body is dystempered and
may not serve god, I trow thou would after the council of a physicien
refreyne thy self from such things that should make the more hot, lest thou
sholdest be more seek. Much more than thou art bound to keep thy soul from
dystemperau^ce of heates whereby thou myghtest be the more vnmylde in heart.
There be two things that make a soul mylde. One is, that thou speak never
boystously. Another is that thou be no threatener. It is not enough for the not
for to speak boystously, but also yt thou be no threatener. The one teaches
the to hurt no body by word. And ye other teaches the to have an easy heart of
forgyuenesse, without rebuki^g or threatenyng. The first longs to troth of
good living, the other to mercy and co^passyon. These be the two ways of our
lord, of the which speaks the prophet thus. Ps. xxiiii. Uniuerse vie dn^i et
mi^a et veritas. All the ways of our forde for to come to bliss by, be troth
and mercy. These ways be taught of our lord to all mylde folk, as Dauyd
says. Psalm. xxiiii. Docebitmites vias suas. He shall teach (he sapeth) all
mylde hertes his ways of true lyui^g without stoborne speaking and
threatenynge. A heart that is souple and myloe may lightly be applied to
receive the impressyon of our lords sweet and meke doctrine. Therefore sister
if thou will have a mylde heart, first apply the to here holy doctrine holy
exhortacion holy in formacyon and i^struction, both of thy soueraynes in
relygion and also of other. For to all such that be glad to here our lords
holy doctrine, he says himself that he was sent. Esa. lxi. Ad annunciandum
mansuetis misit me. I am sent he says) in to earth for to teach and inform
mylde hertes. That is by such that have auctoryte for to teach and inform in
my name. what should they teach all myld folk? Nothing else but as I said
before by the auctoryte of the prophet ye ways of god. what be these ways?
Verily truth and mercy. Truth for to ask and require forgyuenesse mekely
of them that you have done wrong to. Mercy for to forgive all those that have
done the wrong. and neither of them to speak boystously or threatyngly. By
these ways thou must come to that land that our lord has bequeathed to all
mylde in heart, which is the land of bliss. All mylde folk be peasably
enclosed here in this life in the possession and having of our mylde lord
Jesus. and therefore by right they must needs be had and possessed of our lord
at last in endless bliss. There shall none be verily had of our lord, but
such as be had of him verily in this life. All vnmylde folk which be not had
and possessed of god with in themself, but ben from themself, and had and
possessed of ire and wrath must needs be excluded from that worthy possession
of bliss, which our lord has ordained for almyld, but if they turn and
amend them. Sister if you wylt come to this virtue of myldenesse you must be full
of pity, which makes a heart sweet, by ye which sweetness a heart is made
loving unto all creatures for god. In the which sweetness as a Be such a heart
goth about in his thought and gadereth of every manner of creature some manner of
honey. Of some it gadreth sweet honey of obedyence, when it sees how mekely some
do obey. Of some it gadreth pacyence / of some devotion / of some discrete
abstynence / and of some chastyte and clennesse. It beholds not their
defautes, but their good deeds. And that yt it loves that it prayseth. and
than it seeks sweetness of devotion. of the which the heart is replete and
made mylde. O now is such a mylde heart sweet both in the sight of god and
man. For all that it speaks is of sweetness of love, of peace, of unity, of
chastyte, and of charity. Such a soul is ever occupied in virtue, either in
devout weeping and waylyng, or in holy redyng or heryng of virtue, or else holy
medytacyon of our lords passion, restyng here in his precious wou^des, wherein
she fyndeth full sure rest in all her labors, full sure abiding in all her
needs, feeling no manner dyseases of her bodyly infyrmytees, because she feleth
the blissed wounds of her lord. Rather choosing ever after to suffer wrong
than for to do wrong. O how much joy has a mylde soul than? She that is
thus myld is never heuyed with ire, nor with envy, nor with couetyse. Such one
will not look to be taken and counted mylde, but ever it has joy to be little
set by. There be some that be abject in their own sight. but they would not that
they were so taken. All such be not yet mylde. There be some also that be
abject in their own sight, but they can not suffer of other for to be set
little by. Also such be not yet mylde in heart. Good sister as thou art abject
and vile in thine own sight, so desire that all other should perceive the same
of the, and than thou may have that sweet virtue of myldnesse. Four fair
virtues I find that comes of this fruit. One is, that it keeps a soul
without hurtyng. For all vnmylde hertes be oftentimes broken by impacyence. And
therefore it is that our lord byddeth us by Solomon for to keep our souls in
myldenesse, where he says thus. Ecclesiastic. x. Fili in mausuetudine serua
anima^ tua^. Sone (he says) keep thy soul in myldenesse. Another virtue is,
that it wynneth love and grace both of god and man. It makes our lord to
love us tendrely. For in that we bear the prynt of his own heart, in as much as
he is mylde. It makes us to be loved of man, as Solomon says. Eccl. iii. Fili
in mansuetudine opera tua perfice and super gloriam hominum diligeris. Sone (he
says) make all thy works and deeds parfyte in myldenesse, and thou shall be
loved above all erthly joys Thus we read that Moses was most mildest of al
men while he lived in earth, and therefore he was loved of god and man.
Myldenesse is lykened in holy wryt to an Adamant stone, which is of such kind
that it draws to him hard things. So all mylde hertes draw unto them all
other for to be meke and mylde. A Flynt is lykened in holy write to pacyence,
which should be hard as the Flynt, never to be overcome by ire and impacye^ce.
Of these two stones I find by the prophet thus. Eze. iii. Ut adamantem et
silicem dedi faciem tuam. I have given a token in thy face that thou shall
draw to the by myldenesse other, as ye Adamant does. And also I have given
another token in thy face ye thou shall be hard as the Flynt in suffraunce.

The third virtue is, that it amendeth ye soul. It makes such a mylde soul
to se clearly her own defautes, as though she looked in a myrour. Of this myrour
says Dauyd thus. Ps. lxxxix. Qm^ super venit mansuetudo and corripiemur. Lo
(he says) when ye myrour of myldenesse is showed to our soul, anon we se our
defautes and amned us. The fourth virtue is, that it gives to us everlasting
health, with out which there is none health. Of this manner of health speaks
also the same prophet thus. Ps. lxxv. Cum exurgeret in iudcio deus vt saluos
faceret omnes mansuetos terre. when our lord shall sit in judgment where all
bodies and souls together shall appear before him in ye dome, than among all
other specially he will gloryfy all mylde souls which have in this life borne
ye impression of his heart by myldnesse. Thus sister our lord that is so mylde
in heart give the such specyal grace that thou may ever be meke and mylde, and
so to eat of this sweet fruit with thy systers, that ye all at last may
receive the land of bliss, which is ordained for all such

AMEN
The.ix. fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers is Faith, Ca ix.
Of Faith.
THe.ix. fruit of ye holy ghost in goostly lyuers, is called Faith, which is
a right fair fruit. In the which fruit our lord is hyghly pleased. what is
al our living without faith, as saint Paul says. Heb. xi. Sine fide i^possibile
est placere deo. without faith (he says) it is i^possible to please god. Faith
is the life of a ryghtwyse soul. To. i. Iustus ex fide viuit, To that it
seems, and sothe it is that faith without good works is dead, Tha^ as for the
artycles of thy believe I will not in this treatise write nothing to the, For I
wot well thou beleuest well enough, But of ye works of believe that is of true
lyuy^g it is my purpose for to declare, that thy living may accord to thy
faith, For of true living our lord is hyghly pleased, as Saloumon says,
Eccl, i, Beneplacitum est diio fides et mansuetudo, True faithful living and
myldnesse of heart pleases our lord right much. This fruit is the more
precious that it is seldom had, as the same wise man says. Pro. xx. Multi
misericordes vocantur virum autem fidelem quis inueniet. Many ben called
mercyable folk and pyteous, but few we find true in living. The beginning of
good living is for to dread god, which dread causes a soul not for to leave
undone the good deeds that should be done, as Solomon says. Eccl. vii Qui timet
deu^ nichi^ne cligit. He that dredeth god is in nothing neclygent. But for
because many there b^ ye gladly do good, and yet they leave not certain euyill
deeds which they have used of custom. Therefore all such good deeds is nothing
acceptable in the sight of god, that is so myxt or meng^co and defouled with
euyldedes, as Solomon says. Eccl. ix Qui in vno offe^derit multa bona perdet.
He that offends (he says) in one vice, many virtues he destroys. A little
gobbet of sour dough, soureth all a batche of bread. A little galle makes
bitter a great quantyte of honey. Every cl^ne soul which desires to live
virtuously begins first with dread and ends with charity, and so by such
lovely dread it has no wylt to syn^e. But such one ye yet does good for fear
and dread of pain, and not for dread of god he leueth not evil fully in as
much as he would syn^e if he durst for fear of pain. Lo sister if thou wylt
live well, first ground thyn intent of love in dread, and than begin to do
well, Often times many there be that forsake the ways of evil living and take an
habyte of holy lyuy^g, which as soon as they have an enter of virtue anon
they forgete what they have been, and will not wasshe away their old sins by
wayli^g and penance doing, but rather be glad for to be co^me^ded and praised
for their taking of perfeccion desiring to be made more of, and the better to
be set by than other of more longer time in perfection, which therefore be wors
in ye sight of god, under ye habyte of holiness than ever they were before
under a seculer habyte. All such have holy words but little of holy living
They can well teach other, but they norysshe not that teaching with holy
exsample. And so as much as in them is those that they edyfye in words by
their living dystroy them. All symulacyon sister avoid away from the. Show in
word ever and in deed as thou sholdest relygiously. Begin and make an end
with contynuau^ce. Many, begin and make none end, but mar or lose ye merit of
their good beginning with a bad endyng. Therefore live as thou dydest begin. Be
every hour as thou was the first day. Look how meke, how lowly, how
charitable, and how devout, and how sad thou were the first day, so be every
day. Let thy first day be thy myddel days, and thy last day. For thou have
taken upon them thyn enter of religion for to go in ye ways of the lord. In
the begyn^yng the ways seemed peradventure right streyt and hard, but with good
use and contynuau^ce, and with good will it will wax large, easy, and
pleasant There is nothy^g hard to a good will, for the yoke of good living
which is our lords yoke is full easy to them yt have ones begone for to bear
it. Of one thing I would that all new begynners were well ware ye when they be
turned from evil to good, they wax not proud for virtue yt they have found,
but be goostly glad, and thank our lord lest they fall much wors by vayn
glory than they fell before by other vices or they knew virtue. In every
beginning of virtue old customs of old conuersacyon puts them often in
prease. To let ye intent of virtue that uneath they may be overcome. Therefore
perseraunce must sore labor for to bring virtue in use. As many styrynges as
the soul has to virtue, so my paces she gooth to virtue, and profyteth
therein. Many there be that the more they encreas in aege the more they discreas
in virtue. Alas chosen souls do not so, for ye more they increas in aege ye
more they grow inward in aege of virtue. Therefore sister if you wylt not wax
weary of new begone virtues, it is full needful for the to think every day as
long as thou lyuest that thou art but a begyn^er and not yet waxen old in
virtue, and so shall thou never be weary of virtue. All virtuous folk the more
higher they be toward god in worthynesse of virtue, the more subtylly they espy
in themself that they be unworthy and unkind servants to god. why is that
trowest thou? Truly for the more nere they be to the light, ye more better and
clerer they se themself and find sins which have long ben hyd within them
and so the more that they do know themself, the more indygnacyon they have of
wicked and bad works done before. who so will increas in virtuous living he
may not consider what euyls other do, but what good he should do.

Thus sister suffer grace to grow in the with thy bodyly aege. For the more
older thou art in grace, ye more parfyte is thy good living. Ever mysse like
thy self in thy self, if thou wylt come to that ye you have not yet. For there
that you have pleased thy self in thy self, there stood virtue still and it
increased not, but decreased. if thou wylt that virtue increase add thereto mo
virtues and walk forth right. Stand never still, turn never backward again,
go not out of the way, thou stand still when thou profitest not, thou go
backward when thou turnest again to that that thou have forsaken, and thou
go out of the way when thou fallest from the first intent and purpose of
relygion. Good sister therefore ren^e fast from virtue to virtue, that at the
last thou may se that contre where al virtuous people be, thy friends, for
there is a blissed company which abide the and desire thy presence. for though
they be sure of their own endless health, yet they be full besy for thy health,
therefore as I said stand not still, but be ever ren^yng. for either thou must
ascend or descend. If thou stand still thou must needs fall. There is none so
parfyt that when they have won^e the highest point of parfeccion as it may be had
in this life yet they shall seem somewhat least vntowched of the first degree of
perfeccion. And why is that? Truly for they should feel in themself by
meekness as if they had no parfeccion at al, and thynk that uneath they have
towched the least point of parfeccion. It is a great parfeccion, knowledge of
imperfeccio^. Therefore sister ye more you know thine imperfection, the
perfyter you art in ye sight of god. And the more you felest the diseases and
sorows of other, the more is thy perfection. The condycio^ of all perfyte folk
is in every good work for to seek the praysyng of our lord the auctour or
begyn^er of all good works ye in all other pryuate praysinges they may have no
joy. Every perfyte soul as soon as she has overcome a vice, anon she armeth
her against ye releue and wounds which is least of vices, lest they enfester
and stynke. Also if you wylt be perfyte in good living be never impatient of ye
imperfection of other. For if you can not suffer the i^perfection of another you
show well ye thou art not parfyte. Also every parfyte soul in true living
has ever enough of temporal goods when it has enough scarsly. It desires
no gifts. Scarsyte of lyuelode it suffers without grudgyng. It stryueth never
for no need. It can hongre and not grudge. It can be pore and have no need. He
is poor in virtue and not in possessyon of te^porall goods yt cannot suffer
penury. He is rich in soul yt has naught, and desires naught, for to have
of te^porall goods. He yt is perfyte desires nothing. for that yt is nedeful
for ye body it receives, if he may easyly have it. And if it may not be had,
it is easily suffered. Every perfyte soul is mighty and strong in suffrau^ce of
scarsyte. Of this perfection I find few and namely in relygion. I find many in
relygion yt begin ferue^tly and goostly, but they end fleshly.

Alas. Therefore sister if you wylt continue as you have begone, be true to god in
thy thought, in thy promys, in thy work, and in thy deeds. Be ever fervent in
spyrite, and be well ware that thou trust not to thine own merytes, for so
shall you lose grace. An holy desire helps much unto a soul to good deeds.
where that ever a soul is besy in good works, and glad in fervor of good
living, in such one is very faith of true lyuig. This fruit of true faithful
living has.iiii. virtues. Sister one is that it makes a soul truly to be
commended. as Solomon says. Proverb.xxviii. Uit fidelis multum laudabitur. A
true living soul (he says) shall much be commended This co^mendacyon is not
only of a man, but also of god, and of all his saints. For it is great lykyng
to saints for to know good lyuers in earth. The second is that it makes a
soul hyghly to be enhau^ced and promoted to goostly dygnyte. And therefore it
was that our lord says. Math. xxiiii. Quis putas est fidelis seruus et prudens
quem constituit do minus super familiam suam. which trowest thou is he whom
our lord should enhaunce and promote above all his meyny? As who says, none but
such one that is both true and wise. True in good living, and wise in
governance. Lo though it so be that two things be rehearsed in this auctoryte,
yet faythfulnesse of true living is put before. The third is that it makes a
soul virtuously to be loved as well of god as man, as Solomon says. Ecclesi.
xxxiii. Si est tibi seruus fidelis fit tibi quasi amicus: quasi fratrem sic
tracta eum. if thou find a true servant, cherisshe him as thou would thy
friend, and as thy brother treat him. Lo sister by this thou may know that
in ye sight of god, a true liver is cherysshed as a friend, and in ye sight of
man as a brother. The fourth virtue is, that it makes a soul to receive ye
crown of endelesse mede, as our lord says to every true liver thus. Math.
xxv. Super pauca fuifti fidelis, supra multate co^stituam. Upon few things (he
says) thou have be found true in this life, and therefore I shall ordain for
the a crown of endless mede and reward, so to be set above many things. O
now is this fruit of good true faithful living a fair fruit. Good sister eat
specially of this fruit, for with out this fruit is there no fruit saueri. It
is so sauerly a fruit that it smells and sauoreth in to the bliss of heaven,
where all true faithful souls through eating of that fruit whiles they lived
in this life benow her boured wout end. Among whom I hope to se the Amen.

The.X. Fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers, is manner of good living. Capitulo.
Decimo.
Of good Living.
THe.x. fruit of the holy ghost in every goostly liver is called manner of good
living, which is also a full precious fruit. This manner of good living stands
in a reasonable conuersacy on, as when thou gouernest manerly after reason all
thy words and all thy deeds, so that all thy living may sauoure swetly to all
folk as saint Paul says. Phi. iiii. Modestia vestra nota sit om^ibus
hominibus. Solyue (he says) that your virtuous co^uersacion may be known to
all men, who so follows the hastines and beastlynes of his own will, and is
not governed by modestnes or softnes, or manerly conversation, is lykened
rather to a beastly man, than to a reasonable man. O this manner of living our
lord. Jesus gave us example, for he himself disposed all things in measure and
in easy manner, that we should manerly and easly without hastynes be governed.
This is sister one of the virtues wherein all chosen souls be arrayed, as the
apostell says. Col. iii. Induite vos sicut electi dei sancti et dilecti
viscera mie benignitate^ humilitatem, et modestiam. Array you (he says) as
gods chosen and well beloved children with mercy, benygnite, meekness, and
manerly softness of good conuersacyon. It is also one of those ornaments
wherein bishops ben arrayed, as the same apostle says. Tit. i. Oportet
episcopum esse irreprehensibilem, non percusore^ sed modestum. A bishop he
says must be in all his living unreprovable, no smyter, but modest and soft in
all good conversation. Lo sister all thy good lyuy^g avails not, but it be
governed manerly, that is in heart, in mouth, and work. Manerly modestnesse is
in two thiges / that is in refreynyng of superfluyte of thoughts and
superfluyte of desires. Beware that thine heart be not occupied about
unprofitable thoughts. and that desire is nothing but such thing as is very
needful. Hold the content with meat and drink and clothes, rather in a scarce
wise than in a large wise. Manerly easynesse of mouth restreyneth superfluyte
of words, which makes us for to speak easyly, softly, and demurely without
hastynesse in refreynyng of our unreasonable Wylles. Manerly softness of work
restreyneth the excess of our deeds, that we be not to importune and besy in
all our works, But softly and easyly we shall wyn^e virtue without struglyng
or stryuynge with god. For all such hasty gatherers of virtue fall often in
sin^e, and so be made poor and nedy, and lose al their good deeds which they
have gadred before. Though it so be that a modest laborer and a manerly gaderer
of virtue do not so many good deeds as do hasty gaderers. yet al soft and easy
gaderers keep better that they have won^e, and have much more goostly rest in
their gadering than have such hasty befyers in good works, as wise Saloman
says. Ecelesiastic. xxxi. Sompnus suauitatis in homine parco. A sleep of
sweetness is in a scarce man. By this sleep is understand easynesse of virtue,
yt is rest and quietness of soul is more ple^teously in an easy man manerly
gaderyng virtue, than in a hasty gaderer. Virtue that is softly or sobrely
gadered proves, and that yt is hastyly gadered and suddenly stands in great
peril for to be lost. Therefore sister desire never to be hastyly and suddenly
virtuous, that thy life may shine co^tynually by good exsample, and abide
perpetually without ceasyng. why is that trowest thou? yt some which were
sometime parfyte be now vnparfyte? Truly for their parfection caught no rote of
abydyng, because of hasty setting, which oftentimes with every wynd be
overthrown and cast down. Do not you so, but wyn^e virtue softly and sobrely,
and that shall ever abide what wind soever come. if thou wylt verily wyn^e sure
abydyng virtue, First labor in all that thou may to have a good and a true
conscience, and than shall all thy conuersacyon smell sweet in good fame to all
folk. Thy good conscience is necessary for thy self, and thy good fame for
other. It is not enough for the to live well, but if thy living be good
exsample to other. Therefore it is that wha^ a child is chrystned it is
anointed with holy creme which is made with oil and bawme. By the oil which
is shynyng is understand a clear shynyng conscience to god, and by the bawme
that has a sweet smell is understand a good fame and a good exsample of true
living. Be dyligent therefore to wyn^e a good conscience, and soon will follow
after a good name. Be not neclygent for to have a good name. Saint Augustyn
calls him cruel and not mercy full yt is neclygent of his good name. Of this
our lord says thus. Math. v. Sie luceat lux vestra coram hominibus vt videant
vestra hona opera. etc. So he says. Let your living shine aforemen, that
they may se your good works, and thank him for them. Cure or set much to
have a good name yt it may ever shine in virtue. For better is a good name than
much richesse says Solomon.

Thus sister keep manerly in virtue thy conscience and thy name, and specially
in all thy living measure thy words in spekyng, for else thou may lightly
rather wound or slay than heal. Live manerly and gentylly in thy lyuy^g, and
thou shall feel great rest and sweetness therein. And than by thy lyui^g they
that be dead in bad living shall be reuyued and quykned to good living, And
they that be quykned in good living shall be strengthed and made more mighty
thereby. what soever thou shall do, do it gentylly and swetely, that thy deeds
be warely or deyned, and thy tongue be mylde and easy in speaking. And if it so
be that thou be put in charge of governance, namely of temporal and erthly
things, by very necessyte of obedience keep them manerly and warely that they
perysshe not. And if it so be that some take them away, thou may not therefore
by hastynesse lose thy pacyence, but easyly suffer it. And to some that take
them away ye must, charitably forbid them, so that in all things good gentle
and curteys manner be kept. Also in thy going beware that thou ren^e not, for
manerly going and easy becomes a relygious person, except it be either for
great need, or that any great peril cause the to goo fast or to ren^e. And
though it so be that manner or measure of living be so gentle and lowly in it
self that it usurps nothing, yet it is full rich against god. For in
measurable lowlynesse is great tranquylyte of soul, myldnesse of spyryte,
grace of moderacyo^, care of honest, and consyderacyon of clerenesse. Thou
must be also manerly in thy going, in thy standing, in thine habyte, and in
all thy manner of living, so that nothing be found in the which should offend
the sight of other, but rather edify other to holiness. what is manner in good
lyui^g, but measure yt nothing be had to much, nor to little but in scarce
mean? This is one of the pryncypall things that longs to good living, for
to show thy profession, both in habyte and in going. so that in thy going
thou show symplenesse and sadness, in thy mouyng purite and gladness, and in
thy deeds honest and clennesse. Thy life is never vnparfyte sister if it be
honest, and therefore be never constreyned to wyn^e virtue, but with a good will
wyn^e it, and keep it honestly. wylt thou be easy and moderate in living? than
think often upon that rest which is now had of blyssed souls in heaven that
sometime wan^e it here with moderat living. Among all other bytternesse of this
wretched life ymagyne in thy soul how those blyssed souls ben in the sight of
god, sad, sobre, and in loving chere, and than shall you soon feel how sweet
this fruit of easy moderate living is. And than also shall you feel more
gladness of a good conscience wha^ any heuynesses come, than of a bad
conscience among erthly delytes. Which shall be to the tha^ as a paradise full
of temperaunce, myldnesse, and ryghtousnesse. O how merry it is, to have a
te^perate and a moderate conscience, with a simple heart full of quietness and
innocence. There is nothing fo blyssed in earth as is a simple heart. For there
that an heart shows simple innocence to other, in spekyng, in going, in
workyng, yt heart is never aferd to suffer pacyently what soever is done to it.
The more it is scorned of other, the more worthy it is to god* the which
simple innocence keeps a soul from worldly wickedness. A moderate and an
innocent life is not for to be grieved with the^ that noyeth the. And though
thou be noted and marked of all folk, suppose rather yt they speak good than
evil. If thou wylt have this grace (sister) of simple innocence, in all thy
living moderatly keep the from hatred, malice, and envy, which be the seeds of
all wickedness / of whom grows all wretchedness of syn^e. Keep not only
innocency in thy speech and in thy deeds, but also and pryncypally in thy heart.
who so has such easynesse and manerly living in innocence he shall be preserved
from any great offense. For though he be tempted, by that he wynneth great
profit. if he be little set by of other, in that he is in ye sight of god
exalted the more. If he fight against vices he shall have ye maystry. If he
overcome vices he shall be crowned. There is nothing so worthy to god in a
new beginning soul, as is such softness of living. Be a man never so devout,
but if he have that, his life pleases neither god nor man. O now is this a
well smellyng fruit / for it sauoureth both to god and to man. This fruit of
easynesse or manner of good living has.iiii. virtues. One is it keeps good
living both bodyly and goostly. For moderacyon or easynesse is a mean which
sets in measure and in rule al virtues, that they break not asondre, but
hold together. He may never come to sadness of virtue that lacks this mean of
moderacion. The second is that it makes a soul iocund and merry in good
living. Measure and easy moderacion causes great gladness to a set soul,
like as vndyscretnesse in gaderi^g of virtues causes the soul to be vnglad
for the loss that it fyndeth in virtue thereby. The.iii. is, that such a soul
so living in easy moderacion is in manner lykened to the worthy prouyde^ce of
god, which ordeyneth all his ordynau^ces in nombre, weight, and measure. So if
thou discretly with easynesse govern thy soul in all virtues, in that it
seems ourlorde has inpressed his prynt of prouydence in thy heart. The iiii.
is, it makes a soul seem ye it has enough and is content, holdyng her well
pleased mekely with that little virtue that god has given to her, till it
please him to give more, myldely abiding our lords grace. Losyster how worthy
a virtue thou have, if you have this virtue of easynesse and manner of good
living. Eat often I pray the of this fruit, that thou may come at the last
thither where as all easynesse is without trouble or travail in gaderyng of
virtues.

AMEN
The.xi. fruit of the tree of goostly living is Contynence. Ca. xi.
Of Contynence.
THe.xi. fruit of the holy ghost in every goostly liver is called Contyne^ce
which is a precious fruit ye stondeth much by abstynence. For by abstynence
vices should be destroyed, and not the body. but that the body wax not bold in
syn^e but rather quycke in good works, therefore abstynence is very expedyent.
The virtue of contynence is naught but if the body be tamed dyscretly by
abstynence, so that all inordynate affections be thereby withdrawn. For else al
abstinence stands in none avail, if the body be suffered inordynatly to be
encombred in vices. If our meat be ever taken as we would take a medycyne than
shall we live contynently. And as soon as we let go at large and release ye
reins or the bridle of contynence in taking of our meat and drink
inordynatly, hastyly, and with pleasure, anon the snare of lyking and carnal
lust is about privily for to deceive us. Therefore as often as need requires we
eat and drynk, so often we of right serve the flesh and ye body, as lords
give to their servants that need is. What is this virtue of contynence in this
place? but sobrenesse of living, by the which sobrenesse the body receives
both meat and drink and sleep. There be many manners of sobrenesse in
contynent living. Of the which sobrenesse incontinent living. One is abstynence
for medycyne, and that is for health of body. Another is abstine^ce of auaryce,
and that is for to spare costs. The third is abstynence of ypocrisy, and that
is from vaynglory. And the. iiii is abstynence of pouerte, and that is for
need. The.v. is relygious abstynence, and that is for wynnyng of virtue, for
dystroyenge of vices, and for sharpynge of our goostly understanding, in
wyn^yng of wisdom. For right as earth stops a wyndowe that the light may not
come in, so the understanding goostly is stopped with excess of meat and
drink that we may not feel nor se the way of virtue. Sobrenesse is than a
merytoryous virtue, when it is done pryncipally for god, and in good form, in
such wise that the body be provided after his need without superfluyte, so ye
it fail or faint not before his time, for to much scarsyte or labor, but that
it be wisely kept ye ^t wax not wanton in much rest. All our intent should be
occupied about the profit of the soul in love and knowledge of god, and in all
such things that may led us to the love of god. For the soul is not made for
the body, but the body for the soul, that it should both serve it and help it,
to that intent yt the soul with the body might come to the knowledge of god.
The soul is only made for god, for to be knyt and coupled to god. To our lord
it longs for to slay, and for to quicken again such as he made. Therefore it
is unlawful to us for to slay that he has made, that is our body. vices he
would we should fle in our body, but not the body by to much abstinence, which
should be ruled soberly by contynence, and not dystroyed by abstynence. He
dystroyeth and sleeth himself that vndyscretely by abstyne^ce and other great
labors (past measure) makes himself so feeble that he may not serve god as he
should discretly and so decays from his service, or than the order of kind
would, though it so be that fervor of deuocyo^ or pure sy^plenesse excuse some.
The holy apostle would that our service should be reasonable, and not
unreasonable as it is written thus. To. xii. Bacionabile sit obsequium vestrum.
Now sister if you wylt wit in what things lies contynent sobrenesse I shall
tell the? Sobrenesse stands in.iii. things. that is in qualyte, quantyte, and
manner. In qualyte, that thou desire no delycates nor precious meats and
drynkes, nor also costyous, but such simple meats and drynkes that lightly may
be had, and that nature may be sustained without excess, that thou fall not in
to the syn^e of glotony. In quantyte, that thou eat nor drink not to much,
nor ofter tha^ it needs, as thy rule techeth. But temperatly that it be to the
body refresshyng, and not as a burden. All seek folk be fre from this rule /
for they may eat and drink as often as their sickness requires. In manner that
thou take not thy meat and thy drink to gredyly, nor to hastyly. nor to
receive it unmannerly, but easyly, and relygyously / so that your eyes be not
lokyng about hither nor thither, for to se what thy sister has in her dysshe.
But only hold the content with such things as thou have before the. Eating and
drynkyng with dread of god and in scylence / not hastyly as though thou should
never have enough. Fill never thine eyes before thou fyllest thy palate. But
with thankynges of god hold the content. rather suffryng scarsyte than
habundaunce. Set not little by thy service, nor dyspise nothing yt is set before
the. Nor grudge not though thou lack sauce, ne though thy meat be mysse sod or
roasted. But think that many better than thou art hold them pleased with fewer
meats, and more homly dressed than thou have. For that thou put away from
the they take for great deyntees. Suffer pouerte Christ's famylier friend to be
homly with the, and yt love with all thy might both in meat and drink clothes
and in all other things. Se and behold how meke poor folks be in their
apporte, in their answers, and how ferefull. so do thou. Plain never nor
grudge never for wantyng of meat and drink nor clothyng. Ever hold thyself
unworthy for to have y^ thou have. For lack or want of outward things mekely
borne increases inward things by grace into great goostly richesse of a good
conscience. The contrary does habundau^ce and plente. For where that much
habundaunce and plente is in outward things, therefore the most part is great
scarsyte inwardly of graces. Of ye measure of eati^g and drynkyng it is full
hard for to give a certain rule, but thus, that thou keep a good mean between
to much and to little, so that thou eat not so little that thou may not
serve god, but be faint and weary of thy common labor in religion. And that thou
eat not so much that after thy meat thou have no will for to pray, nor for to
read, nor for to be quycke unto such things as thou art bound to. between
these two keep a mean. Also of thy sleping keep the same rule and mean. Thus
if you govern the in thine eating and drinking thy meat shall be to the more
sauery. more profitable, more holsom, and less grieve thy stomach, and lightly
for to be digested, and also it is more honest and relygious, and without syn^e.
He ye lives sobrely is right able to virtue, for he is quyk to do all good ded,
more chaste in his lyui^g, wyser in his speech, redier to deuocio^, and cleuer
in his affection. Also al sobre folk be more rete^tyue in wit than other. There
be.iii. degr^es of abstine^ce or sobrenes. The first degree of sobrenes is to
absteyn fro to much meat and drink. and keeping of due times and hours in
eating and drinking, not for to break the fasting day ordained of holy church,
nor for to live in delectacio^ of meat and drink in unlawful time. And not
for to set his intent for to eat and drink such things as be lykerous /
rather styry^g to uncleaness tha^ to cle^nes. A be yt only can none other
thing but for to serve the body keeps his time in eating and drynking / and
also the manner of eating according to his kind. Than much more should a
reasonable creature do which is endued with reason, else it were better yt he
lacked reason as a be, than for to be ruled without reason. for if he lack
reason as natural fools do, he should not syn^e. The second degree of
sobrenesse is to absteyn from certain lawful things / as is from flesh /
from wine / from milk / from fysshe / and for to be well contented with sharp
vitayles, yt is with homly bread / with thyn^e ale / with common potage / and
often for to fast / and for to abstryne from such meats and drinks ye ben
most lykerous. as religious folk / devout folk / and repentaunt folk do.
But religious must do their special abstyne^ce, if they do other than the
covent does believe or else it stands him to no mede. The third degree of
sobernes is for to tame glotony, and so to teache ye palate that a man may hold
him content with right scarce lyuelod, such as is only sufficient to necessite
of kind and not to the lust that is both in qualite and in quantite of meat and
drink. so the more simple ye lyuelode is the better it should beloved. And if
sometimes we must needs eat delicate meats, tha^ not for to receive them
delycatly, but only for to receive them nedefully and sobrely without excess.
Lo sister thus to love abstynence and sobrenesse is for to live contynent.
Therefore if you wylt come to the very virtue of contynency in sebre living you
must be content though you lackest of such meat and drynk sometime as you would
have. And be not sorry though you lackest them as some be, which sometime when
they want ye meat yt they desire they be sorry and grudge, and put away shame,
nothing thynking of their professyon, consydering how yt rich folk want
sometime that they would have. much more than poor folk should hold them content
ye rich folk want. Thou must also be glad to lack, and in will for to want
for gods sake, and for ye love of sobrenesse, and for good exsa^ple of other. O
sister se what virtue is in such contynent living. It purges the soul / it
reyseth the wit it makes ye flesh subject to ye spyrite / and it makes the
heart low and contryte. Scarfite is ye mother of holiness. By abstynence and
by fasting the batayles of ye flesh against the soul, and ye battle of the
soul against the flesh do cease. Which abstynence lets the seruannt ye
body, for to arise against ye lady ye soul. and so all such co^flycts and
batayles by fasti^ges and abstyne^ce do cease Scarsyte of meat and abstine^ce
of dry^k make vices to be unknown, for like as ye spettel of a fasting body
sleyth an erthly serpent. So much more the fasting of a devout soul sleyth ye
serpent of vicious living Abstine^ce both quickens and sleeth, it sleyth the
vicious leuyng, and quickens ye soul to god. Abstinence with good works is
much acceptable to god. They yt abstayn and fast from meats and do evil, they
follow the condition of fendes which never eat, but they be never without
wickedness. If thou wylt be very co^tinent in sobrenes and abstinent leuyng, let
not only thy throat fast from meat, but the eye from vanite, thy ears from
mysheryng, thy tongue from mysspekyng, thy hand from mystouchyng, and thy soul
from proper will, and so shall thou be a co^tinent soul. Of this fruit of
continence I find.iiii. virtues. One is that it prolongeth the life both bodily
and goostly as Solomon says. Eccl.xxxvii. Qui abstinens est prolongat vitam.
He that is abstinent lengthyth his life, for if the body be kept from
corrupcion of gloteny and excess, ye soul is fre from syn^e, and so both to
live at the last endlessy in bliss for such abstinence. The second virtue is,
that it makes the bodily wantonness to be repressed, for a lean body by
abstine^ce, is constrained for to obey to the soul, and leave wantonness, As
saint Paul says.i. Corinth.ix.

Castigo corpus meu^ et in seruitute^ redigo: I chastyse my body (he says) and
bring it under in to servitude and bondage unto the soul, yt by such
chastysyng by abstynence it may the better serve the soul and obey thereto.
The.iii. virtue is yt it gladdeth both god and his angels. That this is sothe
I find by a figure of Abraham which made a great feast in winning of his
child. What meneth this wynnyng? Nothing else but a departing from ye sweet
milk of delycates. For our lord has great joy of all such that forsaken all
worldly and bodily delytes, as a man would be of a great feast. if we use
therefore scarsly meats and drynkes, we shall be kept both clean in our self,
and also have fruicio^ and felawshyp of holy say^tes in heaven. The.iiii. virtue
is, ye it keeps a soul from ye wicked enemy of lust which lust is bitterer
than death. As Solomon says. Eccl.vii. Inueni amariere^ morti muliere^. Lo (he
says) I have found a more bitterer enemy than is death. And what is yt? Truly
lust. For lust sleeth not only the body but also the soul. Thus sister leave
lusts in meat / drink / and sleep, and learn to live co^tynently in
abstyne^ce. For though abstynence be but a homely fruit, Yet it is a holsom
fruit and a sauery, in asmoch as it dysposeth both body and soul to al other
virtue. Of this virtuous fruit our lord both feed and fill the.

AMEN
The.xii. fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers is Chastyte. Ca. xii.
Of Chastyte.
THe.xii. fruit of the holy ghost in every goostly liver is called Chastyte,
which is a right precious fruit, for as much as it longs only for holy
spouses of our heavenly king. Chastyte is the daughter of sobrenesse. For she is
no rysshed of her, like as uncleanness by glotony. Sister it is a great
dyfference between vyrgynyte and chastyte, as it is between whytnesse of kind
and whytnesse made by craft. The lylly is white by kind, and clothe is made
white by craft. By the lylly is understand vyrginite, and by the white cloth is
understand chastyle. Vyrgynyte is called puryte of soul and body before
falling, and chastyte is called purete of body and soul after falling. For
after long chastisyng of the flesh the soul and body is come to whytnesse
and clennesse of chastyte. Vyrginite has no such labor, for it grows and
contynueth with nege of years, and ever is kept hole in whytnesse unto ye self
aege, as a lylly does without any labor, by kyndly growing. It is not so of
chastyte which I lyken to byce or white lynen clothe, made with great besinesse.
First the fler thereof is grene as grass, and than it is dried. after that
beaten, and so made clothe. which clothe is often watered and sonned unto the
time it has taken whytnesse. So chastyte must be won^e and kept. For chastyte
bears his name of chastysing. First who so will be chaste and is no vyrgin, he
must dry up ye erthly gren^esse of lyking and fleshly lusts by lothnesse and
hate of syn^e, than for to keep hm therein, by chastysing or by reasonable
abstynence and wakinge with other bodyly exercises. And after yt to water it by
often waylyng and weeping ye god would keep such clen^es in them ye he may be
sonned in the light of grace, ever to be kept clean from falling. Thus sister a
man may be chaste yt is no vyrgyn. For as saint Austyn says, vyrginite is a
perpetual medytacion of i^corrupcion in a corruptyble flesh, and a holiness
without experyence of co^tagious filth. Such virginite is ever kept as long as
the heart wtstondeth yt it consent not to no manner of corruption. but ever to
have a lothnesse. He yt will be a vyrgin he must in the begi^nyng of nege and
discrcion first refreyne the kyndly styringes of corruption of nature, and so
distroy yt first sawtes of kind, which be right sharp in ye begyn^yng, and
than ever after he shall find good peace with his flesh, and right seldom
sawtes, but such yt may easyly be withstand without any peril of lesyng of
vyrginite, for the head of the first suggestyon is broken. The contrary labor
has chastyte. For as soon as he has before lived uncleanly and vnpurely,
begins for to live chaste, anon he fyndeth battle, and as it seems many
intolerable heates of styringes, with insatiable fannynges and ymagynacions of
the devil, which styreth the flesh to be i^portune and for to moeue a man
to syn^e by many percussyons of unkindly heates. O how in such batayles a
wretched man stands in great peril, but yet if he myghtily wtstand it he
shall have ye vyctory and also great mede. Is it not trowest you a great maystry
for to overcome him of ye which sometime we were overcome. A wound ones healed
if it be again soon after broken, it can never be healed again without some
mark. And therefore though the battle of chastity be never so medefull, yet it
is a battle of suffraunce and of strokes, but vyrgynite which was never hurt
is a battle of gyuyng of strokes, for it has quenched the styry^ges of ye
flesh, and therefore it receives none. It has broken ye serpe^tes heed, and
he therefore flees fro hy^, and dare not abide battle. Three great rewards I
find that our lord gives to virgins and mayde^s. One is. ye among al
rewards, he makes virgins receive a. C. fold fruit, where cle^nesse of
wedlock receives but xxx. fold, and the cle^nesse of wydowhed but sixty. The
second is, that all virgins and maidens. syngeth a new song which none may sing
but they The.iii. is that they follow the lamb where so ever he go. All chaste
souls be as angels in earth, and cosyns to angels, for there is none of so
nygh affinite that may approach to angels, as vyrgyns and maidens do. Of this
I find auctorite in holy writ, where it is written thus. Mat. xxii Qui neque
nubent, neque nubent^: Eru^t sicut angeli dei. They yt nether wed nor be wedded
in earth shall be as angels of god. Lo sister this is the souerayn singularite
or pryuylege, which is given to virgins and maidens, for to be cosyns to
angels. Vyrgyns and maidens receives a. C fold fruit, yt is a. C. fold
reward in bliss, and so they excede in merit and reward the syxty fold.
fruit of wydowes, and the.xxx. fold fruit of wedlock, which shall be benethe
them as ye no^bres ben. The second is, yt all vyrgyns and mayde^s do sing a
new song which none may sing but they. But what song is this yt is so
syngulerly given to maidens and vyrgis? where should we find this song that is
called a new song to the^? First we must seek out this song among all the
songs yt we find in holy wryt, whyther it be the song that angels sing in
heaven Alleluya. Nay it must be such a song ye maidens may understand. That song
is only angels song, desyryng our salvation. it is good, but yet it is an
old song before the incarnacyon. we must have a new song. whyther it be yt
song which Moses song when he had led the children of Israel over ye read see,
when he song thus. Exodi.xv. Cantemus dn^o. etc. Sing we now to our lord (he
said) for gloryously he is magnyfyed, in as much as he has both horse and man
of our enemies drowned and thrown in the sea. Nay, this is not a new song,
but an old song, yet it is partynent unto man's salvation. Many songs I read
of old songs full good and virtuous, but none of these songs I find
singular and new longyng to virgins and maidens. There is one song which is
new and synguler for them, and that is the song which ye blyssed virgin Mari
our lady made, when she was with our lord, and our lord with her by his worthy
incarnacio^. This new song is called. Luc. i Magnificat ai^a mea dn^m. My soul
(she said) magnifyeth and makes our lord great. After the great ioyeng of
saint John^ whiles he was yet in his mothers womb, and after the worthy
commendable propheci of Elizabeth his mother, This blissed virgin and maid in
co^forting not only of virgyns and maidens, but also of all man kind began
mekely and wisely a new song and sang. Magnificat ai^a mea dn^m. As who might
say thus. All other of old time pronounce our lord a great lord, and a
worthy, as all reasonable creatures should. Other also proved and showed our
lord great and worthy. But I now make our lord great. For like as the worker
is more commendable than ye work, so is this song more commendable than all
other so^ges. For it is new bryngyng in our salvation. Lo sister this song was
made of a vyrgyn and a maiden. All maidens may be joyful, for by a vyrgyn and
a maiden was first begone this new song of our salvation, Than the song of
vyrgyns should nothing else be but the mind and meditacyon of our lords
incaruacion, and ever newly to have in mind the birth of our lord which is
yt new song of our salvation. None may sing this so verily but virgyns and
maidens, for because a maid and a vyrgyn was ye first that caused it and made
it, and that blissed lady our lords mother vyrgin and maid was the first yt
made a vow to vyrginite and offered ye glorious gift first of all to our lord.
For though our lord said by yt law. Gen^. i. Crescite et multiplicamini et
replete terram. Grow and increase, and fulfill the earth (he said). to vyrgins
and mayde^s, grow and multyply and fulfill heaven. So than only the quere of
vyrgyns after our lady may sing worthyly this new song of our salvation. Luc
i. Magnificat ai^a mea dn^m. The.iii. thing is, that all vyrgins and maidens
follow ye lamb whyder soever he gooth. By this lamb I understand our lord god
and man, which ran^e in the wretched way of this world in great purete and
holenesse both of body and soul without any corruption. Only vyrgins follow
next this lamb in great purete of clennesse both body and soul. All other
maidens yt be no vyrgins in holiness of vyrginite follow him, but not so
swyftly, for they halt on the one foot. The body and ye soul has not be kept
so hole without brekyng. It was broken, and is made hole by chastyte. The foot of
chastyte is never so strong as is the foot of vyrgynite. In.iiii. manner of wise
I fynst yt our lord that blyssed lamb walked in this wretched world while he
lived here after the.iiii. fete of a lamb. One is in earth he walked mekely
whiles he was among us. In hell after his death he walked among fendes full
fearfully. Upon the sea after his resurrection he walked full merueylously.
And in heaven after his asce^cyon he walks now full hyghly. In these sasame.
iiii? manner of wise walks all vyrgins and maidens in this life, for they
follow this blyssed lamb foot by foot. They walk mekely if they be very
maidens, for the felaw of may denhode is meekness, and the token thereof is
shamefastness. Ever they be shamefast of ye thing that longs to breakyng or
hurtyng of vyrgynyte and maydenhode. They walk also dredefully. For vyrgynite
and maydenhode among all the conflyctes of this fyghtyng church in earth be more
dredefull batayles to fendes, than any battle of any other good creature. For
ye fend finds no mark of his brennyng in the flesh of maidens, and
therefore he is aferd most of the^, for they only break his heed. There may no
delectacio^ of carnal syn^e by falls suggestion rest in them. They walk also in
earth merueylously. Is it not a merueylous thing, and a wondrefull for to live
in flesh, and not to be overthrown in passions of the flesh. truly yes,
and worthy great merit and high joy. They walk also in earth hyghly, for
they pass in highness all other of living, both prelates and subgectes, but
if they be vyrgyns and maidens as they be. Lo sister what pryuylege longs to
meke vyrgins and mayde^s. Few I find vyrgins, but many I do find maidens, and
therefore this twelfth fruit is called ye fruit of chastyte. Vyrgyns be all they
which set there life so high in heavenly living, yt though battle of ye
flesh be proffered them, they lightly and mightily with stand it, so that ye
fend in his profer is more aferd of the^ than they of him. Maidens ben all they
yt suffer battle, and mightily overcome them, but ever they dread to fall, and
therefore they keep under their flesh in chastysing for fear of falling.
Four things I find of chastyte. One is yt it cleanses the body, as the
contrary wise lechery defiles it, so ye though there were none other mede of
chastity but cle^nesse, ne none other torment of lechery but ye stynkyng fylth
thereof. The honest of chastyte should be desired, and ye fylthynesse of lechery
should be abhorred. Another is ye chastyte makes a man^es mind fre. For it
has no thought, neither for children, how they might be made rich, but only
the mind is set freely on god. The.iii. is, yt it gladdeth the conscye^ce, in
as much as such one for the love of Christ dispyseth and forsakes all
fleshly delytes. The.iiii. is, ye both to man and to angels it makes such a
chaste soul to be loved, so yt both good and bad have in reverence all chaste
folk, but angels specially. For like as naturally every kind loves his own
kind, so angels for as much as they be clean, love more famylierly all chaste
folk, as most like to their own kind. For to wyn^e this virtuous fruit of
chastity, and to come to the performyng and perfection thereof is the eschewi^g
and seperacion of all such yt be either spekers of uncleanness or doers of
uncleaness, and for to be lovers of the co^pani of chaste spekers and chaste
doers, by whose exsample chastyte is taught and learned. Also eschewing of
delycates either in meat, or drink, or slepyng, or eating, or else of fine and
soft weryng. which be norysshers of the flesh. Also keeping of the out ward
wits and senses ye nothing be seen nor herd, nor touched. which that should
tempt the. Also by eschewyng of idleness, which is ye gates of all vices, and
namely of carnal vices. Also keeping of the inward thoughts and affeccyons of
the heart, by the which affection the wicked serpent ye fend puts in his
venymous heed of uncleanness. Also business of prayer whereby is gotten of god
help against te^ptacions. who so governs him thus may lightly come to
cle^nesse of chastyte. There be many degrees of chastyte. There is chastity of
wedlock, of wydow hode, and of maydenhode. There is also chastyte in deed, and
chastyte in affection. Some be chaste in body and not in soul, as all such ye
keep their bodies clean from all actual corruption, but yet in heart and will
they be wedded, for they desire to be wedded. All such for the most party
delight to here and speak of corrupt love, desyryng to love and to be loved, and
so hyndre many a soul by their affection. But now of the degrees of chastyte
the which belongs to relygyous folk, and to all devout maidens, let us se.

The first degree is keeping and contynence from actual deeds with a purpose for
to live so and to wtstand al manner consent to any unlawful styryng. This degree
is yet full nygh to lykyng and lust, for new tornyng therfrom, in as much as
yet it smells of carnal temptacions, and therefore it is full necessary ye
such one so new turned from carnal sins unto chaste leuyng, look not again to
such carnalytees, least it perysshe: but that in all have it aspyre upward to
another degree and in an higher degree of chastity, that he may be safe from
peril thereof. This first degree is yet in labor of battle and uncertain of
victory, for asmoch as only will with gods grace fyghteth against.iiii. enemies
yt is against the styryng of the flesh, against the appetite of affection,
against the styryng and prouokyng of ye world to lust, and against suggestio^s
of fendes. And so, iiii be against twain. yet let good will trust and lean to
our lord truly and faithfully that says. Io. xvi. In mu^do pressura^
habebitis, sed confidete q ego vinci mundu^. In ye world (our lord says) ye
shall have much torments of styryng to syn^e, but fight mightyly theragaynst
with good will, and trust faithfully me, and ye shall overcome the world, for I
overcame it. Lo sister. thus is the world overcome with good will and help of
grace. Also if you wilt overcome the fend, have also good will and trust in god,
which bound the fend, and depryued him, and dispoyled him from all his robbery
of souls. For he is as weyke as a mous if he be withstand with a good will. As
for the other.ii. enmyes which be to ye fend and to the world but exactours
and tollers and servants to them, as is the flesh lykynges and unlawful
affections may soon be overcome wha^ their lords and masters be overcome.
All this does good will with gods help. The second degree of chastyte is when by
chastysyng of the flesh, and by other goostly exercises ye unclean affection
is cleansed, and the body is made subject to the soul, so that it is very
seldom tempted, And if it be tempted it is but right easyly. For at all times
without temptacion is it not, but yet it is so easy and so little that lightly
with little labor the styryng may be ouercom more with bydyng than with stryuyng,
more with easy tornyng away and lothing, than with struglyng, but it so be that by
neclygence and slowth it is suffered to gather strength and might against the
soul. as though no force ware given thereof, than it is no wondre thought a
clean soul be troubled and ouercom in such long sufferau^ce of temptacio^s.
If we will myghtyly wtstand our goostly enemies when they begyn^e for to
i^pugne us. anon despise those temptacions that they send in, and so shall we
never be ouercom of them as for yt time, and not only we shall not be ouecom,
but also they shall be so made weak in their batayl that they shall not dare
to assail us afterward. And if they assail us, they wot well that they shall
be lightly ouercom, so that they dare not ons quynche upon us. Lo what good
will can do, but many be right slow in wtstandyng, by the which sluggyshnes we
give the fend strength and boldness against us to i^pugne and assail us the
ofter and the more sharperly or fiersly. Of one thing take heed, that when our
adversary ye fend is myghtyly euercome, sometime he abides long before ye he
will assail us of yt same vice of the which he is overcome, unto ye time it be
forgoten and put out of use. And tha^ soon after unadvised and suddenly he
falls upon us for to throw us down in to the same vice the more surelyer yt
we be unadvised. And because he finds us unready to wtstand him. I may lyken
such one to a man in battle, that when he has long fought against his
enemies than he does of his armor and rests him, and sends away from him
all his meyny, for he has no suspecio^ of no more battle, and so he plapeth
holyday in quietness and rest. In such faint holy days I find many killed.
Therefore sister be you ever ready armed, thinking that thyn enemies wait sore
upon the, we should ever be ready myghtyly for to withstand the^, for they cease
never from assayly^g, but it before a wyle and craft, and for a while. and it
seems that they rest. and it is not so, their ceasyng from assayllyng is to
assayll us, for ye ceasyng is for no kyndenesse or love that they have to us,
nor for werynesse, but for gyle and wylynes. Sister believe him not in his
wyles, nor trust not to him, for he is full of wickedness and at the last he
will break out. The.iii. degree of chastyte is to have all the lusts and delytes
of the flesh so tamed and chastysed, yt uneath and seldom and right little
the styrynges of the flesh ben felt. For the soul is so arrayed with affection
and love of chastity ye it has great abhominacion of uncleaness and flesshely
styri^ges. It is so squaymous thereof yt it may not suffer to heart, ne to be
spoken of flesshely works without great lothnesse, so that it seems that it
would cast, ye heart is so squaymous when it hereth thereof. O now is this a
blyssed cle^nesse of chastyte. If it happen sometime for profit of other, and
for reverence of the sacrament ye such a chaste maid must needs speak of ye
cases of matrymony, than she speaks thereof so sobrely, so chastely, and so
clenly yt she feleth her flesh so quiet and restfull with such co^munycacion,
as if she spoke of stones, or fylth, or such other ye styreth not. Also in
slepyng such one slepeth full surely without any natural habundau^ce, without
foul ymaginacions or illusyons, in so much ye she shall feel no manner of
styryng slepyngly, but that it may wakyngly be sone ouercom gracyously. This is
a very discrypcion of parfit chastity, as it may be had here in this synful
body, full seldom this grace of clennesse is had here of right perfyte folks.
But if you wylt be stabled in this perfyte degree of chastyte, and continue
therein I trow thou must ask of our lord a special priuylege of grace, in as
much as it is above ye bonds of natural possybylite for to live in the
flesh without felyng of ye vycyousnesse of the flesh. Such as be cold of
complexion, or else be feeble in body lack oftentimes styringes of the flesh.
But yet them needs with that cle^nesse and puryte of flesh, for to have
clennesse and chastity of soul, which is had only of virtue and of grace. for
else such one is no mede worthy. Of all such yt so have tamed their flesh and
feleth no styring speaks the prophet with great admyracyon, as though it were a
wo^dre thing, when he says thus. Ps.xlv. Uenite et videte opera dei que posuit
prodigia superterram, aufere^s bella vsque ad finem terre. Come and se (he
says) ye works of god, for he has ordained upon earth wonder things in
wtdrawyng of batayles of temptacyons, from ye end of flesshely styringes. Lo
how he calls this a wonderful thing, and truly so it is, to live in flesh
and feel no styring thereof. But what says he more? Ps. xlv. Uacate et videte
qm^ ego sum deus. Therefore he says, and our lord says by the same prophet.
Take heed restfully, and se inwardly. for I am ye god does these wondrous
things and none other. As who says, when batayles be overcome and enemies
overthrown, the soul may than rest in himself, and be in quiet understanding
and seeing inwardly god, yt he it is which so mightily. and so mercyably would
repress and overthrow unclean temptacyons of vices, and give finally peace and
rest to all such that have good will for his love to live in cle^nesse. Of such
peace our lord says thus. Leuit. xxv. Dabo pacem finibus vestris dormietis, et
no^ erit qui exterreat auferam malas bestias. I shall give you peace in your
flesh, and ye shall sleep, and there shall no fend make you aferd by
illusions. I shall also with draw froyou wicked beasts of flesshly ly kings. Lo
what our lord does to all such yt have a good will to live in cle^nesse.
Have a good will sister, and thou shall have rest fro all uncleaness, and
inwardly set thine heart on him. For who so will inwardly behold our lord, and
have all his delight in him, he must lift himself above himself, as the prophet
says. Treno^. iii. Bonu^ est prestolare cu^ sile^cio salutare dn^isede bit
solitarius et tacebit quia leuabit se supra se. It is right good and well done
to abide in sweet stylnesse the health of our lord in all our living, and so to
sit solytaryly and aloue wtin himself set aside from all outward lettynges. for
ye soul will lift herself by grace above herself. In such solytarynesse and
stylnesse a clean soul fyndeth great rest fro concupisce^ces, fro troubles,
and fro worldly occupacyons. These.iii. things do let a chaste soul fro
inwardly beholding of god. I mean of such worldly occupacions that be all
worldly without any intent of goostlynesse. Outward occupacion in relygio^ is not
worldly occupacyons, for it is done for a goostly end, and for a heavenly
reward, because of obedyence. But yt call I worldly occupacions which is done
only for wynnyng of worship of temporal good, and of favor. He yt desires
nothing of all these, neither for himself nor for his worldly kyn and friends,
than has he nothing whereby he should be troubled and let from inwardly
beholding of god. for he dredeth nothing to lose of such things, neither of
worldly worship nor of profit, nor of te^porall goods. Also if such one shake
fro him his curyous beholding of other folks deeds, and if he be no demer nor
occupy his thoughts in thinking about such things, he may right freely be
occupied about inward things. For he yt will be occupied with high heavenly
things. He must be fre from all lower worldly things. A bird if his wings
belymed or bound or broben or plucked or cut, he may never fle high. Right so
if the wings of the soul yt is goostly love and affect^on be lymed with
worldly affeccio^ or bound by worldly gifts, or plucked with worldly delytes,
or cut by wtdrawyng of goostly love, it shall never well fle goostly. Many
things there be which should moeue and styre us to chastyte. One is fredome to
entend about the souls health and about ye pleasau^ce of ye love of god For
business about worldly things and fleshly desires is so inordinate and
peryllous yt it lets the spyrituall fruit of chastyte. Fleshly love is to a
chaste soul as bird lyme ye lets it to fle chastely. Who so will not be
shakled and tied with such byrd lyme of fleshly loves, let them live in
fredome of chastyte and clennesse both of body and soul. Another thing yt
ought to styre us to chastyte is the excellency and worthiness thereof, by the
which it excedeth and ouerpasseth in fruit and reward all other manner of
chastyte, both of wedlock and widowhed. For where as our lord assygneth unto
ye bodyly spousayle, but.xxx. fold fruit, he rewards the chastyte of wydo
whode with.lx. fold fruit, and the chastyte of maydenhode with a. C. fold
fruit, as it is aforesaid. Therefore saint Paul exhorts and cou^celeth both
maidens and wydowes, and all unwedded persons to chastyte, as to thestate of
more perfeccyon, and says.i. Cor.vii. Dico autem non nuptis et viduis bonum
est illis si sic permanea^t. I say (he says) to the^ that be unwedded and
wydowes. It is good for them to live in clean chastyte if such rewards be
ordained for all.iii. degrees of chastyte. I trow a relygious woman which has
made her vow to live in chastity shall have three rewards. One is for her
vyrginite and maydenhode. Another for her goostly spousage to god. And the.
iii, for her meke abiding here in manner of a mourny^g wydowe, in as much as
she lives here under a mournyng habyte. So than such shall receive of god.xxx.
fold fruit, lx. fold fruit, and a. C. fold fruit. O how precious and
glorious is the fruit of chastity, when it is the spyrytual array of all chosen
spouses of the king of heaven. O, how ryall is this array, and semely upon a
chaste soul, when it causes almighty god to choose such a soul unto his dear
beloved spouse. Chastyte it is that arayeth the soul with merueylous sayrnesse
with inward clennesse, with plenteous fruit, It arayeth ye soul with glorious
brightness with the reward of i^mortalyte, and with lastyng worship both in
heaven and in earth, as yt holy ghost witnesses in holy write, where he says.
Sap.iiii. O qua^ pulcra est casta generatio cu^ claritate, imortalis est enim
memoria illius qm^ et apud deu^ nota est et apud hoi^es. O (he says) how fair
is chaste generation with bryghtnesse? the mind of whose remembrance is
i^mortal. For it is known both against god and against man. ye. and not only
known before god and man, but it makes also of men and women aungelles, as
saint Bernard says. Quid inquit castitate decentius que de hoi^e angelum
facit. what is more semely (he says) than chastity? that makes of chaste men
and women angels. For though the chastyte of angels be in more bliss, yet
the chastyte of man or woman that stands in battle is more strong. Chastity
(he says) is alonly that thing that in the time and place of this mortalyte
rep^senteth a manner of i^mortall glory and bliss. Therefore it was that our
mercyful and chaste lover and lord Jesus although he would have his holy mother
spoused to Joseph, to show ye spousage were good, yet he would in her spousayl
that she should keep the chastyte of vyrgynite to show that it was much better
and more glorious, than bodily spousayle. Therefore also it was that our heavenly
spouse Jesus king of bliss called a way his own chosen derlyng and holy
apostel saint John^ the euangelyst from his bodily spouses, and because he
left his bodily spousayl for our lord, therefore he made him more famylyer and
homly with him before all other apostels. And because he forsook ye carnal
love of wedlock, therefore our lord fulfilled him with ye swetnes of his
goostly love more plenteous than other. In so much yt at his last souper he
made known to him that yt was hyd fro all other. And there slepyng on our
lords breast did se the preuytees of his godhede, which afterward he wrote
mere hyghly than ever did any other. To him because of chastyte our lord in
his passion commended the keeping of the most holy, chaste, and glorious vyrgyn
his own glorious mother. For love of chastity also it was that this same a
postell loved specially the holy king saint Edward for, to whom he appeared and
received his ryng in alms, and sent it again warnyng hy^ before the time yt he
should depart out of this life, and receive in heaven the great reward of
chastyte which is full plenteous and synguler as our lord promyseth by his
prophet I say and says. Esa. lvi. Dabo ennuchis meis in domo mea locu^ et
nomen melius a filijs et filiabus. I shall give (says our lord) to my chaste
servants a place and a name in my house of heaven. better and and more worthy
before other of their sons or daughters. O, therefore now thou may se by
this, how worthy and excellent a virtue is chastyte, and how acceptable and
pleasyng it is to our lord Jesus thy heavenly spouse. Keep it therefore and halse
it to the as yt thing that may make the full lovely and pleasyng unto the hye
king* and thyn endless spouse Jesus. whither saint Agate knew not this, when
for the love and faith of chastity she went unto death as she would go to a great
feast, whyther also saint Margarete and faint Katheryn knew not this, which
for the love of clean chastity chose rather to be martyred than for to lose it.
whither also saint Lucy knew not this, that for the love of chastyte, the holy
ghost made her so heavy that she might not be drawn with many fold tyemes of
oxen to the brothell or strumpet house. whyther also saint Agnes that was so
tender of arge which was led unto the brothell house, where an angel of god
kept her, and by ordinance of god was more clad with her hear than by any
clothes. I trow yes. Look sister and you shall find that all these holy
vyrgyns rather would be dead than to lose their chastyte. The third thing yt
may styre us to the virtue of chastyte is the inward calling of our lord and
the comfortable inspyracion of graces which our lord shows to all meke and
chaste souls, for all such desires. vii things of god. One is the sight and
the love of him, and set right naught by outward beauty of any creature, as for
any lykyng in syn^e. An other is yt all such desire to have right naught but
only whereof to live, and yt to their only need without any superfluyte. The.iii.
is all such fle and eschew vain and idle words. The.iiii. is they care not
for to se their worldly friends, neither faders nor mothers, for our lord they
love and desire. The.v. is al such coueyt to keep meekness wtinforth in their
conscience, and withoutforth in their habyte. The.vi. is that all such be in
will never to do uncleanness, but rather for to dye. The.vii. is that all such
bring forth to our lords service mo children by their good conuersacyon and
good exsample (by spekyng of spyritual and goostly words) than they should have
done if they had been wedded. Lo sister what graces our lord gives to all meke
maidens. Thus than chaste vyrginite is peace of ye flesh, scyle^ce of charges,
prison of lusts, stoppyng of the.v. wits as touching to evil, the bedle of
good name and fame, joy of conscience, part of ye nature of angels,
fayrnesse of good living, lord ship of virtue, ye bed and restyng place of
Christ, and the foundament of al goodness. Chaste vyrgynite is also as a lylly
undefiled. In a lylly be.vi. white leaves, by the which clennesse of chastyte
is sygnyfied. The first is sobrenesse of meat and drink. The second hard
waring. The iii. business of labor. The.iiii. keeping of the. v wits. The.v.
casynesse of words. The.vi. avoiding and eschuyng of idleness. Such chastyte
as doctors say rauysshed ye prophet Elyt in a fyry charet in to paradyse. By
such chastyte ye same prophet raised dead to life. By such chastyte Elizie the
prophet had given to him of god a double spirit. one of prophecy, and another
of miracles. Such cle^nesse and chastyte quenched the outward fire of the.iii.
children which were cast in to the fire, as is rehearsed in Danyel the
prophet. And no wondre though such outward fire might not bren^e the^, for as
much as the fervor of uncleanness brenneth not them wtin. All such may in no
wise be bre^ned of any man's ordinance withoutforth, that quench the deuyls
fire withinforth. And that has be well proved by holy vyrgi^s before, whose
materyal fire our lord quenches with his dew without forth, because they had
quenched the fire of hell withinforth. Such chastyte delivered Danyel fro
devouring of lions. because he dystroyed in himself yt most cruel be of
flesshely delectacyon, which is wylder and wodder more than any other wild
be. Thus than chaste vyrgynite is ye spouse of Christ, the throne of god, the
temple of the holy ghost, the hale of the endless king, the treasure of heaven,
the ernest and dowry of everlasting reward, and ye gate of paradyse. And for
to say shortly chaste vyrgynite makes a man or a woman in this wretched body
blyssedly to clepe, and gracyously to wyn^e the bliss of heaven. For to
conclude up this holy fruit of chastyte, four great virtues I find whereby it
is hyghly commended, and praised in ye sight of god. One is that chaste
vyrgynite grows among worldly people, as the lylly does among thorns. For
like as a lylly among thorns grows upright without hurtyng, so does worldly
chaste vyrginite among worldly people, thus says Solomon. Cant.ii. Sicut
lilium inter spinas, sic amica mea inter filias. As a lylly says our lord by
Solomon grows without hurtyng among thorns, so does my dear beloved spouse
chaste virginite among all mine other daughters. The second virtue is, that
chaste vyrgynite beryth the precious flower above all other manner of chastity,
be it of wedlok or of wydowhed. For like as one sterre passes an other in
shyny^g in the fyrmament, so does chastity among all the clennesse of the earth.
The third virtue is, that chaste vyrginyte has the high seat in heaven next
unto the trinite, in as much as our blyssed lady gods mother that holy
virgyn is inhaunsed in bliss above all the orders of angels. Therefore glad
may all chaste maidens be, which has so special a vyrgin nygh the trynite.
The fourth virtue is, that chaste vyrgynite here in earth is most next unto
Christ both bodily and goostly. Bodily both by famylyer conuersacyon and also
by natural knowledge. The first was well known by saint John^ the evangelist
which by the merytes of his chastity was most famylyer with Christ above all
the apostles, and much preuy to the secrets of his godhed. The second was
well known in our blissed lady that holy vyrgyn whom our lord chase to his
mother, because of her meke vyrgynyte, and so was borne of a chaste vyrgyn, to
show thereby that he loves ever the clennesse of meke and chaste vyrgynyte. Lo
how virtuous chastyte is, keep it well, for if it be lost, it may never be
won^e again. Though you lose charity thou may have it again as well as ever
thou hadest, so of goostly joy, of patience, of sufferaunce, of goodness, of
benyngnite, of myldnesse, of true living, and of contynence, which I call here
soberness of living, but not so of chastyte. For if ye lose that it may never
be had again as it was. And therefore I pray the keep it well. Which if it be
meke will bring in all the other virtues.

Now sister I pray the specially eat often of this fruit both waking and
slepyng, for it is sweet in smellyng, that it sauoureth among angels in the
bliss of heaven. Part with thy sysysters of this fruit that ye all at the last
may come thither where as your holy cosyns be angels, there for to se the
vyrgyn of vyrgyns, and our lord your loving spouse her blyssed sone endlesly.

AMEN
Here ends an epistle made and sent to a relygyous woman, of the.xii. fruytes
of the holy ghost.
Robert Coplande

printer's device of Robert Copland


