THE WHOLE Aphorisms of great HIPPOCRATES Prince of Physicians: Faithfully
translated into English for the benefit of such as are ignorant of the Greek
and Latin Tongs. Whereunto is annexed a short discourse of the nature and
substance of the Eye, with ma ny excellent and approved remedies for the cure
of most the disea ses thereof. With an exact Table showing the substance of
every APHORISM.

AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for Richard Redmer and are to be sold at the
great Westdoore of Paul's, at the sign of the Star. 1610.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND his worthy friend M. TIMOTHY CHALONER, a great lover of
learning.
PHilostratus, a famous Philosopher, writing sometimes to a Noble young man,
uses these words: Cauendum esse ne temporis preciu^ sine fructu praetereat:
and Nazianzenus says, that our time being but short, and yet precious, is not
carelessly, and negligently to be let slip; but that every man in his Place,
and Calling, is to do some good to the Country and Commonwealth wherein he
was borne. For which cause, I have taken some pains in the publicatio^ of
these Aphorisms; a work very needful to be known, and understood, by all
sorts of people: and as Leonardus Fucchius witnesses, the best work that ever
Hip. compiled; wishing that all Physicians and Chirurgions, should carry them
in their bosoms: as it is reported of Tully, concerning the Comedies of
Terence, tanquam in sinu portare, and to have them at their fingers ends.

These Aphorisms were first of all written in the Greek, and since translated
into Latin by many excellent and learned Physicians, and are daily set forth
with large Comments: which does show unto us their excellency and worthiness.
For a man may by them preserve himself from sickness being in health, and
being sick cure himself of sickness.

Accept therefore I pray you of these Labors, which I for the benefit of my
Country have undertaken to make common: which if you shall so do, I shall
little esteem of the venomous teeth of any carper. For, to you only I present
them as a token of my love, and affection, which I bear unto you: not for many
favors which I have received from you, but for your many virtues and love of
learning which is known to be in you. For (truly) I do not know to whom
books may better be presented, then to those that love books, whereof I know
you to have many; a great riches to you, but little regarded with thousands
of your rank. But I leave to trouble you: and wishing you as many happy years,
as you have virtues, I commit you to the Almighty his protection.

Yours, S. H.

To the understanding Reader.
I Doubt not (gentle Reader) but thou art very well acquainted with the hardness
of translation, and how uneasy it it is to translate a Greek Author into our
english tongue, that it should carry that grace and elegancie, as in the
original. For as a fruitful tree being removed out of a fertile soil, into a
barren, does rather wither ^^d become unfruitful, then to bring forth such and
the like kind of fruit as formerly it did; so does it happen with a diverse
translation: so that the first translation cannot have the grace of the
original, nor a second translation, that of the first, but must needs seem
more harsh and barraine then the first: So I fear me it will happen with these
Aphorisms, which were first written in Greek by the Author, and after in
latin, and now as thou see in English. Wherefore if thou do find any
faults committed, or any mistaking in the translation, my request is that thou will rather wink at a small fault, until it may be amended, then to carpe
with Zoilus, and do nothing thy self. Well, what the labor has been to the
Translator, sapientum sit iudicium; this I am sure, it is for thy profit if
thou list, and for the benefit of all such as do not understand either greek
or latin. And if thou accept of this work kindly, thou may have it
hereafter in better fashion, and perhaps with a Comment. In the mean time use
these, and let the Translator have thy good word: and so fare thou well.

An exact Table, showing every Aphorism per taining to every Disease.
Of sickness of the Head. Read Aphorism 71. Sect 4. 64, 5. 67, 5. 40, 2. 5,
6. 7, 6. 10, 6. 22, 6. 51, 6. Lethargy read 20. 7. dead sleep. 1, 2. Overmuch
waking. 3, 2. Apoplexy 57, 6. 42, 2. 43, 2. Melancholy, 24, 6. 56, 6. 11, 6.
9, 4. Madness, 22, 6. 5, 7. Doting 53, ^. Sleep 2, 2. Falling sickness 46,
2. 8, 5.
Of the Dispositions of the Sinews. Palsy 18, 5. Crampe 57, 4. 66, 4. 67, 4.
79, 4. 1, 5. 2, 5. 3, 5. 4, 5. 6, 5. 7, 5. 18, 5. 17, 5. 23, 5. 39, 6. 9, 7.
10, 7. 13, 7. 18, 7. 26, 7. Astonishment 14, 7. Of the wrie mouth, nose, or
lips. 49, 4.
Of the dispositions of the Eyes. 12, 3. 13, 3. 14, 3. 18, 3. 17, 3. 22, 3. 49,
4. 52, 4. 17, 6. 31, 6. 52, 6. 47, 7. Of the dispositions of the Ears. 49, 4.
Of the dispositions of the Nose. 2, 6. 40, 2. 23, 3. 14, 3. 15, 3. 32, 3. 36,
7. 25, 5. Flux of blood at the nose. 37, 3. 27, 4. 60, 4. 75, 4. 32, 5. 10, 6.
9, 7. Neesing. 34, 5. 12, 6. 52, 7.
Of the diverse dispositions of the Mouth and the Tongue. 25, 3. 32, 6.
Dispositions of the teeth 26, 3. 53, 4. 26, 3. Of the Affects of the throat,
read 23, 3. 34, 4. 37, 4. 11, 5. 37, 6. 60, 7.
Affects of the Breast and Lungs. 68, 4. Asthma. 46, 6. the voice 6, 5. 51, 5.
48, 7. spitting of blood. 30, 3. 67, 4. 47, 4. 14, 5. 10, 6. 15, 7. 37, 8.
Pleurisy 12, 1. 6, 3. 24, 3. 9, 5. 16, 5. 16, 6. 33, 6. Peripneumonia 34* 6
12, 7. Empiema or spitting of matter. 27, 6. Phtisicke 11, 3. 14, 3. 23, 3. 30,
3. 8, 4. 10, 5. 12, 5. 13, 5. 16, 5. 64, 5. 16, 7.
Affects of the Heart. 66, 4. Affects of the Paps. 36, 5. 27, 5. 38, 5. 39, 5.
50, 5. 52, 5. 54, 5.
Affects of the Stomach. 15, 1. 18, 1. 33, 2. Difficulty of swallowing 35, 4.
Pain of of the stomach 66, 4. 21, 2. of Thirst 27, 5. Vomiting 2, 1. 7, 4. 22,
4. 10, 7. Of the Hicket 4, 5. 13, 6. 15, 6. 17, 7.
Affects of the Liver. Pain of the liver 53, 7. apostumes of the liver 60, 5.
18, 6. 46, 7. Dropsy 23, 3. 8, 6. 22, 6. 11, 4. 35, 6. 43, 6. 5, 7. 48, 7. 46,
7. Of the hypocondres 64, 4. 74, 4. 64, 5. 40, 6.
Affects of the Gaul and Spleen. Iaundis 64, 4. 63, 4. 71, 5. 42, 6. of the
spleen 23, 3. 43, 6. 48, 6.
Fluxes of all kinds. 14, 2. 21, 4. 22, 4. 23, 4. 24, 4. 26, 4. 28, 4. 49, 5.
1, 6. 3, 6. 32, 6. 43, 6. 48, 6. 5, 7. 24, 7. 30, 7. 31. 7. Pains of the
Intestins. 11, 4. 49, 4. 5, 6. 7, 6. Iliac passion 44, 6. 10, 7.
Affects of the Fundament. 11, 6. 12. 6. Affects of the reins. 6, 4. 80 ^^
(...) 7, 6. 35, 7. 36, 7. 37, 7. 55, 7.
Affects of the Bladder* 17, 3. 23, 3. 27, 3. 32, 3. 70, 4. 71, 4. 73, 4. 72,
4. 74, 4. 75, 4. 70, 4. 76, 4. 77, 4. 75, 4. 80, 4. 82, 4. 83, 2. 84, 4. 58, 5.
19, 6. 44, 4. 32, 7. 34, 7. 35, 7. 39, 7. 40, 7. 49, 7. Affects of the members
of Generation in men. 63, 5. 19, 6. Of the Affects of the members of Generation
in Women. 13, 3. 1, 4. 28, 5, 29, 5. 30, 5. 31, 5. 32, 5. 33, 5. 34, 5. 35, 5.
36, 5. 37, 5. 38, 5. 39, 6. 40, 5. 41, 5. 42, 5. 43, 5. 44, 5. 45, 5. 46, 5.
47, 5. 48, 5. 49, 5. 50, 5. 51, 5. 52, 5. 53, 5. 54, 5. 55, 5. 56, 5. 57, 5.
59, 5. 60, 5. 61, 5. 62, 5. 28, 7. Of the Affects that do appear in the extreme
parts. 46, 2. 20 4. 31, 4. 33, 4. 44, 4. 25, 5. 21, 6. 22, 6. 28, 6. 29, 6. 30,
6. 34, 6. 49, 8. 49, 6. 55, 6. 59, 6. 60, 5. Aphorisms, touching Fevers. 12, 1.
14, 1. 23, 2. 25, 2. 26, 2. 28, 2. 30, 2. 34, 2. 7* 3* 8. 3. 10, 3. 12, 3. 22,
3. 29, 4. 31, 4. 44, 4. 43. 4. 46, 4. 48, 4. 45, 4. 49, 4. 50, 4. 51, 4. 52, 4.
53, 4. 55, 4. 56, 4. 67, 4. 58, 4. 60, 4. 62, 4. 63, 4. 94, 4. 66, 4. 67, 4.
68, 4. 69, 4. 26, 6. 54, 6. 71, 4. Of Diet to be observed in Fevers. 4, 1. 5,
1. 6, 1. 7, 1. 8, 1. 9, 1. 10, 1. 11, 1. 13, 1. 14, 1. 15, 1. 16, 1. 17, 1. 18,
1. 19, 1. These Aphorisms following, belong only to the Surgeon. 27, 6. 31,
6. 38, 6. 55, 6. 24, 6. 49, 6. 60, 6. 67, 5. 25, 6. 14, 7. 20, 7. 21, 6. 21, 7.
26, 2. 4, 6. 18, 6. 45, 6. 2, 7. 14, 7. 24, 7. 47, 2. 16* 6. 46, 2. 77, 7. 50,
6. 19, 6. 24, 6. 50, 7. 20, 5. 50, 8.
The Aphorisms of Hypocrates Prince of Physicions.
The Argument of the 1. Section.
THis first Section of Aphorisms does handle for the most part the Dietarie
part of Physic; prescribing not only the measure and observation in meats
and drinks for sound bodies, but also for those bodies that are sick and
diseased, with a moderation also of labor and exercise.

Aphorism. 1.
THe life of man is short, the Art of Physic long, occasion sudden,
experience uncertain, judgment difficult. Neither is it sufficient that the
Physicion do his office, unless also the Patient, and those which are
atte^dants about him do their duty, and that outward things be as well
ordered as those that are given inwardly.

[2]
In distempratures, loosnesse, flux of the belly, and vomitings, which do come
of their own accord; if those things be purged which ought to be purged,
they are easily suffered, and are profitable: but if it be otherwise it
falls out contrary. In like sort if such an emptying of vessels be done as
should be, it is well suffered: but otherwise it is hurtful. Wherefore,
discreet consideration is to be had, both of the region and the time, as also
of the age and the quality of the disease for which such things ought to be
euacuated, or else not.

[3]
The full habit and state of the bodies of wrestlers and Champions if it come
to the highest degree of fullness is dangerous, for it cannot continue or
remain in the same state: and when it cannot so remain, nor grow into a
better habit, it remains that it must needs decline into a worse. Wherefore
that ouer-full plight of body must be speedily dissolved, to the end it may
take a beginning of new nourishment: Neither must we proceed so far that the
vessels be quite empty and void (for that is dangerous) but we must proceed so
far as Nature will bear and tolerate. So, extreme euacuations are perilous,
and so again extreme repletions are likewise dangerous.

[4]
A small and slender diet, in long and lingering diseases is always dangerous:
and so in sharp sickness when it is not convenient. And again diet reduced to
extreme sle^derness is as full of peril as extreme repletio^ and fullness is
laborious and painful.

[5]
The sick may offend in a slender diet: for thereby it happens that they grow
worse; for every error in this case is wont to prove more dangerous, then
should be. Wherefore a very slender diet and too precise is somewhat dangerous to
a sound and healthful body, because they endure the errors thereof with more
difficulty. Wherefore a thin and exact manner of diet for the most part is more
dangerous then that which is a little more full and plentiful then should be.

[6]
To extreme diseases extreme and exquisite remedies are the best.

[7]
When therefore the disease is sharp, and has forthwith most extreme pains
and passions, we must use a most exceeding slender diet when it is so: but in
the contrary we may minister a fuller, and give more nourishment: and as the
disease shall decline we may remit the manner of thin diet, by little and
little, and give the patie^t more meat.

[8]
When the force of the disease is greatest, then a most sparing diet is to be
kept and observed.

[9]
But we must conjecture by the sicke-man, whether he be able to hold out, and
persist with the prescribed diet, even to the state and uttermost extreamitie
of the disease, or may faint or fail, and being too weak with such diet may
yield the victory to the disease, before it retire and be quayled.

[10]
In diseases which shall come instantly to their state, we must instantly
administer slender diet, but in the which shall not come so soon to state, we
must a little diminish diet: both in the time of the vigor, and extremity, and
also a little about the time of the fit: but before we may allow more liberal
diet, that the sick man may be able to hold out.

[11]
In fits and their fierce invasions, we must take away meat; for then to give
it, it is hurtful: and when diseases do return by circuit, or course, in the
recourse of those fits we must use abstinence.

[12]
The diseases themselves, and the seasons of the year, and the observation of
the proportion of the periods beween themselves, whether they be made daily or
by certain days returning by course, as the second or every other day, or by
greater distance of time, will show the sharp invasions and state of the
diseases. Likewise, signs and tokens are taken from those things which do
appear afterward. As for example, in a Plurisy, if the corrupt matter avoided
by spitting do presently appear in the beginning, it declares the disease
shall be but short; but if it be longer before it do appear it declares to
continewe longer. Moreover vrines, the excreme^ts of the belly and sweats do
declare and show the diseases to prove either easy or difficult, short, or
long.

[13]
Very old men do most easily in dure fasting, and next to the^ those of
middle age, young men not so well, children worst of all; and amongst the^
chiefly those which are of the more cheerful, quick and lively nature then
the rest.

[14]
They which grow and increase have great store of natural heat: therefore
because they need plentiful and copious nourishment, we must abundantly
supply the same: otherwise the body is consumed. But in old men there
remains but little heat: therefore, they need not so much norishme^t to
kindle the same, for a small fire is extinguished with abundance of fuel: for
that cause fevers which happen to old folk are not so sharp because their
bodies are not so hot.

[15]
The venters by nature are most hot in winter and the spring time and the
sleeping most long: wherefore at those seasons we ought to afford most meat,
because they have most natural heat: whereby it comes to pass that they need
more abundant and plentiful food. Of which thing the differences of ages and
the bodies of Champions and wrestlers are manifest arguments.

[16]
A moist diet is profitable to all perplexed with agues; but especially to
children and others which have accustomed to use such diet.

[17]
We must consider whom it may be convenient to feed once or twice, more, or
less, and by little and little: we must attribute something to the season,
region, ages and custom.

[18]
Sickely folk do most hardly brook store of meat in summer, in winter most
easily, in the spring time not so easily.

[19]
Nothing must be given to them, neither must they be constrained to take meat
which have fits returning at certain determined courses: but we ought to
diminish food before manifest tokens appear to judge of the disease.

[20]
We ought not to move, alter, or change those things which are, or have been
justly determined by nature, either with medicines or other procurements, but
to let them alone.

[21]
Carry those things which are to be drawn out, thither whither they shall
seem to incline, and bend, by such ways and places fittest for co^ueiance and
expulsion.

[22]
We must move with medicine those things which are concocted and digested; and
not those things which are raw and undigested: Neither in the beginning of
diseases unless they be provoked by their own force and violence, which very
seldom comes to pass.

[23]
Things euacuated and purged are not to be estimated by the multitude, but
advisedly to be considered if those things be avoided and sent forth which
should and ought to be, and if also the Patient do easily endure it. Also when
it is needful we must euacuate even to souning and fainting of life, if the
Patient be Meaning bloodletting.
able to endure it.

[24]
In sharp diseases, and in their beginning we ought seldom to use a purging
medicine: Neither must it be done without great advise and judgment.

[25]
If those things be avoided and purged which should be, it does good and the
sick can easily suffer it: but if the contrary be euacuated, they do
painefully endure it.

The end of the first section of the Aphorisms. Now follows the second.
The Argument of the se cond Section of Aphorisms.
THIS second Section, of which the universal and full scope, or intention cannot
well be assigned and set down, has many things appertayning to the Doctrine
of Ages, Signs, Nature and purgation.

[1]
IF sleep bring pain and labor in the disease, it is a mortal sign: but if
it bring ease and mitigation of pain the sign is not deadly.

[2]
When a Delirium and rauing, is appeased by sleep it is a good sign.

[3]
Sleep and watching, if they be immoderat and shall exceed a mean, are evil.

[4]
Neither satietie, neither hunger, neither any other thing which shall exceed
the measure of nature, can be good or healthful.

[5]
Weariness and dullness proceeding of their own accord do signify diseases to
come.

[6]
They which suffer pain of any part of the body, and do not almost feel the
pain have their understanding distempered and diseased.

[7]
Bodies extenuated and wasted with long sickness are to be restored and
refreshed by little and little: but those which have been brought low quickly
and in short time are sooner to be restored.

[8]
If any man eating meat after a sickness, does not recover strength; it
argues his body is burdened and oppressed with too much store of food: But if
the same happen to one feeding meanly, we must understand that he has need of
euacuation.

[9]
By how much the more thou shall nourish and cherish impure and corrupt bodies,
by so much the more thou shall harm and hurt them.

[10]
He which will purge bodies must make them fluxible and apt to flow before.

[11]
It is more easy to be restored with drink the^ with meat.

[12]
Those things which are left behind after the Crysis in the body after
sickness, they are wont to bring forth backsliding diseases again.

[13]
The night which goes before the fit and invasion is wont to be tedious and
grievous to them to whom the Crysis is caused, but the night following is wont
to be more easy and light.

[10]
The alteration of the excrementes not made to the worse part, in the fluxes of
the belly is good.

[15]
When the upper parts of the throat or gullet are sore, or a breaking out of
wheales do arise in the body, it behooves us to look upon the excrements: for
if they shall be choleric the body is also sick: but if they shall be like
the excrements of sound persons the body may be cherished without danger.

[16]
When hunger bears swaie, we must rest from much stirring or labor.

[17]
When overmuch meat is received against nature, it causes sickness: as the
manner of curing diseases, proceeding from repletion does declare.

[18]
The excretions and auoydings of excrements are wont to be quick, if they come
of those things which do nourish speedily and plentifully.

[19]
Praedictions and foretellings of death or health in sharp diseases are not
altogether certain.

[20]
They which in young age have their belly moist and loose, in old age have it
dry and hard: and contrariwise they which being young men have their womb or
belly dry and costyue, being aged have the same moist and laxe.

[21]
Drinking of strong wine puts away hunger.

[22]
Diseases which are bred of sacietie and surfeting are cured by euacuation: and
those which proceed from emptiness are cured by fullness: and in other things,
contraries are the remedies of co^traries.

[23]
Acute and sharp diseases are judged and determined within fourteen days (and
have their Crysis.)

[24]
The fourth day is the Index of the seventh: the eightth day the beginning of
the week following. Also the eleventh day is to be considered, for that is the
fourth day of the second week. And again, the seventeenth day is to be
considered, for that is the iiij* from the fowrteenth, and the seventh from the
eleventh.

[25]
The Quartan fevers of the summer are for the most part short: but the Autumnal
long; especially those which remain unto the winter: which are most long.

[26]
It is better that a fever should succeed a conuulsion, then that a conuulsion
should succeed a fever.

[27]
We ought not to be too confident, if any thing more easy and light do happen
in sharp diseases without any great reason: neither to be troubled if any
thing more grievous do suddenly fall out. For, many such things are
uncertain, neither are they wont to persist* and continue long.

[28]
If the body of them which have a sharp fever* do abide all at one stay, and
nothing abated, or else is melted and wasted away beyond reason, it is a very
evil sign: for the first does signify a continuance of the disease, and the
latter a great weakness and imbecillitie of nature.

[29]
In the beginnings of diseases, if any thing seem good to be moved for
euacuation, move it: but being in their state it is far better to let it alone.

[30]
About the beginnings and end of diseases, all things are more calm and
remiss: in the vigor and state more vehement.

[31]
If the body thrive not to him that after a disease feeds well, it is evil.

[32]
Those which in the beginning of sickness do feed much, and do not prosper
therewith, all such for the most part do at last fall into a loathing of meat.
On the contrary, those which in the beginning do vehemently abhor food, and
afterward desire much meat, are more easily freed from their sickness.

[33]
In any disease (similar, instrumental, or common) if reason be not weakened
nor hurt, but that they are desirous of those things which are offered, it is
good: but if it be otherwise it is an evil thing.

[34]
They are not so dangerously sick, to whose nature, age, habit, or season, the
disease in familiar and agreeable, as they to whom the disease is not agreeable
in any of those proportions.

[35]
It is better in any disease that the parts adjoining to the Navel and
nethermost belly be somewhat thick and gross: for the extenuation and
consumption of them is evil: and then it is not safe to minister purgatio^s
working downwards.

[36]
Those which are endued with health of body, do quickly faint, drinking a
purging potion: and so in like manner those are impaired which do use naughty
and corrupt nourishment.

[37]
Those which are of sound and perfect health of body do painefully and
grievously endure purging medicines.

[38]
Those meats and drinks which are worse yet pleasant, are to be preferred
before those which are better, but yet unpleasant and distasting.

[39]
For the most part old men are not so often sick as the young are. But being
once taken with long diseases they most commonly die of them.

[40]
Rheums desce^ding down to the mouth, and falling down to the throat, do not
come to concoction in those which are very old.

[41]
They die suddenly, which do often and exceedingly sown and faint without
any manifest cause.

[42]
Thou shall never cure a strong apoplexy* and also a weak one very hardly.

[43]
Strangled and suffocated folk, being not as yet dead, do not return to
themselves, if about their mouth there shall appear spume or foam collected
and gathered together.

[44]
Those that are very gross by nature, do enjoy shorter life then those which
are lean.

[45]
Change and alteration of place and diet, then also most especially of age,
does deliver children from the Epilepsia and Falling evil.

[46]
Of two pains at one time not possessing the self same place, that which is
the more vehement, does dull the sense and feeling of the other which is not so
vehement.

[47]
Whiles the filthy and corrupt matter is digesting, pains, and agues do
rather happen, then when it is digested and brought to maturation.

[48]
In every exercise of the body, when it begins to be wearied,
straightwaies rest does mitigate the wearisomnesse.

[49]
Those which are accustomed to daily labors, although they be vveake or old
men, do more easily endure accustomed exercises: then those which are not
accustomed to them although they be strong and young men.

[50]
Things accustomed a long time, although they be worse, are wont to be less
grievous then those things unaccustomed: wherefore also a change is to be
made to unaccustomed things.

[51]
It is dangerous, at one time much and suddenly either to empty, fill, hear,
or to cool, or by any other means to move or stir the body: for any thing
passing the bounds of mediocrity is an enemy to nature: for that is safe which
is done by little and little, both at other times and also most especially when
an alteration and change is to be made from one thing to an other.

[52]
He must not pass forthwith from one medicin to an other, when all things,
fall not out so well as they should to him which does proceed by good reason,
so that remain still which seemed to him to be so from the beginning.

[53]
Those which have a moist womb or belly, do pass their youthful age more
easily then those which have the same dry: but they pass their old age more
hardly and with more difficulty; for when they wax old for the most part it
is dried.

[54]
As greatness and talness of of body is comely to the state of young age, so it
is more unprofitable than littleness, and low stature, in old age.

The end of the second Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the third Section.
The Argument.
THis third book is almost reduced to the discourse of ages or times,
expressing unto us two Common places, that is to say the strength and the
forces of ages, and the diversity of diseases throughout those ages and times.

[1]
Alteration and variableness of the seasons do most especially bring forth
diseases, and likewise great alterations of cold and heat in those seasons,
and of other things answering to them in proportion.

[2]
Some natures are well, or ill in the summer season, and others are well or ill
in the winter.

[3]
Some diseases are well or ill affected, some more to one time, and some to an
other; and some ages more to some one time, place, and kind of diet, then they
are to an other.

[4]
Autumnall diseases are to be expected in these seasons, when on the self
same day, it is some times hot, and some times cold.

[5]
The South wind dulleth the hearing, obscureth and darkneth the sight,
offends the head with aches and rhumes, procures and causes heaviness and
faintness in the members. When therefore it is frequent and blows often,
such things happen and are incident to the weak and sickly. Contrariwise* the
North wind causes coughs, exasperateth and excoriateth the jaws, hardneth the
belly, suppresseth urine, stirs up cold shiuerings, and shakings,
ingendreth pains of the side and breast. Therefore when this wind bears swaie,
those that are weak and feeble, must expect and look for such accidents.

[6]
When summer is like the spring time, we must expect much sweating in agues.

[7]
Sharp Agues are engendered with great droughts and dryness: and if the year
proceed to be such as the state of the season is, which it has affected, we
must expect such kinds of diseases.

[8]
In certain and moderat times, observing their seasonablenesse, certain and
seasonable diseases having a happy determination, are engendered: But in
uncertain, wavering, and unseasonable times, uncertain diseases are engendered
(whose Crysis is accompanied with grievous accidents.

[9]
In Autumn universally there are most sharp and pernicious diseases: but the
spring time is most wholesome and not dangerous.

[10]
Autumn is hurtful to such as are in a consumption.

[11]
Amongst the parts of the year, if the winter shall be dryer and the wind
northernly, and the spring much raining and the wind southernly it must of
necessity fall out, that in summer sharp agues, rhtums in the eyes, bloody
fluxes do happen, especially to women and to men being moist by nature.

[12]
Contrarily, if winter shall be southernly, full of rain, and warm, and the
spring dry and northernly, women whose childebirth and deliverance happens
near the spring do upon the least occasion suffer aborsment and untimely
birth: or if they be deliuened at their due time, they bring forth such weak
and diseased children, so that either they die quickly, or live but leanly and
sickly. To others there happens bloody fluxes and hot infla^mations of the
eyes, and to old men rhumes which do quickly bring destruction.

[13]
Summer being dry and the wind northernly, Autumn full of rain and the wind
southernlie, vehement pains of the head are to be expected in the winter
following. Also, coughs hoarsnesse, and rhumes, distillings at the nostrills,
and to some pining consumptions.

[14]
A northernly and dry Autumn is profitable and good to men which are moist by
nature, and also to women: to others, it causes hot inflammations in the eyes,
and fevers partly sharp and partly long, and some also are troubled with
melancholy by (...)

[15]
Of all the seasons thorough-out the whole year, dryness and droughts are more
wholesome and less dangerous to man's life, then daily showers of rain and
moisture.

[16]
When much rain showreth down, these diseases for the most part are
inge^dred, that is to say, long continuing agues, fluxes of the belly,
corruption of the humors, falling sickness, apoplexies, or the dead palsies,
the squinances in the throat: but when there is much dryness and drought there
happens consumptions, rhumes in the eyes ^^^ines of the ioints, difficulty
in making vrin, and the passion of the Intestins.

[17]
Daily seasons of weather being northernly do close and strengthen the bodies,
they make them more mouable and nimble, better colored, and more strong and
able in hearing: they dry and harden the belly, but they bite and offend the
eyes: and if any pain have before possessed the breast, they make it more fierce
and grievous. Contrarily, southernely constitutions do loose and moysten those
bodies, they dull the hearing, they bring giddiness of the head, they bring
mistiness, and dimness of the eyes, dullness and laziness to the body, they
make the belly loose and laxatiue.

[18]
As touching Seasons of the year, in the spring and prime of summer, children
and those which are nearest to them in age, do live best in health. But in
summer and in some part of Autumn old men live best: but in the rest of
Autumn and winter they which lead a middle age.

[19]
Any diseases are engendered in any times of the year: yet many are rather
caused and stirred, in someone more then in an other.

[20]
In the spring there happens madness, Melancholy, the falling evil, fluxes of
blood, the Squinancie, rhumes, distillations of humors, coughs, leprosies, dry
scabs, Morphues and many vlcerous wheales, pushes, and pains of the ioints.

[21]
In summer there are some of those specified before in the spring: also
continual fevers and burning agues, and many Tertians also and Quartan agues,
and vomitings, fluxes of the belly, infla^mations of the eyes, pains of the
ears, vlcerations of the mouth, rotting and putrefying of the privy members,
and sweatings.

[22]
Also many summer diseases are in Autumn, both Quartans and also uncertain and
wandering agues, swellings of the spleen, hydropsie, consumptions, strangurie,
loosnesse and excoriation of the bowels, aches of the huckle bone, the
squinancie, shortness of breath, a straight pressing or drawing together of the
bowels in some part of them, the falling sickness, madness and melancholy.

[23]
In winter are engendered plurisies, inflammation of lungs, lethargy, rheum in
the nostrels, hoarsnesse coughs, pains of the breast sides, and loins,
headaches, swymming and gyddinesse of the head, (causing dimnesse to the eyes)
Apoplexies (or sudden deprivation of the senses.)

[24]
But as concerning ages, these diseases do happen to little children, and
lately borne; ulcers in the mouth, vomiting, coughs, want of sleep, great
fears, inflammations of the nauill, moist running at the ears.

[25]
The time of teeth-breeding coming, there happens itching of the gums, fevers,
convulsions, fluxes of the belly; especially when they bring forth their
teeth, and most principally to those children which are most fat and gross
and have their belly hard and bound.

[26]
To those children which are a little bigger there does happen infla^mations of
the almondes of the mouth, disioynting and dislocation of the turning joints in
the nape of the neck inwardly, shortness of wind, breeding of the stone round
worms, gut worms, long hanging warts, unnatural erection of the Yard,
difficulty* in making of water, Scrophulus in the neck, and other risings,
especially those before declared.

[27]
Moreover, to those which are greater and coming to ripe age, there happen
many of those former diseases* but more often, long continuing agues, and flux
of blood issuing out of the nostrells.

[28]
The diseases of children for the most part, some of them do attain to the
Crysis, or alteration within 40. days: some within seven months: some within
seven years, others when they come to ripe age. But those which shall continue
longer, and shall neither be dissolved, to men children when they come to ripe
age, nor to may den children when their monthly terms break forth, Hi
consenescere consueuerunt.

[29]
To young men* there does happen spytting of blood, consumptions, sharp
fevers, falling sickness, and other diseases, but chiefly these now rehearsed.

[30]
To those which have passed beyond this young age, there does happeu
shortness of breath, impostumes of the lungs, lethargies, phrensies, burning
fevers, long fluxes of the belly, choleric passions, or flowing of the gall,
bloody fluxes, fluxes of the stomach and belly of meats indigested, the
Haemorrhoides and such like.

[31]
To old men does happen difficulty and hardness of breathing, Rhumes, with
the cough, strangurie or avoiding of vrin by dropmeale, Disuria and difficulty
of making vrin, aches of the ioints, the stone in the kidneys, gyddinesse of
the brain, Apoplexies, or dead palsies, an evil habit or disposition of the
body called Cachexia, itching of the whole body, watchfulnes and want of
sleep, moistness and humidities of the belly, eyes, and nostrills, dimnesse
of the sight, Glaucoma, and dullness of hearing.

The end of the third Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the iiij. Section.
The Argument.
THis fourth Section is variable; but for the most part is reduced to
euacuation and prognostic signs of future events.

[1]
Thou shall purge childbearing women if it be needful, at the fowrth month
after conception, and so unto the seventh, but those more sparingly: but the
co^ception being young or elder thou shall abstain.

[2]
Such things are to be drawn out of the body, by the use of purging medicines,
as they are which issuing forth of their own accord do help the same: but
those which issue forth in a contrary manner are to be stopped.

[3]
If such things be purged as should be, it does good, and the patient does
easily endure it: but if otherwise it be done, the patient does endure it
painfully.

[4]
In summer it is more convenient to purge the upper venters, in the winter the
inferior by stool.

[5]
Under the Canicular or or dog star, and before the dog-starre, purgations are
painful anp difficil.

[6]
Lean and slender men are easy to vomit, and therefore must be purged by
vomit, unless it be in winter.

7* Purge those which do not vomit easily, and being in good plight, downwards
by stool, so it be not summer.

[8]
Do not purge them upwards which are subject to the phtisick or a consumption.

[9]
Thou shall purge melancholicke folk strongly by stool. In like manner
beginning the contrary way of purging. (For, light matter bending upwards
must be drawn out by the upper parts: But the heavier and grosser matter by
the lower parts.)

[10]
We must purge in very sharp sicknesses, if the matter do move to the purging
of it; and that the very same day wherein the sickness does begin: for delaie
in such diseases is very hurtful and dangerous.

[11]
Those which have gripings and wringings in the belly, and horrible pain about
the Navel and the loins, and cannot be eased and dissolved by medicin or
otherwise, they shall fall into a dry dropsy called, aqua inter cutem sicca
(which is a Timpanie.)

[12]
Those are not to be purged in winter by vomit without hurt, whose stomach and
belly cannot retain meat until it be digested.

[13]
Their bodies are to be made moist before hand with abundance and plenty of
food and also with ease and rest, which taking a potio^ of veratrum or
hellebor, do hardly and painfully vomit.

[14]
Elleborus being drunk, the body ought rather to be moved, then to be yielded
to sleep, or rest: for the sailing in a ship, does manifest that our bodies
are stirred and provoked by motion.

[15]
When you will have Elleborus or veratrum to work more forcibly, move and
stir the body: but when you will stay it, procure sleep, and do not move.

[16]
Elleborus is very dangerous to them which have sound flesh, for it ingendreth
convulsion.

[17]
When he which is not sick of an ague does loath his meat, has a gnawing of
the mouth of the stomache, a darksome gyddinesse of the brain, and bitterness
of the mouth, hit signifies that he had need to be purged upwards.

[18]
Whosoever having need of purging has pains about the myddryffe, it is a
sign that he must be purged upwards: but the pains which are under the same
do note a purging downwards to be needful.

[19]
Those which do not thirst whiles they are purged with a medicinal potion,
shall not leave purging until they shall thirst.

[20]
If there be wringings and gripings of the guts without a fever, heaviness
of the knees, and pain of the loins, they: signify that there is need of
purging downward.

[21]
Black excrements of the belly like unto black blood, coming forth of their
own accord, either with a fever or without a fever are most evil: and by how
much the more those evil colors shall be, by so much the more those excreme^ts
shall be the worse: But such things to be expelled out by a medicin, is far
better, and that by how much the more colors there shall be of them.

[22]
In the beginning of any disease if black* choler come forth either above, or
beneath, it is dangerous and pernicious.

[23]
Those which are pyned and brought low by sharp or long diseases, or by
wounds, or any other means, and do avoid black choler, or as it were
black blood: do die the next day following.

[24]
A bloody flux if it proceed from black choler is mortal.

[25]
For blood to be carried upward of what kind soever it be, is an evil sign:
but if black blood be egested and avoided downwards, it is good.

26
If any man being afflicted with a blouddie flux do avoid as it were little
pieces of flesh, it is a mortal sign.

27
To those which have store of blood flowing, from what part soever in fevers:
their bellies become moist, after they have been refreshed.

28
Those which avoid choleric excrements downwardes, if deafeness come upon the
same they do then cease from avoiding of them: and on the other side, those
which are affected with deafnes are delivered from the same, by the avoiding of
choleric excrements.

[29]
If cold shakings happen to them which are sick of an ague the sixth day, they
have a difficult Crysis, and we cannot well judge of the disease.

[30]
In them which are afflicted with fits of Agues, howsoever the ague shall leave
them; if it return again the same hour the next day, it is wont to have a
difficult Crysis and determination.

31
Apostumes are caused near the ioints, and especially nigh the iawe bones, or
ma^dible, to them which feel weariness, and lassitude in fevers.

[32]
Those which recovering and amending from a disease, and have some place
grieved with pain, shall have apostums, or botches in the same place.

[33]
But if any part shall be pained before the disease, the seat and abiding of
the disease is there.

[34]
If a suffocation or stopping of the breath do happen upon a sudden to one
afflicted with a fever, no swelling appearing in the jaws, or gullet, it is
deadly.

[35]
If to one afflicted with a fever the neck be suddenly turned awrie, and he
can scant swallowe, and there be no swelling, it is deadly.

[36]
Sweats are good to those sick of an ague, which begin to issue forth the
third day, fifth, seventh, ninth, eleventh, fowreteenth, seue^teenth, one and
twentieth, seven and twentieth, thirty one, and thirty four: for those sweats
work the dissolution of the disease: those which happen otherwise, signify
pain, and length of the disease, or a return of the same.

[37]
Cold sweats with a sharp fever, do verily betoken death: but with a more mild
and gentle ague, length of the disease.

[38]
In what part of the body the sweat is, there is the disease.

[39]
And also in what part of the body there is heat, or cold, there the disease
is settled.

[40]
And when alterations do happen in the whole body so that the body be
cooled, and heated again by turns, or one color arise after an other, they
signify continuance of the disease.

[41]
Much sweating* caused thorough sleep, does signify that the body is sed with
store of meat: but if this happen to one feeding sparingly, we must know that
there is need of euacuation.

[42]
When there is much sweat, cold, or hot, alwaie issuing forth, the cold does
signify the disease to be more grievous: and the hot sweat does note the
disease to be less grievous.

[43]
Fevers continual which afflict every third day more vehemently and do not
cease, are the more dangerous: but by what manner soever they shall cease, and
pause, they signify that there is no present danger.

(44)
Swellings and pains about the ioints are caused to them which are afflicted
with long agues.

[45]
Those which have swellings and pains of the ioints after agues, do feed over
liberally.

[46]
If a cold shiuering fit, the fever being without intermission, do assail
the sick man being already weak, it is a deadly sign.

[47]
Excrements avoided in fevers not intermittent, by vomit or spitting, if they
be of a leaden color, blodie, choleric, or stinking, are all evil: but if
they come forth conveniently, and easily, they are good. Also, the same
consideration is to be had of those things avoided by the belly, and vrins.
But if any thing be avoided by those places, which does not help, it is
evil.

[48]
In continual fevers, if the outward parts are cold, the inward do burn, and
the patient be thirsty, it is a deadly sign.

[49]
In continual fevers, if the lip, eye, brows, or nose, be perverted or
turned awrie, if the sickeman do not see, nor hear, which-so-euer of these
shall happen the body being weak, death is near at hand.

[50]
If there happens in a continual fever, difficulty and hardness of breathing,
with delirium, and doting, the signs are deadly.

[51]
Apostumes in fevers which are not dissolved in the first Crysis, or
judgments, they signify length of the disease.

[52]
It is not absurd to weep and shed tears in fevers and other diseases,
voluntarily: but to weep against the will is very absurd, and inconvenient.

[53]
They have fierce and vehement fevers, which have a tough and clammy moisture
about their teeth in those fevers.

[54]
Those which have dry coughs provoking little, are not wont to be very
thirsty, in burning fevers.

[55]
All fevers proceeding from the tumors in inguine and other adenosus parts, are
evil, except those fevers which are called Ephemerae, and last but one day.

[56]
Sweat coming* upon one sick of an ague, the ague not ceasing, is evil: for
the disease is prolonged, and it signifies that there is much moisture.

[57]
If a fever happen to the crampe, Spasmus, or Tetanus: then it dissolueth the
crampe.

[58]
If a cold shaking fit do com upon him which has a burning fever, then a
deliverance from the disease is procured by it.

[59]
An exquisit, and perfect Tertian fever, comes to his Crysis or state in
seven circuits or fits, at the utmost.

[60]
Those that wax deaf and thick of hearing thorough fevers* are delivered
from that disease by flux of blood at the nose, or by flux of the womb.

[61]
Unless the fever shall leave the patie^t in the odd days, it is accustomed
to return again.

[62]
Those which have the yellow Iaundis happening unto them upon agues, before the
seventh day, have an evil sign.

[63]
Those fevers which have their cold shaking fits returning at a certain day,
are dissolved the same day.

[64]
It is a good thing for them which have the yellow iaundes coming on them in
fevers on the seventh day, ninth, eleventh, or fourteenth day: unless the
right hypocondrium be hard: for then it is not good but evil.

[65]
In fevers, a vehement heat about the stomach, and a gnawing about the heart,
is an evil thing.

[66]
Convulsions in sharp fevers, and vehement pains about the bowels, are evil.

[67]
In fevers, great fears through sleep, or convulsion, do prognosticate evil.

(68)
The breath not keeping due course is evil: for it does signify convulsion.

(69)
Vrins with a fever being thick, clotted, and little in quantity, do profit
them which make them, if afterward thin vrins, and much in quantity be
avoided of them: but those vrins most commonly become such in which the
Hypostasis or sediment, shall appear straight after they are made, or not long
after.

[70]
Those which have their water troubled or unclean in agues, such as are the
waters of Cattle, have or shall have headache.

[71]
Those which shall have their Crysis or alteration of the disease the seventh
day, have a little red Cloud in the urine the 4. day, and other things
thereunto belonging accordingly.

[72]
Vrins very clear and white are very evil, especially if they appear in
those which are afflicted with frenzy.

[73]
Those which have an inflation of the Hypocondria, and a rumbling pain of the
loins succeeding, have their belly moystned and loosned, except the winds
break forth downwards, or store of urine do issue forth: and these things
happen in fevers.

[74]
To those that doubt of apostumations to come about the ioints, much vrin
thick, and white, does deliver from the apostum, such as is wont to be avoided
in painful fevers, the fowrth day: when also blood shall issue forth of the
nostrels there shall be a dissolution and a deliverance speedily.

(75)
If any piss blood or filthy matter, it signifies an exulceration of the
kidneys or bladder.

[76]
Those which have small pieces of flesh, and as it were hairs, issuing forth
together with thick urine, do avoid those excrements from the kidneies.

(77)
Those which avoid with thick vrin certain branny contents, have their bladder
infected with an ulcer, or scabbednesse.

(78)
It is signified to them which piss blood upon the sudden, that there is some
vein of the kidneys broken.

(79)
They in whose vrin there appears an Hypostasis or sediment full of sand, have
their bladder or kidneies diseased with the stone; but especially the bladder,
because it has a very spacious hollownesse or cauity.

[80]
If any one piss blood or clotts of blood and make his water by drops, having
pain in that part of the belly (which is between the navel and the secret
parts) named hypogastrion, or at the seame-line of the skinnne of the coddes,
called perinaeum, and at the place called pecten* (where the hair about the
privy members grows) then the places about the bladder are diseased.

[81]
If any one piss blood or filthy matter, or little scales, and there be also
a stinking or strong smell, it does betoken an exulceration of the bladder.

[82]
Those which have an apostume bred in the vrinarie passage, or conduit of the
water, they are delivered from it, the same being brought to suppuration and
broken.

[83]
Voiding of much vrin in the night, does signify final euacuation of
excrements by the fundament.

The end of the fourth Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the 5* Section.
The Argument.
THe fifth Book or Section is variable yet almost it does wholly entreat of the
diseases of women, and of the good and badde dispositions of the womb.

[1]
A Conuulsion by taking Elleborus is deadly.

(2)
A Convulsion after a wound, is pernicious and deadly.

[3]
The hicket or a convulsion, after a copious flux of blood, is evil.

[4]
After an immoderat purgation (which the Greeks call Hypercatharsis) a
convulsion or hicket is evil.

[5]
If any drunken man do suddenly wax dumb, he shall die with convulsion,
unless he be taken with a fever, or presently recover his speech at that
hour in which the surfeit is dissolved.

[6]
Those which are taken with the cramp or distention, named Tetanus, do die
within four days: but if they shall ouerpasse them, they recover their health.

(7)
The falling sickness which is before ripeness of age, is removed away: but
that which happens after the 25. year of the age does for the most part
accompany us unto death.

[8]
Those which are sick of a plurisie, unless they be purged vpwardes, within
fowrteene days shall have the disease turned into an impostume.

[9]
A consumption most especially happens in those ages which are fro the 18*
year to the thirty and fifth year*

[10]
Those which have the evil cause of the squinancie converted into the lungs,
do dry within seven days: but if they escape them, they are affected with
corrupt and filthy matter (called empiema)*

(11)
If the spittle which they avoid by coughing that are affected with a
consumption, do stink strongly being cast upon the coals, and the hairs of
the head do fall off, it is a pernicious and deadly sign.

(12)
If a flux of the belly happen to them which have their hair falling away by
a consumption, death is near at hand.

(13)
Those which cough forth frothy blood, do ^etch and draw the same out of the
lungs.

(14)
If a flux of the belly come upon him which is in a consumption it is a
pernicious sign.

(15)
Those which are infected with an impostume by a plurisie, if they be purged
from the corrupt matter within forty days after the breaking of the apostume,
are cured, or otherwise they pass into a consumption.

(16)
Hot water too often used brings these discommodities; tenderness of the
flesh, distemperature of the sinews, heaviness and drowsinesse of the mind,
fluxes of blod, swounings, and faintings of life to which death is incident.

(17)
But the use of cold water brings convulsions, the crampes called Tetani,
blackness and cold shakings usual in some fevers.

(18)
Cold water is hurtful to the bones, teeth, sinews, brain, and marrow of the
back: but that which is hot is good and profitable.

[19]
We must heat those things which are ouercold; except those which power forth
blood, or are inclined to power forth blood, in short time*

[20]
Cold water biteth and nippeth ulcers, hardneth the skin, hinders the
soreness from maturation of the corrupt matter, causes, blackness, brings
forth cold shiuering fittes of* agues, convulsions, crampes, and distention of
the sinews.

[21]
Notwithstanding, there is some time, when in the crampe without an ulcer in a
well flesht young man in the midst of summer, plentiful pouring out of cold
water does call back the heat, and so the heat does dissolve the crampe.

(22)
Hot water yields unto us a great token of security, and safety in that ulcer
and sore in which it causes ripe and well digested matter: it softneth and
mollifieth the skin, it makes it thin, it does appease pain, it
mitigateth and asswageth cold shakings, convulsions, and the cramps (named
Tetani) it dissolueth heaviness and pain of the head, it profits broken
bones very much, especially if they be bare without flesh; and principally in
the head: also it profits those things which are mortified and exulcerated
through cold. Lastly, it is profitable to eating ulcers in the su^dame^t,
privy members, womb, bladder: to all those, hot water is a friend and
comforter, but cold water is an enemy and a destroyer.

[23]
We must use cold water to those sores from whence blood does issue, or is
about to issue, and not to be applied in the same place by which it issues but
to those places from whence it flows. And if any inflammation or burning of
the parts, do incline to a red and bloody color with fresh clear blood,
apply cold things, or cold water unto them: but if the infla^mations be
inueterate and old, it makes them black. Also it helps the fiery
inflammation, named Erysipelas, if it be not vlcerated. For, being vlcerated it
hurts.

(24)
Things that are very cold, as snow, and ye, are hurtful to the breast,
they procure coughs, they cause ruptures of the veins, and also rhumes.

(25)
Cold water powered forth abundantly, does ease and diminish the tumors and
pains of the ioints, which are without vlceration, and also gowty swellings
and pains and convulsions for the most part, and dissolueth dolor and pain:
for a small benumming has the force of dissoluing and putting away of pain.

(26)
Water that is quickly made hot, and quickly cold, is most light.

(27)
It is good for them which have great desire to drink in the night to fall a
sleep, being very thirsty.

(28)
A fumigation, or perfume, of odoriferous spyces does bring forth the terms.
It would also be profitable for many other things if it did not breed
heaviness and pain of the head.

[29]
Thou shall purge a woman with child if it be needful, the fowrth month after
conception, and so forwards until the beginning of the seventh month: but
those that come near the seventh, month not so much: but the foetus* being
younger or elder thou shall abstain.

[30]
A woman with child, a vein being opened, aborteth and is delivered before due
time: and so much the rather, if the foetus be of any bigness.

[31]
It is pernicious and deadly if a woman great with child be taken with any
sharp disease.

[32]
A woman is cured from vomiting blood, her mo^thly terms issuing forth.

[33]
A flux of blood at the nose is good and healthful to a woman, her flowers
failing contrary to the due course of nature.

[34]
If the womb be very laxatiue and loose to a woman with child, there is
danger of aborcement.

[35]
Sneesing happening to a woman grieved with suffocation of the womb, or having a
painful and difficult deliverance is good.

[36]
The monthly courses being discolored, neither coming forth always in the
same manner, and time, do declare that a purgation is necessary for the woman.

[37]
If the paps be suddenly extenuated and become lanke to a woman with child,
aborcement does follow.

[38]
If one of the dugs be extenuated and become lank to a woman conceived with
child with twins, she brings forth one of them before due time: And if the
right dug become sle^der she brings forth the male child before due time, but
if the left dug become lank she makes aborcement of the female.

[39]
If any woman neither with child nor having bin delivered of child, have milk
in her breasts, her monthly courses have failed her.

[40]
Madness is signified to happen to those women in whose dugs or paps there is
blood collected and heaped together.

[41]
If you will know whether any woman have conceived or no: give her a potion of
honey and water mixed together going to sleep: and if she feel gripings and
wringings of the belly she has conceived; if she do not, she has not
conceived.

[42]
If a woman conceived with child do bear a manchilde she is well and fresh
colored: if she bear a maid child, she is ill colored.

[43]
If the inflammation called Erysipelas be bred in the womb or mother, it is a
perniuous and deadly thing.

[44]
Those women which are very lean contrary to nature and do bear children;
do suffer untimely deliverance; until they come to better plight and be
fatter.

[45]
Those women which being reasonable fat and making abortion the second, or
third month, without any manifest cause, have acetabula vteri plena mucoris,
neither are they able to co^taine the foetus because of his heavy weight (but
those Cotylidons being broken) it falls down.

[46]
Those which are fatter then Nature requires and do not conceive child, have
os vteri compressed, and closed together by the omentum and call of the guts,
and therefore they cannot conceive until they wax leaner.

[47]
If the womb shall apostumate in that part where it lies near the hip, or
huckle bone, it is necessary to cure it with tents lipped in liquid medicines
such as the Greeks do call Emmota.)

(48)
Men children do lie and are carried on the right side of the womb, and women
children rather on the left side.

[49]
A medicine procuring sneesing, put into the nostrills, does drive and force
out the secu^dine* so that you stop the nostrils and mouth close with the hand.

[50]
If it please a woman to restrain her accustomed courses, apply a very great
cupping glass to her breasts.

[51]
Those women which are conceived with child, have the mouth or gate of the
mother shut and closed up.

(52)
If milk flow plentifully out of the dugs of a woman bearing a child in her
womb, it signifies that the child is weak: but if the paps be hard and
stiff, they declare a stronger co^ception.

[53]
The dugges and pappes become slender and limber to those women which shall loose
their foetus. But contrarily, if the pappes become hard, pain shall either
molest the pappes, hips, eyes, or the knees, but they shall not suffer
aborcement.

[54]
Those women have the mouth or gate of the womb closed or shut up* which have
the same hard.

[55]
Childe-bearing women which are taken with fevers, or are brought to a low
state without a manifest cause, do bring forth the birth painfully, and with
danger, or are in hazard of life by untimely and unseasonable deliverance.

[56]
If a Convulsion or swouning happen to a flux of a woman's flowers, it is an
evil thing.

[57]
Women's terms flowing immoderately, diseases are engendered: and being suppressed,
and stopped of their due course, diseases do likewise happen from the womb.

[58]
The strangurie or dropping out of the vrin does happen by the inflammation of
the straight gut, and likewise of the womb or mother, to the reins that be
exulcerated: also if the liver be inflamed, the hicket or yexing does happen in
the mean while.

[59]
If a woman do not conceive, and thou would know if she shall conceive at
all, let her be wrapped and lapped round about with clothes, and make a sum
under the lower parts: and if the sent be perceived to pass through her
body, to her nostrills, and her mouth; know that she is not barraine, by any
default in her self.

[60]
If the monthly purgations do keep their course to a woman with child, it is
impossible that the foetus should be in health.

[61]
If a woman's monthly courses stop, and she have neither shiuering cold, nor
ague coming upon her, and she loath her meat, make account that she is
conceived.

62
Those women which have their womb cold and dry, do not conceive: and such
as have them over moist* cannot be conceived, for the seed is extinguished and
perished in them. Also, those women cannot conceive, which have those places
over dry, and hot; for the seed becomes corrupted for want of due
n^^rishment. But those women which have obtained a moderate temperature of the
places in respect of both the oppositions and contrarieties, do excel in
fruitfulness.

(63)
The same consideration and reason is likewise to be respected in men: for
either through the spoungy and poery substance of the body the spirits are
dissipated and scattered abroad, so that they cannot cast forth seed, or else
the moisture does not issue forth because of his grossness and thickness,
or else because of coldness it does not conceive any heat, that it may be
collected in his proper place: or the very same thing does and may happen
through heat.

(64)
It is not good to give milk to them which are troubled with headache, or with
agues, nor to those which are troubled with the disease called status
Hypochondriacus, nor to those which are troubled with thirst. It is also naught
for them which avoid choleric excrements downwards, or to those which have
sharp fevers, or have had some copious euacuation of blood. But it is good for
those which are in a consumption, so they be not troubled with any vehement
fever. It is also good for long lingering and mild agues, so that none of the
signs before spoken be present. It is good also for them which are brought
low without any apparent reason or occasion.

[65]
They are not much trobled with convulsions or with madness, which have
apparent and evident tumors with their ulcers or sores: But convulsions, and
the crampes (named Tetani) do happen to them to whom the tumors shall
suddenly vanish away, if it shall happen on the hinder part of the body: but
if they happen in the forehead, or forepart, there happens madness, vehement
pain of the side, Empiema and spitting of matter, Dysenteria, if the tumors or
swellings shall be red.

(66)
If no tumor nor swelling appear in great and badde wounds, it is a great
evil.

(67)
Soft tumore aregoods but those which are hard and undigested are evil.

(68)
To one which has pain in the hinder part of the head, the venarecta in the
forehead being opened does profit.

(69)
Cold shakings and shiuerings for the most part do begin to women from the
loins, and through the back do come to the head: But to men they do rather
begin in the back part then in the forepart; as from the hinder part of the
thighs and from the elbowes: the raritie and thinness of the skin is a
token there of* which thing the hair there growing does declare and manifest.

[70]
These which are taken with a Quartane ague, are not much assaulted with
convulsions: but if before they have bin assailed, upon the coming of the
Quartan they are delivered and freed.

[71]
Those which have their skinnearid, withered, and dry, do dye without sweat:
but those who have their skin loose, and open, do end their life with sweat.

[72]
Those that are diseased with the Iaundis, are not much molested with
windiness.

The end of: the fifth Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the 6. Section.
The Argument.
THIS sixth Section does almost altogether concern that part of the Art, which
foretells good and evil things to happen in diseases.

[1]
In a long lubricitie, and slipperinesse of the guts, if a sowrish belching do
happen, which was not before, it is a good sign.

[2]
Those which have their nostrils more moist then others by nature, and their
seed also, do enjoy their health but badly: but those which have the
contrary properties, do lead their life more healthfully.

[3]
In long difficulties, pains or fluxes of the bowelles a loathing of meat is
evil: and with a fever it is more evil.

[4]
Ulcers or soars which are smooth and glaber, are malign, and evil.

[5]
In the pain of the sides, and of the breast, and of the other parts, we must
learn if the sick do differ much, or keep at a stay.

[6]
The diseases and infirmities of the kidneies and bladder, are of hard and
difficult curation in old men.

[7]
Dolours and pains of the belly being aloft and in the upper part, are more
light and easy; not being aloft are more tedious and forcible.

[8]
Ulcers or sores arising in the body of those which are diseased with the
dropsy, are not easily cured.

(9)
Wheales being broad, are not very full of itching.

[10]
Corrupt matter, water, or blood issuing out by the nostrils, mouth, or ears,
dissolueth and cures a vehement and grievous headache.

(11)
The Haemorrhoids happening to those which are troubled with melancholy and
pain of the kidneies, are good and profitable.

(12)
Unless in the cure of the Haemorrhoids which have long continued, there be one
vein kept open, it is to be feared that a dropsy or consumption will shortly
follow.

(13)
The hicket or yexing trobling or vexing us, is put away by sneesing.

(14)
If water flow, from the veins of him which is diseased with the dropsy, to
the belly, the disease is dissolved (if nature it self make euacuation.)

(15)
Vomiting coming by the benefit of nature, dissolueth and riddeth away a long
flux or looseness of the belly (by reason of the retraction and drawing back
of the humors which did bend downwards.)

[16]
A looseness of the belly happening to one afflicted with a pleurisy, or the
disease of the lunges named peripneumonia, is an evil thing.

(17)
It is a good thing for him which is troubled with a watrish running of the
eyes called lippitudo, to be taken with a flux and looseness of the belly.

(18)
It is a deadly thing when the bladder is wounded, or the brain, or the heart,
the midriffe, any small gut, the stomach, or the liver.

[19]
A bone perished or cut off, or a cartilag, gristle or sinew, or any little
parcel of the eye lid, or the praeputium being diminished, do not grow or
join together.

[20]
If blood flow into the belly contrary to nature, it corrupts and is
putrified of necessity.

[21]
If the swelling of veins in the legs, named varices, or the Haemorrhoids,
shall happen to them which are mad and frantic, then the disease of madness
is dissolved.

(22)
Breaches or fluxes of humors which do descend from the back to the elbow, are
dissolved by opening of a vein.

[23]
If fear and sadness do continue long, it is a sign of melancholy.

[24]
If any small or slender gut be wounded or pierced, it does not close or
grow together again.

[25]
If the choleric tumor Erysipelas, being outward be returned inwards, it is
evil: but if being inward it be turned outward it is a good thing.

[26]
Those burning fevers are dissolved with dotage, or rauing, in which there are
trembling shakings.

[27]
If the corruption, matter, or water, do flow out altogether at once, from
them which are burnt, by catire, or cut, by the Surgeon for the cure of the
inward apostumation between the lungs and the breast, or of the dropsy, the^
the diseased shall die without all doubt.

[28]
Eunuchs or gelded men are not diseased with the gout, neither do wax bald.

[29]
A woman is not troubled with the gout, unless her monthly terms do fail
her.

(30)
A young stripling is not troubled with the gout, before he has used venerie.

[31]
Drinking of strong wine, or a bath, a fomentation, phlebothomy (or letting of
blood) or a purgation does cure pains of the eyes.

[32]
Those which slammer, are taken most commonly with a long flux of the belly.

(33)
Those which have sower belchings, are not much subject to a plurisie.

[34]
Great swelling veins, named varices, are not incident to them which are balde:
but yet they have their hair growing again on their head, to whom the
swellings and veins do happen being balde.

(35)
If a cough come upon them which are diseased with a dropsy, it is an evil
thing.

(36)
Phlobotomie, or bloudletting, cures the difficulty of making urine, but we
must open the inward veins.

[37]
If a tumor appear in the neck to him that is diseased with angina, it is a
good thing.

[38]
Those which have hidden or deep Cancers, are not to be healed or cured of
them: for they which are healed die sooner; and those which are not cured of
them live the longer.

(39)
A convulsion is caused either by repletion, or by euacuation: so is also the
hicket or yexing.

[40]
Those which have pain at the Hypocondrium without an inflammation, are cured
by a fever happening to them.

(41)
If corrupt matter give forth no signification, nor sign of it self in the
bodies of the diseased, the cause that it does not disclose it self nor
appear, is either for the grossness and thickness of it self, or of the
place.

[42]
If the liver wax hard to them which are affected with the yellow iaundis, it
is an evil thing.

[43]
The spleneticke, which are taken with a bloody flux of the bowels, do die of
a dropsy, or a slipperinesse of the bowels, called a lientery, following a
long flux.

[44]
They die within seven days, to whom the disease named Ileos, or pain in the
small guts, shall happen after a strangurie, unless a fever coming upon them,
store of urine shall issue forth.

[45]
If ulcers continue a year or longer, the bone of necessity must grow foul,
and be corrupted, and so hollow cicatrizes are caused.

[46)
Those which become crookt backed by shortness of wind, or a cough* before they
attain to ripeness of age, do die quickly.

[47]
Those are to be let blood or purged in the spring time to whom opening of a
vein or purging may do good.

[48]
The difficulty of the intestins, and guts, coming upon them which are
diseased with the spleen (viz. with hardness) is good.

[49]
Goutie diseases, the inflammation being assuaged, within forty days do
cease.

[50]
It must needs be that a fever, vomiting, and perbraking of choler must come
upon them which have their brain divided, or wounded.

[51]
Those which are in health being suddenly taken with headache and thereupon
presently become dumb, and snort, do die within seven days, unless a fever
come upon them in the mean while.

[52]
But we ought to behold in their sleeps also, if any part of the eyes do
appear underneath the liddes: for if any thing appear of the white of them,
the eye lids not being fast closed, if it do not happen by a flux of the
belly or by some medicinal potion, it is an evil and a very deadly sign.

(53)
That doting which is done with laughter, is not so dangerous: but that which
is done with earnest sadness is more dangerous.

(54)
Painful breathings in sharp diseases with a fever, as it were, of such as
sigh, and mourn, are evil.

(55)
Pains of the gowt do most commonly afflict and are provoked in the spring
and autumn.

(56)
The falling down of humors are very dangerous in melancholicke diseases, at
these seasons, and do declare an apoplexy, or a co^vulsion, madness, or
blindness.

[57]
Also apoplexies are caused most especially from the fortith to the threescore
years.

(58)
If the Call Omentum shall hang forth of the body it putrifieth of necessity.

[59]
Those that are afflcted with long pain of the hips, having the huckle bone
coming forth and returning in again into his place, have clammy phlegm
collected and gathered together in the hollownesse of that part.

[60]
Those which have the huckle bone (being the head or upper part of the thigh)
coming out, and tormented with the ache called sciatica, shall have the thigh
of feeblished and consumed: and they do halt and are lame, unless they are
burned (with hot iron instruments.)

The end of the sixth Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the 7. Section.
The Argument.
THIS seventh book is altogether prognosticall and foretelling things to come
in which he entreats of the presagements and foretokens of health and death.

[1]
Coldness of the extreme parts in sharp diseases is evil.

(2)
Flesh black, and blew, because of a foul diseased bone, is an evil thing.

[3]
The hicket after vomiting, and also redness of the eyes, are evil.

[4]
After sweat, cold shiuerings, and shakings, are not good.

[5]
After madness which the Greeks call mania, a blodie flux, the dropsy, or an
ecstasy or trance is good.

[6]
Abhorring of meat in a long disease, and the excreme^ts avoided downwards
without mixture of humors, are evil.

[7]
Cold shakings, and fond doting, after much drinking, is evil.

[8]
After the eruption of an impostume inwardly, faintness, and looseness of the
parts of the body, vomiting and swouning does ensue.

[9]
After a flux of blood, Delirium, or a convulsion is evil.

[10]
After the Iliack passion, vomiting, the hicket, doting and convulsion, are
evil.

[11]
An impostume of the lungs, named peripneumonia, after a pleurisy is evil.

[12]
A frenzy with a peripneumonia, is evil.

(13)
A convulsion or the crampe (Tetanus) because of hot burnings, is evil.

(14)
Astonishment, and doting called Delirium, thorough some blow of the head, is
an evil sign.

[15]
The spitting out of corrupt matter after the spitting of blood, is evil.

(16)
A consumption, or pthisis, and a flux of the belly, coming after spitting of
corrupt matter, are evil signs: for when the spitting is stopped the diseased
do die.

[17]
The hicket, or singult coming through an inflammatio^ of the liver, is evil.

[18]
A convulsion or delirium caused through watching, is an evil thing.

(19)
After the laying bare of a bone, the inflammation and hot tumor Erisipelas is
evil.

[20]
Putrefaction, or impostumation from the inflammation Erisipelas, is evil.

[21]
A flux of blood after a strong pulse, in ulcers is evil.

[22]
After a long pain of the parts belonging to the belly, an impostumation is
evil.

(23)
After avoiding of unmixed excrements downwards, a bloody flux is evil.

(24)
Delirium, or foolishness does ensue after the wound of a bone, if it shall
penetrate into the hollow or void space.

(25)
A convulsion after the taking of a purging potio^ brings death.

[26]
A great coldness of the extreme and utmost parts through vehement pain of of
the parts, pertaining to the belly, is evil.

(27)
If the disease, called tenasmus, shall happen to a woman with child, it is
the cause of aborcement.

[28]
If either a bone, cartilag or sinew shall be cut in the body, it does neither
increase nor grow together again.

[29]
If a strong flux or looseness of the belly shall come upon him that is
diseased with the dropsy named leucophlegmatia, it dissolueth and cures the
disease.

(30)
They have a falling down of flegmaticke humors from the head, which do
avoid frothie and fomie excrements out of the belly in their laxnesse and
looseness of the same.

(31)
Sediments in vrins made in the time of agues, like unto course wheat meal,
do signify that the sickness shall continuew long.

[32]
Choleric Sediments appearing in vrins, but being before thin, and
waterish, do signify a sharp disease.

[33]
Those which make diverse vrins, have a vehement disturbance, and unquietness
in the body.

[34]
The vrins, in which bubbles do swim aloft, do signify the disease of the
reins, and that the infirmity and weakness shall endure long.

[35]
It is a sign that the disease is of the reins, and a sharp disease to be
present, to them in whose vrin a fattie and thick superficies appears.

(36)
If also pains be caused to those which are diseased with the grief of the
kidneys about the muscles of the back bone, and have the signs abouesaid; if
they be felt toward the outward parts, look and expect that the Apostume
shall also be outwardly: but if the pains bend and incline rather to the
inward parts, we must then fear that the apostume shall be inwardly.

(37)
Vomiting of blood is wholesome to them which do it without a fever: but if it
be with a fever it is an evil thing; and the cure and remedy of the same is
to be performed with things that have a cooling and a binding quality and
virtue.

[38]
Distillations upon the upper belly, do come to suppuration and ripeness
within twenty days.

(39)
If any one piss blood, or clots of blood, and be diseased with the disease
named the stranguria, the pain attaining to the part of the belly, called
Abdomen or Hypogastrion, and the place named pecten (and also to perinaeum) the
places and parts above the bladder are diseased.

[40]
If the tongue be suddenly become feeble, or any part of the body being
astonished, be benu^med without feeling, it is a sign of melancholy.

(41)
If the hicket do happen to old men purged above measure, it is not good.

(42)
If the fever be not caused of choler, store of warm water powered upon the
head does dissolve the fever.

[43]
A woman has not the use of both hands alike.

[44]
If clear and white matter do issue out from them which are affected with
corrupt matter between the breast and the lunges when they suffer cauterising
or incision, they do escapes but if bloody, stinking, and filthy matter do
issue forth, they die and cannot escape.

(45)
If clear and white matter do issue from them whose liver is corrupted or
apostumated with filthy matter, and burnt, they recover health and become
sound: for the corrupt matter is contained in the coat: but if that which
comes forth be like the lees and dregs of oil, they die.

(46)
Cure and heal pains of the eyes which proceed from drinking of strong wine,
and bathing in hot water, by opening of a vein.

(47)
If a cough come upon one diseased with the dropsy, he is without hope of
recovery.

(48)
Drinking of nete strong wine, and the opening of a vein, does dissolve the
diseases stranguria, and disuria: but the inward veins must be opened.

(49)
A swelling and redness arising on the breast of him which is grieved with
angina, it is good: for the disease bends and inclines outwardly.

[50]
They die within three days whose brain is corrupted and benummeds but if
they ouerpass them they shall recover their health.

(51)
Sternutation or sneesing is provoked out of the head, the brain being much
heated, or the void and wide space of the head being much moistened; for the
air enclosed within does break forth: but it makes a noise because it passes
through a narrow place.

[52]
Those that are grieved with vehement pain of the liver, are delivered from the
pain, if an ague come upon them.

[53]
Those which have occasion to have blood taken from them, must be let blood in
the spring.

(54)
Those which have fleagm enclosed between the ventricle and the midriffe, and
the same also painful unto them, having no passage into either of the
bellies, are deliuerd from the disease, the fleagme being turned and co^uaied
through the veins into the bladder.

[55]
Those have their belly filled with water, and do die, whose liver
replenished with water, shall make a breach, and eruption of the same into the
belly named, Omentum.

[56]
Wine being drunk with an equal proportion of water, does put away sorrow,
yawning, and cold shaking.

(57)
For this, look in the 4. Section, and 82. Aphorism, where it is expounded.

(58)
They must of necessity become dumb forthwith, which have their brain
vehemently shaken, and troubled by some outward occasion.

(59)
Hunger and fasting is to be endured of bodies consisting of moist flesh: for
fasting dries the body.

[60]
Where there is an alteration in the whole body, and the body becomes cold
and hot again, and changes from one color to an other, the continuance of
the disease is signified.

(61)
Much sweat, hot, or cold, always issuing forth, does declare, that the
moisture in a strong body is to be euacuated, and purged upwards: but in a
weak body, downwards.

[62]
If agues become more fierce and vehement every third day without any
intermission, they are dangerous. But in what manner soever they shall cease,
it signifies that they want danger.

(63)
Those which are afflicted with long fevers, have little swellings or aches in
the joints.

[64]
Those which have long swellings or pains in the ioints after a fever, do use
too plentiful a diet.

[65]
If any give the meat to one sick of a fever, which he gives to a sound and
healthful person, he shall strengthen the whole person, and increase the
malady of the sick party.

[66]
We must look upon those things which pass through the bladder, whether they
be such as issue forth in prosperous health. For those which are unlike the^,
are vnhealthful signs: but those which are like the^ are healthful signs.

[67]
Also when the sediments if thou shall suffer them to rest, and shall not move
the^, do sink down into the bottom like shauings, or parings of guts: or
such like matter: which if they shall befew, do signify that the disease is
little: but if they shall be many do signify that the disease is great; then
it is necessary that euacuation and purgation be made downwards: otherwise if
the belly being not purged, thou shall give broaths and nourishment, the more
thou shall give, the more thou shall hurt.

(68)
Crude, raw and undigested excrements, voided downwards, do proceed from
black choler: if they be many they proceed from a more copious quantity, if
they be few they proceed from a less quantity.

(69)
Spittings in fevers not intermitting, ash colored, bloodish, choleric,
stinking, are all evil. Yet if they come forth conveniently and easily, they
are good. Also if any thing issue out through the belly, and bladder, or from
any other part of the body whatsoever, which shall not restore him to health
which is purged, then it is evil.

[70]
When any one goes about to purge unclean bodies, he must make the bodies
soluble and fluxible; and if he will purge upwards, the belly must be
co^stipated and hardened: but if he will purge downwards, it must be softened and
loosed.

[71]
Sleep and watch fullness if they exceed a measure, are a disease.

[72]
In fevers not intermitting, if the exterior parts be cold and the inward
be burning, and the patient very thirsty, it is a deadly sign.

[73]
In a fever not intermitting, but continual, if the lip, nose, eye, or
eye-brow, be perverted and turned awrie, if the sick man does not see, nor
hear, whatsoever of these things shall happen to a weak sick man, death is
near at hand.

(74)
A dropsy is engendered by white fleagme.

(75)
From a laxness and looseness of the belly named diarrhoea, does proceed the
bloody flux dysenteria.

[76)
The flux named Lienteria, does come upon the bloody flux, named dysenteria.

[77]
After the corruption or putrefaction of the bone (called in greek
Sphacelismus) there follows an impostumation of the bone.

[78]
After vomiting of blood, a co^sumption, and an euacuation of purulent and
filthy matter does follow and ensue.

(79)
We ought to behold what things they be which pass out by vrines, by the
belly, or womb, and what things issue out thorough the flesh: And we must also
consider and behold if the body do decline or degenerat in any other thing
from nature. For if little be avoided, the disease is little, if much be
avoided the disease is great, and if very much then it is a deadly thing.

The end of the 7. Section of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.
Here follows the 8. Section.
The Argument.
THE intention and scope of this eight book which is the* last, cannot be
assigned: because the Aphorisms be variable and different; yet almost all are
reduced to that part of physic, which foretells things to come.

[1]
Men above 40. years of age, being troubled with a frenzy, are not cured at
all: for they are in less peril and danger whose disease is agreeable to
their nature and age.

(2)
It is a good thing in what disease soever, when the eyes do shed tears for
some cause or occasion: but when they weep without a cause, it is an evil
thing in any diseases whatsoever they be.

[3]
In what Quartan fevers so ever blood shall issue forth of the nostrils, it is
an evil thing.

[4]
If sweats be caused in the judicial days they are dangerous, especially such
as issue forth from the forehead like drops of water, and bubling water pipes,
being very cold and abundant: for it must needs be that such sweat
comes forth with much force long labor and strayning.

[5]
Depression of the belly after a long disease is evil.

[6]
Incision does cure those ulcers which are not cured by medicines: and those
which are not cured by incision, are cured by cauterizing: but those which are
not cured by the cautier, are judged incurable.

[7]
Consumptions are engendered, from the, 18. year of the age, unto the thirty
and fifth year.

(8)
The tongue black and bloudish, when any of these signs are absent, then the
evil and malady is not forcible, and signifies less pain.

[9]
The right testicle being cold and having a convulsion, is a messenger of death.

[10]
The nails black, the toes of the feet cold, hanging down, or stooping
forwards, do declare that death is very near.

[11]
Also the extreme parts of the fingers being cold, are a signification of
death drawing near.

(12)
Also, the lips ash colored, resolved, and effeeblished, disordered and
perverted, are deadly signs.

[13]
If the eyes be darkened or cannot abide the light, also he which is oppressed
with much sleep, and great heat, is without hope.

[14]
If any one become raging by little and little, with furious madness, if any
one do not know them with whom he has been familiar, if he do not hear nor
understand, it is a deadly sign.

[15]
Those are more evident signs to them which shall die a little while after, if
the ventricles, or cauities be lifted and heaued up, swel, and be puffed up
with wind.

Finis Aphorismorum.
A BRIEF discourse upon the nature and substance of the Ey.
Definition of the eye.
AN eye is a member, of substance, round, whole and hard as a ball (which may
aptly be resembled to a bright basin, full of clear resplendent water) fixed in
the well or spring of the head to minister light to the living body by influence
of the visible spirit, sent from the Cell of fantasy, or common wits by a
sinew, that is called Nervus Opticus, with help of a greater light ministered
without. Right well may the place wherein nature has placed the eye be termed
the fountain or spring of the eye, in respect of the abundance of waterie
humidities, and tears which are often seen to issue and flow thereat; which
happens upon diverse occasions: as The cause of tears.
sometime of inward sorrow and heaviness of the disstressed heart, sometimes of
joy and gladness immoderate: yea, and otherwhiles it proceeds of the only
superfluity and abundance of humors engendered of unnatural and distemperate
coldness. And this may suffice to declare briefly what an eye is. It The
parts of the eye.
rests now, that we show of what parts it does consist. Touching which matter
a certain learned writer called Iohannicius in his introductio^ affirms, that
the eye has seven tunicles, or coats, four colors, and three humors. The
first of the said tunicles, or coats, he calls Retina: the second Secondina,
the third Sclerotica, the fourth Aranea, the fifth Vuea, the sixth Cornea, the
seventh and Four colors of the eye.
last, Subiunctiua. Of the colors, he says, the first is black, the second
Subpallidus, that is whitish, the third Niueus, the fowrth 3. Humors of the
eye.
Glaucus. Now of the humors, according to his mind, one is called, vitreus
humor. i. a glassie humor: the second is called albugineus. i. resembling the
color of the white of an egg: the third is called Crystallinus, that
resembles the clearenesse of Crystal.

And this as I have expressed is the judgment and opinion The Authors opinion.
of Iohannicius. Nevertheless, I my self upon knowledge attained by cutting
dead bodies, am moved to dissent from him both in coats, and also in colors.
Therefore you shall understand my mind also in this matter. I find in the
studious dissection of the eye, the tunicle called salua trix, which saves and
keeps the humors ordained naturally, to be in the member; of which duty it
has that name. Secondly, the tunicle or coat, called discolorata; so named
because that while it remains in the eye, in it self it has properly no
color, but is varied and diversely affected according to the diversities of
colors which appear in the eye. For, when the crystalline humor is near the
tunicle of the eyes, then lo they seem of no color. But when it is deep
within them, it gives a show of 3. colors: wherefore I may well conclude, that
the eye of it self it discolored, and of no color properly.

Yet this by observation is found to be very true: they which have the humors
very low and deep set in Black eyes
the bodies of their eyes (by reason whereof they seem to be of black color)
have their sight best for a time: but when they approache unto thirty years
and upward, it begins to fail and appaire. And such as have the humors
placed in the middle or mean region of the eye, commonly are endued with good
sight Gray eyes.
both young and old: the color of their eyes is menable black, which is gray.
Howbeit, it is seen that this sort of eyes is more subject unto Opthalmies,
Pannicles, with diverse other evil affects then those that be of other colors.

Moreover, I say, those that have the humors more outwardly, underneath the
tunicles, as their eyes appear unto sight more various and diverse colored,
inclining much unto whiteness, Whitish eyes.
so their visible faculty is not very good, neither in youth nor in age. The
reason is, because in such manner of eyes abounds humors and tears more then
in others. For when the visible spirits descend down, by the hollow optique
sinews, and find about the tunicles of the eye abundance and plenty of
vicious humors, they be Note this reason.
the sooner scattered and dissolved from the humors, by occasion whereof the
sight is more weak and feeble in them then in gray Gray eyes sure of sight.
eyes, which before we called menable black. And they that have the said graie
eyes may seem to have their sight more durable, for that the crystalline
humor being resident in the midst, makes the visible spirits to rest and
stay there; which by the glasen humor and the said tunicle are so preserved
and kept, that they may not readily be dispersed. But in them which have the
humors depressed, and kept Black eyes ^erfect of ^ight.
down (which as we said before) makes the eye to look black, the sight is
better then in other, because the crystalline humor is deep within: and
therefore the visible spirit coming from the Optique nerve at hand, finds the
larger space, and possesses plentifully all the cauitie and hollowness of the
eyes, before it passes out from the glasen humor and the vppermore tunicles.
But as I said, it dureth not in many folk until age. For oftentimes in such
manner of eyes are engendered * Catharactes, yet more in some sorts of them, then
in other. As concerning the humor I willingly subscribe unto the opinion of
Iohannicius and make therein no variance.

Hereafter follows the manner of helping the catharact by the needle, out of
the same author.
Definition of a Catharact.
A Catharact is nothing else but a water corrupt or congealed like a curde,
engendered of humors distempered in the eye, betwixt the tunicles, and ^et
before the sight of Division of Catharacts.
the eye, and the crystalline humor. And of the manner of Catharactes be noted
seven kinds, whereof four be curable. And the first of the curable sort is
light, even like unto white The first curable kind.
chaulke or alablaster, well polished. This happens oftentimes with a stroke in
the eye, with a stick or a stone, or any other outward The second kind.
violence. The second kind curable is somewhat white, and much resembles the
sky color. It proceeds from the stomach; and is commonly caused of evil
meats, whereof a gross fumositie resolves and ascends up unto the brain,
from thence falling down again into the eyes. The third kind The third kind.
curable is also whitish, but enclining unto the color of ashes; and is
commonly engendered of pain in the head, as megrime and such others. Also it
is caused sometime thorough great sorrow and heaviness provoking great
lamentation and weeping. And sometime of much cold, immoderat watching, and
such like. The 4. kind.
The fourth kind of Catharactes curable is of citrine color, and is commonly
engendered of excess in meat and drink, evil digestion, great labor, and
sometime of melancholic humors. And these which we have remembered be the
four kinds of Catharactes curable, but not until they Tokens of ^penesse.
be ripe and confirmed. And the time of their ripeness, is when the patient
cannot see at all any longer, except it be the brightness of the sun by
day, and the light of the moon, or a candle by night. Now for the cure to
proceed orderly The cure
first you must purge the brain, with these pills ordained for that purpose,
called Pillulae Hierusolymitanae. And giving the patient this on the one day,
on the next following about nine of the clock, while he is yet fasting, cause
him to sit overthwart a stool in ryding fashion, and sit thou also on the same
stool face to face, and make the patient hold his whole eye close with his
hand, and in that state charge him so to sit steadfastly not starting in any
wise.

This done, first with thy own hand lifting up the over eye lidde, with thy
other hand put in thy needle made for that purpose, on the side further from
the nose; and finely thrilling the tunicle called Saluatrix, writhe always thy
finger to and fro, till thou touch with the point of thy needle the
corrupt*water, which indeed is the Catharacts and then begin to remove
downewarde from above, with the point of thy needle, the said water which
lies before the fight: and driving it down to the neathermost parts, keep
it there still with the point of the needle, as long space as may serve thee to
say four or five times the Lords Prayer.

Then remove easily thy needle there from, and if it happen to rise up
again, bring it eftsoons to the cords of the eye to the earwarde.

But here you must bevvare that after the needle has touched the Catharact,
in any wise you vvryth no more your fingers to and fro till it be out.

And after when it is all out, cause him to shut his eye, and anon make a
plaster of cotton or flaxen hardes, with the white of an Egg, and lay it
upon the sore eye, and cause him to lie down in his bed, until the 9. day,
giving him in straight charge that during all that time he stir not his eye:
and thrice in the day, and thrice in the night, remove his plasters, and make
him to lie in a dark place; namely, Diet.
all that time. For his diet within the said nine days, let him eat rear eggs
with bread: and if he be young, and strong of body, let him drink water, and
keep straight diet during the time. But being in age, permit him the use of
wine, but well watered. Now The subtance of he needle.
for the substance of the needle wherewith you work, let it be of gold, silver,
or at least spanish latten, and in no wise of iron or steel: for iron and
steel is hard, and with the hardness it dissolueth the substance which it
touches. Or else for this cause, if the Catharact be hard, it might
peradventure break in the drawing down thereof at the point: for vron and
steel be free and brittie, and the breaking thereof remaining therein, might be
cause of consumption of the same through the abundance of tears, and
greatness of pain.

Furthermore, I give you to understand, that the first kind of Catharacts
curable, The first kind of Catharacts.
are easy and soon helped: but yet they that be cured thereof recover not
their sight perfectly, for as much as the humors in the eye be imperfect,
disgregate and dissolved, by the bruise and stroke, which at the first caused
the Catharact.

The 2. kind.
The second kind of Catharacts curable, if they be well cured with a cunning
workman, in this feate, the sight returns again to his former goodness,
because of the pureness of the humors which be not dissolved, and also for
the abundance of visible spirits reserved in the eye: for these causes, I say,
they be better then other.

The 3. kind.
The third kind of Catharacts curable after they be helped, in manner above
said, and the sight restored, it endures not long time in that estate,
unless it be helped with medicines, as with our Electuarie, which is called
Dia Olibanorum Hierusolimitanum, and by wholesome regiment of diet, wherein he
must refrain from goats flesh, Eeles, and such other^ but especially those
that might engender raw humors: for certainly I have proved by experience,
the same to be very evil and noisome in this wise; for diverse have come
unto me with Catharactes not fully confirmed, to whom I have given raw
onyons, by eating whereof in short space they have become ripe and ready to
the needle. Whereupon I gather that raw Onyons be noysom unto the sight, and
inducers of Catharacts. Furthermore, let not the patient in the winter season
(if it may be otherwise) drink any hot wines, in the which be put sage and
rue. Let him forbear (as much as may be) the company of women, forbid him the
use of all common bathes and stews. But if he will bathe him, let it be with a
vessel ordained with the decoction of Camomill, and other sweet smelling
herbs: but in any wise let him keep his head without the vessel that the
fume come not into his eyes, for that were noisome. The Electuarie The virtue
of Olibanum.
of Dia Olibanum is also good to avoid tears, and to dry them up, as likewise
it is right profitable for all manner pain of the megrime which is caused of
fleagme. The fourth kind The 4. kind.
of Catharactes curable is, those that be of color citrine more harder then
the other, and of form round: wherefore, it may not be laid right down in the
eye, for it will not abide there, because of the said roundnesse and hardness
of it: therefore it must be laid in the corner of the eye to the ear ward,
and there be kept with the needle a great while as is aforesaid. And thus to
conclude. I do you to understand, there needs not any abstinence from meats
which be clean and healthsome, after the cure is perfectly achieved; save only
in the third kind: which thing to be true experience has taught me.
Nevertheless, it behooves oftentimes to use comfortatiues, and nutritiues for
the visible spirits in the eye afterward.

Of the three kinds of Catharacts The first kind of catharacts incurable.
incurable.
THe first kind of Catharactes incurable, is that which the Physicians of
Salerne in Italy do call Guttam serenam, and these be the signs whereby ye
may know it: when the pupil of the ey. i. the place of the midst of the eye,
has the depth of the visible part, black and clear as though it had no
spotte, and the eyes are always moving their lids, trembling, as though it
were quickesiluer.

Verily, this kind of Catharact is engendered and caused of a corruption in
the mothers womb: and therefore they that have these kinds of Catharactes, be
blind even at their nativity; of which sort I have seen many, and have assaied
by many ways and medicines to cure them: but the success was not worthy my
labor, neither yet have I heard that any other have sped better in dealing
with that sort. Nevertheless, in process of time, I perceived that of this
manner of Catharact, there were diversities of kinds. For some of those persons
which had them might see the brightness of the sun, and went by the way with
open eyes, as though they had perfectly seen: yea moreover some of them might
see the stature of a man, or a beast or any other thing, and some enjoyed this
little portion of sight unto their lives end, whereas in othersome it does
vanish away, and they become stark blind. Therefore assure your selves, they
that have such manner of Catharacts, be deplorat and without al possibility of
cure by man's hand. For why? the nerve optique is deplorate and mortified, so
that there is no manner of help in power of hand, or medicine for them: and
this aforesaid kind is called Gutta serena, because it is engendered of a
corruption, coming down from the brain, like a drop of water, which one
drop corrupts and dissolueth all the humor natural in the eye: in so much
that from thence forwards the concaue and hollow nerves be oppilat and
ouerlaid, in that the visible spirits may no more pass down by them into the
eye.

The 2. kind.
The second kind of Catharact incurable, is that which does appear in the
eye, of green color like water standing in watrie places, not much moved
with running. This sort is yet worse then all the other, and springs of the
immoderate and excessive coldenesse of the brain with great beating and
diseases of the head, with unmeasurable fasting and such like.

The 3. kind.
The third and last kind of curelesse catharacts, be those in which the
circles may not be seen within the tunicles of the eye; but the eye appears
all over black* or all over white: and who so busieth himself to cure any of
these three kinds of Catharacts, he abuses his time and labor, more worthy
to be reproved for his ignorance, then any ways commended for his fruitless
diligence.

Here follows the cure of Ophthalmia and other diseases of the eyes.
THis Ophthalmia is an infla^matio^ of the whole eye, happening by some great
diffluxion from the brain, and in the tunicle of the eye which is called
coniunctiua: this infirmity is sometimes cured by dropping into the A good
medicin.
eye woman's milk, with the white of an egg, and especially if it shall happen
from some outward cause, or from blood. If it chance to happen by some blow,
or through cold, then the yolke of an egg boiled hard and mixed with oil of
roses and a little saffron must be applied, If it shall happen through dust or
smoke, wash the eye Bloudletting.
with cold water: if from repletion, or fullness, open the head vein, which is
a present remedy: if the humors be gross and thick, administer an
euaporation of the decoction of lentiles with water, also wash the eye with
sponges intincted in a decoction of foenugraeck. In this disease it is very
good to use abstine^ce from meat and drink, the diet must incline to cold
and moisture. Wine, eggs, and all sweet things are hurtful.

An excellent Collyrium, which does mitigate, re press and beat back heat,
and inflammation.
Collyrium
TAke the muscelage of psyllium, of gum dragant, of quinces, being prepared in
rose water, of either 3. drams, of woman's milk giving suck to a girl five
drams, of the white of an egg well beaten, two drams: mix them and instill
thereof into the eye.

Emplaster.
Or else use this emplaster against an hot flux of the eye.

Take of the juice of the herb vermicularis, of virgapastoris, of plantaine,
of nightshade, of endive, of purslan, and such like* with the flower of barley
and oil of roses make an emplaster; which must be applied to the temples of
the forehead: or dippe linen clothes in the iuyces and apply them to the
forehead.

The face may be washed with running water, rosewater mixed with a little
vinegar: so that will alter the biting humor, flowing to the eye.

If the eye happen to be hurt, or wounded with a thorn, needle, or knife, we
must presently make repercussion.

A water against in inflammamation of the eye.
Take bole armonick, sanguis draconis, tutia prepared gum arabic, and dragant,
of either a dram, make a powder and mix therewith 6. ounces of rosewater in a
glass viol, then let it stand in hot water the space of an howr, the^
afterward add 1. ounce of the wine of pomgranats* and so let it stand for 1.
whole day, and then strain it, and of that straining put a little into the eye
Morn, and Even; and for to lay over, you shall frame an emplaster with the
juices of houslike and niteshade, of either two Emplaster.
ounces: or in their place take rosewater, bole armonicke, myrrh, gumdragant and
araback; of either one ounce: make it into powder and so apply it in the form
of an emplaster to the eyes, for it does both beat back, and cure.

For spots or webs in the eye being remaining after the cure, we must
presently use this remedy. Take young Pyes out of the nest a little before
they are ready to fly, let them be clean pulled and cut in pieces, and then
distilled: of which water put into the eyes an hour before supper, and in the
morning it remoueth away al redness, spots, and cataracts: this remedy is
confirmed by experience: some do affirm the same virtue to be in
Consolidaregalis.

Weeping eyes.
Sometimes the eyes do weep and water against the will, which is caused by the
debilitie of the brain, being weak and ouermoist: for which cause thou shall
do no more but drop into the eye for xv. days together, two drops of the water
of Tapsus barbatus, called in english Hagtaper.

Again, Rue being dried and beaten into powder, and mixed with hunny and
vinegar, and boiled and after strained through a linen cloth and the eyes
therewith anointed will restrain the weeping and tears thereof: the patient
must avoid all things that do euaporat and fly up to the brain: if the cause
proceed from choler or from blood, it shall be diuerted by bloodletting: if
the cause proceed from fleame, it is good to purge with pills of aureae, and
imperiales; take heed of gargarisms, Bathes.
masticatories, and apophlegmatismes. Bathes of warm water are very
convenient so they be used in the morning fasting: for that draws the matter
to the utter parts.

If the matter be sharp, apply a repercussiue about the forehead framed with
the white of an egg. and bolearmonicke, and so applied upon a piece of linen
cloth.

If the cause have proceeded from fullness or much drinking of wine, let him
use a spare diet, and open the head vein, and let him purge with the pills of
the 5. kinds of myrobalans: his diet must be dry; for he must avoid all
broaths and liquid things: sower grapes and unripe, being burnt in an earthen
pot to powder, and searced very finely and put into the eyes, do remove
away the tears and redness of them.

A singular remedy for the eyes, is to take true frankincense, and melted at
the fire, and so seven times extinguished in red rosewater, and thereof
instill into the eye that weepeth.

An excellent medicin for the eyes that weep, for a pearl, and dimnesse, is
this.

Take half an ounce of tutia, one dram of red corrall, burn them in a vessel
of earth, then add thereunto half a dram of sine A powder for the eyes
pearl, and then beat them small into very fine powder in a stone mortar, and
then searce it finely thorough silk, and then put thereof into the eye, this is
a great secret.

How to cure debilitie and weakness of the sight.
HIs diet must be good as in ophthalmia, let Weak sight.
his head be well combd with an iuorie comb, let him behold things that are
green, and behold himself in a steel glass: the use of triphera does
comfort very much, because it hinders euaporations by reason of the
myrobalans. Let him take after his meals Diacitoniton, the confection of
Coriander prepared, Diapliris, and sugar of roses, in an hot cause. Venerie and
lust is hurtful, and all things that are vaporous. Rapes either raw, or
boiled are very good. Wine unless it be in small quantity, is very hurtful.
There must not be made any strong euacuation, least the spirits be dissolved.

An excellent water An excellent water to preserve the sight.
which does preserve the sight, and good against all manner of spots, is in
this manner. Take Celendine, rue, endive, betonie, roses, Silermontaine,
mallows, maiden hair, of every one three handfuls, let them be infused in pure
white wine for the space of 24. hours and then distilled.

A Collyrium for the eyes which has bin approved, is to take tutia prepared,
2. scruples, aloes hepaticke one scruple, cloves half a scruple, white vitriol
six grains, and make a fine powder.

A Collyrium for the eyes.
Then take rosewater and fenell water of either two ounces, let it warm upon
the hot imbers, then mix the powder therewith, and after a while strain it
and put thereof into the ey in the moving.

Electuarie to comfort the sight.
An Electuarie which does clear and comfort the sight. Take the flowers of
eyebright and of betony, of either one ounce, fenelseed three drams, cubebs,
maces, cinnamon, and cloves, of either one dram, long peper half a dram let all
be made into fine powder: then take of the juice of Rue clarified one ounce and
a half, clarified honey one pint, boil the juice with the honey to a
perfection, and then adding three drams of zedoarie to the former powder make
an Electuarie.

A powder to comfort the sight.
TAke betonie, veruin, eyebright, celendine, hysop, penny rioll, sage, all
these being dried in the sun, of every one half an ounce, horehound,
fenelseed, wild time, Coriander prepared* the seed* of maiota^ of every a
dram, ginger, saffron, cloves, cubebs, nutmegges, cinnamon, long peper,
galengall, of every one half a dram, rosemary flowers, the citren rynde, of
every one a scruple, and of fine white sugar three times the weight of all the
rest: make all into fine powder, or into lozenges with the water of fenell,
eyebright and betony.

An household receipt for the removing of any spot or pin and web of the eye.
TAke the juice of houslick the quantity that will goe*into an egg shell,
then put therein 3. grains of pure white vitrioll, let them boil together on
the hot ashes, and then scum the top thereof away, and drop thereof into the
eye morning and evening, and close up the eye with a boulster of linen.

For all inflammations and blood shotten eyes, take the juice of a limon, and
drop thereof into the eyes at the entrance into the bed, and close up the eyes
as is aforesaid: and remember that for all inflammations proceeding of an hot
cause bloudletting, to be the present remedy.

FINIS.
THE LIFE of Hypocrates.
HYpocrates by the testimony of Galen, was the son of one Heraclides: but
others affirm him to be the son of Asclepius, borne and brought up in the
Isle Cos. His master and instructor was the great Pythagoras. He was by his
nature inclined to goodness: for he hated, loathed and abhorred all pomp and
worldly pleasures, and the use of venerie. He constrained all his scholars by
an oath to use silence and secrecy, modesty, affabiliti, and humility as well
in manners as apparel. He restored the science of physic; being lost for
the space almost of five hundred years, even from the time of Esculapius. He
was in body and stature very little; but fair, and exceeding well favored. He
had a good and strong head: he went slowely and softly: he was very pensive
and of few words: he was no great eater nor glutton: he lived nintie five
years, and used often this sentence; He that will live in liberty, let him not
desire that which he cannot obtain: and he that would have that which he
desires, let him desire nothing but that which he may obtain. In like
manner, He that would live in peace in this mortal life, let him conform
himself to him who is invited to a feast, who gives thanks for all that is
set before him, and grudgeth not at any thing which is omitted. He lived about
the times of Eliachim, of Malachi, of Pereno and Socrates.


