EZEKIEL 37.22. -- I will make them one nation --.

A SERMON PREACHED At Paul's Cross, March the 24. 1624.

BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Archdeacon of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold
at his Shop at Saint Austines Gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN LORD BISHOP OF OXFORD, HIS WORTHY
DIOCESAN.
My good Lord,
THat which is the cause, for which many men do not publish their labors, is
the chief cause for which I do publish mine, the danger of the attempt. I
judged this the choicest proof, whereby I might express how hardy I dare be,
rather then be ungrateful. And this courage in me is but an effect of your
goodness; a goodness not more acceptable for the bounty, then for the
circumstances: which argues as much your wisdom, as your favor. It is a great
favor to satisfy hope: but it is a skillful favor to prevent it. Hope gives
more speedy content, then possession does; but hope gives less content, then
possession gives; nay, it makes less the content, which possession gives.
Which, your bounty, that well knows how to manage it self, so well
understands, that it delights only in this noble oppression, To disturb him,
whom it blesses, giving him happiness, sooner then the apprehension of it. And
yet it is a kind of mercy to give a man the respite of expectation, though of
good things; the sodainnesse of news, though good, being sometimes deadly. But
this is the only mercy, which your goodness uses to deny: yet, for which,
whiles your bounty claims thanks from one, your judgment claims applause
from all. And this is a part of that wisdom, which now has made you as
eminent in the Church, as it has hitherto made you industrious for the Church.
Which honor, as it was begun by your wisdom and zeal, so was it perfected by
the wisdom and favor of our late Sovereign: with whose most acceptable
memory, I thought good thus to conueigh my thanks. And this memorial may be
the more grateful, since it is an Anniuersary not of his death, but of his
happiness, in the Union of his Britanies It was, before, my service to his
Majesty; but now to his memory: then it expressed my duty, but now my
syncerity; in which only blessing I shall always defend and endeavor an
ambitious perfection. Nay, this endeavor is already at that height, that it
may almost make my gratitude fall into the suspicion of pride, whiles it does
wish my meditations immortal, that so my thanks might be immortal. The only
way of con^e at that I have taught my self is, not so much in that your bounty
did help me, as in that your judgment did choose me; to make me a part of
your good works: which, by their nature, must be a part of your joy even in
death, and a sign of that joy, which shall be after death. Thus is it as
possible for you to lose your good work, as the necessary gratitude of

Your Lordships perpetually obliged, Barten Holyday.

TO speak of Kingdoms may be as full of danger, as it is of difficulty. I
knew not therefore how to endeavor an apter union of truth and safety, then to
speak of kingdoms in the words of a King. My text was first delivered by a
Prophet, and has been since coined by a King in letters of gold, a metal
not more compact, then the kingdoms he united. The King is the happiness of
this day, and God the glory of it, and the day is the thankful History of
both. This day, in which, the expedition of the Divine bounty did by the right
of Coronation prevent the act of Coronation, which graciously yields to the
leisure of Ceremony, and of the subject; who notwithstanding does not make his
King, but declare him; Our approbation and joy, though in themselves they are
of a natural liberty, being yet in this politic relation but parts of
Allegiance; which then is complete, when we prove our memory to be as good a
subject, as our understanding and our will; and by the loyal Astronomy of an
Almanacke no less faithfully represent unto our selves the revolution of our
joy; then of our time. No Coronation needs such repeated solemnity; every
Coronation expects it; and this singularly deserves it. There is in no
Coronation an Union of heads: there is in every Coronation an union of a head
and a body; but in this there is also a union of bodies: and then proportion
as well as piety ought to presume an union of hearts. Variety is the pleasure
of nature; but Unity is the business of Nature. And therefore though the
Creator have in the diversity of creatures showed his power: Yet has he as
much in their union showed his propriety. There is implanted in the creatures
a Catholic similitude, which is the secret cause of a possible union; and so
Diversity may seem to arise, but from accession of circumstance, which being
withdrawn, makes the creatures retire to their primitive unity. And if you
would see this unity in the creatures, behold first the Heavens, which indeed
deserve to be first beheld; and though some Astronomers have accused them into
a division of Spheres, yet may we suspect such division to be rather in the
Astronomers then in the heavens: and therefore some have courteously preserved
the unity of that great body, by multiplying only the motions of the lesser
bodies, the Stars: yet diversity of Spheres would not overthrow unity, but
magnify it, whilst the inferior Orbs do at the same instant profess a
contrariety and an obedience to the first moouer, striving to recompense the
variety of their bodies, by the consent of their motions. Behold the Elements,
and you shall find, that though they are apt to quarrel, yet as if they would
show the goodness of a hasty nature, they are reconciled with equal facility
and speed, and sometimes fall so far in love with their enemies, that they
seem to lose themselves, whiles they run half way to meet them. Thus does
the fire delight to be extinguished into air, that it may slide nearer unto
water, as well in nature as in affection. And for a preparatiue to such union,
two opposite elements have always by providence, one friendly element
interposed, which cunningly persuades them to a peace by the discretion of
indifferency. Behold the most sullen minerals, that seem to be settled in the
stoicisme of their separated natures, and you shall find their pretended
obstinacy so conquered to a change by the united power of Nature and Art, that
they shall at least dissemble their dissimilitudes, and even the fowlest
appear as fair as the promises of an Alchemist. Or if you think you are not
able to judge the heart of the earth, you may read this unity in the face of
the earth: you may read it expounded in the fruits of the earth: you may see
the several kinds of the apple dwell upon the same apple tree, by which
friendship of nourishment through their grafts, the growth and fruit is not
more manifest, then an easy unity in their juice. But if you would by a near
instruction see the obedience of the creatures, it disioyned; to return to
unity, you may from your selves instruct your selves; and when man's body
fals-off from his soul, in that one disunion behold two unions, and nature
hastening to its first similitude. You may see the body put-on an humble
corruption, and be content to return to as unfeigned dust, as that which is
the food and curse of the Serpent; or that into which every beast must be
confounded; that if the ashes of Alexander and his Bucephalus had been put in
one vrne, Aristotle himself could not have distinguished them either by
Philosophy, or by flattery. You may likewise by the eye of the soul see the
soul at its separation so refined by similitude into spirit, that it is ready
to mistake it self for an angel, as if its knowledge were at the same time
perfected and deluded. Nor will it only imitate the likeness, but also the
office of an angel, and shall at last be sent upon a message to its own body,
which it will take up as an angel will take up both the body and soul, But
because the soul can ascend higher by contemplation, then it can by essence,
it may behold the beginning of unity in all things, by beholding him, who is
the beginning of all things. In whom we may see an unity in a division, and
show the Mathematician a mystical possibility of the dividing of a point,
whiles we may behold God not multiplied, and yet divided into persons. Now
though man be not capable of the mystery, yet he is of the instruction, and
may with as much case as delight understand, that God is so delighted with
unity, that it is always either his nature, or his work. It was the same
wisdom which dispensed Adam into Nations, and contracted them again into the
household of an Arc. God created angels in multitude, but he made man in
unity; he gave excellence to them, but to man Supremacy: the chief of
angels being in heaven but a subject; but the chief of men being on earth a
King. And though an angel be more like to God for purity, yet man is more
like him for production. An angel can more subtly understand his own
likeness; but a man more powerfully can also partly beget his own likeness,
being made a Deputy Creator; and therefore he is a King, because he is a
father. A kingdom by nature is but an enlarged family; and the first King
begot his own subjects; and a father by the Roman Law had once as just power
to execute his son, as to preserve him. The Law of God, which commands our
obedience to a King, commands it for him by the title of a father. Adam was by
God and Nature the King of Mankind; and Nature would have delivered this
kingdom to his first borne. Nor had it been a mistake: Nature saw just cause
why he should have succeeded, though it did not see a juster cause, why he
should not succeed: and though the Divine justice changed the person, yet it
changed not the Law. It did interrupt it, but not abrogate it; and therefore
the Royalty goes still with the Eldership. Thus he that was the first King, was
before his people; and this agrees with the course of nature, by whose
instruction we know, that in the method of every birth, which is not perverse,
the head is elder then the body. As then both angels and man took their
beginning from one God: so all other men took their beginning from one man.
And God has not only honored this unity in succession, but also preserved it
by succession. So some Kings supply birth right by victory, and some by
election; though to elect a King be as much news to nature as to adopt a
Father; and it did first arise from necessity and conueniency in families,
whom the blessing of multitude had dispersed and mixed. And though it were often
among the Gentiles continued by faction, and by the Jews at first entertained
by Fancy; yet God in the Wisdom of his divine indulgence did grant their
desire, and chastize it; giving them a King by choice, but it was also by his
own choice; he did not in the election commend election, but Monarchy, which
makes families so wise, as to become a Nation: nay, which makes Nations so
wise, as to become a Nation: and by the witty happiness of unity, to prove
one to be stronger then two. It is as great a difficulty, as a blessing for
brethren to live in one Nation and friendship; but it is as great a wonder as a
blessing, when Nations become brethren, and are distinguished rather by number
then affection. Abraham and Lot were almost brethren, and yet they were
divided; that they might not be divided. Jacob and Esau were brethren, and
though one womb could contain them, one Country could not: but Jacob must
fly, and Esau is as ready to hunt Him, as Venison. But Cain was at that
division with Abel, that the same world could not hold the^ both: and yet he
killed him for he knew not what; it was about Gods favor, but not for it. Thus
experience can hardly find union there, where reason would think it hard to
find a division: Union is the happiness of man, and the accusation: it being
more entertained by inferior creatures, which rather possess it, then enjoy
it; then it is by man, who likewise does more understand it, then enjoy it. And
yet it is a blessing not so excellent for the raritie, as for the increase: it
being by nature of that thrift and cunning, that it grows in goodness by
growing in greatness, and from number receives excellence. The union of
families into a City, as it does conquer affections unto peace; so it self is
conquered into a perfection by a greater union. The union of Cities into a
kingdom, tries the goodness of a King: but the union of kingdoms tries his
wisdom; the simplicity of justice being enough to manage one kingdom, but
two will require the mystery of wisdom. When Nature unites people into a
kingdom, it does but work by an humble safety: but when it unites kingdoms, it
works by the transcendent power of love and glory; this excellent union being
as much the delight, as the imitation of Nature. So that although it arise
sometimes by accident from causes less natural, as from pride, and force: yet
the divine wisdom has in all ages condemned and rectified such union; still
suffering a great part of the world by a happy rashness to run it self into
Empires. In each of which, me thinks, we may observe some eminent and
distinct blessing, which attends and honors the union of Nations. If you will
wipe-off the dust of antiquity from the Chronicles of the Assyrians, you may in
that union of Nations sufficiently discern the blessing of peace; witness
their plantations, wherein they more employed the trowell, then the sword.
Witness their tower of Babylon, a work and corruption of peace; for which,
Gods accurate justice did so aptly correct them, that it made the same tongues,
into which they were cursed, deliver the history of the curse. Witness their
City of Babylon more famous for the walls, then for the Kings; though not so
famous for either, as for their captives, the Jews. The Assyrians indeed made
some excursions by the sword: but it was rather to vary their pleasure, then
diminish it; or untowardly to prove their possession of a peace, by their
abuse of it; till at last they did not so much possess peace as vice possessed
them, and now have well near lost their story with their Empire; which stood
almost as long after the Flood, as the World from its beginning to the Flood;
such continuance as fairly approouing their union, as their destruction did
condemn their abuse of it. If you will view the Persian Monarchy, you may in
that union of Nations see, that which most desire to see, the blessing of
wealth; wealth enough to please and torment folly in the invention of expense.
Witness their feasts, in which they labored no less with curiosity, then
with surfeit, and by a strange convulsion of gluttony, drew their stomach and
their palate into their eye: witness their wives, whom they adorned more then
their own souls, or then their gods: witness their wars, wherein their
wild Xerxes brought mankind against the Athenians; an act, that yet might have
been excused by the same disproportion that condemned it, had he come to
conquer rather their wits, then their Country; witness their fear, which
made Darius through a desire of peace and infamy, present a bribe greater then
his fear, and as he hoped; greater then Alexander. If you will view the
Grecian Monarchy (though you can hardly view it either for the luster, or the
swiftness) you may in that union of Nations see the blessing of glory; the
glory of Alexander further extended then his ambition; as if he had been
Emperor of Fame, as well as of Greece; and by this Essay of immortality had
been flattered after death, or recompensed thus for the shortness of his
life; which afforded him leisure rather to destroy an Empire, then erect one.
Yet his glory was like the Sunne's, though not his course; which was toward
the East, and when by victory he made the Persians bow unto him, he changed
their obedience, but not their Religion, since they did still worship the
Sun. And thus he was made a God according to his desire; a God in this life,
beyond his desire; a God as vain as his desire. And sure the world by too much
beholding the glory of this Sun, has still before its eyes the dazzling images
of this Sun, that now it scarce can see Greece for Alexander; who has so
obscured his Country by illustrating of it, that it may rather boast of a
Monarch then a Monarchy. If you will view the Monarchy of the Romans, you may
in that union of Nations see the blessing of strength-strength of such
confidence, that it might have dared to arm an enemy, and deride him; strength
of such firmness, that vice could not overcome it, but by a new way, making
it grow more wanton by victory, then by peace. You may behold the degrees of
their strength; they threatened Parthia, frighted Egypt, struck Germany,
wounded Spain, but destroyed Iudaea. You may behold the arts of their
strength; they conquered Egypt with its own corn, and made that their
storehouse; they conquered Spain with its own gold, and made that their mine;
they conquered Germany with its own people, and made that their Camp. They
could make no advantage of Parthia, where they received too many wounds: and
did make none of Iudaea, where they gave too many wounds; and all this while
there came nothing from Rome, but the courage and the sword. And thus you see
the blessings which so constantly attend the union of Nations, that sometimes
they attend the equivocal union of Nations. For there are Nations which are
united in cruelty; that murder the Christian, and (which is worse) wound his
soul, whiles they slight his Christ, and by an art, which the Jew strangely
forgot, put his Sepulcher to use. And yet these Nations enjoy by prevention, as
rank pleasure as they shall be deceived of hereafter by the forgery of their
Mahomet: who was better it seems at the erecting of a conspiracy, then of a
Paradise. Thus every union of Nations is either rewarded with a benefit, or at
least attended with a benefit. If Nations then will desire peace, let them
desire union: so shall the Fig and Grape be ripened as much by peace, as by
the Sun: so shall we be made as secure by neighborhood, as by wine and
innocence: so may we at land be as free from the suspicion of injury, as from
injury; and the Merchant in his Voyage shall fear but one tempest at a time,
having no other enemy but the Sea. If Nations will desire wealth, let them
desire union: so may the labourer be no less the master of his own gains,
then of his industry: so may the Citizen have his coffers forced open, not by
the hand of the spoyler, but by the same abundance that fills them: so may the
Countriman not need to eat his sheep from the Soldier, but may feed upon
them, and yet never hurt them; nay, grow fatter with the wool, then with the
flesh, and make the fleece keep the shepherd as warm as the sheep. If
Nations will desire glory, let them desire union: so shall their wisdom, which
began their happiness, exceed it; and be extended like their dominion; and be
extended beyond their dominion: so shall justice triumph for having more
leisure, then occasion to exercise it self: so shall learning help wisdom
and justice both in their practice, and in their fame by conueighing them into
story almost as immortal, as their goodness. If Nations will desire strength,
let them desire union: so shall every one be what Cain ought to have been,
his brothers keeper, esteeming him no less a part of his care, then of his
blood; so shall they be afraid to shut the gates of their Cities, which they
were afraid to leave open; lest that, which before was counted wisdom, should
now be interpreted discourtesie; so may their Havens expect more danger from
their own shelues, then from the fleet of an enemy: so may they prevent those
triuiall supremacies; in which the fragments of Nations have delighted and
perished. Was it not this, by which Greece lost its fame, before its liberty?
Was not Athens with Sparta admired like the Persian? But was not Athens against
Sparta derided like the Persian? As then the union of Nations is a blessing
always most excellent for the kind; so does it then become most excellent also
for the degree, when it is between Nations which have been enemies, and when
as those enemies have likewise been friends; their first friendship making
their dissension admirable, and their dissension making their second friendship
admirable. But because example is the most legible character, let your
understanding descend into your sense, and behold such nations; behold Judah
and Israel, which, when they were, were not able to instruct themselves; and
since, they have not been, have instructed the World. Behold Judah and Israel;
who had they stood undivided, had stood; and yet they were once so united, that
we can scarce divide them into the names of Judah and Israel; and you will
delight to behold them, as they were united. You may see them united in Gods
favors; who made his other creatures pay their service to these creatures. He
made the earth swallow up a sedition with the seditious Corah from among them;
he made the waters at the Red Sea fly faster from his people, then his people
did from the Egyptian: He made the most inexorable earth the Rock relent
into a stream of waters and amazement unto them: He made a tree sweeten water
for them; which was such a fruit of a tree, that Paradise it self was
unacquainted with it: He made the air feed them with meteors, compacting it
into the dainty miracle of Manna and Quails: He made the fire so mindful a
Guide to teach them by the shape and emblem of a pillar, on whom in their
pilgrimage they should rely, that it forgot its own nature which would have
inclined it to an ascent in a sharper form: He made the Sun wait upon their
victory, and increase it; by multiplying the day, as he did his favors. You
may behold them united in afflictions; they had made brick together in Egypt,
and were as hot with indignation, as their work with the fire; being more vexed
with the kind of the labor, then with the labor; they had been tired
together in the wilderness, not so much with not coming to their journies
end, as with not knowing when they should come to it. Forty years were they
grieved with the distrust of their own expectation, and forty years was God
greiued with the distrust of their expectation; they had in the wilderness for
their murmuring, been bitten with fiery Serpents; the sin of their tongues
being punished with the teeth of the Serpents; their murmuring tongues being
like fiery Serpents, by which their sin was chastised and expounded. Thus you
see how God united them: but now you shall see how they divided themselves; and
as if they had remembered their own plague only to imitate it, they become
fiery Serpents one to another. When by succession of time and children they had
spread themselves into the breadth of a Kingdom, Gods favor raises them to
the height of a Kingdom, which they quickly divide; it had not else been to
their minds; it had not else been like their minds, which were divided.
Jeroboam puts on the person of a King, though not the right; and by the
subtlety of Treason undertakes to distinguish Israel from Judah. He could
have undertaken nothing harder, but to have distinguished Jeroboam from a
Traitor. Yet he goes-on in his crime and cunning, confirming his division of
the Kingdom by a division of Religion. Had Ahitophel lived in his time, he
had certainly hanged himself for envy of this wit; and I wonder Machiauell did
not choose Jeroboam, rather then Caesar Borgia for his jdoll of a Prince. What
Jeroboam began by erecting two jdols (the number was a memorial of the
division;) Baasha continues by the erecting of a fort; that as Jeroboam had
renounced the Religion of Judah, so henceforth he would renounce the commerce
with Judah. Afterward Omri to show the invention and addition of a successor,
erects a City against Judah. Israel had a King before, but not a Throne; and
now Samaria, as it is the younger, so will it also be counted the fairer. And
it were well if the quarrel were but in opinion; and yet it is but for
opinion. But ambition, whose end is always but folly, does often use
wickedness for its means. Wherefore Iehoash, who came after these in time,
though neither in emulation, nor in confidence, thinking his Samaria not
perfectly up, as long as Jerusalem was perfectly up, was vainly provoked, and
as vainly opposed by Amaziah King of Judah; and with the speed of the same
fury, throws down the King and the wall of Jerusalem. Yet when he had chosen
his own bribe, the spoil of the Treasury and of the Temple, he returns
leaving behind him nothing but the hope of revenge, and the God of revenge. And
when the heirs of these injuries were repaired to strength, their projects
increasing with their fury, they made their confederacy reach as far as
their infamy. Israel therefore by prevention combines with the Syrian, who was
not strong, yet he was near; Judah combines with the Assyrian, whose fame was
as good as neighborhood, and his power better. Thus you see how lamentably
they divide themselves; but now will you see how lamentably God diuides them?
Iudahs wrath calls the Assyrian against Israel; and Gods justice brings him.
Israel is immediately in a bondage of fear, and Samaria it self in the bondage
of a siege. Thus were they taught to lose their liberty, and at last by
captivity to forget it; they were before transported with their own fury; and
now by the fury of another: they were carried from the pleasure of their
malice, and of their country. But was not Judah too glad, and guilty of this
misery? And did they not as much deserve such destruction, as procure it?
Behold the mercy and instruction of Gods anger: Israel has now for ever ended
war with Judah: but now is God to begin war with Judah. He gives them time
to employ in sorrow for their own offense; and they peruersely employ it in
joy, for their brethrens ruin: and were so unable to foresee their own
punishment, that they were not able to see their own sin. But when their
sin had increased like Gods mercy; the Assyrian who was now as well
acquainted with the victory, as with the way, comes to fetch Judea into
Assyria; depriues Jerusalem of a King, and the King of his eyes: having first
made sight his affliction, by causing him to see the slaughter of his sons;
then making blindness a double affliction, by hindering him in his captivity,
to see the captivity of his enemy Israel. And as the Assyrian thrust out his
eyes, so now his captive people may weep out theirs: now may they sit down by
the waters of Babylon, and increase them with their tears: now may they hang
their Harpes upon the willowes; their instruments now being as unable to yield
music, as the willow fruit; now have they leisure to remember Sion, and
themselves, who did before forget both; and now may Judah desire to return to
Sion, though with Israel. But shall Judah for ever be divided from Israel? Or
shall Judah and Israel be for ever divided from their Country? No, they have
left it, but not lost it; they have not lost their Country because they have
not lost their God; who raises Ezekiel to raise their hope: and in Assyria
they receive their Country again by promise, as afterward by possession;
returning from the captivity of their bodies, to a happy captivity of their
passions: being now as much united in love; as they were before in affliction.
Judah returns not in sorrow, yet in tears; weeping for joy, because it has
no longer cause to weep, having now changed the place, the motive, and the
nature of its tears: through which it can scarce see Jerusalem, which it does
long to see; as if they would imitate in their return from Captivity, the
blindness of their King, when he was led into Captivity. But does not
Israel also return, that it may repent in joy for its jdolatry and Conversion?
Does not Israel also return, that it may with shame and delight build up the
wall of Jerusalem, which with fury and delight it once pulled down? Does it
not return, that it may repair the Temple, and in the Temple, with tears
confess how once it spoiled it? Does it not return that it may pray for
Judah, that it may pray with Judah? Or is Israel now become more odious to God
then captivity is to Israel? is it left behind in Assyria, as if it were a
thing as execrable, as Assyria? Else why do we not see them in their journey,
unless they be clouded in the dust of their journey? why do we not hear the
tumult of their return; unless their joy be so mannerly, that it is afraid to
make a noise? Why do we not hear the shouts of liberty, unless they are
become hoarse with mourning? Or peradventure they are not yet on their way? Or
peradventure they will not be yet on their way: or it may be, they will return
to Judah, but not with Judah? Shall we then delude our selves into the Creed of
the Jews, believing as the Doctors of their Poetry do at this day deliver,
that Israel has changed Assyria for the Caspian mountains, and their
captivity for a second wilderness? Shall we believe that there they multiply
children, as these Teachers do their fancies, to make up the train and fable
of a Messiah, which these our Jews have bespoken for them? Or to return
strong to Jerusalem, for fear of another falling-out? Or not without their
Messiah, as if he were to make their peace with Judah, as well as with God?
Shall we yet expect Judah and Isreal's union in the Empire of the Rabbines? And
must the Heifer fall again at Jerusalem under the stroke and folly of the
Priest? This were not to offer a sacrifice for sin; but to make the sacrifice
a sin: this were not to hope for union, and dominion, but to feign them; this
were not to fulfill a prophecy, but violate it; and by an impious courtesy to
defend a Prophet, and wrong the Lord of the Prophet. Our Messiah is come, and
has excused the beast from sacrifice, as he has excused us from the
necessity of such sacrifice. Our Messiah is come, but his Kingdom is not
come; his Kingdom being not of this world: though in this world he did the
acts of a King; in uniting Nations, in saving Nations. But did he unite Judah
and Israel, who were so divided that they could only be united by that God
from whom they were divided? Or must we with the tedious Millenary wait for
their union, till our souls with expectation have wearied our bodies? Nay,
till our souls have left our bodies? Nay, till our souls resume our bodies by
our own union at the Resurrection? And must we believe, that then, when all
the world rises from the grave, it must yet but walk in its sleep for a
thousand years? And that the Jews shall see Christ in Jerusalem, and yet not
crucify him? And that they shall have such delights in marriage, that
Cerinthus himself, who invented them, shall be weary of them? Alas, at the
Resurrection, there shall be no marriage, but of the Lamb; there shall be no
Jerusalem, but the heavenly Jerusalem, for Judah and Israel to be united in.
But will not God in this world unite them, as in this world he has promised to
unite them? Judah has had the blessing to return; and has not God a blessing
for Israel also? has he not promised this blessing to Israel also? Or will not
God perform his promise, because Israel has not performed the condition of
his promise? Indeed he did not give them all the land of promise; but made
some of it, always a land but of promise; not that he neglected his promise
made to Them but to make them remember they had neglected their promise made to
Him; and that they did more provoke his justice, then the Heathen did ever
provoke their passion. But now will you see how God does at once magnify his
Prophet and his mercy? Will you see the progress of his jealousy, which
proves his word to be himself imparted to the ear? Observe then the parts of
time, by which the parts of his promise are famously distinguished; in which
the parts of his promise are famously justified. When Cyrus gave leave to the
Jews to depart, not from his Countries, yet to their own, did he stay Israel
from this departure? Or did Israel stay it self from this departure? Is any
man so stupid, to suppose Israel so stupid? Does he not deserve captivity,
that can think they would choose captivity? Perhaps some few (besides the
aged) made their lazy wishes travel to Jerusalem, in steed of themselves:
some few, whose degenerate souls made them captive, wheresoere they were,
although the Assyrian had never conquered them, and although Cyrus did release
them: some few, who belike had lived as much without a God, as without a
Temple. But Israel did return; the people of Israel, though not the name.
Israel had before left out Gods Name; and now God leaves out theirs; now all is
Judah, which was before as good, as all. God made them into one name, as well
as into one Nation; and to show his love, gave them for their Prince a Prince,
whom he loved, his servant David; David, not in person, but in succession. He
gave them Zorobabel, the restorer: with whom they returned to their own land,
and were as welcome as the spring; with whom they returned to their Jerusalem,
which was as glad of them, as it was once of the Temple; with whom they
returned, not to the Temple, yet for the Temple. And thus you see them united
in peace, which is their union among themselves: but now you shall see them
united in holiness, which is an union in themselves; which is Gods union with
them. When the Redeemer of Israel descended to Israel, when God vouchsafed to
endure flesh, that man might be as near Gods nature, as God was pleased to be
near man's conversation, he made no difference between the Ierusalem-Iew and
the Samaritan-Iew; but provided Baptism to be so tempered for them both, that
though they both came unto it, divided by an inequality of sin, they both
depart united by an equality of cleanness. One union more you shall behold;
you shall behold it, for as yet you cannot; and this is their union in triumph.
You saw, before, Gods union with them; and this shall be their union with God;
their union as new, as the Jerusalem in which it shall be; where Gods servant
David shall be their King, as long as the new Jerusalem shall be a Kingdom.
Zorobabel had not strength enough to fulfill this promise; and our Messiah had
not time enough to fulfill this promise: but when time shall be no more, then
shall our Messiah the eternal David be their King and restorer for evermore.
And though this their union in triump his not yet performed, and their union in
holiness, but in part performed; yet both shall be, and be as much their
wonder as their happiness. But their union in peace we have beheld; and their
union in peace they also might behold; a peace almost as admirable, as the
Peacemaker. Cyrus and Zorobabel were instruments, but God was the workman. As
at the raising of the dead, the bones shall return into their method; and the
dust shall be molded into flesh, and the sinew shall gird them into a body,
which the breath of the Almighty will instruct with a soul, a soul that shall
understand the mercy of the Miracle: so was the Resurrection of Judah and
Israel from the grave of Assyria. As when a man takes two sticks, and joins
them one to another into one stick, and they become one in his hand, as verily
one, as his hand, and more united, then the fingers of the hand: So was the
union of Judah and Israel, so plain, so firm in the hand of the almighty. And
the almighty did stretch out his hand to stretch-out this union for an example:
the fame whereof shall last, as long as the world, and the blessing of it
out-last the world. The division of Judah and Israel was the work of men;
which it confessed by being bad and short: but the union of Judah and Israel
was the work of God, begun on earth, but to be finished in Heaven; as if it
would imitate the Eternity of the author. It is the art of Gods mercy to unite
sinners among themselves, and yet by uniting them, not to increase their
sins; nay, by uniting them, to make their sins the less: but it is the
holiness of his mercy to unite sinners to himself, and by uniting them to
make them like himself. This is the blessing of Judah and Isreal's union: this
is the wonder of the God of union! But is there no union, which by similitude
can be united with this union? Does the Creator of the world confine his power
to one Country, because he does illustrate it in one Country? Does he not
dispense his wonders like his essence, which can be as eminently every where,
as it is truly euerywhere? Could not he make every wonder in the world, as
broad as the flood, which was a wonder as broad as the world? or could he not
as easily have made another flood, as a Rainbow, by which he tells us, he will
make nere another? And yet if we will view, by reflection, our own Country,
we shall almost as much deceive our eye, as employ it; whiles we may think that
as before we saw Judah and Israel carried into Assyria, so now without a
captivity they are brought into Britany, or by a National Metempsychosis,
which Pythagoras never thought-on, that they are changed into Britanie. Were
not both our Britanies since the beginning of nature, united by nature? Did not
nature provide one friendly Tweed to purify the inhabitants of them both, with
the same waves? Did it not provide one liberal Cheuiot to advance them to an
equal height of the same sports and prospect? Behold the actions of our
Britanies, since they were visible in earnest, since by exactness of Commerce
they have refined themselves from fable and neglect, and you shall see, that
they were so wonderfully united, that there could be no greater wonder, but
that they should afterward be divided. You may see how they were united in
Entertainme^t, the Pleasure of friendship, when one King was received by
another King into his Court and bosom, and yet was nearer to his love, then to
his heart. You may see how they were united in Marriage, the Constancy of
friendship; when one King would not only be the neighbor but also the Son
of the other King, and make a nearer union then by nature, without nature. You
may see how they were united in War, the Courage of friendship; when one King
was not only ready to live with the other, but also to die with him; as if
they had thought they had not sufficiently proved their friendship, till they
had ended it. And at last indeed they did end it, and by a quicker way, before
death, though seldom without it. And you may see them prosecute their division
with such degrees of fury; that the intention could not more easily make you
believe it were natural, then the variety make you believe it were artificial.
Sometime you may see their passion so out-runne their reason, that it runs
out of their Country, and begins a friendship with a stranger, that it may
continue a quarrel with a neighbor; increasing its strength to increase its
hatred; and laboring by multitude to be so sure of revenge, that it may more
justly fear its aid, then its enemy. Sometime you may see their passion so
impotent, that they will not give themselves the respite to stay for help; but
preferring a quick revenge before a great, make small incursions for as small
spoil; as if many of them were to make up but one revenge; and yet all of them
but express, how they rather wished one another a mischief, then did one.
Sometime you shall see them more unhappily deliberate, settling themselves in
vengeance and a siege; shutting up a City, that it may be opened to them;
waiting upon a City, and hating it; vexing themselves as much with the delay of
their desire, as they could be delighted with the effect of their desire, and
continually more afraid of a repulse, then the besieged were of death, nay,
then of famine; which had it bin in the besiegers trenches, might peradventure
have broken through the walls, and made them content to make their victory
invisible, by making their enemies their conquest, and their food. Sometime you
shall see the blood of their slain cover their earth; which by an instructing
use of the slaughter, does at the foulness of the fact, blush with the same
blood, with which it is stained; nay, blush at the slain, with their own
blood. You shall hear an outcry for the captivity of a King; as if it
endeavored to call him back again. You shall hear the Trumpet sound to
revenge, for the slaughter of a King, though his own blood had a louder voice.
And yet behold no Assyrian to imitate and chastize these slaughters; And yet no
deportation of these people into some land, on which they would have bin taught
to commit no violence, but with the plough. But God did not stretch out his
hand to judgment; but did correct them with their own hands, making their
fury, which was their guilt, their punishment. He threatened them with
captivity: but graciously did but threaten them. But he conquered them both;
he conquered them with his mercy; which undertook their union, when hope and
reason had forsaken it. Could any man expect they should be united by
marriage, which was a means that in former times had been proved to be
weak; and now seemed as desperate, as the war that followed it; wherein the
royal Bridegroom falling by the irreuerent fury of the sword left an infant
for his successor, not able to understand the blessing of a Kingdom, or the
loss of a father; but left a man for his enemy, our last Henry, a King full of
triumphs and heirs? Yet were they united from the blessing of marriage; and
thus their first union was the union of their bodies. Could any man expect they
should be united by Religion, whiles they beheld two glorious Queens, the one
famous for wisdom, the other for wisdom and happiness, the one of age to
bring up her heir, the other of age to bear an heir, but Princes as much
divided by Religion, as they were united by nature? Yet were they united in
their successor, who was heir in Royalty to the one, and in Royalty and
Religion to the other. Thus were our Britanies united from the blessing of
marriage by Religion also; and this was the union of their souls. And now you
will expect they should be united in obedience, and now they were united in
obedience; which was the union of their persons: which was the union of their
bodies and souls. And they were so obedient to this successor, that as soon as
they heard of him, they did obey him; without ambition, commending their own
obedience, as much for the expedition, as for the sincerity. As soon as they
heard of him, they did obey him; loyally commanding their King to love them, by
obeying the report of him, which did prevent his command. The report had no
sooner entered the ear, but like the soul, it straight informed the whole
subject. It was in an instant in the heart, commanding love: it was in the
tongue, commanding acknowledgement; it was in the knee, commmanding worship; it
was in the hand commanding applause; it was in the eye commanding desire; it
was in the foot commanding speed. And yet, as if that had been too slow, the
report of the Kingdom striued to be swifter then the report of the King, and
taking horse it carried the messenger waking and sleeping. It allowed him
sleep, but not rest; as if it would have proved, that even the sleep of a
good subject is busy in the Kings service. But we have heard of some Kings
abroad, that have been heard-of, yet not so soon obeyed. When the right
Reverend father in God, Henry King of Portugal had by the boldness of death
left his Crown, as for a Crown, he had before by the temptation of his right,
put off his Cardinals cap, Portugal quickly heard of Philip of Spain; but did
it as quickly obey him? And yet he was heir to Charles the fift's glory and
wisdom; and yet he was feign to use more wisdom, by using more force, ere
he could win obedience; and so whiles diverse Pretenders labored to prove
themselves to be nearer the Crown, he by a wiser speed proou'd himself to
be nearer the Kingdom. Our neighbors quickly heard of their greatest Henry,
immortal for all Rauillac's Knife; but did they as quickly obey him? Was he
not feign to make them hear his Drum, as well as his fame? But when our
Peacemaker was heard of, there was no tumult, but of our joy; there was no
voice of a Trumpet, but to proclaim our joy; there was no lifting up of a
hand, but of the hand that anointed him. God did prevent him with liberal
blessings; he changed his Cradle into a Throne, and almost as soon compassed
his head with a Crown, as his body with a Swath. His hand did afterward lead
him; his hand did afterward protect him: and by a new Coronation doubled his
Royalty with his age. God did prevent him with liberal blessings: God did
prevent us with liberal blessings. He blessed us with a union as quiet as
sleep or a good conscience. We have heard of some unions in our own Country:
and it is a cheaper sorrow to have heard of them, then to have seen them:
since they were as much attended with blood, as with victory. The old Saxons
were united, but it was by ruin; nay, it was into ruin; they did rather fall
into union, then rise by it; and their blood seems still as fresh as their
story. Our eldest Britains, who lay divided from the Saxons by injury and
melancholy, could not yet lie hid from the inquisitiue sword of our first
Edward; which forced them all to union, either in death or obedience; though at
last they were fully united, and recompensed for all their afflictions in our
wisest Henry, in their Henry; in whom their blood was repaired and honored.
The two Royal Houses of York and Lancaster were at last united, yet not
without division; and they were feign to shed some blood, that they might shed
no more blood. The Usurper, that great Artist, must become as foul in his
death, as in his plots, and lose his blood, ere Henry and Elizabeth by the holy
union of marriage could mix theirs. But God did prevent us with liberal
blessings; he did with peace, prevent our peace, and also made for us a
greater blessing, then peace, the continuance of it. When our enemies opened
their mouths to revile us, when they opened their mouths to devour us; when
they said, God has dishonored them to the protection of a Woman; nay, when
they said, they shall lose even that protection, though not that dishonor;
when they had measured our iniquity (for their own indeed could not be
measured) and had made-vp God Almighties accounts for him without his notice:
then did the Almighty advance himself in his jealousy, and in his people:
then did he advance the memory, as before, the victory of that Queen, which
perpetually conquered her enemies, and her sex; then did he advance the piety
of our King, as the King had increased it. He placed him before in the kingdom
of his Predecessors, but now in the Throne; and made him as well acquainted
with the Chair, as with the Prophecy; then did he advance our peace like our
peacemaker. O happy Britanies united in the same justice, though not in the
same laws, which differ more in their form, then in their purpose. O happy
Britanies united in the same honors, in the same signs of honor; the
glorious wreath of our white and red Roses, which was before united but with an
Emblem, a knot, being now united surer without a knot, being now defended
surer from any irreuerent touch by the provision of the Thistle. The Rose has
naturally a little of the Thistle; but ours have the whole Thistle; they had
before the sharpness of it, but now the company. O happy Britanies united now
in the discipline of Religion, as before in Religion; Now do we all not only
serve the same God in the same truth, but also in the same manner: and the
Priests of God are so far from being divided in opinion, that they are united
even in apparel, which, as well as the body, is taught an obedience to the same
Commandment. A Prelate and an Organ are now no news; but the one is every
where more sacred then a father; the other as cheerful as a Psalm. And in the
voice of a Psalm will we praise thee, O thou God of Psalms; and in the
cunning and unfeigned breath of an Organ, will we imitate and praise thee, O
thou Creator of our breath, that have given us another breath, our King, the
breath of our nostrils. And by thy blessing, in thy blessing, in our peace,
will we praise thee, O thou Prince of peace! Thou, that make the Wolf dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid: and the Calfe, and the
young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child to lead them; thou
that make the Cow and the Bear feed, and their young ones lie down
together: and the Lion eat straw, like the Ox; thou that make the sucking
child play on the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child put his hand on the
Cockatrice den! in our peace will we praise thee, O thou Prince of peace;
that have broken down our partition wall; which now was no more able to hinder
our peace, then it was before able to procure it. And as thou have thus made
way for us to meet together to enjoy this blessing of our union: so by this
blessing have we now made use of that way, and met together to acknowledge this
blessing of our union. And here with union of heart and voice we render united
praises unto thee, O thou God of union! Who have this day crowned thy King with
favor, who have this day crowned thy self with glory; whiles this day thou
have crowned thy people with a King.

The end.

