THE HOLY HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR Jesus Christ nativity, life,
acts, miracles, doctrine, death, passion, resurrection and ascension: Gathered
into English meeter, and published to withdraw vain wits from all unsavory
and wicked rimes and fables, to some love and liking of spiritual songs and
holy Scriptures.

By ROBERT HOLLAND master of Arts, and Minister of the Church of Prendergast.

Be filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts.

Ephesians. 5.18.

LONDON, Printed by George Tobie, 1594.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, MISTRES ANNE PHILIPS OF PICTON, R. H. wishes
increase of worship, continuance of godliness, and health in Christ Jesus.
AS the highest tides have their falls and ebbes, and after greatest te^pests
and darkest days, the sun shines: so fares it with me, (right Worshipful)
it pleased God the author of all goodness (when I had been four years or
more tossed with sundry troubles and adversities able every way to oppress
me, had not the same mighty Jehovah, Jacobs God, Exodus 2^* ^^. Leuit. ^^.12.
Psalm. 50.14. Psalm. 116.1.
the hope and strength of Israel (who by the mouth of his holy Prophet has
willed all men in their troubles to call upon him, promising even then to
deliver them) so stirred up and opened the hearts of my worshipful good friends,
^o favor my innocence and to relieve my case, to Gods holy name be all praise,
honor and glory for it,) to grant me at length a breathing time after my
travels, yet intermingled with remembrances of my former miseries, and with
special warnings of the Lord: all which I most joyfully receive, and with my
heart embrace, considering, (...). 12.5.6. (...). 3.11.12. ^u. 3.19.
that he corrects whom he loves: and that the race of my youth was so
unadvisedly run, that I have merited much more grievous punishment for it. In
which time of rest (if I may term it a rest that we enjoy while we remain
here in this world) I have bestowed such vacant time as my necessary business
let not, in penning the whole history of Christ our Savior plainly and as I
could, according to my simple capacity and knowledge in English me^ter, to be
applied to the tunes of sundry of David's Psalms: following therein the four
Evangelists, dissenting from them in nothing, though in the disposing of Christ
his acts and doctrins (as near as I could) to their proper places, and as they
were done in order of time, I follow other directions. Which work (howsoever)
to Gods glory I hope, I have finished, and for two especial causes have
determined (though the workmanship be but as it were rough hewn, yet in
respect of the matter that is so worthy) to dedicate the first fruits of my
labors under your worships name.

The first is, your godly zeal and forward affection to the hearing and
reading of Gods word, much like that noble Roman Caecilia, which let no day
pass without reading some part of Gods book, and ever carried about her,
whither soever she went (the Romans 10.17. Deuteronomy. 6.6. Cap. 11.18. Luc. 1^.26.
Io^. 5.39. Act. 17.11.
touchstone of our faith) the new Testament, which rare virtues of her mind
much more adorned and beautified her, then either her birth, though borne of
honorable parentage, or her attire how costly so ever. The book of God is in
deed to be esteemed of greater value then all other jewels: in it is the
heavenly manna, that Ioh. 6.48. Cap. 4.14. Cap 7.38.
bread of life, and the waters whereof whosoever drinks shall never thirst,
offered us: in it is the Ioh. 14.6.
way, the truth, and the life taught us, and by this way only have we access
unto the Father. Homer. Odyss. lib. 12.
The Poets faigne that Ulysses sailing between Italy and Sicilie, was driven
to stop the ears of his company with wax, and to be bound him self to the
mast of his ship, least by hearing the songs and sweet melody of the Siren
that lay in his way, he and his should f^ll into their danger: but whosoever
sa^leth in this ship, may safely unbound, and with open ears, pass by all the
Sirens of Italy at this day, which exceed (I dare avouch it) for number and
craft, an hundred to one that all Italy and Sicilie affoorded in the days of
Vlyss^s. In the book of God is the true and best triacle found, which
delivers the receauer from the poisoned cup of that great Circe the Bishop of
Rome, Reave. ^8.3* Mar. 16.18.
who has infected so many thousands, and transformed them into swine: in it is
that notable whore of Babylon, sitting on a scarlet colored beast full of
names of blasphemy, Revel. 17 3.
with seven heads and ten horns, notably described: from whose fornications
the Lord deliver us. While your Worship does (as that kingly prophet David did)
exercise your self in the same book of the law of the Lord day and night,
Psalm. 1.2. Psalm* 119. Joshua 1.8.
you shall easily perceive that vain and wicked are the trash and trumperies
that Rome does offer us, the which I know and can justly report, that with all
your heart you utterly abhor them: which gift of grace as God has begun in
you for your good, so I beseech him to continue the same to his glory. In the
book of God you shall see that Romans 1.20. Cap. 10.18. Psalm. 19.4. Wisd. 13.
ignorance (which the Romanists do account the mother of devotion) can not
excuse them: that devotion without knowledge is dotage, and knowledge without
virtue ostentation. And therein you shall see and find it indeed, that Psalm.
97.7. Exodus 20.3. John 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Matthew. 7.7. Reu. 19.10. Cap. 22.9.
to pray to Angels or Saints, or for the dead (which they make no small point
of their religion) is plain superstition, and their counterfeit holiness
hypocrisy.

Novelties in these days delight dainty ears, and fine filed phrases so fit
some fantacies, that no book except it abound with the one or the other, or
both of these, is brookt of them. Some read Gascoine, some Gueuar^, some
praise the Palace of pleasure, and the like whereon they bestow whole days,
yea some whole months and years, that scarce bestow one minute on the Bible,
albeit the book of God. And no marvel though hypocritical Papists delight in
any other book rather then the Bible, seeing that this (as the Sun
scorcheth the naked Ethiopians skin) so grieueth the galled consciences of some
that when it discovers their dissembling, they never leave kicking while any
Christian is in their company. Other there be that are more mild, who for fear
their offices should fly, or their livings be lost, have learned such
conformity, that they can dissemble with dear friends in deep points of
religion, and seem outwardly that which inwardly in heart they utterly abhor:
these snakes are most venomous when they cast their old skins. Are not they
gross, and drunk with the dregs of their superstition, that dare utter this
blasphemy against God and his word (to terrify and withdraw as much as they
may, the well meaning man from so godly and comfortable an exercise) that it is
dangerous for the unlearned to read the Bible? If they would consideratiuely
wai^h what great and grievous punishment the Lord laid on Sennacherib king or
Assyria, 2 King. 18.30. Esaias. 37.1. 1. Mac. 7.43. Leuit. 24.11.
Nicanor and others, for blaspheming his name, they would not so rashly do the
like. If their forefathers had considered that the word of God is a sea, Ezec.
47.1.
wherein both the elephant may swim and the lamb may wade, the greatest
Doctor may daily learn in, and the simplest man may co^continually have
comfort; and that in the same there is a sovereign salve for every sore, they
would not (as I think) have forbidden the reading of Gods book, and in stead
thereof commanded to be read (yea and that openly in churches) the legend of
lies, rather then lives of Saints: not unlike in most places, for method and
matter, to the monstrous fables of Garragantua, Huon of Bordeaux, and the like.

Whosoever will (as Isaac) continually meditate on Gods book, Genesis 24.63.
he shall as David says, find it a lantern to his feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light to his paths: yea Gods word will be in his mouth sweeter then
honey and the honey comb. When I perceived how desirous your Worship was, to
hear and read Gods word, it greatly moved me to write this book, persuading
my self that it will be to you and all the godly, a recreatio^, to apply some
part of this heavenly history of Christ our Savior to the tune of one of the
Psalms of David, that being (as S. Paul advises all men) filled with the
spirit of God, you may still be speaking unto your self in Psalms and hymns
and spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5.18.
singing and making melody unto the Lord in your heart, and giving thanks
always for all things unto God even the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The second reason that moved me to take this work in hand (besides the hope
that I have thereby to benefit many, and especially such as have delight to be
reading and singing of Ballades and other English meeters, by giving them
better matter to read and sing, then such commonly do yield unto them) is to
signify in some part, my gratefulness to God and your Worship, for the
manifold benefits and favors that I and mine have received at your hands: to
God (I say) first, as the author, and your self the instrument that he has
used to do me much good. For if God had not opened your heart, (...). 16.14.
as he did the heart of Lydia to hear the preaching of S. Paul, you had not
regarded my misery. And therefore with David I will as long as I live receive
the cup of salvation, ^sal. 116.12.
and call upon the name of the Lord: for as nothing pleases God more then
thankfulness, so nothing can displease God and man more then ungratefulness.
But lest some Sicophant should (seeking to deface my good meaning) note or
charge me with adulation, I will rather pass over the sundry and daily
benefits I have and do receive by your Worships means, with this slight
remembrance of them, the^ give him any such-aduantage, or the least occasion
to carpe at the same. But if any of Momus mates mislike with my doings, either
in this or the rest of my book, (so that the godly and well disposed, and of
them chiefly your Worship, to whom I offer my book and my self to be
patronized and defended, do like and allow of it) I esteem not his detractions
but as trifles, and his floutes as follies, and therefore let him content
himself with this answer, I took not this travel for his sake. And thus
desiring your Worship to accept in good part this my humble duty and
remembrance of you, as glad by this means to impart the effect of my affection
toward you, as the widow was by two mites to manifest her good meaning to the
treasury, I beseech Almighty God to bless you and all yours with continual
and daily increase of the riches of his graces and gifts, that you may ever go
forward from faith to faith, ready with all your endeavors to maintain the
quarrel of Christ and his Church, until you be summoned to reign with him in
glory without end. Amen.

From Prendergast the first day of August, 1594.

Your Worships in all duty, Robert Holland.

TO THE GODLY and Christian Reader.
GEntle Reader, I think my labor well bestowed if the same may benefit any,
and my reward sufficient, if the godly like and allow of my book. I must
confess, and do, that this work would have required one of greater reading
and of far deeper judgment then my self to undertake it: neither can I any
way make thee amends for my rashness herein, unless thou accept of my good
will, for the recompense.

Many will mislike with it, because it is in meeter ( Beza. Georg. Fabr^ hist.
de not. pa^ and resur. Chr^ carmina. Barthol. Freu^ celij od. sacra^ lib. 3. de
inca^ reb. gestis, and (...) Christi. Witt^ berg. an. 159^ 1. Cor. 2.2.
though sundry have done the like in Latin verse:) and many with the meeter,
because it is rudely handled. The first I hope will excuse me, if they consider
that I seek not herein to set forth my self to the show, but as much as I
may to win if not many, yet some, to know Christ Jesus crucified. Although this
history is so brief and plain in the writings of the four Evangelists, as
no mortal man may presume to amend it: and that many worthy and famous men,
both for their learning and knowledge, have in sundry languages commented at
large, and made very godly and profitable expositions upon the same: yet has
it not won all men to such liking thereof, that they can afford much time to
read the one or the other. If I may any way satisfy such, and hereby draw
them to savor of the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, I shall think my time
well spent, and my self not deceived of my desire. Which reckening of mine if
it be allowed for good payment of my godly hostess, I mean the Christian
congregation and church of God: there shall none of the children of Belial, the
brood of darkness, drive me to any new accounts. I care not who carpe at it,
so that Christ may be glorified by it, and the Christian and godly Reader
satisfied with it: to whose censure I submit it and my self, humbly desiring
the learned with favor to find out all faults, and charitably to amend where I
have mist. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, R. Holland.

(...) Chronographiam carmen.
HEsperiae vasto nox (proh dolor) incubatorbi,
Vesanos magica fascinat art viros:
Integer insano diuisus orb Britannus
Sublimi tuitur sydera front poli:
Syderis aetherij vulgo speculantur ouantes
Ortum, sanati coelica verba libri:
Cosmicus, haud obitum metuens, hic syderis ortus
Nubeculas Papae, scripta nefanda, fugat.
Nec radijs rutilae tantum calet Anglia stellae:
Sed calet haec gemini terra sub axe poli:
Haec pluuialis Hyas, aeterni sermo Iehouae,
Viuifico cunctos irrigat imbre pios.
Passim sacrorum sacrata volumina vatum
Lingua profert genti consona quaeque suae.
Anglus at errantes stellas videt orb cadentes,
Infoelix Babylon stella maligna ruit:
Et coniuratos coelum affectare gygantes
Deserit Almannus, Gallus, and Anglus atrox,
Anglus and aeternas cernit stellas Orientes,
Anglica stella nitet regia, Sermo Dei,
At chronicus clari spectandus syderis ortus,
Hollandi Chronicon, carmine scripta salus:
Ardua molitur, laeto canit acta triumpho
Prototoci Mariae, tempore quaeque suo:
Ortum decantat, vitam, tunc funera Christi:
Cum petijt coelos victor, and ordo docet.
Ergo manent Hollande tibi coelestia serta,
Carpere namque Theon, nullus obesse, queat.
H. Smartus Oxoniensis.

(...) of the Author.
IF Maro who did treat of Mars,
And Lucan civil wars,
If Naso for his wanton verse,
And change of men to stars,
Possessed great praise and endless fame,
What then deserves he,
That treats of him who brought us bliss,
And bond did make us free?
Whose life he loved not as our health,
And us transforms to Angels wealth.
Lo let his praise the brazen posts
And Pyramid outweare,
Nor let not Momus canckred tooth,
The work praise worthy tear:
But as the Phoenix shall it live,
Though birth renewing new:
And as the fire which waterie thorns,
And green wood does subdue,
Does flame at length: so maugre spite,
It flourish shall to goods delight.
Io. Pine in eiusdem.
LEt fame take now her flight,
From place to place, and say,
That if men look to find aright,
To life a ready way,
Or seek the sovereign pearl,
That far surpasses gold,
They may herein find either well,
Sent free to them, not sold.
Let him in lue of pain,
Reap this reward therefore,
That gives what wit (not wealth) did gain,
A name for evermore.
THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY OF CHRIST OUR SAVIOVR, AS IT IS WRITTEN BY the
Evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.
Written in English meeter by R. H.
to the tune of the Psalm. 81.
The promised Messiah.
BE light, and glad, in God rejoice, Psalm. 81.1.

Which is our strength and stay,
Confess also with heart and voice, Genesis 3.15. and 12.3. and 28.14* Act. 3.25.
Ga. 3.8. Number. 24.17. Esaias. 40.9.

His goodness every way:
Whose promise to the Patriarks past
So often, and long before,
God has performed at the last;
To him be praise therefore.
His word into the world he sent, Ioh. 1.1.3.10. Colos. 1.16. Hebr. 11.3.

By whom he made the same:
Who us to save, (as then was meant)
A perfect man became*
Christ is that light, that lightneth all, John 1.9. Mat. 4.1. mar. 1.12. luc
^. 1. cor. 15.^*

That in the world do dwell:
Of him the deu'll had a fall;
He has us freed from h^ll.
The Angel Gabriell saluteth the virgin Marie.
^uc. 1.26.27.
To Naz'reth Gabriell came from God,
A town in Galilie:
Six months after, (and no odd,)
He spoke to Zachary.
To blessed Marie, then he went,
A maid and virgin pure:
And said (all hail) to thee is meant,
Much happiness be sure.
Luc. 1.31. Math. 1.21. Esaias. 7.14.
The Lord thy God, has thought it good,
That thou shall bear his son:
Which when she heard and understood,
She said his will be done.
I nothing doubt what thou have said,
But do the same believe:
No fond conceit shall cause men fear,
All thanks to God I give.
Marie visits her cousin Elizabeth.
Luc. 1.39.
When he was gone from her away,
Most joyful, and most glad
The virg^^ was, to see that day,
And h^^e the news she had.
Straightway she thence went hastily,
Her cousin for to see:
They did rejoice most heartily,
Such mothers both to be.
Joseph disposed to leave Marie, was satisfied by an Angel, and so took her.
Math. 1.19. Deu. 24.1.
But this amazed Joseph's mind.
That was a man so just:
He thought his spouse had been unkind,
And had abused his trust.
Yet when he meant to shift away
With her, his worldly shame:
An Angel warnde him where he lay,
And then he took the dame.
The taxing of the world under Aug. Caesar.
And in Augustus Caesar's reign, Luc. 2.1.

When all the world so wide,
He so commanding, this is plain,
Was taxt on every side.
Cirenius over Syria,
Was governor also:
When to be taxt in Judea,
They thither both did go. Joseph and Marie.

With Marie, his espoused wife, Luc. 2.^. Math. 2.6. Ioh. 7.42. Micah. 5.2.

From Nazareth he came:
To Bethlehem; to lead his life,
To answer to the same.
Of David's house and line they wear,
And therefore thought it good:
Among all such their tax to bear,
As were of David's blood.
The birth of Christ in Bethlehem.
While they were there her days were done, Luc. 2.6. An. mundi. 4142. An.
Aug. Caesar. 42. An. Herod. Ant. 33. Christus natus.

Her childbearing did hye:
So she brought forth, and bare a son;
Such was their poverty,
A stable room they only had,
This heavenly babe to lay:
Whose birth has made so many glad,
Within a cratch of hay.
His clothes were clouts, they wrapped him in,
And laid in cratch he was:
Although his weeds were very thin,
Between an Ox and Ass.
Thus poorly came our mighty king,
into the world so vain:
Without all pomp, our prince did bring
His people out of pain.
Christ, our Messiah, God and man,
Borne of a virgin pure,
Contented (though no princes can,
Such poverty endure:)
For kingly court, with stable was,
For bed of Down, with hay:
A while in manger by an Ass,
The king of kings he lay.
An Angel declares to the sheapheards the birth of Christ, and they are made
witnesses of it.
Luc. 2.8.
His birth the Lord did first bewray,
To shepherds poor and base:
Which day and night in field did stay,
Their flock of sheep to grase.
An Angel came most gloriously,
Unto those silly men,
Saluting them, (though graciously)
Yet were they fearful then.
Let not your minds be so afraid,
For tidings of great joy
I bring to you: the Angel said,
Nothing shall you annoy.
All people may rejoice at this,
And praise their God for aye:
For Christ the Lord is borne iwis,
in Bethlehem this day.
And this (as sign) you shall epsy,
The savior shall be laid,
All swadled, in a cratch to lie,
In poorest sort araid.
Disdain not you his poverty,
The Savior is the same;
He will his save most certainly,
From everlasting blame.
Then with the Angel straightway were,
A multitude surely:
Of heavenly soldiers, praising there
One God in trinity.
All glory be to God on high,
And in the earth be peace,
And toward men continually,
Good will may still increase.
So when the Angels all were gone,
To heaven melodiouslie:
The shepherds of their news anon
Would try the verity.
They went, and saw what they had heard,
And published the same:
All wondered at what they declarde,
Though few believed the fame.
They praising God, not now afraid,
Did thence again depart:
But Marie kept what they had said,
And pond^ed in her heart. Eusebius. lib. 1. ca. 4. probat Chr. regem, sacerd. and
propheta^ esse.

For she brought forth the Lord, the Prince,
The prophet, and the priest:
That did the devil, and death convince,
Our Savior Jesus Christ.
The Circumcision of Christ.
^uc. 2.21.
When eight days were accomplished,
Because they stood in awe:
The child was then Circumcised,
According to the law.
Then Jesus was he calde by name,
His friends ordaining so:
Because the Angel willed the same,
To Joseph long ago.
The wisemen, the first fruit of the Gentiles, came from the East and
worshipped Christ.
Math. 2.1. L. Codoma^nus. Epipha. and alij dicunt magos Chr. adorauisse 12.
die post eius natiuitatem.
Next, after this came from the East,
The wisemen by a star:
To see this babe; for ever bleast,
The wisemen came so far.
In Herod's days these wisemen came,
And asked (him) this thing:
We saw his star, yet heard no fame,
Of Christ your Prince and King.
Babilonij and Persae magos: Graeci Philosophos: Indi, Brachmenas: Aegiptij
gymnosophi. Iudaei Prophetas homines doctos and sapientes vocant.
Where is he borne? that we may see,
And worship him they say?
King Herod, what is known to thee,
Declare without delay.
This troubled all Jerusalem,
(as it had done the King:)
Yet many knew in Bethlehem,
Should be this childbearing.
But Herod fearing his estate,
So doubtful to endure:
Did of this matter much debate,
His Crown it was not sure.
Therefore, he sent the men away,
To search where Christ should be:
That Christ (says he) without delay,
May worshiped be by me.
Now as the chief Priests, Scribes, and rest,
Had therein taught to them:
The wisemen so were ready pressed,
To go to Bethlehem,
Yet warned by the king they were,
To make return again:
Thereby he thought, to end his fear,
When he the child had slain.
So they depart, and lo the star,
Which they had seen before:
(By which they had now iourneyd far,
And were to travail more,)
Did still direct them in their way,
Each day by day and night,
Till they had seen (it did not stray,)
The only Lord of might.
Whom, when they found, they fell down flat,
To worship him, and these
Gave to him treasures, each one what
Each one of them did please.
Or as their country yielded then,
They unto him did bring
Gold, incense, mirrhe: those sage wisemen,
Did offer to that king.
And so being warned in a night,
(For God an Angel sent)
Another way with all their might,
They to their country went.
Then they perceived, that Herod's drifts,
Was only him to slay:
Whom they adored with their gifts,
Therefore they went their way.
Christ was presented in the temple at Jerusalem: where Simeon and Anna
witnessed of him. Marie purified according to the law.
^c. 2.22. ^uit. 12.6.
When Mary's days were finished,
Full thirty days and three:
She afterward was purified,
As women wont to be.
And then the child they did present,
Meekely before the Lord:
For to Jerusalem then went,
His friends with one accord.
^uc. 2.23. ^xod. 13 2. ^euit. 12.8.
This was a law they did observe,
The first that opened
The mothers womb; they did reserve
To God as hallowed.
And offered an oblation,
Of turtle Doves a pair,
Or pigeons young: this portion
They would not sure appaire.
Luc. 2.25.
Then Simeon surnamed just,
That long had lived there:
For Isreal's comfort he did trust,
He lived of God in fear.
The holy Ghost him this foretold,
No death shall dint on thee,
The Lord his Christ (though thou art old)
Before thou surely see.
Luc. 2.27.
He then into the temple came,
When Jesus there was brought:
And speaking plainly of the same,
As in his mind he thought,
Said, Lord, now let thou in peace,
Thy servant to depart:
According to thy promise, ease
Is happened to my heart.
For with mine eyes, I sure have seen,
Salvation sent by thee:
And in mine arms, thy son has been,
That works the same for me.
Him thou prepared had before,
To be the Gentiles light:
And eke to Israel ever more,
Their glory and their might.
Then Joseph and his mother mild
Did marvel much, to hear
The words he spoke there of the child,
And pondred them with fear.
Yet Simeon blessing them, could say, Luc. 2.34. Psalm. 118.22. Esaias. 8.14. Cap.
28.16. Math. 21.42. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.7.

Oh Marie be content,
This fall to many, is the stay,
To Israel was meant.
Old Anna was a Prophetess,
Which prayed day and night:
This likewise did the child confess,
To be the Gentiles light.
She came by chance, the same to see, Luc. 2.36.

That she so much desirde,
The rites, performed orderly,
They home-wardes all retir'de.
Joseph warned of an Angel flies into Egypt.
After all this; was Joseph warnde, Math. 2.13, Hosea. 11.1.

That he should take the child,
And mother; then, all three vnharmde,
Least they should be beguilde.
For Herod, as the Angel said,
Would seek to take his life:
Wherefore to Egypt all affrayd,
Went Joseph and his wife.
The infants slain.
Math. 2.16.
Herod (as mocked) did take a scorn,
And in his angry mood,
Slew infants all in Bethlehem borne,
And spilt their guiltless blood.
The children there of two years old,
Or under as they were;
He slew them all; his act was bold,
It wanted grace and fear.
Math. 2.18. ^erem. 31.15.
This act was foretold long before,
In Jeremy we read,
That Rachell she should so deplore,
Her children being dead.
Which was accomplished in deed,
By Herod in his ire:
Who made so many infants bleed,
Yet mist of his desire.
For Christ was gone from thence away,
To Egypt to remain:
Whence he till Herod's dying day,
Did not return again.
That it which erst the Prophet said,
Might certainly be done:
Hosea. 11.1. Math. 2.15.
I out of Egypt vnaffrayd,
Have called back my son.
Joseph warned again by an Angel, returns out of Egypt, after the death of
Herod.
When Christ was now full five years old, Math. 2.19. Epiphan. supp^seth that
Chr^ was 6. yeare^ old at his return out of ^gipt: other think but fiu^
because he w^ but 3. going (...) staid there tw^ Math. 2.20.

And had in Egypt been
Two years or more, as authors hold,
The Angel there was seen,
To warn Josephus thence to come,
Again to Israel:
And bring his wife, and son, (as some
Supposed) there to dwell.
For now they were both dead and gone,
That sought the child his life:
Then he and his supposed son
Returned and his wife.
But Archelaus Herod's son,
That held his fathers place,
Made Joseph think they were undone,
He doubted of his grace.
He went and turned then aside,
Another part unto,
Of Galilie; there to abide, Math. 2.23.

As he was wild to do.
In Nazareth he did remain,
That it might come to pass:
What erst the Prophets very plain
Foretold: and so it was.
Jesus being twelve years old disputes with the elders in the Temple at
Jerusalem.
His parents year by year they went, Luc. 2 41. Deuteronomy. 16.2.

Their passover to hold:
And did the same with like intent,
When Christ was twelve years old.
They to Jerusalem did go,
And there abode the days
Appointed for that feast; no mo,
For then they went their ways.
Yet Christ the Lord abode behind,
Whom they with sorrow sought
Three days, not knowing well his mind,
What then our Savior thought.
For he began to set abroch
The business he had:
Who did perceive the time approach,
To make his chosen glad.
Among the Doctors as he taught,
And posed them withal,
His parents found him, that were fraught
With grief unto the gall.
Yet were they easd; and pleased to hear
Each one to give him praise:
Though hey had sought their son with fear,
And sorrow sundry ways.
Then he again obediently,
To Nazareth did come:
And served his parents reu'rently,
Most like a loving son.
And he increasd in stature so,
In wisdom, and in grace
With God and men, where he did go,
That happy was the place.
Six things specially to be noted in this first part of the History.
Six things, we may especially,
In this part mark and see:
Pertaining to Christ's infancy,
As authors do agree.
1 First, of what line Christ Jesus came: Luc. 2 4. 2. Sam. 7.12. Luc. 1.35.

He was of David's seed,
2 The holy Ghost conceived the same
That Marie bore in deed.
3 The wisemen thirdly, came to see, Math. 2 3.

And seek to find a king:
Then found, confessed him so to be,
For whom they treasure bring.
4 Fourthly, by flight Christ scapeth sure, Math. 2 14.

King Herod's heavy hand:
5 For him, the infants death endure, Math. 2.16.

When Christ had left the land.
6 Sixthly, being warnd to come again, Math. 2.21.

For sundry causes good,
From Egypt where they did remain,
Josephus past the flood,
And came to lurie for to dwell,
Thus tossed cruelly,
Was Christ the king of Israel,
From his weak infancy.
Thus did our good and loving God, Luc. 1.31.

Send down his only son:
To save us sinners from his rod, 1 Thessalonians. ^.9.

That else had been undone.
There was no merits left for man, Act. 4.12.

His silly soul to save;
But only this, Christ only can, Ioh. 11.25.43.44. Gal. 4.4.

Revive us in the grave.
This Christ at the appointed time,
Took flesh, of Adams seed:
(...). 3.19.
Whose substance was but earthie slime,
This flesh, he took in deed.
And in this flesh, that did offend,
This second Adam he
Did all our former faults amend,
And fully made us free.
(...). 1.12. ^^l. 2.32. ^ct. 2, 21. ^m. 10.13. ^ct. 3.16. ^sal. 81.1.
As many as unfeignedly
Believe and say the same,
They find salvation certainly,
In Jesus Christ his name.
Therefore be glad, in God rejoice,
He is our strength and stay:
Be joyful, and lift up your voice,
To Jacobs God always. Amen.
THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST,
containing those things which he did the first year after his Baptism: which
was the xxx. of his age, according to the four Evangelists.
To the tune of the Lords Prayer.
Christ Baptized the time when, and where he was Baptized.
CHrist, thirty years of age at lest, Luc. 3.23. Eusebius. lib. 1. Cap. 11.
Carrion. Chron. lib. 3. de 4. Monarch. fol. 110

Began to preach the Gospel then:
Our savior Christ, was ready pressed,
To bring glad tidings unto men:
But ere he would this enterprise,
In Jordan John did him Baptize.
Tiberius Caesar as we read, Luc. 3.1.

Then reigned full the fifteenth year:
Judea Pylate ruled as head.
In Galilie, it does appear,
That Herod reigned in the place:
And in Iturea Phillip was.
Lysanias ruled Abylen,
Annas and Cayphas high Priests were:
Th'Euangelistes agree that then,
John preached and Baptized there.
Among the rest, he did Baptize
Our Savior Christ, but on this wise.
Mat. 3.13. Mar. 1.12. Luc. 3.21.
Christ Jesus came from Galilie,
To Jordan, where John did Baptize:
John Christ fore-running certainly,
His office did well exercise
With diligence, whose time then came,
To yield to Christ, and leave the same.
Mat. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luc. 3.16. Ioh. 1.26. Act. 1.5. Cha. 2.4. Cha. 8 17. Cha.
19.4.5.
With water I Baptize, said he,
Men's lives t'amend I teach the way:
But he that comes after me,
To Baptize his, will not delay,
With fire and with the holy Ghost,
To whom I yield; his might is most.
Therefore, when Christ Baptisde would be,
Mat. 3.13. Mar. 1.9. Luc. 3.^1.
John put him back, and said, I need
To have thy help, come thou to me?
Christ said again, we must in deed,
Both thus all righteousness fulfill:
Then John obeyed Christ Jesus will.
Christ needed not at all to have
This badge of penitence: but he
That meant his chosen for to save,
Most humble shows himself to be.
Christ Baptism did receive therefore,
That he might honor it the more.
When Christ out of the water went,
Straightway the heavens were opened:
John saw the same incontinent,
As Soon as it then happened,
The holy Ghost, John like a dove,
Did see descending from above.
He heard withal from heaven this voice, Math. 3.17 Mar. 1.11. Luc. 3.22. Ioh.
1.32. Math. 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. Colloss. 1.13

This is my well-beloved son,
In whom I only do rejoice,
By him my will is truly done;
The Father, Son, and Spitite he
Then heard, and saw, at once all three.
The voice, and sight, John heard, and saw, Ioh. 1.33.

Assured him, that this was he,
Of whom, all men should stand in awe,
By whom, all men must saved be.
He that sent John for to Baptize,
Said, thou shall see him in such wise.
John then, discharging well his place,
Was glad in heart to leave the same,
And yield to Christ, so full of grace;
Of whom he published the fame.
I came before, said John, to tell,
And spread his name in Israel.
Christ by the spirit was lead into the wilderness where he fasted forty
days and 40. nights.
After all this, Math. 4.1. Mar. 1.12. Luc. 4.8.
the spirit lead
Christ Jesus, to the wilderness:
Where he troad down the Serpents head,
To bring us out of heaviness.
There first, he did both pray and fast,
While forty days and nights did last.
Among wild beasts he lived then,
This was his comfort all those days: August. in Psalm. 85.

(So far from company of men,)
In prayer to talk with God always.
Christ thus with reu'rent care did take,
In hand his office for our sake.
But after that those days were done,
To show him perfect man to be,
An hungered was Gods only son,
Though far from food as then was he.
The tempter thought this place most fit
And time to ply his wily wit.
Christ was tempted of the devil three ways, and thrice himself overcome by
Christ.
Ioh. 8.44.
He like himself, is always found
Most false, and feign would Christ deceive:
This first demand he did propound,
(As doubting (though he did perceive)
That Christ the son of God should be;
And tryes it with devises threee.)
The first temptation.
First, to despair he Christ would bring,
As then to doubt of help at need:
His wants he knew, and urged that thing,
If thou be Christ, Gods son in deed,
Command these stones made bread to be:
For other food I can not see.
Math. 4.4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Christ answers, man does not live
By bread alone, as thou do deem,
Gods word is bread, which I believe
Does feed all his, this I esteem.
By it, man's life preserved is:
Satan's first fall.
I will not tempt my God in this.
The second temptation.
Then next, the devil devised so
From doubt, to confidence as vain,
Christ to provoke, they both thence go
The temple to, from top again
Satan willd Christ to take a fall:
Angels will aid thee if thou call.
For this is written sure, said he, Psalm. 91.11.12.

That God has charg'de them so to do,
If thou do fall, then shall I see,
And show it unto many more.
Thus did the deu'll Gods word abuse:
Which God has willd us well to use.
Christ said again, this written is, Deuteronomy. 6.16.

Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God:
Who so does so, deserves this,
For such a fault, to feel his rod. Satan's second fall.

I will not so deceived be:
Depart therefore, thou deu'll from me.
Lastly, by wealth and worldly gain, The third temptation.

The subtil'st shift of all the rest
Man to deceive, whose mind is vain,
This wile as then the devil addressed,
To tempt our Savior Christ withal:
Not doubting him therewith to fall.
He brought him to a mountain high,
These worldly kingdoms to behold:
The devil was in his majesty,
This act of his was very bold.
All these (said he) will I give thee,
If thou fall down and worship me.
But Jesus could no more abide, Satan's third fall.

To hear him vaunt so much amiss:
Christ did convince him then of pride,
To offer him that was not his.
Void Satan; get thee hence away: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Chap. 10.20.

Worship the Lord; thy God obey.
You see therefore Christ Jesus was
So by the spirit led away:
He fasted, in a desert place.
Aret. in Cap. 4. Math. fol. 28.
He practiced prayer day by day,
And Satan's sleights did overthrow,
All this the Scripture, does us show.
Hebr. 2.18.
And in that he was tempted so,
And suffered: S. Paul does say,
He is well able to help mo,
That tempted are by any way.
We need not therefore stand in fear,
When we do call, Christ will give ear.
Though Satan, had three drifts diuisde,
By fraud our Savior Christ to foil:
Yet naked then, and all disguisde,
He gained shame for his great toil.
Three ways he tempted Christ withal,
And thrice himself he had the fall.
This conquest of the infernal foe,
Christ Jesus made ere he began
In open sight himself to shoe,
The Savior of mortal man.
That his might evermore boldly,
The devil and all his works dofie.
When Satan felt his force, he flead,
And left Christ Jesus all alone:
Genesis 3.15.
The woman's seed, on Serpents head
In his good time, did tread upon,
And then the Angels to him came,
To be as witness of the same.
John's testimony of Christ.
Ioh. 1.15.
While Christ was in the wilderness,
And vnreturned back again,
The Scripture plainly does express,
That idle John did not remain.
The Jews sent to him, for to see,
They thought him sure that Christ to be.
But Jesus he confessed to be, Ioh. 1.15.

Before him, and his greater to:
All grace in him received we,
Said he, and so all faithful do.
The law by Moses given was:
By Jesus Christ came truth and grace.
God was not seen of any man, Ioh. 1.18. 1. Tim. 6.16. 1. Ioh. 4.12.

His son has him declared sure:
Which best and only do it can,
And does both God and man endure.
Which in the fathers bosom still
Does rest, and knows all his will.
One day ere Christ came back again, Lau. Codoma^nus says that John gave
this answer to the Priests and Leuits the day before Chr. came from the
wilderness. Febr. 14.

To Bethabara where they were,
The Priests and Levites answer plain
Of John receive, back home to bear.
What art thou, they to John did say?
Tell us, let us go hence away.
Confessing, he did not deny,
That Christ whom ye suppose I am,
I am not he assuredly.
Tell whom thou do thy self then name? Ioh. 1.20. Mar. 1.7. Act. 13.25.

Art thou Elias? no said he.
Whom make thou thy self to be?
Art thou that Prophet? John said no.
What art thou then the Levites say?
Give answer now and let us go,
So answer others that we may.
For hither they for this intent,
Us from Jerusalem have sent.
^oh. 1.23. Esaias. 40.3. Math. 3.3. Luc. 3.4.
I surely am (said John) the voice,
That in the wilderness does cry,
Unto all such as do rejoice,
That their redemption is nigh.
Make straight the paths, prepare the way,
Of God the Lord, without delay.
They which were sent were Pharisees,
They asked him then, thus again,
Why Baptisest thou now all these,
If thou be none of both those twain?
That Christ, nor yet Elyas he;
How can this work agree with thee?
Ioh. 1.27. Math. 3.11. Mar. 1.7. Luc. 3.16. Act. 1.5. Cap. 11.16. Cap. 19.4.
John said, with water I Baptize,
But there does stand among you one,
Whom ye acknowledge in no wise,
For all that I to you have done:
He was before me, and his shoes,
I am not worthy to unloose.
These things in Bethabara were
So done, as you do hear the same:
For John Baptized even there,
As many then as to him came:
And Christ returned the next day,
When John had sent those men away.
Ioh. 1.29.
At Christ's return, John sure said this,
Forthwith as Jesus came that way,
Behold, the lamb of God it is,
That comes here, this man I say,
He of this world, and all therein,
Away will only take the sin.
John the 17. of February, An. mundi 4170. sent Disciples to Christ, this was
John Baptist.
A few days after this was done, Ioh. 1.35.

Christ as before then passing by,
Behold, said John, here is the son,
And lamb of God assuredly.
This his Disciples heard him say, Andrew and John called.

And two of them went straight away.
Andrew and John were the same twain. Aret. in Cap. 1 Ioh fol. 147. This was
John Evangelist, he that wrote this Gospel.

That followed Christ, to them said he,
What seek ye? where do thou remain
Rabbi, said they? he said come see.
They went and saw, and both did stay
With Christ our Savior all that day.
His brother Simon Andrew found, Peter called. Ioh. 1.41.

And brought to Christ, to whom Christ gave
Cephas to name, which men expound
To be a stone, and this we have
To note, that as his name so was,
His faith for firmness it would pass.
In this discourse, well may we see,
As John, so his, themselves did show,
Most willing, that all men might be
Brought the Messiah for to know,
To Christ John sent such as he won,
For then he knew his time was done.
In Christ's return to Galilie, Phillip called. Ioh. 1.43.

He finding Phillip by the way,
Said, follow me: he presently
Christ's call most humbly did obey;
This Phillip of Bethsaida was,
And Andrew also of that place.
^en. 49.10. ^eut. 18.18. ^^ay. 4.2. ^erem. 23.5. ^zek. 34.23. ^an. 9.24.
Then Phillip found Nathanaell,
And said the Savior is hear:
The only king of Israel,
A Nazarite he does appear.
Can any good come, I pray thee,
From Nazareth (Phillip) said he?
Nathanaell ^alled. ^oh. 1.46.
Then Phillip said, come thou and see.
When Jesus saw Nathanaell,
Oh Israeli^ie, no guile in thee,
Or deep deceit (said he) does dwell.
Whence know thou me, said he again?
I never saw thee, this is plain.
Then Jesus said, I did thee see,
Ere Philip came and calde thee thence,
When thou wast under the fig tree.
Nathanaell said in their presence,
Gods son thou art, I see it well,
And eke the king of Israel.
Because I said so, unto thee,
Said Jesus to Nathanaell;
I saw thee under the fig tree,
Beleeuest thou? thou do well.
Thou shall see greater things then these:
Thy plainness, me said Christ, does please.
Hereafter, shall ye verily,
The heau'ens see open all above,
And Angels coming certainly,
Ioh. 1.51. Genesis 28.12.
Upon his son, whom God does love.
Ascending and descending they,
The son of man will all obey.
The first miracle that Christ wrought was in Cana in Galilie at the marriage,
Bonauentura Mantuan.
as some suppose of John the Evangelist, turning water to wine.
In Cana was a marriage made, Ioh. 2.1.

(This Cana was in Galilie,)
Three days after Phillip had
Been called of Christ so lovingly:
And eke Nathanaell also:
Or after Christ did thither go.
Marie unto the marriage came,
So Christ withal was bidden there,
And his Disciples to the same,
As John reports, all called were.
Of miracles the first this was,
That Christ then wrought in the same place.
But Marie there presumed so,
That Christ gave her a grievous check;
In thought man may not God out-go,
Prescribe not him, obey his beck.
They have no wine (oh son) said she: Said Christ to her.

Oh what have I to do with thee?
He turned yet (as he before
Had with himself in mind decreed)
Six water pots (to mend their store)
Of water full, to wine in deed.
And showed his glory, that he might
So strength their faith, that saw the sight.
Christ went from Cana to Capernaum.
From Cana to Capernaum he, Ioh. 2.12. Aret. in Ioh. 2 Theophilact. Chrisost.

His mother, and his brethren went:
Because he there used often to be,
To leave his mother there he meant.
For it would weary her to go
From place to place, though Christ did so.
For her Christ Jesus did provide,
(To teach us all the like to do,)
Where he was wont for to abide,
^ath. 9.1.
And liked of the place also,
For where his mother placed he,
His City, it was namde to be.
Yet there (as then) he tarried not,
But very shortly went away,
For nothing could make him forgot,
Or then his fathers works delay,
The more he car'de for his in deed,
He did the more about this speed.
Christ went thence to Jerusalem to the feast of the passover, and there drove
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
^h. 2.13.
From Capernaum Christ did go,
Up to Jerusalem; for he,
As other, always used so,
Not sailing, at that feast to be.
The passover was then at hand,
A feast observed through the land:
^h. 2.14. ^ath. 21.12. ^ar. 11.15. ^uc. 19.45.
When Christ came there, as he did use,
Into the Temple then he went,
Where he reproving their abuse,
All such out of the Temple sent,
As did therein then buy or sell,
And told them plain they did not well.
A whip of cords Christ Jesus made,
Wherewith both oxen, sheep and men,
He drove out, he lowed there no trade,
No not money strangers then,
Those thence he forced to pack away,
And suffered none of them to stay.
Such as sold doves, they had a check,
He did command them quickly thence;
Perforce they must obey his beck,
He not regardes their ware or pence,
But said my fathers house make ye,
No house of merchandise to be.
They were amazed all at this,
Yet none of them durst disobay,
Resist, or say thou do amiss,
They yielded all and went away.
But his Disciples thought in mind,
This zeal God joys in him to find.
When this was done, Ioh. 2.17. Psalm. 69.9.
the Jews began
To question with him thus again:
What sign show thou? oh son of man,
That thou do this? declare it plain: Ioh. 2.19. Math. 26.6* Cap. 27.42.
Mar. 14.58. Cap. 15.29.

Destroy this Temple, in three days,
The same again I will up raise.
The Temple-sixe and thirty years
In building was; thus answer they,
This unto us no truth appears,
That did thy words and works obey.
They meant the Church of lyme and stone,
Christ meant his body, flesh and bone.
When he was risen from the dead,
Then his Disciples cal'de to mind
What he foretold, and how he spread,
A truth in him they still did find,
The ground of their belief, they make
The Scripture; and the word he spoke.
While he did at that feast remain,
Many believed in his name:
They saw his works, they were not vain,
His wonders wanted not their fame.
He gave to them no credit then:
For he knew well that vain were men.
Christ instructs Nicodemus in the regeneration by water and the holy Ghost.
(...) 3.1.
There was a man, a Pharisie,
A ruler, one of chiefest fame,
Named Nicodemus verily:
This man by night to Jesus came.
He had a mind for to amend,
Yet men he feared to offend.
Master he said, we know thou art,
A teacher come from God above:
Such signs and works none can impart,
But such a one as God does love.
Those miracles that he had done:
Approved him to be Gods son.
Said Jesus, I do say to thee,
Except a man be borne again,
Of water and the spirit, he
Shall not Gods kingdom sure obtain.
Can this be true, as thou have told,
May man be borne that once is old?
Assuredly, except a man
Be borne as I have said to thee:
Heaven be never enter can,
Gods kingdom he shall never see.
Of flesh, but flesh is borne ywis:
The spirit yeeldes that spirit is.
Thou know not whence comes the wind,
Whose going in and out to thee,
Though by thine ear the sound thou find,
The seat thereof thou do not see.
Who of the spirit is borne hear,
Is so, though strange it does appear.
Nicodemus said, how can these things be.
A teacher greater things should know,
I testify that I have seen,
When earthly things to thee I show,
If dull and faithless thou have been;
What will thou be, when I declare
Of heavenly things? and what they are.
No man ascends up above,
But he that did descend from thence:
The son of man, whom God does love,
And is in heaven in his presence.
He must be lift, Ioh. 3.14. Nomb. 21.9.
as by Moses
The Serpent was in wilderness.
That who so does in him believe, Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 4.9.

Eternal life the same may have:
For God his only son did give,
The faithful from hell fire to save.
The world to save Gods son was sent:
It to condemn God was not bent.
Condemned shall he never be,
That does believe in him, the same
Condemned is already he,
Whose faith is not firm in his name.
The light is come, yet darkness more
Do worldly men love, then before.
The evil ever hate the light,
By it their deeds reproved are,
He loves the truth, that with his might
His deeds by day seeks to declare.
Oh Nicodemus, all I say,
A faithful heart must bear away.
Christ returning into Judea preached the Gospel, and Baptized the people by
his Disciples near John, of purifying a question did then arise.
Ioh. 3.22.
After this done, came Christ again,
With his Disciples as we read,
Into Judea, this is plain,
Where he Baptising tarried,
John did Baptize in Enon by,
And ply'de his office carefully.
Ioh. 3.25.
Of water there they had great store*
And John was not in prison cast,
But as the number waxed more,
Of Disciples, strife grew as fast,
The Jews, and John's Disciples, crave
Of purifying the truth to have.
John's testimony again of Jesus.
Ioh. 3.26.
They also came to John, and said,
Most men to Christ (Baptising) go.
John bad them be no whit dismayed,
From heaven it is appointed so:
Ye know, I said, I am not he;
Christ must increase, as you do see.
He that is come from God on hye,
Does testify what he has seen,
Ioh. 3.33. Ro^. 3 4.
He that receives it, verily,
Does seal how true our God has been,
Whom God sent, speaks Gods word, John says,
And plenteously Gods spirit has.
The Father loved the son, John. 3.35. Math. 11.27 Habac. 2.4. 1. Ioh. 5.1.
and gave
All things he had into his hand,
He that believes in him shall have
Eternal life, this understand,
They dead are that him disobay,
The wrath of God all such will slay.
Jesus to avoid danger departed out of Judea into Galilie.
When he, that knew of all things well, Ioh. 4.1.

Perceived by relation,
Or of himself, for he could tell
His enemies intention,
How that the Pharisees did hear,
That he was famous every wheare:
And that he made Disciples more,
And more Baptized then likewise,
Then John, that had gone him before.
Mark ye now well Christ Jesus guise,
He did his office earnestly,
Yet voyded danger warily.
Christ passing through Samaria toward Galilie, conferred with a woman at the
well of Sichar: and converted many Samaritanes.
Christ leaving Jury, did depart, Ioh. 4.3.

And went again to Galilie,
He knew what love or hate in heart
Men bare him hidden outwardly,
Christ through Samaria needs would go,
He had himself decreed so.
What works for him did there abide,
To bring the Gentiles to the light,
He did foreknow, and then did guide
Ioh. 4.5. Gene. 48.22. Cap. 33.19. Joshua. 24.32.
His company to Si^har right,
Near to the place that Jacob gave,
Where Joseph should possession have.
And there on faithful Jacobs well,
Christ Jesus sat about midday:
A woman, that thereby did dwell,
For water came while he did stay.
But his Disciples they were gone,
Into the City, every one.
The Jews agreed not with the Samaritanes, because they professed themselves
to be Jews, come of the seed of Jacob and kept Moses law, while the Jews
were in prosperity: and in their adversity denied the^ saying, that they were
Syrians, Medes and Babylonia^s the Jews enemies, and hereof grew their hatred.
Then to the woman Jesus said,
For me to drink some water give:
So she again then vndelayd,
Said, thou a Jew art I believe;
Jews with Samaria disagree,
And water ask thou of me?
Then Jesus said, oh woman, see:
If thou the gift of God did know,
And who it is that asks thee,
Thou would not then seem so slow,
To ask of him, for he can give
Water of life, if thou believe.
The woman said, the well is deep,
And thou have naught to draw withal:
Where do thou then thy water keep?
Or do of me for water call?
This well our father Jacob gave,
Whose name in reu'rence here we have.
Art thou greater then Jacob was?
He drank of it, and so did then
His children, in this very place,
His cattle, and his household men.
But Jesus said, who so does drink
Of this, will thirst, thou so must think.
The water I give, who drink will,
Thirsts no more while he does live,
It shall in him be springing still
To everlasting life; this give
That I thirst not, oh sir said she,
Nor to draw here more driven be.
Then Jesus said, thy husband call,
And come again with him to me.
Husband I have now none at all,
To Jesus then thus answered she.
Thou have well said; thou have had five,
This is not thine, that is alive. Ioh. 4.19. ca. 6 14. Luc. 7.16. Mount
Ierizim wherein a temple was built by the Samaritanes of envy to the temple at
Jerusalem. Joseph. li. 11. ca. 7.8

Thou art a Prophet I do see:
Our fathers worshipped in this mount,
But now Jerusalem say ye,
To worship in, men most account,
The hour is come, now shines the light,
Yet here, nor there, ye worship right.
Ye worship that ye do not know,
We worship that we know and see:
Salvation is, I say to you, Ioh. 4.22. Deuteronomy. 12.5. 2. King. 17.29.

Come of the Jews, and now said he,
In truth and spirit men have need,
The father to adore in deed. Romans 1.8.

God is a spirit, and they must,
In spirit and in truth withal,
Worship him, that in him trust, Ioh. 4.24. 2. Cor. 3.17.

And on his name for mercy call.
Messiah comes (said she again,)
And he will teach us all things plain.
Ioh. 4.26. Cap. 9.37. Ca. 10.11 Math. 26.64. Mar. 14.62. Luc. 21.69.
He said to her, lo I am he;
And his Disciples came with that:
When Christ so talk with her they see,
They all did marvel much thereat.
They of their meat did offer make,
But he as then no meat would take.
Christ answered his Disciples, that his harvest was ripe. Ioh. 4.35. Math.
9.37. Luc. 10.2.
His meat, was to accomplish then
His fathers will, and work to end,
The harvest is among all men
Most ripe, where to God did you send:
The reaper wages shall receive,
And sower joy thereof perceive.
Herein the proverb true is found,
That one does sow, another reap,
You reap where other tild the ground,
Their labors all on you I heap.
The woman all this while was gone,
And left Christ there, though not alone.
She went into the City then,
Come see, said she, one that told me,
All I have done; and straight the men
Went out our Savior Christ to see;
Whom when they saw, they did believe,
For words that she to them did give.
When the Samaritanes were come,
They prayed him to tarry there,
And he abode (as says some,)
Two days with them, and they with fear,
When they had heard, and seen also
His words, and works, believed tho.
Then said they to the woman, we
Do now believe, not for thy sake,
But for the words, and works we see,
For Christ the Savior we him take.
So two days after, thence he went,
To Galilie; for so he meant.
Christ passing from Samaria to Galilie, turned aside to Nazareth, where he
preached on the Sabbath day, etc.
When from Samaria he was gone, Luc. 4.16. Math. 13.5 Mar. 6.1. Ioh. 4.43.

To Nazareth he took his way,
Christ knew what best was to be done,
No time he would at all delay:
About his fathers work he went,
In which his time he wholly spent.
Then to their Sinagogue to preach,
Upon the Sabbath day he came;
Esayas book they did him reach, Luc. 4.18. Esaias. 61.1.

That he might read upon the same.
Whereout he taught them what he was,
What he should teach, and bring to pass.
Christ reproves the ingratitude of his countrymen: affirming that a Prophet
is esteemed least in his own country.
His doctrine so astonished some, Ioh. 6.42. Luc. 4.22. Mar. 6.3. Math. 13.55

That they did wonder at his words,
Whence does (say they) this wisdom come?
Or who to him these works affoords?
Is not that Iosephes son (we pray,)
The Carpenter, we heard this day?
His mother Marie we do call,
His brethren be they not with us?
As men amazed were they all,
To hear him so that text discuss.
Luc. 4 24. ^ob. 4.44.
Save in his country, then said he,
A Prophet sure shall honored be.
^am. 5.17. Luc. 4.25. ^ King. 17.9.
Wherefore he said to them again;
When famine plagued Israel,
And they for three years wanted rain,
And months six, as stories tell,
Eliah then was sent to none,
Save in Sarepta unto one.
Luc. 4.27. 2. King. 5.14.
Oh Israel, thy leprosy,
Was great in Eliseus time,
Yet none could find a remedy,
But Naaman was cur'de by him.
When they heard this it grieved them sore,
And they deuisde his death therefore.
So rising* they out thrust him all,
And lead him on that very hill,
Where they might give him such a fall,
As might have pleased their wicked will.
He freely yet from them did go,
Escaping for all they could do.
Christ went from Nazareth to Cana in Galilie, where he restored the rulers
son to health, the noble man and all his household believed.
Ioh. 4.46.
To Cana Christ from Naz'reth came,
The Galileans him received,
And joyfully they did the same,
His Godhead there was well perceived,
Of water wine he made before,
Now one to life he did restore.
A ruler, that thereby did dwell,
At Capernaum, had a son
Sore sick: when he of Christ heard tell,
And what he every where had done,
He came to Christ, and him did pray,
To go with him without delay.
His son was ready now to dye,
Therefore he made the greater have.
Your unbelief assuredly,
Does make you many words to wast,
But go thy way, thy son does live.
He went, and did Christ's word believe.
And as he iourneyd, by the way,
He heard his son recovered,
And by account that hour and day.
That Jesus health had promised:
So he and his believed all.
Christ when he will, can thus men call.
Christ hearing of John's imprisonment went to Capernau^, after he called sundry
of his Apostles, preached the Gospel in Galilie, and healed the diseased.
When John was then imprisoned, Math. 4.13.

Or much about that time, I say,
Christ went and he inhabited
Capernaum; and there did stay*
The sea of Zabulon was nigh,
And Nepthalim assuredly.
Esayas Prophecid before, Math. 4.15. Esaias. 9.1.

That there the Gentiles should have light,
Whose darkness still increased more,
Until of Christ they had a sight,
Who does unto all that believe,
Eternal life most freely give.
^ath. 4.18. ^ar. 11.
Christ passing throughout Galilie,
As he did walk by the sea side,
Apostles called verily,
Of such men as did there abide,
Poor fisher men without respect,
By whom he would his works effect.
With whom about from place to place,
Throughout all Galilie he went,
Heaping on his all gifts of grace,
And teaching them with like intent,
He made those foolish weaklings rise,
For to confound the worldly wise.
And as he past, continually
He every where did daily teach,
Their Synagogues to openly
He went, the Gospel for to preach.
The sum of ^hristes do^trine.
Amend your lives, for now said he,
Gods kingdom is at hand you see.
He also healed each disease,
And sickness that the people had,
Afflicted folk by him found ease,
And every one of him was glad.
When once abroad was spread Christ's fame*
In multitudes they to him came.
From all the regions round about,
Those then that had infirmities,
As palsy, gripings, or the gowt,
Came to him in great companies:
And each was eased of his sore,
To God alone be praise therefore. Amen.
THE THIRD PART OF THE HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST*
containing those things which he did the second year after his Baptism, which
was the xxxj. year of his age, according to the four Evangelists, the year
after the creation of the world. 4172. beginning at the Sermon, which Christ
made in the mount. CODOMANNVS.
To the tune of the Lords Prayer, vt sup.
CHrist did prepare all his in mind,
To seek for treasure up on hye,
In heaven; where as the godly find,
All happiness eternally,
It is not health, wealth, shape, or age,
That brings men to the heavenly stage.
Therefore clean contrary to those,
That taught true happiness to be
In earthly things, this heavenly rose,
A sweeter sent has given thee,
To trace the tract that leads sure,
Where happiness does still endure.
When Christ the multitude did see, Math. 5.1.

A mountain he went up into:
When he was set, where he would be,
To his Disciples he spoke tho,
The 9. beati^des. Math. 5.3. ^uc. 6.20.
1 The poor in spirit blessed are,
A kingdom God did them prepare.
2 Blessed are they that mourn for good,
Math. 5.4. Esaias. 61.2. Cap. 65.13.
For they shall surely comfort have,
Such to their power ill withstood,
And for amendment daily crave.
3 Blessed are they that meek are found,
Math. 5.5. Psalm. 37.11.
The earth they shall inherit round.
M^th. 5.6.
4 Blessed are they which suffer thirst,
And hunger after righteousness:
For they (said Christ) shall as the first,
Math. 5.7.
Be filled with all happiness.
5 The merciful are blessed all,
They shall have mercy when they call.
Math. 5.8.
6 Blessed are all the pure in heart,
They shall see God undoubtedly.
Math. 5.9.
7 Peace makers they play such a part,
As pleases God assuredly:
Blessed are they therefore said he,
Gods children they shall called be.
Math. 5.10. 1. Peter. 3.14.
8 Blessed are they, which patiently
Do suffer persecution
For righteousness, they verily
Shall after their affliction,
Gods kingdom in heaven possess,
For so he will their griefs redress.
Math. 5.11. Act. 5.41. 1. Peter. 4.14.
9 When men revile you most of all,
And persecute you for my sake,
And falsely speaking ill withal,
If patiently you do it take,
You shall therefore find happiness,
The salve to ease your heaviness.
Rejoice also, I say, be glad,
When they have done you greatest wrong,
You have no cause for to be sad,
In heaven shall you the Saints among
Rewarded be, as were before,
The Prophets, whom they grieved sore.
Christ contrary to the opinion of flesh and blood, and the doctrine of the
Philosophers, pronounces a woe to those whom they thought happy.
But woe to them that are rich here, Luc. 6.24. Amos. 6.1. Eccl. 31.8. Esaias.
65.13.

And do therein repose their trust:
The day will come it shall appear,
They dearly bought such dross and dust.
True treasure in the heavens are found,
Each thing corrupts in the ground.
Woe be to you that now are full, Luc. 6.25. Esaias. 65.14. Gene. 25.30.

For ye shall hunger after this,
If you were not exceeding dull,
For meat ye would not morgage bliss.
Woe be to you that now laugh so,
For you shall wail and weep for woe.
Woe be to you whom men do praise,
And speak well of, deserving ill,
When you have driven out your days,
You shall bewray your wicked will:
False Prophets were by like device,
Among your elders, had in price.
Christ teaches his Disciples, and in them all other Ministers, what lives
they should lead, seeing they were appointed to be the salt of the earth, and
light of the whole world.
Next, his Disciples he did teach,
What they should be in word and deed,
Lest when to others they did preach,
They to be taught should stand in need;
In life and manners he would have,
Them honest, wise, and very grave.
^ath. 5.13. ^ar. 9.50. ^c. 14.34.
Ye are the salt the earth does yield*
If in the salt no savor be,
It does no good in house or field,
Men cast such out of doors we see:
As it could salt nothing before,
So it cannot be seasoned more.
^ath. 5.15. ^ar. 4.21. ^c. 8.16. ^p. 11.33.
Of all the world ye are the light,
A City set upon an hill,
Can not be hid, by wile or might;
And light a candle no man will,
To hide it with a bushel then,
When it should give most light to men.
Math. 5.16. ^ Pet. 2.12.
Let your light shine before men so,
That your good works they all may see,
Your modest manners where ye go,
Example must to others be:
Your father that does sit on hye,
In heaven, see you so glorify.
Christ came to fulfill the law.
Math. 5.17.
I am not come for to destroy
The law or Prophets, but fulfill,
I take in nothing so much joy,
As to obey my fathers will,
Till heaven and earth do all decay, Math. 5.18. Luc. 16.17.

The law shall not be done away.
The least commandment expressed Math. 5.19. James. 2.10.

Who breaks, and teaches other so,
In heaven he shall be counted least:
The contrary who so will do,
Observing them, and teach the same,
In heaven he (...) receive a name.
I say, except your righteousness, Math. 5.20. Luc. 11.39.

Exceed the rigeteousnesse of these,
You shall be void of happiness,
And heaven (as they) for ever leese;
The Pharisees are verily, Scribes and Pharisees.

Full fraught with all hypocrisy.
Christ interprets certain Commandments or Laws: and first thou shall not
kill, correcting the false interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees.
Here Christ corrects very well,
The doctrine of the Pharisie,
Ye have ofttimes (said he) heard tell,
How they expounded sensuallie
These words, which have been said of old, Math. 5.21. Exodus 20.13. Deuteronomy. 5.17.

To kill another be not bold.
Who so (say they) does kill, shall be
By judgment therefore punished,
But ma^ke what I say unto thee,
Without cause who so is moved
(Against his brother) angerly,
Is subject to judgment thereby,
Who Racha says his brother to,
By counsel shall be punished,
Take heed therefore before ye do,
Ye may hereby be terrified,
Who so his brother fool will call,
In danger of hell fire does fall.
With hand, with heart, and so in word,
We often spill our neighbors life,
The hand does use to weild a sword,
The heart deuiseth bate and strife,
And words when one disdainfu^,
Reuileth as an enemy.
Christ would have men to reconcile them selves one to another.
The greedy Pharisees, they say,
That offerings and oblations please,
Which now men offer day by day,
Yet no man knows his own disease.
I say, who does his brother hate,
His gift is naught, and worse his state.
Math. 5.23.
If to the altar thou do bring,
Thy gift remembering some offense,
Against thy brother the lest thing,
Leave there thy gift departing thence,
Go reconcile thy self again,
Thine offering then is not in vain.
Math. 5.25. Luc. 12.58.
Agree while thou art in the way
With him that is at strife with thee,
Lest to the judge without delay,
Delivered by him thou be:
If Sergeant thee in prison set,
Thence, till thou pay, thou shall not get.
Of Adultery.
It was of old time, also said, Math. 5.27. Exodus 20.14. Romans 13.9.

Commit not thou adultery.
But I say, look you be affrayd,
To gaze on women lustfully.
Who so does so, does for his part,
Commit adult'rie in his heart.
If thy right eye, or hand offend,
Pluck out, or cut, and cast away,
For it is to a better end,
One member perish and decay,
Then all thy body thou know well,
Should wholly so be cast to hell.
Of Diuorcement.
It has been said, Math. 5.31. Cap. 19.7. Mar. 10.4. Luc. 16.18. Deuteronomy. 24.1.
1. Cor. 7.10.
who so had sent
His wife away, he giving her
A letter of their diuorcement,
Had not been then an offender;
Except the wife a whore be found,
To live with her, the man is bound.
Who so commits adultery,
The man or woman does amiss,
And for that fault may verily,
Divorced be as reason is:
No such offender may therefore,
While the other lives, match any more.
Of Oaths.
Again of old they did forbid, Math. 5.33. Exodus 20.7. Leuit. 19.12. Deuteronomy.
5.11.

Forswearing, for the same is ill,
Of oaths each man his house should rid,
So to obey Iehouahs will.
Oaths rightly made do not delay,
For to perform the same always.
But otherwise swear not at all,
No not by heaven the throne of God,
Nor by the earth, for so ye fall
In danger to deserve his rod.
Nor by Jerusalem, for this,
The City of the king it is.
Nor by thine head, thou can not make,
One hair thereof as black or white,
Most vain are they that oaths do take,
And vain those that in oaths delight,
Math. 5.37. James. 5.12.
Let ye and nay declare your will,
What so is more does come of ill.
Of Revenge.
Math. 5.38. Exodus 21.24. Leuit. 24.20. Deuteronomy. 19.21.
Revenge not though the law be so,
That eye or tooth must be repayde;
When one does smite thee as a foe.
Use patience, be not dismayed.
And he that for thy coat will sue,
Give him thy cloak, and more then due.
Math. 5.42. Deuteronomy. 15.8.
If one compel thee for a mile,
Do thou at least go with him twain;
The asker do thou not revile,
Give thou and lend without disdain;
To do men good be ready still,
And slow to do thy neighbor ill.
Math. 5.43. L^uit. 19.18.
Love thine enemy.
Love thou (say they) thy neighbor well,
Thine enemy thy self may hate,
Of virtues, love, does all excel,
What so the Pharisees do prate,
Your enemies love not the worse,
And bless you them that do you curse. Math. 5.44. Luc. 6.27.35.

Do good to them that do you hate,
Pray for them that you persecute:
They sure shall have a blessed state,
My fathers will that execute:
He makes his sun and rain to fall, Math. 5.45. Luc. 6.35.

On good and bad, alike to all.
If man do love, Math. 5.45. Luc. 6.32.
or friendly be
To him, that does to him the same,
What thanks for that deserves he?
Each sinner must do this for shame.
Have you therefore regard of this,
Be perfect as your father is.
Alms.
By sound of trumpe, and in men's sight, Math. 6.1. Romans 12.8.

As hypocrites are wont to do,
To give thine alms is not aright,
They gape for praise, and get no mo.
In secret give what God has sent,
God will reward thy good intent.
Prayer.
Pray not as hypocrites do pray, Math. 6.5.

All open to be seen of men;
But when thy prayers thou will say,
Shut close in chamber be thou then:
Pray to thy father secretly,
He will reward thee openly.
Much babbling see thou do not use,
Nor repetitions, they are vain,
The heathen hope for like abuse,
Some great reward thereby to gain.
Be not like them, for God in deed,
Before ye ask, does know your need.
The Lords Prayer.
Math. 6.9. Luc. 11.2.
Pray thus when ye do pray therefore;
Our father which in heaven art.
Thy name be hallowed evermore,
Thy kingdom we desire in heart,
Thy will in earth make us to do,
As it in heaven is, even so.
Give us this day our daily bread,
Our debtes forgive us we thee pray,
As we our debtors do: and lead
Us not (Oh Lord) by any way
Into temptation, but see,
Math. 6.13. Cap. 13.19.
From evil we deliu'red be.
For thine (good Lord) the kingdom sure,
The power and the glory is,
For evermore for to endure,
Which live in eternal bliss.
Let this be done (oh Lord) we pray
In heart, whereto Amen we say.
To forgive one another.
Math. 6.14. Mar. 11.25. Eccl. 28.2.
If ye men's trespasses forgive,
Your heavenly father will again
Forgive you yours: you while you live,
In love and concord must remain.
If you forgive not other men,
Your faults God will not forgive then.
Fast.
Math. 6.16.
Moreover when that ye do fast,
Look not sour, as the hypocrite,
That time as vain, they vainly wast,
For God therein has no delight,
Their faces they disfigure to,
That men may see what then they do.
When thou do fast, anoint thy head,
And let thy face then washed be:
Seem not to men as one half dead,
Let God thy deeds in secret see.
Thy heavenly father, both regards
Thy fast, and theirs, have their rewards.
The careful seeking of worldly things forbidden.
On earth hoord up no treasure so, Math. 6.19.

Where moath and canker eat apace:
Lest with them you do heap on woe.
There thieves (men void of better grace)
Break up, thus they for riches deal,
When digging through, men's wealth they steal.
But lay your treasures up above, Math. 6.20. Luc. 12.33. 1. Tim. 6.19.

In heaven; where none of these are found:
You on your treasures set your love,
Lay not your love so on this ground.
But lay it where is no decay:
Earth will corrupt and fade away.
The eye, does give the body light, Math. 6.22. Luc. 11.34. The light of the
body is the eye.

And reason rules the inner man:
If clear and sound remain the sight,
No darkness hurt that body can.
If thine eye wicked be, then mark,
Sure all thy body shall be dark.
Two masters, well, no man can serve: Math. 6.24. Luc. 16.13. No man can serve
two masters.

For truly he the one will hate,
And for the other love reserve:
This of man's life is right the state.
God and your riches, disagree:
They may not both, then served be.
Math. 6.25. Psalm. 55.22. Luc. ^2.22. Phil. 4.6. 1. Tim. 6.8. 1. Pet. 5.7.
Set not your care on meat and drink,
Nor yet on your apparel so:
You with your selves must always think,
That howsoever here ye go,
He that gave life and body, will
Provide you meat and clothing still.
Math. 6.26.
The fowls of heaven, ye may behold,
To sow or reap they have no care:
Fowls.
They neither want, nor suffer cold,
Much better far then them ye are.
Your heavenly father feeds these:
And so will you, if you him please.
Math. 6.28.
Which of you can by taking care,
One cubite ad unto his length?
Clothing you know what things they are,
Who gives them and gives strength.
Lyllies.
Learn of the lyllies how they grow,
To spinne or card they do not know.
Yet Solomon, to you I say,
Was not aray'd like one of theafe.
The grass if God do so array,
Can he not cloth you if he please?
The faithful never fail to speed:
God more regards you then a weed.
For meat, for drink, for cloth always,
Take ye no thought at all therefore:
The Gentiles seek these day by day,
Your heavenly father evermore
Will all your wants relieve in deed:
He knows well what things ye need.
Gods kingdom, if ye do seek first,
You can not wish but you shall have.
If for his righteousness ye thirst,
He will give you, the things you crave.
Care not then for to morrow day,
The grief with it shall pass away.
Christ forbids rash judgment.
Judge not lest that ye judged be, Math. 7.1. Luc. 6.37. Romans 2.1. 1. Cor. 4.3.
Mar. 4.24.

Like judgment you shall have be sure:
Like measure shall be measured thee,
Look that thine eye be clear and pure;
A moate in others do not spy,
While that a beam is in thine eye.
Holy things may not be given to dogs.
Give not to dogs, that holy is: Math. 7.6.

Nor cast your pearls before the swine.
The wicked they regard not this,
And Epicures to lust incline.
When under feet they them have tread: Pearls.

They will not rest till you be dead.
Ask, seek, knock.
Ask, and it shall you given be: Math. 7.7. Cap. 21.22. Mar. 11.24. Luc. 11.9.
Ioh. 14.13. Cap. 16.24. James. 1.5.

So they that seek shall surely find:
Knock, I will open unto thee:
To them that call God he is kind,
He loves such men verily,
As pray unto him heartily.
If you for bread, give not a stone,
Nor for a fish, a Serpent send,
When that your sons for want do moan,
If good things you do give and lend;
How much more shall the father be,
Give good things (if thou ask) to thee?
The scope of the Scripture, and of the strait and wide gate.
Math. 7.12. Luc. 6.31. ^^bie. 4.15. Luc. 13.24.
What you would men to you should do,
Do even so to them again:
The strait gate enter in unto,
The way to death is broad and plain,
And many find that path (I say)
But few do go the better way.
False Prophets.
Math. 7.15.
False Prophets fly with all your might,
Whose clothing plead simplicity:
But inwardly their minds are dight,
Math. 7.16. Luc. 6.43.
With rau'ning and all villainy.
Such by their fruits ye may well know:
For grapes on thorns did never grow.
The good and evil tree.
Math. 7.18.
A good tree, good fruit it will bear,
The evil yeeldes no fruit as this:
Ill fruit on good trees grows no where,
By fruit, the tree best known is.
Math. 7.19. Cap. 3.10.
The ill, men hew, with fire to burn:
The good serve for a better turn.
Not every one that faith to me,
Lord, Lord, but he that does Gods will,
In heaven be sure shall saved be.
My father gardes all his from ill;
The wicked that their good works tell:
Shall miss of heaven, and go to hell.
The house on the rock or sand, the conclusion of this Sermon.
Math. 7.24. Luc. 6.47.
All that I have declared now,
Who so does hear with good intent:
Is like to one that did bestow
His money well, that he had spent,
To build a house for him and his,
Where rain and wind hurt not ywis.
But who so hears these my words,
And does them not, is like a man,
That charges great in deed affoords:
To build a house where no man can,
Upon the sands, where sea and wind,
Do spoil and swallow all they find.
When Jesus, thus had finished
This Sermon which he there did preach,
The people were astonished,
To hear what doctrine Christ did teach.
He taught as with authority,
Unlike the Scribe or Pharisie.
Christ after his Sermon descending from the hill and going to Capernaum,
healed a leaper by the way.
Descending down then from the hill, Math. 8.1. Mar. 1.40. Luc. 5.12.

A leaper met him by the way:
And cried, master if you will,
Both help, and heal me here you may.
I will, said Christ, be clean, and gone,
See that thou tell it unto none.
Go to the Priest thy self to show,
That he may judge if thou be clean,
And offer there that thou do owe,
What Moses did appoint I mean:
Give them their due of all thy wealth, Math. 8.4. Leuit. 14.4.

That they may witness of thy health.
Christ healed the Centurions servant of the palsy.
^ath. 8.5. ^uc. 7.1.
As Christ came Capernaum to,
A Captain there, a Gentile borne,
Who for his servant was so woe,
That he seemed a man forlorn;
He sought all means his health to have:
Christ with a word his life did save.
The Captains great humility,
And faith: Christ Jesus did commend.
In Israel then verelie,
Like praise to none he did extend.
Of these said Christ shall many come:
To heaven, and have the childrens room.
Christ cast out a devil at Capernaum, and diliuered the possessed from that
infirmity.
Mar. 1.21. Math. 4.13. Luc. 4.31.
And so upon the Sabb^th day,
Into the Synagog^^ ^e went:
Those works to do without delay,
For which he to the world was sent;
The people did upon him gaze,
His doctrine did them so amaze.
He taught as with authority,
Not as the Scribes were wont to do.
Or the dissembling Pharisie,
To whom Christ often pronounced woe.
But as Gods only son in deed:
Sent man to save, as God decreed.
And in the Synagogue there was,
A man possessed, even then:
Whose cure Christ Jesus brought to pass,
Yea in the fight of all those men.
His doctrine he confirmed still:
With wonders, which he wrought at will.
Satan that wicked spirit he,
Began within the man to cry;
Oh what have we to do with thee? Oh Jesus of Nazareth.

I know thou art assuredly
The holy one of God, his joy:
Art thou come us for to destroy?
Jesus rebuked him, and said,
Come out of him and hold thy peace.
Satan of Christ was all affrayd,
Yet loath the man for to release.
But forced thence, the devil did fly, The man.

Crying; and tare him cruelly,
When he came out, the standers by,
Were much amazed at the fight:
Asking each other busily,
How they supposed that this might
Be done of him? what thing is this?
What think you that this doctrine is?
The spirits with authority,
He does command; and they obey.
His fame was spread immediately,
Throughout that region every way.
All Galilie did hear his fame:
And countries bord'ring on the same.
Christ raised Peter's mother in law.
Christ from the Synagogue did go, Math. 8.14. Mar. 1.29. Luc. 4.38.

To Symons house as does appear:
With Andrew, James, and John also;
His Godhead he declared there.
Men tasted still in every place,
In ample measure of his grace.
For when to Peter's house he came,
Peter's wife mother sick there lay:
A fever vexed sore the dame,
Which Christ rebuking, went away.
By touch of hand Christ helped her,
And she to them did minister.
Christ cast out devils, and healed all that came unto him.
Math. 8.16. Mar. 1.32. Luc. 4.40. Esaias. 53.4. 1. Peter. 2.24.
When even came he healed all
They brought to him that vexed were;
And the possessed there withal,
Of devils, among the people there.
That what the Prophets said before,
Might be approved evermore.
Jesus passed thence to preach to other Cities.
Luc. 4.42.
So he that night went to take rest,
But rose again by break of day:
For to go thence he thought it best,
Into a desert place away.
The people.
Christ then they sought, and found, kept so,
As men loath he should from them go.
But Christ said unto them, I must
To others preach assuredly
The kingdom of God, this my trust
I will discharge most faithfully.
And so he preaching daily went
Through Galilie, as he was sent.
Luc. 5.1. Math. 4.18. Mar. 1.16.
It came to pass as Jesus taught,
The people pressed on to hear:
Some faithful, some with faults full fraught,
Both good and bad to him drew near.
The word of God Christ did not let,
To preach then by Genezaret.
And seeing ships by the lake side, Two snippes.

Although the Fishermen were gone
To wash their nets then in the tide:
Yet Christ went boldly into one.
The same was Symons ship in deed,
To ask him leave he had no need.
Yet Christ required him that he,
Would thrust a little from the land;
That of the preasse he might be free,
He left them on the bank to stand:
And sitting down he taught them there,
That to his doctrine did give care.
After Christ had preached out of the ship, at the lake of Genezareth, he
miraculouslie took a great multitude of fishes.
When Christ left speaking, then he said
To Simon; launch the deep into: Luc. 5.4.

Cast out your nets, be not dismayed,
Make hear a draught before ye go.
Trauailde we have master indeed,
All night, and yet we could not speed.
Nevertheless, at thy command,
I will let down the net again:
Oh master, thou shall understand,
That I let not for any pain.
Which done, of fishes they did take
So many, that their nets they brake.
Then beckned they for help unto
Their partners, in the other boat:
To come, for they had much ado,
To save what they as then had got.
The ships they filled when they came:
They both almost sunk with the same.
When Simon saw it, all afraid
At Jesus knees down flat he fell:
Go from me Lord, withal be said,
I am a sinner, I know well.
For he and they astonished were,
That draught had put them in such fear.
And so was James and John also
Amazed, wondering all at this:
And Jesus said to Simon tho,
Thou shall henceforth catch men iwis.
When they the ships had brought to land,
They followed Jesus out of hand.
Christ's answer to a Scribe that would follow him.
When Jesus then had finished
Math. 8.18.
The miracle ye heard before:
Perceiving that him followed,
Then companies still more and more,
Christ his disciples did command,
To pass the river out of hand.
Math. 8.19. Luc. 9.57.
Then came a Scribe to him and said,
Oh master, I will follow thee:
For answer he was not delaid,
The Foxes have their holes ye see:
And fowls (said Christ) their nests; but I
Have not a place wherein to lie.
Christ's answer to one of his disciples that would go bury his Father.
Math. 8.21.
Then a disciple leave did pray,
He might go first, and in his grave
(As custom was) his father lay,
Him so to do Christ would not have;
Thine office and thy call see thou,
(Not worldly works) go follow now.
The greater work thou may not leave,
To take the lesser work in hand:
They that do so themselves deceive,
Thy charge learn thou to understand;
And let the dead therefore, said he,
Their dead bury, and follow me.
Christ as he passed the lake to the Gergesens, stilled with his word a tempest.
When Christ aboard the ship was gone,
Him his disciples followed:
Where suddenly to them anon,
A cruel tempest happened.
But Jesus then slept very fast,
Whom they were forced to wake at last.
For as they passed then the lake,
Unto the Gergesens to go:
The wind and weather sore did shake
Their ship, and they all full of woe,
Calde Christ to help, whose word, I say, This history, though the Euang.
differ in some things: yet is the same that all the 3. recite, and but one
history. Math. 8.28. Mar. 5.1.

The wind and weather did obey.
Christ passing over into the country of the Gergesens, met two men there
possessed with devils: which he healed, and gave the devils leave to go into
the heard of swine. It is supposed of some, that this heard contained 2000.
swine, for they were many.
When to the other side they came,
There two possessed met them then,
Luc. 8.26.
Out of the graves: for in the same,
Then commonly remained those men.
Their fierceness so did men affray,
That no man might go by that way.
And yet behold immediately,
As Soon as Jesus Christ they saw
They all began on him to cry;
(Satan of him did stand in awe)
Oh Jesus (said they) what have we,
Thou Son of God to do with thee?
Before the time what art thou come,
To torment us, hither this way?
This time supposed is of some,
That Satan meant the judgment day.
A heard of Swine fed certainly
Far off from where the men did lie.
The devils beseeching Christ did say,
If thou do cast us out give leave,
That go into those swine we may.
Christ Jesus did their suit receive:
He bid them go, and so they went
Into the Swine as they were sent.
And the whole heard with violence,
Into the sea ran from the hill:
The heardmen also fled from thence,
Their loss they took it very ill.
They of the swine they had before,
Then of their health regarded more.
These news, being brought the city to,
The citizens came out apace:
They for their swine made much ado,
Because they had no better grace.
They craved that Christ would leave with speed
Their coasts: which he did then in deed.
Sending the man late cur'de away,
Which would so feign with him have gone:
But Christ gave charge without delay,
He should go show what God had done,
Among his friends, who with good will,
Went back and did his charge fulfill.
Christ returning from the Gergesens to Capernaum, healed one of the Palsy.
Math. 9.2. Marc. 2.3. Luc. 5.18.

To his own city thence he came,
And lo, they brought him one in bed:
The Palsy had made him so lame,
That he lay there as one half dead.
My son arise, take up, said he,
Thy bed, thy sins forgiven be.
The Scribes thought these blasphemous words,
Why think ye so (said Christ) again?
You see what mercy God affoords:
Do you at me therefore disdain?
I spoke that you may know I may
Forgive his sins: rise go thy way.
Christ also healed a leaper there. Luc. 5.12.

Another leaper then again,
Christ healed of his leprosy:
Jesus did no disease disdain,
He helped all indifferently.
This leaper fell down on his face:
Calling on Christ for help and grace.
So Jesus stretching forth his hand,
Did touch him: saying, so I will,
Be clean: and straight at his command,
The man was healed of his ill.
And Christ commanded him to say
Nothing of this: but go his way.
Yet go (said he) the priest unto,
And show thy self: for so I will.
The law this likewise bids thee do,
And it of force thou must fulfill.
The priest must judge (said Christ) of thee:
If wholly cleansed that thou be.
The more that Christ himself kept close,
The more hereby encreasd his fame:
The bruit by this begun, so rose,
That more and more was spread his name,
So that the sick from place to place,
Came and received of his grace.
The calling of Matthew from the receipt of custom.
Math. 9.9. Mar. 2.14. Luc. 5.27.
As Jesus forth from thence did pass,
Matthew he called, and went to meat
Home straight with him from the same place,
With whom some Publicans did eat.
The Pharisees found fault with this:
Christ told them how they thought amiss.
The whole seeks no physic at all,
Math. 9.12. Cap. 12.7. Hosea. 6.6. 1. Tim. 1.15.
The sick of the Physician
Have need: and often for him do call.
So sinners I have mercy on,
For the repentant me does move,
As does the righteous, him to love.
Of the time and causes of fasting, Christ answered the Pharisees and John's
disciples.
Then John's disciples came, and said,
The Pharisees fast often, and we: Math. 9.14. Mar. 2.18. Luc. 5.33.

But thy disciples vnaffraid,
Do eat and drink abroad with thee.
Then Jesus said, the children sure,
Mourn not: while that the feast endure.
But when the Bridegroom shall be gone,
Then they will all fast at that day.
No man does patch a new piece on
An old garment, it rents away.
The law observed is by thee:
The Gospel makes the other free.
New wine will burst the bottels sure
If they be old: therefore I say,
Since ceremonies may endure
No longer time, but must delay,
Let new wine have new vessels then,
And be contented with these men.
Christ healed a woman that had bin sick of a bloody issue twelve years, and
raised Iayrus daughter from death.
As Christ with Iairus thence did go, Math. 9.18. Mar. 5.22. Luc. 8.41.

To raise his daughter lately dead:
A woman sick twelve years or more,
With touching him, of health was sped.
And after that where they did see,
The maid from death deliu'red he.
Christ gave sight to the blind.
When Jesus did from him depart, Math. 9.27.

Two blind men meeting him did cry,
Thou son of David ease our smart.
Believe ye then said Christ, that I
Can helpe' yes Lord said they: then he
Did touch their eyes, and made them see.
Christ casts out a devil, and makes the dumb man to speak.
Mat. 9.32.
Again, they brought a dumb man there,
Possessed with a deu'll: but he
Cast out the deu'll, to their great fear:
And the dumb spoke, which Christ made free.
The people maruaild, yet some said,
He had done it by Satan's aid.
Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6. Luc. 13.22.
So Jesus went from place to place,
Teaching and healing every one:
To all that sought, he did give grace,
He was of great compassion.
Math. 9.37. Luc. 10.2. Ioh. 4.35.
The laborers are few said he,
Yet is the harvest great ye see.
At the poole of Bethesda, Christ healed a man that had been diseased 38.
years, and being accused defended his fact.
Cyrill. Chrysos. and Theophilact as Aretius says, take this feast rather to
be Pentecost then the Passover.
After all this, against the feast
Of Passover, which then was nie,
Ioh. 5.1. Leuit. 23.3. Deuteronomy. 16.1.
Christ Jesus that took little rest,
Unto Jerusalem did hie.
That holy Sabbath of the Lord,
The Jews observed with one accord.
Christ at Jerusalem then found
A multitude of sick and lame:
About Bethesda lying round,
Abiding till the Angel came.
When as the Angel stird the poole,
The water still made one man whole.
Christ by that poole a man did see,
That had lain sick there very long:
Will thou be whole oh man, said he?
Sir I want help among this throng.
Rise thou said Christ, thy bed up take:
For perfect whole I do thee make.
Christ healed him on the Sabbath day,
Whereat the Jews were grieved sore:
And sought our Savior Christ to slay,
Rewarded thus he was therefore.
The Jews accusing Christ, do move
Him justly them for to reprove.
To whom the father witnessed,
And John did testify the same:
The Scriptures also verified,
As did his works so full of fame,
That he the son of God should be:
The stubburne Jews him would not see.
Christ defended his Disciples accused for plucking ears of corn on the
Sabbath.
Three feasts the Jews kept year by year, Math. 12.1. Mar. 2.23. Luc 6.1.
Exodus 13.3. Cap. 23.15. Numb. 3 13.

And chiefest Sabbath days did call:
Of the same feasts it does appear,
The Passover was first of all:
This they the feast of sweet bread name,
On this day they from Egypt came.
The next was that whereon God gave, Exodus 19 20. Deuteronomy. 16.10. Acts. 2.1.

The law by Moses unto men:
That day in reverence we have,
The holy Ghost was given then:
This some the feast of weeks do say,
Some Pentecost, some Whitsonday.
Deuteronomy. 16.13.
The feast of Tabernacles last
Came of these three in order there:
Those feasts were never fully past,
Till all their days accomplished were.
The first and last day of each feast,
Were counted chief of all the rest.
Exodus 20.8.
The seu'nth day also through the year,
Is was and so shall be for aye,
With them and Christians every where,
In solemn wise a Sabbath day,
Though theirs and ours do disagree;
One day with them observe not we.
Christ passed thorough a corn field,
Upon the second Sabbath day,
This does to many matter yield,
To reason when he went that way.
Aret. in Math. Cap. 12.
Some say it was in Easter feast,
The last and chief day of the rest.
That day the first, does answer well,
And so the second Sabbath day
Men might it call; it did excel,
The middle days as all men say.
And there withal time of the year,
This reason good makes to appear.
Gualt. in Luc. Cap. 6. Eras. in Luc. Cap. 6.
Some think it was on Whitsonday,
Because this Sabbath second was,
As they suppose, and that no way,
The first did the same Sabbath pass.
These reasons both, may please all such,
As self-will leads not overmuch.
That day a Sabbath day was sure,
When the Disciples plucked corn:
Which thing the Jews could not endure,
They did the act most vilely scorn.
Not knowing him that went that way,
To be Lord of the Sabbath day.
The cause they did not weigh withal,
That hunger then did cause the same:
The Pharisees on Christ did call,
And his Disciples fowlie blame.
They did prefer tradition,
Before their own salvation.
But Christ said unto them again, Math. 12.3. 1. Sam. 21.6. Exodus 29.33.
Leuit. 8.31. Cap. 24.9.

What David did who has not read?
Now his example does remain,
Though David lie a good while dead.
These do as he did them before,
When he and his did hunger sore.
He had the meat that was forbid:
These break you think the Sabbath day:
They do as he and his then did,
Find fault with him yet no man may. Math. 12.5. Number. 28.9.

The Priests do in the Temple so
The Sabbath break, yet free they go.
One greater then the Temple is, Math. 12.7. Hosea. 6.6. Caep. 9.13.

And here he stands verily:
Mercy will I, not sacrifice;
Learn what this means faithfully.
Then will you not condemn this day,
These innocents that hurt no way.
The son of man is Lord likewise.
Yea even of the Sabbath day:
Shall I then these so much despise,
Or suffer them for food decay?
Though fault with them you find so soon:
Deuteronomy. 23.25.
The law allows what they have done.
Mar. 2.27.
The day is made all men to serve,
And no man made to serve that day:
Should not man then his life preserve,
Upon the Sabbath, if he may?
The law that binds man so fast,
To finish I am come at last.
Christ healed one in the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, that had a withered
hand, and answered his accusers.
Math. 12.9. Mar. 3.1. Luc. 6.6.
Now Christ disposed to beat down,
Their grievous superstition,
Went shortly after to their town,
To reason of this question.
And to the Synagogue he went,
The fittest place for his intent.
For there was always most resort,
Which was our Saviors Christ's desire:
That many men might have comfort,
All his affection was on fire.
This his devise to further then,
Fell out a work among those men.
A man there with a withered hand,
Was present in that very place:
The Scribes and Pharisees.
They said give us to understand,
If law allow men so much grace,
As to be cured on this day?
Christ to accuse they sought a way.
Math. 12.11.
Christ answered to them again,
What man shall have a silly sheep,
Fall in a pit, and lie in pain:
If it were worst of all he keep,
And will not on the Sabbath day:
Have care to fetch it thence away?
How much more may a man be then,
Preferred before a sheep I pray?
There is no law forbids men,
To do good on a Sabbath day.
Stretch forth said Christ, thy withered hand:
This heard they all that there did stand.
It was restored to him so,
And all the people saw the same:
It filled the Pharisees with woe,
Which sought for to eclipse his fame.
And they went out with little joy,
Devising Christ for to destroy.
For they had missed their intent,
Which made them rage so much the more:
To trappe him in his words they meant,
Yet fayl'd as they had done before.
His worthy works they did despise:
And went his death for to devise.
But he that knew their meaning well,
Departed thence, and went away:
He needed not that man should tell,
That they sought how they might him slay.
His fathers will he did respect:
And he his works did well effect.
Great multitudes him followed thence,
And he likewise them healed all:
Each one that came in his presence,
And unto him for help did call.
Yet charged them they should not tell.
Or make him known, if they did well.
Math. 12.18. Esaias. 42.1.
Esayas Prophecy took place;
My servant whom I chose ywis,
And my beloved full of grace,
In whom my soul delights, is this.
My spirit put on him I will:
And he shall judge the Gentiles still.
He shall not strive in word or deed,
None in the street shall hear his voice:
He shall not break a bruised reed,
The Gentiles shall in him rejoice.
Yea smoking flax quench shall not he:
Till he both judge and victor be.
Christ then had twice refelled such
Opinions fond, as they did hold:
At first they had presumed much,
And then again did seem as bold.
The Sabbath lets no man at need,
His wants supply, or do good deed.
Jesus seeing the multitude dispersed as sheep having no shepherd, took
compassion on them.
Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6. Luc. 13.22.
And Jesus Christ did not cease then,
But went about to every place,
In towns and Cities among men,
To preach, and he was full of grace.
He healed each disease they had:
All men of him were very glad.
But when he saw the multitude,
He took on them compassion:
The people seemed very rude,
And wanting consolation.
For all abroad they scattered were,
As sheep that had no shepherd there.
The harvest great and the laborers few.
The harvest is surely said he,
Now very great, yet few I say,
Do labor in the same: pray ye
The Lord thereof to send away
Some laborers for to take pain,
That by his harvest he may gain.
Christ called his xij. Apostles, and sent them forth to preach, giving them
power to work miracles and heal diseases.
Then his Disciples Christ did call, Math. 10.1. Mar. 3.13. Luc. 9.1.

Power to them he gave and grace,
That unclean spirits they should all,
Cast out of men, in every place.
As free you have, so likewise deal:
All sicke-men freely see you heal.
Twelve, Jesus did send fotth to preach,
And did command them saying so:
Among the Gentiles them to teach,
Or to Samaria do not go. Math. 10.6. Acts. 13.46.

To the lost sheep of Israel
Go first of all these news to tell.
Say ye, and teach that now at hand
The kingdom of our God does come, Math. 10.7. Luc. 10.9.

Salvation throughout the land,
Is surely sent to all and some.
To all that will believe, say ye,
That they the same shall shortly see.
Heal ye the sick, the leapers cleanse,
Raise up the dead, the devils out cast,
And see when ye depart from hence,
Math. 10.9. Mar. 6.8. Luc. 9.3. Ca. 22.35.
Ye freely give from first to last.
And in your journey take no care:
What weeds ye wear, or how ye fare.
Math. 10.10. Luc. 10.7. 1. Cor. 9.9. 1. Tim. 5.18.
What house or City ye come to,
Among the worthy there remain,
Till you from thence have cause to go,
Let them with you in peace retain.
As a witness unto them that you have not of theirs as much as the dust.
Such as do not deserve this grace,
Shake of their dust in the same place.
That dust shall witness against those,
Acts 13.51. Cap. 18.6.
That you desired not their wealth:
And earthly treasure, that they chose
Before this proffred saving health.
They in the judgment sure shall gain,
Of Sodom and Gomorh the pain.
As sheep, I send you simple men,
In midst of worldly wolves to go:
Be ye as wise as Serpents then,
And innocent as doves also.
To kings and counsels for my sake,
When you are brought, no thought then take.
For what ye speak, it is not ye:
When torments for you do remain,
The holy Ghost in you shall be,
To guide your speech, and ease your pain.
Math. 10.21. Luc. 21.16.
The father shall the son said he,
And friend his friend betray for me.
Math. 10.22. Mar. 13.13. Luc. 21.17.
Ye shall be hated for my name,
But he that dureth to the end,
Shall saved be, and void of blame.
From persecution you defend,
From City to another go:
If you have need for to do so.
For the Disciple is not sure, Math. 10.24 Luc. 6.40. Ioh. 13.16. Cap. 15.20.
Math. 12.24.

Nor the servant his Lord above:
Like death if you as I endure,
A sign it is of perfect love.
If Beelzebub they do call me:
Is it strange then you so should be?
Nothing is hid, Math. 10.26. Mar* 4.22. Luc. 8.17. Cap. 12.2.
but that shall I
Make manifest, and what ye hear
In secret, preach it openly.
Of men ye need not stand in fear;
Fear him that soul and body may
Destroy in hell, fear him I say.
If that a sparow shall not fall, Mat. 10.30. 2. Sam. 14.11 Acts. 27.34*

Nor any hair of yours decay,
But that your father cares for all,
And over all does bear a sway:
Why should you care or be afraid?
You shall be sure to have his aid.
Who so shall me on earth confess, Math. 10.32* Mar. 8.38. Luc. 9.26. Cap.
12.8.51 2. Tim. 2.12.

Or me deny before men here,
Shall have the like and nothing less,
In heaven, before my father there.
For my cause peace must needs decay,
And dearest friends their friends shall slay.
Who father, friend, his son or wife, Math. 10.37 Cap. 16.24. Mar. 8.34. Luc.
9.23. Cap. 14.26.

Does love more then he loves me:
Who so my Cross (to save his life)
Does not take up, but seeks to fly.
The one unworthy of me is:
The other shall not escape ywis.
He that receives you, or me,
Receives him that us has sent:
Math. 10.41. Luc. 10.16. ^oh. 13.20. Mar. 9 41.
A Prophet who receives, he
Reward shall have to his content.
These little ones who does relieve:
God sure to him reward will give.
Christ's Sermon at the sending forth of his Apostles to preach.
^uc. 6.17. ^welue Apo^^les.
When Jesus had then made an end,
Of giving these commandments
To his, whom he then forth did send,
To teach the Jews good documents:
The place he stood in was a plain,
And with him many did remain.
Yea multitudes of people were,
Out of all Jury standing by:
From Tire and Sydon they were there,
To hear his doctrine verily.
And at his hands to have relief,
Each one as he was painde with grief.
And they that with foul spirits sore
Tormented were, Christ healed them all:
And still they sought him more and more,
(Which boldly durst not on him call)
To touch his vesture as he went:
For health thereby to them was sent.
Then Jesus lifted up his eyes,
On his Disciples, saying this:
Ye poor are blessed even thrice,
For yours Gods kingdom surely is.
Ye that now hunger blessed are,
You shall be sure of better fare.
And ye that weep, yet blessed are,
For ye shall likewise laugh again:
When men hate you, take ye no care,
And when they do procure your pain.
Nor yet when they you separate,
Reuiling at your base estate.
If for the son of man's sake, they
Your names put out as evil men,
Rejoice ye greatly, God obey,
And be in heart glad of it then.
Behold in heaven reward have ye:
The Prophets were, as now ye be.
But woe to them that rich are here, Luc. 6.24. Amos. 6.1. Eccl. 31.8.

And do repose thereon their trust:
The day will come it shall appear,
They dearly bought vile earth and dust.
In heaven true treasure may be found:
Each thing corrupts that grows in ground.
Woe be to you that now are full,
For ye shall hunger after this: Luc. 6.25. Esaias. 65.13. Genesis 25.30.

If you were not exceeding dull,
For meat, ye would not morgage bliss,
Woe be to you that now laugh so,
For you shall wail and weep for woe.
Woe be to you whom men do praise,
And speak well of, deserving ill:
When ye have spent out all your days,
You shall bewray what was your will.
False Prophets were by like devise,
Among your elders had in price.
But unto you which hear, I say, Luc. 6.27. Math. 5.4^

Your enemies see that ye love:
To them that hate you, if ye may,
Show how my doctrine does you move
To do them good, and bless withal,
And pray for them, that wish your fall.
^uc. 6.29. ^ath. 5.39. ^ Cor. 6.7.
To him that smites thee also,
Upon one cheek, the other give:
Who so thy cloak would take thee fro,
Give him thy coat, and do not grieve
To purchase so a quiet life,
And stir thou no debate or strife.
Give every man that asks thee:
And he that takes thy goods away
By force or fraud how so it be:
Ask thou them not again I say.
^^c. 6.31. ^ath. 7.12. ^^h. 4.15.
But unto other men so do,
As thou would be of them done to.
If that ye love, do good, or lend,
^^c. 6.32. ^ath. 5.46. ^^ut. 15.8.
To them that do requite the same,
Each sinner so does for his friend;
You should do more then such for shame.
Be merciful to such as need:
For so your father is indeed.
Christ healed the Centurions servant being absent: the Centurions faith.
After that Christ had finished
His Sermon, as you heard before:
From thence he likewise hastened;
For he desired more and more,
The work he had in hand to end:
Which for our good did wholly tend.
^ath. 8.4. ^uc. 7.1.
As Capernaum he came to,
A Captain there a Gentile borne,
Made for his servant much ado,
That seemed then a man forlorn.
He su'd by means his health to have:
Christ with a word his life did save.
The Captains great humility,
And faith, our Savior did commend:
In Israel then certainly,
Like praise to none he did extend.
Of these said Christ shall many come
To heaven: and have the childrens room.
Christ raised from death the widows son at Naijm.
The next day after, Christ did raise
The widows son to life again: Luc. 7.11.

And all the people gave God praise,
That present then did there remain.
All they did spread abroad his fame,
That either saw or heard the same.
John Baptists message to Christ by two of his disciples.
John Baptist was in prison cast, Math. 11.2. Luc. 7.18.

Herodias had obtaind the same:
And his disciples came in have,
And told him there of Jesus fame.
Yet he in prison as before,
Would win to Christ disciples more.
For when his works to him were told,
That his disciples might believe
In Jesus Christ: John said; behold,
A message unto you I give,
(John knew him well assuredly:
As he often times did testify.
But that his might also perceive,
That Christ the true Messiah was:
Of whom they should all grace receive,
In whom they might all truth embrace.)
Go ye, and say, John sent to thee,
To ask if thou be even he?
They went, and both to Jesus came,
And said to him, our master sent:
To know if thou be sure the same,
Or else another that is meant?
Men knew as then that Christ should come:
How, when, or where, that knew but some.
Christ's answer sent back to John by his disciples.
Go back said Christ, to John again,
Show him what ye do hear and see:
The blind and halt are rid of pain,
The leapers and the deaf go free:
Math. 11.5. ^uc. 4.18. ^say. 61.1.
The dead are raised up, this day
The poor, the gospel bear away.
And therewithal to them he gave,
A gentle admonition,
His humbleness that they might have
In reu'rent estimation.
Blessed said Christ, shall that man be,
That takes no offense by me.
Christ's testimony of John Baptist.
When they were gone, then Christ began
To speak unto the company:
What went ye out to see? a man
Infected with inconstancy?
John you in wilderness did find:
Not as a reed, shakt with the wind.
What went ye then out for to see?
A man clothed in soft raiment?
Such men in kings courts use to be:
John is with meaner weed content.
John's raiment shows him to be plain:
He flattred not, he could not feign.
But what went ye out then to see? Math. 11.10. Luc. 7.27. Malach. 3.1.

A prophet? I say to you more.
Of whom is written, (this is he)
My messenger shall go before.
This is Elias, whom they say,
Should come for to prepare the way. Either because he is in heaven already,
and John alive: or the least is bear taken for Christ, as he is made less
then the angels. Psalm. 8. Math. 11.12. Luc. 16.16.

No greater among men did rise
Then John the Baptist, verily,
Not any that you can device.
Yet this I say, assuredly
The least in heaven goes him before:
And does enjoy Gods graces more.
Gods kingdom suffers violence,
Since John's time to this very day:
The Gentiles with all diligence
Without the law, new called, obey.
The law and Prophets have their end:
For he is come whom ye attend.
He that has ears to hear, may hear.
Mark what I say therefore, amend,
Since that Elyas did appear,
The law and Prophets made an end.
Yet you remain both deaf and blind,
That may your true Messiah find.
Christ reprooueth his auditorie.
Math. 11.16. Luc. 7.31.
This generation it is,
Like children that their fellows call:
And say we piped have iwis,
And yet ye daunced not at all.
So you defer from day to day,
For to repent for all we say.
Hard was the life that John did lead,
For meat and drink he took no care:
He had a devil, men supposed.
The son of man they do compare,
With gluttons, and with drunkards, when
He eats meat as other men.
Christ vpbraideth the unthankful cities, wherein he had taught and done so
many miracles, and yet they repented not.
Math. 11.20. Luc. 10.13.
Then Christ began for to vpbraid,
The cities that so often had seen
His works: and yet for all delaid
For to repent, as they had been
Clean void of sin, or had no will,
To learn the good, and leave the ill.
Chorazin woe be unto thee,
And to Bethsayda woe likewise:
The great works that were done by me
In you, ye greatly did despise.
If they in Tyrus had been done,
It had repented long agone.
If Tire and Sidon had, I say,
Both seen, and heard what ye did hear:
Sac^loth and ashes every day
Had been their weed: ye buy it dear,
For at the judgment then to thee,
To them more easy shall it be.
Thou Capernaum lift so hie,
Yea raised up to heaven above,
To hell thou shall be brought to lie,
Because my works thee never move.
If they in Sodom had been wrought,
It had not yet been brought to naught.
For Sodom it shall easier be,
Oh Capernaum be thou sure,
At the last judgment, then for thee,
Thy punishment for to endure.
Tire, Sydon, and Sodom shall have
More ease then these, though then they crave.
Christ his gratulation for the success of the Gospel by his Apostles.
Then Jesus said, Math. 11.25. Luc. 10.21.
I give to thee
(Oh mighty Lord and Father dear)
Most hearty thanks, thou hear me,
And to my call thou give ear.
These things thou hidest from the wise,
Their worldly wit thou do despise.
Thy secrets unto babes withal,
And humble men, thou do declare:
These do on thee for mercy call,
These, these, oh God thy chosen are.
This thy good pleasure was, and is:
Oh Father none can alter this.
All things to me now given are Math. 11.27. Ioh. 3.35. Cap. 6.46.

Of my father, the son and he,
No mortal man can well declare
One of them both, except he be
Taught by the son, and so he may
Learn both to know, this only way.
Christ's exhortation to bear the Cross.
Math. 11.28.
Ye that are laden, come to me,
Come all that weary are likewise:
And you shall all refreshed be,
They shall have woe, that me despise.
I am the life, the light, the way:
They that seek me shall not decay.
Take up my yoke, and learn of me,
Math. 11.29. Ierem. 6.16.
For meek and lowly sure I am:
Rest to his soul so find shall he,
Whose neck, my yoke, does only tame.
Math. 11.30. 1. Ioh. 5.3.
My yoke is easy day and night,
And so my burden very light.
Christ dined in the house of Simon the Pharisie, was anointed of a sinful
woman, and being accused, defended himself, and her fact.
Luc. 7.36. Mar. 14.3.
Then of the Pharisees came one,
Which bid Christ to his house to meat:
And Jesus went with him anon,
And at the table sat to eat.
While he was there, came by and by,
A sinful woman verily;
And when she knew he was set down,
At table with the company:
(Because she dwelled in that town,
No man mislikt her modesty:)
With box in hand of ointment sweet,
She came and fell at Jesus feet.
To show withal her misery,
She stood Christ Jesus back behind:
And there shed tears abundantly,
The tokens of a woeful mind.
With tears his feet she washed fair,
And then did wipe them with her hair.
And oftentimes she kissed his feet,
That so she walked with such care:
Her box of ointment very sweet,
To spend on them she did not spare.
Her sins so great, she did believe,
That Christ would them to her forgive.
And Simon seeing what was done,
By her since she his house came to:
This to conceive, he then begone,
If this man were a Prophet lo,
He would know that this woman is
A sinner, that his feet does kiss.
Then Jesus unto Simon said,
Somewhat I have to say to thee.
No longer let it be delayed,
Oh master, this again said he.
Though Christ perceived Simon well,
Yet knew not he what Christ would tell.
There was a certain lender had,
Two debtors, and their state was such,
That neither of them could be glad,
Their debt to either was so much.
The one five hundred pence, I know,
The other fifty pence did owe.
When neither knew what shift to make,
For they had not wherewith to pay,
The lender did then pity take,
Forgave them, and sent both away.
Oh Simon show me if thou can,
Which of them will love most this man?
He answered, and said again,
He unto whom he most forgave:
For he was rid of greatest pain,
And had most need of both to crave.
Then Jesus said, thou iudgest right:
Behold this woman in thy sight.
Into thy house when first I came,
Thou gave thy feet no water tho:
Yet she with tears has washed the same,
And wipt them with her hair also.
No kiss of thee I had, I say,
She kissed has my feet this day.
Thou did not mine head anoint,
But she anointed has my feet:
(Christ reasoned from point to point,
Of her and of her odours sweet:)
Wherefore her sins, I say to thee,
(Though many) all forgiven be.
Whom much or little men forgive,
Like measure they do yield of love:
It will no good man therefore grieve,
That men his mercy so should move.
And to the woman, then said he,
Thy sins they are forgiven thee.
But they that sat with him at meat,
Began within themselves to say,
How can this man that here does eat,
Forgive sins? this God only may.
Christ said to her, from labor cease:
Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.
The women that Christ had delivered from evil spirits and healed of sundry
infirmities, followed him as he went from place to place to preach the Gospel,
and ministered unto him of their substance.
And afterward, it came to pass, Luc. 8.1.

That Christ from town to town would go,
Preaching, and publishing apace,
The kingdom then of God also.
The twelve Apostles with him were,
And certain women every where.
Some of them Christ had helped before,
And rid of their infirmities:
He cured with his word their sore,
And healed all their maladies.
Yea deu'ls he out of many sent:
Seven out of Magdalen there went. Marie Magdalen was one of the^ that followed
Christ.

Ioanna, also Chuzas wife,
King Herod's steward then was there,
A woman of a godly life,
And one that stood of God in fear.
Susanna, and a number mo,
From place to place with Christ did go.
They for their health received, restore
To Christ all kind of thankfulness:
To him and his they of their stor^
Did minister with ioyfulnesse.
Those women all with full intent,
To hear and learn Gods word were bent.
And when into a house they came,
The multitude met so again:
(So far abroad was spread his fame,)
He could no space alone remain.
Both he and his, though they had meat,
Had then no time the same to eat.
Math. 12.22. Luc. 11.14.
Then they brought unto Jesus one
Possessed with a devil, I find,
And him for help they call upon,
The man withal was dumb and blind.
These three impediments had he:
Yet with his word Christ made him free.
The multitude amazed were,
And praised God with heart and voice:
The son (said they) of David here,
Does give us cause for to rejoice:
And now we all assured be,
This Christ the Lord is even he.
Math. 12.24. Cap. 9.34. Mar. 3.22. Luc. 11.15.
But the hard hearted Pharisees,
When they heard this, began to say:
He fills you full of fantasies,
For Beelzebub this part does play;
Without his help he never can
Cast out the deu'll out of a man.
A kingdom or a City divided within it self cannot endure.
Math. 12.25.
But Jesus knew their thoughts before,
And therefore unto them did say:
What kingdom warreth very sore
Within it self, without decay?
What City or what house may stand,
Divided so, in any land?
If Satan cast out Satan sure,
Or I by Beelzebub do so,
His kingdom cannot long endure:
One thing I ask you and no mo;
By whom do your sons cast them out?
They shall you judge in this no doubt.
If through God cast out the same,
Then is his kingdom come this day:
If one man to a strong man came,
To spoil his house, and run away,
Can he his purpose bring to pass,
Ere he be bound that owner was?
But I by force gave him the foil,
Whose help you say, I daily use:
The more for you that I do toil,
The more you still do me abuse.
He that on my side is not, he
Against me fully sure must be.
Blasphemy.
Each sin, and so each blasphemy, Math. 12.31. Mar. 3.28. Luc. 12.10. 1. Ioh.
5.16.

Shall be forgiven men, I say,
If they repent it heartily,
And for remission do pray;
Except against the holy Ghost,
Of all, this sin offends most.
The sin against the son of man,
Which oftentimes does hap and chance:
Both francke and free remit I can,
For it may come of ignorance.
The works Gods spirit works are such,
That they cannot be hidden much.
Take heed ye do not then offend,
Or sin against the holy Ghost:
God will not sure world without end*
Forgive that sin, he hates it most.
The tree and fruit make good I say,
Or make both ^it to cast away.
As by the fruit we know the tree,
So by your words, ye known are:
Oh vipers, you that evil be,
Your speeches do your works declare.
Math. 12.34. Luc. 6.45.
The heart it storeth good or ill,
Whereof the mouth does savor still.
Both good men and the evil show,
What treasure they have hid in heart:
At the last judgment you shall know,
How well or ill you plaide your part.
Vain talk who so does here afford,
Shall answer for each idle word.
Christ denied the Jews any sign, saving only the sign of Jonas.
Math. 12.38. Cap. 16.1. Luc. 11.29. 1. Cor. 1.22.
The Scribes and Pharisees withal,
Came tempting Christ, and sought a sign,
As if on sight thereof they all,
From former faults would then decline.
But Christ that knew the inward mind,
With words they could not so make blind.
Christ answered, and said again,
Thou wicked generation,
Adulterous, and very vain,
Though signs thou do depend upon,
No sign shall given be to thee,
But that of Jonas thou shall see.
Math. 12.40. Jonas. 1.17. Cap. 2.10.
As three days and three nights he was,
Within the whale all covered:
So shortly it will come to pass,
I shall in earth be buried. Jonas in the belly of the whale was a figure of
Christ in his grave.

Three days and three nights verily,
In grave the son of man shall lie.
Christ argued the Jews of impenitencie.
The men of Niniuie shall rise
With these, and shall condemn them to: Math. 12.41. Jonas. 3.5.

They Jonas words did not despise,
But did repent, as you should do.
One greater then Jonas is here,
Yet small repentance does appear.
The Queen of Saba she shall rise, Math. 12.42. 1. King. 10.1. 1. Chron. 9.2.
Saba is full South from Jerusalem.

In Judgment, with these men also:
And them she shall condemn likewise,
That so far from her home would go
To hear king Solomon; I say,
His greater yet you hear this day.
Christ prnounced an heavy sentence against such as revolt from the truth
received.
They which are once delivered Math. 12.43. Luc. 11.24.

From unclean spirits, free and well:
Are after justly punished,
If in them they again do dwell.
Their last end sure far worse shall be,
Then was the first, take this of me.
The unclean spirit places dry,
Does walk throughout seeking a rest:
Where faith, where hope, where charity,
Is settled sure within man's breast,
It is so dried with Gods grace,
That devils have there no resting place.
Then he returns home again,
Into the house from whence he went:
(For all this while he walked in vain,
And missed still of his intent)
This house he finds swept within,
Clean void of virtue, decked with sin.
Math. 12.45. ^. Pet. 2.20. ^ebr. 6.4. Cap. 10.26.
Then takes he seven spirits more,
As ill as he in every thing:
And dwells where he did dwell before,
His end is worse then beginning.
So shall it with this people be,
They mend not for all that they see.
This spirit is the devil indeed,
His house is man where he does dwell,
The dry place where he cannot speed,
Man's heart it is, heat by God well
With godly zeal, and hate of sin;
He rests not there though he come in.
Christ showed who his mother, sisters, and brethren are.
While Christ spoke to the company,
Math. 12.46. Mar. 3.31. Luc. 8.20.
His mother and his brethren were
Without: desiring earnestly,
To talk with him as may appear.
Then one of them that was there, came
And told our savior of the same.
But he preferring far before,
The work that he then had in hand,
Increasing daily more and more;
He said, to such as there did stand,
My mother and brethren be they,
That do my doctrine still obey.
My mother, whom I love so well,
My brethren, whom I like also,
Are these: and they (mark what I tell)
For brother and sister shall go.
My friends they are who so do still,
Perform and keep my fathers will.
The state of the kingdom of God, set forth by seven parables, and first of
the seed.
By parables Christ taught men plain,
The state, nature, and worthiness
Of Gods word: he did not disdain,
To show always his readiness,
His chosen in all things he may
To help; and win them every way.
Christ though of late he had been let,
And interrupted by his friends,
His office he did not forget,
For their great fault he made amends.
To the sea side from thence he went,
To preach again with like intent.
And the same place, Math. 13.1. Mar. 4.1. Luc. 8.4.
was the sea side
That by Genezaret does lie,
Where he sat down for to abide;
But preased on with company,
He took a ship wherein he sat,
And taught them as he had done late.
The people standing on the shore,
With diligence did give him ear:
The multitude increasing more,
The more of him did stand in fear.
Whose words and works they all did see, The first par^ble, wherein showed the
^dition of the word of God

In every thing so well agree.
Behold, said Christ, a sower went
To sow his seed; but some seed fell
Far otherwise then he had meant
By the way side, which could not well
Yield fruit: the foul without delay
Devoured them all so clean away.
Some fell on stony ground also,
Where they of earth had little store:
They sprung the rather there, but lo
The sun rose up and parcht them sore
And so for lack of root, I say,
Anon they witherd all away.
Among the thorns some other fell,
Which springing up were choakt withal:
Some fell in good ground and did well,
The same brought fruit where they did fall,
One corn an hundredth fold or more,
Some sixty, some thirty also,
He that has ears to hear, may hear,
For herein the condition
Of Gods word may to thee appear,
The rule of thy salvation.
Three sorts decayed all, you see,
The fourth yields only fruit to me
Then his disciples asked him, why
By parables he taught them then?
To you said Christ this verily
Given is to know, not to those men.
The secrets of Gods kingdom ye,
Shall learn, and know always of me.
Math. 13.12. Cap. 25.29.
To you that have, more will I give*
That you may have abundance still:
He that has not, although he grieve,
Shall loose all that, against his will.
For seeing, they shall neither see,
Nor hearing hear, as you hear me.
This Prophecy Esayas spoke, Math. 13.14. Esaias. 6.9. Mar. 4.12. Luc. 8.10.
Ioh. 12.40. Act. 28.26. Romans 11.8.

Which now in them fulfilled is:
I will this people surely make,
By hearing so to hear iwis,
That they shall not yet understand,
Nor think on that which is at hand.
This peoples heart is waxen fat,
Their ears of hearing deaffe and dull,
They with their eyes have winked at
The truth, least they should see it full,
Hear, and perceive it, as ye do,
And turn, that I might heal them to.
But blessed are your eyes, they see,
Your ears also do hear the same:
All you thereto appointed be,
For you and such I surely came.
The rest of sin are very full,
And shall remain both blind and dull.
Christ interpreted to his disciples the parable of the seed.
This Parable hear ye therefore, Math. 13.18. Mar. 4.15. Luc. 8.11.

When that a man Gods word does hear,
And understands thereof no more
Then ere he heard, it may appear
The devil did catch the word away,
That seed by the way side it lay.
He that had seed in stony ground,
Did hear the word, and that with joy,
Yet had no root, he was not sound,
He dured not, for every toy
When trouble for the word shall be,
Offended very soon is he.
He that receives seed also,
Among the thorns, are they that hear
The word of God; yet go it fro,
For worldly cares in them appear.
Deceitfulness of riches make
Gods word in them no place can rake.
But he that does receive the seed,
In the good ground; is even he
That hears the word, and does indeed
Gods word perceive it for to be.
This bears fruit an hundredth fold,
Some sixty, some thirty, be bold.
The second parable of the good seed, and of the tares declaring likewise the
state and condition of Gods word.
Math. 13.24.
Another parable Christ spoke,
The kingdom of heaven is, I say,
Much like one that good seed did take,
And sowed it, and went away:
But while men slept, the enemy,
Did sow tares there immediately.
And when the blade sprung up in sight,
And brought forth fruit, then did appear
The tares that he had fowne by night:
The servants seeing, said with fear,
Did not thou (Master) sow good seed?
Whence comes then this filthy weed?
He said, the envious man it is
That has done this: the servants say,
Will thou that we go gather this,
And pluck it up to cast away?
Nay, while about the tares ye go,
Lest ye pluck up the wheat also.
Let both grow till the harvest come,
Then will I to the reapers say,
The tares now gather to one room,
And bind them in the fire to lay.
My wheat see ye that reapers are,
It be brought to my barn with care.
This parable declares well,
The state and the condition
Of Gods word writ in the Gospel,
The doctrine of salvation.
The householder sows the seeed:
The deu'll sowes tares and other weed.
The 3. parable of the mustard seed, wherein is set forth the nature of Gods
word.
Another parable again,
Christ put forth to them, saying this, Math. 13.31. Mar. 4.30. Luc. 13.19.

Gods kingdom like unto a grain
Of mustard seed assured is:
Which man does sow within his field,
That it some fruit to him may yield.
This seed, of seeds is least of all,
Of herbs it grows the greatest one
And is a tree (though not so tall)
Yet birds may breed his branch upon.
The nature of Gods word iwis,
Is very well comparde to this.
For though this seed is very small,
And subject to contempt therefore,
Yet it of herbs grows great'st of all,
And birds therein do breed some store.
Gods word at first seems so, I say,
Yet grows great each day by day.
And sharp in taste is mustard seed,
Yet heateth man, though bitingly:
So is Gods word in very deed
Sharp to the mind, yet soul healthy.
Of him that takes of this a grain,
It sharply heateth every vain.
The fourth parable of the leaven, declaring also thereby the nature of Gods
word.
Math. 13.33. Luc. 13.21.
A parable then like the last,
Jesus put forth to them again,
To prove the nature, force, and taste,
That in Gods word does sure remain.
It is like leaven laid in meal,
That leaueneth it every deal.
As little leaven leaves not,
Till it have leauened the meal:
So Gods word searches every knot
Or vain in man, his sores to heal.
The one makes bread taste well in deed,
The other man which most has need.
In parables spoke Jesus then,
Unto the people that were there:
He would not speak unto those men,
This otherwise: as may appear,
That it might be fulfilled so,
Which David spoke so long ago.
Math. 13.35. Psalm. 78.2.
My mouth I will open, says he,
In parables; and show to man,
The things that now so hidden be,
And have been since the world began.
Then Jesus sent the men away,
For there he made no longer stay.
Christ went into the house, where he declared to his Disciples, desiring it,
the meaning of the two parables of the tares.
When Christ into the house was come, Math. 13.36.

Then his Disciples to him say;
Declare to us the very sum,
And certain meaning we thee pray,
Of the same tares so in the field,
We can no reason of them yield.
Then Christ did answer them again,
He that there sowed the good seed,
It was the son of man certain,
The field, it is the world in deed,
The good seed, are Gods children sure,
The tares, the wicked and vnpure.
The enemy, the devil it is, Math. 13.39. Joel. 3.13. Revel. 14.15.

The harvest of the world is end:
The Angels are reapers iwis,
Which to his harvest God will send:
And as the tares are burnt in deed,
The wicked so in hell shall speed.
The son of man then forth shall send
His Angels, for to gather all
That in his kingdom do offend,
And still from sin to sin do fall.
These to hell fire shall be cast tho,
Where they shall gnash their teeth for woe.
Math. 13.43. Dan. 12.3. Wis. 3.7.
Then shall the just men shining be,
As is the Sun in greatest light,
In the kingdom of heaven, said he,
Abiding in their fathers sight.
See ye these words receive in fear,
With humble heart, and open ear.
The fifth parable of the treasure hid in the field, declares the worthiness
of Gods word.
Math. 13.44.
While Christ did in the house remain,
(As he had done by the sea side)
He spoke in parables again,
To such as did with him abide.
The worthiness declared he,
And of what price Gods word should be.
Like treasure hid within a field
Gods kingdom is, which when one found,
In hope it would much profit yield,
He hid the same within the ground;
For joy and hope such wealth to wield,
That man sold All that he bad.
all to buy that field.
The sixth parable of the pearls, declaring as before the worthiness of Gods
word.
Math. 13.45.
Again he said, Gods kingdom is
Like to a wary merchant man,
That sought pearls, and found one of price,
To buy the which this merchant can
Find in his heart to sell away
All that he has without delay.
Genesis 12.1. Acts. 7.3.
Old Abraham was such a one,
He left his country, friends and all:
His wealth he never thought upon,
But did obey when God did call.
And David that Gods word did taste, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 1 19.

As sweet as honey to his last.
And the Apostles they were such,
And so the godly Martyr all:
These did esteem nothing so much,
As to obey, when God did call:
These merchants, all they had they sold,
To buy this pearl, surpassing gold.
The seventh parable of the draw-net, declaring the state and condition of Gods
word.
Gods kingdom is like a draw net, Math. 13.47

Which one into the sea does cast:
Things of all sorts when it does get,
He draws it full from thence at last.
The good he does in vessels lay,
But casts all the bad away.
So shall it be at the worlds end,
The Angels shall sever the bad,
And such as by no means amend,
From just men, which shall then be glad:
Though wicked men in fire then do
Both wail and gnash their teeth for woe.
Then Jesus asking them could say,
All these things understand ye yet?
Yea Lord, for so say they we may,
Thy words we never shall forget.
By this Christ did teach them again,
The state of Gods word very plain.
The godly may not sever now,
Themselves away from wicked men,
But as the tares in wheat must grow
Till harvest time; the reapers then
Shall save the wheat, and for their hire,
Shall burn the tares in flaming fire.
And every Scribe said Christ, that is
Taught to Gods kingdom, I compare
Unto a householder iwis,
Whose treasure houses stored are:
And does (to whom himself so would)
Bring forth (to give) both new and old.
As these, so more of Christ were done,
Then we in writing left us have,
Approving him to be Gods son,
Come to the world man's soul to save.
Yet here the meek and godly mind,
Of heavenly food his fill shall find.
All glory be to thee on hye,
Oh Father, Son and holy Ghost:
One mighty God in Trinity,
Which saved us, that else were lost.
To thee be laud oh God therefore,
And praise, and honor, evermore. Amen.
THE FOVRTH PART OF THE HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST,
containing those things which he did the third year after his Baptism, which
was the two and thirtieth year of his age, according to the four
Evangelists: the year after the creation of the world 4173. beginning at the
death of John Baptist.
To the tune of the Lords Prayer.
John Baptist was beheaded, his head given to Herodias daughter, and his body
buried by his Disciples the 13. of April. Anno Domini. 32.
THe year of Christ's Nativity, Math. 14.1. Mar. 6.14. Luc. 9.7.

The thirty two, as then it was,
And thirteenth day assuredly
Of April, thus it came to pass,
That John the Baptist lost his life,
To please Herodias, Philips wife.
For John had said to Herod's face,
Herodias may not be thy wife:
Which wrought in her that wanted grace,
Such fervent hate, she sought his life.
She never rested night nor day,
Till she had got his head away.
His doctrine she misliked so,
Two brethren may not mary ^ne woman, nec (...) conuerso, Leuit. 18.16. Cap.
20.21.
Because he said; she could not be
King Herod's wife and Phillips to,
Two brethren may not mary thee.
And though she did him much despise,
Yet could not she his death devise.
For Herod heard John willingly,
And feared much him to offend:
For he confessed John to be
Both just and holy to his end,
This was a let, to work her will,
Her malice she could not fulfill.
Till it befell when Herod had
Enclosed John in prison fast,
And on his birth day to be glad,
As he had used in times past,
A Royal feast he causd to be
Made for the states of Galilie.
Whereat what happened you shall hear,
Though Herod knew it in his heart,
That John was just, and stood in fear,
To play with him that bloody part:
For often he heard him joyfully,
And did obey him willingly.
Yet at that feast a dainty Dame,
Herodias daughter daunc'd so well,
That all that to the banquet came,
Commended her, and then befell
The thing that was desired so,
By the maids mother long ago.
For Herod so was pleased withal,
That straight he gave without advise,
(Hap what might happen to befall,
He did not reckon of the price)
What gift soever she would crave,
The same he promisd she should have.
She quickly went and Counsel had,
Or else was taught to ask before:
This made her mother very glad,
For this she thirsted had so sore.
Ask thou John Baptists head she said:
Which done, was granted to the maid.
Though Herod grieved at the same,
Yet would not he the gift deny:
For fear of foolish worldly shame,
And for their sakes that then stood by.
Therefore he to the hangman said,
Go fetch his head, give it the maid.
The minion with John Baptists head,
Unto her mother straightway went:
When his Disciples law him dead,
His death they greatly did lament;
And they his body buried,
And thereof Jesus certified.
Then Jesus fame so far was spread,
That many wondered at his name:
King Herod knew that John was dead,
Yet scarsly could believe the same.
John risen is again said he,
By whom are wrought the works you see.
Some other said Elyas was,
Or else some Prophet come again:
By whom such works were brought to pass,
To name him Christ they thought it vain.
Yet Herod him desired to see,
That he might learn what he should be.
Christ preaching in his own country, was despised of his countrymen.
Luc. 4.16. Math. 13.54. Mar. 6.1. Ioh. 4.44.
When as Christ Jesus for to preach,
To Nazareth his country came,
Esayas book they did him reach,
That he might read upon the same:
Whereout, he taught them what he was,
What he should teach, and bring to pass.
His doctrine so astonished some,
That they did wonder at his words:
Whence does (say they) this wisdom come?
Or who to him these works affoords?
Is not that Joseph's son I pray,
The Carpenter, we heard this day?
His mother Marie we do call,
His brethren be they not with us?
As men amazed they were all,
To hear him so that text discuss.
Save in his country then, said he,
A Prophet shall sure honored be.
Luc. 4.25. 1. King. 17.9. Iam. 5.17. Elyas was sent to a poor widow in
Sarepta. Luc. 4.27. 2. King. 5.14.
Wherefore he said to them again,
When famine plagued Israel,
And they for three years wanted rain,
And months fix as stories tell,
The Prophet then was sent to none,
Save in Sarepta unto one.
Oh Israel, thy leprosy,
So great in Elyseus time,
Though few could find a remedy,
Naaman yet was cured by him.
When they hard this, it grieved them sore,
And they devised his death therefore.
No greater works there then did he,
Then on few sick his hands to lay:
When he their unbelief did see,
He maruaild much, and went away,
Teaching in every town and place,
Where he came, and had gotten space.
Christ sent forth his Apostles by two and two to preach.
And he the twelve did call again, Mar. 6.7. Math. 10.1. Luc. 9.1.

And sent them forth by two and two:
Power of him they did obtain,
And charge withal what they should do;
For clothing, or how they should fare,
He willed them to take no care.
What house ye enter to, said he,
There tarry till ye thence depart:
If that you there despised be,
They work themselves the greater smart. Acts. 13.15. Cap. 18.6.

Shake ftom your feet the dust away,
As witness against such I say.
That city, house, or man be sure, Mar. 6.11. Math. 10.14. Luc. 9.5.

That will not you receive or hear,
A harder judgment shall endure,
(When all in one place shall appear)
Then Sodom and Gomorhe shall have,
Where worldly wealth can no man save.
So they went forth, and preaching told,
That all men should their lives amend*
They cast out devils with courage bold,
And as their master did them send,
Of griefs each grieved did relieve,
And to the sick they health did give.
The Apostles returning, showed Christ what great things they had done.
Luc. 9.10. Math. 14.13. Mar. 6.30.
When the Apostles came again,
They told to Christ all they had done,
As Well where most they did remain,
As how to preach they had begone,
Relieuing all men's miseries,
And helping their infirmities.
Christ went aside into the wilderness with his disciples, where he fed 5000.
men with five l^aues and two fishes.
Math. 14.13. Mar. 6.31. Luc. 9 10.
And Jesus said, come hence, depart
By ship into another place:
He thought he might in the desert
Have had some ease a little space:
For he and his Apostles were
Much cloide with prease then every where.
This was not done so secretly,
The people soon espide the same:
In multitudes they after hie,
So great was grown Christ Jesus fame,
That from the cities all about
They followed, till they found him out.
Bethsayda was near to the place,
Where Christ did mean to take some ease:
The people thither ran apace,
Each to be cured of his disease.
Like scattred sheep the people were,
All ready for the Wolf to tear.
To pity them it did him move,
And that he might express the same,
And give them tokens of his love,
He heald their blind, their sick, and lame;
And of his kingdom verily,
He taught to them the certainty.
And now because the time was spent, Math. 14.15. Mar. 6.35. Luc. 9.10. Ioh.
6.5.

And that they had far way to go,
Christ thought it was expedient,
With meat to feed those men also,
Least that they going by the way,
Should faint, and of his help dismay.
When his disciples came him to,
Willing the people might be gone:
For else said they, how shall they do,
The night apace now draws on.
And this is desert where we are:
For vittailes therefore let them care.
They have no need to go away,
Said Jesus, unto them again:
See therefore that ye do them stay,
Let them a while with us remain:
And give you them now of your meat,
For I would have them hear to eat.
Then the disciples said, we have
Five loaves, two fishes, and no more.
Give thanks to God that the same gave,
He daily will increase your store:
Bring the same hither unto me,
That your provision I may see.
Then Christ commanded on the grass,
The multitude to sit down round,
Where he brought that thing then to pass,
Which did their reasons all confound.
When he had prayed and blessed the bred,
Five thousand Beside women and children. ^ohn. 6.13.
men therewith he fed.
And of that broken meat had they,
Twelve baskets full among them all:
This was to warn men to obey,
And to depend on him withal.
They that his kingdom seek to have,
Shall want nothing that they do crave.
^oh. 6.5.
For Christ's demand to Phylip was,
Where bread for all them might be bought*
He knew not what would come to pass,
And therefore spoke as then he thought;
Two hundredth peniworth will not be,
To each of them a bit; said he.
And Andrew said, here is a boy
That has five loaves, and fishes two,
And thought it but a very toye,
To offer that, all those unto.
Yet with the same, Christ fed as then,
As I have said, five thousand men.
The multitude when they did see,
The miracle that Christ had done:
Did straight confess him then to be,
(As sure he was) Gods only son.
This Prophet (say they) certainly,
We looked for so earnestly.
When Jesus therefore did perceive,
That they would seek to make him king,
Worldly conceits could not deceive,
(Or work in him ^o base a thing.)
Therefore he did himself convey
Into a mount out of the way.
Christ stilled the raging of the sea, walked on the sea, and saved Peter, when
through infidelity he was ready to sincke.
Then Jesus sent by ship before, Math. 14.22. Mar. 6.45. Ioh. 6.16.

All his disciples thence away,
And eke the people from the shore,
And went alone aside to pray.
But they were tossed too and fro,
The wind and waves then raged so.
All this he saw, that sees all,
And therefore went to ease their pain:
Who so does come when he does call,
Or sent does go, shall sure remain
Amidst all troubles safe and free:
For Christ with such will ever be.
About the fourth watch of the night,
Christ walked on the sea as then:
And passing by them, at the sight
They cried out like fearful men,
Supposing he had been a Or spirit.
ghost,
And that they surely had been lost.
Comfort your selves then Jesus said,
It is my self, you need not fear:
Though want of faith made you afraid,
Yet none of you shall loose a hair;
Rejoice therefore, regard no pain,
You shall have ease for this again.
Then Peter minding him to try,
Said; master, bid me come to thee.
Then Jesus said; Come by and by,
And walk on foot along to me.
Out of the ship he stepped straight way,
As one that would his Lord obey.
But when he saw a mighty wind,
He sore afraid began to sink:
If help (he cride) I do not find,
I shall be drowned as I think.
So want of faith, did let him fall,
And faith again, gave grace to call.
Him Jesus then reproved sore;
When they into the ship were come:
The sea and wind did cease to roar,
Which seemed a marvel unto some:
Yet all confessed verily,
By this, Christ Jesus deity.
When Christ had landed in the country of Genezareth, they brought unto him
all that were sick, and as many as touched the hemme of his vesture were
healed.
Math. 14.34. Mar. 6.54.
Christ to Genezareth then went,
Where when he came first to the shore,
The country all with one consent,
(Yea such as saw him not before,)
Devised how to bring him there,
All such as then diseased were.
All which desired but to tuch
His garments, as he passed by:
His shadow did relieve all such,
As shadowed were, where they did lie.
Thus did their faith bring forth much fruit,
For they obtained all their suite.
Lo he that lately with disdain, Math. 13.54. Mar. 6.1. Luc. 4.16.

Among his own had no regard:
He whom his kinsmen would have slain,
Him truly, strangers gladly heard.
His doctrine these men did embrace,
And he on them shed forth his grace.
Christ's Sermon of Manna from heaven, and of the bread of life, at Capernaum.
Ioh. 6.24.

The people that Christ Jesus fed,
Sought him till they found him again:
They sought not for the heavenly bread,
For earthly meat they took that pain.
Strive not so for that meat, said he:
Strive for the meat I shall give thee.
Then said they all what shall we do,
That work the works of God we might?
Christ Jesus answered thereto,
And taught them how to do it right;
The work of God (with good intent,)
Is to believe in whom he sent.
Show us some sign that we may see, Ioh. 6.31. Exodus 16.14. Nomb. 11.7. Psalm.
78 24. Wis. 16.20.

And so believe in thee: they say,
Our fathers Manna had, to be
Their meat, in the desert always:
God gave them bread from heaven to eat,
And it was long our fathers meat.
And Jesus then said verily,
Not Moses but my father he
Does give to you assuredly,
True bread from heaven: believe ye me;
The bread of God came down I say,
And to the world gives life always.
Then they again to Jesus said,
Give us this bread, Lord, evermore:
The bread of life (be not afraid)
Ioh. 6.35. Cap. 4.14. Eccl. 24.24.
I am: he shall not hunger sore,
Nor thirst, that does believe in me,
So do not you, for all you see.
They come to me whom God does give,
And them I do not cast away:
I loose not one that does believe,
But raise him up at the last day.
My fathers will, not mine to do,
I came from heaven this earth unto.
The Jews did murmr he said so,
(I am the bread that down did come.)
Ioh. 6.42. Math. 13.55.
What is this Joseph's son or no?
Is not he known to us, said some?
No man can come (be sure said he)
But whom the father draws, to me.
John. 6.45. Esaias. 54.13. Iere. 31.33. Ioh. 6.46. Math. 11.27.
Whom God has taught, come unto me,
Not that the father sure has been
Of any one, save only he
Which is of God (said Jesus) seen.
To him that does in me believe,
Life everlasting I do give.
I am the bread of life in deed,
John 6.49. Exodus 16.15.
Your fathers Manna long did eat,
Yet are they dead: so shall not speed,
Such as feed on this heavenly meat.
My flesh it is the bread I give,
Which is life to all that believe.
How can this man give us to eat
His flesh say they? can it so be?
My flesh except it be your meat,
Add that ye drink my blood, said he,
Eternal life I say again,
Does not at all in you remain.
Who so does eat my flesh, I say, Ioh. 6.54. 1. Cor. 11.27.

And drinks my blood, has life in deed:
Him I will raise at the last day,
But so shall not the wicked speed.
My flesh and blood is faithfully,
Both meat and drink assuredly.
He that does eat my flesh, is he,
And he that drinks my blood withal,
In whom I dwell, and he in me,
As God the Father eternal
Has sent me; so, by him I live,
And life to others I do give.
From heaven above came down this bread,
Not as your fathers that did eat
The Manna sent them, yet are dead,
For he that eats of this meat
Shall live, and he shall never dye,
As sinners do eternally.
At Capernaum spoke he this,
Where some of his Disciples were,
That said, a hard thing sure it is,
Who can abide the same to hear? Ioh. 6.62. Cap. 3.13.

Does this offend you then, said he?
What, if I should ascend, will ye?
It is the spirit that in deed
Does quicken, not the flesh be sure:
In spirit, this both life does breed
And nourish, ever to endure:
For what I speak (to end all strife)
To you is spirit and is life.
Yet some of you believe not this,
(He knew them, and the traitor to)
Therefore I told you how it is,
That come unto me any do:
The father only gives this grace
To him, that does enjoy the place.
So some went clean from him away,
Then Jesus said, unto the rest;
Will ye depart from me this day?
And walk as they where you think best?
Shall we said Peter, then at last?
Words of eternal life thou have.
Ioh. 6.69. Math. 16.10. Math. 26.16.
And we believe, and know thou art
The Christ, the Son of God in deed:
And if we did from thee depart,
We should be sure, full ill to speed.
Christ did again the traitor note:
Least his Apostles should forgote.
Christ rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, for trangressing Gods commandments,
and answered their accusation against his Disciples, for eating meat with
unwashed hands.
Math. 15.1. Mar. 7.1.
The Scribe and faithless Pharisie,
Came then our Savior Christ unto,
Supposing by their subtlety,
For to deface what he would do.
They from Jerusalem then came,
That so feign would his works defame.
Why thy Disciples do transgress,
Of elders the tradition,
Do thou now unto us express;
This was at first their question:
For they (say they) wash not a hand,
When they eat meat, we understand.
O hypocrites, said Christ again,
You do Gods word still disobay,
Supposing you shall escape the pain, Math. 15.4. Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
Ephesians. 6.2.

That you do merit day by day.
He that his parents (sure says God)
Dishonoreth, shall feel my rod.
In words you worship, but in vain,
Lip labor, likes not the Lord,
A double heart, he does disdain:
When words and deeds do well accord,
Then praise and prayer he will hear,
Which never does in you appear.
It is not meat that hurts man,
Which with the mouth he does consume:
But evil thoughts which now and than,
Do move the heart to fret and fume,
Or else devise some evil deed*
Of this ye should take greatest heed.
Each plant my father planteth not,
Shall by the root be plucked again:
Our God will not all his forgot,
When hypocrites do suffer pain.
These blindly still, the blind do lead,
You have no cause, their craft to dread.
Christ cast a devil out of the daughter of a woman of Canaan, and healed many
other.
From thence likewise did Jesus pass,
Of Tire and Sydon through the cost,
Of such great care our Savior was.
To save that else might there be lost:
He ceased not but day by day,
Did good to all that would him pray.
Behold a woman, came to him,
That did within those borders dwell,
Whose daughter was in every lymme
Sore vexed with a deu'll of hell.
Christ she most earnestly did pray,
From her to drive the deu'll away.
Whose suite, though seeming to deny,
Christ granted unto her at last,
When that he saw how faithfully,
She hoped his favor for to t^st.
He gave to her to do her good,
Some portion of the childrens food.
Christ returned thence again into the costs of Galilie, healed a deaffe man
that stammered in his speech and many others, and fed. 4000. men besides women
and children with seven loaves.
Mar. 7.31. Math. 15.29.
Christ did return yet then again,
Into the costs of Galilie,
Their late contempt and deep disdain,
Withdrew not so his piety.
Among the midst of wolves he still,
Protecteth safe his flock from ill.
A deaffe man unto Christ they brought,
That stamb^ed in his speech also:
He granted them, what then they sought,
And healed him, and let him go:
So that amazed in great fear,
They gave God praise all that were there.
He then up to a mountain went,
And sat him down upon the same:
And the people with full intent,
By multitudes unto him come,
To hear his doctrine, and to crave
That they some help of him might have.
They thither brought the lame, the blind, Math. 15.30. Esaias. 35.5.

The deaffe, the dumb, and maimed sort:
These had as they did hope to find,
Their former health, to their comfort:
So that the people did rejoice,
And praised God with heart and voice.
Which caused Christ to pity these,
As he before had done also,
When in the desert to their ease,
He fed five thousand men and mo.
This did he that they might perceive,
That Christ would not his chosen leave.
Wherefore he fed now once again,
Four thousand men sure at the least,
Near Galilie on that mountain,
Where he had healed all the rest,
With seven loaves and few fishes small,
Christ Jesus fed those men withal.
The Pharisees and Saduces tempted Christ, and desired him to show them a
sign. Math. 16.1. Mar. 8.12. Luc. 12.54.

To Magdala, when this was done,
By ship our Savior did sail,
To whom the Saducees did soon,
And Pharisees without all fail
Resort, which feign a figne would see
From heaven above, if it would be.
They could discern the outward face,
And each appearance in the sky:
These hypocrites had yet no grace,
But needs they would Christ Jesus try.
Those that by tempting, Christ assail,
Do most in all their fetches fail.
For those no figne at all could have,
But that of Jonas, which we read,
That lay three days as in a grave,
Within a whale, as he were dead:
The son of man shall even so,
Lie in the grave, and rise therefro.
Christ commanded his Disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees.
Math. 16.5. Mar. 8.14. Lu^. 12.1.
They thence went to the other side,
But had forgot to buy them bread,
So far men's fancies wander wide,
When they do stray from Christ their head.
These minded not that Jesus could
Provide them meat when that he would.
Christ warning them to shun always
The leaven of the Pharisie,
Made them conceive, this does he say,
Since we forgot some bread to buy.
They never thought how he had fed
Four thousand men with little bread.
This leaven of the Pharisie,
The Saducees, and Herod to,
Then his disciples warned he,
They should in any wise forgo
False teachers, and their doctrine flee,
For they men's souls do slay ye see.
Christ healed a blind man in Bethsayda.
Then Jesus to Bethsayda came, Mar. 8.22.

Where they unto him brought one blind,
Desiring him to heal the same,
For other help they could not find.
Out of the town the blind led he,
Where afterward he made him see.
Christ Jesus spat his eyes into,
And put his hands upon him then,
And said, now tell it, if thou do
See any thing among these men.
I see them walk as trees, said he,
Though perfectly I cannot see.
Christ put his hands on him again,
And bad him look then all about.
He looked, and saw each thing plain,
He stood of nothing then in doubt.
Go home said Christ, since thou art well,
Of this in town to no man tell.
Peter in the name of all the Apostles, confessed Christ to be the son of the
living God: to which confession Christ answered, and in his name promised unto
them all the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
When to Caesarea Jesus came, Math. 16.13 Mar. 8.27. Luc. 9.18.

Called Philippi, as we read:
Of his disciples then what fame
He asked, of him abroad was spread?
The son of man I am said he:
What do men say therefore of me?
John Baptist, some name thee, they say,
Elias some do thee suppose,
Or Ieremias, or some way,
That of the Prophets one of those
That in the elder times have been,
Is rise again, and of them seen.
But whom say ye, said Christ again,
That I the son of man should be?
Mat. 16. Ioh. 6.69.
Then Simon Peter said certain,
The son of God we knowledge thee.
Then Christ said, Simon verily,
Blessed thou art, and worst thou why?
To men's opinions subject I,
Most willingly my self do give:
Yet mine do know me perfectly,
And as they know, do so believe;
This knowledge thou could never have,
Of flesh and blood, but God it gave.
O Peter, this confession,
The ground work of my Church shall be:
For upon that foundation,
I mean to build a Church for me.
The gates of hell shall not prevail
Against the same, but still shall fail.
To you of heaven I give the key,
That is the preaching of my word:
All men that will not it obey,
Against all such, draw out this sword;
What so in earth ye loose or bind,
The like in heaven, the same shall find.
Then charged he that they should tell,
As then to no man what he were:
E^^ Christ we learn to know full well,
We may not preach him, without fear;
For though no more but man we see,
Yet must we know him God to be.
Christ taught the faithful to bear his Cross, and rebuked Peter for
dissuading his death.
From that time forth Jesus began, Math. 16.21.

To show that he himself must go
Unto Jerusalem, for man
To suffer and abide much woe:
The elders, Priests, and Scribes had plain
Devised all, to have him slain.
And though he told them this before,
The third day I will rise again:
Yet Peter thought it wisdom more,
To keep him thence to shun the pain.
And therefore he took him aside:
But Christ would not his words abide.
So he that late revealed by God.
Did know and knowledge Christ his son,
Does straightway here deserve a rod,
Not knowing yet what he had done.
When self-will casts Gods word behind,
Our weakness then we quickly find.
Here Peter does presume to teach
His master Christ himself to save:
Christ him of folly did appeach,
And so a sore rebuke him gave.
Oh Satan come (said he) behind,
On earth, not heaven, thou set'st thy mind.
The faithful must bear the Cross.
Math. 16.24. Math. 10.38. Mar. 8.34. Luc. 9.23. Cap. 14.27.
Then Jesus said to them again,
If any man will follow me,
He must forsake himself at vain,
And bear my Cross though vexed he be:
If his afflictions shall be sore,
Yet in the same I go before.
Who so would live still lothing pain,
And yet does seek his life to save,
Does loose his labor, this is plain,
Life without me he cannot have.
He that for my sake yields to dye,
Shall save his life eternally.
What profit shall that man obtain,
That winnes the world his soul to loose?
When he has reckned all his gain,
Most vain it is that he does choose.
For he that will not for me dye,
Shall dye a death perpetually.
For sure the son of man, he shall
In glory of his father dear,
(The Angels him attending all)
Math. 16.27. Psalm. 62.12. Romans 2.6.
In judgment here again appear.
And then according to his deed,
Shall every man be sure to speed.
Math. 16.28. Mar. 9.1. Luc. 9.27.
Yet truly unto you I say,
That some of them which here do stand,
Shall not by death be fetched away,
Until the time be near at hand,
That in his kingdom they do see
The son of man so come to be.
Christ was transfigured on mount Thabor, in the presence of Peter, James, and
John, and talked with Moses and Elyas.
Saint Matthew after six days said, Math. 17.1. Mar. 9.2. Luc. 9.28. Matthew
says that this was the sixth day after the preaching of the cross remembered
before. Luke says it was eight days after, which both agree thu^^ Matthew
reckons neither the day he preached, nor the day he wa^ transfigured, Luke
does both*

That Jesus was transfigured:
The order of it made afraid,
All such as saw what happened;
For he appeared in majesty,
Surpassing their capacity.
Christ, Peter, James, and John then took
Into mount Thabor all apart:
Where on his glory they should look,
That they might ponder it in heart:
He took them three, for against three,
Exceptions may not taken be.
Moses, Elias, and the voice of the father, were three witnesses of his deity
or Godhead.
So as the sun, did shine his face,
His clothes were white as is the light,
And two men standing in the place,
With whom to talk he took delight:
They Moses, and Elias were,
That stood and talked with him there.
But his disciples were afraid
To look upon so strange a sight,
This voice withal made them dismayed,
That came out of the cloud forth-right,
This is my son I love so dear,
Happy are they that do him hear.
And Peter was amazed so,
That he knew not the words he spoke;
Come Master said he, ere we go,
Three tabernacles let us make.
Be not afraid said Christ of me,
For now alone you may me see.
So as he came the mountain fro,
He said to them, this vision
You may declare all men unto,
After my resurrection:
Till then to no man may you say,
What you have seen all three this day.
Why do the Scribes said they tell us,
Come needs must first Elyas be?
Then Christ to them gave answer thus,
Elyas came, they could not see.
And his Apostles well then wist,
He had spoke this of John Baptist.
Christ coming down from the mountain, cured a child that was lunatike.
Math. 17.15. Mar. 9.14. Luc. 9.38.
When from the hill come down they were.
Among the multitude was one
That said, oh master, pity here,
And help I pray my vexed son:
Of thy Disciples I can have
No help at all, my son to save.
Oh crooked generation,
Bring here said Christ, the child to me:
How long shall in this nation,
Such unbelief ingraffed be?
Christ then the deu'll rebuked so,
That from the child he made him go.
Then his Disciples secretly,
Asked why they could not cast him out?
It was your infidelity,
Else you had done it without doubt.
Prayer and fasting it the way,
Whereby this deu'll cast out you may.
They came thence into Galilie, where he foretold them of his passion, and
paid tribute. Math. 17.22. Cap. 20.17. Mar. 9.31. Luc. 9.44. Cap. 24.7.

Christ told them this in Galilie,
The son of man shall given be,
Into men's hands assuredly,
For to be slain as you shall see:
Yet he the third day, shall again
Revive, and so for ay remain.
Then they which tribute did receive, Peter was a Citizen at Capernau^, where
Christ the^ lay.

Came unto Peter secretly,
And said to him, we do perciue,
Thy master at thy house does lie,
Tell us therefore and if he do
Pay tribute, unto Caesar to?
Whose answer (as he thought in deed,)
Was that his master paid the same:
Wherefore he hy'de him home with speed, Christ declared his deity in that he
told Peter his thought.

And to his master quickly came.
Who then preventing him took pain,
To ask of him the same again.
What think thou, oh Peter show
Of whom do kings their tribute take?
Of children? or of strangers now?
Of strangers, he did answer make.
By this thy reason then said he,
Both thou and I may well go free. Another infallible toke^ of his deity, in
that h^ foretold Peter of the money in the fish mouth.

Yet lest we should them so offend,
Go to the sea, and angle there:
Where if thou do a while attend,
A fish thou shall take, do not fear,
That in his mouth shall surely have
What they for thee and me do crave.
Thus Christ to Peter twice did show,
That every thing what so it were,
Himself the same before did know:
Whereby his Godhead did appear.
And therewithal example gave,
To pay the king what he should have.
The contention of the Apostles for the primacie, Christ's answer, and warning
against offenses.
Math. 18.1. Mar. 9.34. Luc. 9.16.
Then his Disciples did demand,
Who should in heaven the greatest be?
Christ did a little child command
To stand, and said, lo here you see,
In heaven the greatest is the mild,
That humbles him as does a child.
Math. 18.10. Psalm. 34.7.
Offend not these, whose Angels see,
And do behold my fathers face:
Math. 18.8. Cap. 5.30. Mar. 9.45.
Though that offenses needs must be,
Yet sure offenders do want grace.
Cut of the hand, pluck out the eye,
If that offenses come thereby.
Math. 18.15. ^f a man being ^arned pri^atly, and again before one or ^wo, and
thirdly before the church, do not ^me^d, then let ^im be excommunicated, not
^therwise.
Of forgiving our brethren.
But if thy brother thee offend,
Seek thou to win him privately:
If thee he hear not, nor amend,
Go yet, and warn him earnestly:
If then he do not hear the same,
Before the Church let him have blame.
Then Peter came to him, and said,
When that my brother does offend,
Shall I when he does seem affrayd,
Forgive him seven times, if he mend?
Not seven times, but as often (said he)
As he repents, let him go free.
By you on earth what so is bound,
Or loosed likewise by you is,
The same in heaven shall so be found. If they ask to Gods glory, the profit
of their neighbors, and the salvation of their own souls.

Two their requests shall have iwis,
Where in my name meet two or three,
I in the middst will surely be.
The example of the king receiving accounts of his servants, and the reward of
cruelty.
A certain king would take accounts, Math. 18.23.

Among his servants Jesus said:
And one was brought whose debt surmounts
Ten thousand talents, all dismayed.
Of this, the mighty king could say,
Sell him and his, my debts to pay.
But when the servant cried grace,
Desiring him a longer day:
He said not, go thou for a space,
But I forgive, go hence away.
This king so full of piety,
May teach us to use clemency.
But the same servant met his mate,
That ought to him an hundred pence:
He straight not waighing his estate,
Nor yet regarding the offense,
Put him in prison that did pray,
Without respect, till he would pay.
His fellows saw, and sorry were,
And told their master of the same,
Who would not long this fact forbear,
But paid him like for like, with shame.
Till all were paid, withouten fail:
He sent that servant then to iayle.
So likewise shall my father do,
(Said Christ) except you do forgive,
Yea from your hearts your brethren to,
Their faults, whereat you so much grieve:
For as you hope of him to have,
So grant them grace, that grace will crave.
Christ his journey out of Galilie into Judea, and his Sermons in the Temple at
the feast of Tabernacles.
Mat. 19.1. Mar. 10.1.
Christ did depart from Galilie,
And to Judea came again,
Where as he passed Jordan by:
While in that cost he did remain,
(As graciously he vsd to deal)
Their sick and lame he then did heal.
Then came to him the Pharisie,
Full fraughted both in heart and mind,
With craft, and cloakt hypocrisy,
Hoping in Christ some fault to find.
But still for all his taken toil,
Ere he departs he has the foil.
Ioh. 7.2. Leuit. 23.34.
The feast of Tabernacles then,
Was kept with great solemnity,
Unto the which those country men,
Did use to go continually:
That feast was even then at hand,
Which they gave Christ to understand.
His brethren to him therefore say,
Depart hence, and to Jury go,
That thy Disciples there they may,
See all thy works, that here we do.
For none in secret works the same,
That being known sets forth his fame.
My time it not yet come, said he,
But your time always ready is:
The world loves you, and hates me,
Because it does all things amiss.
Go ye that are thereto addressed:
I will not yet go the feast.
These things he said, abiding still
In Galilie, behind the rest,
Till he his time might there fulfill:
Yet after he came to the feast,
Though secretly, which made the Jews
To muse, they heard of him no news.
Some cald' him good, some other bad,
And said he does but men deceive:
When half the feast was done, yet glad
Were some our Savior to receive.
Christ taught, the Jews did marvel how
He should untaught the Scriptures know*
My doctrine is his that sent me,
If any man will do his will,
Gods word he shall know it to be,
And that I must the same fulfill.
Unrighteousness in him was none,
He sought Gods glory not his own.
Did Moses give to you a law? Ioh. 7.19. Exodus 2^.^.

And none of you does keep the same?
And yet as men that stood in awe,
For breach therefore ye do me blame.
Yea more then that, ye would me kill,
That only do my fathers will.
Thou have the deu'll, said they again,
Who goes about to kill thee here?
One work I did, I tell you plain,
Ioh. 7.22. Leuit. 12.3. Genesis 17.10.
You marvel at, on may with fear.
You Circumcise them Sabbath day:
I made one whole, ye would me slay.
Ioh. 7.24. Deuteronomy. 1.16.
Judge not as outwardly you see,
But righteous judgment judge withal.
Is not this man (said some) even he
Whose death they have decreed all?
Do not the rulers see plainly,
That he now speaks openly?
This man from whence he is know we,
Whence Christ shall come we cannot tell*
Whence I am come ye know, said he,
Him that sent me ye know not well:
But I know him, and he sent me;
I am of him, so are not ye.
They sought to take him, but did lay
No hands on him, his hour as then
Was not come, to make him away.
Some said, believing of those men,
When Christ comes shall his works be mo?
Or greater then we see him do?
The Pharisees and high Priests sent
Their officers Christ for to take:
A little while now be content,
Said Christ, my journey hence I make:
Ioh. 7.34. Cap. 13.33.
To him that sent me will I go,
You (leeking) shall find me no mo.
Now whither will he, said the Jews?
That we shall not find him again?
If to the Grecians that were news.
This thing they would have learned feign;
Ye shall seek me, but shall not find,
Nor come to me, in deed or mind.
Now in the last day of the feast, Ioh. 7.37. Leuit. 23.36.

Christ stood, and cryde to them, and said,
If any thirst, lo I am pressed
To give him drink, be not affrayd,
In him that does believe in me,
A well of life shall springing be.
This of the spirit they should receive, Ioh. 7.39. Joel. 2 28. Act. 2.17.

That would believe in, him he spoke,
Although the Jews did not perceive,
Nor great account of Jesus make.
When Christ was glorified then,
The holy Ghost was given men.
So many when they heard this, said,
This is the Prophet certainly:
Some other not so much affrayd,
Said, he was Christ apparently.
Of other minds again were some,
From Galilie Christ should not come.
Says not the Scripture, Ioh. 7.42. Micah. 5.2. Math. 2.5.
of the seed
Of David, Christ shall come to thee?
And out of Bethlehem in deed,
Where David was, thou shall him see?
Each liked his own opinion
^f Christ, which bred dissension.
Some would he should then taken be,
Yet no man laid on him a hand:
The rulers all did so agree,
And so their officers command.
Of whom they asked the reason why,
Christ was not taken by and by?
The servants said, assuredly,
Man never yet like this man spoke.
The rulers answered bitterly,
Ye are deceived and much mistake.
What trust do wisemen to him give,
Though the unlearned him believe?
Ioh. 7.50. Cap. 3.1. Deuteronomy. 17.8. Cap. 19.15.
Then Nicodemus said, our law
Does judge no man, before it hear
What he has done of him in awe.
Art thou said they? what do thou fear:
Search well and look, from Galilie
Comes not one Prophet verily.
Bethany where Lazarus, Martha and Marie dwelt, was in the mount of Olyues.
Then every man went to his home,
And to the mount of Olives he
That night did go, it seems to some,
He went to pray, yet other be
Of mind, he went to take his rest
In Bethanie, where he thought best.
A woman taken in adultery brought to Christ, we delivered by him from her
accusers.
Ioh. 8.1.
And early in the morning came
Into the temple Christ again:
Yea all the people saw the same,
Christ sat him down and taught them plain.
But mark the craft and subtlety,
Of Scribe and froward Pharisie.
Though they had by temptation,
Assaild him often, and had the fall:
A new devise they hammer on,
To tempt our Savior Christ withal.
A woman in adultery
Was found, the act did verify.
They brought her unto him, and said, Ioh. 8.5. Leuit. 20.10.

Moses commands in the law,
No time therein should be delayed,
To stone such as live not in awe.
But master what do thou suppose,
That God would have us do with those?
Then Jesus stouped to the ground,
And with his finger wrote thereon:
The Scribes still asking him were found,
Some answer to their question.
He that sins not, let him Said Christ. Ioh. 8.7. Deuteronomy. 17.6.
not stay.
Cast the first stone at her he may.
They hearing this, no longer muse,
They go out every one away:
Their conscience did them so accuse,
To punish her they would not stay.
And Jesus was there left alone
With her, and she condemned by none.
Since no man has condemned thee,
Go hence said Christ, and sin no more:
Misliking her adultery,
Which sure he would have punished sore,
But that repentance by her face,
He saw in her, had got his grace.
Christ is the true light of the world. Ioh. 8.12. Cap 1.5. Cap. 9.5.

Of this world sure I am the light,
For him to walk that follows me:
Yea clear shall be the darkest night,
The light of life that man shall see.
Thou of thy self do record bear,
It is not true, we therefore fear.
Ioh. 8.14. Cap. 5.31.
Then Jesus said, though I do so,
My record yet is true in deed:
For whence I came, and where I go,
I know, to learn I have no need.
This thing from you so hidden is,
Because ye judge each thing amiss.
I judge no man, yet if I do,
My judgment ye the truth shall find:
For I alone do nothing so,
I still am of my fathers mind.
The father is always with me,
Ioh. 8.17. Deuteronomy. 17.6. Cap. 19.15. Math. 18.16. 2. Cor. 13.1. Heb. 10.28.
Two witnesses allowed be.
Where is thy father then, say they?
Ye know him not, nor will know me:
You all the son do disobey,
And yet the father feign would see.
He that does seek the son to know,
To him I do the father show.
Jesus spoke in the treasury,
As he within the Temple taught,
These sayings all most constantly,
And yet no man Christ Jesus caught.
His hour vncome, no man there could
(For all their spite) on him take hold.
Then Jesus said, I go my way,
Ye shall seek me, yet dye in sin:
You cannot come to me I say,
Your wickedednesse so wraps you in.
Will he said they himself go kill,
That he says so? what is his will?
Ye from beneath, I from above,
Ye of this world, I am not thence:
Your sins, said Christ, I cannot love,
In them you dye, departing hence,
Except your faith unfeigned be,
And ye believe that I am he.
Who art thou then, said they again?
The same said he, I told before:
And many things of you remain
To say, and judge, that grieve me sore.
Yet true is he that sent me here,
Whose words to speak I do not fear.
They understood not, he spoke this
To them as of the father then:
When ye lift up the son iwis,
Then shall I be well known to men,
That of my self I do, nor say,
But as my father makes the way.
For he that sent me is with me,
The father left me not alone:
My doings all directs he,
Him please I, and we both are one.
As he spoke these things, many were,
That then believed on him there.
Christ said, to those that did believe,
In my word if ye do abide
Ye my Disciples are, I give
You knowledge of the truth beside,
And the same truth shall make you free,
That are so joined in league with me.
They said we be of Abrahms seed,
And never yet to any bound:
Why say thou then ye shall be freed,
As we had been in slau'rie found?
I say, said he, who so does sin,
Ioh. 8.34. ^am. 6.20. ^. Pet. 2.19.
Sins servant is, it wraps him in.
Of freedom, or the difference between the son and the servant.
^oh. ^.35.
The servant does but soiourne here:
The son does in the house abide.
They that the son shall free, are clear*
And shall be free at every tide.
I know ye are of Abrahms seed,
Ye seek to kill me yet in deed.
And why, in you can take no place
My words, I speak that I have seen
With my father: you void of grace,
With your father to long have been,
Ye follow him, the devil I say,
And therefore seek ye me to slay.
Abrah'm said they, our father is.
Christ said, if ye his children were*
Ye would his works then do, not this,
Ye would to kill me stand in fear,
This did not Abraham, sure I have
Told you the truth, which God me gave.
Your fathers works you do in deed:
They said, of fornication
We were not borne, we are Gods seed,
And other father have we none.
If God were he, ye would love me:
For I came forth from, God said he.
I came not of my self, but sent,
My talk why do you not perceive?
Because my word with good intent,
Ye do not hear nor yet receive. Ioh. 8.44. 1. Ioh. 3.8.

The deu'll your father is, whose lust
You do, and in him only trust.
A murderer he ever was,
And did the truth most deadly hate:
For lies all other he does pass,
This is your fathers dreadful state.
Because I tell the truth said he,
Ye wickedly believe not me.
Who can of sin rebuke me here?
The truth why do ye not believe?
He hears Gods word with much fear, Ioh. 8.47. 1. Ioh. 4.6.

That is of God, and so does live.
Ye hear it not therefore said he,
Because of God none of you be.
The Jews then answering said again,
Samaritan, devil thou have:
I have no devil I tell you plain,
My father whom away ye cast,
I honor, ye dishonor me,
Which your decay no doubt will be.
And I seek not so much my praise,
But there is one that seeks the same:
And judges you, and all your ways,
Whose judgment you may never blame.
The man that keeps my word, I say,
Shall see no death, nor dying day.
A deu'll we know thou have in deed,
For Abraham is dead and gone:
So did the Prophets likewise speed,
And yet thou say, there shall not one
That keeps thy word, death taste or see,
But from his dart thou keepst him free.
Then Abraham which now is dead,
And all the Prophets, dead also,
Whose fame so far abroad was spread,
Art thou greater then they or no?
Whom make thou thy self to be?
Tell us, that we may honor thee.
Jesus said, if I honor me,
My honor is naught worth at all:
My father does the same, said he,
Which you your God in vain do call;
Ye know him not: but him know I,
If I said no, then should I lie.
I know him, and his word I keep,
Your father Abrahm did rejoice,
To see before he fell on sleep,
My day, and so to hear my voice.
He saw it, and thereof was glad:
Ye want the grace your father had.
Thou art not old yet fifty year,
Have thou our father Abrahm seen?
Though this so strange to you appear,
Before he was, I sure have been.
They took up stones to stone him then:
But Jesus hid him from those men.
Christ gave sight to one that was borne blind.
^oh. 9.1.
And as Christ Jesus passed by,
When he out of the Temple went,
Where then the Jews most cruelly,
To stone our Savior Christ had meant.
He saw a blind man by the way,
That had been blind from his birth day.
And his Disciples asked thus,
Oh master, who did sin we pray?
He or his parents, tell it us?
That he is blind, what do thou say?
Then Jesus said, nor they, nor he,
But that all men Gods works might see.
His works, I must work, that sent me,
While it is day, the night comes on: Ioh. 9.5. Cap. 1.9. Cap. 8.12. Cap. 12.35.

I am the light while here I be,
When I go hence, the light is gone:
And so he spat and made the clay,
Which curde his blindness clean that day.
Then Christ said, go, in Siloam wash,
Lo, I have sent thee so to do:
Which when he did, his eyes as glass
Were made as clear, and seeing to.
The neighbors that knew him before,
To see him see, did wonder sore.
Some said, and thought that it was he,
Some other thought him like the same:
But he confessed himself to be,
Borne blind, and spread Christ Jesus fame.
For whom (said he) you Jesus call,
Has made me see, as you see all.
They said, how opened he thine eyes?
Mine eyes he did anoint with clay:
And then he said to me arise,
Go wash the same from thee away.
I washed, and then received sight,
Which never saw before the light.
Where Christ was then, he could not tell,
They brought him to the Pharisees:
Though Christ had done but all things well,
In opening the blind man's eyes,
They chaft, that Christ should work the clay,
To heal him on the Sabbath day.
The Pharisees asked him the same,
He answered, as he did before.
From God (said they) he never came,
That makes not of the Sabbath more.
Some said, how can he sinful be?
That works such works as we do see?
Then asked they the blind again,
Tell us of him what do thou say?
He said he is a Prophet plain,
That wrought this work on me this day.
They scarce believed he had been blind,
Till they had known his parents mind.
Of them his parents were afraid,
Because they had decreed so,
Who so confessed Christ, they said,
Out of their Sinagogue should go.
Our son he is, borne blind he was,
Let him tell how this came to pass.
Then called they the blind again,
And said to God the glory give:
He is a sinner this is plain,
Though he thy grief did so relieve*
I know not if he sinful be:
Once I was blind, and now I see.
How opened he thine eyes, say they?
I told you once, and hard you not?
Would ye his doctrine now obey?
Or else have ye so soon forgot?
They checked him, saying, Moses we,
Not his disciples, sure will be.
God spoke to Moses, this we know,
This man we know not whence he is.
The blind man answered, now I trow,
Ye doubt not that he has done this:
And this to all men may appear,
That God will not a sinner hear.
It was not since the world began,
Hard that his eyes were opened,
That was borne blind; and now a man,
But that of God it happened.
If he were not of God, said he,
He could not have done this for me.
In sins (they said) borne sure thou art,
Do thou teach us what we shall do?
They cast him out: he did depart,
When Jesus heard they had done so,
He said to him, will thou believe,
Now in the son of God and live?
Who is he Lord, that so I may,
Believe in him as thou would have?
It is my self, Christ did then say.
Lord I believe, help me I crave.
Christ said, I make the blind to see, John 9.39. Cap. 3.17. Cap. 12.46*

And seeing blind, that love not me.
Some of the Pharisees were there,
Which hard these words, and thus said then,
Are we blind? how does that appear?
The blind are not such sinful men;
But now ye say that ye do see,
Your sins remain therefore, said he.
Of the true shepherd and the hireling.
^ohn. 10.1.
And that they might the better know
Their state, and so consider his,
Christ in a parable did show
The faithful Shepherd who he is:
The hireling Jesus did bewray,
And thief, that lives upon the pray.
Verily, verily, I do say,
He that into the sheepfold goes,
Beside the door some other way:
May well be counted one of those,
That comes to rob and steal the sheep,
Which other men have charge to keep.
But he that goes in by the door,
Is sure the shepherd of the flock:
To him the porter evermore,
Does open as soon as he does knock;
To call his sheep he does rejoice,
The sheep likewise to hear his voice.
When that his own sheep forth a ^nt,
He goes before: they follow fast,
His voice they know, and what he mea^
Their peril he before does cast.
A stranger they will surely flee,
By voice they know him strange to be.
They understood not all he said,
Therefore Christ said to them again,
My sheep may safely vnaffraid,
Void of all dangers so remain.
I am the door of all my sheep,
And care most safely them to keep.
All that before me came, said he,
(That is, such as I have not sent,
And such as feign them Christ to be)
The thieves and robbers are I meant.
But sure the sheep hear not their voice,
Though to hear mine, my sheep rejoice.
By me (the door) if any do
Enter therein, shall saved be:
He in and out shall freely go,
And pasture find that follows me.
The thief does steal, destroy, and kill,
I came to save my sheep from ill.
I the good shepherd surely am, John. 10.11. Esaias. 40.11. Ezech. 34.23.

That give my life to save my sheep:
An hireling has thereof no shame,
To see the Wolf, and take no keep;
He leaves them: the Wolf does catch,
Destroying one at every snatch.
The hireling flees, he serves for hire,
And therefore cares not for the sheep,
But that the is not my desire:
The good ^pheard takes little sleep,
And I am (...) my sheep I know,
And so (...) known of mine, I trow.
So as the father knows me,
So I do him: and for my sheep
My life I lay down; John. 10.16. Ezech. 37.22.
and there be
Another flock that I must keep:
As yet of this flock are not they,
When I call them, they will obey.
My Father loves me the more,
Because I do my life down lay,
That I might it again restore.
John. 10.18. Esaias. 53.7. Act. 2.24.
No man takes it from me away:
To lay and take I power have,
But this precept my father gave.
Among the Jews dissension grew,
For these his sayings then again:
He should be mad, if some said true,
And have a devil: some other plain
Confessed his words and works to be
No deuillish deeds, to make men see.
Feast of dedication was an. mundi. 3118. 1. King. 8.65. 2. Chro. 7.1.
Three feasts of dedication,
We find in scripture there have been*
The first, solemnized Solomon,
In harvest time this feast was seen.
Then Ezra. 6.16. This feast was anno mundi 3627. anno. 6. Darij Hystapsis reg.
and mensis martij. 3. die.
Ezra next, did keep the same
In Spring, when they from Babell came.
1. Mac. 4.59 This feast was anno mundi. 3967. and mensis December. die. 25.
Then Judas Macchabeus he,
Lastly this feast solemnized
In winter: and the same decree,
Till Christ's time so continued.
When Jesus walked (which took small rest)
In Solomon's porch, this was the feast.
The Jews came there him round about,
If thou be Christ, now tell us plain,
How long do thou keep us in doubt?
Then Jesus answered again;
Ye trust not what I told: yet see
That my works do witness with me.
Yea, ye believe not, for ye are
Not of my sheep: mine hear my voice;
I know them, and for them I care,
To follow me they will rejoice.
Eternal life to them I give,
They perish not, Or in me.
with me they live.
My father which gave them to me,
Is greater then all, this I know.
And in my fathers hand they be,
None can thence take them as I trow.
I and my father sure are one.
The Jews again thought him to stone.
Then Jesus said, good works I have
Showed from my father verily:
For which of them now do I crave,
Would you stone me so cruelly?
For the good work no stone cast we;
Thou being but man, God make thee.
If that the Psalmist Gods them call, Ioh. 10.34. Psalm. 82.6.

To whom Gods word then given was,
The Scripture faultlesse yet withal,
Do I blaspheme? or so trespass?
To say that I Gods son should be?
Sent to the world, as here ye see.
If I do not my fathers works,
Believe me not: but if I do,
In you some hidden hatred lurkes,
That wilfully the truth forgo.
Believe the works that ye do see,
The father works the same by me.
So then ye shall know and believe,
That sure in me the father is:
And I in him, yea he does give
To me all power that is his.
They sought then to put him in bands:
But he escapt out of their hands.
Now when the Jews he escaped fro,
He passed Jordan, then again
Where John Baptized he did go,
And there a while he did remain.
There many did to him resort,
And did receive of him comfort.
Though all Jerusalem of pride,
And deep disdain did Christ refuse,
Yet there where then he did abide,
They did our Savior better use.
What John of him had spoke before,
They knowledgd, praising God the more.
Thus many conflicts Jesus had,
With froward foolish Pharisees:
All which might make his chosen glad,
That he obtaind such victories.
To God let us the honor give.
That did our weakness so relieve.
Give glory unto God on high,
To Father, and so to the Son:
See that the same perpetually,
Unto the holy Ghost be done,
Which is, and was, and so shall be,
One mighty God in persons three. Amen.
THE FIFTH PART OF THE HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST,
containing those things which he did the fourth year after his Baptism, which
was the three and thirtieth year of his age, according to the four
Evangelists: the year after the creation of the world. 4174.
To the tune of the Lords Prayer.
The time of Christ's departure approaching, he confirmed himself to go to
Jerusalem.
WHen Christ had now accomplished Luc. 9.51.

The time appointed him before,
And that his death then hastened,
He did prepare himself therefore:
His mind he fully settled tho,
Thence to Jerusalem to go.
Wherefore he did before him send,
A lodging for him to prepare,
Of such as did him then attend,
Which they did with exceeding care.
Within Samaria entered they,
Into a town for to puruey.
But the Samaritans in deed,
Their message would not then receive,
When him and his they (with such speed)
Go to Jerusalem perceive.
This was the cause, for all their care,
They could no lodging there prepare.
When John and James that then were sent,
Saw they could not provided be:
Shall we said they, incontinent,
Command as did Elias he,
That fire come down from heaven hye,
And so consume them utterly?
Jesus rebuking them, did say,
Know ye not yet what men ye are?
The son of man came not to slay,
But save men's lives, whereof have care.
So to another town they went,
For then the day was almost spent.
Christ's answer to the Scribe that would have followed him.
A Scribe came then to Christ and said,
Luc. 9.57. Math. 8.19.
Oh master I will follow thee.
For answer he was not delayed;
The foxes have their holes ye see,
And fowls their neasts, said he, but I
Have not a place wherein to lie.
Christ's answer to the Disciple that would go bury his father first.
Luc. 9.59.
But to another Christ said then,
Come thou forthwith and follow me:
Thus calls he us mortal men,
Whom when, and how best likes he.
Ioh. Calvin. in Cap Math. 8. verse. 21.
My duty first discharge must I,
To my old father till he dye.
And Jesus said to him again,
Let thou the dead their dead bury:
For my Disciple must remain,
And do his office carefully.
Go thou therefore abroad, I say,
Preach the kingdom of God always.
Christ's answer to a third that would follow him, but would first ^^d his
household farewell.
Another said, ^^e follow thee, Luc. 9.61.

But first I must go bid farewell,
To such as be in house with me;
But Jesus said, be does not well,
That to the plough does put his hand,
And looks back, and lets it stand.
Christ sent forth the seventy Disciples to preach.
After these things appointed he, Luc. 10.1. Math. 10.1.

Of his Disciples seventy mo,
That still were wont with him to be,
And sent them forth by awd two,
Where he would come, before they went,
To do and teach, as they were sent.
The harvest is surely said he,
Now very great, yet few I say,
Do labor in the same, pray ye
The Lord thereof to send away
Some laborers for to take pain,
That by his harvest he may gain.
Behold, I send you, go away,
As lambs among the wolves ye be:
As simple as the doves, I say,
And as the Serpent wise be ye.
Do in your journey take no care,
What weeds ye were, or how ye fare.
What house, or City ye come to,
Among the worthy there remain,
Till you from thence have cause to go,
Let them with you my peace retain.
Such as do not deserve this grace,
Shake of their As a witness that you have ^^t of theirs as much as the dust.
dust in the same place.
This dust shall witness against those,
That you desired not their wealth;
And that they earthly treasure chose,
Luc. 10.11. Math. 10.14. Act. 13.51. Cap. 18.6.
Before this proffred saving health.
And in the judgment they shall gain,
Of Sodom and Gomorh the pain.
Chorazin woe be unto thee,
And to Bethsayda woe likewise:
The great works that were done by me
In you, ye greatly did despise:
If they in Tyrus had been done,
They had repented long agone.
If Tire and Sydon had, I say,
Both seen and heard what ye do hear,
Sackcloth and ashes every day
Had been their weed: you buy it dear,
For at the judgment, then to thee,
To them it shall more easy be.
Thou Capernaum lift so hye,
Yea raised up to heaven above,
To hell thou shall be brought to lie,
Because my works thee never move:
If they in Sodom had been wrought,
It had not yet been brought to naught.
For Sodom it shall easier be,
(Oh Capernaum be thou sure)
At the great judgment, then for thee,
The punishment for to endure.
Tire, Sydon, and Sodom shall have,
More ease then these, though then ye crave.
He that does hear you, hears me:
He that despises you also
Despises me, and likewise he
Despises God whom I came fro.
They do aright in God rejoice,
That in his Preachers hear his voice.
The seventy returned, and told Christ all that they had done.
The seu'ntie did return with joy, Luc. 10.17.

And told the Lord what they had done:
The devils (said they) could none annoy
Or hurt, where we to preach begone:
For every where we through thy name,
His rage and fury soon did tame.
Christ said, I Satan did behold,
Like lightning down from heaven fall:
To you I power give (be bold)
To tread on Serpents great or small,
And Scorpions: yea the enemy
shall not hurt you assuredly.
In this yet do not ye rejoice,
T^^t spirits to you subject are,
But lift both hands, both heart, and voice
To God which has of you such care.
That he your names has written sure,
In heaven, for ever to endure.
Luc. 10.21. Math. 11.25.
Then Jesus said, I give to thee,
Oh mighty Lord and father dear,
Most hearty thanks, thou hear me,
And to my call thou give ear:
These things thou hidest from the wise,
Their worldly wit thou do despise.
Thy secrets unto babes withal,
And humble men thou do declare:
These do on thee for mercy call,
These, these oh God thy chosen are.
This thy good pleasure was, and is,
Oh father, none can alter this.
All things to me now given are
Of my father, the son, and he,
No mortal man can well declare
The one of them, except he be
Taught by the son, and so he may
Learn both to know, this is the way.
To his Disciples turned he,
And secretly to them did say,
The eyes are blessed that do see,
As ye do see, now at this day.
Prophets and Kings wished to see so
And here what you do long ago.
A Scribe or Lawyer tempting Christ, was answered hi^ question, and taught who
his neighbor was.
Luc. 10.25. Math. 22.35. Mar. 12.28.
A certain Lawyer stood up then,
And tempting Christ began to say:
Oh master, thou do teach these men,
To everlasting life the way.
Vouchsafe to tell it I do crave,
Eternal life how I may have.
What is written said Christ again?
And in the law what do thou read?
Thou shall (said he) with Or all the strength.
every vain
The Lord thy God both love and dread:
And next the Lord thy God above,
Thy neighbor, thou shall likewise love.
Thou have said well* said Christ in deed,
Go thou and do th^^* thou shall live:
But he in hope of better speed,
A new assault to Christ would give.
Who is my neighbor then said he?
This thing I would feign learn of thee.
Then Jesus answering, said so,
A certain man went by the way
That leads down From Jerusalem.
to Jericho,
Where among thieves he fell that day:
Robbed, and wounded, there he was,
And left half dead so on the grass.
By chance a Priest came by that way,
Which when he saw him, passed by:
Likewise a Leuite where he lay,
Did look on him, and let him lie.
But a Samaritan by chance,
Came by, and saw him in his trance.
Which sight, so moving then his heart,
He took on him compassion:
Whereof before he did depart,
He made full declaration.
He powered in (and also bound)
Both wine and oil into his wound.
And not contented yet with this,
He set him up, on his own beast,
And brought him to an inn of his,
Where he provided for his rest:
And on the morrow ere he went,
He told the host his whole intent.
Lo take these two pence that I give,
Have care of this man I thee pray:
His wants therewith do thou relieve,
What more he spends, I will thee pay.
Which think thou now of these three,
To him most neighbor* like to be?
The Lawyer answering, did say,
The merciful was even he.
Go thou said Christ, then hence away,
And do as this man teaches thee;
To every one in misery,
Show thou like liberality.
Marie and Martha entertain Christ.
^c. 10.38.
Now as they further passed on,
Into a certain town they came,
Where was the habitation,
Of one that Martha had to name:
Who to her house received tho,
Christ and those that with him did go.
Her sister, Marie men did call,
Which also sat at Jesus feet
And heard his preaching as then all
Most heedfully, as it was meet.
But Martha was most busily
Providing for the company.
Martha therefore to Jesus said,
Master regardest not thou this?
That all the care on me is laid,
And that my sister sitting is?
Bid her therefore that she help me,
So shall thou better served be.
And Jesus answered her again,
Oh Martha, Martha thou have care,
For many things put thee to pain,
And helpers very needful are:
The good It shall not be taken from her.
part Marie chose in deed,
And she there after sure shall speed.
Christ rising from prayer, was requested of one of his Disciples, to teach
them, as John taught his Disciples, to pray.
As Jesus was praying with his, Luc. 11.1.

In the desert as some suppose,
Which unto Ephraim nearest is,
And from his prayers as he rose,
Of his Disciples one, did say,
Teach us (as John taught his) to pray.
He soon of him had his request,
He was not long enforced to crave:
Christ's readiness, this well expressed,
As he to them example gave:
In their distress both night and day,
That they (as he them taught) should pray.
Our father which in heaven art,
Thy name be ever sanctified:
Thy kingdom come: withal my heart,
I wish the same accomplished.
Thy will in earth be done we pray,
As thine, in heaven do it always.
Our daily bread give us this day,
Our sins also to us forgive:
As we our debtors do, I say,
That us in any wise do grieve.
Let us by no illusion,
Be lead into temptation.
But Lord, from evil us defend,
And graciously deliver all:
That we which do on thee depend,
By frailty from thee never fall.
Grant these requests (oh Lord) we pray,
To us and thy whole Church always. Amen.
Moreover Christ unto them said,
Which of you all shall have a friend,
And shall when he in bed is laid,
Have cause to go to him, or send,
And say a friend to me is come,
Bread I have none now lend me some.
And he within should answer so,
Why do thou trouble me I say,
I pray thee to some other go,
I must at this time say thee nay;
The door is shut, my children be
In bed, I cannot come to thee.
I say though he would not arise,
Nor thee regard as should a friend,
Yet when he sees thee in such wise,
Importunat he will thee lend*
Of bread or meat what thou do crave,
Or what thy need requires to have.
Ask then it shall be given thee, Luc. 11.9. Math. 7.7. Cap. 21.22. Mar.
11.24. John. 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Iam. 1.5.

And they that seek, shall surely find,
Knock, I will open then, said he,
For God to them that call is kind:
He loves such men verily,
As pray unto him heartely.
If you for bread, give not a stone,
Nor for a fish, a serpent send,
When that your sons for want do moan;
If good things you do give and lend,
How much more shall the father he,
Give good gifts if thou ask, to thee?
Christ cast out a devil, and the dumb man spoke.
Then they brought unto Jesus one, Luc. 11.14.

Possessed with a devil, that day,
And him for help they call upon,
The man was dumb withal* I say.
Though these impediments had he,
Yet with a word, Christ made him free.
The multitude amazed were,
And p^a^^ed God with heart and voice:
The son said they of David here,
Does give us cause for to rejoice;
And now assured all we be,
That Christ the Lord* the same is he.
A woman that his works did see,
And heard how he taught great and small,
^^id, blessed is the womb that bare thee,
And pappes that gave thee suck withal.
But Christ said, blessed they rather are,
That Gods word hear, and keep with care.
The Jews required asigne.
Luc. 11.29. Math. 12.38.
Christ to the people said again,
This wicked generation,
Adulterous and very vain,
Though signs they do depend upon,
No sign to them shall given be,
But that of Jonas they shall see.
Luc. 11.30. Jonas. 1.17. Cap. 2.10.
As to the Ninevites was he,
That three days in the Whale did lie:
The son of man shall shortly be,
The like to these assuredly:
The sign that Jonas to them gave,
I shall give these, so long in grave.
The men of Niniuie shall rise,
And these condemn assuredly:
Luc. 11.32. Iam. 3.5.
They did not Jonas words despise,
But did repent immediately.
A greater then Jonas is here,
Yet small repentance does appear.
Luc. 11.31. 1. King 10.1. 2. Chron. 9.1.
The Queen of Saba she shall rise
In judgment with these men also:
And them she shall condemn likewise,
That so far from her home would go,
To hear king Solomon: I say,
His greater you do hear this day.
Christ dining with one of the Pharisees, and misliked for eating with unwashed
hands, answered them, and rebuked their hypocrisy.
Luc. 11.37.
As Jesus taught the people then,
There came to him a Pharisie,
Requesting him and all his men,
To dine with him immediately.
Then he went in with him to meat,
And sitting down, began to eat.
But when the Pharisie did see,
That Christ sat down, unwashed before,
He maruaild what the cause might be,
For they did use it evermore.
They sit not down at all to meat,
But first they wash before they eat.
Indeed said Christ to him again, To drink wine in a cup unwashed, defiles
not a man, but to drink wine gotten by fraud, or for excess, and no^ of
necessity defiles a man.

Ye do make clean the utter side
Of cup or platter, all in vain,
Bewraying still your foolish pride:
But they within are not the less,
Of bribrie full, and all excess.
Ye fools made not the very same,
The inside and the out also?
Give alms therefore, and leave for shame,
To be so tied your toys unto.
Relieve the poor when they do crave,
And clean shall be all that ye have.
Woe be to you ye Scribes, I say,
And Pharisees so full of guile:
Ye hypocrites is this the way,
To cloak your cursed craft so vile?
Ye keep the least the law does will,
And leave the great things unkept still.
Mint, Annise, and Cummin tith'd be,
And waightier matters left alone;
The law commands these to thee,
But last of all to think upon.
For judgment, mercy, and faith are
The chiefest things should be your care.
Woe be to you ye Scribes also,
The highest seats ye all do love
In Synagogues, and where ye go,
And that men in the markets move
With reverence to greet you there,
Or give you place, and praise elsewhere.
Woe be to you, for sure ye be,
Like painted tombs in outward sight,
Appearing fair, to them that see
No part within, how they are dight.
For dead men's bones lie there doubtless,
Within them full; and filthiness.
A Lawyer answered him again,
Oh master, thou in saying so,
Rebukest us likewise as vain,
And subject with them to like woe.
Christ said to him it cannot be,
That you of all men should go free.
For heavy burdens ye do bind,
And on men's shoulders them do lay,
Most grievous to be borne in mind,
Intolerable every way:
But you your selves will not once prove,
With any finger them to move.
Woe be to you that build so brave
The Prophets tombs that were before,
And garnish outwardly each grave
Of righteous men now more and more.
And more then that, you verily
Thus utter your iniquity.
If we had been alive, ye say,
In our forefathers time, had we
Consented so to be the day,
That so much blood then spilt should be?
No, no, the Prophets should not so
Have di'de or suffered any woe.
So then ye are as witnesses
Unto your selves, how that ye be
Their children (as ye do confess)
That murdered them: therefore do ye
What lacked of their cruelty,
Perform with all dexterity.
God said, behold, I will you send
Both Prophets, and Apostles sure,
To see if that you will amend,
Yet you will not their words endure:
You will them kill and crucify,
And persecute most busily:
That on you all the blood may come,
Which was shed upon earth, I say,
From righteous Abell Adams son,
To Zacharias blood, which lay
Between the temple verily,
And the Altar, slain cruelly.
Martha and Marie sent Jesus word that their brother Lazarus was sick.
Lazarus sure as then did lie
Sore sick, and near his death indeed: Ioh. 11.1.

This man he dwelt in Bethany,
His sisters both of him took heed:
Martha the first, then Marie she,
They were beloved of Christ all three.
(Christ's feet anointed Mary sure, Ioh. 12.3.

And wiped with her hair the same:
The oil was costly, sweet and pure,
Her fact Christ did defend from blame:)
These women did for Jesus send,
And said, come help thy sickly friend.
This sickness Jesus then did say,
(Is for Gods glory) not to death:
The son of God must by this way,
(Who takes and gives men life and breath)
Assure your selves be glorified,
Which thing Christ shortly verified.
Now Jesus loved Martha well,
Her sister and her brother to:
Yet he there after this did dwell
Two days ere he to them would go:
And did as he had done before,
There, heal and teach men more and more.
The Pharisees question of diuorcement and marriage, answered of Christ.
Math. 19.1. Mar. 10.1.
As Christ departed Galily,
And to Judea came again:
And as he passed Jordan by,
While in that coast he did remain,
As graciously he used to deal,
Their sick and lame he there did heal.
Then came to him the Pharisie,
Full fraughted both in heart and mind
With craft and cloakt hypocrisy,
Hoping in Christ some fault to find:
But still for all their taken toil,
The Pharisees received the foil.
May man his wife, Sir, put away
For every cause he can devise?
Have ye not read, then Christ did say,
(Or Gods decree do ye despise?)
That they were male and female framed, Math. 19.^ Genesis 1.27.

When Adam the first man was named?
Therefore a man shall love his wife, Math. 19.5* Genesis 2.24. 1. Cor. 6.16.
Ephesians. 5.31.

Though he his father should forsake:
With her he needs must lead his life,
They both by promise that they make
Become one flesh; and so remain,
Though they in persons still are twain.
Let no man put a sunder then,
All such as God has coupled so, Math. 19.7. Deuteronomy. 24.1.

Though Moses have allowed some men
Their married wives for to forgo:
From the beginning (sure I say)
It was not as it is this day.
Truly for whoredom she may be Math. 19.^ Cap. 5.32. Mar. 10.11* Luc. 16.18.
1. Cor. 7.11.

Divorced, and so may the man,
If he commit adultery,
Nor afterward well mary can:
For which of both this part does play,
Should single live, till death say nay.
If it be so, of man and wife, Said his Dis^ples. Christ's answ^^

It were not good to mary then:
Yet some so borne, chaste lead their life:
Some are made chaste also by men.
Some chaste themselves, who can perceive,
Let him this doctrine so receive.
Jesus among other other things that he taught his Disciples, declared unto
them the parable of the rich man that so much delighted and trusted in his
riches.
While Jesus his Disciples taught,
Luke. 12.1. Mat. 16.5. Mark. 8.14.
The Leaven of the Pharisie
To shun with care, for it was naught.
He called it Hypocrisy,
And willed them to teach openly,
What he had taught them privately.
Fear ye not man, but God, said he,
Before men likewise me confess,
And you shall well assured be,
I will to you like love express:
Before Gods Angels verily,
I will confess you constantly.
Blasphemous words avoid withal,
And for your selves take ye no care,
God will hear you when ye shall call,
Of him your hairs all numbered are.
When Princes vex you for my sake,
In worth do you your troubles take.
Then said one of the company,
Master, command I do pray thee,
The living now immediately,
My brother may divide with me.
A Judge, or a deuider who
Made me, said Christ, I should do so?
Wherefore said Christ to them again,
Take heed beware of greediness,
Abundance here is all but vain,
It works man but heaviness;
A man for all his riches may
Prolong his life, no, not a day.
The grounds of a rich man, said he,
Brought him forth fruits most plenteously,
Therefore he thought, what then might be
Done, in such great prosperity.
I have (said he) no room to lay
My fruits, such store I have to day.
This thing (said he) sure will I do,
I will now all my barnes down pull,
And greater build: and thereunto
Gather my fruits, till they be full;
I have devised this therefore,
Because my grounds do yield such store.
I to my soul will also say,
Soul, thou have much goods laid in store
For many years: live now I may
At more ease then I did before:
From henceforth soul eat, drink and play,
This work shall thou do every day.
But God said unto him again,
Thou fool, this night i will fetch from thee,
That soul of thine, that is so vain,
Whose then shall all thy riches be?
So shall it ever be with those,
That too much trust in wealth repose.
Therefore take you no thought I say,
How you shall make provision,
But give your selves to learn the way,
That leads to salvation
Alms, watching, and all wisdom ye
Shall use, and with all men agree.
The parable of the watchful servant. Luke 12.42. Math. 24.45.

A faithful servant and a wise,
Made ruler of his masters men,
His masters trust will not despise,
But feeds them in season then
When he is absent; as he were,
Still present with his servants there.
That servant happy is in deed,
Whom his master when he does come,
Shall find so doing, he shall speed,
Be sure of some especial room.
His master will make him therefore,
Ruler of all he has in store.
But if the evil servant say,
My master will not come as yet,
And smite his fellows day by day,
And still with drunkards drink and eat,
His master will come, when that he
Expects not him for to see.
And will cut him of from the rest,
And give to him his portion
With hypocrites, this is the least,
That after condemnation
He shall both weep and gnash for woe,
His teeth that he applied so.
Wake therefore, and be wary men,
For ye know not what hour or day
Your master comes, least sleeping then
You with the reprobates decay.
And watch that with th'elected sort
Received ye be, to your comfort.
Christ received infants brought unto him and blessed them.
Mar. 10.13. Math. 19.13. Luc. 18.15.
At that time some did children bring,
That Christ his hands on them should lay:
But his Disciples did the thing
Dislike, and would have said them nay.
But Jesus said, forbid not these,
For such my heavenly father please.
Assuredly to you I say,
Gods kingdom who receives not
As does a child, there shall not stay,
Of him no place may there be got.
In arms Christ took the infants tho,
And blessed them and let them go.
Christ conferred with a rich young man, that would be justified by the law.
When Jesus was gone on the way, Mar. 10.17. Math. 19.16. Luc. 18.18.

There came one after him apace:
Which kneeling down, to him did say,
Good master show me so much grace,
That I may know, how I may have
Eternal life good Lord I crave.
Then Jesus answered him again,
Why do thou call me good, said he?
There is none good, this thing is plain,
Save God alone, I tell it thee:
Eternal life thou may not see,
If broken these commaund'ments be.
Thou shall not kill, by word or deed, Mar. 10.19. Exodus 20.13. Deuteronomy. 5.17.
Romans 13.9.

Nor yet commit adultery:
Thou shall not steal, for all thy need:
False witness, is plain treachery.
Thy parents honor, not for pelf:
Thy neighbor love thou, as thy self.
I have, said he, observed all
That thou command from my youth:
What lack I yet, before I shall
Have life, I pray thee tell me truth?
Sell all, if thou will perfect be,
And give the poor that want by thee.
This made the young man very sad,
Who then with sorrow went away:
The great possessions that he had,
His fervent zeal did soon allay.
The rich t'enioy eternal bliss,
Said Jesus, sure a hard thing is.
Whereat amazed as they were,
And thought that few could saved be:
Christ said to them, do you not fear,
But mark and listen unto me,
What men impossible do take,
God possible the same can make.
Life everlasting, promised to all them that follow Christ.
^ar. 10.28. ^ath. 19.27. ^uc. 18.28.
Then Peter said, we follow thee
Forsaking all: what shall we have?
When I in throne of majesty
Shall sit: though you do nothing crave,
Upon twelve thrones you shall sit by,
And judge all Israel certainly.
For who so shall his house forsake,
His parents, or what other friend
For my name: and does well it take,
Or wife, or wealth, what God does lend,
The same an hundredth fold shall he
^ath. 19.30. ^^p. 20.16. ^ar. 10 31. ^uc. 13.30.
Enjoy, and life eternal see.
And Christ pronounced in this place,
That many first should be the last:
And that the last obtaining grace,
Should be the first; the first outcast;
And that this sentence is certain,
By parable Christ made it plain.
The parable of the laborers sent to the vineyard.
The kingdom sure of heaven, is so, Math. 20.1.

Much like to a houshoulder hear,
That to hire laborers would go,
As Soon as day light did appear:
With whom for pence he did agree,
All day to work, this was their fee.
About the third hour of the day,
When he came to the market place,
The idle thence he sent away
Into his farm, to work apace.
Likewise the sixth and ninth hour he
With other more did so agree.
Again th'eleu'nth hour there he found,
Some other idle standing by:
Go hence he said to my farm ground,
Why stand vee thus so idly?
No man has hired us, you see.
Go to my Vineyard, then said he.
When eeuen came, the master said
Unto his steward, call them soon:
For I would have the workmen paid,
That all this day my work have done;
Begin and pay the last of all,
As he is served, the other shall.
A penny then each of them had,
From last, to first, as he did go:
Which made the first men very sad,
They thought their pay should not be so.
Go to said he, this is your hire,
You may no more of me require.
This parable may teach us all,
(As Peter) true humility,
Not to presume on Christ to call.
As meriting felicity:
Least we of first the last may be,
And last be first in each degree.
The cruelty of Pylate toward certain Galileaas, and of the Tower of Siloam.
When Christ had ended thus the same,
Which never shunned any pain,
Though in Judea was a fame,
That he should of the Jews be slain,
He went about his fathers will,
Therefore the Jews sought him to kill.
Then some told him how cruelly,
Those Galileans used were,
Whom Pylate caused for to die,
Without respect he slew them there,
And mingled with their sacrifice
Their blood; which was a strange device.
Then Jesus said, suppose ye these
Were greater sinners then the rest?
I tell you nay, your sins doubtless,
May cause that you shall so be dressed.
So of the eighteen whom the tower
Of Siloam slew, all in an hour.
The parable of the barren Fig tree.
^uc. 13.6.
This parable Christ did declare;
A certain man a Fig tree had,
Which for three years he still found bare,
When fruit would make the owner glad.
Come Gardener, cut down said he,
Why are we combred with this tree?
The Gardener then said again,
Lord let it stand this year also,
Till I once more have taken pain,
To dig it round, and dung it to;
If then no fruit this tree do bear,
It shall no longer tarry there.
Christ healed a woman that had had a spirit of infirmity xviiij. years, and
was so bowed together, that she could not lift up her self.
As Christ taught on a Sabbath day, Luc. 13.10.

A woman whose infirmity
Had bowed her long, she could no way,
Lift up her self, then certainly.
Christ said be loosd of thy disease,
Laying on his hand, she straight found ease.
The ruler of the Synagogue,
Was filled with indignation,
As if his conscience had a clogge,
Or of a proud presumption;
Six days ye may well healed be,
And rest the Sabbath day, said he.
Then said the Lord, thou hypocrite,
Do ye not on the Sabbath day,
Your ox and ass without respite,
Loose from the stall and drive away?
And should not This daughter of Abraham
she whom Satan bound,
The Sabbath day go safe and sound?
When Christ said this, his enemy
Was sore ashamed, and the rest
Rejoicing, did God glorify,
Which by their words was well expressed:
For they gave God the only praise,
That wrought such works in those their days.
The parable of the mustard seed, and of the leaven.
Luc. 13.18. Math. 13.31. Mar. 4 31.
What is the kingdom of God like?
Or whereto shall I it compare?
(Christ saw that some did not mislike
His deeds, and doctrine which were rare)
It is like to a mustard seed,
That man does sow, to serve his need.
This seed of seeds though sure the least,
Yet sown, it waxes to a tree,
Wherein the little birds may neast,
As oftentimes we do them see.
Or leaven in three peckes of flower,
Till all be leauend and made sour.
This mustard seed, that is so small,
And therefore subject to disdain:
And eke the leaven there withal,
Does signify Christ's Gospel plain;
Gods word though weak it seem to be,
Works great effects in some we see.
The parable of the strait and broad way.
^uc. 13.22. Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6.
And as through every town he went,
And taught going to Jerusalem:
That few be saved is it meant,
Said they? thus answered Christ to them;
The strait gate strive to enter to,
Though many fail that so would do.
The goodman of the house when he
Is risen up and shuts the gate,
Your might or merit little be,
To cry Lord open, is to late.
Luc. 13.27. Psalm. 6.8. Math. 7.23. Cap 25.41.
Depart says he, hence speedily,
You workers of iniquity.
We eaten have, say you again,
And drunk, oh Lord, so often with thee,
And thou have taught us, but in vain.
Depart (says he) away from me.
Your sins are only cause of this,
That you shall loose eternally bliss.
There ye then weeping all shall be,
And gnashing of your teeth full sore,
When Abraham in heaven ye see,
And ye shut out, as is before.
The Patriarks, and the Prophets, rest
In heaven above, for they are blessed.
And many shall come from the East,
And from the North, and South also:
And many likewise from the West,
The heavenly kingdom come unto:
And then the first, the last shall be, Luc. 13.30. Math. 19.30* Cap. 20.16.
Mar 10.31.

And so the last, first you shall see.
Christ called Herod a soxe, and cried against Jerusalem.
The Pharisees to Christ did say, Luc. 13.31.

King Herod doubtless will thee kill:
Depart therefore and get away,
Ere he do work on thee his will.
Thus would they seem his friends to be,
That sought his death as well as he.
Go tell the fox, said Christ, from me,
Behold, I cast out deu'ls to day,
And eke to morrow I make free
And heal the sick that do me pray.
The third day I do make an end,
I care not what the fox intend.
To morrow as to day I must,
And yet the third day walk also:
It cannot be, you may give trust
To this that now declare I do,
Save at Jerusalem alone,
Shall of the Prophets perish none.
Luc. 13.34. Math. 23.37.
Jerusalem that often do kill,
And stone those that are sent to thee,
Thy childrens good I wished still,
Yet can not thou thy saftie see:
But from thee when I shall be rest,
Thy house then desolate is left.
Christ healed one of the dropsy on the Sabbath day.
Luc. 14.1.
Again as Jesus would eat meat
With one of the chief Pharisees,
They friendly seem him to entreat,
To color out some brave devise:
Their snares and traps for him they lay,
And watch him on the Sabbath day.
Behold, a certain man was there,
Infected with a dropsy sore:
Some Lawyers there at that time were,
Which watched him so much the more.
Christ asked if it lawful be,
The man on that day to make free.
They held their peace: for to reprove
His words and deeds they did intend:
The matter he no more did move,
But healed him, and made an end.
Who does said Christ his ox espy
In pit, this day, and lets him lie?
Christ forbad men to press for the highest rooms at feasts, taught men
lowliness, and to use liberality unto the poor.
A parable Christ Jesus spoke* Luc. 14.7.

When he the guests had marked well,
How each the highest room would take.
See that (says Christ) you do not mell
With chiefest rooms, when you are bid,
Least thence your betters do you rid.
When thou art bidden to a feast, Luc. 14.10. Prou. 25.5.

Go and sit lowest in the place:
Then says the Or he that bad thee. Luc. 14.11. Cap. 18.14. Math. 23.12.
master, come my guest,
Sit higher up; this gives grace:
For who so him exalts hye,
Shall be brought low reprochfully.
When thou do make a feast, command
To call the poor, the maimed, the lame,
And blind, to such stretch forth thy hand,
This will gain thee deserved fame:
And thou thy recompense, this trust,
Shall have in heaven, among the just.
And one of them that then there sat,
Said he is blessed that eats bread
In heaven, and happy are their state,
That their lives there might always lead.
In heaven as (this man does confess)
Sure rests all true happiness.
Christ declared how a certain man made a great supper, and bade many: of the
excuses of certain guestes, and their unworthiness.
Luke. 14.16. Mat. 22.2. Reu. 19.9.
Christ Jesus said, a certain man
Made a great supper or a feast.
Come ye as soon now as ye can,
His servants said unto each guest:
For all things are now ready made,
To welcome whom our master bade.
But they began to make excuse:
The first said, I have bought a farm,
I must go see it, as they use,
Thou may excuse me without harm.
The next, of Oxen bought yokes five,
And must go prove how they do thrive.
The third had married then a wife,
Sure he might well excused be:
For he was bound to lead his life
With her, and live no longer free.
You know what wilful men deserve,
All their excuses may not serve.
The servants told their master, these
Whom thou have bid, come not at all:
Which did him very much displease,
And said, another sort go call;
Go bid the poor, the lame, the blind,
And such as in the streets ye find.
The servants said, Lord, it is done,
Yet there are rooms unfurnished.
In the high ways seek some out soon,
That my house be replenished:
For those men that were bid before,
Shall never taste my supper more.
Then to the multitude that went Luc. 14.26. Math. 10.37. Cap. 16.24.

With him, Christ turned back, and said;
If any man with good intent,
Come after me, now vnaffrayd,
He must hate father and each friend,
To bear my cross unto the end.
Who means to build a stately tower, Luc. 14.28.

And does not cast the cost before,
He may repent him in that hour,
When he can make thereof no more:
Or when he hears one mocking say,
This man did work well for a day.
What king also will purpose war, Luc. 14.31.

Ere he know what his strength may prove:
And will not rather send so far,
And see if he some peace may move?
He my Disciple that will be,
Forsaking all, must follow me.
And sure what salt this earth does yield, Luc. 14.34. Math. 5.13. Mar. 9.50.

If in the same no savor be,
It does no good in house or field,
Men cast it out at doors we see.
In salt of man, this does appear,
He that has ears to hear, may hear.
The parable of the lost sheep and the groat.
Then to Christ Jesus did resort, Luc. 15.1.

Both Publicans and sinners to:
Such in his doctrine found comfort,
As still the penitent may do.
The Scribes and Pharisees disdained,
That Christ with sinners so remained.
Then Jesus said, I came to save
That which my dearest blood must cost:
How think ye if a rich man have
An hundred sheep, if one be lost,
Will he not leave the rest behind,
And seek that one till that he find?
Or else, what woman does not so,
If she ten silver pieces had,
And loose but one, will she not go
Search till she find, and found is glad?
The Angels joy as these in heart,
When that one sinner does convert.
The history of the prodigal son.
Luc. 15.11.
Moreover, mark ye this, said he,
Two sons a certain rich man had,
Who cared much that they might be
A cause to make his last age glad.
The younger led by lust, would go
To travel far, his father fro.
Wherefore he to his father said,
Give me that is my portion:
My suite, let it not be denayd,
But make a just division.
His substance he divided tho,
And gave him his, and let him go.
This younger son did gather all
His father gave, and went away,
From place to place as did befall,
In countries strange, this son did stray:
Till riot wasted all his wealth,
As whordome had impaird his health.
When he had spent all wilfully,
There rose a dearth throughout the land,
And he there pincht with penury,
Was forced to go then out of hand
To serve, nor durst the man repine,
To keep and feed his masters swine.
Where often for want of better food,
Husks with the swine this youth did eat,
And then the same thought very good,
For no man gave him better meat:
And sometimes in his misery,
He wanted husks assuredly.
Then came he to himself, and said,
How many hired servants be,
That find my fathers house an aid,
And there have meat enough said he,
While I do live thus lothsomely,
And near for hunger daily dye?
I will unto my father go,
And say to him, I sinned have
Against both heaven and thee also,
Forgive me father now I crave,
And me receive yet I thee pray,
No son but servant from this day.
So he unto his father went,
Who did his son from far espy,
And ran to him incontinent,
Much pitying his misery.
And then upon his neck he fell,
And kissed him, that he loved so well.
The son then to his father there,
Said I have sinned against thee,
And am not worthy to be here,
Or called thy son that I should be:
For heaven and earth can witness this,
That I have run my race amiss.
The father said his servants to,
Bring forth my best robe unto me,
To put on him, this ring also,
And shoes on his feet, I will see:
The fat calfe kill, and make us meat,
That this my son, and we, may ear,
For this my son of late was dead,
And now he is alive again:
The lost, I found, so well I sped,
He shall henceforth with me remain.
This they performed speedily,
And past the time most merrily.
Abroad the elder brother was,
And coming home, he heard a noise,
Yet knew not who was in the place,
Nor why his father did rejoice:
He only heard the mynstrelsie,
With dancing, and much melody.
He called, and bad a servant come,
And tell him what all those things meant*
Thy brother is said he come home,
And was received incontinent:
Thy father spares for no cost,
To welcome him that late was lost.
All angry when he heard the same,
He would not in unto them go:
Therefore to him his father came,
Requesting him not to do so.
Now he unto his son does stand
(That should command) with cap in hand.
The son his father answered,
I have unto thee service done,
Yet have thou not considered,
How though I were thy eldest son,
And many years now night and day,
I still at thy command did stay;
Yet all this time I never had,
A kid of thee that I might spend,
When I was willing to be glad,
And welcome any honest friend:
Yet thou the fat calfe killed have,
For him that worse thy goods did wast.
Son unto him again, said he,
All that I have is thine in deed:
Thou ever did abide with me,
And shall therefore the better speed;
Yet should we joy and merry be,
The dead alive, and lost to see.
The parable of the unjust Steward. Luc. 16.1.

And Christ to his Disciples then,
Said that a certain rich man had
A Steward, charged by some men,
That he did use his office bad:
For he (said they) does day by day,
Consume and wast thy wealth away.
He called him, and said withal,
How do I hear this ill of thee?
For thine accounts I needs must call,
Thou may no longer Steward be.
The Steward then began to muse,
How he might best the matter use.
What shall I do? my master will
Mine office take from me away:
I cannot dig nor delue but ill,
And beg for shame I never may;
Wherefore I must devise, said he,
That I of some received be.
His masters debtors he did call,
And asked the first, what owe thou?
Declare at once the sum of all,
For I must loose mine office now.
Of oil an hundredth measures he
Confessed, at least, his debts to be.
The Steward said to him again,
Upon thy bill down fifty lay:
The next in debted did remain,
And hundredth measures, he did say,
Of wheat, to whom the Steward said,
Write fourscore down, be not affrayd.
The Stewards wisdom Christ did praise,
Though he unjustly dealt in deed:
For when he knew none other ways,
He this deuisd, to help his need.
The worldlings in their kind, said he,
Are wiser then the godly be.
Make you so friends, Christ to them said,
With riches of iniquity:
That when ye want, they may give aid,
And then receive you readily.
The just or unjust in the small,
Will prove the very same in all.
If then ye have not faithful been
In wicked riches, who will trust,
That you (whose trial men have seen)
In treasures true may be found just?
If false to other men ye were,
Who shall give you that yours is there?
Two masters well no man can serve, Luc. 16.13. Math. 6.24.

For truly he the one will hate,
And for the other love reserve,
This of man's life is right the state:
God and your riches disagree,
They may not both then served be.
All these things heard the Pharisees,
Whose greediness was very great:
They mocked Christ, for fantasies
They do account his words as yet.
Before men ye, you justify,
Though fraught with foul hypocrisy.
Gods kingdom suffers violence, Luc. 16.16. Math. 11.12.

Since John's time to this very day:
The Gentiles with all diligence,
Without the law, now called obey.
The law and Prophets have their end,
And he is come whom you attend.
I came not sure for to destroy Luc. 16.17. Math. 5.18.

The law, or Prophets, but fulfill:
I take in nothing so much joy,
As to obey my fathers will,
Till heaven and earth do all decay,
The law shall not be done away.
The history of the rich glutton and of poor Lazarus.
Christ said, a certain rich man he, Luc. 16.19.

Was clothed in purple and fine white:
His fare most dainty vsd to be,
For he therein did take delight.
As costly was the man's array,
So fa^'d he sumptuous every day.
There was a certain beggar that
Was named Lazarus also,
Which was laid at the rich man's gate,
All full of grievous sores and woe:
This man therewith had more annoy,
Then Dives had in heart of joy.
And he desired for to have,
(Wherewith his body for to feed)
The broken meat, yet no man gave
One crumbe for to relieve his need:
The dogs yet came and lickt each sore,
These then their master, easd him more.
It came to pass the beggar he,
Dying, was carried thence away,
In Abrahms bosom for to be,
The Angels there this man did lay:
Those messengers God sent to fetch
To heaven to him, that silly wretch.
The rich man also shortly dyed,
His wealth could not deaths dart withdraw,
But needs he must be buried,
Each man must yield to natures law:
And as the beggar was on hye,
So Dives deep in hell did lie.
From whence as he in torments lay,
And looked up, he might espy,
Above from him so far away,
Where Lazarus in heaven did ly
(With Abraham:) so was he blessed,
For there Gods chosen all shall rest.
Then cried Dives loud, and said,
Oh father Abrah'm pity me,
Let not thy mercy be delayed,
My cruel torments thou do see:
The fiery flame does fry me so,
That here I wallow full of woe.
Send Lazarus, that once he may
His finger in the water dip,
This fervent heat for to allay,
If it were but the very tip.
One drop to cool my tongue withal.
That so his finger would let fall.
But Abraham said thus again;
The pleasures (son) thou did receive,
Remember now and this man's pain:
Thy wealth at will did thee deceive,
Therefore art thou (as does appear)
In pain, and he in pleasure here.
Comforted now is Lazarus,
And thou in hell tormented art:
There is set likewise between us
A mighty gulf, no little start,
So that none hence go to you may,
Nor come from thence to us away.
Here Christ did speak of heaven and hell,
No Purgatory then was found:
Or else Christ Jesus could not well,
As school men can, all things expound.
But woe to them that think them wise,
And do Christ's doctrine so despise.
Him, Dives said, I pray thee send,
(Oh father) to my fathers house:
To warn my brethren to amend,
And force no wealth so frivolous.
Vain trust therein has wrought my fall,
And will do theirs, I fear me all.
Send him therefore (father) I pray,
For five of them I left behind:
Which warned may amend their way,
And become of a better mind;
Oh father show them so much grace,
Least they should come into this place*
Then Abraham said thus again,
They Moses and the Prophets have:
If they do not hear them, in vain,
They shall obtain what thou do crave.
They warn all men to seek for grace*
While they have time, to shun that place.
Nay father Abraham, said he,
But if one from the dead do come
To them, repentant they will be,
And be affrayd then of this dome:
They will not sinning wilfully,
Be subject to such misery.
Then Abraham said to him, son,
If that those men they will not hear,
But do as thou before have done,
No more will they to this give ear:
For truth in Gods word seek they must,
And not on dead men vainly trust.
Here heaven is the appointed place,
Where Gods elect for aye shall rest:
In hell we see such as want grace,
All torments are for them addressed.
Gods word not dead men must us guide,
Unless we mean to wander wide.
As for all Dunses drowsy dreams,
Or Monkish toys to mock an ape,
Or frantic Friars, for all their theames,
They now want nails new pits to scrape:
Their Purgatories had a fall,
There is not one now left of all.
Offenses are to be avoided, and our brothers trespasses forgiven.
Though that offenses needs must be, Luc. 17.1. Math. 18.7. Mar. 9.42. Psalm. 34
7.

Yet sure offenders do want grace:
Offend not these whose Angels see
And do behold my fathers face;
He that does so, were better sure,
In surging seas death to endure.
And if thy brother thee offend,
Seek thou to win him privately:
Or if he hear not thee, and mend,
Take two or three in company;
But if he hear not then the same,
Before the Church let him have blame.
But if he do repent, he said,
As often as he does thee offend,
And seems still to be affrayd,
And seeks all means for to amend,
Not seven times, but as often (said he)
As he repents, let him go free.
And the Apostles all said then,
O Lord increase our faith we pray.
If ye had faith as much (o men)
As is a mustard seed, I say,
You might command this mulb'rie tree,
So growing in the sea to be.
Which of you if his servant were
At plough, or did his cattle feed,
When he came home, would say, sit here?
And so serve him at board with speed.
And would not rather bid him dress
(That he him self might eat) a mess?
Or who does thank his servant then,
When he perfourmeth readily
What he commands, that his men
Should see accomplished faithfully?
I trow the servant may be ^lad,
That he did what his master bad.
So likewise ye, when ye have done
What you are bid, although with care:
Say, that small profit may be won
By such slack servants as ye are.
We have done, you may say also,
What was our duty, and no mo.
Christ healed ten leapers.
^uc. 17.11.
As to Jerusalem he went,
And passed thorough Galilie,
Ten leapers did them selves present
To Jesus Christ immediately,
Which stood far off, and cried thus,
Have mercy master now on us.
^^c. 17.14. ^uit. 14.2.
And when he saw them, then said he,
Unto the Priests go straight way now,
That they may judge you clean to be,
And have what law does them allow.
And as they went they cleansed were,
While Christ remained even there.
Then one of them when he did see,
That he was healed very well:
Returning back, with loud voice he
Gave praise to God for what befell.
He falling down upon his face,
Gave thanks to Christ, that showed him grace*
The same was a Samaritan,
Which cleansed came so back again:
Of ten, returned but this man,
Though all were eased of their pain.
This in Samaria verily
By Christ was done, or Galilie.
Are not ten cleansed? Jesus said,
The other nine where be they gone?
Arise therefore, go vnaffrayd,
Thy faith saved thee that came alone.
Of all the ten this stranger came
To give God praise, that wrought the same.
The Pharisees demanded of Christ, when the kingdom of God should come, and
his answer. Luc. 17.20.

Then of the Pharisees when some
Demanded Christ when it would be,
That the kingdom of God would come*
To them again thus answered he;
With observation verily
It comes not, though with majesty.
Men shall not say, lo here, lo there,
Behold the same among you is:
His kingdom is spread every where,
In faithful hearts abides this.
In truth and Romans 14.17.
righteousness I say,
Find out Gods kingdom well ye may.
To his Disciples then said he,
The days will come you shall desire
(As now ye are) with me to be,
And shall not have what ye require.
The son of man must suffer woe:
And for a time depart you fro.
Luc. 17.23. Math. 24.23. Mar. 13.21.
If any then to you do say,
Lo here is Christ, or Christ is there,
Believe it not, for at that day,
False Christ's and Prophets shall appear,
And shall show signs and wonders such,
As will deceive men very much.
For as the lightning from the East
Does come, and that most suddenly,
And shines forth into the West,
So shall it be most certainly:
The son of man shall come, I say,
In like sort at the judgment day.
^uc. 17.26. Math. 24 38. ^^ne 7.5. ^. Pet. 3.20.
And as it was before the flood,
They did both eat and drink also,
And married wives, as they thought good,
Till Noah the arc had entered tho:
Where he and his from flood were free,
Though all men else were drowned, said he.
^uc 17.28. ^en. 19.24.
In Lots days likewise it befell,
They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold,
They built, and thought that all was well,
Nor would hear Lot, for all he told,
Till fire and brimstone from above,
Destroyed all that In Sodom.
there did move.
So shall it in the latter day,
When I shall then revealed be:
Let him that on the house does stay,
Not fetch his stuff below, said he:
Nor from the field, but have in mind,
Lots wife that looked so behind.
Who so his soul does seek to save, Luc. 17.33. Cap. 9.24. Cap. 16.25. Math.
10.39. Mar. 8.35. Ioh. 12.25.

If not through me, shall loose the same:
And life he likewise then shall have,
When life he loses for my name:
For he shall live eternally,
That dies so here willingly.
Two in one bed, or field shall then, Luc. 17.34. Math. 24.40. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Whereof but one received shall be,
The other of those very men,
To be refused sure is he.
Two women grinding then at mill,
The good received, but not the ill.
Where Lord? where the carcass does rest, Luc. 17.37. Math. 24.28.

The eagles will resort thereto:
If that it be by East or West,
Such foul, unto their pray will go.
Gods chosen shall resort that day
To Christ, as these unto their pray.
The parable of the unrighteous Judge and the widow, teaching men to pray
continually.
By parable Christ spoke that day Luc. 18.1. Eccl. 18.22. Romans 12.12. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17.

To his Disciples, to this end,
That they ought always for to pray,
And not to faint while they attend:
For they shall surely mercy have,
That instantly for mercy crave.
There was a Judge which had no fear,
Nor reverence of God or men:
A widow woman dwelling there,
Did move this Judge (not now and then)
But daily crying mightily,
Avenge me of mine enemy.
Though for a time he would not hear
Her suit; thus the poor widow sped,
At last said he, though without fear
Of God or man my life I lead,
Her instancie does vex me so,
I Will do her right, and let her go.
If this unrighteous Judge thus do,
For his elect will not God care,
That day and night cry him unto?
Though for a time their foes he spare,
He will revenge each injury
That they receive assuredly.
The Parable of the Pharisie and the Publicane, that went into the Temple to
pray.
Luc. 18.9.
A parable he spoke again,
To some infected with self trust:
For they did other men disdain,
And did account them selves for just.
Into the Temple for to pray,
Two men went up, both in one day.
The one of them a Pharisie,
The other was a Publican:
The first full of hypocrisy,
The other was a simple man.
Their prayers shows what they were,
Of whom Christ makes mention here.
The first stood up and prayed so,
Oh God this day I do thank thee:
This I as other never do,
Extort or rob as some, said he:
I am not an adulterer,
Nor as this man is, a sinner.
Twice in the week also I fast,
I give tith of all I possess.
The Publican poor man at last,
Began his sins for to confess:
This man in great humility,
Acknowledged his misery.
He stood far of, and did not there,
Lift up his eyes to look on hye:
The poor man was in such a fear,
For to offend Gods majesty;
Be merciful (oh God) said he,
Most wretched sinner unto me.
This man, said Christ, went thence away,
More just then did the Pharisie:
For every one that does delay
To knowledge his infirmity,
Shall be brought low: the humble he,
Likewise exalted sure shall be.
The parable of the Talents.
The kingdom of heaven much like is Luc. 19.12. Math. 25.14. Mar. 13.35.

Unto a king that went from home,
To a strange country far from his,
But made his servants first to come,
To whom he did deliver tho,
His goods ere he from home would go.
To one man gave he Talents five,
And to another only two:
The third had one, therewith to thrive,
Each one had something for to do,
As they were able: then straightway,
He went from home that very day.
Then he that the five Talents had,
Went and did occupy the same:
And gainde, to make his master glad,
Five Talents more before he came.
He that likewise received two,
Did therewith gain as many mo.
But he that had received one,
Within the earth did dig the same,
And hid the money with a stone,
To keep until his master came.
Thus every one did occupy
Their masters Talents diversely.
And after a long season came
The master of those servants home,
And reckned with them for the same,
One after other as they come.
To give accounts from first to last,
They all were called, till all was past.
Then came he that five Talents had,
And brought with him five Talents mo,
And said, oh master hear (be glad)
Thy money is, and gaynes also:
For I have gained as much more.
As I received of thee before.
To him his master said again,
Thou good and faithful servant have
Well done, therewith to take such pain,
Thou shall receive reward at last.
Thy masters joy enter and take,
Of much I will thee ruler make.
He came also that did receive
Two Talents, and thus could he say:
Oh master, here thou may perceive
My gaynes, since thou went hence away;
Here is thy money that I had,
And as much more, that I have made.
His master unto him then said,
Good servant sure it is well done,
The time, I see was not delayed,
Thou could not else so much have won:
Thy faithfulness in this was such,
I will thee ruler make of much.
Then he which had received one,
Came to his master, and did say;
When thou away from hence wast gone,
I hid thy money without nay,
Because I feared thy cruelty,
Receive thine own contentedly.
His master answered and said,
Thou ill and slothful servant, why
(If thou of me were so affrayd,
And knew'st so well my cruelty)
Did not thou find some mean or way,
To get me gaynes against this day?
The Talent take from him therefore,
And give it him that now has ten:
Math. 25.29. Cap. 13.12. Mar. 4.25. Luc. 8.18. Cap. 19.26.
For who so has, he shall have more,
And he shall have abundance then.
From him that has not, shall a way
Be taken what he has, I say.
That servant void of profit, ye
To utter darkness therefore cast,
There weep and gnash his teeth shall he:
Thus shall his sloth be paid at last.
See then your talent fructify,
Least you loose it eternally.
Of the laborers hired into the vineyard.
Math. 20.1.
The kingdom sure of heaven is so,
Like unto a householder here,
That to hire laborers would go,
As Soon as daylight did appear.
With them for pence he did agree,
All day to work, this was their fee.
About the third hour of the day,
When he came to the market place,
The idle thence he sent away,
Into his farm to work apace.
Likewise the sixth and ninth hour he,
With other mo did then agree.
Again th'eleu'nth hour there he found
Some other idle standing by:
Go ye (said he) to my farm ground,
Why stand ye thus so idly?
No man has hired us you see.
Go to my vineyard, then said he.
When even came the master said,
Unto his Steward, call them soon,
That I may see the worke-men paid,
Which all this day my work have done.
Begin and pay the last of all:
As he is served the other shall.
A penie each of them then had,
From last to first as he did go:
Which made the first men very sad,
They thought their pay should not be so.
Go to, said he, this is your hire,
You may no more of me require.
Christ as he went to Jerusalem did admonish his Disciples of his passion.
As to Jerusalem he went, Math. 20.17. Cap. 22.14. Mar. 10.32. Luc. 18.31.

Christ Jesus told them certainly,
The Priests and Scribes with full intent,
Do purpose me to crucify:
Yet when the Gentiles have me slain,
The third day I will rise again.
John and James the sons of Zebede contended for primacie, and were taught
humility and patience, and to avoid ambition.
The wife of Zebedeus came Math. 20.20. Mar. 10.35.

To Christ, and both her sons also,
And her request she thus did frame,
Grant ere thou to thy kingdom go,
That these my sons there sitting be,
Each one, upon each hand of thee.
Ye wot not what ye ask, said he,
Can ye drink of my cup in deed?
Or be Baptized as I shall be?
Yea that we can, if we may speed.
Yet I can not grant your request,
That in my father sure does rest.
But when the other ten heard this,
They at the brethren did disdain.
Then Jesus said ye think amiss,
Among the Gentiles Lords do reign:
They that are great of them, are pressed,
Authorized, to rule the rest.
It shall not so among you be,
He that would greatest seem of all,
Or chiefest in authority,
Shall serve the rest, as at a call.
As to be served came not I,
But serve, and save men certainly.
Christ gave blind Bartimeus and two other blind men their sight as he passed
from Jordan through Jericho toward Jerusalem. The 14. of March.
Mar. 10.46. Math. 20.29. Luc. 18.35. Jericho was two miles from Iorda^, and
four miles and a half from Jerusalem.
The fourteenth day as Jesus went
From Jordan toward Bethanie,
In Jericho, there did present,
A work none else could remedy:
Blind Bartimeus and two men
As blind as he, were crying then;
O son of David make us see,
We are poor men both bare and blind,
Let our estate (oh Lord) move thee,
That we may of thy mercy find.
Their blindness he did help straight-wayes,
And they him followed giving praise.
The calling of Zacheus a rich man, and by office the chief receiver of
tribute.
Luc. 19.1.
As Jesus went through Jericho,
Zacheus sought him for to see:
His stature did not serve him so,
Among the throng it would not be,
He ran and clymed up therefore,
A fig tree in the way before.
This was the shift that rich man had,
To see Christ as he came that way:
When Christ came by, to make him glad,
He looking up, to him did say;
Zache come down without delay,
At thy house I Will abide this day.
Then he came down full hastily,
As Soon as Jesus did command:
And him received joyfully;
But some of them that there did stand,
Did murmr that he then would go,
To lodge there with a sinner so.
To Christ Zacheus as he stood,
Said (Lord) I give half that I have
Unto the poor, to do them good,
And no man shall have need to crave;
What I by fraud or force did take,
Fourefold I Will give him for thy sake.
Then Jesus said, salvation
Is come into this house, ye see:
Since of the generation
Of Abraham, by faith is he.
The son of man does seek and save,
That which was lost, as here I have.
Jesus though he stayed a while (after he had heard that Lazarus was sick)
working in the regions round about sundry miracles, and preaching the Gospel:
at last he returned to Bethanie, where he raised Lazarus from death to life
again.
Now to return to Lazarus, Ioh. 11.7.

Which was already dead in deed:
To his Disciples Christ said thus,
Come let us go from hence with speed:
To Jury we without all stay,
Must pass apace the ready way.
Ioh. 11.8. Cap. 7 30. Cap. 8.59. Cap. 10.31.
O master, then said they again,
The Jews sought lately thee to stone,
And will thou not then here remain,
And so provide to save for one?
He stumbleth not that walks by day,
But in the night (said Christ) he may.
These things Christ Jesus to them spoke,
And then said, Lazarus does sleep,
But I go him for to awake.
What Christ then meant, they took no keep,
But said, Lord, if he sleep, then he
Both safe and sound will shortly be.
Then Jesus said to them again,
Our friend is dead, and I rejoice
I was not there: Christ then was plain,
To strengthen such as he made choice.
Then Thomas said, come, let us go,
That we with him may dye also.
The fifteenth day Christ Jesus spent,
In iourneying along the way:
He then bewrayed what he meant,
In Bethanie the sixteenth day.
For Jesus then in hand did take,
His sleeping friend, again to wake.
Christ found he had lain in the grave,
Four days already ere he came:
The women they this comfort ^ad.
have,
The Jews that heard his death by fame,
(Because Jerusalem was nigh)
Came unto them to Bethanie.
When Martha heard that Christ was there,
She went to meet him by the way,
And said, Lord, if thou had been here,
Thy friend had not been dead this day:
Yet what thou do desire or crave
Of God, I know thou may it have.
Thy brother then said Christ shall rise. Ioh. 11.24. Math. 22.23. Mar. 12.18.
Luc. 20.27. Act. 23.8.

I know said Martha the last day.
Life without me is in no wise,
Nor resurrection said Christ.
I say.
The man in me that does believe,
Though he were dead, yet shall he live.
Who lives and does believe in me,
Shall never dye: beleeu'st thou this?
I do believe, thou Lord, art he,
That Christ, the son of God iwis,
Which should come to the world, and so
When she had said, home she did go.
Then called she forth secretly,
Her Mary Magdalene.
sister, and to her she said:
The master is come hard here by,
Where he and his for thee have stayed.
When she heard this, she quickly rose,
And to the Lord forthwith she goes,
Jesus came not yet to the town,
Where Martha met him there he was:
When Mary went so hasty down,
The Jews that were then there in place,
Rose up, and said, come follow now,
She will go weep for him we know.
When Mary came our Savior to,
She flat down at his feet then fell:
My brother (Lord) she said also,
Had not been dead, I know it well,
If thou had here been him to see,
For God had him restored to thee.
When Jesus therefore saw her weep,
And all the Jews that came with her:
He groned in the spirit deep,
So moved his affections were.
Where have ye laid him then said he?
They said unto him (Lord) come see.
And Jesus wept: the Jews then said,
Behold, how he did love the man:
His death could Christ not have delayed,
That blind men's eyes so open can?
Then he again did deeply groan,
And from the grave, said take the stone.
Then Martha said, he stinketh now,
For he is dead four days ago.
Then Jesus said, I did thee show,
If thou believe what I would do;
Gods glory, this I said to thee,
If thou believe, thou should see.
When they, the stone removed had,
Then Jesus did lift up his eyes,
And said (oh father) I am glad,
My prayers thou do not despise;
That these (as thou still hear me)
May know that I am sent of thee.
Then Jesus cried with a loud voice,
Come Lazarus, out of the grave.
Then he came forth, and they rejoice,
Their dead again so whole to have.
Christ bad them loose away each band,
For he was bound face, foot, and hand.
Then many of them did believe,
When they had seen what he had done:
This act did others of them grieve,
And to the Pharisees they run;
To whom they told what they had seen
In Bethanie, where they had been.
The high Priests and the Pharisees, A Counsel held against Christ.

A counsel called out of hand:
What shall we now (said they) devise?
Christ's fame is spread throughout the land.
Such wondrous works now works he,
His miracles, who does not see?
All men in him will sure believe,
If we do let him thus alone:
The Romans will come us to grieve,
(Supplanting all our nation)
They will our rulers take away,
Therefore devise we may him slay.
Then he that Cayphas had to name,
And was the high Priest that same year, Cayphas Prophecy of Christ's death.

Perceive ye not (said he) the same?
And does it not to you appear,
That for the people one must dye,
Least they should perish utterly?
This God did make him Prophecy:
Against himself he witness bears,
Though for all people Christ should dye,
(Who, guiltless blood to spill but fears?)
Gods children and his scattred sheep,
Christ Jesus had a care to keep.
From that day, they consulted how
They might him take, and cause to dye:
Whereas the Jews of him might know,
Christ walked no more openly.
To Ephraim he went away,
Where he and his Disciples lay.
The passover was then at hand,
And to Jerusalem there went
Full many out of all that land,
Before the feast: some with intent
Themselves as then to purify,
Which feast the Jews kept orderly.
The Jews for Jesus sought about:
All in the temple where they where,
That he came not did make them doubt,
For they had sought him every where.
They chargd'd who knew where he would lie,
To tell, or take him craftily.
Ioh. 12.1. Math. 26.7. Mar. 14.3.
Six days before the feast, no more,
Our Savior came to Bethanie:
Where he would not be seen before,
His enemies it was too nigh.
Now the appointed time was come,
And Christ obayd his fathers dome.
Though he but lately fled away,
He then returned with good will.
His fathers mind he would obey,
And so all Prophesies fulfill.
He came therefore to Bethanie,
Prepared for mankind to dye.
Christ being come back to Bethanie from Ephraim, supped with Lazarus, and was
anointed by Mary, whereat Judas was offended especially.
Christ fearing neither watch nor ward, Ioh. 12.2.

Did offer all occasion
Unto the Jews, without regard,
To hasten on his passion:
Wherefore he supt in Bethanie,
His adversaries even by.
With Lazarus Christ supped there,
And Martha served then at board,
Where many did with joy and fear,
Attend unto Christ Jesus word:
As John does witness Mary then,
Anointed Christ before those men.
Of ointment Mary took a pound,
Of Spiknard very costly sure,
As any ointment might be found,
For it was perfect, sweet and pure,
This all she spent on Jesus there,
His head and feet as may appear.
His feet she wiped with her hair,
The house with odor it was sweet:
The savor so perfumed the air,
That came from Jesus head and feet.
Yet Judas did repine at this,
For of his purpose he did miss.
For he it was that did receive,
What men at any time did give:
This Christ did very well perceive,
How that her Or act.
fact his mind did grieve:
For straight with her a fault he found,
And did her check thus very round.
This wast it needed not, said he,
This ointment for three hundred pence
Might have been sold and given me,
As part of the beneficence
That used is unto the poor,
And such as go from door to door.
He spoke not as his mind then gave,
But moved with a vain desire:
For he did covet all to have,
This kindled in him flaming fire
Of greediness, as did appear,
By such words as he vttred there.
Then Jesus said, let her alone,
She kept this for my burying day;
The poor ye may well think upon,
They shall remain with you always:
Ye shall not always so have me,
But they always with you shall be.
The woman's work thus wrought on me
Is good, and shall not be forgot,
This Gospel where as it shall be
Preached throughout the world, I wot:
This act of hers shall be spoke sure,
And her memorial shall endure.
Much people of the Jews were there,
Not all for Jesus sake only,
But for to try what they did hear,
Of Lazarus assuredly.
Of him they heard, as you have read,
How Jesus raisd him from the dead.
The high Priests therefore took advise,
How they might Lazarus also
Condemn with Christ in any wise,
Because they saw that many mo
Did for his sake, in Christ believe,
Which thing did very much them grieve.
The next day following Christ went toward Jerusalem, riding most gloriously,
the people crying Hosanna to the son of David.
When they were thence to Bethphage come, Math. 21.1. Mar. 11.1. Luc. 19.29.

Which to Jerusalem is nigh:
From the mount Olives he sent some,
To the next village by and by;
There hence to fetch an ass away,
For him to ride upon that day.
If any one say ought, say ye,
Thereof the Lord as now has need:
And he will send the same to me,
Therefore go hence, and come with speed.
That Prophecies so long ago,
Might be fulfilled, he did so.
To tell it Sion, see ye go, Esaias. 62.11. Zach. 9.9. Math. 21.5. Ioh. 12.13.

Behold, thy king does come to thee,
Meek sitting on an ass, and lo
This happened then so to be:
But his Disciples (as forgot)
These things at first perceived not.
Yet the Disciples went away,
Accomplishing their masters mind:
They brought the ass without delay,
Which Christ had told them how to find:
And put their clothes the ass upon,
That Jesus then might ride thereon.
Ioh. 12.12. Math. 21.8. Mar. 11.8. Luc. 19.35.
A multitude that very day,
Of such as were come to the feast:
When they heard Christ would ride that way,
Met him, and they for joy were pressed
To spread the branches they did bear,
And some the clothes that they did wear.
Moreover they that decked the way,
And went Christ Jesus there before,
And they that followed, each did say,
And praise his name for evermore;
The king of Israel is come,
Blessed be he for ay, said some.
Hosanna David's son, to thee,
Blessed art thou, some other say:
All praise and honor given be,
To him that In the name of the Lord.
comes now this way.
Hosanna thou which art so hye
In heaven, full of all majesty.
When to Jerusalem they came,
The City all was moved then:
And fully pressed this pomp to blame:
Who is this, say they, to those men?
Jesus, they say, that Prophet he,
Of Nazareth in Galilie.
Math. 21.13. Mar. 11.17. Luc. 19.46. Esaias. 56.7. Ierem. 7.11.
Christ then again purged the Temple, and cast out the buyers and sellers
thence, and cured certain blind and lame persons.
So Christ went straight the Temple to,
And purged then again the same:
He did (as he was wont to do)
All their abuses greatly blame,
Reproving all those evil men,
That made Gods house for thieves a den.
Then to the Temple came the blind,
The halt, and such as grieved were:
Whom Christ did heal (such grace they find
As seek to him, let no man fear)
Those men gave God continual praise,
That such a Prophet he would raise.
But when the chief Priests, Scribes, and such,
Saw all the maruels that he wrought,
It grieved them, and disdayning much,
They vtter'd what in mind they thought:
For they the children heard on hye
(Hosanna David's son) to cry.
Do thou hear what these children say,
Said they to Christ? he said I do:
Have you not read of this I pray,
That written was so long ago?
By babes and sucklings sure thou have, Math. 21.1^ Psalm. 8.2.

Made the praise perfect now at last.
Christ conferred with certain Grecians, or rather they desired to see Christ,
and speak to him.
Now there were certain Greeks as then, Ioh. 12.20.

That came to worship at the feast:
Which were among those other men,
As earnest as they saw the rest;
These say to Philip we pray thee,
To help that we may Jesus see.
Philip told Andrew of the same,
Again they both to Jesus went,
As messengers, in those men's name,
And told him all, and who them sent.
The hour is come, the son (said he)
Of man must glorified be.
I say unto you verily,
Except that the wheat corn do fall
Into the ground, and therein dye,
It brings forth no fruit at all:
But if it dye, assuredly,
It brings fruit abundantly.
Another Sermon of the Cross, wherein Christ covertly foretold of his death.
Ioh. 12.25. Math. 10.39. Cap. 16.25. Mar. 8.35. Luc. 9.24.
He that does love his life, he shall
Loose it, but who so hates it here,
Shall keep it to life eternal,
Though this scarce truth, to some appear:
Learn ye your selves to hate therefore,
That ye may live for evermore.
If any man wish to serve me,
Let him come follow me, I say:
For where I am, there shall he be,
I will protect him night and day.
They (in my service) that endure,
My father will them honor sure.
And Jesus herein declared
Himself a perfect man to be:
My soul (says he) is now troubled,
From this hour, father, save thou me.
But therefore to this hour I came,
Yet father, glorify thy name.
Then came from heaven a mighty voice,
Saying I have, and will again:
(This may each mortal man rejoice,
That God did not for him disdain,
To send his son to bear his blame)
In whom he glorified his name.
Then said the people that stood by,
It was some thunder that they heard:
But others said, nay verily,
An Angel if ye do regard,
Spoke unto him; thus diverse men,
Did diversely judge of it then.
And Jesus answered, and said,
This voice came not because of me,
But for your sakes, be not affrayd,
Great things you shall both hear and see:
For your sakes God will glorify
The son of man, assuredly.
Of this world now the judgment is,
The Prince thereof cast out shall be:
And if I were lift up iwis,
I Will from the earth, draw men to me.
Now this said he to signify,
What death then shortly he should dye.
We heard out of the law, said one, Ioh. 12.34. Psalm. 89.36. Psalm. 110.4. Psalm.
117.2. Ezekiel. 37.25.

That Christ for ever should remain:
And how say thou, he must be gone,
The son of man must needs be slain,
And lift up high upon a tree?
Tell, who that son of man should be.
Then Jesus said, Ioh. 12.35. Cap. 1.9.
a little while
Light is with you, walk in the same,
Least that the darkness you beguile,
Who walks therein may merit blame.
While ye have light believe therein,
As loving it, and hating sin.
Math. 21.17.
So left he them, and went again,
As he was wont, to Bethany:
For there all night he did remain,
Among his chosen company.
This night by night he used still,
That so he might all things fulfill.
Christ going the next day from Bethany to Jerusalem, cursed the fig tree.
Math. 21.18. Mar. 11.12.
As Christ returned the next day,
From thence Jerusalem unto,
He was an hungered by the way,
And to a fig tree he did go,
That grew hard by, thereon to find
Some figs, as then to ease his mind.
But when thereon he only found
Green leaves, and not a fig at all,
From top he cu^^d it to the ground:
Fruit henceforth on thee never shall*
Be seen again, said Christ, and so,
Away from thence they all did go.
Like to an hypocrite, this tree
(...) leaves, but had no fruit so eat:
Let hypocrites then warned be,
(...) the some curse, that Christ did threat:
(...) with one word the Lord he may,
Head, branch, and root, cause to decay.
All his Disciples then did see
What he had done, and heard likewise
The curse Christ gave unto that tree,
Yet little thought in any wise,
What would be fall, but thence they went,
The City to as they were bent.
Christ to the Temple went again,
And purged it, as he did before,
Reproving them that were so vain,
Abusing still then more and more
That place, appointed men to pray,
And not for merchandise to stay.
The Scribes and high Priests hearing this,
Sought how they might him then destroy,
Though he had done nothing amiss,
But gave them cause of greatest joy*
They sought his life, that life does give
To all men that in him believe.
They feared him, for they did see,
They could no way resist his will:
And did perceive most men to be
Astonished at his doctrine still.
When even came Jesus did hye,
And got him back to Bethany.
Christ returning the next day, the Disciples seeing the fig tree withered,
tell him of it. Math 21.19. Mar. 11.20.

The next day, as they passed by,
Then the Disciples all did see
The fig tree dried, verily,
And that up from the root to be*
Then Peter said, master see this,
The fig tree thoroughly withered is.
Then Jesus answering, did say,
If ye have faith unfeignedly,
Ye may this mountain move away
And lay it in the sea to lie.
See that your hearts be clean and pure,
And that your faith be firm and sure.
Mar. 11.24. Math. 6.14. ^ap. 7.7.
Then what ye do desire, I say.
By prayer shall be done in deed:
Faithful requests have wings always,
To fly unto the Lord with speed.
Forgive when ye do pray also,
That on your faults God think no mo.
Mar. 11.27.
Then to Jerusalem they came,
And to the temple went again:
Where walking then within the same,
The high Priests fraught with foul disdain,
And all the Scribes and Elders were,
To see Christ Jesus coming there.
They asked by what authority,
Christ did those things so lately there;
Who is of so great dignity,
As may appoint thee ruler here?
Our elders left us long ago
All power here, and to no mo.
Then Jesus answered, and said,
I will ask you one question,
And answer me now vndelayd,
Therein your just opinion:
And I, by what authority,
Have done these things, will testify.
John's Baptism tell me certainly,
Was it from heaven or else of men?
Now answer me unfeignedly,
And you shall have your answer then.
Like doubtfulnesse there is in this,
As in their former question is.
They thought, if we confess it came
From heaven, then will he surely say,
Why did ye not believe for shame
His doctrine, and his words obey?
But if we say, of men, we fear
The people, that are standing here.
For John accounted was in deed, Math. 21.26. Cap. 14.5. Mar. 6.20.

A mighty Prophet of them there:
When they perceived how they should speed,
To answer him they stood in fear;
They answered then they knew not well,
He answered them he would not tell.
The Parable of the two sons.
What think ye then said Christ again? Math. 21.28.

Two sons a certain rich man had:
Unto the elder of the twain
The father came, and thus he bad:
Go son, said he, and work I say,
Within my vineyard all this day.
The son then answered, and said,
I will not work therein at all:
But afterward as all affrayd
To disobay his fathers call,
His frowardness he did repent,
And then into the vineyard went.
Then came he to the second son,
And said to him such words likewise:
Thy will (said he) shall sure be done,
Yet did his fathers hests despise.
For this son never labored
In his work as he promised.
Now whether of the twain say ye,
Performed best the fathers will?
The first or last tell this to me?
The first said they, did it fulfill.
The Publicans and harlots then,
Shall go to heaven before these men.
For in the way of righteousness,
John came to you I say, said he:
As did his doctrine well express,
Yet ye beleu'd not him, I see;
The Publicans and harlots they,
Believing did his words obey.
Though ye his words and works did find,
So well agreeing certainly:
None to repentance gave his mind,
Among you all assuredly.
His doctrine, that believing ye,
Might for your sins much grieved be.
Another Parable of the vineyard, let out (...) the unfaithful husbandmen.
^th. 21.33. ^r. 12.1. (...). 20.9. ^y. 5.1. ^em. 2.21.
Another Parable hear ye,
A certain householder did plant
A vineyard, and round hedged he
The same, that nothing it did want:
And therein this man builded tho,
A wine press, and a tower also.
All this he let to husbandmen,
And traueld to a strange country:
For thence he went to soiourne then,
In hope his farmours would obey
His will, and well perform also
Their promise made, ere he did go.
But when the time of fruit drue nigh,
And he had sent for to receive
The fruits of them his servants by,
As promise was when he took leave.
His servants they did beat and kill,
Little regarding their Lords will.
Again he sent unto them mo,
Which servants they did kill likewise:
At last his son he causd to go,
His son also they did despise.
His only son which he sent there,
Of whom he hoped they stood in fear.
But when the husbandmen did see
The son: Math 21.38 Cap. 26.3.4. Cap. 27.1. Ioh. 11.53.
this is the heir, they said:
Come let him likewise killed be,
All shall be ours, be not affrayd;
They slew the son himself at last,
And him out of the vineyard cast.
Now Jesus said, what think ye then?
For these offenses that your hear,
What shall their Lord do to those men,
Whose faults so manifest appear?
They slew his servants one by one,
And lastly slew his only son.
They said the Lord will sure destroy
Most cruelly those wicked men,
And others shall his farm enjoy,
To whom the Lord will let it then,
That fruit in season will him yield, Math. 21.42. Psalm. 118.22. Act. 4.11.
Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.7.

Of every sort within his field.
Then Jesus said have ye not read?
The ^one the builders did refuse,
Is of the corner made the head?
And so put there to chiefest use.
The Lord his doing it is this,
And in our eyes a marvel is.
The fruits of ^he kingdom ^f God, is to ^mbrace Christ jesus, and ad^onished
by ^im to amend ^ur lives. The fruits of ^he spirit. Gal. ^. 22. are also ^he
fruits of ^he kingdom ^f God* etc. Aretius.
Therefore I say to you again,
The kingdom of God sure shall be
Taken from you, this thing is plain,
And given others francke and free,
Which will the fruits thereof forth bring,
And yield increase in every thing.
And who so on this stone shall fall,
Shall broken be, this you shall find:
But on whom it shall fall withal,
To powder him the stone will grind.
The first he may be heald again:
This last shall labor but in vain.
When the chief Priests and Pharisie,
These Parables of Christ did hear,
They did perceive then by and by,
Of whom he spoke as did appear:
For they on him sought hands to lay,
Yet did for fear their purpose stay.
That Chr. was ^ prophet, the ^eadines of the ^eopleto set him free, and that
his ^oure was not ^ome, were 3. ^hiefe causes that the Scribes and Pharisees
^ooke not Christ ^hen.
The people that were standing by,
A Prophet they took Christ to be*
This feared them that did espy,
Their readiness to set him free.
And eke his hour was not come then,
Which was a let unto those men.
Another Parable of the King that made a marriage for his son, whose bidden
guests refused to come (although they were called) to the wedding.
Another Parable he spoke
As then, before the multitude,
That vnexcused he might make
The Jews for their ingratitude,
To whom the Lord so bounteously,
Had offered so much clemency.
Gods kingdom is like to a King,
That made a marriage for his son:
And when he had for his wedding
Prepared what was to be done,
He sent his servants then forth all,
That they his bidden guests might call.
The guests would not, though bid they were,
Repair with them unto the feast:
They said, they could not then be there,
To their affairs they were addressed:
And thus they did the King abuse,
For every one made his excuse.
The first had bought a farm he said,
And he must needs the same go see:
The second was no whit affrayd,
Excused well he hoped to be,
Five yoke of oxen he did buy,
And went to prove them hastily.
The third had wed a wife as then,
He could not come in any wise:
Thus answered those wicked men,
That did the heavenly feast despise:
Yet were they not so very bad,
But there were some ten time as mad.
For they entreated shamefully,
The servants that the King had sent:
They killed them most cruelly,
That so much good to them had meant;
Though wicked were the first in deed,
These did the other far exceed.
But when the king had heard the same,
He sent his warriors forth with speed:
For he was wroth to hear the fame,
And worse displeased with the deed.
Those murderers destroyed he,
And causd their City burnt to be.
Unto his servants he said then,
The wedding truly is prepared:
Unworthy were those wicked men,
That would so lightly it regard;
Go ye therefore to the high way,
And bring me guests without delay.
The servants went and so they did,
They brought him guests both good and bad*
For every one they met, they bid,
To seek to make their master glad;
And so with guests they furnished
The feast that he solemnized.
The king came in his guests to see,
And there he did perceive anon,
A man among the rest to be,
That had no wedding garment on;
This came not to adorn the feast,
But to have meat among the rest.
The king unto him quickly said,
How camst thou hither in, my friend?
And he then speachlesse all affrayd,
Could by no means his cause defend.
The king could soon his faults epsy,
For all his cloakt hypocrisy.
Then to his servants said the king,
Bind him, and take him hence away: Math. 22.13. Cap. 8.12. Cap. 13.42. Ca.
20.16. Ca. 25.30.

To utter darkness see you bring
Him, bound both hand and foot, I say;
There weep and gnash his teeth shall he:
Many are called, few chosen be:
Of paying tribute unto Caesar.
The Pharisees took counsel then, Math. 22.15. Mar. 12.13. Luc. 20.20.

How Christ in talk might tangled be:
They sent unto him Herod's men,
With their Disciples this to see.
Thus all their wits they busied still,
To seek to work Christ Jesus ill.
Master, said they, we know and see,
That thou art true, and teach right
The way of God, and that with thee,
Respect of man is very light:
Man's person thou do not respect,
But him that does Gods will effect.
Tell us therefore how think thou?
May we to Caesar tribute give?
Thy judgment herein show us now, The tribute paid to the use of the Temple,
was the^ levied to the use of the Emperor.

For this thing does us greatly grieve,
To pay him that mislikes men more,
The temple had always before.
Jesus knowing their wickedness,
Said, Hypocrites, why tempt ye me?
Your deeds show you to be no less,
I cannot so deceived be:
The tribute money show me soon,
And you shall know what must be done.
They brought a penny to him then,
Whose Image (then said Christ) is this,
And superscription (to those men?)
Math. 22.21. Romans 13.7. Mar. 12.17. Luc. 20.25.
Caesar's, said they, it surely is.
Give Caesar, Caesar's things therefore,
And God his due, for evermore.
When they heard this, they marvelled,
And left him then and went away:
H^s answer them astonished,
So that they could not him gainsay.
Erasm. in Math. Cap. 22. verse. 22.
Yet left they not (such was their grace)
To hate him, though they left the place.
Christ confuted the Saduces, which denied the resurrection.
Math. 22.23. Mar. 12.18. Luc. 20.27. Act. 23.8.
The Saduces the same day came:
The resurrection they deny,
And all such men did fowly blame,
That would believe it verily.
These came, I say, to Christ that day,
Their ignorance for to bewray.
Math 22 24. Deuteronomy. 25.5.
Master (said they) Moses has said,
Childlesse if that a man should dye,
His brethren need not be affrayd,
To take his wife successively,
And mary her, to raise him seed,
This law allowed was in deed.
There were seven brethren here with us,
The first of them did wed a wife:
And dying then it happened thus,
He left no child, that left this life,
His wife unto his brother he
Did leave also, his wife to be.
The second, third, and all the rest,
Did mary her, but had no seed:
For each of them as is expressed,
One after other died in deed;
And last of all then dyed she,
Whose wife in heaven there shall she be?
Then Jesus answered again,
And said unto them verily,
Ye are deceived, this is plain,
In your conceit, and wot ye why?
The Scripture ye at any hand,
Nor yet Gods power understand:
For in the resurrection,
Men do not mary wives as then,
But are in each condition
As Angels are, not mortal men.
But that the dead do rise again,
Have ye not read, yea often in vain?
I am said God, of Abraham, Math. 22.32. Exodus 3.6.

Of Isaac and Jacob in deed,
Their God, and of all them that came
Of them, by faith, or of their seed.
Sure of the living God is he,
Not of the dead, I say to thee.
And when the people heard it, they
Were all astonished at the same:
But some his doctrine did obey,
Some other shrunk away for shame:
Which did his works and words despise,
Nor would believe in any wise.
The Pharisees demanded of Christ, which was the great commandment, and his
answer. Math. 22.34 Mar. 12.28.

But when the Pharisees had heard,
That Christ to silence then had brought:
The Saduces, without regard,
They then a shift against him sought,
To work his shame if it might be,
And so assembling this agree.
A Doctor of the Law therefore,
Should ask him there a question,
Tempting him then as before,
And asking his opinion:
Oh master, in the law which is
The great commandment? tell me this.
Math. 22.37. Luc. 10.27. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Then Jesus said to him again,
The Lord thy God him shall thou love
With all thy heart, and every vain,
Thy soul, and what thy mind may move:
This is the great commandment,
To keep it is expedient.
Math. 22.38. Mar. 12.31. Leuit. 19.18. Romans 13.9. Galat. 5.14. Iam. 2.8.
The second is like unto this;
As thine own self thy neighbor love
On these commandments it is,
The law and Prophets hang and move.
In first and last, the wiseman can
Learn duties, due to God and man.
To Jesus said the Pharisie,
Master, thou have said very true:
There is but one God verily,
To love, fear, and serve him is due.
Then Jesus said, Gods kingdom thou,
Art not far from, I tell thee now.
Math. 22.41. Mar. 12.35. Luc. 20.41.
Christ demanded of them how Christ the Messiah is the son of David.
While that the Pharisees were there,
Gathred together as we find:
Jesus did ask them without fear,
Of Christ, what think ye in your mind?
Whose son is he? they said again,
Christ David's son is very plain.
Christ said to them, Math. 22.44. Mar. 12.36. Psalm. 110.1.
how then does he
In spirit call him Lord, I pray*
As in the Psalms is for to see,
The Lord unto my Lord did say,
Sit at my right hand till I make
Thy foes thy foote-stoole, for thy sake.
If David called him Lord, how then
Is he his son, do you declare?
And none of all those busy men
Could answer him, as witness are
Their works, they durst not, this is plain,
From that day ask him ought again.
The doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses chair was to be
heard, but their lives and manners not to be followed.
Jesus spoke to the multitude,
And his Disciples likewise then,
(Not waighing the ingratitude,
Of such malicious wicked men.)
Commending of the Scribes their place,
Though they themselves were void of grace.
There are 3. sorts of Ministers. The first do teach well and live well, as
the Apostles, and they build with both hands. The second, teach well and live
ill, as the Scribes and Pharisees: these build with one hand and pull down
with another. The third teach ill and live worse: these scatter with both hands.
The Scribes and Pharisees do sit,
In Moses seat, Christ Jesus said:
All therefore what they bid is fit,
That you observe it vndelayd:
But what they do, do not the same,
They say and do not, to their shame.
For heavy burdens they do bind,
And on men's shoulders them they lay,
Math. 23.4. Luc. 11.46. Act. 15.10.
Most grievous to be borne in mind,
Intolerable every way;
But they themselves will not once prove,
With any finger them to move.
All that they do is to be seen,
To have of men a praise therefore:
Math. 23.5. Nomb. 15.57. Deuteronomy. 22.12.
It is not now as it has been,
They do dissemble more and more.
For God would have his word well known,
And not upon their clothes so shown.
Math. 23 6. Mar. 12.38. Luc. 11.43. Cap. 20.46.
But they have broad Philacteries,
And Gods commandments in those
Not in their hearts, these mysteries
Their foul dissembling do disclose.
What they about them written bear,
The heart to have it, fittest were.
And other vanities among,
That th^se men use continually:
They fringe their garments all along,
For outward show assuredly.
They love the chiefest place and seat,
In all assemblies, and at meat.
Math. 23.7. Iam. 3.1.
And greetings in the market place,
And masters to be called of men:
Be not so called, least you disgrace
Your call, and doctrine even then.
Christ only master you may call,
And ye your selves are brethren all.
Math. 23.9. Malach. 1.6.
On earth your father, no man call,
For one your father is in deed:
He is in heaven far above all,
And gives you what you have need.
Be not called Doctors, for one is
Your Doctor, even Christ iwis.
Let him that is the greatest, be
As servant unto all the rest:
Math. 23.12 Luc. 14.11. Cap. 18.14.
Himself who so exalts he,
Shall be brought low: but this is best,
That ye your selves do humble; so
To be exalted where ye go.
Christ cried woe against the Scribes, Pharisees and Lawyers.
Woe be to you, ye Scribes therefore, Math. 23.13.

And Pharisees withal, I say,
You hypocrites do evermore
Shut men from heaven all that ye may:
For in your selves ye do not go,
Nor suffer them that would do so.
Woe be to you, Under color of their holiness and long prayers for them, they
often consumed their wealth and their honesty.
for ye devour
The widows houses craftily:
Your prayers longer by an hour
Ye make, to work your treachery;
Wherefore without compassion,
You shall receive damnation.
Woe be to you (I say) again,
For ye do compass sea and land
To seek one Proselite to gain,
That he your law may understand.
Which when he learnes then sure is he,
Much more the child of hell then ye.
Woe (...) to you, ye guides so blind,
Which say that who so use to swear
By the temple, this oath does bind
No man, thereof ^e need not fear:
But by the gold thereof, say ye,
Who so do swear, offenders be.
Of both these things which do you deem,
To be in deed the holiest?
The gold which you so much esteem,
Or temple of the mightiest?
The gold it does The temple.
it beautify,
The temple That is the gold.
it does sanctify.
And who does by the altar swear,
It is nothing as you do say:
But so to do ye make men fear,
By the offering, in any way.
The gift or altar which think ye,
The holiest of them both to be?
Ye fools and blind, the offering
Is by the altar sanctified*
Who swears by it, for any thing,
Of this you may be certifi'd,
He swears by it and all things there,
Therefore take heed how ye do swear.
Math. 23.21. Cap. 5.34. 1. King. 8.13. 2. Chron. 6.2.
Who by the temple swears, he
By it, and by him sure does swear
That dwells therein: and likewise ye
That swear by heaven without all fear,
Of God ye do swear by the throne,
And him that sits thereupon.
Math. 23.23. Luc. 11.42.
Woe be to you ye Scribes (I say)
And Pharisees so full of guile:
Ye hypocrites is this the way,
To cloak your cursed craft so vile?
The least things that the law does will,
You keep, and leave the greatest still.
Mint, annise, and cummin tith ye,
And waightier matters leave alone:
The law commands these to thee
But last of all to think upon.
For judgment, mercy, and faith, are
The chiefest things should be your care.
Ye blind and wicked guides, which strain
A gnat, as if ye could not well
Devour the same except with pain,
And swallow up a great cammell:
Ye hypocrites, for cloaking so
Your craftiness, you heap on woe. To drink wine in a unwashed cup defiles
not a man, but to drink wine gotten by fraud, or for excess, not for
necessity, this defiles a man.

Woe be to you (I say again,)
For ye make clean the utter side
Of cup and platter, all in vain,
It does bewray your foolish pride:
But they within, are not the less
Of briberie full, and all excess.
Thou blind and foolish Pharisie,
Cleanse first the inside of the same,
And then the outside verily,
Thou may make clean without all blame:
If that the inner man be pure,
The outward man is clean be sure.
Woe be to you, for sure ye be
Like painted tombs in outward sight:
Appearing fair to them that see
No part within, how they are dight:
For dead men's bones are there doubtless
Remaining with much filthiness.
So ye also, for outwardly
Ye do as righteous men appear,
But are full of hypocrisy,
And vices, it is very clear:
The outward man is fair in show,
And foul within, as God does know.
Woe be to you that build so brave
The Prophets tombs that were before,
And garnish outwardly each grave
Of righteous men, now more and more;
And more then that you verily,
Thus utter your iniquity.
If we as then had been (ye say)
In our forefathers time, had we
Consented so to see the day,
That guiltless blood then spilt should be?
The Prophets had not dyed so,
Nor any godly man with woe.
So then ye are as witnesses
Unto your selves, how that ye be
Their children, as ye do confess,
That murthred them, therefore do ye
What lacked of their cruelty,
Fulfill with all dexterity.
O Serpents the offspring in deed,
And bloody generation
Of vypers, and their very seed
By nature and opinion:
How ye should escape no man can tell,
The great damnation of hell.
Wherefore behold, to you I Will send,
Prophets, wisemen, and Scribes surely,
To see if that ye will amend,
Whom ye will kill and crucify,
And scourge in Synagogues apace,
And persecute from place to place.
That on you all the blood may come, Math. 23.35. Gene. 4.8. Heb. 11.4.

Which was shed upon earth always,
From righteous Abell, Adams son,
To Zacharias, blood which lay
Between the temple verily,
And altar, slain most cruelly.
All these things shall assuredly
Come on this generation,
This ag^ shall bear this penalty,
And righteous condemnation,
That all their vain hypocrisy,
May be detected openly.
Jerusalem which killest so, Math. 23.37. Luc. 13 34.

The Prophets that are sent to thee,
And stonest some t'augment their woe,
How often would I, tell it me,
Thy children gather for their good,
Which they most frowarly withstood? Math. 23.37. Esd. ^.30.

Yea even as a careful hen
Does clock her chickens, so have I:
And yet will not these wicked men
Be saved from their misery:
All wast and desolate shall be,
Their dwellings left that lothed me.
For unto you, mark it, I say,
Ye shall not henceforth see me more,
Until ye bless the very day,
And wish good hap for evermore
To him that comes so with fame
To you, in great Iehouahs name.
As Jesus by the treasury
Beheld, what men did offer there,
The rich and poor most bounteously
Did cast therein, as may appear:
Of all the rest a widow then,
Cast in two mites among those men.
To his Disciples Jesus said,
I say to you assuredly,
She in this treasury has laid
More then their superfluity,
She cast in all she had in store,
They want no whit they had before.
Of the destruction of the temple and City, and of the end of the world.
Math. 24.1. Mar. 13.1. Luc. 21.5.
When Jesus then had finished,
To purge the temple as ye heard,
And had also accomplished
His judgments hear before declard,
He left the temple, then to go
To Bethanie, whence he came fro.
And this the third day after was
The feast of Palms, or Palm sunday:
But ere he thence away could pass,
Thus his Disciples to him say;
Come Lord, and see this building here,
How beautiful it does appear.
And Jesus said to them again,
See ye these things and mark them all?
There shall not verily remain,
One stone hereof that shall not fall.
A stone shall not be left on stone, Math. 24.2. Luc. 19.44.

But shall be cast down every one.
And his Disciples came again,
As he upon mount Olives ^ate,
And said, do thou now tell us plain,
When this shall be, and of the state
Of thy coming, and the worlds end,
And what sign then thou will us send. Math. 24.4. Ephesians. 5.6. 1. Coloss. 2.18.

And Jesus answered and said,
That you be not deceived take heed:
Great cause ye have to be affrayd,
Least you as others then should speed:
For many shall come in my name,
And deceive many with the same.
And ye shall hear of wars, I say,
And rumors of wars there shall be:
Let not all this your minds dismay
Or trouble, though the same ye see:
These things to come no man may let,
But sure the end is not as yet.
One nation shall first arise
Against another nation:
And realm with realm shall in this wise,
Fall into great contention.
Pestilence, and famine then,
And earthquakes, shall vex diverse men.
For these assuredly shall be,
And that in diverse places so,
That who so shall those troubles see,
And plagues, shall sore lament for woe.
Of sorrows and also of care,
All these things but beginnings are.
Math. 24.9. Cap. 10.17. Luc. 21.12. Ioh. 15.20. Cap. 16.2.
Then you delivered up shall be,
By men to be afflicted sore:
They shall kill you, take this of me,
Ye shall be hated more and more
Of nations, for my names sake,
Which you contentedly must take*
Offended then shall many be,
And one another shall betray:
And hatred in the highst degree,
Shall among men bear too great sway.
False Prophets also shall arise,
Which shall deceive the worldly wise*
And then because iniquity,
Shall be increased day by day,
The love of many verily,
Shall be as cold as clod of clay:
Math. 24.13. ^. Thessalonians. 3.13. ^. Tim. 2.5.
But to the end who does endure,
Shall saved be, of this be sure.
When this Gospel of the kingdom,
Shall preached be in every place
Throughout the world, sure then shall come
The end within a little space.
This witness to both good and bad,
Increases joy or makes sad.
These are the signs that Christ foretold,
Should come ere thy destruction,
Thou City that to sin art sold,
Still working thy confusion:
Jerusalem thou will not see,
Nor yet receive health sent to thee.









Deceiving many subtly:

Stained with all pollution.

Of brethren then shall likewise be:
Yet for the faithful this comfort,
Ere then they shall be sure to see

And then the end shall soon appear.
And therefore this shall be the end,
Which you must mark advisedly,
For few shall then find out a friend,
There will be such calamity:
When former signs are come to pass,
The end is worse then all that was.
For then Jerusalem shall be Math. 24.15. Mar. 13.14. Luc. 21.20. Dan. 9.27.

With men besieged round about:
Let them consider then that see
What Daniell spoke: it is no doubt
The great abomination,
Of thy just desolation.
This standing in the holy place
When ye do see, mark what I tell,
Let him that reads while he has space,
This prophecy consider well.
Then let them which in Iewrie be,
From thence into the mountains flee.
Let him that is on the house top,
Not come down thence to fetch away
Ought that he has in house o^ shop,
Least lingering there by such delay
He loose the opportunity,
Offered for his commodity.
And he that in the field is then,
Let him not go back home again,
To fetch his clothes, though this to men
May seem to be exceeding pain,
The time shall then require no less,
Then I to you do now express.
Then woe to them with child shall be,
And them that do give such also:
^lee you must: therefore pray that it happen (...) on the Sab^oth least
Reli^ion, or in win^er the season, be lets to ^ou.
For these are most unapt to flee,
And therefore subject to all woe.
That your flight be not, see you pray,
In winter or the Sabbath day.
For then great troubles shall be sure,
Such were not since the world began:
Nor shall be while the world endure,
That saved scarce should be a man,
If for the elect it happened,
Those days should not be shortened.
Math. 24.23. Mar. 13.21. Luc. 17.23.
If any then to you do say,
Lo here is Christ, or Christ is there,
Believe it not: for at that day,
False Christ's and Prophets shall appear,
And shall show signs and wonders such,
As will deceive men very much.
Those false Christ's and false Prophets shall
Gods chosen very near deceive,
If possible it were at all,
As then you shall full well perceive.
Behold I have told you before,
Have always care hereof therefore.
Wherefore if they unto you say,
Behold he in the desert is:
Go not forth after him that way,
For you shall find untruth in this.
In sectet if they say he be,
Believe it not, it is not he.
For as the lightning from the East,
Does come and that most suddenly,
And shines forth into the West,
So shall it be assuredly:
The son of man shall come I say,
In like sort at the judgment day.
For where the dead carcass does rest, Math. 24.28. Luc. 17.37.

The eagles will resort thereto,
If that it be by East or West,
Such foul unto their pray will go.
Gods chosen shall to Christ that day
Resort, as these unto their pray.
Math. 24.29 Mar. 13.24. Luc. 21.25. Es^y. 13.1^. Ezekiel 32.7. Joel. 2 31. Cap.
3.15. Math. 24 30. Dan. 7.13. Revel. 1.7.
After those days immediately,
And all those troubles, then forth-right,
The sun shall darken by and by,
And eke the moon shall not give light:
The stars of heaven they shall fall,
And powers thereof shall shake withal.
And lo, in heaven shall sure appear,
The sign of Christ his coming then,
And much shall mourn then every where.
All kindreds and all tribes of men.
Then in the clouds Christ coming he,
Most glorious all men shall see.
Math. 24.31. 1. Cor. 15.52. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
And he his Angels forth shall send,
With sound of trumpe that is so shrill:
On the elect they shall attend,
And gather them as he does will,
From the four winds and every where,
In one together to appear.
The Parable of the Fig tree.
Math. 24.32.
Now learn the parable, I say,
Of the fig tree, whose boughs shut out
And bearing leaves, do well bewray
Summer at hand without all doubt:
So all these things when ye do see,
Gods kingdom near know then to be.
This generation verily
Passes not, until all be done,
As you have heard effectually:
The Lord will it accomplish soon.
Matthew. 24.35. Mar. 13.31.
Both heaven and earth shall pass away,
But my words sure shall not decay.
Christ's coming shall be as the days of Noa^ were, sudden and unlooked for.
Matthew. 24.36.
No man does know that hour or day,
No, not the Angels, be ye sure:
My father only, this I say,
Does only know that day and hour:
For as the days of Noe have been,
So shall Christ's coming then be seen.
As in the days before the flood, Matthew. 24.38. Luc. 17.26. Genesis 7.5. 1. Pet.
3.20.

They did both ear and drink also,
Marry, and else what they thought good,
Till he the Arc had gone into.
All this we may in Moses see,
How he and his from flood were free.
And all the rest did nothing know,
Till that the flood took them away:
It shows how they were very slow
For to repent their sins that day.
Christ's coming shall as suddenly
Be seen, as that was verily.
Two men shall in the field be then, Matthew. 24.40. Luc. 17.34. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

The one of them received shall be,
The other of those very men,
To be refused sure is he.
Two women grinding then at mill,
The good received, but not the ill.
A warning to all men to be watchful.
Wake therefore and be wary men, Matthew. 24.42. Mar. 13.35.

For ye know not what hour or day
Your master comes, lest sleeping then
You with the reprobate decay.
Watch that with the elected sort
Received ye be, to your comfort.
Of this be sure, if the good man,
The hour the thief will come may know, Matthew. 24.43. Iuc. 12.39. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2. Reu. 16.15.

He will keep watch all that he can,
To save his house from hurt I trow.
Be likewise ready always then,
For Christ will come ye know not when. Matthew. 24.45. Luc. 12.42.

A faithful servant and a wise,
Made ruler of his masters men:
His masters trust will not despise,
But feeds them in season then
When he is absent, as he were
Still present with his servants there.
That servant blessed is in deed,
Whom his master when he does come,
Shall find so doing, he shall speed,
Be sure, of some especial room:
His master will make him therefore,
Ruler of all he has in store.
But if the evil servant say,
My master will not come as yet:
And smite his fellow day by day.
And still with drunkards drink and eat
His master will come when that he
Expects not him for to see.
Him he will cut off from the rest,
And give to him his portion
With hypocrites this is the least,
Math. 24.51. ^ap 13 42. ^ap. 25 30.
That after condemnation,
He shall both weep and gnash for woe,
His teeth that he applied so.
The Parable of the ten Virgins.
Math. 25.1.
The kingdom sure of heaven shall be
Unto ten virgins likened,
Which took their lamps and went to see*
If they could meet (as happened)
The bridgrome, coming by that way,
For whom all they together stay.
^retius in Ca. ^5. Math.
Yea virgins they were all in deed,
Such find this spouse assuredly,
As chastely have in heart decreed,
On Christ to call unfeignedly,
And not on idols, for they must
Repose in Christ their only trust.
Yet only five were wise of these,
And five were foolish certainly,
Which had their lamps the bride to please,
And went to meet him solemnly.
The former five had oil all night.
The last had none to save their light.
Now while the bridegroom tarried long,
All slumbred and slept heavily:
There was at midnight heard among
The Vingins, suddenly this cry;
Behold, the bridgrome comes this way,
Go meet him forth without delay.
Then all those Virgins quickly rose,
And trym'd their lamps away to go:
The foolish Virgins said to those
That wiser were, give us also
Some of your oil, our lamps to save,
Our lamps are out, no oil we have.
The wise thus answered them again,
Lest there be not enough we fear
For us and you, therefore take pain,
To go and buy some oil elsewhere.
Their foolishness deserved blame,
For while they went the bridegroom came.
And they that then were ready, went
Into the wedding with the bride,
And they that there were not present,
Were shut out at that very tide.
And when they came and knocked fast*
This answer they received at last.
I know you not that cry and call,
Lord, Lord do open us this gate:
Nor you may not come in at all,
Your knocking now is to to late:
Math. 25.13 Cap. 24 ^2. Mar. 13.33. Luc. 19.12.
Since, ye know not the hour or day,
That Christ does come, watch still and pray.
The Parable of the Talents.
Math. 25.14. Mar. 13.35. Luc. 19.12.
For the kingdom of heaven, it is
Like to a man that went from home,
To a strange country far from his,
But causd his servants first to come:
To whom he did deliver tho,
His goods, ere he from home would go.
To one he gave then Talents five,
And to another only two:
He one unto the third did give,
Each one had something then to do,
As they were able; and straight way,
He did depart, that very day.
Then he that the five Talents had,
Went and did occupy the same,
And gayn'd to make his master glad,
Five Talents more before he came.
He that likewise received two,
Did gain therewith as many mo.
But he that had received one,
Within the earth did dig the fame,
And hid the money with a stone,
To keep until his master came.
Thus every one did occupy,
Their masters Talents diversely.
And after a long season came,
Their master home to them again:
They reckned with him for the same,
And gave accounts of all their gain:
One after other as they could.
What they had done, to him they told.
He came first that five Talents had,
And brought with him five Talents mo:
And said, o master here (be glad)
Thy money is, and gains also:
For I have gained as much more,
As I have received of thee before.
To him his master said again,
Well done good servant sure thou have:
That thou therewith did take such pain,
Thou shall receive reward at last:
Enter thy masters joy to take,
Of much I will thee ruler make.
He came that did receive likewise,
Two Talents, and he thus did say:
O master, thou may not despise,
These games since thou went hence away:
Here is thy money that I had,
And as much more that I have made.
His master unto him did say,
Good servant, sure it is well done:
The time thou spendest well always,
Else could not thou so much have won:
Thy faithfulness in this was such,
I will thee ruler make of much.
Then he which had received one,
Came to his master, and did say,
When thou a way from hence wast gone,
I hid thy money without nay,
Because I feared thy cruelty*
Here, take thine own contentedly.
His master answered and said,
Thou ill and slothful servant, why
(If thou of me art so affrayd,
And know so well my cruelty)
Did not thou find some mean or way,
To get me gains against this day?
The Talent from him take therefore,
And give it him that now has ten:
Math. 25.29 Cap. 13.12. Luc. 8.18. Cap. 19.26. Mar. 4.25.
For who so has, he shall have more,
And he shall have abundance then.
From him that has not, shall away
Be taken all he has, I say,
Math. 25.30. Cap. 22.13. Cap. 8.12.
That servant void of profit, ye
To utter darkness therefore cast:
There weep and gnash his teeth shall he,
Thus shall his sloth be paid at last.
See then your Talent fructify,
Least you loose it eternally.
The manner of the last Judgment.
Math. 25.31.
When that the son of man comes to
The Judgment, with great majesty,
His holy Angels all also,
Shall be with him most gloriously:
And he shall sit upon the throne
Of glory, judging every one.
All nations shall be gathered,
Before the son of man as then,
And there they shall be severed,
The godly from the wicked men,
As shepherds separate their sheep,
From flocks of goats that they do keep.
The sheep, whereby are meant the best,
He shall set then on his right hand.
The goats, by which are meant the rest,
On the left side of him shall stand:
So shall the King to the good men,
Pronounce this loving sentence then;
Ye blessed of my father come,
Inherit you the kingdom here,
Prepared ere the world begone,
For you (of him) as does appear: Math. 25.35. Esaias. 58.7. Ezekiel. 18.7.

For when I wanted food to eat,
Ye gave me lodging, drink and meat.
Ye clothed me, that naked was,
Me, being sick, ye came to see:
Imprisoned ye did not pass,
Until ye had relieved me,
My wants supplying willingly, Math. 25.36. Eccl. 7.35.

And comforting my misery.
Then shall the righteous, say again,
Lord, when saw we thee in such case?
And then the King without disdain,
Shall answer them; in every place,
In as much as ye have done this,
To these my brethen, mine it is.
Then shall he to the other say,
(The wicked goats on the left hand)
Depart ye cursed hence away,
All, as ye do together stand:
Math. 25.41. ^ap. 7 23. ^sal. 6.8. ^uc. 13.27.
Go into fire unquenchable,
Prepared for the damnable.
For when I hungered very sore,
Ye gave me then nothing to eat*
And often I thirsted more and more,
Yet wanted drink, as well as meat:
Ye lodged not, nor clothed ^e,
Nor sick in prison would me see.
They ask when they had seen him so:
He answers now as before:
Math. 25.46. Dan. 12.2. Ioh. 5.29.
Therefore he says, that these shall go,
To suffer pain for evermore*
But sure the righteous shall then all,
Go and possess life eternal.
Luc. 21.37.
Christ in the Temple taught by day,
And there hence out at night he went
To Oliuet the ready way,
Where that time he then always spent.
To hear him daily many came,
So much was spread abroad his fame.
Another Sermon of the Cross, which Christ made to his Disciples in Bethanie,
at Simon the leapers house.
Math. 26. Mar. 14.1. Luc. 22.1.
When Jesus had thus finished
These sayings, he began to say
To such as him then followed,
From place to place so every day;
Ye know within two days will be
The feast of passover, said he.
And then shall be delivered,
The son of man (as heretofore
I told you) to be crucified,
Although it grieve you very sore:
The time, is come that death the just,
For sinful men needs suffer must.
The chief Priests were then assembled, Math. 26.3. Ioh. 11.47.

The Scribes and eke the Elders all,
Where they this thing delibered,
(Within the high Priest Cayphas hall)
How Jesus might by subtlety
Be had, and killed cruelly.
But they said, not on the feast day,
Least any vproare there should be
Among the people any way,
If they the same should hap to see:
The people him do magnify,
Whom we desire to crucify.
Then Judas took occasion,
(Set forward by the devil in deed, Math. 26.6. Mar. 14.3. Ioh. 11.2. Cap.
12.3.

To be of such opinion,
Which caused him so ill to speed)
When Christ did sup in Bethany,
At Simons house assuredly.
Where Mary did annoint the Lord,
With precious ointment that she had,
As Christ was there set at the board,
Which made the traitor Judas mad*
He thought it wast that so was spent,
Revenge it therefore thus he meant.
He went to the chief Priests, and said, Math. 26.14. Mar. 14.10 Luc. 22.4.

What will ye now give unto me,
If I deliver vndelayd,
Christ to your hands? what then say ye?
All thirty pence they said again,
We will give thee if thou take pain.
And from that time, as most suppose,
He sought all opportunity
For to betray him unto those,
That hired him so liberally:
For all his mind was fully set,
By hook or crook some gains to get.
The Disciples demand of Christ, where he would they should prepare the
passover.
Math. 26.17. Mar. 14.12. Luc. 22.7.
The first day of unleavened bread,
Peter came unto Christ and John,
(Whom they acknowledged their head)
And askd of him this question;
Where will thou that we do prepare,
To eat the passover declare?
Then he thus unto them did say,
Go ye into the City both,
And you shall meet one in your way,
Mark whither that the same man goes*
You shall see him a pitcher bear,
Of water full, when you come there.
Go ye and follow him into
The house he goes in, and say
To the good man, we pray you do
Show the chamber our master may
Eat passover, and he forth right
Will show a chamber ready dight.
So the Disciples found in deed,
As Christ before to them did say:
And they prepared for him with speed,
Math. 26.19 Mar. 14.18. Luc. 22.14. Ioh. 13.21.
To eat the passover that day.
So when the even was now late,
Christ came and with the twelve he sat.
As they did eat, Christ said again,
Assuredly to you, I say,
You shall see this (though to his pain)
That one of you shall me betray.
Then the Disciples sorry were,
And of this saying stood in fear.
Now there was one whom Christ did love, Ioh. 13.22. Math. 26.21. Mar. 14.18.
Luc. 22.21.

That leaned then upon his breast:
Him Peter did with signs so move,
That he demanded for the rest;
Tell us (o Lord) we do thee pray,
Who is it that shall thee betray?
And Jesus said, the hand is here
At this board, that betrayeth me,
(As to you all it will appear)
And in the dish now dippeth he.
He lift his heel against his head,
That eats with me of this bread.
The son of man shall surely go,
As of him it has written been:
But to that man be ever woe,
By whose devise the same is seen.
It had been good for him, I say,
He had not yet been borne this day.
Then Judas which did Christ betray,
Answered and said, sir is it I?
The traitor thought to find a way,
To cloak his treason craftily.
Then Christ said, thou have said in deed,
As I have said, so shall I speed.
Christ washed his Disciples feet.
^oh. 13.1. Math. 26.2. Mar. 14.1. ^uc. 22.1.
Christ knowing that the father had
Given all things into his hand,
(Whereof all men may be right glad,
That truly this will understand)
And that from God come forth was he,
And went to God, with him to be.
He rising from his supper, laid
His upper garments all aside,
And took a towell, it is said,
And withal girt himself that tide*
Christ Jesus did this verily,
To teach us true humility.
Christ powered in a basin then,
Water to wash their feet withal,
He humbling him among his men,
Did with a towell wipe them all:
Thus vsd he all simplicity,
To teach us still humility.
To Simon Peter then he came,
Who said, what do thou Lord to me*
To wash my feet it were my shame,
Therefore good Lord, this may not be.
What I do now, said Christ, at all
Thou know not, but hereafter shall.
But Peter said, thou shall not now,
O master, wash my feet, I say.
Then Jesus said, clean art not thou,
Nor may be if thou disobay:
For Peter if I wash not thee,
Thou shall have sure no part with me.
And Simon Peter said again,
Lord, not my feet all only then,
But head and hands if thou take pain,
And wilt such favor show to men.
Christ said, whose feet is washed so,
Is clean, and needs not any mo.
And ye are clean although not all,
For he knew who should him betray:
He knew him well before his fall,
How fowly he would slide away:
But to repent he had no grace,
Though he were checked in every place.
So after that he washed had
Their feet, and took his clothes again,
And was set down, as always glad
He was, for his to take all pain;
Know ye, said he, what I have done?
Do ye therefore as I begone.
Ye call me Lord, and master well,
For so in very deed I am:
If I your Lord, that so excel,
Most humble for your sakes became,
Ye ought each others feet therefore
To wash, as I have done before.
Example unto you gave I,
That you as I have done, should do:
The servant was not certainly
Above his master, hitherto,
Nor the ambassador I say,
Greater then who sent him away.
If ye know these things I declare,
And do them, then blessed are ye:
It is a virtue very rare,
Among most men the same to see.
All this he spoke to them as soon
As he of washing them had done.
Christ instituted the Sacrament of his holy Supper.
Math. 26.26. ^. Cor. 11.24.
And as they sat all then at meat,
Jesus took bread, and brake the same,
And giving thanks, gave it to eat,
To them that thither with him came:
And said, take, eat ye all of this,
My body for you given is.
Also he took the cup, when he
Had given thanks, and gave it those:
Saying, of it now drink all ye,
(This cup see ye do so dispose
As I have taught you) still, said he,
Receiving this, remember me.
For this it is my blood truly,
Of the new Testament I make,
For many shed assuredly,
Thereby their sins away to take:
Who so has not remission
By it, has just damnation.
Henceforth of this fruit of the vine,
I will not drink, until that day
When I shall drink it new with mine,
And that Gods kingdom come I say.
When Supper thus all finished was,
Christ Jesus song a Psalm for grace.
And Judas that did Christ betray,
(As Soon as Satan pricked him on)
Departed thence and went away:
But Jesus said ere he was gone,
What is devised secretly,
Go Judas do it speedily.
But none of them that then were there,
Knew why the Lord said to him so:
The bag, thought they, Judas does bear,
And therefore he does bid him go
To give the poor what he thinks best,
Or to provide against the feast.
When he was gone out, Jesus said,
The son of man is glorified,
And God in him, be not affrayd,
For you in both are sanctified:
As God, in the son verily,
So he the son will glorify.
Christ departed thence into the mount of Olives, where as also by the way he
comforted and strengthened his Disciples.
When Jesus thus forewarned had
All them, of that which happened,
To comfort them and make them glad,
Against his death which hastened,
They passed thence though it was night,
And to mount Olives they went right.
Where he, as also by the way,
Admonisht them, and comforted,
To love together, and I say,
Against the deu'll them strengthened:
For Christ did know it well before,
They should be tempted ye ^^fore.
Math. 26.31 Mar. 14.27. Ioh. 16.32. Zachar. 13.7.
This night, said he, you shall be all
Offended much because of me:
For when the shepherd has a fall,
The sheep soon shall then scattred be:
Yet after I am risen, I
Will go with you to Galilie.
O little children, yet a while
I am with you, ye shall seek me:
Let not the deu'll you then beguile,
Ioh. 13.33. Cap. 7.34.
Where I go, yet, come cannot ye:
Let this therefore I say, you move,
Each one another for to love.
Ioh. 13.34. Cap. 15.12. Math. 22.39. Leuit. ^9.1^. 1. Ioh. 4.21.
By this shall all men know indeed,
That my Disciples sure ye are,
If each one help ano^hers need,
And to the world your love declare
Love is the badge and only sign,
That men may best know you for mine.
Then Simon Peter said, I pray,
Lord, tell me whither go thou?
O Simon where I go, I say,
Thou can not come and follow now,
But afterward I tell it thee,
Thou shall be sure to follow me.
Ioh. 13.37. Math. 26.33. Mar. 14.29.
And Peter said Lord, why not now?
My I fe^^ will loose for thy sake.
Thy life for my sake loose will thou?
No have, said Christ, o Simon make:
The cock shall not crow verily,
Until thou do me thrice deny.
Luc. 22.31. 1. Pet. 5.8.
And Jesus said o Simon see,
Satan's desires assuredly,
That you as wheat should winow'd be,
This he attempted earnestly:
But I for thee have prayed, I say,
Thy faith so fail not clean away.
And see when thou converted art,
Thy brethen that thou strengthen then:
But he said, though I suffer smart,
And dye the death before all men,
My master I will not deny,
So said the rest, assuredly.
And he said unto them again, Luc. 22.35. Math. 10.9.

When you without a bag I sent,
And scrip, and shoes, declare it plain,
What then ye lacked where ye went?
Nothing said they, but now said he,
To you these things may wanting be.
See then of these things ye make store,
And sell thy coat a sword to buy:
The Scripture shall be evermore, Luc. 22.37. Esaias. 53.12.

In me performed certainly.
They said, o Lord, two swords have we.
It is enough, again said he.
Christ armed his Disciples with consolation against trouble, declaring that he
is the way, the truth, and the life.
Though otherwise he knew it well, Ioh. 14.1.

It would fall out immediately,
Then they said: yet for to expel
Their fear, he armed them graciously;
Let not your hearts now troubled be,
Ye trust in God, do so in me.
And dwelling places many are,
Within my fathers house, I say:
For you I go, place to prepare,
That be there, where I am, ye may:
Yet I will come to you again,
And you receive without disdain.
Now ye know whither that I go,
And likewise ye do know the way.
Thomas ignorant of the way, is taught ^t by Christ.
Then Thomas said, Lord, no not so,
We know it not, nor know it may,
Except thou show it, how should we
Know well the way to go with thee?
Then Jesus said, I am the way,
I am the truth, and life also:
Come to the father no man may,
Except that he by me do go.
Full well my father knows he,
That perfectly has known me.
Philip desired to see the father.
Philip said, Lord, it will suffice,
If thou let us thy father see:
Then Jesus answered in this wise,
O Philip he that has seen me,
Has seen my father verily:
Believe the same unfeignedly.
Beleeu'st thou not that sure I am
In the father, and he in me*
The words I speak, from him they came,
The works I do, all them does he:
I am in him, so do it take,
At least believe for the work sake.
In deed, in deed, to you I say,
Who firmly does believe in me,
The works I do, do them he may,
And greater works then these shall he.
That man shall sure be blessed so,
For I unto my father go.
What ye ask in my name, I Will do, Ioh. 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Math. 7.7. Mar.
11.24. Iam. 1.5.

That in the same my father may
Be glorified, I hither to
Have ever taught you so to pray.
Withal I say, if ye love me,
See my precepts observed be.
Christ said, the father I will pray,
And he another comforter
Shall give to you, that the same may
Abide and be with you ever.
Gods spirit sure on you shall be,
A teacher of all truth is he.
I will not leave you comfortless,
But I will come to you again,
And then to you I will express,
How in the father I remain:
The world shall not these things perceive,
Because it will not me receive.
Then Judas said unto him, Lord, Judas demanded of Christ, why he would not
show himself unto the world.

(Not Judas that the traitor was)
Why do thou not as well accord,
To grant unto the world this grace?
To show thy self to them also,
As unto us thou mean to do?
He that my precepts will obey,
And keeps them, he loves me:
He that does keep my word, I ^ay,
Loved of my father he shall be;
What I say therefore mark it well,
For we will come with him and dwell.
The comforter the holy Ghost,
The father will send in my name:
He will see that no word be lost,
That out of my mouth ever came.
Let not your heart be moved to fear,
Peace with you I leave every where.
That I do go, and come again,
Might give you cause with heart and voice,
To laud the father, God certain,
And so much more in heart rejoice,
In that I tell you this before,
You may believe me evermore.
I will not many things to you
Speak after this, as I have done:
The Prince of this world comes now,
Yet he in me has nothing won:
But this I do that men may see,
I love the father, he loves me.
The Parable of the Vine.
Ioh. 15.1. Math. 15.13.
I am the true and perfect vine,
My father is an husband man:
Fach branch that is not truly mine,
He cuts away that cut it can:
And each one that bears fruit in me,
He makes more fruitful for to be.
Ioh. 15.3. Cap. 13.10.
Through the word I have spoken now,
Ye are assuredly made clean:
Abide in me and I in you,
If to bear fruit ye ever mean.
As branches cut of fruitless be,
So you, except you bide in me.
I am the vine, ye branches are,
He that abides still in me,
And I in him, he need not care,
Much fruit in him shall ever be.
Give ear and listen hereunto,
Ye can without me nothing do.
He that abides not in me,
Is cut off as a withered bough,
And to the fire cast then is he,
Where he is punished sore enough.
In me abide, ask what ye will,
And your request I will fulfill.
My father he is glorified,
In that ye bear much fruit in me:
And we are both much honored,
If ye together loving be.
This ought you greatly thereto move,
That I (as he loved me) you love.
Sure greater love can no man bear
Then this, when one does for his friend.
Bestow his life, to him so dear,
Which I do only to this end,
To keep safe mine from all annoy,
That they in me might still have joy.
Ye are my friends, if ye (...) serve
What I do both command and show:
The hireling does his master serve,
His secrets yet he does not know.
All that I of my father heard,
The same to you I have declared.
Ye have not chosen me before,
I first chose you, I tell you plain, Ioh. 1^.16. Math. 18.19.

To bring forth fruit still more and more,
And that your fruit it might remain:
That what so ye ask in my name,
My father may give you the same.
Love one another I command,
The world does hate you, well ye know,
The cause ye likewise understand,
Is that I have so chosen you.
If they have persecuted me,
So persecuted shall you be.
If they have kept my word before,
They will keep yours hereafter so:
All those things they and rather more,
For my name sake to you will do.
Against me and mine they are bent,
Not knowing from whom I am sent.
If I had not come, then in deed
They should have had no sin at all:
But now have they no cloak at need,
To hide their sin that is not small.
My father hates who hates me,
And they hate both, for all they see.
But it is that the word might be
Fulfilled, written in their law;
Ioh. 15.25. Psalm. 35.19.
Without a cause they hated me,
Of my word they stand not in awe.
Ioh. 15.26. Cap 14.16. Luc. 24.49.
The comforter shall testify
Of me, with you assuredly.
Another Sermon of the Cross: the Disciples comforted with promise of the holy
Ghost: the coming of Christ again: his Ascension: to ask in his name: peace
in Christ, and affliction in the world to such as follow him.
These things I have unto you said, Ioh. 16.1.

That ye might not offended be:
Nor that ye should be much affrayd,
When from their Sinagogues that ye
Be thrust out, for they shall you kill,
And yet think that they do Gods will.
These things they will unto you do,
Because that they have not known me,
Nor yet the father hitherto
These things I say to you, that ye
May think on it for evermore,
That I have told you this before.
I tell it now, because I go
Hence unto him that did send me,
And none of you though grieved so,
Does ask of me, what ayleth thee?
Or whither go thou a way?
And yet ye sorrow all ye may.
Yet surely this to you say I,
It is expedient I go:
For if I go not hence truly,
The comforter he comes not so
As I have said, think this in heart,
I will send him when I depart.
When he is come, he will reprove,

Distrust in me, whom thy should love:

To my father, from hence away,
You shall see me no more, I say.

Reproved be by him as then:
Because their Prince then judged is,
And righteousness restored to men:
For Satan's empire has a fall,
And Gods anointed rules all.
I have yet many things to say,
But ye cannot them now well bear:
The comforter will not delay,
To tell you all things, do not fear.
He shall show you mine verily,
And so he shall me glorify.
A little while and surely ye
Sall not see me, and yet again
After a while ye shall see me,
For I go where I must remain.
But they had not as then the reach,
For to perceive what Christ did teach.
Therefore he said to them again,
Assuredly to you I say,
You shall weep and be full of pain,
Yet shall the world rejoice that day.
Though sorrow do you much annoy,
Your sorrow shall be turned to joy.
A woman when she trauaileth,
Has sorrow that her hour is nigh*
As soon as she delivers
Her child, then she immediately,
Her anguish does not think upon,
For joy of him, her pain is gone.
So now ye sorrow at the heart,
But I will see you sure again,
Though for a time I do depart,
I Will come to ease you of your pain:
And then your joy shall be so great,
As you may never it forget.
Ye shall ask nothing then of me, Ioh. 16.23. Cap. 14.13, Math. 7.4. Cap.
21.22. Mar. 11.24. Luc. 11.9. Iam. 1.5.

But of my father in my name:
And what ye ask shall given be,
Be most assured of the same.
In my name ye asked nothing yet,
Ask, ye shall have, nothing shall let.
In Parables these things I spoke,
But sure the time will come, when I
A plainer speech to you shall make,
And preach the father openly.
What in my name ye ask, that he
Will give, because ye loved me.
For from the father out I came
Into the world, and out again,
I do depart, and leave the same,
And go to him thereto remain.
Thou Said his Disciples.
speak now so plain, we see.
That no man more needs ask of thee.
Now we believe thou came from God.
The hour is come then Jesus said,
Ye shall taste of a bitter rod,
And scattred be, be not affrayd,
From me though you be fled and gone,
The father leaves me not alone.
These things I speak to comfort you,
And that in me, you might have peace:
For in the world assured now,
Afflictions for you do increase.
B^ of good comfort: verily
The world now overcome have I.
The prayer of Christ unto the father for his elect.
^h. 17.1.
After that Christ had preached long
To his Disciples, of the cross,
He mingled comforts all among,
Lest they dispayr'd for such a loss.
He prayed God them to protect,
And this his doctrine to effect.
And Jesus lift his eyes on hye,
And said, the hour, o father dear,
Is come, thy son then glorify,
That so thy glory may appear.
^oh. 17.2. Math. 28.18.
As thou him power gave of all,
So he gave his life eternal.
And this is sure eternal life,
That they the only God know thee,
And whom thou has^ sent (without strife
Acknowledge) Jesus Christ to be.
The work thou gave me to do,
I to thy glory finished to.
Now glorify thou me again,
With thine own self (o father dear)
As when I did with thee remain,
Ere heaven and earth did first appear:
Thy name to those declared I,
Thou gave me, accordingly.
They kept thy word, and know withal,
That all I have are come of thee:
They did obey when I did call,
Ioh. 17.8. Cap. 16.27.
Believing that thou have sent me.
For those thou gave me* always
For them, not for the world, I pray.
As they and else all mine are thine,
And I in them am glorified:
So thine undoubtedly are mine,
Thou have thy son so favored,
I in the world am now no more,
But they are as they were before.
O father, keep them in thy name,
Those that thou have so given me:
As one in deed we both became,
That so they may for ever be.
I kept them safe, I lost not one, Ioh. 17.12. Psalm. 109.7.

Save that child of perdition.
I speak these things, and come to thee,
That they in them might have my joy:
Thy word is given them of me,
Yet will the world much them annoy;
It hates them, for both they and I
Are not of this world, verily.
Out of the world I do not pray,
That thou should take them by and by,
But that from evil night and day
Thou keep, and give them victory,
In all their combats, when they crave,
Thy help (o father) let them have.
They are not of this world, nor I,
Thy word it is the truth in deed;
Therewith do thou them sanctify,
And help them father at all need.
As to the world thou did send me,
So these of me sent likewise be.
And for their sakes I sanctify
My self, that through the truth they may
Be sanctified assuredly.
For them I do not only pray,
But for them also which afford
Firm faith in me, Lord, through thy word.
That they all may be one, as thou
(O father) art in me, and I
In thee was, and am present now,
So they may all be verily
Made one in us, that the world may
Believe thou have sent me this day.
The glory that thou gave me,
I gave them, that they may be one
As we are one, that they might be
Known the Disciples of thy son:
And that as me thou love those,
Whom so out of this world I chose.
^oh. 17.24. Cap. 11.26.
I will (o father) that they be
With me, where ever that I am,
That there the glory they may see,
Which thou have given to my name.
Thou louedst me, ere thou began
To make this world, and create man.
The world (o father) knows not thee,
But I have known thee: and so these
Have known in deed that thou sentst me.
Thy name to them whom thou do please
I will declare: thereby to move,
There may in them be perfect love.
The Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, and first of his prayers in mount
Oliuet, where he sweat drops of blood, and an Angel came and comforted him.
When Jesus these things spoken had, Ioh. 18.1. Math. 26.36. Mar. 14.32. Luc.
22.39.

Over brook Cedron then he went
With his Disciples, who were sad,
When they perceived what he meant.
Some Gethsemane do name the place,
This garden in mount Olives was. Ioh. 18.3. Math. 26.47. Mar. 14.43. Luc.
22.47.

And Judas which did him betray,
Did likewise know the place full well:
And knew that Christ would walk that way,
As then most truly it befell.
For thither often to their comfort,
With his, Christ used to resort.
When he was come into the place,
He chose of his Disciples three,
To watch and pray with him a space,
To whom he said, go ye with me:
And so he went aside to pray,
And left the rest behind to stay.
And these were Peter, James, and John,
That he took then with him apart;
They so with sleep were over gone,
That they perciu'd not all his smart.
These on mount Thabor verily,
Had seen before his majesty.
Where they as witness chosen were
By him, of his divinity:
And now that likewise may appear
To them his great humility.
He chose no more, because by three,
All things well witnessed may be.
Then to wax heavy he began,
And sorrowful as all affrayd:
Sore troubled was the outward man,
He thus to his Disciples said;
My soul is heavy verily,
Yet I must needs now yield to dye.
Now tarry here and watch with me,
While I go yonder for to pray:
A little further then went he,
And falling on his face, did say,
Let this cup pass (o father mine)
Yet not my will be done, but thine.
^uc. 22.43.
And there from heaven did appear,
Him comforting an Angel then:
The weight of sin that he did bear,
So pressed him (for mortal men)
That he sweat drops of blood a pace,
Which trickled down along his face.
Then up from prayer he arose,
And his Disciples came unto:
But he all sleeping there found those,
For heaviness oppressed them so.
Why sleep ye, then said Christ? I say
Arise, watch earnestly, and pray.
The flesh is weak and frail also,
But yet the spirit ready is:
Pray least ye enter now into
Temptation in any wise;
And so again he went away,
Where he then (as before) did pray,
At his return to them again
The second time, they were a sleep,
Their eyes were heavy, they in vain
Did labor, waking them to keep:
They knew they had deserved blame, Mar. 14.40.

And could not answer him for shame.
So he left them, and went away,
(He saw they could not well awake)
And as before again did pray,
Thus thrice he did his prayers make.
To his Disciples then said he,
Take rest and sleep henceforth may ye.
Behold, the hour is now at hand,
And ready come assuredly:
This you shall shortly understand,
That sure the son of man shall dye;
Into the hands of sinners he
Shall presently deliu'red be.
Judas the traitor with a band of men, and officers, which he received of the
high Priests and Pharisees, came thither with lanternes, torches and weapons to
take Jesus.
Now let us go, I say arise, Math. 26.46.

He comes that does me betray:
The traitor Judas on this wise,
Was then set forward in his way,
And near approaching to the place,
Where Christ with his Disciples was.
He had received a band of men,
And officers also withal,
That the high Priests allowed him then,
The number of them was not small:
They with their weapons came all night,
With lanterns and with torches light.
The high Priests in all things were pressed,
Christ Jesus for to crucify:
The Pharisees they would not rest,
Till Christ were slain most cruelly.
Therefore with Judas they did send
By night, men armed to that end;
All which with Judas then were come.
As Christ to his Disciples spoke,
A token Judas gave to some,
That they might know whom they should take,
He whom I kiss it is the same,
Lay hold on him, least you have blame.
Ioh. 18.6.
But Christ whose might they could not match,
If he had meant them to withstand,
(Whom they by fraud or force would catth,)
Went forth to meet them our of hand:
Who with his word their weapons all,
And they themselves did cause to fall.
When Christ said to them, whom seek ye?
Jesus of Nazareth, they say.
He answered and said, I am he,
And so they all went back away,
And to the ground they did thereat,
As men amazed fall down flat.
Then he said unto them again,
Whom seek ye after tell it me?
Jesus of Nazareth certain,
They answered is even he.
Then Jesus said, sure here I am,
For whom ye say, you hither came.
If you seek me let these men go,
And quietly depart away:
This was that his word might prove so,
Which he of them before did say; Ioh. 18.9. Cap. 17.12. Psalm. 109.7.

Of them which thou have given me,
I have not sure lost one, said he.
Then Simon Peter drew a sword,
And smote the high Priests servant there:
He minded to revenge his Lord,
And therefore cut of Malchus ear:
For so they called him by name,
He was one that with Judas came.
Put up thy sword in sheath, said he,
What say thou (o Peter) now?
The cup my father gives me,
Shall I not drink of think thou?
The Scripture thus I must fulfill,
That says, it is my fathers will.
Do thou suppose I cannot pray
My father, that he would give me
Twelve legions (as well he may,)
Of Angels with me still to be?
Then pressed Judas Christ to kiss.
Betray'st thou me, said Christ with this?
Then to the multitude he said,
The high Priests, and the Captains there:
Ye be come out as men affrayd,
Or as against a thief it were,
With swords, and staves: when I, said he,
Did daily teach, you took not me.
Jesus was taken, bound, and brought to Anna^ first, and then to Cayphas.
The Captain, officers and band, Ioh. 18.12.

Took Jesus, and they bound him then,
And thence they led him out of hand,
Among a sort of armed men.
To Annas first, he father was
To her that was wife of Cayphas.
Ioh. 18.14. Cap. 11.50.
This Cayphas was high Priest that year,
He to the Jews this counsel gave,
How it expedient did appear,
That they the man as then should have,
Which there must for the people dye,
Lest they should perish utterly.
This of himself then spoke not he,
But being high Priest propheci'd
Numb. 24.5.
As Balam did, the Lords decree,
Which he would feign have contrari'd:
But both or them were bridled so,
They must obey would they or no.
Ioh. 18.15. Math. 26.58. Mar. 1^.54. Luc. 22.5^
Now Simon Peter followed
His master, and another then
Of the Disciples, acquainted
With the high Priests and with their men:
This therefore by acquaintance went
Into the hall, where Christ was sent.
But Peter stood out at the door,
He was not friended there so well:
The other that went in before,
Came out to him as it befell,
And spoke to her that kept the gate,
And so brought Peter in thereat.
The high Priests, the Elders, and the whole Counsel sought false witness
against Jesus: Peter denies him thrice.
Ioh. 18.17.
Then said the maid that kept the gate,
Thou one of his Disciples art:
But he denied it very flat,
And so from her he did depart.
Then came he where the servants were,
And sat him down among there.
The high Priests and the Elders all, Math. 26.59. Mar. 14.55.

That then were met in Counsel there,
Within the high Priest Cayphas hall,
Sought such as would false witness bear,
Whereby they might make Jesus dye,
But they found none assuredly.
Though many came that witness bare,
Their witness yet did not agree;
At last are found two men that dare
False witnesses against him be.
They undertook to justify,
More then was true assuredly.
They said, that they had heard him say,
That he Gods temple could destroy,
And build a fayrer every way,
Within three days without annoy. Mar. 14.59.

Yet these as Mark does testify,
Did not agree so perfectly.
Then the chief Priest from seat arose,
And asked Jesus on this wise,
Why answerest thou not to those?
Thou see what witnesses arise,
And testify, as may appear,
A truth, against thee to us here.
But Jesus yet did hold his peace.
The high Priest said to him again,
I charge thee that thou do no less,
By God the Lord, but tell it plain,
Mar. 14.62. Math. 24.30.
If Christ the son of God thou be?
Then Jesus said, I sure am he.
Math. 26.64. Cap. 16.27. Romans 14.10. 1. These. 4.14.
And ye shall see the son of man,
Sitting at the right hand of God,
(Whose power to resist none can,
Nor of himself escape his rod)
And in the clouds of heaven shall ye,
The son of man then coming see.
The high Priest then his clothes did rent,
And said, what need we any more
Of witnesses for this intent?
He openly blasphemeth sore.
What think ye? then they cried all,
Death he deserves, and dye he shall.
Math. 26.67. Esaias. 50.6.
They mocked Christ, that him did hold,
And spat withal into his face:
To strike him also they were bold,
So much they were deuoyd of grace;
With rods and fists most cruelly,
They beat, and vsd him shamefully,
Then said they to him, Prophecy,
Which of us all now has done this:
And other things as wickedly
They did against him then devise.
But he most meekely suffered all,
To bring us sinners our of thrall.
Math. 26.69. Mar. 14.66. Luc. 22.55. Ioh. 18.25.
Now all this while there at the fire
Did Simon sit, among them then:
Another maid did thus inquire,
Art not thou one of this man's men?
Though she affirmed it to be so,
Yet he denied it, saying no.
Then they that stood by, said again,
One of them thou most surely art:
Thy speech bewrays thee so plain,
Thou can not hide it for thy heart.
Then he to curse and swear began,
That he did never know the man.
The cock did crow then once again, Mar. 14.72.

For Mark does say he crowed twice:
Man of himself is very vain,
Peter denied his master thrice.
The cocks crow could not let his fall,
Till Christ did look on him withal.
Then he remembered what was said
Of Jesus unto him before;
And then he went out all affrayd,
And wept and wayled very sore.
Whom late no death could terrify,
Perceived then his infirmity.
Christ was brought unto Pylate then President of the Romans: Judas repentance
and death.
Then in the dawning of the day, Math. 27.1. Mar. 15.1. Luc. 22.66. Ioh. 18.28.

The high Priests and the Elders did
A counsel hold to find some way,
By death Christ Jesus life to rid:
Whom thence they led then hastily,
Bound hand and foot most shamefully.
From Cayphas unto Pylats hall,
Jesus condemned so of late,
They brought bound by their counsel all;
(Re^oycing at his woeful state.)
For they had no authority,
Our Savior Christ to crucify.
Yet they into the common hall,
Where Pylate did his judgment give
Went not themselves, least thereby all
(For so the Jews did then believe)
Should be defiled, and be let
Thereby the passover to eat.
Math. 27.3.
While this was doing, mark the end
That to the traitor Judas fell:
He was past grace for to amend,
He loved Mammon to to well:
Yet his offense displeasd him so,
That he was wrapped all in woe.
When by his means he did perceive,
His master was condemned to dye,
An inward grief he did conceive,
And did repent him mightily:
But his repentance took no place,
For it was void of faith and grace.
The thi^tie silver pieces he
Unto the high Priest brought again:
I sinned, said he, and woe is me,
Which have procured my masters pain;
It was because you thought it good,
That I betrayed his guiltless blood.
What is that unto us, said they?
Look thou to that which thou have done:
Therein thou did our hests obey,
And we will end what is begone.
Math. 27.5. Act. 1.18.
In temple he the silver cast,
And went and hanged himself at last.
The chief Priests took the silver plate,
And said, it is not lawful we
Do them put up (such is our state)
Among our treasure for to be.
And why? the law does so devise,
Because it is of blood the price.
Then they took counsel, and did buy
A potters field, as did befall, Zachar. 11.13.

For to fulfill the Prophecy,
To be the strangers burial:
Wherefore that field is called, I say, Math. 27.8. Act. 1.19.

The field of blood until this day.
And to leave of his tragedy, Math. 27.11^ Mar. 15.1. Luc. 23.3. Ioh. 18.33.

Let us return to Christ again,
Whom then the Jews maliciously,
For to accuse did take such pain;
On Pylate they did cry and call,
Though then they went not to the hall.
Pylate went out to them, and said,
What cause bring you against this man?
The wicked Jews nothing affrayd,
For to accuse him thus began;
An evil doer were not he,
We would not have brought him to thee.
Then Pylate said to them again,
Take him, and judge him by your law,
We may not judge him, it is plain, Ioh. 18.32. Math. 20.19.

Of Caesar we do stand in awe.
Christ's word this was to verify,
When he foretold how he should dye.
Luc. 23.1. Math. 22.21. Mar. 12.17.
They charged Christ that found he was,
Perverting of the people there,
Forbidding men from place to place,
To pay their tribute any where
Unto Augustus, persuading
That he was Christ their only king.
^uc. 23.3. Math. 27.11. Mar. 15.2. Ioh. 18.33.
As Jesus in the judgment hall,
Before the governor did stand,
He said to Christ before them all,
Answer thou this now out of hand;
Art thou king of the Jews or no?
And Jesus said, thou say so.
The high Priests, and thy nation,
Delivered thee unto me:
Now tell me then what have thou done,
That they should so cry out on thee?
They say thou art a naughty man,
Defend thy cause now if thou can.
Ioh. 18.36.
Then Jesus said, my kingdom is
Not of this world, for if it were.
My servants sure would never miss,
To fight for me without all fear,
Ere I should thus delivered be,
Unto the Jews, as thou do see.
Then Pylate said, art thou a king?
And Jesus said, thou say I am.
I was borne for this very thing.
For this cause to the world I came,
And witness of the truth to bear:
My voice he that loves, truth will hear.
Pylate sent Christ to Herod, and they were made friends that day: Herod sent
Christ back to Pylate: Pylate warned by his wife sought by all means to
deliver Christ.
Then to the high Priests Pylate said, Luc. 23.4.

I find no fault sure in this man:
Their fury then could not be stayed,
But fiercely thus they all began;
He teaches moving mightily
All Judea to this place.
All, and begone at Galilie.
When Pylate heard of Galilie,
Is he a Galilean then?
Said he; and forthwith hastily
Sent Christ to Herod with his men:
He at Jerusalem then was,
When all these things came so to pass.
When Herod saw him, he was glad,
For he desired him to see:
And so his wish at last he had,
Which never till that time would be.
Such signs and wonders Herod thought
He should have seen, as Christ had wrought.
He then with Christ there questioned,
And did him many things demand:
But Jesus nothing answered,
For all king Herod could command.
Though high Priests, Scribes and people all,
Accused Christ in Herod's hall.
Then Herod with his men of war,
Mocking Christ, him in white array:
(Pylate and Herod were at jar,
And were made friends that very day.)
And Christ so clad, Herod again,
Sent back to Pylate it is plain.
Then he thus warned by his wife,
Wrong not thou that just man, said she:
He sought all means to save his life,
But by those means it would not be.
This made the Jews yet almost mad,
To hear what he devised had.
Ye have brought this man unto me,
As who the people does pervert:
I have examined him, ye see,
And find in him no such desert,
To punish him for any thing,
That you against the man do bring.
Nor Herod unto whom ye went,
Finds that he does deserve to dye:
For unto Herod him I sent,
Whom uncondemned verily
He did send back; since it is so,
I Will chasten him, and let him go.
The governor was accustomed at that feast to let loose unto the people a
prisoner, whom they would: he offered to let loose Jesus unto them, but they
required Barrabas and obtained; their importunity also prevailed with Pylate
against Christ.
Math. 27.15. Mar. 15.6. Luc. 23.17. Ioh. 18.39. Act. 3.14.
The governor still at that feast,
Was wont to give a prisner free:
He whom the people would request,
Who so it were, the same was he.
One Barrabas was prisoner,
A very thief and murderer.
Then Pylate to the people said,
Whom will ye that I do let loose?
His liberty shall vndelayd
Be granted him, whom ye do choose:
If Christ, or Barrabas be he,
Now name the man, he shall go free.
For Pylate knew it verily,
That envy caused them indeed
To deal with Christ so cruelly,
And therefore sought to have him freed.
His wife also to that intent,
A message had to Pylate sent.
But the chief Priests and Elders bad Math. 27.20. Mar. 15.11. Luc. 23.18.
Ioh. 18.42.

The people that they should require,
That Barrabas might free be had,
And that none should for Christ desire.
To this advise with full intent,
The people soon did yield consent.
For when that Pylate did demand,
Which of them both they would have loose:
They (as the high Priest did command)
Barrabas the thief did choose.
Since we (say they) this custom have,
Then Barrabas we all do crave.
But Pylate willing to let go
Christ Jesus, asked them again;
What will ye then that I should do
With Jesus? and they answered plain,
And did request most instantly,
That Pylate would him crucify.
He did the third time ask likewise,
What was the evil Christ had done:
I cannot see (though you surmise)
A cause of death since you begone.
Christ I will chastise and let go,
If you consent to have it so.
But they more earnestly require,
That he would Jesus crucify.
At last he granted their desire,
Although it were unwillingly:
For when the people seemd to fail,
The high Priests voices did prevail.
When Pilate saw all he could do,
Would not effect then his desire,
But that it made the tumult mo,
And that they did Christ's death conspire:
Their fury grew to such a rage,
That naught but death could it assuage.
Math. 27.24.
Then Pilate washed his hands, and said,
Most innocent I am indeed:
Though you seem not to be affrayd,
To make this just man's heart to bleed.
As they wished ^o they had, and ^his curse conti^ueth to this day. Math. 27.26.
His blood on us and ours let be,
If it offend, and none on thee.
Christ Jesus was condemned and crucified.
So Pilate willing them to please,
Gave sentence as they did require:
He Barrabas did then release,
And Jesus as they did desire
He scourged, and delivered
Unto them to be crucified.
Matthew. 27.27. Mar. 15.16. Ioh. 19.1.
The soldiers led Christ away,
And brought him to the common hall:
Whereas the band without delay,
Were gathered together all,
To work and do assuredly,
To Christ all kind of villainy.
They stripped him of all he had,
And put on him a scarlet weed:
A crown of thorns which they had made,
Set on his head, in hand a reed,
And bowing knees, in mocking way,
God save thee king of Jews, they say.
And they did spit then in his face,
With rods they smote him on the head,
They were all clean deuoyd of grace,
They in their sins so wallowed:
They practiced what they could tho,
That wrought, or might increase his woe.
They took his robe from him away,
And put his clothes on him again:
Then led him forth without delay,
No whit regarding all his pain.
Some thought the time lost verily,
They let Christ to crucify.
As they out of the hall then came, Matthew. 27.32 Mar. 15.21. Luc. 23.26.

They met a man that passed by.
Simon of Cyren called by name,
Him they compelled certainly,
The cross of Christ with them to bear:
Which the man did for very fear.
A multitude of people then, Luc. 23.27.

Did follow Christ the way he went,
As Well of women as of men,
For him they all did much lament.
Weep not ye women so for me,
But for your sons and selves, said he.
The days will come when men shall say,
Blessed are they that barren are:
The paps that give no suck this day,
And wombes that likewise never bare:
Luc. 23.30. ^say. 2.19. ^osea. 10.8. ^euel. 6.16.
For they shall wish the hills to fall,
And so the mountains, on them all.
^uc. 23.31. ^ Pet. 4.17. ^erem. 25.29. ^rou. 2.21.
If they do this in the green tree,
What shall be done then in the dry?
If thus they execute on me
The depth of all their cruelty?
What shall God to the wicked do?
Consider it, and weep no mo.
Math. 27.33. Mar. 15.27. ^uc. 23.32. ^oh. 19.18.
Two evil doers likewise were,
Then led with Christ for to be slain,
A just reward they both did bear,
Their evil deeds deserved pain.
Yet Christ was vsd more spitefully
Then they, for all their villainy.
Math. 27.38. Mar. 15.22. ^oh. 19.17. Luc. 23.33.
From thence into the place they came,
Which Golgotha they called then:
Or dead men's sculs it had the name,
For there they executed men:
They also called it Caluarie,
Where they did Jesus crucify.
Math. 27.34. Mar. 15.33.
Then vinegar they mixed with gall,
Or wine and myrrh as other think:
When Christ for drink began to call,
They offered this for him to drink.
They had devised it in vain,
He would not so be rid of pain.
When Jesus thus did suffer death,
Impatiencie in him was none,
He sought no means to stop his breath,
As he with fear were ouergone:
But for us died verily,
As God appointed, patiently.
And crucified when Jesus was, Luc. 22.33. Matthew. 27.38 Mar. 15.27.

Those evil doers likewise were
So put to death, each in his place,
On his right hand and left hand there.
Christ Jesus suffered like a lamb,
Not once repining at the same.
But calling to his father, said,
O father do thou them forgive,
Though they be not at all affrayd,
Thy son with torments thus to grieve:
And though my life they take away,
That thou will blot their sins, I pray.
His garments then they parted all, Matthew. 27.3^ Mar. 15.24. Ioh. 19.23. Psalm.
22.18.

And did cast lots there for his coat,
That he whose lot thereon would fall,
Might sole enjoy what he had got.
This was almighty God his will,
That they the Scriptures should fulfill.
And all the people that stood by,
Beheld and saw what there was done:
The rulers also scornefully
Said, if he be Gods chosen son,
As unto others health he gave,
So he himself now let him save.
A title Pilate also wrote, Matthew. 27.3^ Mar. 15.26* Luc. 23.38. Ioh. 19.19*

And put it up the cross upon,
Whereby each man might plainly note,
What was then his opinion;
Jesus of Nazareth to be
King of the Jews, confessed he.
And though the high Priests did repine,
That Pilate then should write him so:
This sentence, said he, it is mine,
It shall remain will ye or no.
In Hebrew, Greek, and Latin he,
Did cause the same so writ to be.
^oh. 19.25.
All this while by his cross did stand
His mother, and her sister to,
Marie Cleopas was at hand,
And Marie Magdalene also.
Though grief did pierce them to the heart,
They would not yet from Christ depart.
Then Jesus to his mother said,
And the Disciple standing by,
Though they were both then all dismayed,
To see Christ vsd so cruelly.
Thy mother see, said he to the one,
And to the other, see thy son.
And this Disciple was the same,
That Christ did so entirely love,
Though John does here conceal his name:
Yet duty did so deeply move
His heart, that he obediently
Christ's hests performed faithfully.
Math. 27.39. Mar. 15.29. Luc. 23.35.
The wicked Jews that passed by.
Reuil'd at Christ, and wagd the head:
The high Priest, Scribe and Pharisie,
Continued so till Christ was dead;
They mocking him from most to least,
Till he was dead, did never rest.
Thou that the Temple do destroy,
And build it in three days again,
Now save thy self from all annoy,
Why do thou so here suffer pain?
The son of God if that thou be,
Come from the cross, that we may see.
Then of the evil doers one Luc. 23.39.

Began to rail on him also:
If thou be Christ Gods only son,
Command that we from hence may go.
Help now, said he, thy self and us,
That here do hang tormented thus.
The other answered and said,
Do thou not fear the living God?
Art not thou sinful man dismayed,
That feel justly of his rod?
For we are punished worthily,
But this man undeservedly.
Thus unto Jesus then said he,
When thou do to thy kingdom come,
I pray thee Lord remember me,
And grant me there with thee a room.
Then Jesus said, to thee I say,
Thou shall be there with me this day.
From the sixth hour the ninth unto,
That day was darkened through the land:
The sun gave then no shine also.
The Jews would not yet understand,
No, not though that The veil of the Temple rent through the midst as after
appears. Math. 27.46. Mar. 15.34. Psalm. 22.2.
the temple there,
Renting, did put them all in fear.
About the ninth hour Jesus said,
Crying aloud as then likewise,
My God why have thou thus delayed,
Or seem thy son so to despise?
He seeks said some, that then stood by,
Elias help assuredly.
And other said, now let us see,
If that Elias will him save.
Then Jesus said, I thirst, give me
To cool my thirst some drink, I craves:
And said, all things are finished,
As God the Lord has promised.
Matthew, Mark, as John also
Say, that some there that then stood by,
With sponge and vinegar did go,
That they had filled hastily:
And offered it upon a reed,
But Christ drunk not of it indeed.
Luc. 23.46. Psalm. 31.3.
Then with a loud voice Christ did cry,
Into thy hands I do commend
My spirit, now most heartily:
O father dear, the same defend.
And so he bowing down the head,
Gave up the ghost, and straight was dead.
Matthew. 27.51. 2. Cor. 3.14.
Then (as is said) the veil did rent,
Of their great Temple into twain:
From top to bottom it was splent,
Which never could enclose again;
The earth did quake, and stones did riue,
And graves did yield their dead alive.
And many Saints did rise and go,
After his resurrection,
Into the city, to and fro,
And made their apparition
To many of the godly there,
That of Gods wrath did stand in fear.
When the Centurion that stood by,
And they that were abiding there,
Saw what did happen, certainly
They fell into exceeding fear:
Surely this man was just, said he;
And needs the son of God must be.
The people that came to that sight,
And did behold what things were done,
Smiting their breasts, returned right,
Confessing him to be Gods son.
Of his acquaintance some did stay,
But most were fled and gone away.
The women boldly there did stay,
And stood aloof, and looked on:
Though his Disciples fled away,
These did behold his passion:
For God would have those weakelings there,
Witness of such things for to bear.
The Jews because they did prepare
That day, against the Sabbath day,
As men that had exceeding care,
Lest they offended any way:
For that day was the Matthew. 27.57. Mar. 15.42. Luc. 23.50. Ioh. 19.38. Their
Sabbatu^ magnu^ fell out that year.
chiefest feast
Among the Jews of all the rest.
Now that the bodies might not be,
Remaining on the cross that day,
They all together thus agree,
To beg of Pilate, that they may
Break all their legs, and them down take,
Lest it should them polluted make.
The Jews they all did greatly fear,
In outward things for to offend:
Their Sabbath they observed there,
Religiously they did pretend;
Yet spared not most wilfully,
To kill the guiltless cruelly.
And now when leave they gotten had,
The soldiers did perform the deed:
Both they and these were very glad,
That so they of their suite did speed:
Therefore they first the thieves did take,
And both their legs a sunder brake.
And when they unto Jesus went,
And found him then already dead,
His legs they brake not, as they meant,
But then a soldier opened
H^s side so sweet with cruel spear,
Which he in hand as then did bear.
And there-out straightway issued,
As blood then water freshly both:
He that saw when it happened,
Does witness it as very troth,
And knows that he here does give
The truth, that you might it believe.
All these things were so done in deed,
That they the Scripture might fulfill:
Act. 2.23.
For God before had so decreed,
And man could not resist his will.
Ioh. 19.37. Zach. 12.10.
Whom they thrust thorough they shall see:
Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12.
His bones shall not one broken be.
Christ was taken down from the Cross, enbalmed and buried by Joseph of
Arimathia and Nicodemus.
Matthew. 27.57.
When euen-tide was now at hand,
That day of preparation, Mar. 15.42. Luc. 23.50. Ioh. 19.38.

A night then kept throughout the land,
With solemn observation:
Their Sabbath then must have no let,
For it began when sun was set.
Then Joseph came that was so just, Mar. 15.43.

A noble counselor in deed,
Which did in God repose his trust,
And of his kingdom hoped to speed.
To those he did not give consent,
That Christ our Savior did torment.
His worldly wealth was not a let,
And banished he had all fear:
His master he could not forget,
That did for him such torments bear;
Whose body Joseph then was glad,
To beg of Pylate: which he had.
But Pilate maruell'd if he were
Already dead, and sent to call
The Captain, witness for to bear,
That h^d been present there at all.
And when he heard the truth, then he
To Joseph's will did soon agree.
Then Joseph went to take away
The body which he begged so:
He would therein make no delay,
But straight to take it down would go.
The feast drew on, Joseph would have
Christ Jesus body laid in grave.
And Nicodemus likewise came, Ioh. 19.39. Cap. 3.2.

Which a Disciple was also,
Though secretly for fear of blame,
This man with Joseph then did go.
Of mirrhe and ^loes pure and rare,
An hundred weight with him he bare.
They both his body down did take,
And it in linen cloths did lap:
Ointments and odours they did make,
Which with the body they did wrap.
They buried him as manner then
Was for to bury Noblemen.
Christ in a sepulcher they lay,
That Joseph in a rock did hew,
Wherein no man until that day
Was ever laid, this Joseph knew,
That had thereof the property,
As Luke and John do testify.
So when they had in solemn wise
Interred Christ, ere they were gone,
They did between them both devise,
To roll unto the door a stone:
And then they did with heavy heart,
From thence unto their home depart.
And Marie Magdalene did see,
And so did Marie loses to,
Where Christ in grave was laid to be;
Then homeward both began to go,
Ointments and odours to prepare:
They then of Christ (though dead) had care.
Yet rested they the Sabbath day,
Because of the commandment:
Though they kept them from thence away,
They carried still a full intent,
When that the Sabbath had an end,
To visit Christ their Lord and friend.
Now that the Lord might manifest, Math. 27.62.

Christ Jesus resurrection
Unto the Jews, and all the rest,
That were of the same faction:
He caused them, to their great shame,
To be the witness of the same.
They spared not the sabbath day,
To manifest their malice more:
Their zeal was such they would not stay,
Or rather raging as before,
The high Priests, Scribes and all the rest,
Assembled them upon that feast.
And so they unto Pilate went,
And humbly did desire his aid,
Expressing wholly their intent,
They in this manner to him said;
Christ that deceiuer often would say,
I will from death rise the third day.
Command the grave (we do pray thee)
To be made sure, till that be past,
Lest his disciples, which may be,
Do steal him while those days do last:
And to the people then do say,
That Christ from death rose up that day.
So the last error worse shall be,
A great deal then the first has been.
They raged yet as when that he
Among them late alive was seen.
Ye have a watch, said Pilate, go,
And make it sure, do even so.
All thence they went then hastily,
The sepulcher for to make fast:
A watch provided carefully,
They sealed the stone, this was the last.
And this the Lord did so effect,
To confound whom he had reject.
And to their saving health likewise,
Whom he had chosen long before.
To thee therefore God only wise,
Be praise and thanks for evermore:
One mighty God in persons three,
All honor we do give to thee.
Amen.
THE SIXTH AND LAST PART OF THE HISTORY OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOVR Jesus Christ,
as it is written by the Evangelists: containing his resurrection from death,
and his ascension to heaven.
To the tune of the 81. Psalm.
Christ rose from death the day after the Sabbath, called the Lords day: Marie
Magdalene and others came to the sepulcher, and saw a vision of Angels.
BElight and glad, in God rejoice, Psalm. 81.

Which is our strength and stay:
Be joyful and lift up your voice,
To Jacobs God always:
Math. 1.16. Luc. 2.7.11. Ioh. 1.14. Cap. 8.42.
For he has sent his son indeed,
Our flesh on him to take,
As he had long before Genesis 3.15. Cap. 12.3.
decreed,
For his great mercies sake.
Which flesh in Luc. 2.11. Mat. 8.20. Mat. 9.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Cor. 6.11.
base and poor array,
Christ clad him self withal,
And in this flesh he took away
Luc. 2.11. Mat. 8.20. Mat. 9.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Cor. 6.11.
The cause of all our fall.
First, needs he must be perfect man,
Since Genesis 3.6.
man did first offend:
^en. 3.6. ^oh. 1.1.
And God also, who only can
So great a fault amend.
Thus Christ as he appointed was,
Both God and man in deed,
Brought by his death that thing to pass,
^. Cor. 15.3.4.
Which nothing else could speed.
This Christ wrought our redemption,
From devil, death and hell:
We have by him salvation,
As holy Scriptures tell.
And when all men had lost this light,
As far as man could see:
For darkness is our sharpest sight,
If faithless that we be:
1. Cor. 15.4. Esaias. 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Jonas. 2.1.10.
Yea then when all our hope was past,
To see Christ Jesus slain,
Out of the grave God brought at last,
Our saving health again.
And to be witness of the same,
And triumph over hell,
(That flesh and blood might to their shame,
Consider of it well)
The weakelings of the world he chose,
Whom worldly men despise,
For to confound the wits of those,
That thought them worldly wise.
1. Cor. 15.12.
I mean the rising up again,
Of Jesus from the dead:
Lest that our hope had been in vain,
And we with fancies fed.
For if the dead did not arise,
Our hope were vain, I say,
And we as beasts should in that wise,
Continue in the clay.
But Christ the first fruits of the dead, 1. Cor. 15.20. Coloss. 1.18. Revel.
1.5.

Is risen up in deed:
As we the members of that head,
Shall sure hereafter speed.
And to stir up the slothful fear,
That his Disciples had,
Weak women did first witness bear,
Of that which made us glad.
They when the Sabbath day was past, Mar. 16.1. Luc. 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.

Or while it did endure,
Devised how they might at last,
With ointments sweet and pure,
Enbalme Christ's body in the grave:
Therefore at Sabboths end,
Odours and ointments sweet they have,
To work what they intend.
With them the Sabbath day was done,
As Soon as sun was set:
And then the women all begone,
(For nothing then did let)
Their ointments sweet for to prepare:
And this they did by night,
That they might be (this was their care)
There by the day was light.
Then Mary Magdalen by name,
And Mary Solom to,
Were they which thus together came,
With other women mo:
And as they went all by the way,
This doubt did then arise,
The stone to roll the women say,
We cannot all devise.
Yet to the sepulcher they go,
The first day of the week:
Where they at sun appearing so
Found that which they did seek:
I mean when they came to the place,
Behold the stone was gone:
Gods Angel showed them this grace,
To roll away the stone.
Whose face did shine like lightening,
His garments white as snow:
Which unto them in the dawning,
These joyful news did show:
How from the dead Christ risen was;
But they amazed were,
To see such things come so to pass,
Did put them in great fear.
The earthquake first, and then that sight,
Vnusd of them to see,
Did make the women all affright,
And wish at home to be.
And sure no marvel, fith also
The watch was fraught with fear,
Notable once to move or go,
They so astonished were.
When Marie saw the stone away,
She went thence home with speed,
To Simon Peter where he lay,
To show him of the deed.
And to the rest, for this she thought,
From grave the body they,
(Which we with tears and sorrow sought)
By night did sure convey.
Then Peter went with John away,
To see what they had done:
They would no longer make delay,
But both together run;
Yet this Disciple him out went,
And Peter left behind,
Though both did run with full intent
The truth thereof to find.
When John unto the grave did come,
He stouped down to see,
Supposed as it is of some,
If Christ therein might be;
But he went not into the cave
Till Simon Peter came,
Who stepped first into the grave,
To see and search the same.
Who there did find the linen lie,
And kerchiefe of his head:
Not with the linen, but set by,
Wrapped in another stead.
Then went the other in also,
That first came to the place:
And both saw and believed tho,
God giving both such grace.
For they did not well understand,
That Christ should rise indeed,
Till then: so they thence out of hand,
Returned home with speed:
Nor did they see, or hear, as then,
More then the empty grave:
Christ surely had not chosen men,
First sight of him to have.
But Mary would not so depart,
Nor leave his grave as yet:
She felt such sorrow in her heart,
She could him forget.
But wept, and wayled very sore,
Which she did not in vain;
She was first witness made therefore,
That Christ did rise again.
The women they did not depart,
Their minds were wholly set
To find Christ, though they suffered smart,
Nothing the same could let:
Wherefore to comfort them again,
God down his Angels sent,
Who hears his when they complain,
Effecting their intent.
Which Angels to the women said,
Why do ye weep and wayle?
Pluck up your hearts, be not affrayd,
Ye have no cause to quayle:
Jesus that late was crucified,
In grave you look to find:
Since the Scripture is verified,
Then be not of that mind.
Christ is not here, but risen is,
Alive in deed is he:
And that ye may be sure of this,
Come to his grave and see:
What God before appointed had,
Christ Jesus did fulfill:
Thereby to make his chosen glad,
And to obey Gods will.
Christ spoke to you before of this,
If ye remember well,
While he in Galilie iwis,
Did there among you dwell: Luc. 24.7. Cap. 9.22. Math. 17.23. Mar. 9.31.

The son of man delivered,
To sinful men must be,
Said Christ, for to be crucified,
Yet rise again will he.
Then they these words remembered,
Though they were all affrayd:
And knew that he had suffered,
As he before had said.
Thus were the women comforted, Those 3. things which the Angels did to the
women. Christ afterward appearing to the^ by the way did the same. 1. Eased
their fear comforted the^. 2. Satisfied the^ of his resurrection. 3. And sent
the^ to declare the same to his Disciples.

And eased of their fear:
And of Christ's rising answered,
While they were weeping there.
And sent home hastily with care,
His resurrection
To his Disciples to declare
With expedition.
Which three things afterward again,
Christ did to them, I say:
1 He easd their fear: 2 they saw him plain:
3 He sent them back a way.
Ioh. 20.11. Mar. 16.9.
But Christ to Mary Magdalen
Did first of all appear,
While she was weeping, even then
At his sepulcher there:
And when she bowed down to see,
And look the grave into,
Of Angels there she found to be
(As John reports) two.
Which both, where Jesus body lay
Were sitting in the grave:
And thus they unto Mary say,
What seek thou to have?
Why weepest thou? she said again,
My Lord is stolen away:
Because I know not (I complain)
Where they my Lord did lay.
When Mary thus to them had said,
She turning back might see
Christ first apparition was to Mary Magdalen after his resurrection.
Christ standing by, yet all dismayed
Christ knew him not to be.
Christ said, why weep'st thou? she did say
Sir, if thou bore him hence:
Now tell me where thou did him lay,
And I will fetch him thence.
All this while she thought Christ to be
The gardener in deed:
But when by name Christ called, she
Did turn about with speed:
And with her body turned her mind,
Thus did effect his call:
For she which hitherto as blind
Perceiud him not at all,
Confessing now, does answer so
That he her master is,
Whom she as gardner spoke unto,
And does rejoice at this.
Mar. 16.9.
This Mary (Mark says) Christ made free,
When she had then at least
Seven devils in her; wherewith says he,
This woman was possessed.
But touch not me, did Jesus say, Ioh. 26.17.

That I am not ascended,
Thou do believe: this error may
And must by faith be moved.
Leave thou to look as dead for me,
I live assuredly;
And now to touch me, learn to fly
By faith above the sky,
And to my brethren, say thou so,
To them I do thee send:
To my father and yours, I go,
To God I do ascend.
Which was to lift their earthly mind,
To look for whom we love,
No more in earthy grave to find,
But now in heaven above.
Christ appeared to the women as they went back from the grave, after they had
seen the Angels, which told them of Christ's resurrection.
Then next, Christ second apparition to the women as they went homward by the
way. Math. 28.10.
while that the women went
All homeward in the way:
For back the Angels had them sent
To tell these news: I say
Christ Jesus did to them appear,
Matthew does testify:
They worshipped him with reu'rence there
Embracing joyfully.
To whom, what both the Angels said,
Christ did confirm again:


Go bid my brethren, this said he,

For me (as you have) must they see,
And shall do speedily.
Mar. 16.10.
So thence, they went as charge they had,
(No fear did them annoy)
All his Disciples to make glad,
Who thought it but a toy:
For all the women did report,
They would it not believe,
No comfort, could with them confort,
Christ's death so did them grieve.
The soldiers signified to the high Priests what was done, and they were
corrupted with money by them.
Math. 28.11.
When they were gone, the watchmen came
The City then unto,
And told the high Priests all the same,
Which knew not what to do,
So mad they were, that their devise,
Did not effect in deed:
Together they therefore their wise
To counsel called with speed.
Wherein they did with one consent,
Among themselves agree,
The watch with money to content,
They spared for no fee:
Nor yet the watch did force to lie,
When they the money had;
The high Priests hired them easily,
And each of them was glad.
The Jews that they had so obtaind
The watch to work their will:
The watch that they so much had gaind,
They cared not how ill.
So both were pleased, but mark the end,
What was it they should do?
The watch must lie, and they defend,
It was concluded so.
The lie was this, that Christ from grave
Was stolen away by night,
And his Disciples surely have
Now hid him out of sight.
When was it done? while we were all
By heavy sleep oppressed:
And when we thought that great and small,
Had likewise been at rest.
If they then slept, how did they see,
When he was stolen away?
And his Disciples knew to be,
That did him thence convey?
Or why did they (being armed men)
Not seem for to resist
Those weakelings, without weapons then?
Too late comes had I wist.
If thieves had stolen the body thence,
They had not left behind
The linen clothes, the recompense
That they were there to find.
If friends, the shame to see him bare,
Had causd them this to do:
As of the body to have care,
To take the linen to.
Yet they upon presumption,
And promise to them made,
By the high Priests persuasion,
Set up their lying trade:
For when they knew they should go free,
And fall to no disgrace,
Although the governor did see,
That they did lie apace,
They spread abroad this false report,
Which no way can be so:
That his disciples did resort
By night his grave unto,
And had Christ's body stolen away,
To make men think that he,
Ioh. 2.19. Cap. 10.17. Esaias 53.7.
As he before (alive) did say
In three days will I be.
And this among the Jews is said
Unto this very day,
(For they are not at all affrayd)
That he was stolen away.
By Pilates winking came to pass,
That this escaped tho:
He (as the high Priests) blinded was,
For God would have it so.
The high Priests did the Governor
Persuade; he was content;
The watch men had their hire therefore,
And so away were sent.
And being gone, they spread this fame,
That Christ was stolen away:
Which sure the Jews do to their shame,
Believe unto this day.
Christ. 3. apparition, to Simo^ Peter.
Christ appeared to Peter.
Christ first to Marie did appear,
To comfort sinners all, Luc. 7.37. Cap. 8.2. Marc. 16.9.

Then to the other women there,
To answer Euahs fall.
And thirdly unto Peter he
Did show him self also, 1. Cor. 15.5. Luc. 24.34. Luc. 22.62.

From former fear to set him free:
For Christ did see his woe.
Of the two Disciples that went to Emaus, and what happened to them by the way.
Christ's 4. apparition. Luc. 24.13. Aret. in Luc. Erasm. in Luc.

Of the Disciples, the same day,
As two to Emaus went,
(This from Jerusalem then lay,
As writers do consent,
Threescore furlongs; or foorthright
As we account do take,
Seven miles and one half mile we might,
Of the same furlongs make.
This Nicopolis since we name, Hieron. 8. cap. Daniel. Nicepho. li. 10. cap.
31. Plinius lib. 5. cap. 14.

The Romans called it so:
It was a town sometimes of fame,
And very pleasant tho.)
They talked both of what was done
As well to Christ before
He died, as this, which now begone
For to amaze them more.
For they had heard the women tell,
That Christ rose up again,
And was alive; yet knew not well,
Which they should do of twain:
Believe, or not: or what to do,
For all men saw him die:
But women only, say these two,
These news do testify.
And as they thus then reasoned,
Behold it came to pass,
That Christ him self as happened,
Or purposely it was,
Did join him self in journey wise,
With those Disciples then,
And said, what do ye thus devise,
And look as woeful men?
Yet all this while their eyes were hold,
They could not both perceive
What man he was, that was so bold,
Though they did him receive
Most willingly to walk the way,
And travel with them to,
As may appear by what they say,
As they together go.
Art thou, said Cleopas, (my friend)
A stranger only here?
And if thou be, a while attend,
And give unto me ear:
For at Jerusalem of late
The thing has happened,
That we so much do wonder at,
Was thus determined.
Then Jesus said, what things were those?
They said to him again,
The thing that we do now disclose,
A number do disdain.
Jesus of Nazaret was this,
A Prophet mightily
In word and deed, allowd iwis
Of God and man lately.
Him the high Priests and rulers all,
Delivered to be
Condemned in their judgment hall:
And crucified was he.
But we did hope, that he would sure
Deliver Israel:
It Is since he did his death endure,
Three days, we know it well.
And certain women that we have
Among us, verily
Astonished us: for at his grave
Where they were certainly,
Though they there found his body gone,
They did return and say,
Of Angels that a vision
They saw this very day.
Which said, that Christ did live indeed:
So that on this report,
Some of us did with have and speed,
Unto the grave resort.
And they did find apparently,
All as the women said,
But saw not him assuredly,
Which made us all dismayed.
O fools, said Christ, and very slow
Of heart, for to conceive:
What has been said, do ye not know?
Or will ye not perceive?
The Prophets all have this foretold,
That Christ should suffer so,
Then to his glory enter should,
And to his Father go.
And he at Moses then began,
And the Prophets by name,
Interpreting from man to man,
Their sayings of the same:
And all their writings left behind
Of Christ, from first to last,
He then imprinted in their mind,
And would from them have past.
For to the town they did draw near,
Whereto as then they went:
He seemed, not to tarry there,
So trying their intent.
But they constraining him, did say,
Abide with us all night;
Far spent already is the day,
And now the town in sight.
So he went in to take his rest,
Whereof they both were glad,
And then to supper them addressed,
Content with what they had.
He sitting down, the bread did take,
And when they both did see,
He first gave thanks, and then it brake,
They knew him Christ to be.
For both their eyes were opened,
And they did know him well:
But mark what after happened,
For thus it then befell,
While they with joy surprised were,
He went out of their sight,
And left them both abiding there,
To take their rest all night.
Herein we may assuredly,
Perceive Christ Jesus use,
And learn to eat meat thankfully,
Lest we the same abuse.
Christ using now his wont before,
In breaking bread to pray,
Did lighten them, that very sore
Were blinded by the way.
And yet again twixt joy and fear,
They were amazed so,
They could not see how from them there,
He then away did go.
Not that he did his shape at all
Exchange, as some men say:
But from this earth their minds to call,
On heavenly things to lay.
For now no more on earth is he,
At he before has bin
As mortal man, so found to be
In all, excepting sin:
But sits sure in heaven above,
Now in great majesty,
His Father for us still to move,
And work our liberty.
Then they between them selves did say,
Did not our hearts rejoice,
While he talked with us by the way,
And while we heard his voice?
Our hearts did burn, while we heard how
He opened more and more
The Scriptures unto us, so slow
To mark the same before.
And in that hour they rose again,
And did return with speed:
They let not for any pain,
They went back both indeed:
Unto Jerusalem they hie,
Where the Apostles were:
For they did there together lie,
Amazed much with fear.
Whom when they found, they joyfully
Began for to report,
How by the way most happily,
Christ did to them resort.
Yet ere they came the news was spread
That Simon Peter he
Had likewise surely lately sped,
Of Christ a sight to see.
While these confessed what he had done,
And told them by the way,
Luc. 24.36. Mar. 10.14. John 20.19. Christ's 5. apparition.
And how to know him they begone,
By breaking bread that day:
Jesus stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you all:
It is my self, be not affrayd,
Perceive it well you shall.
This was that very day at night,
That he did first arise,
That Christ appeared in their sight,
While closely in this wise
They shut them in a secret place:
The Jews they feared so,
That they durst not be seen a space,
Abroad the streets to go.
He while the doors all close were kept,
And they of him did talk,
Into the midst of them then stepped,
He made no longer walk.
Christ showed his divinity
Herein, we must confess;
Yet left not his humanity,
For he meant nothing less.
Nor did he pierce the doors indeed,
As foolish Papists hold:
For so to do he had no need,
That could do what he would.
If bars or bands and iron gate, Act. 12.10.

Gave Peter leave to go,
Why wonder ye so much thereat,
If these did even so?
And that no feigned shape he had,
As ghosts or spirits have,
To ease their fear, and make them glad,
His hands and feet he gave
That they should handle them and see
That he had flesh and bone:
And not as spirits wont to be,
For they have neither none.
Therefore set care and fear aside,
These troubles that arise,
You may out of your hearts let slide,
And them as toys despise.
The body that was laid in grave,
Now glorified they see,
And to their handling subject have,
So good a God is he.
Lo, thus did Christ to his appear,
Such as sought him indeed:
At every time and tide his ear,
Was open to their need.



Cleopas and others going to Emaus.
these ere day was done.

Appeared Christ also:
Great comfort had they of that sight,
And so had many more.
But while for joy they did not yet
Believe that it was he,
Their blindness did them so much let,
That then they could not see.
Christ did again unto them say,
Peace be unto you all:
As me my Father, so I may,
And do you to me call,
To be sent forth, as I was sent
To do my Fathers will:
The which you must with good intent,
As I have, all fulfill.
He breathed then on them, and said,
Receive the holy Ghost:
And so gave them such heavenly aid,
As might relieve them most.
John 20.23. Matthew. 18.18. 1. Cor. 5.4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
Whose sins ye do remit, they are
Remitted, then said he;
Whose sins retained ye declare,
Retained shall they be.
And while they wondered yet, he said,
Have ye here any meat?
A piece of broyled fish they laid
Before him for to eat,
And of an honey comb a piece:
Which meat then surely he
Did take and eat, that he by these,
Might show him man to be.
Then said he unto them again,
These are the words I spoke,
When as I did with you remain,
And here abiding make:
Fulfilled needs must all things be,
Which by the Prophets were,
As also Moses writ of me,
As in the Law ye hear.
And he their understanding then
Did open, that they might
See what was said by holy men,
And know the Scriptures right.
Thus it is writ, thus behooved
Christ Jesus for to die,
And rise again so from the dead,
The third day verily.
And that of sins remission,
And eke repentance should
Be preached to each nation,
As has before been told;
And that in Christ's name alonely,
Which at Jerusalem
here should first begin:
For his name is assuredly,
The only salve for sin.
Now ye of these things witness are,
Which happened to me:
Therefore see you your selves prepare,
And always ready be.
The promise that my Father made,
You shall receive indeed:
The same I Will send to make you glad,
Assure your selves with speed.
Therefore when I depart you fro,
See that you tarry still
Here in this City; for I go
To do my Fathers will.
In his good time he from on hi^
Will to you power give,
To preach abroad this mystery,
That many may believe.
Christ the eight day after appeared to them again, Thomas himself being then
present.
John 20.24. Christ's sixth apparition.
But Thomas was not with them there,
Which of the twelve was one,
When Jesus did to them appear,
For he from thence was gone.
And the Disciples to him said,
When he was come again;
We saw the Lord while hence ye stayed,
And did abroad remain.
Except in his hands I do see
The print of every nail,
And put my finger there, said he,
Your words will not prevail,
Except also into his side,
My hand that I may thrust:
Your news from reason are so wide,
That them I will not trust.
Now eight days after Christ had been
With his Disciples there,
He thus again was likewise seen,
Unto them to appear:
And that while Thomas was within,
The doors then shut withal:
To stir up Thomas from his incredulity
sin,
And raise him from his fall.
Christ came, and in the midst he stood,
Peace be to you, he said:
Come hither Thomas, for thy good
I come, be not affrayd.
Put in thy fingers here, and see
My hands and side also:
They bear their marks, now faithful be,
And let this weakness go.
Then Thomas answered and said,
My Lord my God art thou.
Thomas said he, be not dismayed:
Because thou see me now
Thou do believe: blessed I say
Are they that have not seen,
And have believed without nay,
As I with them had been.
And many other things did he,
More then are written here:
And his Disciples witness be,
That daily with him were.
But this is written that ye might
Believe that Jesus is
That Christ the son of God, whose right
Is to give life to his.
Christ appeared to James.
1. Cor 1^.7. Christ's 7. appa.
And James another time did see
Christ, Paul does it declare:
Whereof we may assured be,
For Christ of his had care;
And as to Peter, so alone
He unto James then came.
Thus did they see him every one,
And witnessed the same.
Christ appeared to seven of the Disciples as they were fishing at the sea of
Tiberias.
John 21.1.
After these things Jesus also
Did show him self again,
To his Disciples, seven or mo,
Where then they did remain,
At the sea of Tiberias:
For they a fishing were.
And thus as then it came to pass,
That they were fishing there.
These were together in one place,
And Simon Peter said,
I Will go a fishing for a space,
To whom they promise aid:
For they said, we will go with thee,
And so away they went;
Soon shipped they were as they would be,
Small time therein was spent.
But they that night their labor lost,
Christ Jesus was away:
They took no fish along the coast
All night, till it was day.
That Christ came unto them, and then
When he was come indeed,
Though past all hope (as weary men)
Yet presently they speed.
For when it was now early day,
Christ on the shore did stand: Christ's 8. apparition,

They knew him not (as John does say)
Though they were near at hand.
Have ye said Christ, sirs any meat?
They answered him, no.
Christ does not his at all forget,
Where ever that they go.
Cast out your net, and you shall find
On the right side, said he:
So they obeyed Jesus mind,
And cast that side, to see;
Their travels past was then no let,
They did what Christ them bad:
They scarce could draw to land the net,
Such store of fish they had.
Then that Disciple whom Christ loved,
Said unto Peter, lo,
It is the Lord: his heart was moved,
His mind did give him so.
When Peter heard that it was he,
He girt his coat in have,
And cast him self to swim, to see
He would not be the last.
But all the rest by ship did come,
They were not far from land:
For as it is supposd of some,
The shore was hard at hand.
Two hundredth cubits off they were,
Or thereabouts, they say:
The net they drawing with them there,
Made to the shore away.
As Soon as they were come to land,
A fire of coals they see:
And Jesus by the same did stand,
There bread and fish had he.
The fish upon the coals were laid,
That Jesus had before:
Bring of your fish also, he said;
Thereof they had great store.
Then Peter stepped, to draw straightway
The net and fish to land:
His masters mind he did obey,
He ready was at hand.
And hundredth, fifty, then and three
Of fishes great they had:
Their net unbroken safe they see,
For all they were so lade.
Come now and dine, then Jesus said.
Of the Disciples none
Durst ask, who art thou? so affrayd
They were at what was done:
And eke withal they knew it well,
Him Christ the Lord to be:
No man had need the same to tell,
They knew all it was he.
Jesus took bread, and fish likewise,
And to them did it give,
And they did eat what did suffice,
Thus Christ did his relieve.
This was the eight time since he rose,
Christ did to them appear:
To some Disciples, as to those,
That met together there.
Christ restored Peter to his former place, thrice calling him, to answer his
three fold denial of him.
Christ said when they had dined well, John 21.15.

And each of them at ease;
Simon thou son of Jonah tell,
Love thou me more then these?
I love thee Lord, thou know I do.
My lambs (said Christ) then feed.
Jesus the second time said so:
He said, I do indeed*
Then feed my sheep, Christ Jesus said.
Yet once again did he
Ask Peter; which made him dismayed,
So instant him to see.
Yea Peter grieved in heart to hear
Christ ask him thrice the same;
It does to thee (o Lord) appear,
That I do love thy name.
Then feed my sheep, said Christ again;
So to his former place
Christ called him, by this it is plain,
And he received grace.
He did his master thrice deny,
So grievous was his fall:
And thrice to ease his misery,
Christ Jesus did him call.
Amen, amen, I say to thee,
When thou wast young, thy way
Was where thou would then, as free
To walk at will each day.
When thou art old, another shall
Gird and lead thee also,
Where thou would not have gone at all,
Yet may not choose but go.
And this Christ unto Peter spoke,
To signify thereby,
What death or end Simon should make,
His God to glorify.
And when to him he had said this,
Christ said then; follow me:
That now his calling certain is,
Assured well is he.
He turning back did soon epsy
Him whom the Lord did love,
Then following after; verily
He Christ for him did move:
(For this had leaned on Christ's breast,
As he at supper sat,
And asked Christ then for the rest,
Who should betray his state.)
When Peter therefore saw him so,
To Jesus he did say;
Lord, what is it that he shall do?
Now tell me I thee pray.
Then Jesus said to him again;
Man, what is it to thee,
If till I come he do remain?
See thou, thou follow me.
Then went this word among them all,
That that man should not die.
Christ said not unto him, he shall
Not die assuredly,
But if until I come, I will
That tarry still shall he,
Do thou what I command fulfill:
What is the same to thee?
Christ appearing to his Disciples, reproved their infidelity.
The ninth time that Christ did appear, Christ's 9. appa.

Of incredulity
He did reprove all that were there.
Through imbecillitie
They did misdoubt though they did see,
And speak to him withal.
Thus blind (as they) our eyes now be,
Till Christ them open shall.
Christ appeared to his Disciples and five hundred brethren at once in a
mountain in Galilie.
The next time was in Galilie, 1. Cor. 15. Christ's 10. app.

Upon a mountain there:
Where he as Paul does testify,
To many did appear.
There unto his a charge he gave,
The which to undertake,
He promisd them a help to have,
Which should them able make.
For Jesus spoke, and thus did say,
All power now I have, Matthew. 28.18. Cap. 11.27. Hebr. 2.8. John 17.2.

In heaven and earth, and every way,
Which God the Father gave.
Math. 28.19 Mar. 16.^
Go ye therefore now teaching all,
Baptizing them also:
Throughout the world where I shall call,
And you oppoint to go.
Baptize all in the Fathers name,
The Son, and holy Ghost:
What I command, do ye the same,
Your labor is not lost.
Teach them all things for to observe,
That I command indeed:
I am with you, you ^le preserve,
And still relieve your need.
I will save them that shall believe,
And be bap^ized to:
My Father did me power give,
That I the same may do.
The vnb^leeuers all shall be
Condemned for the same.
And these things also do shall he,
Which shall believe my in my name.
name.
Marc. 16.17 Act. 16.18.
The devil, cast out in my name shall,
Act. 2.4.
With new toungs speak shall they:
Marc. 16.18 Act. 28.5.8.
No deadly drinks shall hurt at all,
And serpents take away.
On sick men if their hands they lay,
They shall recover well.
All these things they shall day by day
Perform, as I do tell.
Christ appeared again to the^ in Bethanie, and led them into mount Oliuet,
where after he had blessed them, he ascended most gloriously into heaven in
their sight.
Christ's 11. app.
Then the Disciples all they were
By Jesus led away,
To Bethanie together there,
On his ascension day:
And to mount Oliuet they went, Mar. 16.19. Luc. 24.50. John 20.21. Act. 1.9.

Where he did bless them all,
Willing them then (as they were sent)
All his elect to call.
When he had blessed them, foorthright,
While they beheld the same,
A cloud took him up out of sight,
Which suddenly so came.
And while they looked steadfastly
To heau'nward as he went,
Behold two men did stand them by,
Perceiving their intent.
Which said to them, why gaze ye so,
Ye men of Galilie?
This Jesus whom ye see thus go,
Shall so come verily,
Those men in white apparel were,
Whom they knew not as then
Angels to be, that did appear
As though they had been men.
Which when they heard, they every where
Went preaching day by day,
The Lord increasing here and there, Mar. 16.20. Heb. 2.4.

His Church, by them, I say:
And eke confirming what they taught,
With signs and wonders so,
That still some fish their net then caught,
Where ever they did go.
Thus Jesus was seen bodily,
In forty days we read,
Eleven times assurely,
When he rose from the dead.
And after his ascension,
Christ also was seen twice:
Act. 7.56. Act. 9.5. 1. Cor. 15.8. Christ's 12. apparition, which was
spiritually.
By Steven when they did him stone,
And by Saint Paul likewise.
First Steven upon Gods right hand
Did see him sit on hie,
The which to them that there did stand,
He then did testify.
Chr. 13. appar. spiritually likewise was the last that is read ^f in the
testament.
Paul persecuting sore of such
As did in Christ believe,
Saw him, rejoicing very much,
That God did grace him give.
And many other things there are,
That Jesus did also,
Which man with tongue cannot declare,
Nor pen paint out: for lo
If written were his works and words,
The world could not contain
The books (so much the same affoords)
Unwritten that remain.
Yet herein is so much containd,
As we have need to know:
Gods spirit sure in them remaind,
That this to us could show;
Therefore be glad, in God rejoice,
That left us such a stay:
Be joyful, and lift up your voice,
To Jacobs God always.
To Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
All glory be therefore,
That was and is of might the most,
And shall be evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
The Table of the first part.
THe promised Messiah. 1 The Angels salutation to Marie. 2 Marie visited
Elizabeth. ibid. Joseph warned by the Angel. ibid. The tax under Augustus
Caesar. 3 The birth of Christ. ibid. The Angel to the shepherds. 4 The
circumcision of Christ. 6 The wisemen. ibid. Simeon and Anna prophecy. 8
Joseph's going into Egypt. 9 The infants slain. 10 Joseph's return out of
Egypt. 11 Jesus disputed with the Elders. ibid. A repetition of six things. 12
The Table of the second part.
The baptism of Christ. 15 Christ fasted forty days. 17 Christ was tempted.
18 John's testimony of Christ. 20.30 John sent Disciples to Christ. 23 Andrew
and John called. ibid. Simon Peter called. ibid. Philip called. ibid.
Nathanaell called. 24 Christ's first miracle in Cana. 25 Christ went from Cana
to Capernaum. ibid. Christ drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. 26
Christ's conference with Nicodemus. 28 Christ's return to Iudaea. Of purifying.
30 Jesus avoided danger in Iudaea. 31 Christ's conference with the woman of
Samaria. ibid. Christ preached at Nazareth. 35 A Prophet not esteemed in his
country. ibid. Christ healed the rulers son. 36 John's imprisonment: Apostles
called. 37
The Table of the third part.
Christ's sermon in the mount. 39 Christ pronounces woe. 41 Ministers salt and
light. 42 Christ came to fulfill the Law. ibid. Thou shall not kill. 43
Reconciliation. 44 Adultery, Diuorcement, Oaths. 45 Revenge. 46 Love thine
enemy. ibid. Alms, Prayer. 47 The Lords prayer. 48 To forgive one another.
ibid. Fasting. ibid. Worldly care forbidden. 49 Rash judgment forbidden. 51
Holy things may not be given to dogs. ibid. Ask, seek, knock. ibid. The
strait and wide gate. 52 False prophets. ibid. The good and evil tree. ibid.
The houses on the rock and sand. ibid. A Leaper cleansed. 53 The Centurions
servant healed. 54 Christ cast out devils. ibid. Peter's wives mother healed. 55
Christ again cast out devils. 56 Christ went from Capernau^ to preach to the
other cities. ib. Christ's sermon in the ship. 57 Christ's answer to the Scribe
that would follow him. 58 Christ's answer to the Disciple that would first go
bury his father. ibid. Christ stilled the tempest of the sea. 59 Christ healed
the possessed with devils. ibid. Christ healed one of the palsy. 61 Christ
healed another leaper. ibid. Matthew called. 62 Of fasting. 63 Iayrus daughter.
ibid. A blind man healed. ibid. The dumb speak. 64 Christ healed one that had
bin diseased xxxviij years. ib. The Disciples plucked ^ares of corn on the
saboth day. 65 The man with the withered band. 68 Jesus took compassion on the
dispersed multitude. 70 The harvest great. 71 The twelve Apostles sent to
preach. ibid. Another sermon of Christ. 74 Tht Centurions servant. 54.76 Christ
raised the widows son at Naijm from death. 77 John Baptists message to
Christ. ibid. Christ's answer to John. 78 Christ's testimony of John. ibid.
Christ reproved his auditorie. 80 Christ vpbraideth the unthankful cities.
ibid. Christ rejoiced for the success of the Gospel. 81 Christ's exhortation
to bear the cross. 82 Christ dined with Simon the leaper. ibid. Certain
women followed Christ. 85 A kingdom divided. 86 Blasphemy. 87 The sign of
Jonas. 88 Impenitencie. 89 To revolt from the truth. 89 Christ's mother,
sisters, and brethren. 90 The parable of the seed. 91 Christ interpreted the
same. 93 The parable of the good seed and tares. 94 The parable of the mustard
seed. 95 The parable of the leaven. 96 The parable of the tares interpreted. 97
The parable of the treasure hidden. 98 The parable of the pearl. ibid. The
parable of the draw-net. 99
The Table of the fourth part.
John Baptist beheaded. 101 Christ preaching in his own country, was despised
again. 104 Christ sent his Apostles to preach. 105 The Apostles return. 106
Christ fed five thousand with five loaves. ibid. Christ walked on the sea. 109
Christ healed the sick at Genezaret. 110 Christ's sermon of the true Manna. 111
Of eating meat unwashed. 114 The woman of Canaans daughter healed. 116 Christ
fed four thousand with seven loaves. ibid. The Pharisees and Sadduces seek a
sign. 117 The leaven of the Pharisees. 118 Christ gave a blind man sight. 119
The keys of the kingdom of heaven. ibid. To bear the cross. Peter rebuked.
121 The faithful must bear it. 122 Christ transfigured on Thabor. 123 Christ
healed the lunaticke. 124 Christ foretold his passion and paid tribute. 125
Contention for primacie. 126 Of forgiveness. ibid. A king receiving accounts.
127 Christ's sermons at the feast of tabernacles. 128 A woman taken in
adultery. 132 Christ the light of the world. 133 Of freedom. 136 Christ gave
sight to one borne blind. 138 The true shepherd and hireling. 142 The feast of
Dedication. 144
The Table of the fifth part.
Christ settled to go to Jerusalem. 147 Christ's answer to the Scribe. 148
Christ's answer to the Disciple. ibid. Christ's answer to another that would bid
his friends farewell. 149 Christ sent the seventy Disciples to preach. ibid.
The seventy returned. 151 The Lawyers question answered. 152 Marie and Martha
receive Christ. 154 Christ taught his Disciples to pray. 155 Christ cast a
devil out of a dumb man, and the dumb spoke. 157 The Jews required a sign.
158 Christ rebuked the hypocrisy of the Pharisees. ibid. Lazarus sick. 161
Diuorcement. 162 The parable of the secure rich man. 163 The parable of the
watchful servant. 165 Christ received infants. 166 A rich young man that would
be justified by the Law. 167 Everlasting life promised to them that follow
Christ. 168 The laborers sent to the vineyard. 169 The cruelty of Pilate. 170
The parable of the fig tree. ibid. Christ healed a woman that had been sick
18. years. 171 The parable of the mustard seed. 172 The strait and broad way.
ibid. Christ called Herod a Fox. 173 Christ healed the dropsy on the saboth.
174 Christ taught lowliness. 175 Of the great supper. 176 The parable of the
lost sheep and the groate. 177 The parable of the p^odigall son. 178 The
parable of the unjust steward. 181 The history of Dives and Lazarus. 183
Offenses are to be avoided. 185 Christ healed ten Leapers. 186 The Pharisees
would know when the kingdom of G^d should come. 187 The parable of the
unrighteous Judge. 189 The parable of the Pharisie and the Publican. 190 Of the
talents. 191 Of the laborers. 194 Christ foretells again of his passion.
195 The sons of Zebede, and their request. ibid. Blind Bartimeus. 196 The
calling of Zache. ibid. Christ raised Lazarus from death. 197 A counsel held
against Christ. 201 Christ supped with Lazarus. 203 Christ rides into
Jerusalem. 205 Christ cast the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. 206 Of the
Grecians. 207 Another sermon of the cross. 208 Christ cursed the fig tree.
210 The fig tree withered. 211 The parable of the two sons. 213 The parable
of the vineyard let out. 214 The parable of the king that made a marriage for
his son. 216 Of paying tribute to Caesar. 219 Of the resurrection. 220 Of the
great commandment. 221 How Christ is the son of David. 222 The Scribes and
Pharisees sitting in Moses seat are to be heard. 223 Christ cried woe against
the Scribes and Pharisees and the Lawyers. 225 Of the destruction of the
temple, the city, and the end of the world. 230 The parable of the fig
tree. 236 Christ's coming. ibid. A warning to be watchful. 237 The parable of
the ten virgins. 238 The parable of the talents. 240 The manner of the last
judgment. 242 Another sermon of the cross. 244 The Disciples dema^d where
they should prepare the passover. 246 Christ washed his Disciples feet. 248
The institution of the Lords Supper. 250 Christ went to mount Oliuet. 251
Christ comforted his Disciples. 253 The parable of the vine. 256 Another sermon
of the cross. 258 Christ's prayer for his Elect. 262 The history of the
passion. 264 Judas with a band of men took Christ. 267 Jesus was brought to
Annas and Caiphas. 269 The high priests sought false witness against Christ.
270 Christ brought before Pilate: Judas death. 273 Christ brought before
Pilate. Judas death. 273 Pilate sent Christ to Herod. 276 Barrabas let loose.
278 Christ condemned and crucified. 280 Joseph and Nicodemus buried Christ. 288
The Table of the sixth part.
Christ rose from death the day after the Saboth. 293 Christ appeared to Marie
Magdalene. 300 Christ appeared to the other women. 301 The soldiers were
corrupted. 302 Christ appeared to Simon Peter. 314 The two Disciples going to
Emaus. 315 Christ appeared Thomas being present. 324 Christ appeared to James.
326 Christ appeared at the sea of Tiberias. ibid. Peter restored. 329 Christ
appeared to his Disciples, reproving their unbelief. 331 Christ's last
apparition bodily. 332
The end of the Table.

