THE LAST SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY'S Funerals, at Denmark house: On
Tuesday the third of May.

BY PHINEES HODSON Dr of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by M. F. for Hannah Barret, 1625.

IOS. 1.2. Moses my Servant is dead; now therefore arise.


HE that might not see GOD in the fiery bush, but he must put off his shoes,
Exodus 3. might not see him as he is, till he had put off the sinful body of
his flesh, Coloss. 2. yea, and the flesh of his body too, the apparel of his
soul; his shoes must off then, because the place where he stood was holy
ground. No marvel if his body must off now, before he enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, the Kingdom of Heaven.

Numb. 20.12. GOD told Moses and Aaron that for their unbelief they should not
bring the people into the Land which he had promised them; and shortly after,
even at the next remove from Cades to mount Hor, Aaron must up to the mount,
and there die. Moses is repriued, till he come to the other side of Jordan, but
not pardoned; and GOD will let him see that Land, which he may not possess.
Nor is he therefore secure, he forgets not his summons, but finding himself by
account to be an hundred and twenty years old, Deuteronomy. 31. and therefore he
could not live long; that he was come to the side of that River, which he might
not pass; and therefore, in all likelihood, he drew very near, he prepares
himself to welcome the good will of GOD. When Moses is ready, but not before,
GOD calls again, and Deuteronomy. 32. Up he must to mount Nebal, and there die. Deuteronomy.
34. Up he goes, and when GOD had let him see the Land, he died, ver. 5. was
buried, ver. 6. and the rest of the Chapter contains a Funeral Sermon, made
by Joshua in the commendation of Moses.

Now after Moses' death and burial, the LORD spoke unto Joshua (the verse
before my text, and in my text) Moses my servant, etc. Moses is dead, buried by
an Angel, mourned for by the children of Israel, panegyrically commended by
Joshua: and that which he said of him is recorded to posterity, that all ages
may know, that none is like to Moses: Yet this is not enough, GOD undertakes
the matter himself; for when an Angel bears the Coffin, and that by Gods own
appointment, and (for ought we know) made his Grave too: No wonder if the same
GOD vouchsafe to revive his memory, and not so much as name Moses without
honorable mention, Moses my servant. Yea being dead, he referres, and as it
were appeals to Moses; As I said unto Moses, v. 3. and if he will comfort
Joshua, he will be with him as he was with Moses, v. 5. for that will serve:
yea he calls his own Law, the Law which Moses my servant commanded, v. 7.

And surely much was it, that a man, (but it was the man of GOD Moses, Deu.
33.1.) that a man (I say) should receive such testimony from his Maker. But
well it was for them, whom he left behind him, well it was for Joshua, to whose
charge they were left, and little enough it was, that he that was the Servant
of the Lord in Gods mouth, should be the servant of the Lord in Joshua's mouth,
v. 13. And if GOD will call his own Law Moses' Law, Joshua would be bold to
call Gods Land, Moses' Land, verse. 14. And if GOD promised to be with Joshua,
as he was with Moses, they will ask no more, they will pray for no more, but
the Lord be with thee as he was with Moses. So then, well it was with Joshua,
it got him authority; well it was with the people, it taught them obedience:
for if GOD will be with Joshua as he was with Moses, they will obey him as they
did Moses.

The words are delivered by GOD to Joshua, and have two parts; first, Gods
testimony of Moses: secondly, his Commission to Joshua. The testimony in these
words, [Moses my servant is dead:] the Commission, [Now therefore arise.] In
the testimony are two general parts considerable; first, the Author, secondly,
the Matter: the Author is expressly set down in the first verse. Secondly, In
the Matter are four circumstances; first, Servus, secondly, Meus, thirdly,
Moses, fourthly, Mortuus. In the Commission are two things; first, the
connection, [Now therefore,] secondly, the tenor of the Commission, [Arise.]

[Now therefore,] Not before thou receive warning, till then lie still, take
not upon thee; when I say the word, Arise. While he lives thou art his
Minister, v. 1. and at his command, no rising then without his direction: with
his life his power ceased, My people lack an head, and I have made choice of
thee, [Now therefore, Arise.]

To return. The Author of this Declaratorie Commemoration and honorable
recognition is GOD himself: he commemorates him, for he names Moses, though
dead; he declares his worth, in calling him his Servant. And a recognition it
is, Joshua had done it before, GOD now again, by a postliminious solemnization
of his Funerals. Nor may it seem strange; Funeral Sermons are ordinarily made
by such as are near to those that are deceased, and have some interest in
their memories: then who should rather do this office to Moses then his
gracious Master? who had before testified of him, that he was faithful in all
his house, Numb. 12. Others heard GOD, Moses heard, and saw him, and talked
with him, as a man talks with his friend, Exodus 33. yea, face to face, Deuteronomy.
34.10. Hence he continues to honor him dead, as he did alive; living he was his
servant, and being dead, from Gods own mouth, he receives the same testimony,
Moses my servant is dead. For his person was not ordinary, There arose not a
Prophet like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10. His Burial was not ordinary, other men
had Sepulchers, as monuments of their mortality; Moses had none, lest his body
should have been abused to Idolatry. Others have Sepulchers, to show they have
been; Moses had none, lest he should have been thought that, which he was
not, and adored for a Diety. And more honorable it was for Moses he had none,
then for others, when they are most sumptuous, as Tacitus observed:
Praefulgebant Iunius and Blaesus, eo ipso, quod effigies eorum non visebantur.

And though it be true, which Saint Augustine says, that these solemnities at
Funerals, are rather Solatia vivorum, then Subsidia mortuorum, yet whether we
call it an act of civility, as from men to me^; or an act of love, to prosecute
with honor those that are dead, to whom we gave respect, while they were
living; or an act of necessity, to free the living from the contagion of the
dead; or an act of discretion, to remove their bodies from our sight, and
thereby sorrow from our hearts; or an act tending to mortification, as being
Remonstrances of our frailty and mortality; or an act of hope, as implying
their resurrection, whom with so much care and respect we interre; or an act of
faith and religion, as thereby teaching others, and leaving an impression in
our own hearts of our faith in him, that is our Resurrection and our life;
whether any of these, or all, or others that I conceive not, move Gods spirit,
sure it is, he commends the Burial of the dead, as a godly and charitable
work, reports the circumstances of persons, place, pomp, care, cost of
embalming the bodies of the Patriarchs, of their pains in transporting them to
their own Sepulchers; yea the women in the Gospel are approved for their
intended care to our Saviors body. It is a blessing promised to the godly,
that they shall go to their grave in peace, 2 Kings 22. It is a curse
threatened to the wicked, that they shall want burial, so of Iehoiakim, They
shall not lament for him, nor say, Ah my brother! nor mourn for him, saying,
Ah my Lord! or, Ah his glory! but they shall bury him as an Ass, drawn and
cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Ier. 22.

And though the place of Moses burial be concealed, that the Devil might not
have his body, yet the world shall have his fame; and if Moses die, All Israel
shall mourn for him; an Angel shall bury him; Joshua shall commend him; and
if all this be not yet enough, GOD himself shall give him an honorable
firname, that all posterities may take notice of his love to his Servant Moses.
Thus much for the Author, the LORD.

In the Matter, I observed four things, Servus, Meus, Moses, Mortuus; for they
rise by degrees, and make several parts. For first, that Servus should be
Mortuus, it is no marvel: but why Servus Meus should die, may be enquired. And
not only Servus Meus, but Servus Meus Moses will make a further Quare. And it is
Gods own Rhetorique, who makes Moses more than Servus Meus, when he said to
Aaron and Miriam, Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant,
even against Moses? Numb. 12.

First then for Servus.

Servi are Captivi, Emptitij, or Nativi; the last are such as descend of the
other two: and of all, One said, Primos servos bella fecerunt; for when men
were taken in wars, and jure belli occidi possent, quia servati Servi
appellati. And hence likewise were they called Mancipia, quia manu capti. And
of this another says; Of all evils war is the worst; in war, servitude,
whereby personae become res, other men's Chattels; which they do as absolutely
command and dispose of, as any thing they else possess. We read of Vedius
Pollio, who had many servants, that caused one to be cast into a Fish Pond for
breaking a glass. Hence were servants said, Habitare in mortalitate, to dwell
in the very gates and shadow of death, because they were slain upon every
trifling occasion. Then that Servus should be Mortuus is no marvel.

Saint Augustine gives it another pettigree; Servum vel adversitas, vel
iniquitas fecit, Adversity made all the former Servants; Iniquity made Cham a
servant. Now we commiserate those which are made servants by adversity; we
abhor Cham, made a servant by iniquity, and we our selves are in the same
estate, and yet are secure. All our lives, and liberties were made forfeit in
Adam, and by his transgression we became slaves to sin, death, and the
Devil. Herein Servus and Mortuus so well agree, that unless we had been
servants to sin, Death had not been Lord over us; for, Mors non accessisset,
nisi culpa praecessisset. Sinner and Slave are now become Termini
convertibiles: To whomsoever you give your selves servants to obey, his servant
you are, to whom you obey. Romans 6. And the consequence of that service is
death; so it there follows, whether it be of sin unto death. Yea the same
Apostle more directly; By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so sin reigned over all, Romans 5. Then Servus must die, and Servus
and Mortuus do so agree, that they cannot be parted. But if Servus and
Mortuus agree, may not Servus Meus be privileged? Let us examine Meus, so
shall we see how Mortuus does challenge.

In a large sense Servi Dei, or Servi mei, are extranei, Transfuga, Domestici;
and all these three he feeds as he does the Ravens; clothes as he does the
Lillies; showers down his blessings upon them with an indifferent, or rather
unequal proportion: Many times suffering the first two to swim in abundance,
whilst his own Domestici are busy in providing necessaries. Where Is the
privilege then of Servus Meus? Much every way, for though iniquity and misery
break in like Rivers, to the ouerflowing of all mankind, the first of
Iniquity prevailing by the Devil, the second of Misery, by the first of
iniquity; whereby it is true of all mankind, Servum vel iniquitas, vel
aduersitas fecit: yet here is the difference between Servus, and Servus Meus,
we were all by the Woman made servants, but there is another Seed that overcame
the Devil; the Woman, conquered, lost us all; but the seed of the Woman by a
new onset prevailed, and jure belli freed us from that slavery, wherein he
found us; and of vassals to sin, made us servants to himself. And this he
did by a mighty hand, whereby we are now made Mancipia to our Redeemer. The
first two are servi, but only Potestatis, and so are the Devils; the last
Domestici, are Servi gratiae. Now the question is not of the two former, but
what shall become of Domestici. Shall Servi gratiae die too? Yes, Christ's
victory freed us from the second death, the Curse of the Law; not from the
first, the effects of sin. Nor is it therefore a small blessing to be Servus
Dei, it was a part of that blessing, (as some Divines do expound it) which
Isaac gave to Esau, Servies fratri, Genesis 27.40. Then what a stay, what an
honor, what a comfort has Servus meus? that is, servant to the most High.
Psalm. 119. If once we can come to this, to get our selves booked in this
Checke-roll, such a man while he lives shall want no manner of thing that is
good, Ps. 34. that is for this life; and in the end he shall have a reward, yea,
an Exceeding great reward, as GOD promised to Abraham: for how should he forget
his own servants?

It Is said that GOD loves Adverbes in men better than Adjectiues; Man, sure,
loves this Pronoune possessiue, better than any other part of Speech: there
being no good thing in this world, whereto he would not have Meum joined. Oh
that he would be as careful to get possession of GOD, that with confidence
we could say unto him, Deus meus! For if this reciprocal bond were once past,
that we could say to him, Deus meus, and he to us, Servi mei, it should never
be cancelled; once His, and always His, living and dead he never forsakes
us; My sheep shall none pluck out of my hands, John 10.28. Here on earth we
sometimes lose our Services, sometimes our Lords and Masters, but Nullum tempus
occurrit Deo, his tenure holds throughout all Generations. Its true, Nor Servus
Meus, nor Amicus noster will serve for Privilege in the case of death, but
Servus Meus Mortuus, Amicus noster dormit: only remember this, if Servus Meus,
and Amicus noster, and he whom Christ loved be dead, John 11.3. why should
any man be afraid? If death were a Scorpion, Servus Meus, and Amicus noster
should not be endangered by it: then let sin reign to death, so Grace also
reign unto righteousness, through Jesus Christ unto eternal life, Romans 5. So
then, nor Servus, nor Servus Meus exclude Mortuus.

But if Death be not afraid, like Aaron and Miriam, to set upon my Servant,
dare it adventure upon Moses; may not he be privileged? whose life was a
book not of Lamentations, and mournings, and woes, Ezekiel. 2. (though even of
these it had reasonable store of marginall notes) but a book of Privileges
and Miracles, and strange observations, such as (set him aside) the world never
had among the Sons of men.

Begin at his birth. In the Edict against the male Children he was privileged
and preserved from death: When Pharaoh sought his life, for slaying the
Egyptian, then was he likewise privileged, Exodus 2. yea in those Wonders,
which he wrought in Pharaohs Court, he was so privileged, that the wrath of
the King was not only no messenger of death, but he did fawn upon Moses, as
if he would lick the dust of his feet; I have sinned against GOD, and against
you, and I pray you forgive me this once, Exodus 10.17. Aaron was great, yet
was Moses his God, Exodus 4. Pharaoh was a great King, yet was Moses his God,
too; Exodus 7. And as God, he not only received, but gave privileges. Was it
not a great privilege that he gave unto the Israelites, that they should not
wet their feet, where Pharaoh was drowned and all his host? Exodus 14. No
marvel, if he made the Sea a Wall to the Israelites, that drew water out of
the Rock for the Israelites. The Sea, nothing more fluid; the Rock, nothing
more hard; and the Rock again a River: that still Moses life was a succession
of privileges. Nor was his Power confined to the Earth, or Sea, it reached to
Heaven, where it brought down Manna, for their bread, and Quails for their
food. And may not this Man of privileges be privileged to go some other
way; but by the gates of death, even Moses must pass to life? He that had
been so long entertained by Angels food in the Mount, that when he came down
his face did shine, as if he had been transfigured, so as they were afraid to
look upon him; may not He be translated to heaven, body and soul together,
but that skin, once so bright must be eaten with worms? GOD entreated
Moses, Let me alone, (as if without his leave he could do nothing) that I
may consume them; he offers him fair conditious, so indulgent was GOD to
Moses, that he would buy his consent, Let me consume them, and I will make of
thee a mighty people. Exodus 32.10. And Moses prevailed with GOD, but GOD could
not prevail with Moses, for Moses prayed, and chid, verse 11, Why does the
wrath of my Lord wax hot against his people? And pleads, verse 12. Lest the
Egyptians say, he brought them maliciously out of Egypt to destroy the^: Yea
in the same verse he importunes GOD yet further; Turn from thy fierce wrath:
nay challenges GOD of his word, verse 13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
yea charges him with his oath, which thou swarest unto them: Then after all
this, the Lord changed his mind from the evil he meant to bring upon them.

You see his Privileges, and you see his power, but never a word on Gods part,
that he shall not die; never a word on his own part that he may not die. He
that would not let GOD alone for his people, lets him alone for himself; never
opens his mouth; but hearing of death, as a thing that never troubled him, he
addresseth himself to dispatch such business as was fit for a man of his
quality and place. And being ready to depart out of the world, he blessed the
people, went up to the mount, and there he dyed. I said before, if Seruus Meus
dye, why should any man fear? Now if Moses be dead, none shall escape. One
example we have before the Law, Genesis 5. Enoch was taken away, and was no more
seen: and the same GOD, that dispensed with one before, privileged one other
in the time of the Law, but long after, in the times of Iehoram King of Judah,
Elijah in a whirewinde was carried up to Heaven, 2 King. 2. GOD vouchsafing to
those several ages of the world, demonstrations of our immortality But this
was extraordinary; two there were, and but two, to show that we are bound,
and he is not, but has a transcendent power over all the works of his hands.
Nor was he frequent in making such grants, lest any man should challenge; and
those rather to good, than to great men.

And though in Elijahs time, when devotion grew cold, fifty sons of the
Prophets were allowed to be witnesses, it was not yielded to in Enoch's time,
none were then suffered to be present; yea, it is delivered in obscure
terms; Enoch was taken away, not taken up, so wary was GOD in passing such
grants.

The best then must die; Servus meus, and Amicus noster, GODS servants, and
friends all are dead, and the greatest cannot escape. For if Moses so great,
and (besides all ye have heard) so honored, that many ages after, GOD reviueth
his memory, and says, Though Moses stood before me, I would not be
entreated, Ier. 15.1. If Moses so famous to posterity, and whose memory is so
frequent in the Scriptures, that it is mentioned above an hundred and twenty
times in the old Testament after his death, and almost as often in the new, and
that by many honorable testimonies even from our Savior Christ himself, if
he might not be spared; let all generations submit themselves to that
condition, which the best and greatest have undergone. Then let not strength
presume, he whose eye was not dim, nor natural force abated, when he was
an hundred and twenty years old, is dead, Deuteronomy. 34. Let not courage: he that
so bravely slew the Egyptian in the defense of his Countryman, is himself
dead: Let not beauty; the glorious Countenance of Moses (2 Cor. 3.7.) is now
become dust and ashes. Let not power magnify it self; he that destroyed
Pharaoh and all his people, even Moses is laid down, and cannot rise up. Let
not wisdom and learning boast; his thoughts are perished, that was learned in
all the knowledge of the Egyptians, Acts 7. Let not authority and
pre-eminence, Pharaohs God, and Aarons God, a man greater the^ the Pope would be
thought to be, above Prince, above Priest, is now dissolved into dust. Let not
the favor of the multitude, they can mourn thirty days for Moses' death, they
cannot fetch him again, once dead. In a word, suppose a man's miracles and
privileges be never so many so as his life seem a continued miracle, a
miraculous Funeral he may have, but he must die, for Moses is dead.

And if present examples move more, King JAMES is dead too, in whom many of
these privileges met, and a number of other excellencies, which divided give
honor to others: even Gods servant Moses, and our late Sovereign King JAMES,
both are dead. Then what may this Mortuus be that thus incroacheth?

There is a threefold death, a death by sin, a death to sin, and a death for
sin. The first is the death of the Soul: the second, the death of sin in the
soul; the third is the parting of the body and soul. The first is always
evil, the second always good; the third is sometimes evil, sometimes good,
according to the quality of him whom it does surprise. The first that cannot be
good, and the last which may be evil, are both repaired by the second, which
is ever good and not evil. The first is deserente Deo, when God forsakes a
man's soul: the second subveniente gratia, when Gods grace sustaines a man's
soul; the third is recedente anima, when the body is forsaken by the soul.
The first is the cause of the last; for, Mors mortem antecessit, voluntaria
necessariam: One death vshered forth another; the voluntary death of sin,
the necessary death of the body. And this third is here meant, when he says
Moses is dead. Plato said of death, that it was (...): a loosing and separating
of the soul from the body. Two friends have long lived together, and now they
must part, and go several ways, the one to earth, the other to heaven: For
we are not destroyed by death, but dissolved to be elsewhere placed. And
this is clear in this History of Moses death; Thou shall die (says God) and
sleep with thy Fathers. Deuteronomy. 31.16. And, Thou shall be gathered to thy
people, Deuteronomy. 32.

So that death is our sleep, and restitution to that place from whence we
descended. For when the soul leaves the body, GOD then gathers us as ripe
Corn into his Barn. And these considerations, that by death we sleep with
our Fathers, and are gathered to the Saints, as they did prepare him, so should
they satisfy us, as carrying in them secret reasons, and consolations against
the terrors of death. So as now it is no strange thing, that Servus Meus, and
Servus Meus Moses should dye, who thereby sleeps, and is gathered to his
people. Just Simeon looked upon death, and esteemed it, Nunc Dimittis: quasi
necessitate teneretur in hac vita, non voluntate. Indeed death seems not so to
all, but that is not death's fault: for, Mors aut suae quietis bono vtitur, aut
malo alieno laborat. The reason is, Mors mala non est, nisi vbi vita mala. Yea
to such it is better to dye than to live. It may seem a Paradox, but it is
none: for, quo vita diuturnior, culpa numerosior: and therefore to that
comfort, which Seneca gives against death, Desinam aegrotare posse, alligari,
etc. I shall no more be sick, no more imprisoned, no more tormented; we may
add this as the principal, Desinam peccare posse: I shall no more sin. And
it is no small advantage to be freed from Sinning. It troubled S. Paul,
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death, Romans
7.24. where you see the Apostle as much troubled, that he must live, as others
are, when they must dye. For, as S. Augustine observes, some that would live,
yet cum patientia moriuntur; so others would dye, but cum patientia vivunt.
For, Anima absolvitur, corpus resolvitur; quae absolvitur gaudet, quod
resolvitur nihil sentit. So that this is one comfort, we have by the sleep of
death; we rest from sin, we rest from sorrow.

But this is not all: He that lies down to sleep, makes account to awake;
Vt cum dormientes audimus evigilaturos, minime desperemus. For as it is true,
that per vitam fit ad mortem transitus; so, per mortem fit ad vitam reditus.
Then let us not be dismayed with the mask and vizard of death, but rather joy,
and comfort our selves, in so happy a passage unto life. Bona vita, absoluto
certamine: that is the life we should look after; wherein the law of our
members rebelleth no more against the law of our mind: where we shall have no
more strife with this body of death, but shall have victory over it. Thus slept
and rested Moses, when he was gathered to his people. For while we are in
this world, we are scattered up and down as Pilgrims and strangers, death
brings us home. We read of Socrates that he thirsted after death, that he
might meet with those brave spirits, Orpheus and Hesiod, and Homer: let not us
be weak and irresolute, that shall be gathered to the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, troops of Martyrs, and Confessors, yea Christ himself, in his
flesh, in his glory, sitting at the right hand of God. It is true, to flesh and
blood, the shell of death seems hard; but to him that has the spiritual
relish of the Apostle, it contains a sweet kernel. How shall we do then to
get S. Paul's taste? there is but one way, and that is to keep S. Paul's diet,
by accustoming our selves to dye daily, and by bearing about in our bodies the
death of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. For then the life of the Lord Jesus should
be made manifest in our mortal flesh. If thus we could frame our selves to
welcome death, adeo mors non esset timenda, vt ejus beneficio nihil
anteponendum.

So then it is well with Moses; happy is he that ever he was borne, to dye in
such a case. What shall become of the people? who shall go in and out before
them? they are as sheep without a shepherd, who shall gather them, that they
may hear and learn, and fear, and observe the Commandments of GOD, and
keep the Law of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 31.12. Moses is gone: who shall smite the
rock, that the people may drink? who shall bring down Manna for them, when
they are hungry? who shall now hold up his hands, that they may prevail
against their enemies? nay, when the people shall have made GOD himself their
enemy, who shall stand in the gap betwixt GOD and them? or if they be at peace
with GOD, who shall sit in judgment to make peace among them from the morning
to the evening? Exodus 18. Moses loved the people of GOD better then his own
soul, Spare them, or raze me out of thy book. Who shall care for them now?
Moses offered his soul for their bodies, who will now offer his body for their
souls?

Yes, the same GOD that preserved Moses till he came to the other side of
Jordan, provides Ioshuah to bring them into the Land: for he loves his with
an everlasting love, Ier. 31. No sooner Moses must dye, but Joshua must arise:
yea he prepares beforehand, that Moses shall not hear of death, till Joshua
be ready to take the charge: he must prepare beforehand, but he must not take
possession, till Moses be dead. Yea he received this due commendation, Moses
my servant, which was not only an honor to Moses, but an encouragement to
Joshua: for if he do as Moses did, he shall have the honor which Moses had.

I will not say a greater than Moses is lately dead amongst us, though even for
that purpose much might be said: for strip Moses of his Privileges and
Extraordinaries, and though he commanded much people and a great Army, yet had
he no kingdom but a Wilderness, that I know. That way King JAMES was greater
than Moses. Thus far we may be bold. None was like Moses among the Prophets;
none like King James among the Kings. Moses his privileges were many and
great; King James his privileges not few, nor small. None more miraculously
preserved than Moses; none more miraculously preserved than King James. And if
Moses were a great Warrior; King James was as great a Peacemaker. I would I
had not cause to complain, that the Israelites never murmured more against
Moses for bringing them out of their thraldom of Egypt, then Many of us
against his Majesty for laboring to keep the Drum and Cannon from amongst us.
And though it be the duty of good Subjects, with Shem and Iapheth, so to cover
their Sovereigns infirmities, as not to look upon them themselves, yet has
it ever been the condition of the best Princes, even to be traduced for their
virtues. Vnum crimen consiteor, Pacificus erat. Doubtless for wisdom and
learning Moses and King James were both admirable. What the learning of the
Egyptians was, I dispute not; but surely all ages will confess and wonder at
the learning of King James: a walking Library he was, an abstract of
knowledge, an Oracle to resolve Quaestions and Mysteries, the mirror of this,
and miracle of the next age; to which his abilities will seem fabulous. All
this he had, and a large heart, and a large hand, and three great Kingdoms to
attend his bounty, and supply it, but yet came short of it: yet all this was so
tempered, as it could not puff him up, nor make him proud, and herein he was
Meek as Moses was. And though I doubt not but he loved well to be a King, and
being careful and jealous enough of his Prerogative, yet was he ever best
pleased, when he was most like a private man. It was not for ^^ght, that the
Devil in his temptation to our blessed Savior, offered not only all the
kingdoms of the earth, but the glory of them: his Majesty took his right to
his Kingdoms, the glory of them he did not regard.

This was much, and yet but little, to that Crown of his Crown, his
resolution for Religion, and care of the Church, wherein he represented Moses
his Zeal. For his Resolution to religion, Consider his frequent Speeches
publicly and privately, his learned Writings, which shall live with the world;
his continual exercise and attendance upon the duties of Religion: And this I
am persuaded, that in two and twenty years (whiles he reigned over us) he heard
more Sermons, than all the Princes before him in two hundred. But if any
maliciously shall impute this to a formality, or the outward obligation of his
Vow, whereby he had tied himself to those weekly Exercises, for his
preservation from the Traitorous Conspiracy, (though even the religious
performance of such vows be not ordinary among Princes) I appeal to all the
three Kingdoms: First for England, never Prince more careful for the Church,
never King more indulgent to the Clergy: if no more, so many Bishops privy
Counselors, in an age, when such honors and favors were out of dare, do
sufficiently express it. If he had not laid the love of religion near his
heart, he would not have placed the Prelates, and Professor of it so near his
person.

For Scotland and Ireland we shall speak miracles, but so much by me more
worthy to be remembered, as they are by most men little observed: in these, I
say, he restored one Church, and in effect new planted another; he restored
Scotland, and how did he this? by wresting from the possessours such titles as
they had gotten to their reuennues? no, but by restitution of what the Crown
had gotten; by purchase and redemption upon valuable consideration, out of his
own coffers, he restored and settled the torn Church of Scotland: so as now it
bears the goodly face of a glorious Church. And by new indowments, where the
old could not be recovered, he founded many both Bishoprics and Churches in
Ireland.

We talk of the charity of former ages, but let our Adversaries be silent and
lay their hand upon their mouth; I dare say (and I think I am not mistaken)
King JAMES has testified his devotion to the Church and Religion by more
bounty and charge, than the superstition of any six Kings together since the
Conquest have brought upon them. So many Bishoprics and Parish Churches in
Scotland, so many in Ireland, and all raised out of his own Coffers and
inheritance, if the value were cast up, (which I wish might be done, for the
Kings eternal honor) would grow to such a sum, as report would hardly find
credit. Then if a Tree may be known by his fruits, by these take knowledge of
his Majesty's love to Religion.

Yet is he dead, he might not be privileged in this point no more than
Moses; but this is our comfort and assurance, that GOD, would not be wanting
to so excellent an instrument of his honor, but to whom he gave graces, for
the ornament and benefit of his Church, him he did furnish with all such graces
as were necessary to the salvation of his own soul; and then death was his
advantage: Regnum Dei intra nos est. Upon which words St. Hierom notes, that As
a man that is free of any City, travel where he will through the world, he is
still a Citizen and free of that place, so if we can once truly say, Regnum Dei
intra nos est, though we walk on earth, Habemus municipatum in coelis. And
then suppose, his late Majesty lost not three Kingdoms, but thirty three
Kingdoms, they are all well exchanged for One Kingdom in Heaven. Nor have we
cause altogether to cry out with Saint Hierom, upon the death of Nepotian, Cui
jam meum sudabit ingenium? cui literulae placere gestient? quicquid dixero,
quia ille non audit, mutum videtur. For though he be dead Joshua is alive, the
most worthy son of an incomparable Father; and happy we, seeing GOD has
taken such a Moses from us, that he has provided such a Joshua for us.

And observe now therefore: for if Moses death enabled Joshua, he must not stir
till he dye, nay he must attend Moses death and Gods call; for so it was
necessary, where there was no succession: but where the succession of a
Kingdom is established in a line, the death of the Father calls the son; a^
thereby GOD speaks to him as if in express terms he called, Arise. The last
breath of the Predecessor gives first title and possession to the Successor;
and though it be never so faint when it goes out, it cries aloud, Arise.
Herein let us magnify Gods Providence for our Joshua, that as he preserved
Moses till Joshua was ready; so did he preserve our Moses till our Joshua was
fit; so fit, and so incomparably worthy, as if succession did not cast the
Kingdom upon him: upon who^ else should we affixe our eyes and hearts? where
should we choose such another? we have read of some that have been so composed,
as Ingentes virtutes, and ingentia vitia did strive whether should exceed: but
so much virtue, without any exception, where shall we find? Non semper errat
Fatum, aliquando eligit.

And now that our gracious King comes to us in the parallel of Joshua, I
conceive hope, and I cannot but conceive it, that he will likewise come to us
in the Power of Joshua: The greatest act of Iosuah's power appeared in this,
that at his word the Sun and Moon stood still till he was avenged on his
enemies. Amongst the Canons of the Church of Rome, we find that they make the
Pope the Sun, and the Emperor the Moon; this they, to magnify the Pope so
many degrees above the Emperor, as the Sun exceedes the Moon. But the Sun
and the Moon they must be, and so let them be; provided, that at the mighty
power of our Joshua, and his wor^ ^he Sun and Moon stand still, or be not able
to go forward one degree, till he be avenged of the blood of those Saints,
which has been so prodigally shed; and till Those of his own Royal blood be
delivered from the oppressions, which now they suffer, and be restored to
those Inheritances and honors, which have so violently been torn from them.

Now therefore Arise, yea let our Joshua arise, like the morning Sun, and
thrust the usurper out of his seat. Let him Arise, and let his enemies be
scattered; but let his throne be established from generation to generation:
let the hand of God be established with him, and let his arm strengthen him:
but Lord destroy his foes before his face, and plague those that hate him. Let
thy Truth and Mercy ever be with him, and in thy name let his power be exalted:
Make him thy first borne, higher than the Kings of the earth: make his seed to
endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven! And let all the people
say, Amen.

AMEN.
Faults escaped, in some Copies.
Page 3. Lin. 13. read Joshua will be, etc. Page 11. lin. 22. dele him. Page
13. lin. 21. read Immortality, Page 15. lin. 7. read -- for Moses death,
they cannot fetch him again, once dead. Page 16. lin. penult. read Thus
Simeon.


