October. 3. 1639.
Imprimatur Cantabrigiae per Rogerum Daniel.

Ra. Brownrigg Procan. Samuel Ward. Tho. Bainbrigg. Jo. Cousin.
The Mind of the Frontispice.
depiction of angel

How firmly hangs this Earths rich cabinet
Twix't fleeting Air, on floting waters set?
By this one argument, fond Atheist see,
The Earth thou tread'st on shows a Deity.
On such a liquid basis could it stand,
If not supported by a Powerful hand?
But what is the Earth, or Sea, or Heaven to me
Without Thee Three-in-One, and one-in-Three?
Nec caelum sine T^terra. no^ unda placet.
depiction of man standing on a globe with a hand pointing down from a cloud
THE DIVINE COSMOGRAPHER
by (...)
Quum te pendenti reputa^ insi^tere terrae nonne vel hinc clar^ conspici^ (...)
^^um?



Printed for Andrew Crook. 1640. W^ sulp^it.

To my much honored friend, WILLIAM HODGSON Esquire, on his elegant and
learned descant on the Eighth Psalm.
WHen I peruse with a delighted eye
Thy learned descant on a text so high,
The choice of such a subject first I praise;
And then thy skill and Genius, that could raise
A style in prose so high as to express
This holy Panegyric; and no less
The Use, to view through this variety
Of creatures the Creatours majesty:
And must condemn those vain Cosmographers,
Who whilst they strive to search and to rehearse
All creatures frame and beauty, while they toil
To find the various nature of each soil,
The Oceans depth, through whose vast bosom move
(...) many wonders, nay to skies above
And higher spheres their contemplations raise,
They loose the pith of all, the Makers praise.
Thomas May.

(...).
HOdsonus ille, Lector, ut vides, nova
Illustrat art flammei poli plagas,
Mundique tractus; ceu Syracosius Senex
Ingentis olim Iuserat coeli vias,
Suumque magno reddidit mundum Jovi,
Humana Divi dum stupent ars quid queat.
Sic sic aperti tramitem aeris secans,
Stagnantis olim transiit terrae vias
Columba, justi missa de manu Senis,
Miro volatu remigans liquidum aethera.
Qualisve docti quae Tarentini manu
Efficta veras art lusit alites.
Hodsonus ille, Lector, ut spatio brevi
Se continere non queat amplius vides.
En! ille mensor aeris, and liquidi poli
Percurrit orbem, tranat and quod aethera,
Pinnisque quicquid turbidum findit mare.
Accessus illi haud invius Diespiter
Qua promit orbi syderis radios novi,
Vespereque sero condit ubi lumen suum;
Ali isque tentat coeli inaccessas domus.
Humero efficaci sic prius coelumtulit,
Laturum erat quod se, vice Atlantis, pue^
Tonantis olim, pondere haud pressus grav^
Linguaque docta sic and Hodsonus potens
Styloque docto jam viam adfectat polo;
Terrasque notas linquit, and coelum petit,
Radiavit ipse quod prius lumine suo.
Scrib. V. Optimo and ami^ Guilielmus Burtonus. Kingstoniae ad Thamesin apud
Regn^

To my worthy and learned frien^ W. H. Esquire, upon his divine meditation and
elegant explanation of the Eighth Psalm.
Amongst all the reverend rites the Church dains,
None melts the mind so much, so mildly reign^
Over man's affections, warming our desire
And ycie frozen zeal with heavenly fire,
As the Hebrew Siren's music, Jordans swan,
Gods darling David, that Prophetic man:
Whose manna-dewing lays with charming strains
And anthemes chanted from inspiring veins
Do mount our winged souls aloft, which fly
Ravished to Heaven in blessed theorie.
This sacred Hymn, the subject of thy quill,
Limn'd in such orient colors by thy skill,
As a rich tablet shows in lively features
Gods love to man, and man's rule over the creatures,
Fowls of the air, and beasts on earth residing,
The scaly fry in the vast Ocean gliding,
With all the numerous host of heaven past counting,
In spangled order and bright beauty mounting;
These all by thee are taught to speak the story
Of the worlds fabric, and their Founders glory.
Nor have thou marred the majesty of those
Mysteries sublimed, dressed statelier in thy prose:
But rather cleared those rubs and doubts which did
^n obscure knottie arguments lie hid;
And in this Tit Psalm. Pro Torcularibus.
wine-p^esse trod the grapes whose jnvce
shall to weak fainting souls such heat infuse,
^s will not only cheat their hearts, but be
Thy glories Truchman to posterity.
Reuben Bourn.

To his ever honored friend, William Hodgson Esquire, on his contemplations on
the Eighth Psalm.
Sir,
GOd has blessed you with a lovely vine,
And you have blessed your God in so divine
Soul-ravishing fancies, wherewith you are filled
From the pure Titulus Psalmi, Pro Torcularibus.
wine press of this Psalm distilled
I do conceive what pangs were in thee, when
Thou formd'st and brought forth with thy ski^full pen
This perfect feature, whose alluring face
Smiles on the world with an attractive grace.
When thou beholdest with a single eye
The spangled heavens, the embroidered sky,
That looks upon the earth with thousands, we
Confess and know that thy divinity
Does much irradiate the celestial tapers,
Bright in themselves, but brighter by thy papers
Curious contriver! how do thou enrobe
The great and small ones of each massy globe
In fine-weav'd ornaments! Such is thy skill,
The Persian needle comes not near thy quill.
Richly have thou adorned the Earth our mother,
Sea the Earths sister, and the Air their brother:
And, which is most praiseworthy; each I see,
And all that's in them, laud the Deity.
William Moffet, Mr. of Arts Sydn. Coll. Camb. Vic. of Edmonton.

The DIVINE COSMOGRAPHER; or, A brief Survey of the whole world, delineated in
a tractate on the VIII Psalm: By W. H. sometime of S. Peter's College in
Cambridge.

Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie of CAMBRIDGE. 1640.

PSALM. VIII. To the chief musician upon Gittith, A psalm of David.
O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who have set thy
glory above the heavens.

2 Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because
of thine enemies that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

3 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars which thou have ordained;

4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

5 For thou have made him a little lower then the angels, and have crowned him
with glory and honor.

6 Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put
all things under his feet.

7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field:

8 The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes
through the paths of the seas.

9 O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!

The Divine Cosmographer; or, A brief survey of the whole world, delineated in
a tractate on the eighth Psalm.
SECT. 1. A preface on the book of Psalms in general.
THe Holy Ghost describing the genealogy of our Savior, from how many kings
he was descended, vouchsafes none of them the style and title of a King but
David, and him twice in one verse, Matthew. 1.6. and that for a literal and
moral reason: partly, because he was the first king settling and establishing
the kingdom of Israel; but principally, for that he was endowed with all
princely qualities, as justice, wisdom, clemency, courage, and devotion: A
king as mighty in religion as valor; who wrote more like an Evangelist then a
Prophet. And therefore the Fathers conclude him to be, Homo in Veteri, non de
Veteri Testamento, a man that lived in the time, but not after the manner of
the old law, more like a Christian then a Jew. As the fat was taken away from
the peace offering, so was David chosen out from among the children of Israel
Ecclus 47.2. That which was most excellent in every thing, the Hebrews called
the fat: as, adeps frumenti, the fat of the corn; medulla tritici, the marrow
of the wheat. The witty imitatour of Solomon does there make an allusion
between the father of Solomon and the fat of the peace offering: All the
peace offering was the Lords, yet all was not offered to him; but part was
given to the Priest, and a part to the people: but the fat was fully burnt up
to the Lord: So the zeal of Gods house burnt up David as the fat of the
sacrifice. In this fire of zeal did he often ascend, Judge. 13.20.
like the Angel in the flame of Manoah's altar, to the throne of God: and his
tongue being touched by a coal from that altar, many a dainty song did he tune
upon his harp; which harp was no^ more sweet then his song was holy.

Though Moses the man of God was the first that by a special direction from
God began and brought up this order, to make music the conveyer of men's duties
into their minds; yet David the darling of God has sithence continued it, as
having a special grace and felicity in this kind. One touch of the son of
Jesse, one murmr of this heavenly turtle, one Michtam of David's jewel, his
golden song, is far above the buskind raptures, the garish phantasmes, the
splendid vanities, the pageants and landskips of profaner wits.

Et hic rhetoricantur Patres: The Fathers both Greek and Latin have robed his
Psalter with many rich encomiums. Athanasius, and Basil, and Augustine, and
Hierome, and Chrysostom, and almost all the new writers, stand so deeply
affected to this book, that they hold it to be the Souls Anatomy, the Laws
Epito me, the Gospels Index Omnis latitudo Scripturarum, Hier.
The breadth of the whole Scripture (as he sometimes spoke of the Creed, and
the Lord prayer) may hither be reduced. And it is observeable out of Luke
24.24. that it is put for all the books of the old Testament as they are
differenced from the Law of Moses and the Prophets. Again, it appears in the
Gospel that Christ and his Disciples were very conversant in this book, because
in their sayings and writings not fewer then sixty authorities are produced
from above forty of these Psalms. B. King, Lect. 26. on Jonas.


This book was and still is more usually both sung and read, not only in the
Jewish Synagogues but in Christian assemblies, as well by the people as the
Minister, and that with more outward reverence, then any part of holy Writ. The
Jew^ acknowledge the old Testament, abhor the new; the Turks disclam^ both,
Dr Hakewell in his David's Vow, page 2.
yet swear as solemnly by the Psalms o^ David as by the Alcora^ of Mahomet.

In all ages this boo^ has ever been esteeme^ of the best and most learned
men. Yea, the greatest Potentates, who with Joseph have had manu^ ad clavum and
oculos ad calum, have without blushing stooped unto a verse it being the usual
recreation of King David, wh^ was, as Euthymius speaks primi Regis and lingua,
and cor, and calamus, the ^ongue, the pen, and heart of the King of Heaven.
Thus, as we read, our good king Alfred translated the Psalter himself into the
Saxon tongue. And our late most learned King James of happy memory (who as it
is said of Scevola, K. James.
that he was Jurisperitorum eloquentissimus, of all lawyers the most eloquent
man; so was he (...), of our Nobles the most skillful in Divinity; and as
Sylverius said of Caesar, he honored learning with his own labors: a Prince
mighty both with his scepter and his pen; who besides his prose, it^ ad carmen
noverat, mad^ such a verse when h^ pleased, etiam sanissim^ coloris, of a most
daint and elaborate composit^on, as became Buchanan best Scholar) among other
things truly and exactly translated ou^ Church-psalmes, no^ long before he was
translated hence.

The Subject of thi^ book is singular: For whereas the other Prophesies were
the Ambassies from God to the people, or at least the abstracts thereof, these
are for the most part holy colloquies, holy whisperings, and secret conferences
with God. What a spiritual Library of all manner of prayers, precepts,
exhortations do I here find! The Psalter of this Kingly Prophet operateth that
in the Church which the Sun does in heaven; it illumi^ateth, heateth, and
ma^eth fruitful all the good desires of Christianity. Our Prophet once
desired to be a doorekeeper in ^he house of the Lord; Psalm 84.11.
and ^e was heard in that he ^rayed for: for, as Hilarie ^aith, this whole book
of ^salmes was but a bunch of eyes, opening several ^oores to let the soul
enter into all the treasures of devotion. This is the Spouses garden: here be
lily (...) and roses; here be apple^ and pomegranates, an^ sweet fruits; here
be the myrrh, Cant. 4.12.13.
aloes, and Cassi^ and sweet spices; here b^ the fountains and well of living
water; hic su^preces and vota, here a^ prayers and consolation^ and amulets of
comfor^ more pleasant then the pools of Heshbon, mo^ glorious then the towe^ of
Libanon, more red^ lent then the oil of A^ron, more fructifyi^ then the dew of
Hermo^ Prophets, Apostles, h^ Martyrs, all the ancie^ Fathers have made use of
^is book that begins ^th Blessedness, and ^ntains nothing but ^essednesse;
Blessedness ^ing times repeated twenty ^en times in the con^ete in this one
book: Revel. 21.
which like the tree that ^areth fruit every ^neth, the Church has ^pointed
shall bring ^th fruit every month (...) due season.

As the matter is ex^llent, so is it digested ^o an elegant form of ^ords:
Which fall not ^th the vulgar liberty (...) speech, but run in ^mbers upon
ordered ^et of divine poesy, composed and set to M^sicall tunes: in
observ^tion of which the Psa^mist is as critical as the daintiest Lyrick or
H^roick, yet with a vast d^paritie, both for subs^mitie of matter and admirable
expression. S^ rightly did Hierome pr^nounce of David to Pa^linus, that he is
our Si^nides, Pindarus, Alce^ Catullus, and in stead all others.

Sundry reasons are ^ven why the Lord wou^ have the chief points Religion
included numbers by the sw^ Singer of Israel. T^ first is, That they mig^ be
transmitted pure and without depravation to ^osteritie: for they run ^o evenly
and so harmo^ously upon feet, that if ^here want but a word or syllable the
error is de^rehended.

Secondly; it is done ^or the help of memory: ^or concinnitie of numbers is
sooner learned and longer retained then ^rose.

Thirdly, it puts us in ^ind of the harmony ^f our actions: In which holy and
heavenly use of ^he harp the royal Pro^het by his tunes of Mu^ck teaches men
how to ^et themselves in tune, Psalm. 15. and not one^ how to tune themselv^ but
to tune their ho^ hold, Psalm. 101.

Fourthly, to leap ov^ a large field at once, a^ to speak a little more that of
which we can ^ver speak enough, it s^veth for the comfort the godly who are mo^
often cheared by Ps^ modie then by Praye^ In this last respect S. A^gustine
thus describes Psalm, Prolog: in Psalm.
Psalmus tranqu^litas animarum est er sig^ fer pacis, A Psalm is t^
tranquillity of the so^ and standard bearer peace. With which greeth that of
S. A^ ^rose, Psalmus est vox ec^esiae, et clamor jucundita^s. And this has
truly been verified in the expe^ence of the Saints, that ^evout singing of
^salmes causes tears of ^y to stand in the eyes ^f yet we may call them
^ares, or not rather the ^ew of heaven, Lib. De scala claustrali.
with S. ^ernard) which add a ^rment to the torment^. O how often, says ^ood
S. Augustine, have ^wept for joy, when the ^weet hym^es of thy ^raise, O Lord,
have ^unded in my ears. Aug. lib. confess. cap. 6^
Et ^liquebatur cor meum, My heart melted, and ^rops of heavenly passions
distilled into my sou^ Suspirans tibi and respiran^ Sighing and longing afte^
thee, I was overjoyed i^ spirit, and wholly overcome with the frago^ of thy
sweet ointment^

I will end this prefa^ with a note already mad^ unto my hand: Athanasius in an
epistle ad Man cellinam De optima inte^ pretatione Psalmorum, reports, that
coming to a^ old man, and falling i^ talk with him about the Psalms, he
receive^ from him a good direct^on: whereupon, as himself says, he listened
diligently: The note wa^ this, That there is great odds between the Psalms and
other Scriptures: for ^f you set aside the mysti^all part of them, the ^orall
is so penned that ^very man may think it ^peaks de se, in re sua, it (...)
penned for him, and ^tted for his case: which ^f other parts of Scripture
cannot be so affirm^d. To this note of A^anasius I will add ano^er of S.
Augustines, ^et us so read Psalms ^ll our selves be turned ^to Psalms, till
the ^nging of Psalms and ^ymns unto the Lord ^vite the very Angels of ^eaven
to bear us com^any; so shall we learn with a near approach t^ join our souls as
clo^ to the ears of God (...) Philip joined himself t^ the chariot of the
E^nuch. Then sing ye me^rily unto the Lord, O (...) Saints of his, for it well
b^cometh you to be thankful for you are the timbre of the Holy Ghost.

But because concept^ons like hairs may mo^ easily be filleted up the
dissheveled, I will tie (...) my loose thoughts certain knots: I w^ single out
one deer from the herd, and in particular fix my meditation on the eighth
Psalm.

SECT. 2.
BEfore I enter upon the parts of this Psalm, The title of the Eighth Psalm
explained.
must first clear the title, and show what is imply^d in the very bark and find
thereof. The In^cription, which S. Au^ustine calls the key of ^very Psalm,
is, To him that excels in Gittith. ^o are the eighty first and ^he eighty
ninth inscri^ed.

Some derive the word ^ittith from a Musical ^strument so called, because
either invented or ^ost used in Gath: and ^us the Chaldee Para^hrast
translateth it, To sing upon the harp tha^ came from Gath. So by Gittith here
may b^ meant, either such instruments as were used by the posterity of Obed
(...) Edom the Gittite; or tha^ these Psalms were mad^ upon occasion of
transporting Gods Ark from the house of Obed-Edom, the history whereof is in
2. Sam. 6. and 6* 10, 11, 12 verses. Others more probabl^ think it respects
the time when this and thos^ songs used to be sung namely at the time
Hag^gittith, at the vintage which feast was solemnly celebrated by the
I^raelites; in which they especially praised the name of God for the great and
manifold blessings conferred upon man: Which ^s the whole blood and ^uyce of
this Psalm. According to this the Greek ^ranslateth it the winepresses: and
Gath in Hebrew signifies a winepresse; Torcular calcav^ solus, I have trodden
the winepresse a^one, Isaiah 63.3. Where by the way I could take along with me
this observation; In those words the Prophet speaks not of himself; for it is
he that asks the question, verse. ^. Who is he, etc. Proper indeed they are to
Christ, and so proper to him only that we shall not read them any-where
applied to any other. It is he that was in torculari, in a press, yea, in a
double Winepresse; In the former he was himself trodden and pressed; he was the
grapes and clusters himself; in the latter, he that was trodden on gets up
again, and does tread upon, and tread down his enemies. The press he was
trodden in was his Cross and Passion; never cluster lay so quiet and still to
be bruised as did Christ in that press: But that which he came out of, where
calcatus became calcator, was his Descent, and glorious Resurrection.

Upon this little piece of ground I could raise another fabric, and infer
this collection from the title, To him that excels: As David entitleth these
Psalms, so does God for the most part bestow his graces, to him that
excels; and with a liberal hand does he deal his favors to him that
improves his talent to the best advantage. Gods family admits of no
dwarfes, which are unthriving and stand at a stay; but men of measure, who
still labor to find somewhat added to the stature of their souls. Emblemes of
Perseverance.
The Eagles emblem is Sublimius, To fly higher, even to behold the Sun, as
Pliny notes; the Suns emblem is Celerius, Swifter, like a giant refreshed to
run his course, as David speaks, Psalm. 19. the Wheat in the Gospel has its
emblem, Perfectius, Riper; First the blade, then the ear, then full corn,
Mark 4.28. Ezekiels emblem, Profundius, Deeper; first to the ankle, then to
the thigh, Ezekiel. 47.4. Christ's emblem was Superius; Sit up higher, Luke 14.10.
Charles the fifth his emblem was Vlterius, Go on farther. The woman with
child has here emblem, Before, Fuller, until she bring forth. So ought
every Christian to mount higher with the Eagle, to run swifter with the
Sun, to sit up higher with the guest, to pass on further with the Emperor,
to wax fuller with the Woman, till they may bring forth good fruits of saving
faith, and so come to a full growth to be perfect men in Jesus Christ. But it
is not my intent to angle about the shore: I will now let down my net, and
lanch into the deep.

SECT. 3.
THe ground upon which the Psalmist sweetly runs through the whole Psalm,
is a twofold rapture expressed in a sacred rapsodie, in an exstaticall question
of sudden wonder; a wonder at God, and a wonder at Man. In his wonder at Man,
the parts be Antitheta: first, of his Vileness and Debasement; Secondly, of
his Dignity and Exaltation. In the first each word has its energie, What is
man? and then, What is the son of man? paraphrastically thus, according to
the Chaldee, What is man? Not man, that rare creature endowed with wisdom and
understanding; not man, as he is cura Divini ingenii, the Almighties
masterpiece, the Epitome of the greater world: But, What is Enosh, or Enosch,
Man's abasement.
miserable, doleful, wretched man? or, What is the son of Adam; whose
original is Adamah, earthie? What is the son of calamity or earth? What is
he? Nay, what is he not? what not of calamity and earth?

And because the life of opposites is in comparing them, the Prophet in a deep
speculation looking over that great nightpiece, and turning over the vast
volume of the world, sees in that large Folio among those huge capital
letters what a little insensible dagesh-point Man is, and suddenly breaks forth
into this amazed exclamation, Lord! what is man? Having considered in his
thoughts the beauty of the celestial host, the Moon and the Stars, he brings
up man unto them; not to rival their perfection, but to question his; and
after some stand and pause, in stead of comparison makes this inquiry, What is
man, or, the son of man?

Secondly, Man's dignity.
we are here to take notice of Man's dignity. Though the Prophet abaseth
himself with a What is man? yet withal he adds, having an eye at Gods favor
and mercy toward man, Thou take knowledge of him; Thou make account of
him; making him only lower then the Angels, but Lord over the rest of the
creatures. And this knowledge, this account o^ God, does more exa^ man then his
own vileness can depresse him.

In his wonder toward God, as if Gods glory were the circle of David^
thoughts, he both begin^ and ends the Psalm with an elegant Epanalepsis Prius
incipit Propheta mirari quam loqui; O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy
name in all the world! verse. 1. And desinit loqui non mirari; O^ Lord our
Governor, how excellent is thy name, etc. verse. 9. Sicut incipit it^ terminat;
and geminatio re^ ejusdem intentionem habe^ and animi ardorem, says Musculus
on Psalm. 117. To which agrees that of S. Augustine upon this hymn,
Incipiendum cum Deo, and desinendum cum ^o: To praise God is the first thing we
must begin with, and the last we must conclude with. And it is easy to
observe, how that the universal underlong of most of these Ditties is, Praised
be the Lord. David's gracious heart in a sweet sense of the great goodness of
his God, everywhere breathes out this doxologie or divine Epipho^ema, Praised
be the Lord.

This is the resolution and Logical Analysis o^ the whole Psalm. B^ should I
fold up so ri^ a work in so small a compass, I did but show yo^ the knotty
outside of a Arras-hanging: I wi^ now open and draw o^ at length, and present
t^ your eyes the pleasan^ mixture of colors i^ each piece thereof. An^ least I
should lose my se^ in this Zoan, in this fiel^ of wonders, my meditations shall
keep pace wit^ the Princely Prophet^ method, and among those magnalia Jehovae
mirifica Domini, the wonderful works of the Lord, I will first conside^ how
that out of the ^outhes of babes and suck^ngs he ordains strength, (...)
still the enemy and the ^venger.

SECT. 4.
SAint Hierome writes of Paula that no^le matrone, that she joy^d in nothing
more then ^uod Paulam neptim audie^t in cunis balbutiente lin^ua Halleluja
cantare, that ^e heard her niece Paula ^ven in the cradle with a ^retty
stammering tongue (...) sing Haleluiah unto ^e Lord. O God, thou ^eedest no
skillful Rhetorician to set forth the praise: Virgil.
Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores; even newborn babe^ and sucklings do
sufficiently declare thy power wisdom, and goodness Beza.
-- Qui matrum ex uber^ pendent,
Elingues pueri (dict^ mirabile!) vires
Immensas numenque tuu^ muto ore fatentur.


Thus did the blessed Innocents, those primiti^ Martyrum, witness ou^ Saviors
glory, non l^ quendo sed moriendo, no^ by speaking but by su^fering for him, so
the God out of their mout^ made perfect his praise. Christ assuredly got praise
^n that hymn which the Angels sung, Glory be to God on high; he got great
praise by S. Stephen his Protomartyr, and by S. ^ohn whom he loved: but ^s
praise was made per^ect by the mouth of those ^abes and Innocents. Marvel not
that children ^ake up that train: for unto them and unto us ^en was born a
Child, as ^e Prophet speaks, and ^ch an one as ever de^ghted in little ones,
like ^s Father. To him was ^ver sacrifice more ac^ptable of beasts, then ^mbes;
of birds, then pigeons: and that Lamb^ of God carried the sam^ mind, Matthew.
19.14.
Suffer little children to come unto me, and fo^bid them not, for unto such
belongs the kingdom ^ heaven. And if the kingdom of heaven belong to them,
good reason they should belong un^ the king. As great Princes will have their
se^vants to attend on hi^ whom they honor, (...) God commands the glorious
Angels in heaven to take charge of his lit^ ones here on earth; a^ they are
ever rea^ pitching their te^ round about them, a^ do ever attend either (...)
their safeguard or revenge. Nay, they are no longer Angels as S. Gregory well
observes, then they are so employed: for ac^ording to S. Augustine, Angel is a
name of office ^ot of nature. They are always Spirits, but not always Angels:
For no ^onger messengers from God to man, no longer Angels; since to be an
Angel, implies only to be a messenger.

It was a witty Essay of ^im, who styled Woman ^he second edition of the
e^itome of the whole world, ^eing framed next unto ^an, who was the
ab^ridgement of the whole creation; and though a^ Infant be but man in (...)
small letter, yet (says another Characterist) he (...) the best copy of Adam
before he tasted of Eve or the apple.

-- Felix sine fraudib^ aetas! Thrice happy Infancy, in which no guile (...)
gall is to be found! C^jus innocentia and ignosce^tia, says Culman, Whos^
humbleness and harmlesnesse abundantly co^founds the enemy and the avenger:
For a little child being injured takes not any revenge but only makes
complaint to its parents. I^ this respect we should ^mitate little children;
and when any wrong us, not suddenly break into Gods office, who says,
Vengeance is mine; whose prerogative royal it is, to ^epay it: but only make
complaint to God our Father in heaven, or to the Church our Mother on earth.

He that upon an ambi^uous word, to which he ^rames an interpretation against
himself, upon ^ome Chimera of spirit, ^oth instantly fall into ^rags,
rotomontadoes, ^untilioes, steps as it were ^to his Princes chair of state, yea
Gods own seat, dethroning both and so disturbs heaven and earth. And he the
shall communicate wit^ another, still reteining t^ impure passion of malic^ in
which is steeped the venom of all other v^ces, does put Adonis i^ the crib of
Bethlehem, (...) heretofore the heathen did.

But from our Saviou^ crib I remove m^ thoughts to Moses h^ cradle. When
tyrann^ call Pharaoh sent out h^ bloody edict for the slaughter of all the
mal^ babes and sucklings (...) Israel, when the exec^tioners hand should ha^
succeeded the midwives, The tender care of Pharaohs daughter to the infant
Moses.
then was the merciful daughter of that cruel father moved to compassion with
the beauty and tears of a little infant, Which with a smile seemed to implore
the aid
And gentle pity of that royal maid:
Which young and live^y oratorie so prevailed with her, that from the ^rk of
bulrushes, where^n she found it forlorn and floting among the waves, she
brought it to ^he palace, and bred it; ^ot as a child of alms, ^or whom it
might have ^een favor enough to live, but as it had bee^ her own son, in all
the delicates and in all the learning of Egypt. Thu^ many times God written such
presages of honor and majesty in the fac^ of children as are able t^ confound
the enemy an^ the avenger.

Some have observed how aptly these words ex ore infantum, are her^ inserted in
the secon^ verse of this Psalm, between the first and the third, wherein the
Prophet magnifieth God^ glory in consideration o^ the heavens, and such lik^
works of his and his ordaining; as though the Heavens too, the Sun, the Moon,
the Stars, and the rest, were to be rec^oned among those babes and infants
out of whose mouths together with others he has appointed ^e predication and
per^ct composition of his ^raises.

And because parallel ^xts of Scripture, like ^sses set one against an^her,
cast a mutual ^ght, it will not be a^isse to illustrate this by ^nferring and
medita^g on some passages of ^e former part of the ^eteenth Psalm, and the
next place consider ^w the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows h^ handiwork.

SECT. 5.
THough Men only were made to be the speech-sounding letter in the alphabet of
the Creation; though the Heavens, the Day and the Night be mute, yet have they
a language which is universally understood: The continua^ succession of day and
nigh^ does notably set forth the wonderful power and providence of God; On^
day tells another, and on^ night certifieth another, verse. 2. If the world
be, as Clemens Alexandri^us says, Dei scriptura, the first Bible that God made
for the institution of man; then may we ^ake those words to be ^art of the book
of the world, where Nights are as it were the black in^ie lines of learning,
Days the white lightsome spaces between the ^ines, where God has ^mprinted a
legible deli^eation of his glory.

Here with Chryso^tome we may observe ^he goodly Eutaxie of ^he Hours, The
Hours compared to young maidens.
how like maidens dancing in a round, very handsomely and curiously the^
succeed one another, and by little and little, and without any stir in the
world, the inmost convey themselves utter most, the foremost, hindermost, and
middlemost do all shift places one with another, and yet for all this, they
never stand still, but do still stand in their just distances, -- and positae
spatiis aequalibus horae. Where likewise I may assume that of the Apostle, Romans
10.15. How beautiful are the feet of those that bring glad tidings? How
beautiful (...) (...), how howerlike! and then they are fair and beautiful
indeed.

I will elevate this a point higher, and next consider the goodly and glorious
vault of heaven, where are those worlds of light, much bigger then so many
globes of earth, hanging and moving regularly in that bright and spacious
contignation of the firmament. If there were no other, this were a sufficient
errand for a man's being here below, to see and observe those goodly luminaries
above our heads, their places, their quantities, their motions, to discern
those glories that may answer to so rich a pavement.

The Sun.
There is the Sun, the Heart of the world, the Eyes of the universe, the Gemme
of Natures ring, the Prince of life, Monarch of days and years, the
Bridegroom, the Husband of the Earth which provides heat and sustenance for her
and all the children that hang on her breasts.

The Moon.
There is the Moon, a weaker light for a necessary use, Mother of months, Lady
of seas and moystures, a secret worker upon bodily humors, whose virtue is not
greater in her light then in her influence.

There be those twinkling Stars, The Stars.
as it were virgins with torches waiting on their Mistres the Queen of Night:
Posuit etiam Deus stellas, Genesis 1.16. Some read, Dedit stellas, God gave the
Stars in way of dowry or a jointure; but others, Posuit stellas, He set them
in order: He has not set them tanqua^ in centro, but tanquam in circulo, in
excellent order.

Surely if these dark and low rooms are so well fitted, The Empyreall heaven.
it is not like those fair and upde^ rooms are void. This Sidereall heaven (i^
contemplation of which in an holy trance I could gaze my self into wonder) is
not more richly decked with conspicuous candles perpetually burning, then the
throne of God with celestial Lights. There are innumerable regiments, bands
and royal armies of Cherubims and Seraphims, Archangels and Angels, Saints and
Martyrs. There is nothing which a religious soul can covet but she has it; and
to borrow a strain of the Schools, for the closing up of this sweet note, Hic
Deum amamus amore desiderii; at in coelo, amore amicitiae: Here we desire to
have God, there we have our full desire.

To cast mine eyes back from whence I have a little digressed, by a
retrogradation, I contemplate again the excellency of Man, together with the
privileges of his condition wherewith God has ennobled him.

In some creatures we have only vestigium, the print of Gods foot; but in
others imaginem, his image. The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars are glorious
creatures, yet are they but the work of Gods fingers: whereas man is the work
of his hands; Psalm. 139 14.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, etc. The word in the original signifies such
art and curiosity as is used in needlework or embroiderie. Man is as it were
Gods Scutcheon, wherein he has pourtrayed all the titles of the most excellent
beauties of the world. The world compared to a large clock.
God having framed the world (says Causinus in his Holy court) as a large
clock, has proportionably given to Man the place. The first wheel of this
great clock of the world, is the Primum Mobile: The continual motion, the
secret influences of Antipathies and Sympathies, which are, as it were, hidden
in the bowels of nature: The hand thereof, is this goodly and beautiful
embowed frettizing of the heavenly orbs which we behold with our eyes: The
twelve Signs are, as it were, the distinctions of the twelve hours of the
day: The Sun exercises the office of the steel and Gnomon, to point out
time; and in his absence, the Moon: The Stars contribute thereto their
lustrous brightness: The flowrie carpet of the earth beneath us, the spangled
canopie of the heavens above us, the wavie curtains of the air about us, are
so many Emblemes to exercise the wisest in the knowledge of this great Workman:
The living creatures are the small chimes* and Man is the great clock, which is
to strike the hours, and rende^ thanks to the Creatou^ S. Chrysostom says
that the Angels are the Morning-starres, Job 38.
whereo^ mention is made in Job who incessantly praise God; and Men are the
Evening-Starres fashioned by the hand of God to do the same office. Briefly,
God has made man the Charge of Angels, the sole Surveyour of heaven, the
Commander of the earth, the Lord of the Creatures. And thus am I led by the
hand to consider his Regencie and Dominion over them.

SECT. 6.
WHen God had formed of the earth every beast of the field, and every fowl of
the air of their own fit matter, he brought them unto Man, who was their Lord,
to acknowledge his sovereigntie, and to receive from him their names, Genesis
2.19. Some have conceited Adam sitting in some high and eminent place, his face
shining far brighter then ever the face of Moses did, and every beast coming
as he was called, and bowing the head as he passed by, being not able to behold
his countenance. Most probable it is, that either by the help of Angels, or by
that which the Greeks call (...), a natural and secret instinct from God, by
which every creature perceives what is good and bad for them, they were
gathered to Adam. God brought them to man for diverse reasons:

First, To let him see how much he did excel them, and how much the more he
should be thankful. God made other creatures in several shapes, like to none
but themselves; Man, after his own image: others with qualities fit for
service; Man, for dominion.

Secondly, That he should give them their names, in token of his power over
them.

Thirdly, That posterity might see what admirable knowledge Adam had in giving
names to the creatures according to their kinds. All the Arts were engraven
upon the Creatures, yet none but Man could see them: for he receives them both
actively and passively; and therefore by Logic he understood their natures,
Adam the first Nomencl^tor; and why he gave the creatures their names.
and by Grammar their names.

If God had given their names, it had not been so great a praise of Adams
memory to recall them, as it was then of his judgment at first sight to
impose them. By his knowledge he fitted their names to their disposition: and
even in this he showed his dominion over them, in that he knew how to govern
them and order them also. To witness their subjection they present themselves
before him as their awful king, to do their first homage, and to acknowledge
their tenure. Such was the wonderful beauty of man's body, such a majesty
resulting from his face, that it struck a reverence into them all. The image of
God, as it were the Lords coat of Arms which he had put upon Man, made the
creatures afraid of him. Though God made Man paulo inferiorem Angelis, little
lower then the Angels, yet he made him multo superiorem reliquis, far above
all the creatures: He that made Man and all the rest, praeposuit, set Man above
all the rest. Thus while man served his Creator, he was feared of every
creature.

Observe.
But did he not lose this patent of Dominion by his fall? Are not the beasts now
become his enemies? May we not now take up the complaint of Job, chap. 39.7.
The wild ass derideth the multitude of the city, and hears not the cry of
the driver. The unicorn will not serve, nor tarry by the crib, 9. The hawk
will not fly by our wisdom, neither does the Eagle mount up at our command,
v. 26, 27. We cannot draw out Leviathan with an hook, neither pierce his jaws
with an angle. Job. 41.1, 2. How then is the fear of Man upon the creatures?

Though Adam in the state of innocence had this rule over them in a more
excellent manner, Answ.
for then they were subject by nature, of their own accord, without compulsion;
yet by his transgression Man did not altogether lose this power and dominion:
For it was one of the prerogatives which God gave to Noah and his sons, Genesis
9.2. The fear of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every
fowl of heaven, upon all that moves on the earth, and upon all the fish of the
sea: into your hands are they delivered: That is, says the Paraphrast, The
outward privileges of your first creation I do now, though imperfectly, renew
unto you; Let the fear and dread of you be planted naturally in every beast of
the earth, whether tame or wild, and in every fowl of the air, and generally
in all that treads on the earth, and in all the fishes of the sea: All these,
my will is, shall be subject to your will and command, that as by you and for
you they were preserved, so they accordingly serve to your use.

When Christ was in the wilderness with the beasts forty days and forty
nights, they hurt him not, Mark 1.13. So when the image of God is restored to
man in holiness, all the creatures begin willingly to serve him; but they are
enemies to the unregenerate. The dogs did eat the flesh of Jezebel, 2. Kings
9.36. yet they licked the sores of Lazarus, Luke 16.21. The ravens pick out the
eyes of those that are disobedient to their parents, Prove. 30.17. yet they fed
Elias in the wilderness. 1. Kings 17.6. The serpents stung the people of
Israel, Number. 21.6. yet the viper that leaped on Paul's hand hurt him not, Acts
28.6. The lions that devoured Daniels accusers, touched not him, Dan. 6.23, 24.
And still there are some relics of God left in man which make the beasts to
stand in aw of him: For first, they cannot do that harm to man which they
would, because God restrains their power. Secondly, they do not offend man, but
when he offends God. Thirdly, the nature of every wild beast has been tamed by
the nature of man, James 3.7. Fourthly, the most salvage beasts stand in fear
of him; they fly his company; they shun his arts and snares; they fear his
voice and shadow. When man goes to rest, the beasts come forth to hunt their
prey, Psalm. 104.20. Fifthly, they serve man, and submit themselves to his will.
The Lion will crouch to his keeper: the Elephant will be ruled and led about by
a little dwarf: the Horse yields his mouth to the bridle; the Ox his neck to
the yoke; the Cow her dugs to our hands; the Sheep her wool to the shearers.
He can now stoop the Hawk to his lure, send the Dog on his errand, teach one
fowl to fetch him another, one beast to purvey for his table in the spoil of
others. I am fallen upon a subject not more large then pleasant; and hic
pinguescere potest oration, my lines could here more easily swell into a volume
then be contracted into a manual. Lib. De mundo universo.
For as Aeneas Sylvius notes, That there is no book so weakly written but it
conteines one thing or other which is profitable; and as the elder Pliny said
to his nephew when he saw him walk out some hours without studying, Plin. lib
3. cap. 5.
Poteras has horas non perdere, You might have chosen whether you would have
lost this time: so if we would improve our most precious minutes to the best,
and contemplate on this great school of the world, where men are the scholars,
and the creatures the characters by which we spell, and put together that nomen
majestativum, as S. Bernard calls it, that great and excellent name of God, we
should find that there is no creature so contemptible but may justly challenge
our observation, and teach a good soul one step toward the Creator. There is
not any so little a Spider which coming into the world brings not with it its
rule, Nascitur aranea cum lege, libro, and lucer^a.
its book, its light: It is presently instructed in what it should do. The
Swallow is busy in her masonrie: The Be toyleth all day in her innocent
theft: The Pismires, Prove. 30.25.
a people not strong, prepare their meat in summer, and labor like the Bees:
sed illae faciunt cibos, hae condunt, but these make, the others hoard up meat.
As Vulcan is commended in the Poet for beating out chains and nets -- quae
lumina fallere possunt,
-- non illud opus tenuissima vincunt
Stamina,
so thin that the eye could not see them, being smaller then the smallest
thread: So the smaller the creature is, the more is the workmanship of God to
be admired both in shaping and using thereof. Our God is as cunning and
artificial in the organicall body of the smallest creature of the world as of
the greatest: And what application we may make thereof, I shall have fair
occasion given me again to treat of, when I come to consider the Fowls of the
air, and the Fish of the sea. In the mean time having selected this Psalm for
my meditations on Man's Lordship and Sovereigntie over the creatures, I proceed
according to the Prophets method; and from his Omnia subjecisti, from some
generals, come to handle some particulars: and, as he has ranked them in
order, I will next declare how the Lord has put under his feet all Sheep and
Oxen, and the beasts of the field.

SECT. 7.
THere be beasts ad esum. and ad usum. Some of them are profitable alive not
dead; as the Dog, and Horse, serviceable while they live, once dead they are
thrown out for carrion. Some are profitable dead not alive; as the Hog that
does mischief while he lives, but is wholesome food dead. Some are profitable
both alive and dead; as the Ox that draws the plough, the Cow that gives milk,
while they live; and when they are killed, nourish and feed us with their
flesh: Yet none of them is so profitable as that quiet, innocent, harmless
creature, the Sheep: Whose every part is good for something; the wool for
raiment, the skin for parchment, the flesh for meat, the guts for music. In
Sacrifices no creature so frequently offered; in the Sinne-offering,
Peace Offering, Burnt-offering, Passover, Sabbath-offering; and especially in
the daily-offering they offered a Lamb at morning, and a Lamb at evening,
Number. 28. Lorinus observes out of the Fathers, Mactabant agnum jugis nostri
sacrificii typum, Lorin. in Act. Apost. c. 8.
why a Lamb was so continually offered; namely, as a type of the offering of
Christ: who in eight and twenty several places of the Revelation is called the
Lamb of God.

For the name of Sheep; notatissima est dicendi forma, says Bucer: in the 34.
of Ezekiel, the Prophets are thirteen times called Shepherds, and the people
one and twenty times called Sheep. In what honor the name, function and
person of Shepherds has been, is everywhere apparent through the sacred
Scriptures. A Shepherd was the first tradesman, though the second son of all
the children of Adam. Shepherds in high esteem with God.
And after Abel, many Shepherds were in near attendance upon God. A Shepherds
life, says Philo, est praeludium ad regnum; ideo reges olim dicti sunt (...):
Of which phrase Homer and other Grecians have made use. The old Testament has
none in more esteem then Shepherds. Moses, that kept Jethro's sheep; Jacob,
that kept Labans sheep; Amos a Prophet, taken from the herd; Moses a Priest and
a Prophet, from the sheep; Elisha the Lords Seer (and you know whose spirit
Elisha had) yet taken from the cattle; David the Lords Soldier, (and who ever
got such victories as David?) yet fetched from the fold, and by the choice of
God destined to the Throne. B. Hall.
When he had lien long enough close among his flocks in the field of Bethlehem,
God sees a time to send him to the pitched field of Israel, where at his first
appearance in the list with that insolent uncircumcised Philistine, whose heart
was as high as his head, he takes no other spear but his staff, no other
brigandine but his shepherds scrip, no other sword but his sling, no other
artillery but what the brook affords, five smooth small peebles; and yet by
these guided by an invisible hand he overcame the Giant. Afterward when the
diadem empaled his temples, his thoughts still reflected on his hook and harp.
All the state and magnificence of a Kingdom could not put his mouth out of
taste of a retired simplicity. As a Musician often touches upon the sweetest
note in his song, pavin or galliard, so our Kingly Prophet in diverse Psalms,
but especially in his three and twentieth, (which we may call his Bucolicon)
has most daintily struck upon the same string, through the whole hymn: There
have you Shepherd, sheep, green fields, still waters, ways, paths, valleys,
shadows, yea the rod, and the crook.

But more then all this; God the Father is called a Shepherd, Psalm. 80.1. God
the Son does name himself a Shepherd, John 10.11. God the Holy Ghost is named
a Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, 1. Pet. 2.25. These very terms of Shepherd
and Sheep have led me farther than I thought besides the waters of comfort.

The night has now furled up her sails, and a clear thin cloud laden only
with a light dew besprinkleth with drops the whole earth, like pearls, which
sparkle as little eyes in the faces of the flowers and plants. The glorious Sun
is now unlocking the door of the morning to run his race. The winged
Choristers of heaven do now begin to prune and pick themselves, and in their
circling turns mount and soar aloft, and caroll out their praises to God, as
rendering their dutiful devotions and thanks unto him who has thus reflected
the beams of the Sun upon them: Whose sweet Anthems and modulations invite mine
ear to listen thereunto, and after some pause break off my thoughts from the
beasts of the field, and direct my pen to write somewhat of the fowls of the
air.

SECT. 8.
MY meditations are now on wing: and I will make a short and speedy flight
through the volarie of the open air, to look on the numberless guests which
it contains; to see the several fowls of all shapes, colors and notes, whom
Nature does so willingly and bountifully furnish for the benefit of man, even
to a mirror of delicacie, braverie, use.

First, if we consider profit, they are for meat. Number. 11.
When the Israelites in the desert murmured for meat, Moses asked whether he
should kill all the beeves and sheep, or gather together all the fish of the
sea: He forgot the fowls of the air. But God sent them such a drift of Quails,
in such abundance, that they were about two cubits above the earth. O the
goodness and providence of that great Housekeeper of this Universe! They
desired meat, and received Quails; they desired bread, and had Manna. God gave
them the meat of Kings, and the bread of Angels. Again, they are not only food
in their flesh, but in their eggs also: And as their flesh is for our eating in
the day, so are their feathers for our resting in the night. They are
profitable both in war and peace, in sagittis belli, and in calamis pacis:
Their feathers are for arrows in time of war to fight with, and for quills in
time of peace to write with.

Secondly, they are good if we consider pleasure. There is pleasure in the
taking of them, by fowling to meaner persons, and by hawking to Princes and the
better sort. There is pleasure in them to the Eye; when the navy of Tharshish
brought unto Solomon gold from Ophir, there ^ame also besides Apes, and Parrats
and Popinjayes, (as some have probably conjectured) and the starrie-trained
Peacocks, which are only birds of pleasure; whose daintie-coloured feathers
being spread against the Sun, have a curious luster, and look like gemms: Job
39.16
The wings of the Peacock are pleasant, and the feathers of the Ostrich. So is
the purpled Pheasant with the speckled side. Our Prophet David was much taken
with the color of the Dove; Pennae columbae deargentatae, her feathers are
silver-white, Psalm. 68.13. And three several times in the Canticles does
Solomon set forth the beauty of the Spouse, Cant. 1.14 Cant. 4 1. Cant. 5.12
alluding ad oculos columbarum, eyes single and direct as a dove, not learing
as a fox, and looking diverse ways; oculos columbinos, non vulpinos. There is
pleasure in them to the ear. The harmony of instruments is but devised by
art, but the singing and chirping of birds is naturalis musica mundi, The fowls
of the air do sing upon the branches, Psalm. 104.12. How does it delight us to
hear the pretty lyrick Lark, the Blackbird, the Linnet, the several kinds of
Finches, the mirthfull Mavis, the Wren, the Thrush, and Starling, and all the
shrill-mouth'd quire, chant forth their dulcid polyphonian notes! How does the
Nightingale (which the Latins call Philomela, a bird that loves to sing)
charm our senses, when she makes an organ of her throat, sometimes breaking
her notes into warbles, sometimes stretching them out at length!

Lastly, in these feathered creatures do I likewise find bonum honestum. Many
rare and admirable documents of instruction may we learn from them.

The Dove is an Hieroglyphick of unspotted chastity, The Dove.
of white innocence; and harmless simplicity.

Nescit adulterii flammam intemerata columba. Never was Dove sick of a lustful
disease, but so loving and so true to her mate, that (I will deliver it from a
better pen) she has given life to a Proverb by her property; True as the
Turtle, is the highest language conjugall love can speak ^n. The nature of her
is described in this distich, Est sine fell, gemit, rostro non laedit, and
ungues

Possidet innocuos, puraque grana leg it.

She has no malice to sour her gall, to dissweeten her temper, she hurts
not with her bill, she has harmless claws, and feeds on pure grain. Matthew.
10.16.
In the Gospel (says that ingenious Author) where our blessed Savior
vouchsafes to make the Dove his own text, and our copy, he proposes her in
his Sermon as a pattern worthy the imitation of all Christians; Be ye innocent
as Doves; (...): A word derived from the privative particle a and the verb
(...) or (...), signifying simple, without mixture; or from the same a and
(...) an horn; and then it implies as much as hurtlesse or harmless. Who ever
saw the rough foot of the Dove armed with griping talons? who ever saw the beak
of the Dove bloody? who ever saw that innocent bird pluming of her spoil, and
tiring upon bones? This quality is so eminent in the Dove, that our Savior
there singled it out for an hieroglyphick of Simplicity. Whence it was
questionless, that God of all fowls chose out this for his sacrifice, Sin ex
aliqua volucri, etc. Levit. 1.14. And before the law Abraham was appointed no
other fowls but a Turtle-dove and a young Pigeon, Genesis 15.9. Neither did the
holy Virgin offer any other at her purifying then this emblem of her self and
her blessed Babe. Shortly, the holy Ghost in Scripture is resembled to a Dove,
and appeared in the shape thereof: the Devil on the contrary is compared to
Serpent, and used it as his instrument. Illa a primordio Divinae pacis praeco;
The dove in the beginning brought an olive branch, and preached peace unto the
world: Ille a primordio Divinae imaginis praedo; The Serpent in the beginning
played the thief, and robbed mankind of the image of God.

We have an example of Mercy in the Pelican, The Pelican.
which is a bird of mercy, and has in the Hebrew (as the masters of that
tongue observe) the name of mercy, as a truly merciful bird. She takes her
name Pelican, (...), from smiting or piercing, in regard that by piercing her
breast she reviveth her young ones, after they have been killed by serpents, or
by her own bill.

The brave bird which the Grecians call Onocrotalus, is so well practiced to
expect the Hawk for to grapple with her, that even when sleep shuts her
eyes, she sleeps with her bea^ exalted, as if she would contend with her
adversary. Hence may we have the quintessence of al^ wisdom, To stand upon
our guard, and daily expect death; it being (...) business we should learn all
our life, to exercise i^ once.

When Moses went up unto God, The Eagle Exodus 19.3, 4.
the Lord called him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shall thou say to the
house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel; Ye have seen what I did unto
the Egyptians, and bow I bare you on Eagles wings. By the Eagles some there
understand Moses and Aaron, the two guides that led the children of Israel out
of Egypt; and will have them compared thereunto propter acumen intelligentiae
and altitudinem vitae, by reason of their piercing judgment and holy life.
They indeed were, as Chrysostom says, mollissimae pennae misericordiae
Divinae, Homil. 46. in Matthew.
as it were the down-feathers of Gods mercy, because they handled the people
committed to their charge tenderly, in imitation of Eagles: Of whom some
report, that whereas other birds carry their young ones in their talons or
claws, which cannot be done without some griping, they lay them upon their
wings, and so transport them without any grievance. Which is a good emblem for
Magistrates, and teaches them paternall affection toward their people.

Gorran in his Exposition of Saint Lukes Gospel, cap. 17. v. 37. says, The
Saints resembled to Eagles.
that the Saints resemble the Eagles in these five properties.

First, Calvitie peccatorum. For as the Eagles moult off their feathers, and so
become bald, so the Saints pluck off their sick feathers from their soul; they
circumcise the old man with the lusts thereof, and weed out sin by the roots.
The Prophet Micah exhorting the people to repentance, bids them to enlarge
their baldness like the Eagle, Micah 1.16. Mary Magdalene did more then cast
her feathers, when she converted her eyes, her hairs, her lips, feathers of
wantonness, into pledges of repentance. She had been parched with sin and
the heat of concupiscence, Judge. 1.15.
as the wife of Othniel complained of an hot country when she begged of Caleb
and Joshua the springs above and the springs beneath; This holy Sinner at her
conversion brought unto our Savior irriguum superius, springs of tears in her
eyes above; and irriguum inferius, springs of blood (if I may so speak) in her
heart beneath, even a bleeding, contrite and a wounded spirit. As Pliny says
of the fleur de lis, Lilium lacryma sua seritur.
or flower-de-luce, that it is begotten by its own tears; in the same manner
are the Saints produced to beatitude by their proper afflictions.

The second resemblance is in renovatione novi hominis, in their new birth: Who
renews thy youth like unto the Eagle, Psalm. 103.5. The Eagle by casting her
beak, and breaking her bill upon a stone, receives a new youthfulness in her
age. This rock is Christ, upon which the Saints break their hearts by
repentance. Paul had cast his bill and his feathers when he said, Now I live
not, but it is Christ that lives in me, Gal. 2.20. Extinctus fuit saevus
persecutor, and vivere coepit pius praedicator, says Gregory.

The third resemblance is in volatus elevatione, in their lofty flight. Does
not the Eagle mount up, and make her nest on high? Job 39.27. So it is with the
Saints: As their conversation, so their contemplation is as high as Heaven.
Such elevations had our Prophet David, Psalm. 25.1. and Psalm. 121.1. Such an
Eagle was Saint Paul, qui in terra positus, a terra extraneus: He lived here,
yet a stranger while he lived here. Of all fowls, says Munster, the Eagle
only moves herself straight upward and downward perpendicularly without any
collateral declination. By her playing with thunderbolts, and confronting that
part of heaven where lightnings, and storms, and tempests most reign, she
teaches great and courageous spirits how to encounter all disasters. And by
beating her wings on high, we are taught Sursum corda, Ambr. in Job 39.30.
to ascend up in our thoughts where our Savior is. What the Poets feign of the
Eagles laying her eggs in Jupiters lap fabulously, that does the faithful man
by David's counsel truly, and with Isaiahs Eagle flying up to Heaven casts his
whole burden upon the Lord.

The fourth is in visionis claritate, in the clearness of vision. Saint
Augustine writes of the Eagle, that being aloft in the clouds she can discern
sub frutice leporem, sub fluctibus piscem, under the shrub an hare, under the
waves a fish: So the faithful being Eagle-eyed, Exodus 3.2.
can with Moses in a bramble see the Majesty of God; with the three children
in the furnace see the presence of Christ; Dan. 3.
2. Kings 6.17.
with Elizeus in the straitest siege see an army of Angels to defend him; Romans
8.18.
with S. Paul in the heap of afflictions behold a weight of glory provided for
him.

The last is in viae occultatione, in the secrecy of their way. One of those
things which the Wise man admired at, was the way of an Eagle in the air,
Prove. 30.19. See them fly we may, but their ways and subtle passages we
cannot discern: So the Saints good works are seen of men, but their intentions
with what mind they do them are not discoverable.

I have the longer insisted on this princely bird, the Eagle, because among all
other birds is ascribed to her maximus honos and maxima vis; and in the
Scriptures are grounded many proverbs and similes upon the strength and length
of her wing, upon her lofty flight, and sharp sight. It were infinite to follow
the Allegorists in moralizing her qualities: and to trace Pliny or Aelian for
the variety of Eagles, were a course easy, but a discourse tedious. It would
likewise in my poor conceit, something savor of his spice of pride that numbered
his people, to reckon and heap up all that I have read on this argument. I have
already showed what excellent lessons the Be, the Swallow, and diverse other
birds do read unto us, Tertull. De corona militis, cap. 3.
and I must not per eandem lineam serram reciprocare, draw my saw the same way
back again. I discharge this point: The next that attends our consideration
is the other part of Gods work, on the fifth day, which I may call his
Water-work: And so I take into my thoughts the fish of the sea, and whatsoever
walks through the paths thereof.

SECT. 9.
WHen Argus in the Poet had the custody of Io, Constiterat quocunque loco,
Ovid. Met. lib. 1. Thus elegantly translated by Mr George Sandys.
spectabat ad Io;
Ante oculos Io, quamvis aversus, habebat.
Which way soere he stands he Io spies:
Io behind him is, before his eyes:
So may I say of them that go down into the sea in ships, On every side, which
way soever they look, they see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
deep, Psalm. 107.23.

The Sea wonderful in many respects.
First, the Element in it self is wonderful: First, in regard of the depth,
situation and termination of it. Secondly, in regard of its motion, its afflux
and reflux, its ebs and flows, its fulls and wanes, its spring and neap-tides.
Thirdly, in regard of Navigation, or the art of sailing, which now is so
ordinary and common, that we almost cease to bestow wonder on it.

Again, it is wonderful in the numberless number of Creatures which it
contains. This one word FIAT has made such infinite numbers of fishes, that
their names may make a Dictionarie, and yet we shall not know them all.

First, for the profunditie of the sea, (which is the distance between the
bottom and superficies of the waters) it is of that immensitie that in many
places no line can touch it. The common received opinion that the depth of it
being measured by a plummet seldom exceeds two or three miles, is not to be
understood (says Breerwood a worthy writer) of the sea in general, but only
of the depth of the Straits or narrow seas, which were perhaps searched by the
Ancients, who dwelt far from the main Ocean.

For the site and bounds of it, Whether the Waters be higher then the Earth?
it is excellent. The natural place of the waters by the confession of all is
above the earth: This at the first they enjoyed, and after repeated and
recovered again in the overwhelming of the old world, when the Lord for a time
delivered them as it were from their bands, and gave them their voluntary and
natural passage. And at this day there is no doubt, but the sea, which is the
collection of waters, is higher then the land, as seafaring men gather by
sensible experiments. Psalm. 104.16.
Thou coverest it with the deep as with a garment, says the Psalm. As a
vesture in the proper use of it is above the body that is clothed therewith, so
is the sea above the land. And such a garment, says one, would it have been
unto the earth, but for the providence of God toward us, as the shirt that was
made for the murdering of Agamemnon, where he had no issue out. Therefore the
Psalmist adds immediately, At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy
thunder they hasted away. They go up by the mountains, they go down by the
valleys unto the place which thou have founded for them. Thou have set a bound
that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.
Though that fluid Element is always running and often roaring as if it would
swallow up the earth, though this untamed beast be unresistable by the power of
man, yet is it ruled like a child by the power of God: The sea is his and he
made it, Psalm. 95.5. He stilleth the raging of the sea and the noise of the
waves, Psalm. 65.7. He has shut up the sea with doors, Job 38.8. He has
established his commandment upon the sea, and said, Hitherto shall thou come
and no further; here will I stay thy proud waves, verse. 11.

By many texts of Scripture the earth is said to have the sea for its
foundation, Psalm. 24.2. and Psalm. 116.16. yea, to be made out of the matter and
to consist in it, 2. Pet. 3.5. God would have his servant Job admire hereat,
when he asked him, Whereupon are the foundations set? and who laid the
cornerstone thereof? Job 38.6. Elsewhere it is said to have no foundation, Job
26.7. only to hang in the midst of the world by the power of God immovable,
Psalm. 93.2. Psalm. 104.5. Isaiah 40.12. and 42.5, etc And these which happily may
seem most inept and weak pillars, are firm bases, Psalm. 104.5. and mighty
foundations Mich. 6.2. All which is an argument demonstrative of Gods power and
providence, who as he brought light out of darkness, so has he set the solid
earth upon the liquid waters, and that for the convenience of man's habitation.

Secondly, Reciprocatio and aestus maris: The ebbing and flowing of the sea.
it is wonderful for its motion: Why it moves forward, why it retireth, is to
us above all reason wonderful. That such a motion there is, experience
shows; but the searching out of the cause of it, is one of the greatest
difficulties in all natural Philosophy. Aristotle.
Aristotle was so much admired for his Logical wit, that by some he has been
charactered by three special Epithets: first, that he was (...), a lover of
universalities; secondly, that he was (...), a lover of method; lastly and
chiefly, that he was (...), a subtle searcher out of causes: Yet this Genius
and Secretary of Nature, this acute Philosopher, this prince of Philosophers,
is reported to have stood amazed at the flowing and ebbing of Euripus, and
despairing of finding out the cause thereof, cast himself into the river, and
was comprised of that he could not comprehend. What Aristotle's opinion was
concerning this matter is an uncertain conjecture, for as much as little or
nothing can be gathered touching this out of any boo^ which is certainly known
to be Aristotle's; for the tractate of the propriety of Elements is judged to be
none of his, but of some later Author. This is more at large most judiciously
discussed by Mr Nathanael Carpenter in his Geographie, Lib. 2. cap. 6.

Thirdly, Navigation.
it is wonderful in the art of Navigation on it. Is it not strange that there
should be a plough to delve a passage through the unwieldy Ocean? that the
Water should be of such fidelity as firmly to bear up all vessels from the
shallop to the ship, from the smallest carvel to the mightiest and greatest
carack, and by the help of favorable and propitious winds convey them on their
woven wings from climate to climate, to the benefit and commodity of their
farre-distant owners?

Concerning the original of shipping, I find it to be Gods own invention. If
God had not said to Noah, Fac tibi arcam; and when he had said so, if he had
not given him a design, a module, a platform of the Ark, we may doubt whether
ever man would have thought of a means to pass from nation to nation, of a
ship or any such way of trade and commerce. This Ark resting afterward on the
mountain of Ararat, gave a precedent to other nations neare-bordering how ships
were to be framed. Thus Navigation first taught by Almighty God, was afterward
seconded by the industry of famous men in all ages.

For the use and commodity of Navigation may be produced many arguments. The
benefit thereof.
The first and principal is the promotion of religion; How should the Gospel
have been divulged through the whole world, had not the Apostles dispersed
themselves, and passed the sea in ships, to convey their Sacred message to
diverse nations and kingdoms?

Again, Sea-traffick and Merchandising is of that excellent use, that the state
of the world cannot subsist without it. Not the Lion and the Unicorn, but the
Plough and the Ship under God are the supporters of a Crown.

Non omnis fert omnia tellus,

No country yields all kind of commodities.

There must be a path from Egypt to Asshur, and from Asshur to Egypt again, to
make a supply of their mutual wants. Mesha the king of Moab was a king of
sheep; Hiram king of Tire had store of timber and workmen: Ophir was famous for
gold, Chittim for ivorie, Basan for oaks, Lebanon for cedars, Saba for
frankincense. We have our gold from India, our spices from Arabia, our silks
from Spain, our wines from France. And thus by the goodness and wisdom of God
is one Country the helper and mutual supporter of another welfare. He makes
one the Granarie, to furnish her neighbors with corn; another the Armourie, to
furnish the rest with weapons; another the Piscarie, to furnish the rest with
fish; another the Treasury, to furnish the rest with gold. By this is the
Merchant the key of the land, the treasurer of the kingdom, the venture of his
soils surplussage, the combiner of nations, and the adamantine chain of
Countries. Quo va^ts?
The sea and the earth, says a learned Prelate, are the great coffers of God;
the discoveries of navigation are the keys, which whosoever has received may
know that he is freely allowed to unlock these chests of Nature without any
need to pick the wards.

Here could I spread my meditations, and train on my Reader with delight: but
my principal aim is, to show how wonderful the Sea is in the great variety
and abundance of Creatures that live and move within this womb of moisture.

Almighty God has so richly sown the great and boisterous element of waters
with the spawn of all sorts of fish which so innumerably multiply, and has
crowned the deeps with such abundance, that the Sea contendeth with the Earth
for plenty, variety, and delicacy.

The Breed of it is yielded to be full of wonder. As there is miraculum in
nodo, a wonder in the knitting of those two elements of Water and Earth in one
sphericall and round body; so is there miraculum in modo, Nec laborat Deus in
maximis, nec fastidit in minimis, Ambros.
a miracle in the manner of the operation: For eodem modo producitur balaena
quo rana; totidemque syllabae ad creandum pisciculos quot ad creandum cete.
Small fishes are not the superfluity of Nature: There is as much
admirablenesse in the little Shrimp as in the great Leviathan: both are
miraculous. There are miracula magna and miracula parva; and saepe parva sunt
magnis majora, says Saint Augustine: The basest fish, even that shelfish
called Murex, gives our Purples, the most sumptuous and delightful colors:
Aquarum est quod in regibu adoratur.
And Margarites, the most precious pearls that beautify Princes robes, come
from the sea. And this is first the Bonum jucundum, the pleasure good, which we
find in them. The taste of many fishes, in all manner of magnificence, is more
delicate and exquisite then that of flesh. And Fish has ever had the
privilege which at this day it has, Mountaign in his Essays, Lib. 1. Cap. 49.
That chief Gentlemen are pleased and have skill to dress it.

Nor is Fishing it self less delightful to them that use it then Hunting and
Hawking are to others. They are indeed Princely disports, and studium Nobilium,
the study, the exercise, the ordinary business of many great Ones; yet much
riding, many dangers accompany them: hilares venandi labores, etc. whereas
fishing, which is a kind of hunting by water, be it with nets, weels, bait,
angling or otherwise, is still and quiet. And if so be the Angler catch no
fish, yet has he a wholesome walk Among the curled woods and painted meads
Through which a silver-serpent river leads
To some cool courteous shade. --
He whiffes the dainties of the fragrant fields; he sucketh in the breath of
fine fresh meadow-flowers, which (like the warbling of music) is sweetest in
the open air where it comes and goes; he hears the melodions harmony of
birds, a quire whereof each tree enterteineth at Natures charge; he sees the
Swans, Herons, Ducks, Water-hens, Coots, and many other fowl, with their brood;
which he thinks better then the noise of Hounds* or blast of Horns, or all
the sport that they can make.

This is true of those that use fishing for recreation: But what shall we say
of the poor stipendiarie fishermen, qui cruribus ocreati, who booted up to the
very groins, toil and take much pains for a little pay? Certainly God crowns
their labor with a sweet repose, and their diet is more wholesome and
nourishing; whereas surfets light frequently on the rich, and the gentle blood
grows quickly foul: The bread of him that labors (as Solomon says of his
sleep) is sweet and relishable, Eccle^ 5.12.
whether he eat little or much. This has he prettily expressed in his
Sicelides; Happy, happy fisher-swains,
If that you knew your happiness
Your sports taste sweeter by your pains,
Sure hope your labor relishes:
Your net your living: when you eat,
Labor finds appetite and meat.
When the seas and tempests rore,
You either sleep, or pipe, or play,
And dance along the golden shore,
Thus you spend the night and day:
Shrill wind's a pipe, hoarse sea's a taber,
To fit your sports or ease your labor.
Moreover, by fishing and using themselves thereto men are enabled to do
service for their country: Judge. 5.
When Reuben abode among the sheep-folds to hear the bleating of the flocks,
when Gilead did stay beyond Jordan, and Issachar took his rest in his tents,
then the people of Zebulun did jeopard their lives unto death in the field
against Sisera. Zebulun is a tribe of account, as well as Judah, Benjamin, and
Nepthali, Psalm. 68.27. Moses by a spirit of prophecy, (as likewise remembering
what old Israel had prophesied of this son and his posterity, Zebulun shall
dwell by the seaside; he shall be an haven for ships, Genesis 49.13.) breathed
but this prophetical patheticall dying farewell, They shall suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of the treasures hid in the sands, Deuteronomy. 33.19.

And here does fall into our contemplation the Bonum utile, the great benefit,
commodity and profit that we reap from the Sea: Which according to our English
proverb, is a good neighbor, in that it yields such store of fish whereby the
inhabitants may be nourished, and other creatures the better preserved. For
Abraham's servant to fetch a calf from the stalls, Jacob to bring a kid from the
fold, Esau^ to bring venison from the field, does not so much express how God
fills us with plenteousnesse, as the unseen prey which the fisherman brings
from the sea.

Who can number the sand of the sea? says the son of Sirach, Ecclus 1.2.
nay, what man is able to number the fish of the sea? which are so many that the
Patriarch Jacob prayed that Joseph's children might increase like the fish, Genesis
48.16. Boi^.
Beasts of the field and birds of the air bring forth but one or two young
ones, if they be big; or, if they be little, some three or four, others five
or six, few above ten, none usually above twenty: but fish, as experience
teaches, every day bring forth hundreds at one time: In the great and wide
sea, says our Prophet, are things creeping innumerable, both small and great,
Psalm. 104.25.

In the creation God said, Let the waters bring forth in abundance every
creeping thing that has the soul of life, Genesis 1.20. Howbeit in all that
abundance, as it is observed, there is nothing specified but the Whale, as
being the Prince of the rest, and, to use the phrase of Job, king of all the
children of pride. Wherein the workmanship of the Maker is most admirable: for
it is said, Then God created the whales; and not singly, the whales, but with
an additament, the great whales. So does the Poet term them immania cete, huge
whales, as being the stateliest creatures that move in the waters. God made the
whale, says a Father, to be vectem maris, the bar of the sea: He, like the
Serpent in the Revelation, Apoc. 12.15.
casts out of his mouth water like a flood, -- this monstrous whirle-about
into the sea another sea does spout.


In creating of them creavit Deus vastitates and stupores. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 2.
For, as Pliny writes of them, when they swim and show themselves above
water, annare insulas putes, you would think that Islands swam toward you, and
that great hills did aspire to heaven it self with their tops. The greatness
and strength of a whale in a most elegant narration is expressed by Job, which
for acutenes, vigor and majesty of style does far exceed what ever we can
fetch from the schools of Rhetoricians: He begins it at his first verse of
his 40 chap. and so to the end, where he leaves it ^s an Epilogue of Gods
great work. This Emperor of the Ocean, this unequald wonder of the deep, this
balaena, the great whale (for so Tremellius translateth Leviathan in that
passage of Job) is very profitable to the Merchant, for its oil, bones, and
ribs. In Isleland, as Munster writes, of the ribs and bones of the biggest
whale many make posts and sparres for the building of their houses.

I will land this point with an observation of such fish as are for the food
and sustentation of man.

I never find that Christ enterteined any guests but twice, and that was only
with loaves and fishes. I find him sometimes feasted by others more liberally:
but his domestic fare, for the most part, except a^ the Passover, was fish*
He that chose but twelve Apostles out of the whole world, took four of those
twelve that were by profession Fishermen ^ as, Simon Peter, and Andrew his
brother; and the two sons of Zebedee, James and John. And the ancient Fathers
observe, that our Savior did express himself to the Sea-tribe more than to
any of the rest: For he was conceived at Nazareth a city in the portion of
Zebulun, and in that city was he brought up, and began to preach first there;
and mount Tabor, upon which he was transfigured, was in the tribe of Zebulun
also.

With the Hebrews the same word does signify a pond or a fish-pool which is
used for a blessing. And surely it is a blessing to any country, among other
commodities which enrich a kingdom, to have the benefits of fish ponds and
sluices; in which commodious stews men may preserve the fishes which they take,
and sell them for advantage and gain. The Prophet Isaiah foreseeing the
destruction of Egypt says, The waters shall fail from the sea, and the river
shall be wasted and dried up: And they shall turn the rivers far away, and
the brooks of defense shall be emptied and dried up; the reeds and flags shall
wither. The fishes shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks
shall lament, and they that spread their net upon the waters shall b^ weakened.
And we find that among other plague^ of Egypt this was one, That their fish,
the chief part of their sustenance, died with infection: and their Nilus did
not only yield them a dead but a living annoyance; it did never before so
store them with fish, as it did then plague them with frogs. If it be such a
curse to be deprived of so great a blessing, what a blessing it is not to know
such a curse!

To descend to the particulars: Among this scaly footlesse nation, I likewise
find Bonum honestum: For from them we may draw symbola virtutum quae imitemur,
many exquisite emblemes for our instruction.

The Tench the Physician of fishes.
As fishes when they are hurt, heal themselves again by touching the Tench,
finding the slime of his body to be as a sovereigne salve: so must we when we
are wounded with sin, repair to our Savior Christ, cujus sanat fimbria,
says Ambrose, whose garment is our plaster; whom if we do but touch tactu
fidei, by a true faith, we shall be whole. Thus the woman in the Gospel that
twelve years long had labored of an issue of blood, to whom the art of the
Physician could neither give cure nor hope, at length by a touch of the verge
of his garment was revived from the verge of death: She came trembling to our
blessed Savior, and though her tongue were mute, yet her heart spoke; for she
said within her self, If I may but touch the hemme of his garment, I shall be
safe. That she supposed to find more sanctity in the touch of the hemme then
of the coat, I neither dispute, nor believe. B. Hall.
But what said she? If I may but touch, a weak action; the hemme of his
garment, the remotest part; with a trembling hand, a feeble apprehension. Here
was the praise of this woman's faith, that she promised her self remedy by the
touch of the outmost hemme.

Levit. 11.9. Deuteronomy. 14.9.
In the old law those fish were only reputed clean which had fins and scales.
The fins of the fish are for steering of their motion; the scales, for
smoothness of passage, for safeguard, for ornament: So are those only clean
in the sight of God, ^ern. Sermon. 1. in die S. Andreae.
qui squamas and loricam habent patientiae, and pinnulas hilaritatis, who have
the scales and coat armor of patience, and the sins of joy and cheerfulness
to spring up to Godward; Or as the Paraphrast there says, Those men that have
no knowledge and faith to guide them, no good dispositions to set them forward,
no good works to set them forth, are not for your entire conversation.

By the story of the Dolphines assembled in sholes upon the seashore to
celebrate the obsequies of Ceraunus, The Dolphine. Aelian, lib. 8. c. 3.
who had before freed them from the snare of the fishermen, we learn, That good
turns are golden nets which catch the swiftest gliding fish. The Dolphines
moving from the upper brimme of the water to the bottom when she sleeps,
Optic glass of humor cap. 4. p. 5
condemns those that streak themselves upon their beds of down, and snort so
long -- -- indo mitum quod despumare Falernum
Sufficiat, quinta dum linea tangitur umbra;
as would suffice to sleep out a surfeit till high noon, etc.

I cannot set forth this King of Fishes in more orient and better colors then
he before has done Brave Admiral of the broad briny regions, Sylvester.

Lover of ships, of men, of melody,
Thou up and down through the moist world do fly
Swift as a shast, whose salt thou love so,
That lacking that, thy life thou do forgo.
Seas of examples in this kind are infinite. Sallust du Bartas, a Poet above
the ordinary level of the world, for the choice of his subject most rare and
excellent, is admirably copious on this theme. I will therefore forbear to
write Iliads after Homer. And although for the most part it be true, that wit
distilled in one language cannot be transfused into another without loss of
spirits, yet who so is able judiciously to compare the Translation with the
Original, will confess, to the immortal glory of our Countryman, Mich.
Drayton.
-- that from the French more weak
He Bartas taught his Six-dayes-work to speak
In natural English.
and so Sam. Daniel.
-- has lighted from a flame devout
As great a flame, that never shall go out.


SECT. 10.
THus have I made a brief circuit over the whole earth, and a short cut over
the vast Sea: And now before I put my ship into the creek, before I conclude, I
must draw these scattered branches home to their root again. The general
substance of them all together is this; As it is a most pleasant kind of
Geographie, in this large map of the World, in ^he celestial and
terrestrial Globe, to contemplate the Creator; so there is nothing that
obteineth more of God, then a thankful agnition of the favors and benefits we
daily receive at his bountiful hands. If we be not behind with him in this
tribute of our lips, he will see that all creatures in heaven and earth shall
pay their several tributes unto us; the Sun his heat, the Moon her light, the
Stars their influence, the Clouds their moisture, the Sea and Rivers their
fish, the Land her fruits, the Mine their treasures, and al^ things living
their homage and service. O^ the contrary; If the familiarity of Gods
blessings draw them into neglect, he will have a^ just quarrel against us for
our unthankfulness; and our ingratitude (which is a monster in nature, a
soloecisme in manners, a paradox in Divinity) will prove a parching wind to
damme up the fountain of his favors toward us.

Hugo de S. Vict.
I will seal up all with a pretty note that Hugo has; There is no book of
nature unwritten on: and that which may not ^e a teacher to inform ^s, will be
a witness to ^ondemn us. It is the ^oice of all the creatures unto Man,
Accipe, Read, ^ave.

Accipe; Take us to thy ^se and service. I Heaven ^m bid to give thee rain; I
Sun, to give thee light; ^ Bread, to strengthen thy ^ody; I Wine, to cheer
thy heart; We Oxen leave our pastures, we Lambs our mothers, to do thee
service.

Read; Remember to be thankful. He that gives all, commands thee to return
him somewhat. It is hard if thou can not thank the great Housekeeper of the
world for thy good cheer: This is the easi^ task and impositio^ which the
supreme Lord of all lays upon all the goods thou possessest and on all the
blessings of this life: -- Minimo capitur thuri^ honor Deus.

Cave; Beware of abusing us. The Beasts of the field do cry, Do not kill us
for wantonness; the Fowls of the air, Do not riot with us; the Wine, Devour
not me to disable thy self: The Hours, which ever had wings, will fly up to
heaven to the Author of Time, and carry news of thy usage toward us.

And now, Manum e ^abula: I have finished my meditations on this Psalm,
wishing I could have had S. Ambrose his faculty, qui in Psalmis Davidis
explicandis ejus lyram and plectrum mutuatus, who in the expression of David's
psalms is said to have borrowed David's own harp: so rightly did he express his
meaning. But my fear is, that I have muddled and made this Topaz but so much
the darker by going about to polish it.

To end as I began, with the commendation of the book of Psalms; Est certe non
magnus, verum aureolus, and ad verbum ediscendus libellus; The Psalter is not a
great but a golden book and thoroughly to be learned.

This method our Prophet observes in this excellent hymn; The Proposition and
Conclusion thereof are both the same; carceres and meta, the head and the foot,
as i^ were the voice and the echo: The whole psalm being circular, annular*
serpentine, winding into i^ self again, as it begins so it ends, O LORD
our Governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world!

FINIS.

