THE CHVRCHES AVTHORITY ASSERTED: IN A SERMON Preached at Chelmsford, at the
Metropoliticall Visitation of the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, etc. March 1. 1636.

BY SAMUEL HOARD B. D. and Parson of Morton in Essex.

HEB: 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account; that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

LONDON Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.

MDCXXXVII.

To the Christian and courteous Reader.
SO Sweet a thing is Peace, that God is pleased to put it into his own title,
and to style himself the God of Peace: 1 These. 5.23. Nay, Peace, and Love it
self, 1 John 4.16. and to pronounce him that seeks and makes peace, a blessed
man; Blessed are the Peacemakers, Mat 5.9. But much more amiable is the peace
of the Church; being the principal thing that our blessed Savior, next to
man's peace with God, came into the world to procure, Ephesians. 2.15. and that
which makes Gods family on earth like to the State of innocence in Paradise,
and of glory in heaven. This peace therefore should every son of peace pray
for, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 112. and pursue with all endeavor
possible, as men do their game, for so the word may signify, Hob. 12.16.
Follow peace with all men. But what peace can be expected without unity? like
Hypocrates twins they decay and thrive, live and die together.

And therefore S. Paul puts them both together, Ephesians. 4.3. Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and for the procuring of
agreement in affections, he conjures the Philippians by all the arguments
enforcing concord among Christians, to a consent of judgment, (...), To be of
one mind, Phil. 2.2. to believe and think the same thing. And therefore it
should be every man's care (contrary to the custom of too many turbulent
dispositions, who can fish best in troubled waters, and gain most profit or
respect to themselves by kindling contentions among brethren: not only to mark
them that cause divisions, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. but fix^ pede, with a
s^eled resolution and courage to oppose them, as S. Paul did S. Peter, Gal. 2.
when he saw that he did not (...), walk with a right foot, and take a right
course for the uniting of the minds, and by consequent, the hearts of Jews and
Gentiles. As therefore it has always been my desire, that we who are of the
same says, might be (if possible) in all things of the same opinion, so I
thought it my duty at this time, having so fair an occasion, by the command of
my superiors, to preach the Visitation Sermon, put into my hands, to cast in
my mite toward the purchasing of this pearl, and to set one small prop under
the house and Church of God in our Israel, too much tottering by our mutual
dissentions, and for that end to justify the authority of our Church, in
requiring an uniforme subjection in judgment and practice at the hands of her
children to the comely and good orders therein established, and to persuade a
general good opinion of, and obedience to her just authority in these things.
Some there be so obstinate in their error and undutifulnesse, that like
Solomon's fo^le, though they be brayed in a mortar, and sufficiently convinced
of their false and disorderly opinions and practices, will not leave their
folly: others there be, I hope, of more teachable and tractable tempers, and
willing, if better informed, to frame their courses to more moderation and
subjection. Now, sermons of this nature may be of use to both these: to the
first, to take off their fig leaves, and present them naked (as troublers of
Israel) to the deserved stroke of justice: to the rest, to make them peaceable
members of the body wherein they live, and obedient children to the heads by
whom they are governed. Whether I shall effect this last and best end of such
discourses by preaching or printing this small piece, I know not: I do not
altogether despair: the former (I doubt not) I shall in some measure compass:
at least liberabo animam meam, I shall hereby discharge mine own conscience,
and famam meam, redeem (in some degree) my reputation too: Words being then
most liable to envious mistakes and mis-reports, when they are but taken in by
the ears of some few partial and prejudging hearers, not exposed to the eyes
and view of more indifferent and charitably minded Readers. Bring an obedient
and peaceable spirit with thee, and then read, and censure as thou see cause.

Sa: Hoard.

REcensui concionem hane, cui titulus est [The Churches Authority asserted] in
qua nihil reperio quo minus summa cum utilitato Imprimatur.

March 28. 1637. SA: BAKER.

THE CHVRCHES AVTHORITIE.
1 COR. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.


OF the Devils practices against the Church, The Cohaerence of the Text.
which our Savior gives notice of, Mat. 13.25. while men slept, the enemy came
and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way; the Corinthians were too
true an example. For no sooner had S. Paul (after much pains taken to sow the
good seed of saving truth among them, and to make them one of Christ's
cornfields) departed from them to plow up other grounds, to plant other
Churches, but the enemy of Christ and his dear Church, began to sow the tares
of ungodliness among them, which (as ill weeds for the most part do) sprang
up apace.

For they became 1. Sectaries, dividing themselves among Christ, Apollos, Paul,
and Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. and making men the Lords of their faith and
consciences, which they should have captivated to Christ alone.

2 They were Heretics, denying a fundamental Article, the Resurrection.

3 Polluters also of Gods sacred worship and ordinances: First, by their base
indecencies; Their women sat before God with their heads uncovered, and the
men with their hats on: 1 Cor. 11.4, 5: they mingled intemperate and carousing
bankets with the spiritual feast of the blessed Eucharist, ver. 21: their
women, beyond the modesty that becomes that sex, presumed to chat and talk
their shares in the congregation, c. 14.34.

Secondly, By their disorders likewise; for they received not the holy
Communion together, but by snatches, one before another came, cap 11.33: they
interposed unseasonable questions, while their Ministers were preaching, and
rudely interrupted them, in their discourse: cap 14.29.

Thirdly, By their empty and unprofitable assemblies; for their trumpets made
an uncertain sound, they prayed in their Churches in a tongue they understood
not.

All these were great scandalls.

1 Cor. 1.11.
The Apostle therefore being informed by some of Cloes family, of their declined
condition, like a loving pastor labors to remove these tares, and reduce this
Church to its primitive purity. For the procuring of which he takes a mixed
course, that they might neither detest his severity, nor yet despise his
lenity. One while he sharply reprooveth, another while he gently allureth; in
one place he punishes, in another he prescribes.

In this Chapter he meets with two faults, disorder, and unprofitablenesse:
and because contraria contrariis curantur, distempers are usually cured by
remedies of a contrary nature; for the healing of their unprofitablenesse in
the use of their religious exercises, he command, that all things be done to
edification, ver. 26: and for the removal of their indecencies and disorders;
he requires that all things be done decently and in order. And so I am come to
my Text.

In which (by the judgment of expositors) St. Paul investeth the Corinthians,
The scope and parts of the Text, and the point insisted on.
and in them all Christian Churches, with authority to ordain Rites and
Ceremonies appertaining to order and decency in the service of God Hinc apparet
liberum esse Ecclesus, titus ordinare servientes ordini and decoro.

Heming in hunc locum.


Hinc aparet (says Hemingius) hence it appears, that it is in the liberty of
Churches to ordain rites serving to order and comeliness. Facit Ecclesiae
p^testatem de decoro, et ordine ecclesiastico libero disponendi, et leges
ferendi. Par in hunc loc.
Facit Ecclesiae potestatem etc. He gives the Church (says Pareus) power,
freely to dispose of things belonging to Ecclesiastical order and decency. Non
potest haberi, quod Paulus hic exigit, ut decenter omnia, et ordine fiant, nisi
additis constitutionibus, tanquam vinculis quibusda^, ordo ipse et decorum
servetur. Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.
Non potest haberi, etc. That which St. Paul requires (says Calvin) cannot be
had, unless there be Canons made, by which, as by certain bands, men and
things may be kept together in a comely order. Davenant. de Iudic. Cont^.
fidei c. 16. p. 84.
And the Reverend Bishop of Salisbury, having delivered a position, that the
Prelates of the Church have power to appoint rites and ceremonies respecting
the external policy of the Church, prooveth it by my text, Let all things be
done decently, etc.

These words therefore in the opinion of these men, and almost all writers on
these words or point, contain the Churches Investiture: and may be cast into
these two parts.

1. The Churches liberty, (...), let all things be done. 2. The Churches
limits, (...), decently and in order.
Or else into these two.

1. Her Authority to make laws, Let etc. 2. The object about which her
Authority is to move, matters of order and decency, decently, etc.
From both these arises the point, on which I purpose to build my present
discourse, and which I will deliver in the words of our twentieth Article, --
That the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies.

In the handling of this conclusion, 1. I will explain the terms. 2. Prove
the point. 3. Touch upon such consectartes, as the point does naturally derive
it self into. Of all these with what brevity I can.

The terms explained. what is meant by Ceremonies and Rites.
The terms are two, the Ceremonies and Church.

Ceremonies are external acts and adjuncts annexed to sacred Services.

For in Religion there are two things considerable; Substantialls, and
Circumstantialls.

Substantialls are of two sorts.

1. Matters of faith and manners, to be believed and done of necessity to
salvation, contained in the Creed and ten Commandments.

2. Sacraments ordained, for the bringing of men and women into the Church, and
their conduct therein to everlasting happiness. About these the power which
the Church has, is, to preserve them (as the Ark did the tables of the Law) to
give an honorable testimony to them, to consecrate, to dispense them to her
children, and to transmit them to posterity; in which respects she is called,
(...), the Pillar, and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Power to make, add,
alter, or diminish these she never had. Never durst any Prelates in the Church,
but the Pope, take liberty to stamp new Articles of faith, or to join
Traditions to the written word of God, for supply of its imperfection, which
are of the same authority, Sess. 4. decre^. 1
and to be received (pari pietatis affectu) with the like religious respect, as
the Trent Council has determined: never did any presume, but he, to curt all
the Lords Supper, by taking away the cup from the people, or to transform the
Sacrament into a Sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead, to the great injury
of that alsufficient Sacrifice once offered upon the Cross by our Lord
himself.

In all these, manum de tabula, hands off: for they are all above the Churches
power.

But, Secondly, there are besides these, some ceremonialls and
circumstantialls, necessary for the right ordering and carriage of Gods service,
the trayning up of people in piety, and the preservation of religion: for
without ceremonies (says Zanchy) Sine Ceremon^s, nec sideles in unum convenne
and co^lescere possunt, nec Deo public se^vire. Zanch de Re^. l 1. p 420.
neither could the faithful grow up together into one body, nor give God any
public worship. That God is to be worshipped by his own rule, and with his
own prescribed acts and duties of religion, is Substance; but that this may
be well done, some circumstances of time, and place, persons, gestures,
habites, etc. must be determined. What therefore shall be the times, wherein
Gods people must come together to worship him, and how far they are to be
sanctified; what are to be the places, wherein we are to meet, and how to be
adorned; in what order divine Service shall be celebrated; with what habit the
Priest, when he comes to minister before the Lord, should be clothed; what
gestures of body, both Priest and people shall use in their public devotions;
and the times when this or that particular gesture of kneeling, standing,
sitting, or bowing may be used with most comeliness and profit; what kind of
places are fittest for Service and Sermon; what tables, what chalices, what
other ornaments do best beseem that sacred mystery of the Lords Supper, etc:
These, and such like circumstances, are the things permitted to the Churches
liberty to determine.

What we are to understa^d by Church.
By Church, (which is my second term) I mean; not private and inferior members
of the Church, whose place is obedience, not government: for we should have a
mad Church, and a miserable divine service, if every private spirit might have
authority to order these things, as he thinks good. It would be (I fear me)
like that misshapen Picture, which the Painter Polycletes made by the peoples
direction, a very deformed one: a Church and Service, that could not be known
or acknowledged for such, except a man should write upon it, (as under some
rude draughts men use to do) this is a church; or set a crier, when people are
worshipping God in his House, to proclaim and say, this is divine Service.

But by Church I mean, the Churches Pilots, who sit at the stern, and are by
their office to guide the Ship of the church through the Sea of this world to
the haven of eternal happiness: those whom the Apostle calls Act. 20.28.
(...), Bishops, and Heb. 13.17. (...), the Rulers and watchmen of the Lords
army. For, as head and members divide the body natural, and the members, with
all things belonging to their comeliness and welfare, are ordered by the head,
and could not be disposed of by the members without a schism in the body, 1
Cor. 12: so, heads and members divide all bodies, civil, and ecclesiastical;
and whatsoever is to be done for matter of direction and government, has
always been, and must be the sole prerogative of the heads of these bodies,
unless we will have all common wealths and churches broken all to pieces.

And so I come from the terms to the point.

The power of the Magistrate is dignified with the name of Sword, Romans 13. He
hears not the sword in vain: the authority of the Church with the name of
keys, Mat. 16. To thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. These
keys are twofold.

1. A Key of order, which is the privilege of the whole Priesthood, and it is
an Authority of administering the word and Sacraments, of remitting and
retaining sins, in interiori foro, in the Court of Conscience.

2. A Key of Jurisdiction, which is, a power of binding and loosing men, in
Foro exteriori, in the courts of justice; and of making laws and orders for
the government of Gods house. And this is peculiar to the Heads and Bishops of
the Church; as will appear, 1. by examples, 2. by consent of writers, 3. by
reason.

Proved by examples of the Apostles.
1. It appears by Examples both of the Apostles, and Churches of God, who have
in their several generations put this Authority into execution. It seems
good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these
necessary things; that ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from
blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, say the Apostles in
their letter to the Gentiles, Acts 15.28. In which words we see, 1. That they
make a Canon, 2. That this Canon was concerning abstinence from some things
that were indifferent, (for such were those Idolothytes, things strangled, and
blood) 3. That they usurped not this authority, but had it from the Holy Ghost,
whom therefore they join with themselves in their letter as President of their
Commission, It seems good to the Holy Ghost and to us.

Nor did they exercise this power only when they sat in the Council
together, but when they were asunder also; for St. Paul does often mention
constitutions that he made for diverse Churches. For the Churches of Galatia,
he made an order, That collections should be made for the poor on every
first day of the week; and meant to bring in the same custom into the
Corinthian Church, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

He framed ordinances for Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.2. viz: that women should cover
their heads, and men uncover theirs in the Church, v. 6, 7. that men should not
use long hair, but women should, ver. 14, 15. that they should tarry one for
another when they come to receive the holy Communion, v. 33. etc. And he
commends that people for keeping those his traditions, ver. 2. and promises
when he came again, to dispose of other things, which were not as yet well
settled and ordered. ver. 34.

Some also he made for the government of Thessalonica, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. where
he exhorts them to hold fast the traditions which he had taught them, both by
word of mouth, and by letters; and 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. where he commands opposers
against his determinations to be excommunicated.

But (perhaps) it will be said, their Traditions were of divine authority,
because they were Penmen of the Holy Ghost, and did but convey those
constitutions to the Churches, which the Holy Ghost did make and indite for
their use.

It is true, Apostles spoke by inspiration, and were employed in writing down
Gods word for the good of the Church; but yet many things they spoke and did,
not as Secretaryes to the Holy Ghost, but as ordinary Pastors of the Church,
Q^atenus erant ordinatii ecclesiae Rectores, de hasce titibus externis pro sua
sapientia statuebant, quod ad aedificationem ecclesia^ facere videbatur. Dav^t.
l. de Jud. Cont. c. 16. rat. 2.
As appears most plainly by some speeches which St. Paul lets fall in 1 Cor.
7. I speak this by permission, and not of commandment, ver. 6. To the married
I command, yet not I, but the Lord, ver. 10. To the rest speak I, not the
Lord, v. 12. Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord; I give my
judgment as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful. ver. 25.
In all these passages, 1. He distinguishes between authority divine and
humane. 2. He affirms, that he did advise and command many things by his own
power, as a prudent pastor of the Church, for which he had no express and
particular command from the Lord. Now if he did by his own authority prescribe
some things to be done for the guiding of people in point of manners and
morality, much more did he take that liberty in point of order and ceremonies.

And of the Jewish and Christian Churches.
To these examples of the blessed Apostles, I may join the practice of the
Jewish Church; who though they had an external form of discipline prescribed
them, and all things belonging thereto, even to the pinnes and bars of the
Tabernacle, the broomes, ashpans, and snuffers of the Sanctuary; yet they took
liberty to add some things which were not expressly commanded. They anointed
their dead with odours, and our Savior was content to be buried after that
manner. The Rubenits built an Altar on the banks of Jordan, Josh. 22. which
Joshua and the heads of the people permitted to stand. Solomon built an Altar
of himself by the brazen Altar, 1 Kings 8.64. And (which comes nearer to our
purpose) the Jews did institute two great Festivalls to be solemnized every
year; the Feast of Purim in memory of their deliverance from the bloody
conspiracy of Haman; and the feast of Dedication, for a memorial of the
Temples purification, after it had been polluted by King Antiochus. And this
holy day set up by their own authority, our Savior was so far from
disliking, or reproving, that he was pleased to honor it with his gracious
presence, John 10.22. The order also of their burials, and the rites of their
marriage, were most, or all of them made by their own discretion. Had these
Jews, to whom God had given a perfect platform, this liberty; and have not
Christian Churches, to whom no rule is in this case given, the same power in
such things, and a far greater?

And this liberty have all the governors likewise of Christian congregations
used in their several Churches and ages, as I shall have occasion to intimate
by and by: All which examples are an evident proof of the Churches power in
these external ordinances: because, 1. there is no Precept against these
examples; for against an express command examples prove nothing. 2. The
Apostles were more faithful servants to their Lord, than to entrench upon his
royal prerogative, and more humble than to go beyond the bounds of their
commission. 3. It cannot with reason be imagined, that Christ would suffer his
Church, throughout all ages, to sleep to securely in so great an error. The
power of the Church proved by consent of writers.
And therefore leaving this, I come to my second argument for the proof of the
Churches power, [the Consent of Writers] which is an argument beyond exception,
and able of it self to put the point in hand out of all question.

Calvin, whom all Sectaries make their Oracle in their plea against Ceremonies,
has these words. Calv Opus^. page 344.
Ne quis nos calumnietur nimis morosos, etc. Let no man think or say that we
are so severe and harsh, as to take away all liberty in external rites; I here
give all readers to understand, that I contend not about ceremonies respecting
order and decency in the Church: Our dispute is against those acts, whereby
some think that God is truly, and properly worshipped. I deny that these are
under the power of men. And in Idem Instit. l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 14
another place he says, Ergo (inquies) nihil ceremoniale rudioribus dabitur,
etc? Therefore thou will say, shall nothing Ceremonial be appointed for the
instruction of the ruder sort? I say not so, for I know well enough that all
such helps are profitable to them: only I contend, that in prescribing them,
such a manner and measure be used, as may illustrate, not obscure Christ. And
Calv ^b. Sect. 30.
in the same Chapter he lays it down for a conclusion: That Christ would not
prescribe particularly concerning ceremonies, what we ought to follow, but
refer us to the direction of general rules.

We hold (says Perkins) Perk. ^es. Cat^ol. of Traditions. con^l. 3.
that the Church has power to prescribe ordinances, rules or traditions
touching the time and place of Gods worship, and concerning order and
comeliness to be used in the same.

Peruse the Harmony of confessions, and see whether this be not the judgment
of all those Churches. More particularly, for instance, take the Auspurge
confession; Melancthon the contriver of it, directly for this power says, Aug.
confess. Art. ult. and Apol. ej^dem.
Licet Pastoribus and Episcopis, etc. It is lawful for Bishops and Pastors to
make Canons, that things be done in order in the Church: and he proves it by S.
Paul's example, Sic Paulus ordinat, etc. So S Paul ordained, that women should
cover their heads, and confine their tongues in the congregation, etc. Only
some Cautions he gives to this effect. 1. That these orders be not imposed as
parts of Gods worship. 2. That they be not urged as things necessary in
themselves. 3. That for their matter, they be not contrary to any Evangelicall
truths; for if an Angel from heaven should preach unto us another Gospel, we
are to hold him accursed.

In all which cautions, he does not deny, or abridge the power of
Church Governors in these matters, but only remember them how to use their
liberty therein, to that end for which they received it, the glory of God, and
the Churches edification, according to that speech of S. Paul, This authority
is given us for edification, and not for your destruction. 2 Cor. 10.8.

But what need I stand upon particular instances? Do we not all grant in our
controversy with Papists about traditions; that there are 2. sorts of
traditions, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical, and that both these are under
the power of the Church?

1. We yield that there are Apostolic traditions, rituall and dogmaticall,
which are no where mentioned, or not enjoined in the Scriptures, but delivered
by word of mouth from the Apostles to their followers; for some of which these
are reputed, viz. the number of Canonical books, the Apostles Creed, the
baptism of infants, the fast of Lent, the Lords day, and the great festivals
of Easter and Whitsontide, These we justly take for theirs, grounding upon S.
Austins rule, Quod universa tenet ecclesia, nec concil^s institutu^, sed semper
^tentum est, non nisi authoritate Apost^l^ traditum rectissime creditur. Aug.
de Pap. cont. ^onat. l 4 c. 24.
Those observations which have been of universal use in the Catholic
Church, and appear not to have been the Constitutions of general Councils,
we are in reason to hold for Apostolic traditions.

2. Besides these, we confess that there are and have been many ancient
Ecclesiastique traditions also; from which, as their foundations, grew those
noted practice, of Tert. C^. ^il c. 3.
not fasting on the Lords day; of ^t ib.
saying their prayers not kneeling, but standing, during the whole festivity of
Easter and Whitsontide, (which in those days continued, though in a remiss
degree, full 50. days) Just^ a^q. ad O^thod. Te^t. Apol. c. 16. Bas^d. ^p^tu
sancto c. 27.
of praying to God, and adoring Christ with their faces toward the East: Naz in
l^. Go^ ^a^. per. Leon^. p. 423 Aug. con. l. 9 c. 13
of prostration before the Altar; of Cyp^ p. 56. ad T^t at id. l. de laps su^
^n^t.
signing the baptized person with the sign of the cross, Tert Co^. mil. c. 3.
of renouncing the devil, of tasting honey and milk before baptism; Tert. de
bapt. c. 13.
of using Godfathers in the baptismes even of children, I^d. Hisp. l. 2. de
div. o^ 20. y^ H^ osolan pro^ co.
of exorcising the parties to be baptized, A^al l. 1. de^ccla^. 2^. Aug. S^m.
1^7. de domin^ (...) pas^.
of putting a white garment upon them, which they were to wear for the space
of 7. or 8. days (from the putting off of which, the Sunday after Easter was
called Vi^. (...) ^tiq. ^t. (...) t^. 5. c. 12.
dominica in Albis) Te^t. (...)
of receiving the Eucharist fasting: Just. mar. q. ad orth. Cypr. ep. 56. and
63.
of mixing water with the wine for the Communion; Cypr. ibid.
of sending it to such as were absent: Cypr. l. de. laps. number. 89. Tert. l. de
orat. sub sin. id. l. 2. ad ux.
of eating the consecrated bread in the Church at the time of the holy
Communion, or carrying it home to their houses, and eating it when they thought
good; Tert. l. de Cor. ^il. c. 3. id. l. 2. ad ux. circa ^l.
of crossing themselves when they went out, or came in, when they arose or went
to bed, when they sat down to meat, when they lighted candles, and when they
had any business of moment to do. Many more customs the Church had in former
times, which (doubtless) most of them drew their breath from some rules and
constitutions established by their governors for their use. Now that
Ceremonies and Rites of this nature are under the Churches power to ordain, we
generally grant our adversaries; and what is granted by all sorts of divines,
cannot be called in question by any, without some note either of singular
ignorance, or arrogance, or both.

And so I come to show the reason of the point, The Churches power proved by
reason.

No Church without Rites and rules.


which may be thus declared.

No Church can consist without orders, no worship without rules, given and
observed, concerning times, places, manner, etc. These (as I have showed) are
not of the essence of Gods worship, no more than a man's coat or skin is of the
essence of a man; but yet such necessary appurtenances they be, that take them
away, and you take away all public worship.

But where are these orders to be found? where is this form prescribed? In
Gods Word are no such ordinances delivered, some indeed are mentioned, which were
given by the Apo: to some particular Churches, and by them observed in their
sacred assemblies: but they were never intended to be of perpetual right, nor
for universal use; nor yet mentioned directly and purposely, but as the riots
and disorders of particular congregations gave them occasion. It was not the
Apostles drift (says Socrat. eccles. hist. l. 5. ^. 21.
Socrates) to lay down Canons concerning festivals and other ceremonies, but
to become patterns of piety and godly life. Certainly the Christian Churches,
through all her successions, should have been extremely injurious to their
first founders the Apostles, in antiquating many of those mentioned Canons, had
they been intended for perpetual presidents to all Churches.

Three things do clearly evince, that neither they, nor any other form were
propounded in Scriptures to be of perpetual right.

No set form of government prescribed for, or used by the Churches.
1. The impossibility of making such orders or regiment, as should fit all
Churches in the world. In the time of the Law Gods people were but one, and
they a small people; and therefore one kind of discipline might well enough
serve their turns. But now the Church is an heterogeneall body, consisting of
several nations, and of dispositions as different as of countries; and
therefore not to be yoked under the same laws and customs, Civil or
Ecclesiastique. It is as hard to make one government to fit the Church in her
several times and countries, as to make one shoo to fit all feet, or one
coat to serve all bodies. And so says Calvin (in effect) Calv. Inst. l. 4. c.
10. Sect. 30.
Christ would not prescribe particular ceremonies to his Church, because it was
impossible that the same ceremonies should be agreeable to all so different
nations as are in the world. To the same purpose it is, which Iunius speaks:
Jun. Animadan Pell. cont. 1. l. 4.
The Scriptures (says he) contain in them all matters of doctrine belonging
necessarily to faith and good life; but they only set down a general law
concerning ceremonies (Let all things be done decently and in order.) Therefore
particular Rites appertaining to the Church, because they be mutable and
ambulatory, might well be omitted by the Spirit of God, and permitted to the
conveniences of the Church.

Secondly, the impossibility of finding out such a form, is an argument
against it; such orders could never be found in the Scriptures (at least till
this last overweening age) never any could, or durst determine what the Lords
discipline (as some call it) is, though many, with greater passion than
discretion, have earnestly called for it. Certainly, had God intended such a
thing for his Church, or thought it necessary, he would have set it down so
plainly (for so he did the Jewish regiment which he meant they should live by)
that every Church (without gross ignorance) might have known what it was. But
they are yet to learn what it is, and will be to the worlds end. Some talk of
a Phoenix, and of a Philosophers stone, but who did ever see a Phoenix? or who
did ever enjoy the Philosophers stone? Ab omnibus amatur, and tamen virgo est;
it has had a great many suitors, but never any husband: An evident argument
that these are but imaginary things. And so, that there is such a discipline,
into whose mold, and by whose model all Churches must be cast and squared,
considering that never any yet knew it, is but a mere Chimera.

3. The perpetual variety of all Church- governments does sufficiently
disprove it: for, if as there is one Lord, one Christ, one faith, and one
baptism, so there be one frame of government for Christ's Kingdom on earth,
why do not all Churches stick to this, as they do to them? Scarce three
Churches in the whole Christian world do jump in every thing. It must follow
therefore, that either all the Churches of God are blinded, and cannot see what
lies before them in broad day light; or, which is worse, that they are all too
proud to submit to their masters laws; or, that the conceited platform is a
very Vtopian Commonwealth.

Two objections removed.
Nor does this argue (as some more fondly than truly imagine) any defect of love
in God to the Church of the new Testament, or of fidelity in Christ to his
Father, or of sufficiency in the Scriptures to direct us in our ways.

Want of a set form argues no want of love in God.
1. No want of love in God to his Church now, in comparison of the Jews, can be
hence inferred: for I hope, the clear revelation of the mysteries of
salvation, and the abundant grace bestowed on us above the Jews, may more truly
show the exuberancy of Gods affection to us in comparison of them; than their
prescribed platform which we want, his care of them more than of us.

The Philosopher accused nature to be a stepda^e to man, and a kind mother to
other creatures, because these bring their coats upon their backs into the
world, and are quickly made able to shift for themselves; whereas men come
naked in, and are feign to depend long upon others for their sustenance; A
simple accusation: Because the reasonable nature, wherewith men are beautified,
and their dominion over all creatures, do much overbalance those defects,
and argue more bounty bestowed by nature on him, than on them. And it is a
cavil no less silly, that if we be not provided for by God with a standing
government in the Church, as the Synagogue was, Gods care of us now is nothing
so great, as it was at that time of them; because those many things wherein by
Gods bounty we out strip them, are abundantly sufficient to countervaile that
defect, if it be a defect. But I rather take it to be an honor to be free from
such a burdensome yoke of many, and costly, and toilsome ceremonies, as was
laid on their backs.

2. This is no derogation, neither, Nor of fidelity in Christ.
to the fidelity of Christ to his Father. If we compare him with Moses, Gods
servant in those times, Who was faithful in all Gods house, Heb. 3.5: it is
true, that he did not all the particulars that Moses did, and yet he was never
the less faithful in his place. For the fidelity of a son or servant, is to
be measured, not by the number of acts which he does, but by the conformity of
his actions to his fathers, or masters commands; and so is our Saviors. God
appointed Moses to make every thing belonging to that typical and temporary
dispensation, according to the pattern which he saw in the mount, Heb. 8.5. and
if he had not done so, he had not been faithful. And he sent his Son to be
Our high Priest, to sacrifice himself for the salvation of men; to be a
Prophet also, to instruct them in all necessary truths; and to be a King, to
protect his people in the world, and to bring them at last, maugre all their
spiritual enemies, into his glorious kingdom. All these our Lord has truly
and fully done, who will deny it? But he never gave him in charge to prescribe
external laws for his Churches government, while warfaring here on earth.

Nor imperfection of Scriptures.
3. Nor does this involve the Scriptures imperfection: for the Scripture is an
instrument, and the perfection of an instrument is only relative. We do not
say that a pen or an axe is naught, because they cannot do all things; if a
pen can write well, and an axe cut well, we take them for perfect and good: So,
we must not say that Gods word is insufficient, if it reveal and prescribe
not whatsoever we imagine it should: if it be able to make us wise to
salvation, and completely furnished to every good work (for which use and end
only it was given, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.) it must needs be granted that it is full
and perfect, though it teach us not how the Church should be governed,
otherwise than by general rules, these in my text, and such other. It is with
the Scriptures, as with nature; Non deficiunt in necessariis, nec abundant in
superfluis, They are neither defective in necessaries, nor excessive in
superfluous things, such as this is.

This passage I mean to close up with the Testimony of Beza, in his Epistle to
Bishop Grindall, Bez ep. 8 ad Grindall ep. Land. Proved by a Testimony of Beza.
where first he mentions two sorts of men; one that would have all orders that
had been of use in the Apostles times, brought back into the Church, and
observed; and whatsoever succeeding ages have added to them, abolished: the
other sort would have old Rites of use in the Church after the Apostles times,
to be retain^d, as either necessary, or profitable, or for unities sake: And
then says, Quod ad me attinet, etc. As for my part, that the doctrine of the
Apostles was exact and perfect I make no question, but I am of another opinion
concerning Rites. For, first it is certain, that (the Churches every day
increasing) the Apostles could not ordain whatsoever they held expedient, and
therefore in their making of orders they proceeded by degrees, as by the
institution of Deacons it appears, tolerating for a while even many Judicial
Rites, as we may see in the history of their Acts. Secondly, who sees not,
that in their external constitutions they had very great respect to the
present times, places, and persons? So that it is not probable that the same
Rites were used in all places, as is evident enough by that famous Epistle of
Irenaeus to Victor. Besides, some of their ordinances, those love feasts for
example, necessity it self abolished. Therefore whatsoever was done by the
Apostles concerning ceremonies, is not (in my conceit) either presently or
absolutely to be made a rule. And I do not wonder that the ancient Pastors of
the Church, (having respect to their own times) did antiquate some of those
first injunctions, and set up new ones in their room. Their fault was (that by
their leave I may speak what I think) that they held not a mean in the
number of their Rites, nor had so much regard to Christian simplicity and
purity as was meet. In this discourse of his, Beza 1. delivers his judgment
plainly, that there is no form of government left us by the Apostles,
incompatible with additions, or detractio^s. 2. He proves his opinion by diverse
arguments, 1 from its impossibility, the Church was then in motu, non statu in
motion, not in its full and perfect state, and they were forced to proceed by
degrees in their constitutions, answerable to the increase of the Church, and
the tempers of such people as were made the Church: 2 from the abrogation of
Apostolic Rites by the Churches, as they saw cause; and of some of them even
by the Apostles themselves, after they had ordained them: 3 Lastly, he
concludes that the faults of Church Governors, in prescribing orders, have not
stood in this, that they passed by the Apostles, and set up their own laws,
but that they exceeded in the number or quality of such Rites as they
introduced into their Churches.

Church has power to decree such Rites and ceremonies as are decent and
orderly; but what if the Rites decreed do want this external form and
qualification, and are neither comely nor orderly? does not the Church then
which ordaines such, exceed her commission? or how shall we know what
ceremonies are agreeable to these rules?

1. Significancie or abuse, no mark of indecent ceremonies.
If any Bishops in the Church authorize Rites not suitable to these rules, they
presume beyond their allowance, and shall give account to God who has set them
over his family the Church.

2. We must not judge of ceremonies by false rules. 1 Some reject all
ceremonies as uncomely that are significant; and yet those holy kisses given
and taken by the Primitive Christians, were significations of mutual charity;
the women's coverings, the men's bare heads were signs of women's subjection to
their husbands, and the husbands subjection to Christ alone. And of ceremonies
(says Pet. Mart in 1. Cor. 11. vid. etiam Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 15
Peter Martyr) those are the most laudable, that are the most lively in
signification. 2 Some again condemn all Rites that are or have been used by
the Roman Church; when yet it is most certain, that not only Papists, but
Pagans too, by the light of reason, may be competent judges of decency and
order in external Rites. 3 Others will allow this surname to none that have
been abused to superstition and Idolatry; but would have them all abolished as
most uncomely for the service of God, but without reason; may not Churches be
accounted fit places for public worship, because they have formerly been
polluted with Idolatry? may not that body which has made it self a member of
an harlot, become a glorious member of Jesus Christ, and a holy Temple for Gods
Spirit to dwell in? Wise men have always thought, that the separation of the
use of a thing from its abuse, is very possible, and that the use of some
things stripped out of their abuses, is very commendable. To take away the use of
a Ceremony because formerly abused, Curatio quidem est, sed curatio carnisicis,
non medici, (says Cassand. Commonstr. viae, Circ. med.
Cassander rightly) is a cure of the abuse indeed, but the cure of a hangman,
who takes away diseases, disasters, and life and all at a clap, not of a
physician, who so expells the disease, as he saves the life.

These are all false Cards to sail by. By the best writers ceremonies are then
judged to be conformable to these directions.

1. When they are not elevated above their nature, neither used as true and
proper acts of worship, (as vowed chastity, poverty, and regular obedience
among the Papists are,) nor as instruments to produce supernatural effects, as
holy water is sprinkled in the Church of Rome to wash away venial sins, and
the sign of the Cross is used to drive away devils.

2. When for their multitude they be neither burdensome to the Church, making
Jews of Christians, and Law of Gospel; nor occasions of diverting their
affections and thoughts from such religious acts and services as are
substantial.

And therefore such Rites as are not opposite to these rules, we are to hold
for decent and orderly.

Determination of decency belongs to Superiors.
3. The determination of this decency belongs not to private persons; it is not
for them to nominate, and governors to choose, or for them to bring the
writing, and superiors to give the seal; this would be to make authority but
a mere cipher, and the Bishops of the Church like those images in the Psalm,
Which have eyes and see not, hands and handle not, etc. this were an utter
vverturning of the body, a placing of the feet where the head should be. But
our Rulers must be judges in these matters, the Kings majesty the supreme, and
the Prelates of the Church the subordinate; for 1. this is the honor belonging
to their places, as it is the honor of the head to judge what is fit and
comely and conducible to the welfare of the body. 2. they are best fitted for
this work of determining, both in respect of their learning and experience, and
because of that divine assistance, which by their masters own promise ( Lo I
am with you to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.) is usually afforded them,
though not so far as to secure them from all possibility of mistaking in their
decisions. To their sentence in these things must inferiors submit, if not
their judgments (for perhaps they are not bound to believe at all times that
they do all things well) yet their practices, both for the honor that is due
to their places, and the peace of Gods Church which every good member will
pursue. In Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. God enjoyneth the people under the pain
of death in all their doubts and controversies to stand to the sentence of the
Priest, and to square their practices thereby: he thought it not fit then for
the people to be judges of doubtful cases, and does he think it convenient
now? I will therefore conclude with the speech of Nazianzene. Greg. Naz in
Orat. qua se purgat.
Presume not ye that are sheep, to make your selves guides of them that should
guide you, neither seek to skip over the fold which they have pitched about you,
it suffices for your part, if you give your selves to be ordered. Take not
upon you to judge, nor make them subject to your laws, who should be a law to
you; for God is not a God of confusion, but of order and peace in all the
Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33.

And so leaving Rites and Ceremonies for their determination, to the heads of
the Church, as pieces of coin which bear their image and superscription; I
pass from the point to the Consectaries resulting from it.

1. From hence we may see, that Laws or Canons concerning orders in the Church,
are alterable, and bind to their use no longer than they that made them are
pleased to urge them.

Matters of faith and morality will endure no addition, diminution or change,
because their authority is divine; but matters of order and decency do,
because their authority is humane.

Every particular, or national Church has power to ordain, change, and
abolish ceremonies and Rites ordained only by man's authority, so as all things
be done to edification. Art. 14.
It is the subscribed doctrine of our own Church, and a proof of the
Consectary. Upon this ground S. Ambrose in his own Church abrogated an old
custom of feasting at the Tombs of m^rtyrs ^ud. ^es in Aug de Civ. Dei. l. 8 c
27. S^d ^c Ambrosi^s ^^^r^ ve^u^t, ne u^^ ^oc^sio l^ ^o^sis se ing^rg^ andi,
and q^ua illa qu^si parent l^a superst^m gen^li^m ^s^t si^n (...).
lest occasion of quaffing should be given thereby to drunkards, and because
those parentalia, funeral feasts were very like to heathenish superstition.
And how many Apostolic and ancient Rites have long since bidden the world
goodnight by the Churches pleasure only, on the same ground? Cassand. l de
ossic. P^ page 855.
Cassander reckons up two sorts of old ceremonies; which because they were
different, have been differently dealt with.

1. Some there were, which are of perpetual use to preserve the memory of
Christ's benefits, and to train up Christian people in piety. Such were those
famous festivals of Easter, Ascension, and Whitsontide; for by their
anniversary solemnizations, and by the public reading and explaining the
histories suitable to those holy days, people are put in mind of those Acts
which Christ did for their redemption, and excited to show their thankfulness
to him by their love and obedience to his laws. Of this sort also have singing
of Psalms, and sacred hymns in the Church, reading of suitable prayers and
Scriptures at the holy communion, silence of women in the congregation, and the
fast of Lent been accounted. All these therefore have been religiously
preserved without the least alteration.

2. Others of them were of an inferior nature, and may be divided into three
ranks.

1. Rites of no great moment for their matter or use; as their holy kisses,
standing while they prayed on the Lords day, the tasting of honey and milk by
the persons to be baptized, ad infantiae signifi cationem, to signify their
infancy in Christ, as S. Hierome says, alluding to that speech of S. Peter, As
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of Gods word, that ye may grow thereby.
1 Pet. 2.2.

2. Rites of very good use, while their equity continued, but yet fitted only
to the present times. Such an one was the abstinence from Idolothytes, things
strangled, and blood, imposed on the Gentiles by Apostolic authority, Acts
15. For this as it was enjoined only in favor of the peevish Jews, who counted
some meats unclean, and were kept off from Christ because those abominable
meats (as they thought them to be) were eaten by the Christians; so it was to
live no longer than the scandal continued. Of this nature was the custom of
baptising people that were to be entered into the Church, at the two great
festivals of Easter and Whitsontide only: (except in case of present necessity)
and in the mother Churches of their several countries, and no where else. This
order was a very good one during those times, both in respect of that
Sacrament, which hereby became the more reverend and sacred; and of the persons
to be baptized, who had liberty by this, to prepare the better for their
journies to those mother Churches (which sometimes were very far from their
dwellings) and to get themselves sufficiently catechized in the Christian
religion, that they might be able to give an account of their faith, before
they received their baptism. Nor was this custom prejudicial to any of them,
because being for the most part men and women, they were not subject to sudden
death, as tender infants are, and if by sickness or any casualty they were
brought into danger of death, they found the favor to be baptized. But the
equity of this custom continued no longer than the conversion of Gentiles
lasted; and therefore, extincta gentilitate, when Paganism was almost
swallowed up of Christianity, and the only persons to receive this badge, were
children borne in the Church, who by reason of their tender infant age, were
incapable of instruction, and subject to manifold deaths and dangers, and so
might frequently have ended this life before they had received the Sacrament of
another life, (should they have been deferred and put over to those two times)
this order began to expire.

3. A third sort, were such Rites as were chastely used at their first
institution, but afterward, by the licentiousness of people, did seem to be
accompanied with inseparable abuses; of this sort were those (...) mentioned
Jude 12. feasts of charity; and those meetings together in the night, which
they called vigills, because they were wont to watch together in prayer even
till midnight, (especially in the night before Easter.) All these the Church
has abolished, though in a different way. Some were suddenly and in an instant
removed, as the use of pictures in the Church, by the Elibert. Counc.
Elibertine council, Ne quod colitur, in parietibus depingeretur, that that
which was to be worshipped, might not be painted upon walls: and the threefold
dipping by the fourth Toletane council, because abused by the Arrians, Conc^
Tolet. 4. c. 5. others were suffered like old buildings to run to ruin by
degrees, till they fell of themselves. Some she has clean cashiered; others
she has only changed into somewhat else not unlike them, as vigills into
fasting days, and live feasts into collections for the poor. Now, though the
causes why these have been abrogated, were particular, yet the ground on which
the Church did it, and by which she must be justified in so doing, was the
nature and quality of those Rites, being all humane constitutions; and her
authority over things of that nature, either to make or mar, as occasion
serves; for the hand that gives them life, may strike them dead.

Nor may the Church only alter and abolish old ceremonies, but add new, either
for the begetting of an honorable respect to Gods ordinances, or the stirring
up of our dead devotions in his service. So^. eccl. hist^l. 6. c. 8.
Socrates tells us, that the custom of singing Anthems in the Church, was
brought in by S. Ignatius the Bishop of Antioch; because having heard some
Angels in a vision chanting out the praises of God with interchangeable notes,
he thought it would be a good exercise for Gods earthly Angels in their
public assemblies, which are (...), a heaven on earth. And S. Ambrose,
because he made account that singing had no small efficacy in it ad
commovendum ad pictatem animum, to move the mind to godliness, (says S Aug
ep. 1 ^9
Austin in one place) and lest the people being heavily afflicted with the
Arrian persecution, Moeroris tadio contabesceret, should pine away with too
much sorrow, (says the same Father in another Aug conses. l. 9 c 7.
place) appointed singing to be used in the Oh: of Milan. And from these two
Bishops drew that custom of singing in the Eastern and Western Churches its
original.

What was Ignatius and S. Ambrose, if we look at their authority, more than
other Bishops of the Church? that liberty therefore which they had, to make new
orders, when they saw cause, have all other Prelates in their Churches, so far
as the laws of the lands in which they are, will permit.

It is an envious outcry therefore which is made among us, that Popery is
coming in, Alteration of ceremonies no argument of Popery.
and Gods true religion going out, because some seeming alterations are made in
our ceremonies, and some new ones are, by the examples of Superiors commended
to our use; or rather, some ancient customs, which have been continued in our
mother Churches, revived in others. A heavy charge it is, and had need be well
proved by them that thus clamor, or else it is a foul slander, and so indeed
it is. For what are ceremonies to doctrine? What is the use of the Churches
liberty in these things, to Popery? May not the apparel alter, and the body
remain the same? May not ceremonies, which are the clothing of the Spouse,
admit some changes, and the doctrine remain inviolate? Must Antichrist needs
peep in, because our Bishops do use the liberty which they ever had?

A rumor it is, that argues either ignorance, or envy, or vainglory.

In some, perhaps, but ignorance. 1. Of the difference between substance and
ceremony doctrine and discipline. 2. Of the Churches power to add, withdraw,
and make a change in these things, if cause be offered. And I would wish all
such to labor to be better instructed, and till they be, to hold their peace,
and neither trouble themselves, nor others with things they understand not.

But Envy, I am afraid, and ill-affectednesse toward those that are above them
in the Church, is the cause of this outcry in too many; because their eyes are
too weak to look upon the luster of those Stars in the Church, or their wills
untaught to keep their laws, or bear their censures, therefore they dart their
bitter and biting words upon them, like those Salvages, who shoot their arrows
at the Sun, because he scorcheth them with his beams.

Let such take heed, lest while they resemble the devil in his sin, and
malign the happiness of others, they be not made like him in punishment and
lose their own.

If this envious (...) be no cause, yet (...), vainglory, with which too many
are inebriated, may occasion these uncharitable reports; Absalons ambitious
traducing of his fathers blessed government to advance his own, does plainly
enough show, that the slandering of governors for the getting of a private
name, is a trick and piece of artifice as old at least as Absalon. Who sees
not, that this is a ready way for men to get a great opinion among the people?
either of singular prudence, that they are able to discern Antichrist in his
swaddling clouts, and descry him, while he is but putting in his head at the
door; or of admirable zeal and piety, that they are such as cannot behold the
declining of the Gospels purity, and the sad approach of superstition, without
complaints and outcryes.

But let me tell them: 1. That this odious rumor having no sufficient ground
to stand upon, is but a slander; and which is worse, Scandalum magnatum, a
blaspheming of dignities, a sin, which S. Peter attributes to notorious
presumption, (...), they tremble not to speak evil of dignities: 2 Pet. 2.10.
2. That a slander is not the right way to true honor; never was true zeal
kindled at a kitchen fire, nor ever sweet name built on the ruin of a private
man's, much less of a whole governments reputation. Once Herostratus set fire
on the glory of the world for a building, Diana's magnificent Temple, to get a
name: and a name he has gotten; but what name? a name of obloquy and disgrace
to the worlds end. And such a name (I believe) will be the portion of all those,
Qui ex incenso Dei Templo gloriam quaerunt (as Calvin speaks) who seek their
own glory by such seditious and incendiary slanders.

And so I come to the second Consectary. 2. Consectary


Churches are not tied to the same orders: Each Church has her liberty, either
to take such as are made ready to her hand by others, or to make new Canons of
her own for the government of her people. And so our Church teaches us to
judge in her 34. Art. 34.
Article. It is not necessary (says the Article) that ceremonies and
traditions be in all places one, or altogether alike: for at all times they
have been diverse; and may be changed according to the diversities of countries,
times and manners. Seeing all Rites and ceremonies (says Zanch. de Red l. 1. p.
764.
Zanchy) are instituted for the edification of the Church, it is manifest that
in these things liberty is to be left to Churches, that every Church may so
carry her self in these matters, as she thinks best for the good of her
believers.

On these conclusions of our own Church, and that learned writer, Socr. l. 5.
eccl. hist. c. 21.
Socrates may serve for a comment, for he reckons up many several Churches,
all enjoying their several orders.

The Greek Church gave the Communion in leavened bread, the Latins in
unleavened: the Greeks kept their Easter, quarta decima luna, on the fourteenth
day of that month exactly, fall when it would; but the Latins always on the
first day of the week, the resurrection day. In Rome they fasted on Saturdaies,
in Milan not so: in Rome their Lent was wont to begin but three weeks before
Easter, in Greece and Illyrium, six weeks, and in other Churches seven. Among
the Eastern Churches, their fasting was a total forbearing of all kind of
food till Sun set; but in some Western Churches, it stood only in delectu
ciborum, in abstinence from flesh only, and brake up at three first, then at
twelve a clock. In Antioch the altar stood in the West part of the Church, in
others always in the East. In Hellas, Jerusalem, and Thessaly, and among the
Novatians also at Constantinople, Evening prayer was read by candle light; and
S. Hier. ep. ad vigilant.
Hierome gives the reason, Non ad fugandas tenebras, sed ad signum laetitiae
demonstrandum, not to drive away darkness, (for at those hours it was light
enough) but to represent the spiritual rejoicing of Christians: but in other
Churches it was read by day light. At Alexandria they admitted Catechumenists
to the office of reading, and expounding the Scriptures in the Church; in other
places none were appointed to those functions, till they were baptized. In some
Churches the Communion was celebrated every Sunday, in others, not so often.
Among some people, it was given to children, as well as to men and women, (as
S. Cypr. de lap. number. 89.
Cyprian tells us) and Aug. Epist. 107. ad Vitalem.
S. Augustine says, that there was such a custom in his time: but this was
not the manner of other Churches, as Pam. in loc. cit. Cypriani.
Pamelius observes in these words. Quia apud alios authors rarissima fit
illius mentio, etc. because there is but little mention made of that custom in
other authors, therefore I suspect that it was neither universal, nor of any
long continuance after S. Austins time. In the African and Spanish Churches for
a great while together, they never granted the Churches peace to such as fell
into the crimina majora, the fouler sort of crimes after baptism; but in other
Churches they were more indulgent to offenders upon their true repentance, as
Petav. in Epiphan.
Petavius has noted.

We see by these examples that great was the variety of Church-customs and
constitutions. And yet for all this diversity, the Churches held the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace; none of them being either so proud as to
prescribe to others, nor so uncharitable, as to wrangle among themselves about
those differences. Only once Eusebius.
Victor Bishop of Rome presumed to excommunicate all Asia for differing from
the Latins in observing Easter. But Irenaeus of Lions in France, in the name of
his fellow Bishops, did sharply rebuke him for it; alleging against him the
examples of former Bishops, and in particular of Polycarpus of Smyrua, and
Anicetus of Rome, who notwithstanding they differed in this observation, yet
they held a friendly communion together. Calv. ep. 18 ad Farel.
Calvin tells Farell, that as for himself, he was somewhat sparing of
ceremonies, Luther liberal, Bucer indifferent; yet they all maintained very
good correspondency, and judged those differences in external Rites to be no
just cause why they should break amity. And indeed they are not, no more than
difference in apparel is a good reason why the children of the same father
should maintain a contention. Dissonantia jejunii fidei consonantiam non
tollit; difference in fasting (says Irenaeus) takes not away agreement in
faith: and, In una fide nihil officit ecclesiae sanctae consuetudo diversa,
says S. Gregory; Outlandish Church-orders no rule to us.
Different Church customs bring no prejudice to their one most holy faith. Nay
it is good (says S. Austin) that there should be this variety, for this is
that raiment of needle work wherewith the Kings daughter is clothed and
beautified.

With what warrant then does Cartwright or any of his followers, strive to
bring us to outlandish customs, and make a schism from us, or a faction among
us, for maintaining the liberty wherewith Christ has honored us, of making
and living by our own rules? Graviter peccant etc. They are guilty of a great
fault Zanch. l. de Red. p. 765. Graviter peccant, qui propter has indifferentes
ceremonias turbant ecclesias, damnant alios principes and magistratus: haeccine
pietas quam jactamus? haecci^e charitas, quam debemus ecclesi^s and fractibus?
(says Zanchy) who for these indifferent ceremonies do disturb the Churches,
and damn all other magistrates and rulers, because they use their liberty in
these things: is this the piety which is boasted of? is this the charity which
we owe to the Churches of God? If they want piety and charity, who trouble and
contest with other Churches about ceremonies, much more do they lack it, who
in this quarrel trouble the quiet of their own, because she will not
prostrate her self before their Idol, and be servant to their humors. Came
the word of God from them, or came it to them only? (that I may speak in the
Apostles language, 1 Cor. 4.36.) Are they the Joseph to whom the Sun and Moon
and Stars must bow? all Churches must strike sail? Calvin indeed was too highly
conceited of his own invented discipline (as Pigmalion of his image) and
having made it, did give too honorable a style to it: but did his friends so
mightily esteem it? Vide Calv. ep. ad Pullinger. It. ep. ad Tigur. minist. It.
ep. Bullinger. ad Calvin.
Was it not opposed by his own Senate and Citizens? was not he glad for the
upholding of it to beg the approbation of Bazil, Zurich, and other Helvetian
Churches? And when (to gratify him) they gave it a testimony, was not this the
greatest praise they could afford it, that those consistoricall laws of his
were good ones, and such as were agreeable to the word of God, and might well
be tolerated: not such as were of necessity to be received into their or other
Churches? To go no further than Beza, Calvin's inward friend and scholar; Bez.
in vit. Calvin.
He in the life of Calvin, speaking of the cause why Calvin did so earnestly
contend for the continuance of it, says, it was, Quod eam urbem videret his
fraenis indigere, because he saw that that City (being then it seems somewhat
licentious) had need of such a bridle; by which we see, that he derived not its
pedigree as high as heaven, nor maintained it to be the Lords discipline, nor
prescribed it imperiously to other Churches. Nor do her own divines esteem it
The government: for when occasions have brought them among us, they have with
singular respect conformed and submitted themselves in practice to our received
orders. Herein observing S. Austins rule which he gives in one of his Epistles.
Aug. ep. 118. ad Januar.
Quod neque contra fidem, etc. That constitution which is neither against faith
or good manners, is to be reckoned of, as in it self indifferent, and to be
observed according to the company with whom we converse. And again, Ad quam
cunque, etc. To what Church soever thou shall come, follow their customs, if
thou meanest neither to give nor take offense. Herein also imitating S. Paul's
example, who became all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9.20. and that of S. Ambrose,
Aug. ep. ad Casulan.
who though in his own Church of Milan he kept no Saturday fast, yet when he
came to Rome, where it was the custom, he fasted as they did; by that
demeanor giving occasion to that proverb which has been long in use. Si
fueris Romae, Romano vivito more, if you come to Rome, live as Romans do.

Our own men are only they, our English papists are the greatest admirers of
Rome and the papal power, because they live a great way from them, and know
them only in imagination (which too often like a false glass, is a deceitful
representer) so are our own disciplinarians the only men, that do so much
adore that Geneva platform, because they never had any practical knowledge and
experience of it. And it is the unhappy chance of our Church to have her
bowels eaten out by her own children whom she has carried in her womb, nursed
at her breasts, and fed with her favors and preferments.

A destiny too bad for a well-reformed, nay (without prejudice to other
Churches be it spoken) the best reformed Church in the world; a Church (I
appeal to all Church-stories) which in her reformation and government comes
nearest the pattern of pious and reverend Antiquity. A government so moderate,
and full of respect to those elder Saints (who were in Christ before us, and
are now triumphing in heaven, while we are militant yet on earth, and fighting
for our Crown) Confer. ad Hampt. Court. page 38.
that a French Ambassador in the beginning of our last Kings reign of blessed
memory, upon the view of our solemn service and ceremonies at Canterbury and
at Court, gave out; That if the reformed Churches in France had kept the same
orders among them that we have, he was assured there would have been in that
country many thousand Protestants at that time, more than there were. But alas
poor mother, it is thy lot to be despised by thine own sons, and if there be
no remedy, thou must bear it; Time and chance (says Solomon) happens to all
men, and so it does to all Churches, Hor. l. 1. Carm. Ode 24. Levius sit
patientia, quicquid corrigere est nefas.
Patience is a means to make that burden easy, which must be endured without
remedy.

And so I come to the third Consectary.

3. Consectary
Persons that spurn at Church-ordinances, may be justly punished by
Church Governors: their power to make orders implies a power to censure
disorders in whomsoever they find refractary. For, every law supposes in the
Lawmakers, a power directive to make it, and a power coercive to restrain
transgressors of it; as S. Paul implies, Romans 13.4. where (speaking of the
Magistrate) he says, He bears not the sword in vain. First, he bears a
sword, has authority to punish as well as to prescribe. Secondly, he bears
it not in vain, has authority to smite with that sword, and to put his power
in practice upon evil doers.

There is one Law giver (says S. James, cap. 4.12.) who is able to save and to
destroy: in which words is given us by consequent to understand, that it
belongs to all Lawgivers to do either of these, as occasion requires.

And the reason why they are to have this power as well as the former, is,
because it is a back to the former; without this that other would be
unprofitable; for Morinus de cens. eccles. c. 2.
Inermis authoritas, non authoritas dicenda est, sed authoritatis larva:
unarmed authority is rather a mask and semblance of authority, than authority
indeed.

Into all creatures God has put two faculties.

1. A concupiscible, by which they are carried to seek out whatsoever things are
needful for their preservation.

2. An Irascible, by which they are enabled ad omnia contraria eliminanda, to
expel by slight or resistance, at least in endeavor, whatsoever threatens
their destruction. And without this last the former would not be sufficient to
keep the creature in being. Answerable to this, there is in governors a
concupiscible faculty of making good orders for the maintenance of that body,
whereof themselves are a part: and an Irascible, of resisting and executing
vengeance on such irregular persons, men of Belial, as assault that body, those
orders; and without this that other of making laws, is not only weak and of
little use, but often times a snare to lawmakers, who otherwise would be (like
the log in the fable) fabula vulgi, a scorn to the rude, unruly multitude.

But lest some may think, that this last power is peculiar to the civil
magistrate, A coactive power necessary to Chu: governors.
and belongs not to Bishops and governors of the Church; their Canons being
but counsels, and their authority only to persuade; as V. d. Vrsin. catech.
some of note, to the disparagement of their learning, do not stick to say:
Par. Orat. de Q. anleges magist. obligent Consc. page 13.
Cast your eyes on Timothy and Titus two Bishops of the Church. S. Paul armeth
them both with this double authority. Command and teach (says he to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.11.) There is a power directive given him: Them that sin rebuke before
all, that the rest also may fear, 1 Timothy 5.10. there is his power coactive.
And to Titus he says, These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority, Tit. 2.15. Teach, there is his authority to inform and direct; but
is this all? No, Rebuke too, there is power to censure the disobedient. But how
rebuke? not with weak words only, for that belongs to the inferior Clergy; but
with all authority; that is, with censures and deeds, even to the stopping of
mouths, if need be, as we may see, Tit. 1.11. Nor does S. Paul give these his
Bishops any greater allowance, than he knew his master would warrant; for he
was not ignorant of what with his own mouth he had uttered, Mat. 18.17, 18.
Go tell the Church, and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as a heathen man, and a publican. Verily, verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. In which
words, 1. Our Lord erecteth a Tribunal in the Church, to which offenders
against the Church must be cited, and by it censured, Go tell the Church. 2.
He ratifies and setleth it: whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc. ^i. whomsoever
you cast out for neglect, or contempt of that authority which I have given you,
shall be reputed an outcast in the kingdom of heaven: and by consequent,
whatsoever other punishment you justly inflict, shall be authorized in the
highest Court, by the highest judge. What will you (says S. Paul, 1 Cor.
4.21.) shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love and in the spirit of
meekness? that is, will you be persuaded by fair words, or shall I exercise
my Judicial authority over you, shall I punish you? For, as the rod of Christ
signifies his authority to rule his servants, and subdue his enemies, and
therefore is called the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2. So does the rod of S.
Paul here signify his punishing power, as S. Chrysostom and S. Austin expound
the place. And (which is a thing that should work with us) this is also the
doctrine of our own Church, to the truth of which we (my brethren) of the
Clergy have subscribed.

Whosoever (says the Article) by his private judgment, willingly and
purposely does openly break the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which
be not repugnant to the word of God, and be approved by common authority, ought
to be rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do the like) as he that
offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of
the magistrate, and wounds the consciences of weak brethren.

And shall we not think that the Church has need of this latter power, as
well as the commonwealth? Are people so well affected to the orders of the
Church, that they will obey them if they be but barely propounded, or at most,
by a few persuasions commended to their obedience? Is the Church so settled by
divine goodness, that no unruly winds within her bowels can make her quake?
Or is the King of the Church so careless of his flock which he has purchased
with his own blood, that he has given it weaker supports than Kingdoms and
civil States enjoy? and has set over it shepherds indeed, but yet lame ones,
that cannot or must not strike if there be occasion?

Certainly, this earthly Paradise would soon be entered and wasted, were not
those Angels that are set to keep the door, armed with a flaming sword of
vindicative power, to keep out, or drive out all those that either professedly,
or secretly have evil will to Sion. And therefore we cannot think with reason
that Church Governors have the place of commanding, but no power of compelling
and urging obedience to their commands.

The Lords of the Gentiles, etc. no argument against the Churches primitive
power.
But they that would have a parity in the Church, and would make Church
governors to be but empty Ciphers, allege the speech of our Savior to his
disciples ( contending among themselves for superiority) Mat. 20.25, 26, 17.
The Lords of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so among you. But whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your minister, and whosoever would be
chief among you, let him be your servant, etc. And say, that Christ here
compares the world and his Church, and forbids the use of that power to the
Pastors of the one, which belongs to the Princes of the other, and that is
principally a punitive and coactive power.

For the removal therefore of this Gorgons head, which does so amaze the
vulgar, and make them think that Bishops should use no punishments for the
safeguard of their determinations, two things are to be noted.

1. The persons which are here compared and distinguished. 2. The drift and
purpose of our Savior in this comparison.
1. For the persons, we are to know, that they are not Aaron and Moses, the
Clergy and the Laity, but Christian and Pagan governors, as appears by the
notation of the word; for where does (...) signify lay men, men distinguished
by their callings in the Church, not nations divided from the Church? It is
always opposed to the Christian Church, and men living therein, whether
ministers or people, and is as much in signification, as the Hebrew word (...):
for the Septuagint do always translate (...) by (...), as we may see Esaias
11.10. Psalm. 2.1. etc. Now Goijm signifies all nations that were not Jews, all
such, as they esteemed to be out of the Church: and therefore the Buxtorf. lexic
de vocab. (...) Iudaei appellant Christianos (...), quasi Gentem abommabilem,
affectu proisus malitioso.
Jews do at this day call the Christians, because they account them the
greatest aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, Goijm, unbeleeving people.

Besides, if we look into the new Testament, we shall see that (...) and (...)
are never used, but where Gentiles are mentioned, and must be understood. Mat.
4.15.10.5. Luke 2.32. Act 4.27.9 15.13 46. Romans 2.24.3.9 etc.
Our Savior therefore must have spokenhere very improperly, and far otherwise
than the language did lead him, had he by Gentiles in this place meant lay men.

The comparison therefore which is here made, being between Infidels, and the
Church indefinitely (as it includes all her members and magistrates civil and
Ecclesiastical) it follows, that the restraint here given does not respect
the Prelates of the Church determinately, but equally all that bear rule in
Christian Commonwealths; and so can be no argument for the clipping of the
Churches wings, more than for the limiting of civil authority.

Secondly, for the scope of our Savior, it was not:

1. To forbid magistracy among Christians (as the Anabaptists would have it)
for then, there would be a plain contradiction between him and his Apostles,
who taught that the higher powers are ordained by God, and that they were to be
obeyed by all that were under them Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17, etc.
: and this would have brought the whole world into confusion long since, there
being no possibility of its consistence without government.

Nor secondly, was it his purpose to forbid a superiority of some over others
in the Church; for,

1. He forbids that only which himself did refuse, propounding his own
practice as an example of that doctrine which he taught them: It shall not be
so among you, for I am among you, as he that serves. But did he ever renounce
authority over his disciples while he lived among them? did not he rather
behave himself as a commander and master, enjoining them from time to time what
he would have them do? and did not he willingly accept that title of Lord and
master, which his disciples gave him? John 13.13. Ye call me master and Lord,
and ye say well; for so I am.

2. He prohibites not what he supposed; but he supposes that there was to be
a sub and supra, a subordination and superiority among them, as the words
maximus and minimus, greatest and least here used do import.

Neither was it, in the third place, to hinder the annexion of civil authority
to the Church, and to restrain Churchmen from being Justices of peace, or
privy Counselors, etc. For Christ does use this speech to his disciples to
dissuade them from striving about superiority: but if this had been his
meaning, that the disciples should not be ambitious of temporal power, it
would not have reached home, nor been a sufficient argument for that purpose;
for they might have reasonably replied: Sir, we strive not to be Kings or
Princes, or Counselors of State, let us have authority in the Church, and we
ask no more.

What then was our Saviors intent in this prohibition? The true meaning of
that Text.
It was to prevent the vicious customs of heathen Kings and Lords in Christian
Governments, whether spiritual or temporal.

Their vices or faults in government were especially two.

1. Their ruling by their own wills in stead of laws.

2. Their ruling for their own ends, without respect to the peoples good, as
if the lives, and goods, and children, and servants of their subjects had been
made only to serve their turns, and maintain their pomp.

This was their chief fault, and thus did they govern, as appears by the
speech of Samuel 1 Samuel 8.11 This will be the custom of the King that shall
reign over you; He will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, for his horsemen, etc. and your daughters for his confectionaries,
cooks and bakers, etc.
, who sought to deter the people from desiring a King, by describing (...),
the custom and fashion of their King treading in the steps of his neighbor
princes, who were all Ethnicks. And so much does the Original word, by which
their manner of governing is here described, import, which (...), they play the
Lords, they domineere over their people, as if they had all that sovereignty
over them that can be imagined. This potestatem (...), this vicious and
unreasonable manner of ruling, our Lord would have his disciples and all
Christians to take heed of allowing them in the mean time, potestatem (...), a
fatherly kind of power over their inferiors, to govern as parents do their
children, with an eye on their good, and consequently, to correct and punish
them when they prove bad children and unruly.

The Shepherds of the Church may govern their flocks, but not with force and
cruelty, as they did in Ezekiels time, Ezekiel. 34.4. they may take the oversight
of Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.2. but not as absolute Lords, (...), overruling
them (says the translation in the margin) for their own, either covetous, or
ambitious ends.

Lay these two things then together. 1. Christ compares the Gentiles and
Christians in their kind of governing: and 2. His intent is to bar all
Christian Princes and Prelates from exercising a tyrannical rule over their
inferiors, and to win them to that Moderationem Apostolicae potestatis, and
illius rectum usum ad divinae voluntatis praescriptum ea verba docent. Pilson.
de eccl. Guber. c. 6. p. 91.
moderation in their government, that becomes his people; and it will appear,
that this place makes nothing at all against the Hierarchy of the Church or
that vindicative power which the mildest and most indulgent parents that are, do
use upon their children for their good; and Church, as well as civil
magistrates, may exercise upon disobedient persons for the preservation of
public peace and unity.

Punishments imposed on non-conformers, no persecutions.
Let no man therefore say, when Bishops correct opposers of their orders and
authority, that the offenders thus punished are martyrs, and the poor
persecuted sheep of Christ; and the governors that punish them are wolves and
persecutors, as some il-affected ones stick not to mutter.

S. Cyprian writing to Rogatian a Bishop, who had been abused by a saucy
deacon, Cypr ep. ad Bogat. 65. Magis ^ptamus and cup^nes contumel^s and in^u^s
singulorum clementi pattentia vincere, quam sace^d^tali licentia vind^e.
1. commends him because he had sought to reform him by Christian clemency,
rather than Episcopal authority: then he advises him, if the Deacon continued
in his misdemeanour, to curb and punish him by deposition or excommunication,
P^o Episcopatus vigore, and cathedrae authoritate.
according to his power and place. For if S. Paul said to Timothy, Let no man
despise thy youth; how much more might thy fellow Bishops (says S. Cyprian)
say to thee, Let no man despise thy age: Was this uncivil Deacon a Martyr, or
S. Cyprian a persecutor.

When Vigilantius a Priest had much misbehaved himself in point of doctrine
and manners, Hier. ep. ad Vigil.
S. Hierom wondereth that the Bishop, in whose diocese he lived, did not Virga
Apostolica and ferrea confringere vas inutile, break that unprofitable piece
with the iron rod of his Apostolic authority, Et tradere in interitum carnis,
ut spiritus salvus fiat, and deliver him to the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit might be saved,.i. excommunicate him. 1 Cor. 5.5.
And a little after, turning his speech to Vigilantius, he cries out (somewhat
too passionately like himself) O praecidendam linguam medicis, O tongue worthy
to be cut out by spiritual physicians; ut qui loqui nescit, discat aliquando
reticere; that he who knows not how to speak aright, might learn at last to
hold his peace. Was the delinquent here a martyr, and his pursuer S. Hierom a
persecutor?

Goulartius and the rest of the Geneva Consistory deprived Rotarius one of
their ministers, and thrust him out of their City, and (which is more) they
hunted him by their letters out of a town not far from thence, which had
entertained him for their Pastor. And why did the Consistory so severely
prosecute this man? for giving the Cup in his own Church with his own hands,
and not permitting a lay man to deliver it. This fact of his was the breach of
a Church- custom only, but of no canon, and yet thus sharply did they punish
it. Were Goulartius and the Presbitery persecutors, and that good man a martyr?

Or were the Vid. Morin. de cons^eccl.
decrees made by sundry ancient councills for the suspension, deposition, and
excommunication of unruly ministers, persecutions? I think our scrupulous
minds will not say so, for Non omnis qui parcit amicus est, nec omnis qui
verberat inimicus; Every one that spares is not a friend, nor every one that
punishes an enemy. But if any can so cast off modesty, as to brand these
wholesome judiciary Acts and Canons with the disgraceful name of persecutions,
our Reverend Fathers may the more contentedly put up the like aspersions,
considering that this affliction that befalls them, has been accomplished in
their elder brethren.

suspended, are good men, and therefore, we may well say, they are persecuted.

Some of them, no doubt, are so; and if they be, Inconformity is accidentally a
great sin.
they shall reap the profit of it another day; it is possible sometimes for
good men to tread awry, being carried away with the stream of popularity, and
misled by the hope of gain or glory.

2. Whether they be all good or no, I leave it to be decided by the searcher of
all hearts; only thus much in the general I am sure of, that Multi sunt in
sanctorum catalogo, qui non sunt in consortio, many are now accounted Saints,
which will not go for Saints at that day when all secrets shall be manifested.

3. It is not their goodness that is punished, but their badnesse; S. Peter
intimates, that a Christian may be detected and punished for an evil doer, 1
Pet. 4.15, 16. If good men will have their hands in bad causes, their goodness
must not make them law-proofe, and bear them off from the stroke of justice.
Causa, non poena, (I may add nec persona) facit martyrem, it is the cause, not
the punishment (no nor the person neither) that makes the martyr. Inexpiable
and great is the sin of schism and discord in the Church (says S. Cypr. de
unit. Eccl. Inexprabilis and gravis culpa discordiae, nec passione purgatur.
Cyprian) and cannot be purged even with martyrdom. And a Ardeant licet
slammis and ignibus, traditi vel objecti bestus animas suas ponant; non^t illa
fidei co^ona, sed poena perfidiae; nec religiosae virtutis exitus gloriosus,
sed d^ ^onis ^nte^tus. Occi^ ^alis potest, cotona^i non potest.
little after, speaking of such as lived contentiously in the Church, he says,
Ardeant licet slammis, etc. Though they breath out their souls at a stake, or
under the teeth of wild beasts, their goodness is not crowned, but their
persidiousnesse punished. Occidi talis potest, coronari non potest. Such a man
may be killed, but crowned he cannot be. Martyrs are they (says S. Aug. ep.
50.
Austin) which suffer, not for disorder, and the ungodly breach of Christian
unity, but for righteousness sake: for Hagar was persecuted by Sarah, and yet
she that did impose was holy, and she was the unrighteous person that did bear
the burden: If things be rightly scanned (says he) Hagar did persecute Sarah
more by proud resistance, than Sarah her by inflicting deserved vengeance.

inconformity (if it be a fault) is but a small one, and yet more grievously
censured, than swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, perjury, and many other
sins which far exceed this; want of proportion therefore between the fault
and the penalty, makes those punishments to be no better than persecutions.

nature, or in their manner of committing, and those ill consequents that
spring from them: and a sin that is little and least in the first, may be
great and greatest in those last respects; and so is this sin of which we are
speaking. If we look upon it in its own nature, it is nothing so foul a
sin as is murder, adultery, perjury, etc. for this is a sin by accident,
because against the command of authority; those other essentially and formally,
because damned by the light of nature. But if we behold it in the manner of
committing, it is a greater; this being seldom committed, never punished,
without wilfulness and obstinacy, they many times breaking out through mere
weakness and infirmity. And so it is in respect of its dangerousnesse in the
issue. For,

1. It is a bold faced sin, that Ionah-like stands always upon its
justification, and pleads not guilty, and casts a blemish upon that authority
that dares censure it. These other are sins (as more foul, so) more modest,
less confident; like the Heretic in Titus 3. (...), self-convicted and
self-condemned, and meet with fewer Patrons.

2. Those sins fight against Church- government by consequent only, this
directly; and if it be not in time restrained, brings confusion and Anarchy
into the Church. Like Peter's dissimulation, Gal. 2. it sowreth a multitude in a
moment: like a gangren, if it seize, and be permitted to settle but on one
limb, it speedily runs over, and ruins all the body; men too sinfully
affecting (since the fall) to be Domini suorum actuum, Lords over their own
actions in all things, and to shake off the yoke of government.

3. Those sins go many times alone, this never; but like a fury brings a
troop of mischiefs after it. It makes divisions and breaches in otherwise
peaceable congregations; begets discords, contempts in people of their learned,
able, and wel-deserving Pastors. It breeds emulations also between brethren of
the same Tribe, ministers of the same Christ; even to the sharpning of tongues
and pens against each other, till like the Cadmean brethren, mutuis vulneribus
confossi cadunt (as Erasmus speaks) they fall to the ground by their own
unbrotherly wounds.

This makes some stand neuters and look on, others turn Apostates and deride;
this makes our friends lament us, and our adversaries triumph over us, while
they hope to see our Church dissolved, without either plots or pens of theirs,
by our own unnatural broils and contentions. And therefore it is many ways a
greater sin than they, and worthy of condign punishment.

To conclude this point, take an estimate of this sin from God himself: Did
not he reveal his wrath from heaven even against Miriam, and smite her with
leprosy, and excommunication for a time, for opposing but with one weak word,
or two, the authority of her brother Moses, Number. 12? was not Korah and his
seditious company consumed with fire from heaven, and made Horrenda victima nil
miserantis orci, a lamentable sacrifice to the gaping earth in a moment? and
why, but for denying obedience to Moses and Aaron, and making a rent in the
congregation? Quis dubitat sceleratius esse commissum, quod gravius est
punitum? Who doubts (says S. Hierome) that the sin which was so fearfully
punished, was as highly detested?

Leave off therefore these scandalous criminations, which have in them neither
truth nor modesty, Cypr. de unit. ^l. Q^d fa^ (...) p^o^ C^no ^p^ (...) and
^um^ that seq^ and (...)? g^atul (...) lum e^, (...) l^ ^r. (...) C^st^ (...)
and ^nata ^g ^ne p^ar.
and seek not to make justice odious with such nicknames of tyranny and
persecution. As great a woe is due to such as call good evil, as to them that
call evil good.

Quid facit in pectore, etc. What does the wildness of wolves, and the
madness of dogs (says S. Cyprian) in Christian breasts? the poison of
serpents, and the cruelty of beasts, why should they lodge there? Would ye be
counted Saints? what have Saints to do with such angry and uncharitable
passions? tant aene animis coelestibus irae? would ye be esteemed men of the
spirit? what fellowship has the meek Spirit of God with the malicious spirit
of the devil? Spiritus Dei nec mendax, nec mordax, the Spirit of God, neither
belies nor bites, as they do who call deserved punishments persecutions: Hier.
ep. ad Vigil.
for Nonest crudelitas pro Deo pietas, Zeal for God and the Churches peace, is
no cruelty, says S. Hierome.

And so I come to my last Consectary.

Ceremonies and orders imposed by Church governors on inferior ministers and
people, 5. Consectary
must be obeyed: For power in them to enjoyne, by the law of Relatives inferres
in us a necessity to obey.

There are 3. sorts of things and actions (says Aug. l. 3. de lib. Arb. c. 18,
19
S. Austin.)

1. Some intrinsecally and essentially good, which cannot be evil at any
time; such are virtues and virtuous acts; which, though they may be accompanied
with evil ends, and so non redundare in personam, not redound to the good of
the doer, can never be bad.

2. Some internally and essentially evil; which are not therefore evil,
because prohibited, as the eating of the forbidden tree, and Saul's sparing of
the Amalekites were; but prohibited because evil, as perjury, murder,
adultery, and other sins against the light of nature.

3. Other things there are of a middle nature, neither good nor evil in
themselves, but easily changeable into good or evil by concomitant
circumstances. Of this sort are Rites and ceremonies, ordained by the Church to
be used in or about Gods service. In themselves, they are like fastings,
watchings, and such other bodily castigations, which (considered in the naked
act) are affirmed to be unprofitable, and distinguished from true godliness,
1 Timothy 4.8. neither pleasing nor displeasing to God: yet, sub mandato, as they
are by lawful authority enjoined, they become necessary, and attingunt
conscientiam, lay an obligation of obedience on the conscience. For we read,
that Idolothytes, things strangled, and blood, though they were in themselves
indifferent meats, and might be eaten or not eaten without offense of
conscience; yet when they had the stamp of a negative command upon them, and
were for certain reasons prohibited by the Apostles, they were called
necessary things, Acts 15.28. It seems good, etc. to lay upon you no greater
burden than these necessary things; Necessary, for the avoiding of scandal;
necessary through the command of the Apostles, restraining their use for the
time, though in themselves indifferent. And S. Paul exhorting to obedience of
authority, says, Ye must be subject, not because of wrath only, but for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. giving us to understand, that even these smaller
things, when they are once commanded, do reach the conscience, and cannot be
omitted without some violation of it. Necessity of obedience arises sometimes
ex natura rei, from the nature of the thing commanded, as in all moral
precepts; sometimes ex vi mandati, from the power by which they are enjoined,
as in all positive laws and commands, whether civil or ceremonial. And so it
does here, to wit, from a double power.

1. The power of the Governor commanding these things to be done. 2. The power
of God authorizing him to command, and obliging inferiors to obey.
Obedience then to these smaller things of the law, these appendices of Gods
service, ( Surplesse, Hood, standing up at the Creed, kneeling at the
Communion, the Cross in baptism, and bowing at the name of Jesus) is no
arbitrary and indifferent thing. But it is the part of ever private man, Ca^.
30.
both minister and other, reverently to retain the true use of these things
prescribed by public authority; considering, that things of themselves (...)
different, do in some sort alter their natures, when they are either commanded
or forbidden by a lawful magistrate; and may not be omitted at every man's
pleasure, contrary to the law, when they be commanded; nor used when they are
prohibited. They are the last words of our 30. Canon, and a confirmation of my
point.

Let every soul (says S. Paul) be subject to the higher powers; the words are
not permissive, Rom 13.
let every one that will, subject himself to authority, but imperative, let
every one as he ought, submit himself. And, let every soul; here is no
liberty for libertinisme in any: none must think himself too great, or too
good to yield obedience to his superiors, all without exception, or exemption,
must do their commands. And therefore I wonder how those that seem to make a
conscience of other sins, can make no conscience of this, but rather make it
a point of conscience to lie under this guilt, and be rebellious against their
lawful Pastors in these things. Obey them (says the same Apostle, Heb 13.17.)
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: the persons here pointed
at, are Bishops and Prelates of the Church, as the following words do show,
(for to them alone does the care of men's souls directly and properly belong)
and the duty which all inferiors owe to them, is obedience, which therefore S.
Paul does not barely commend, but peremptorily charge upon them. But a place
that may be instead of all others to enforce obedience to the laws of the
Church, and a full and ample obedience also to all good laws is, that Text in
S. Matthew, where our Savior says: The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
seat: Mat. 23 2.
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, etc.
These words therefore must a little be examined, and pressed upon our
refractory brethren. First then, who are the persons to whom subjection is here
enjoined? the Scribes and Phrisees; but who were they?

What is meant by Scribes and Pharisees.
Scribe in Scripture is a name of office or calling, and signifies 3. sorts of
men. 1. A Scrivener, one that lives by writing, so Psalm. 45. 1. My tongue is
the tongue of a ready writer. 2. A Secretary of State, in this sense Shebna is
called a Scribe, Esaias 36.3. 3. An officer in the Church, an expounder and
teacher of the Scriptures; in this sense Ezra the Priest is said to be a ready
Scribe in the Law of Moses, Ezra 7.6..i. a skillful interpreter: so it is also
taken Mat. 13.52. Every Scribe which is instructed to the kingdom of heaven,
etc. And in this last sense it is to be taken here.

Pharisee, is a name of Sect or Order, and the Pharisees were a fraternity
among the Jews, that lived by peculiar rules, and in a stricter manner than did
others. As we may see Acts 26.5. where S. Paul says, After the straitest sect
of our religion, I lived a Pharisee. Of these Pharisees some were Clergymen,
Scribes, and expounders of the law, as it appears, John 3.10, 11. where
Nicodemus is called a Pharisee, and a master or teacher in Israel, and Acts
5.34. where Gamaliel is called a Pharisee, and a Doctor of the law,.i. an
expounder of the Scripture. So that these two differed, as the Secular and
Regular Priests, they lived after a diver, manner yet both of them were
Teachers, and in spiritual things Rulers and Masters of the people.

We see who the persons are to be obeyed. But why must they be obeyed? because,
says Christ, They sit in Moses seat. 1 We read of a twofold seat, peculiar
to persons of quality and eminency of place.

1. A seat of civil government, What is meant by Moses chair.
belonging to Kings and Judges, as may be seen Psalm. 122.5. There are set
Thrones of judgment.

2. A seat of doctrine and spiritual Jurisdiction, proper to the Priests and
heads of the Church; for such were wont to sit when they taught the people, and
gave judgment, as our Savior intimates, Mat. 26.55. I sat daily among you,
teaching in the Temple.

The first of these seats was usually called the Throne of David, because he
was the first established King, to whom God had appointed a succession of
children to be Kings after him: but this latter seat, the Chair of Moses,
because he was the first that received the law from God, and published it to
the people.

2. To sit in these seats is, to succeed these persons in authority; to sit in
David's Throne, is to succeed him in his kingdom, and therefore Solomon is said
to sit in the throne of David his father, because he did succeed him in his
royal government: and to sit in the chair of Moses, is to have the place and
office of instructing and governing the people in things concerning God. So
that our Saviors reason to urge the people to obedience is, the Scribes and
Pharisees are the authorized teachers and masters of Israel; therefore you must
be ruled by them, and submit unto them.

Authority how far to be obeyed.
But thirdly, how far were the people to obey them? Whatsoever they bid you
observe (says Christ) that observe and do.

These words though in their form they be universal, yet in their sense they
are particular, and must be restrained by their matter. The Papists take them
without any limitation, in a most ample sense, to gain credit to the Popes
infallibility. Others in opposition to them girt them up too short, and say,
that our Saviors meaning was, that the people should obey them in all things
which they taught out of the law of Moses. But if this were all the meaning,
then they had been bound to hearken to these Doctors sitting in Moses chair,
no further than to every Justice sitting on the bench, than to every Tailor
sitting on his shopboard, yea, and then the flock were no more bound to obey
their Pastor, than the Pastor were to obey his flock; for if they admonish them
to do any thing which is commanded in Moses law, they were bound to obey it;
not because they said it, but because Moses did say it before. And if we thus
construe the words, then what shall become of this illation of our Savior,
because they sit in Moses seat, therefore whatsoever they bid you do, do it?
But what then is the meaning of these words? viz. That they should obey them in
all things belonging to the place and authority of Moses his successors; In
omnibus ad Cathedram pertinentibus, in all things which the chair ought to
prescribe them: as when servants and children are commanded to obey their
masters and parents in all things, Col. 3.20, 22. It is meant, In omnibus quae
pertinent ad jus dominativae potestatis, says Aug. 22. q. 104. art. 5. ad 1.
Aquinas, in all things which appertain to masters and parents, right and
authority to command. Now they had authority to command:

1. Whatsoever was within the verge of their own calling.

2. Whatsoever was not repugnant to superior laws of God, or the State in
which they lived, to which being but subordinate and delegated rulers,
themselves were subject as well as their people.

Put all these now together, and the meaning of our Lord will appear to be,
That in all things belonging to their office and authority, the people were to
obey the Scribes and Pharisees, who were their spiritual Pastors and
Governors, because the office of instructing and prescribing was committed to
them.

And from this charge resulteth most evidently this fair conclusion, that it
is the duty of people to submit themselves to the directions and prescriptions
of their Bishops and spiritual rulers, who succeed a greater than Moses,
Christ and his Apostles, in the oversight and government of the Church, in all
such things as they persuade or prescribe not contrary to the word of God, and
the established government wherein they live. And consequently, it belongs to
us that are inferiors (whether ministers or people) to submit to those orders
and Ceremonies in the Church, which are in the power and hands of our Prelates
to prescribe.

bounds, and command us things not lawful.

Our Ceremonies are rightly qualified.
I answer, 1. If we be sure that at any time they do so, we are not to obey
them; for whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye, says S. Peter,
Acts 4.19.

2. In determining Rites and Ceremonies (which are the subject of our
discourse) there is no just cause to fear that.

1. Because the constitution and specification of things of this nature, (as
has been proved,) appertains to Ecclesiastical power; and by the Kings
Prerogative Royal, and supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical) was
granted and confirmed unto the Bishops of our Church under the great seal of
England, as we may see in his last Majesty's Declaration set down before and
after the book of Canons.

2 Because the Rites in use among us, have all those conditions in them, with
which lawful and comely ceremonies ought (as I have said) to be qualified.
They are but few, such as have been least abused, such as may be altered when
authority sees cause, and therefore not esteemed of equal rank to the law of
God: such also as are neither dark nor dumb ceremonies, but carry their
signification in their foreheads, and therefore not easily liable to any great
abuse: they are such too, as are imposed on us, without contempt or prejudice
to other Churches, that use them not; as our Church has been pleased, for the
preventing of idle cavils, and the satisfaction of scrupulous minds, with much
wisdom and tenderness, Whether they must be obeyed with a doubting of
conscience.
declare her self in the Preface before our book of Common Prayer.

But what if we doubt (may some say) whether these Rites be lawful and good,
or no, must we then obey?

1. After so long a time, and such good means of information, it is not fit
that any should doubt, nor likely that many do doubt without much wilfulness.
Confer. at Hamp. Court. page 66.
It is to be feared that some of them which pretend weakness and doubting, are
strong enough, if not headstrong, and such as think themselves able to teach
the King, and all the Bishops of the Land: they are not my words, but the
speech of a King, even our late Sovereign Lord of happy memory.

2. Obedience must be yielded to things commanded (and consequently to these)
notwithstanding doubting. If a doubt be only speculative, of the lawfulness of
such things as lie in a man's own liberty to do or forbear, then it is the
safest course not to do them; for as (according to the Italian proverb) that
meat which a man does not eat, will not hurt him; so such things as he
forbeares, will not offend his conscience: nay, in such a case, to do any
thing doubtingly is a sin, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 14.23. He that
doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever
is not of faith, is sin. But if the doubt be practical and the matter of it
a thing commanded by superiors (as these things are, of which we are now
speaking) that doubting does neither infer nor excuse our disobedience. Such a
man as is troubled with this kind of doubting, if he have time and means,
should expel the doubt, that he may yield obedience where he owes it, with
cheerfulness. But if he will not, or cannot expel it, the things enjoined he
must do, the doubt remaining. For, that lawful authority is to be obeyed, is
certain, that this or that thing commanded by that authority is unlawful, is
doubtful: Now when a doubt stands in competition for mastership with a clear
case, the doubt in all reason must yield, and that which is clear and certain
must be done; for e malis minimum, of two hard choyces the best and safest is
to be made. Aug. ep. 86. ad Casul^a. Episcopo tuo in hisce noli resistere, and
quod facit ips^, sine ullo scrupulo sectare.
And therefore what S. Austin says to Casulanus, I say to every one, Episcopo
tuo in hisce, etc. withstand not thy Diocesan in these things, but what he
does, without scruple imitate; what he commands, obey.

But what do I talk of obeying in this licentious age; it being such, that it
is almost accounted a fault unpardonable to preach for subjection to the
Churches Hierarchy; and he esteemed the purest man that is the greatest
stickler against it. But the spirit of contention will not always reign; it
is pity it should: and therefore in hope to prevail (at least with some) I
say again, in the words of S. Hierome, Esto subjectus Pontifici tuo, and quasi
animae parentem suscipe. Be subject to thy Bishop, and reverence him as the
father of thy soul.

Three sorts I should here persuade to obedience; Our selves of the Clergy, our
Church Officers, and our people. But because the submission of the two last,
for the most part stands and falls in ours, I should hope I might the more
easily win them, if I could but prevail with you (my brethren) for a
complete and cheerful conformity.

Omne malum ab Aquilone, Disobedience to Church Governors begins at the Clergy.
if there be disaffection in our people, it begins too often at the Sanctuary,
for like priest, like people, says the Prophet. The forming of childrens
minds is much in the power of the nurse or mother, who gives them suck, and
brings them up; and so are our peoples manners in these things suitable to our
molds.

If we shall take liberty to break unsavory jests upon the reverend Fathers of
our Church, and their officers, and to make our selves and others merry with
talking of the Idolatry, the adultery, the murder and the felony of the Cross,
and other ceremonies, as sometimes Parker, (whether more foolishly or
profanely) did: if we make our Pulpits Pasquills, in them presuming with a sad
face of seeming piety to traduce our Superiors, and cast our humorous and
discontented aspersions in their faces; if we leave out the cross when we
Christen (to pleasure a friend, or gain a bribe) and the surplesse when we come
to minister before the Lord, and omit such other ceremonies as require our
personable and exemplary obedience; will not our people that hang upon our
hands and lips, and see and hear what we do, do likewise? If our breasts
shall daily run down with such infecting stuff, what can be expected, but
that our people which lie sucking at them, should prove a crazie generation?

And can it be thought, that if we (who are the watchmen of our people, and if
we spy a lion coming upon them, a sin ready to ensnare them, should tell
them so) do either dissemble, or, which is worse, encourage the sin of perjury
in our Churchwardens for our own bad ends, their bills should give in true
evidence, and make a faithful report of Parish-disorders? It cannot be, and
therefore some, whom it too much concerns, may well complain, and cry out
with the Prophet, O my people, they that lead thee, cause thee to err, Esaias
3.12.

Not at the people except first perverted.
But me thinks I hear Aaron charging the people with his sin, the people, thou
know, are set on mischief, Exodus 32.22.

And Jeremy complaining, that the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the people
love to have it so, Ier. 5.31. It should seem, the root of inconformity lies
in them.

True it is, some ministers deny, or curtall their conformity, and the people
love to have it so. But what people? a people Juven Sat. 14. -- Velocius and
citius nos Corrumpunt vitiorum examp^ domestica magnis Cum subeant animos
authoribus.
marred in their making, catechized by their parents, or Pastors with false
principles, and taught to believe, that the Bishops are limbs of Antichrist,
the Surplesse a rag of Popery, Conformity a mark of the Beast; that every good
man must abhor them, and pray to the King of the Church to sweep them out of
his sanctuary: such people love to have it so. And therefore it concerns us
ministers, who should be examples to our flocks in all good things, as S. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 To look to our own conformity. 2 To teach our people
thoroughly the point of obedience.

1. We must look to our own conformity, Considerations persuading to
conformity.
and begin the reformation of disorder at our selves; and to this, three things
(me thinks) should move us:

1. Our subscription to the Articles of our Church, and the book of common
prayer, by which we have (ex animo) confessed two things: 1. that it is in the
power of the Church, (and consequently of ours) to decree Rites and ceremonies:
2. that our service book contains nothing in it repugnant to the word of God,
nothing that may not be lawfully used, and by every one submitted to: and that
which follows upon this, is, that our Ceremonies and orders, justified and
imposed in the book of common prayer, are agreeable to Gods word, and to be
used by us. If we now after our often subscription to these things, shall
refuse or omit the use of them in our practices, will not there be a gross
inconsistency between our judgments and behaviors? do we not condemn our
selves in that which we allow? a course which God will never bless, as we may
see Romans 14.22. Blessed is he that condemns not himself in that which he
allows.

2. That voluntary and special obligation which we have brought upon our
selves in our ordinations, should likewise work with us. For in the book of
ordination (which we have also by our subscription approved) to the Priests
and Deacons ready to be ordered, is put this Question; Will you reverently obey
your Ordinary, and other chief ministers to whom the government and charge of
you shall be committed, following with a glad mind and will their godly
admonitions and judgments, etc? The answer is affirmative and promissory; We
will, the Lord being our helper: and this promise we do not only make, but
ratify in the oath of Canonical obedience, which on sundry occasions we take.
So that every one of our tribe is held with a double bond. 1 A common bond of
subjection to superiors, as we are subordinate and inferior persons: 2 A
particular bond of oath and promise, as we are ministers. Now if to break that
general bond of obedience which lies on all inferiors, be a violation of
authority, a sin to which the guilt of damnation is annexed, Romans 13.2. to
break that awful tie of a vow and voluntary promise, must needs be a greater
sin, and accompanied with a heavier guilt. Solemn and deliberat promises are
not like Samsons green cords, easy to be snapt asunder; but strongly bind,
either to performance, or punishment.

Thirdly, if we fling off these considerations yet let respect to our peoples
welfare (over whose souls we are set to watch, and for whom we must give an
account) win us to obedience. How can the disgracing and impugning of good
orders, and the making of factions and divisions in the Church, stand with
their good? Was it well with the Jews, when Korah and their Levites affronted
their Prince and Priest, Moses and Aaron? Did not the flame of Gods fiery
indignation break out upon them for their disloyalty and schism, Numb. 16.
to the destruction of a great part of the congregation? Can it be well with
the body, when the principal members conspire against their Heads, and will
not be guided by them?

Schism has ever been the bane of Churches, and irregularity the beginner of
Schism, yea of Heresy too, and all kind of confusion, if S. Cyprian may be
believed, who attributes all the mischiefs that usually befall Churches to this
Fury. Hac sunt initia haereticorum, Cypr. cp. ad Rogat.
(says the Father) and orius atque conatus schismaticorum male cogitantium, ut
sibi placeant, ut praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. Self-pleasing pride,
and scornful despising of the heads of the Church, is the viper from which
both schisms and heresies draw their first breath. Let us therefore by our
submission to our Churches Rites commend that humble obedience to our people,
which they owe to their Fathers in Christ, their rulers in the Church.

Next, we must look to our people, People perverted hardly persuaded to
obedience.
and win them to a reverent respect, as of God and his laws, so of Gods
Vicegerents in the Church, and their ordinances. It is a hard task I confess,
to draw a perverted, and prejudging multitude to a love and liking of such
things as cross their Catechism. Some nobler spirits (perhaps) will be
content dediscere been quod didicerunt non been, (as Lyrinensis speaks) to
unlearne bad lessons which they have been taught: but weaker minds are (for
the most part) too obstinate retainers of the precepts and practices of their
first breeders; as the Javen ^at. 14. -- V^us and al^, Forsitan (...) spernant
juvenes quibus ^e benign^ -- -- ^t meliore luto sinxit praecordia Titan: Sed
reliqu^s fugienda patrum vestig^ducunt, Et monstrata diu veretis u^hit orbita
culpae.
Poet could see, who therefore Id ibid. -- Nil dictu faedum, vis^que haec ^mi^
^ng v -- l^a qu^ pu^ est. and -- Maxima deb^tur pu^ro ^everent^, etc.
counsels parents to be very careful of what they say or do in the presence
of their children. We use to say, that quartane agues, and hypocondriack
diseases, are ludibria medicorum, the reproaches of Physicians; because by
reason of the stubborn humors that beget them, and the firm footing which they
have taken in the body, they are seldom cured. What is said of them, may as
truly be said of this evil sickness of faction and undutifulnesse; for where
by the power of bad presidents, the poison of bad principles, and its own
congruity to our proud and lawless dispositions, it has gotten head, it will
not easily yield up its possession. Yet as Physicians give not over such
patients, but by contemperating Juleps first, and by gentle purgatives next,
lead out that stubborn stuff which foments these maladies: Yet must be
attempted.
so must the servant of the Lord (whose duty is with patience and gentleness
to instruct the refractary, and wait, if God at any time will give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.) First by persuading more moderate and honorable
conceits upon their people of governors and government, and then by convincing
them with substantial reasons, of the decency of our prescribed Rites, and the
necessity of using them being enjoined; endeavor to conjure out the evil
spirit of presumption, and to bring in the meek and good spirit of obedience.

This is the ready way to be ill thought of, (may some peradventure think or
say) and (which is worse) to be ill provided for too, and therefore Diana must
not down, disobedience must be wincked at.

It is most true indeed (witness experience) that if a man once show himself
in the cause and quarrel of the Church, and do but heartily wish for an unity
and uniformity of opinion and practice, that friends, maintenance, respect, all
forsake him. And this is the cause why some cannot see the truth, others
dissemble their opinions in this particular. How can ye believe (says Christ)
who seek for honor one of another? Ioh. 5. Implying, that popularity is a
blinder; it makes men unwilling to study such doctrines as are in esteem with
the people, lest they should see their falsehood, and be forced to forsake them;
and it perverts their understandings, and makes them judge with favor the
Diana's of the people, and with rancour the contrary. As it puts out the eyes,
so it ties the tongue, as we may see, Joh. 12.42, 43. Many of the chief rulers
believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue. For they loved the praise of men more
than the praise of God. As it made these rulers, so it makes a great many in
our days dissemble their judgment, and let their people go on in their heady
and disobedient practices. But God keep filthy avarice and vainglory from his
own Portion. If by doing our duties, and seeking our peoples good and the
Churches peace, we can get either name, or means, let us esteem it a precious
ointment and a blessing of God; but if we must lose them, except we will
dissemble our opinions, deny our obedience, and let our people run to ruin for
want of warning and instruction, let them go; the interest is too great, and
he that makes this match, will be a loser in the end; lucrum in crumena, this
gain in the purse, will be damnum in conscientia, loss in the conscience. We
are the servants of Jesus Christ by special commission, and must not therefore
be guided in our doings and sayings by popular humors; for Christ and the
world are contrary masters; and if we should yet please men, we cannot be the
servants of Christ Gal. 1.10.
. It is a kind of martyrdom to lose any thing in a good cause, dulce est and
decorum est pro patria mori, it is an honorable thing to die for ones
country, much more noble is it, for the good of the Church, mori mundo, to die
to the world, and the vanities of it. And therefore with the woman in the
Revelation, trampling Luna^ and sublunaria, the moon and all things beneath it
under our feet, and sacrificing credit and profit to truth and peace, let our
best endeavor be to restore our ill-affected brethren and people as obedient
children to the Church, that so we may serve the Lord (as the Prophet phraseth
it) with one shoulder, and live together under our present happy government
(which God of his mercy long continue) a peaceable and quiet life in all
godliness and honesty. Which God grant for his Sons sake. To whom with thee O
Father, and blessed Spirit, three glorious Persons, and one eternal God, be
rendered (as is most due) all honor, praise, and glory for Evermore.

FINIS.

