A CVRRY-COMBE FOR A COXE-COMBE.

OR PVRGATORIES KNELL.

Jn answer of a lewd Libell lately foricated by IABAL RACHIL against Sir EDW.
HOBIES COVNTER-SNARLE: Entitled Purgatories triumph over Hell.

Digested in form of a Dialogue by NICK-groome of the HOBIE-Stable REGINO
BVRGI.

CIC. Canes aluntur in Capitolio.

ESAIAS 19. v. 5. Et Fluuius exsiccabitur.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop near S. Austins gate at the sign of the Pied Bull. 1615.

2. TIM. 3. 6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts.

7. Which women are ever learning, and are never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth.

8. And as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do the se also resist the
truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

9. But they shall prevail no longer, for their madness shall be evident to
all men, as theirs also was.

ESAIAS 44. v. 27. Be dry, and I will dry up the Floods.


TO THE READER.
NOt gentle ungentle, nor ungentle gentle, but gentle gentle Reader, I desire
no better Patron for this my rusticke Dialogue, then thy favorable smile. Many
things passed in this conference which escaped my memory before I could come
to commit them to the custody of my pen. That which I retained, is here
published for thy solace, and the disgrace of all pamphletting Libellers, who
strut like brave Gallants till their bombasted stuffings be discovered, and
then have nothing to show but poor meagre carcases, which it would pity a
tender eye to behold. With what fidelity I have dealt in producing the
Adversaries assertions, I must refer my self to the indifferent survey of
his book, by which it will appear that I have not set him on the rack, to
compel him to utter that which was against his mind, but took every clause
as it did drop of it own accord from the voluntary evidence of his pen. The
method cannot be so exact as I could have wished. He that tracts a Fugitive,
must take the By-path as well as the Rode-way. Herein could I not be my own
Caruer, being ouer-swayed with the current of his Stream. For the conueiance
of the Dialogue, some few formal passages happily are transposed, but without
alteration either of words or sense, If he complain of too much tartness,
let him blame his own thundering, which turned my sweet Wine into sour
Vinegar. Rather then he should be troubled with the scratches, I have
thought good to bestow upon him this small cast of my Office, for which if he
cunne me small thanks, I shall yet comfort my self with the loyalty of my
serviceable intention. And thus I refer my bold enterprise to thy best
censure, and these homely lines to thy most favorable construction,

Nick. Groom.

CERTAIN ENCOMIASTIQVE Epigrams prefixed as a Prologue to the Authors Dialogue.
NIck-Groome, thy quill has flowne so passing well,
That none denies thy Curry-combe the Bell.
If Bellarmine do send his Mare to thee,
Her neck, if not her heart, will broken be.
The headstrong Jade that scorns the raynes and bit,
Will by thy Art be soon for Saddle fit.
Ere while we saw this Iabal, skittish, wild,
Wincing aloft; thy spur had made him mild.
Oh how he fumes and fomes in foul despite,
To see his pride so curbed by such a wight.
It Is fit the Fool who cannot rule his babble,
Should find some fetters in the Hoby-stable.
HOBY MORTON.

NIck, thou say ill that Miracles are done,
Thy lines do prove that they are scarce begun:
That Stable-groomes should Jesuits confront,
As yet was never heard in Hellespont:
Had not some higher Genius thy thoughts inspired
Thy Muse, thy cause, thy credit had been bemired.
Nor Hall nor Sichem do such wonders yield,
Their wonders vanish, thine has won the field.
Edmund Langston.

BY my consent that noble Sydneys verse,
When thou art dead shall cleave unto thy hearse.
If that the man such praise must have,
Then what must he that keeps the knave?
Idem ad Eundem.
IF Iabal meet thee, Nick, thou must to Hell,
There Is now no middle place for souls to dwell:
It Is not the Tygre on thy sleeue shall bail thee,
Thy comfort is, thy pen will never fail thee.
William Epseley.

SOme free their friends by purse from Purgatory pains,
Some by their Oraysons, some by Oblations:
Nick-Groome has fully cleared that coast without the graynes,
Which hallowed been, or other duplications
Of Aue Mary's, or that mumming foppery,
Which makes the wiser world deride all popery.
To sack those walls it cost him not a groat,
His pen has set Don Charons bark afloat.
Anthony Tonstall.

WHat is this Iabal, an outlandish man?
A Monk, a Punck, or Pembliconian?
Simon Fitz-Magus calls him Jason Raguel,
But he is more kin to Nabal or Pantagruel.
Nabal and Iabal differ but a letter,
Nabal a fool, this Iabal little better.
Iabal is Flood in English, Rachil Detraction,
That notifies his name, this displayes his faction.
Idem.

IS Iabal Doctor by degree in Schools?
If he commenced, 'twas in the ship of fools.
Though never graced with Lambskins seniority,
He bleats in corners, by the Popes authority.
Peregrine Hoby. Aetonensis.

THe middle Ghosts twixt Limbo and the Lake,
Which neither Sun nor Moon of long time saw,
Of this thy Knell do joyful notice take
They showt to see their Iaylor proved a Dawe.
Iabal their Iaylor being put to flight,
They all break loose from shadows of the night.
GILES DABITOT.

WHen Rome shall hear of Purgatories Knell,
Nick will be cursed with candle, book, and bell,
His Curry-combe will be adiudg'd to fire.
O happy Nick to be a Martyrs Sire!
They hardly shall, whether they bless or curse,
Make Nick much better, or his lines much worse.
He took a lucky time his book to vent,
It Is thought the Pope has all his curses spent.
Robert Flint, twice Mayor of Queenborough.

HOw many tongues speaks Iabal? five at least.
His lying tongue does far surpass the rest.
He lies in English, Latin, French and Dutch,
Whether he speak or write he lies; that is much.
IARCAS PARSONS.

HE that Triumphs before the field be won,
May be led captive ere the fight be done.
Saw thou how proudly Iabals Charret vaunted?
My fellow Nick has now his courage daunted.
Nick ties him to the rack (thus fortunes alter)
Nick clippes his mane, Nick leads him in a halter.
Tho. Cook.

MY trusty Nick, think not that I collogue,
I do protest I like thy Dialogue.
Thy Matter, Method, and thy pleasing strain,
Have let the Brauo blood in the Antique vain.
Thy Curry-combe has just as many notches,
As Iabals pybald Coxcombe Iagges and scotches.
Thou shall have passage to the March-beere barrel,
For foyling Iabal in thy Masters quarrel.
Sim. the Butler.

SOme say that Iabal has a Swinish look,
And others say he wrote a dogged book.
I rather think it was a Hog that wrought it,
And wot you why? it was Chance our dog that brought it.
Harry the Portar.

Idem de eodem.
When Chance came in, he seemed to bring a prize,
Nick looked, and found a fardle full of Lies.
And when he took it, Chance did wag his tail,
Praesaging that the Groom should Iabal quail.
When Dogs bring popish Libels tween their gills,
It Is time for Grooms to exercise their quills.
THE CONTENTS of the several Chapters of this Book.
CHAP. 1. Page 1. THe Libellers malice, fraud, and folly detected. CHAP. 2.
Page 71. The Machabees vnthronized. CHAP. 3. Page 103. Purgatories deduction
Logically and Theologically disprooued. CHAP. 4. Page 150. The Scriptures
authority and sufficiency warranted against Prayer for the dead, and other
Romish traditions. CHAP. 5. Page 206. Lipsian Miracles morterized. CHAP. 6.
Page 246. Great Gregory's proud Delegate dismounted, and popish pretended
devotion uncased.
Dialogue
Between the Mayor. of Queenboroughe. Minister. of Queenboroughe. NICK Groom
of Queenboroughe. Iabal Rachil Libeller.


A CVRRY-COMBE for a Cox-combe.
CHAP. I. The Libellers malice, pride, fraud, and folly detected.
Ma. WHat, honest Nick! Welcome into Sheppy. How fares the noble Knight, and
all the true Trojans at home?


Nick. I thank God Sir, all well. My Master remembers his love to your
Worship, to you Master Vicar, and to all his friends in these parts.


Min. We are much bound to him for his kind remembrance; but I wonder what
wind drives you hither? we may strew green rushes for you; I think you were
never here since Master Mayor took his oath.


Nick. Sir, you are in the right, but such troublesome guests come soon
enough, like foul weather, before they be sent for.


Ma. Nay say not so Nick, the worst dog in your masters house cannot come
unwelcome to Queenborough.


Nick. That Is more of your kindness then our merit; but I pray you what is the
reason the bowling green is so empty upon so fair a day?


Min. Why man, there is a great Fair at Sittingburne, thither they are all
gone, tag, rag, and long-taile.


Nick. Then I fear I am come at an ill time.


Ma. Why so?


Nick. My master has sent me for the pyde nagge, he would have him run in
James park, lest he spoil himself this dry season: besides, I have
appointed the Smith to be here in the afternoon. Now if the Castle-keeper
be gone to buy Hobby-horses too, I am in a fair case.


Min. To put you out of doubt, upon my knowledge he is rid out, more then an
hour and a half since.


Nick. Then it is likely to be dark night before he find the way home.


Ma. Assure your self of that; it is a forfeit for a Sheppy-man to come from a
Fair till Sun set.


Nick. See the ill luck; and the worst is, I know not how to spend the time
all this liue-long day.


Ma As if I have not a good dish of Oysters, and a cold pie at home to hold you
tacke.


Nick. Many thanks good Master Mayor: but in very deed I brake my fast so well
with our old Gardener at Vpberry before I came out, that I shall have little
mawe to any meat till night.


Min. Then what will you do?


Nick. On my little honesty I know not, unless some good body would lend
me a Play-booke to make my worship laugh.


Ma. Faith Nick I do not remember any such in my custody, but our Searcher
lent me a merry book which came to his hands the last week.


Min. Sir, you mean that squibbing pamphlet against Sir Edward Hoby, which I
borrowed of you yesterday morning.


Ma. The very same: I would you would take the pains to fetch it.


Min. That labor shall be saved, we never parted companies since we met.


Nick. Now if you be kind gentlemen, let us sit down yonder, upon Secretum
and silentium magis disputationibus conuenit, ne sermo interp^ll^tur a tanta
vltro citroque cunt^um hominum and frequent^^ and sirepitu.
Pennylesse Bench, and survey it.


Ma. Agreed; for I think we shall have no body in have come to trouble us.


Nick. What may the title of the book be? and who is the Author?


Min. He may be Nicholas nemo, for ought I know, he discouers himself only by
the mark of Conscia splend^nt^in formidat noctua solemn.
I. R.


Nick. I dare lay a good wager it is that Ishmael Rabshacheh, whom my Master so
hampred in his Cou^ter-snarle: my mind gives me it is the same Gurgullio,
whose late arrival makes him so much merriment.


Min. Not unlike: he has won the spurs for an arch-rayler. The most
rauing, and brauing Paf-quil that ever I read. Had he gotten any prize by his
last work, you should have now seen him out of his maskers suit: he stands
close behind his picture: if it pass current, he will then peep out,
otherwise he will hide his head in a Bench-hole.


Ma. But is this the fashion of professed Illi saciem velant qui se pudenda
dicere cognoscunt, fatentur se non dicenda dicere. Laur. Val. de volupt. lib. 3.
Divines, to broach Positions which they dare not justify with the
subscription of their names, and being namelesse themselves, to perbreake
persons of note.


Nick. Do you wonder at that? As if old purse-takers will present themselves
in their own likeness without vizards, and scarfes.


Ma. Indeed that were the next way to the Gallows; but surely this kind of
cunning joined with so great scurrility (which in my little view I discovered)
would make me shrewdly suspect their Non sic Phidias qui clypeo Mineruae
imaginem suam insculpsit.
sincerity, who are so intemperate in their own affections, and regardlesse
of better men's credits.


Min. This is the Catholic charity, and soule-gaining patience practiced now
adays; but he is not without his shifts. That he concealeth his name, it is
his Page 26.
humility, as regardlesse of worldly respects. That he is so tarte, it
proceeds from his zeal of the cause, not any hatred of the person.


Ma. In my opinion he needs not fear any great applause* for the extraordinary
skill of his work. It Is well if he escape in this learned age without reproof^
But to make zeal the Patron for his A trim Minion, one of a merry scoffing
wit, Frier-like. Steph. Winton: against G. Joy. page 2.
personal trumps, is intolerable hypocrisy.


Min. Could he show any such sparks of personal disdain, flying from Saint
Augustines pen, there were yet some little hope, that he has at least a
dram of that Primitive Spirit: but you shall hear how he contradicts
himself. Preface Dedicatorie.
Saint Augustine (says he) did endeavor to curb the motions of anger,
seeking to overcome his Adversaries, not by return of injurious reproaches, to
disgrace their persons, but by clear Demonstrations of the victorious truth.


Ma. Then is he as like Saint Augustine, as an Owl to an Iuie bush.


Nick. And could he single out no body but my Master to make the Anuill of his
malice? I doubt he has taken a wrong Sow by the ear; if his coat be not
swingd' well and thriftily, let me be held for a sowced Gurnet.


Min. Indeed it had been the wiser way, first to have beleguered the Castle
which he formerly Mast. T. H.
lost; and had not either vain hope of a second voluntary lapse, or
necessary fear of some foul discovery, diuerted his force, he would rather
have followed the chase of his old prey. Well, he is not unlike to have some
hornets about his ears: But for Sir Edward, he has passed his word to
answer him with contempt.


Ma. Silence verily is fittest for a Gentleman of his place, unless his
adversary were of more worth then this Start-vp.


Nick. I wonder in my heart what Ishmael meant to come upon him with a fresh
reply, having public notice of his resolution.


Ma. This was it that animated him; the Knights Counters. page 68.
Dormitabo secured his pen free passage without control.


Nick. Nay, then I would my girdle might break; seeing he will wake a sleeping
Lion, as long as I can hold a Currie-combe in my hand, I will ferret his sides
till he cry Page 199.
Flebo.


Min. I perceive thou art true bred; such a Whelp is fittest for this game: But
how came thou by thy Latin?


Nick. Faith, I waited on a young Gentleman, at Oxford, some three, or four
years, where I got a few broken ends together, enough to patch Rabsh. his
Cox-combe with a Sternigogulus.


Ma. On my soul thou art a merry grigge. I would not for the price of a good
Breake-fast have wanted thy company in the reuiew of this discourse.


Nick. Perhaps you will say so, by that time we have done; It shall go hard
if I find not Crotchets in this Beetle-head, to descant upon his plain song.
But I long to hear the books name.


Min. It is called Purgatories Do not Owls harbor in the Barn of his brain?
Triumph over Hell.


Nick. What! Ishmael the Conqueror? O victorious Rabshacheh. In what pomp art
thou led to the Capitol?


Min. Would you know how? his Chariot is drawn with four grisly Anticques:
Sophistry, Scurrilitie, Impudency, and Hypocrisy, and attended with
Falsehood, Philosophy, Atheism, and Idolatry.


Ma. If he triumph after the old Roman manner, he must (for the gaining of
applause) be very liberal in his gifts to the people.


Min. He passes for that of all that ever I knew. Here he flings a Rams
horn, there a Tobacco pipe; here he bestows a Mendacium ridiculum and
morione dignum
Black-more Girl of his own taking; there he casts our Ladies Gloves. Asses
are his ordinary favors; and as for Wine, Sugar, Honnie-sops, Green
Goslings, Cocatrices, Wood-cockes, Cocks eggs, and Sallets, you would admire
his lubberalitie.


Ma. Stop there good M. Vicar, Nickes teeth will water, if you talk of any
more such Iunckets.


Nick. No not if he gave Quails insteede of Wood-cockes; these dainterils
have layen so long upon his hands, that I fear me they are scarce sweet.


Ma. His last Treatise, (if I be well advised) wherein he began to fling at
the Knight, was Christened, The overthrow of the Protestants pulpit Babels.


Nick. The Overthrow? O Hercules! They must be Bables indeed if he be able to
move them. What a brave Lad is this, that dreams of nothing but Overthrows,
and Triumphs? No doubt he rescued many Shauelings in this skirmish. It Was
pity he was not in England when my Lord De la Ware undertook his voyage:
Then should his Lordship have had no need to have stood to the courtesy of the
two Universities. Rabshacheh alone would have soon brought those poor Savages,
under the belt of his Discipline. But had he not great luck (trow you) to
escape Cerberus his fanges, coming so near the confines of Hell?


Ma. He complayneth that he met with a Preface.
Cerberus, meaning the Knights Counter-snarle, Which entertained him with an
unfriendly welcome, and saluted his pinnace with a peale of unlovely terms.


Min. And well worthy, for he gave the onset without a challenge, neither
came he as a Merchant (according to his colorable pretense) with an Ibid.
Olive branch, toward the haven of his favor; but as a man of War with a
flagge of defiance, to batter the invincible Fort of the Knights reputation.


Ma. Nay by your leave, Sr. Edward cast out his Glove to any Letter to Mast. T.
H. page 6.
Romified Rennegado.


Nick. What was that to I. R.? what needed he have fought as the Popes Frustra
fatigando se nihil praeter odium quaerere, extremae est deme^tiae. Salust.
Voluntary, under those colors? Had he such interest in the Title, that he
could not forbear the Claim?


Min. As for that, it had been pardonable, if in the confidence of his cause,
he had endeavored to disable the Knights refutation of Purgatory, by the
Dint of argument: but to dart his Porcupine quills to blemish his credit, to
snuff at a Tobacco pipe, to jest with his sword, nay to make him a Page 49.
92. 127.
Peddler to vent other men's patches, as it argues rather an aching tooth, then a
religious mind, so is it able to drive Sobriety her self into an Preface.
arring passion.


Ma. Had the Cumaean Virgin, I mean Discretion, been his guide in that
journey; had the respect of the Knights honor, or desire of welfare of his
soul, been superintendent in his thoughts, he would have found another way
to the wood. It Is strange Rhetorique to alienate his affections, whose
Judgments we labor to inform.


Nick. Will you have the right? I have gotten the length of his foot.
Prurit-anus Wilson sees that Ishmael has a Windmill in his head, therefore
he buzzeth in his ears to set the clapper a iogge, that so he may get a good
Grist.


Ma. Had there not been some such pecuniary, or sinister aim, I verily think
Rabshacheh his pen had been at a full period. He would have accepted the
Knights reasonable satisfaction, and endured a little shower, especially raised
by the blustering winds of his own distemper: he would not have provoked the
grimme Porter the second time, whom he found so fell at the first. Somewhat it
is that makes him so bray in the ears of his supposed Cerberus, who was well
contented to have taken a nappe, and to let him pass without regard.


Min. Yet would he make the world believe he is so desirous of peace, that he
has now out of the abundance of his charity brought him a honey sop to stop
his mouth. Mel in ore, verba lactu, fell in cord, fraus in factis.



Ma. Trust me truly, he comes over him with kindness; this honey was not
fetched from the Bees hiue, but from the Aspes hole, more like to stir choler
then to procure rest.


Nick. This trick he learned in his passage of Charon the Ferriman; to look
toward peace with his face, and row toward discord with his pen. He sets out
the Preface.
Olive branch for a sign, but his vessels are full of gall and wormwood
within.


Min. If we may take his own word in his own work, it is the gentle sound of
a solid answer, Preface.
It is a purgatory sallet to purge his profane humors, made of five
medicinable herbs, wherein he has powered the oil of charitable exhortations,
mingled with the vinegar of sharp reprehension, yet so sparingly that it
cannot be displeasing to his taste.


Nick. If he had presented him with the juice of Rue, and skymd honey, it had
been more proper for the dimnesse of his sight. It seems he has not been
brought up under an Apothecary, but rather in a Cooks shop, he is so cunning
in dishing out this saucy Allegory.


Min. What will ye say then to this? I have done my best to This Allegory was
beaten in the mortar of malice, with the pestle of his pestilent wit. Ouerth.
p. 52.
quench the fire which flashed from the bramble bush of your distempered
thoughts, not with cold water of a dull denial, nor with the oil of sinners,
which might increase the flame, by soothing you in your error, but with wine
and sugar. I hope you will not tax this to be broken-winded.


Nick. I promise you an excellent close. Had my master such a Skull in his
kitchen, that would quench the fire with wine and sugar, the Vintners and
Grocers would soon share his lands: his Page 27.
patrimony would then be in a dangerous consumption indeed.


Min. Nick, you are somewhat too quick, his honest meaning is to be accepted:
yet if I have any judgment, he is more elegant in one leaf of this book*
then in all the other he wrote before.


Ma. Marry he may thank Sir Edward for that, whose phrases are so interlaced
throughout the whole discourse, that Rabshacheh his style may seem to have put
on her holli-day coat.


Nick. This one thing I heard a Gentleman of good quality observe, that he
has an extraordinary gift in the retorting of conceits: And withal protested
that he thought Ishmael was begotten on the side of a hill, he so returns word
for word like an Echo.


Min. The truth is, the poor man has a very weak stomach, he casts up
whole periods as they went down, without digestion or alteration.


Ma. If I were his Physician, I would prescribe him a cup of wine and sugar
next his heart, for what with his watching, weeping and Page 113.
whipping, he has a very bad stomach, and a worse brain.


Nick. He ill deserves it, who measures other men's liquor, by the shallow pan
of his own wheeling skonce. If he break his fast with nymble-brained Wilson
somewhat more liberally, he strait fumbles in the mouth, and tumbles out a
double Preface.
fool in every answer according to his simple folly.


Min. He was not then mistaken that did Hierogliphick him by the name of
Rabshacheh, which upon long search he has found to signify Page 34.
Multum Ebrius: as much to say, as Cozen German to Flood the Ignatian, who has
in his time made more razling Indentures, then the best Scriuener in Doway or
St. Omers.


Nick. Yet as flustred as he was, when his wench told him that he kissed like
a Clowter, he could text her with Labia Sacerdotis custodiunt sapientiam. And
when she pleaded that it went against her heart, he could protest by the faith
of a Catholic, not to come within a Just the length of a Tobacco Pipe.
foot of her conscience.


Min. It seems indeed he speaks not by guess like a Nouice, but as one
beaten to the trade by experimental proof, when he says, I know that the
custom of men that are Page 56.
tipled is, when they stagger themselves, to think that Churches, and the very
heavens ree^e about them. Mark how feelingly he speaks even of the thought.


Ma. Let him be what he will, this is no fit Court to draw his Indictment: he
will trauerse it with an Appeal; Let us rather hear how he bestirs himself
for Purgatory.


Min. Nay by your leave Sir, his Apology touching the exceptions in the
Counter-snarle must have the precedence. This has he cunningly in his first
chapter prefixed to a work; by good probability, long studied, against the
Knights first letter, some six years since directed to Mr. T.H.


Ma. Be it as it list: seeing we are come as Auditors to sit upon his
account, let us first see his charge, and then his discharge.


Min. Indeed equity her self cannot prescribe a more indifferent course then
this. There is great reason your fiat should stand in these praecincts.


Nick. No doubt he has placed a Lion in the forefront to make the better way,
for the Marshalling of his weaker and more heartlesse troops.


Ma. If he have the least dram of Rhetorical Chiualry, he will be sure to
put the best Mallem exercitum Ceruorum duce Leone, qua^ Leonum duce Ceruo.
leg foremost.


Min. You are both wide; in stead of a Lion, he has committed the conduct of
his forces to Reynald the fox, whom he presents on his paper stage with a
Target, to shield him from the imputation of uttering any thing to the Knights
reproach.


Ma. It must be a nimble Fox that can shift off so many palpable wrongs; he
had need have his joints thoroughly anointed with the oil of leazing.


Min. Doubt you not that; his points are well tagg'd with fraud. And first, as
if he (good man) meant nothing but pure devotion, he deplores the hard hap of
his unfortunate treatise, in falling upon so undeserved misconstruction,
wishing that the few lines which concerned the Knight, had been read by him
when he was fasting.


Nick. He were a wise man would loose a good Breakfast, for better repast then
I could ever discover in his Larder. It seems his book is somewhat a kin to
an Apothecaries drugge, which requires the attendance of an houre-glasse, and a
Spanish seruicio. He that dares not but allow a certain number of Psalms in
our Ladies Psalter to be read after supper, is angry if his own lines be
perused when a man has dined. If there be any such danger in taking his
receipts upon a full stomach, he should have done well to prescribe both diet
and time.


Ma. Undoubtedly he has a reference to the wine and sugar, mentioned in his
Preface, which liquor he says the Knight loves well. This holy water runs
from his pen in such abundance as if he had Bacchus his tun for a Standish:
he dreams of no body but Page 94.
Ennius, who in his merry vein wrote more wise sentences, then ever issued
from Rabshacheh his most sober thoughts; herein he displayeth his folly, or
rather his malice, in the highest degree. But the best is, he is like to
purchase as much thanks of the judicious Reader, by this his injurious
scandal, as Sophocles his ungracious Sons got by traducing their old Father
for a Quaes^^it number ill^d carmen desip^ntis? Cato Mayor.
Dotard, and so unfit for the management of his estate. The Knight is able to
show him more then a Tragedy to wipe away this blurre: where Malice is the
prompter, you must imagine Impudency will deliver a good evidence.


Min. Math. 11.19.
Ecce potator vini, Act. 2.13.
(...) are no new inventions, nor grounded truths: as if a Gentleman cannot
drink a cup of wine but he must instantly be as wise as staring Iudic. 9.36.
Gaal. The Knight is of an affable, and pleasant disposition, yet he comes not
always up to Hilary Term. Ulysses was no Plough-man, though once for a
private end he fained himself a Rusticke, and put his hands to the share. Cato
was vpbraided for being all night in a Stapleton. Prompt. Moral.
tavern, but how did he answer for himself? You should relate (quoth he)
how many days before I spent at my book, and never budg'd out of my study.


Ma. Ishmael cannot hear with that ear: He should have showed more
discretion in shaping his credulous Censures, according to the prescript of
this direction; had he Itemd the lamp oil, as well as he summed the Spanish
wine, his intruding curiosity would have passed with less blame. Nemo omnibus
horis sapit. He that is lumpish at his meals, will prove but a slug in his
more serious affairs.


Nick. I am sure the old Friar was of your mind in this; for handling those
words John 2.3.
Vinum non habent, He made his division thus. Here is first vinum, ibi optimus
liquor. Secondly, non habent, ibi pessimus clamor.


Ma. Gra-mercy Nick, I perceive thou have not left all thy Latin shreads at
home. But I would gladly know what the Knight mistook in the perusal of his
discourse that he should be thus charged with an inconsiderate survey.


Min. The Knight (if you be remembered) took it in ill part that he was taxed
by the Cecropidan for want of learning, wit, valor, and conscience, as also
with the surplussage of self-conceit.


Ma. And can he either blame the acceptance, or deny the cause, which is yet
extant under his own hand?


Min. Yes, he forsooth does not simply derogate from the Knight in any of
these, but comparatively matching them together, gives the precedence, where he
thinks he had most cause. I did Page 2.
divide (says he) the three degrees of comparison, betwixt your three most
commendable qualities, Valor, Learning, Wit. I gave the positive to your
valor; The comparatiue I did assign to your pen^ To your wit I did reserve
the superlatiue degree: my conceit did without fraud, sincerely aim at your
praise. If I did Caecus non iudicat de coloribus.
prefer your wit and Learning before your Valor, you have no just cause of
offense.


Ma. Were there no more but this, it is more then common Ciuility can well
warrant; had he not bin ill tutord he might have learned that comparisons are
odious. Might not the Knights commendable qualities say unto him, Quis te
constituit iudicem inter nos? The question de primatu was not allowable amongst
the Disciples. In this case 1. Regum. c. 3. v. 26.
diuidatur, shows little care of the whole. The Poet might have informed him,
Quae non prosunt singula, iuncta iuuant: he that has but an ounce of each of
those former properties, wants not a grain of a worthy man. So that by
sundring them he labors to lessen their esteem, and by disparaging that which
he seems to hold in highest regard, he plainly nullifies the repute of the
rest.


Min. He that has but half an eye, may easily perceive his comparatiue
praises, to be indeed privative disgraces: as you may see by his Peiora
nouissima primis.
Comment upon his own text. For whereas he styled the Knights book an
unlearned Letter, he now explanes himself, that the want of Page 9.
Philosophical and Theological verities occasioned that censure. Page 11.
The learning (says he) with w^nt whereof I charged your Letter, is neither
Pernassian, nor Poetical, nor Profane, but Sacred, Holy and Divine.


Ma. Is this the comparatiue degree wherewith he dubs his pen? Est aliquid
prodire tenus: seeing Rabshacheh will afford no more, it is well we have this.
But such a Boon is not like long to be enjoyed. I fear Rabshacheh repents
himself already of his seeming bounty; For as if his pen had been over
lavish, he does interpret the Pernassian learning formerly acknowledged, to
signify Page 12.
Fustian phrases, Page 15.
nullity of judgment without any mediocrity of Logic, Page 13.
a slippery vein of writing, Page 36.
impertinent and ridiculous annotations, Page 12.
language that must have a Parliament to naturalize it, Page 16.
witless cauils, Page 169.
babbling able to make learned men's heads ache, Page 126.
speech not so wise as the braying of Balaams Ass, Page 2.
agaudy style, Page 36.
a head blanke without matter, defiling, nay Page 4.
loading his margent withal manner of impertinent stuff, as Page 35.
vulgar sentences, Ibid.
triuiall verses, Ibid.
childish authors, Page 127.
reeling, tottering, and Page 35.
ridiculous phrases, serving only to wast ink and to blurre paper.


Nick. I promise you he has mended the matter well, these mild censures are
able to raise Page 2.
fus of choler. Is this the Pern^ssian Laurel with which he is content to
crown my Masters temples? Is this the tune which the Page 9.
poetical sisters sing in Apolloes quire? then may the gingling of my
Curry-combe pass current for reasonable good melody. I easily believe he went
Ibid.
young from Helicon, who can no better judge of those Crystal streams.


Ma. If a man should give Flood this attribute, that he is Ibid.
tam Philosophiae, quam theologiae peritus, which (bearing a double
construction) may be warranted, albeit he have been scarce seasoned with the
Principles of either Science, and so a Dullard in both: how could he but hold
himself ill handled, if afterward the same party should tell him that he
showed more foolery then Philosophy, more Dunsery then Divinity? But the best
is, (as I heard the Knight once say) he makes no more reckoning of his praise,
in giving him that he had not, then of his dispraise, in taking from him that
he had; as having neither more nor less, for either of both.


Min. Yet this comes short of Rabshacheh his equiuocating strain. For did he
sincerely aim at the Knights praise in his grant of Pernassian learning, why
does he then gainesay it in those his contradictory imputations? or did his
mental entendment seek the disparagement of the Knights learning (as now the
event has made apparent) to what end then does he protest the Page 2.
sincerity of his good meaning? Why does he labor to color his former frumpe
with a distinction of learning, yiedling the lesser arm of that tree to the
Knight, and keeping the greater (as purchased by his long Page 9.
s^^dy and delight) to himself? whereas in fine he dispossesseth him of all,
even of the least leaf of the smallest branch.


Ma. Thus is the Fox now uncased, his Preface.
Flag of due respect, and dutiful affection, proved to be but the Ensign of
Subtilty: but I would gladly see upon what ground he builds those his
derogatory and disgraceful terms.


Min. Forsooth he has gotten the wind of an opposition between the Knights
poetry* and his prose, and that in the first sentence of his Counter-snarle,
which he produces as a Page 10.
perspectiue unto the rest. Heresy (says he) has in all ages contrived
artificial shadows, which he justifies with this marginall verse. Artibus
impietas ingeniosa caret? This Rabshacheh reading without an Intergatory says,
that the marginall Muse Ibid.
gainsaith the text, whereas the argument is drawn ab impossibili, vizt. that
it cannot be that witty Impiety should be to seek of cunning conueighance,
then which nothing can be more suitable to the purpose. But admit there were no
dash visible to his squinting eyes, besides the full point, yet might his
wisdom have taken it for spoken Ironically, in which acceptance it is no
less then vnicent to the Prose.


Ma. Tut, this Makebate has no other project but to set Ephraim against
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, to cast a bone between the Margent,
and the Page 11.
Text, and to set them both together by the ears with the truth: but the best
is, the least dash of a pen will easily reconcile them.


Min. Nay this is not all, he challenges the Prose also, as Page 10.
notoriously false, in auerring that the countenance of venerable Antiquity is
the artificial color wherewith Heresy does paint her self, whereas (says
he) Heresy has in all ages disclaimed the Award of Antiquity.


Nick. Then I am sure our Preacher delivered false doctrine the last Sunday,
for he spoke much of Patrem habemus Abrahamum, and I remember he had such a
word as Templum Domini, which was frequent (as he said) in the mouth of the
Idolatrous and Hypocritical Jews. He spoke somewhat also of the Epipham.
Adamians, who vouched nothing but Antiquity, and of the Acephali who Damas. in
Orat. (...).
pleaded the authority of Athanasius and Cyril for the passage of their
heresie^ the particulars are crept out of my slippery brain.


Min. He might further have informed you of the Heretic Dioscorus, who in
the open Council did vant of the Pedigree and descent of his doctrine, from
all the ancient Fathers of the Church. Council. Chalced. Act. 1.
Ego testimonia habeo sanctorum patrum, Athanasij, Gregorij etc. Ego defendo
patrum dogmata. I have the witness (says he) of the holy Fathers; I defend
the Fathers doctrine. Was not Carosus an Heretic? yet forsooth he did
believe, Con. il. Chalced. Act. 4.
secundum expositionem trecentorum december et ^cto patrum; according to the
exposition of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers. If the Plea of Antiquity
were not a glistering varnish, Andreas Barbatius would not have gone so high to
fetch the descent of his Romish Cardinals grounding their foundation upon
those words of Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.8.
Dominisunt Cardines terrae, et posuit super cos orbem.


Ma. He might have shown himself a more skillful Herald, and gone nearer
the sound, and sense, had he drawn their original from these words of the
Apostle 1. Cor. c. 3. ver. 3.
: Vos autem carnales estis; but these Arcadian; must be a day or two elder
then the Moon, or else they will hold themselves no Gentlemen: their holy
water must either flow from Elizaeus, or else it has but a base current; and
could they not fetch the authority of their Monasticke life from the sample of
Christ himself, they would repute it, as of Page 84.
an vpstart family.


Nick. I applaud their wit; this is not the worst fetch to gain esteem.
Were I a rich man it should cost me an hundred A^ro vaenit honos.
pound twice told, but I would have Saturn or Priamus to stand on the top of
my line. I would not stick to alter two or three letters of my name, to make
my self of kin to A Jove tertius Ajax.
Pantagruel. Me thinks Horat. Ode 1.
Moecenas atauis edite regibus is a stately Iambick, it runs so full in the
mouth.


Ma. The best jest (the lively Emblem of his malicious spirit) is this that
he plays upon the Page 36.
letters which fall in order, without any choice, as directs to the marginall
notes. He had charged the Knight with an unlearned Letter: hereupon Sir
Edward, discovering diverse his Solaecismes and Incongruities, (more then were
named) to abridge the length of his Letter did margent thus. Si ego indignus
(which word he falsely cited) ha^c contumelia, tu indignus qui faceres tamen.
This falling under the letter, O, Rabshacheh* wittely tells him that, that had
reason to cry Page 36.
, O, with which letter it was marked. In like manner he descants upon the
letter, T, by which he understands Throne.


Nick. Alas poor man, I beshrew my heart if I do not pity the penury of his
barren conceit. He was near driven, (God wot) when he was feign to ransacke
the Wardrope of his wit, for such thredbare shifts.


Min. What think you of this? when the Knight tells him that he had a spite
only at one page, which lies in the heart of his Letter, he in the
quaintness of his nimble Conceit retorts it thus. Page 30.
It lies in the heart. Was not here an Echo far fetched? When the Knight
says, well flowne Buzzard, he conceitedly answers Page 2.
I did not mark how near a kin that soaring bird was to a Buzzard. For
Miles gloriosus has been long since hissed off the stage, he returns Page 3.
you play Miles gloriosus: somewhat more Art he shows in putting Cerberus,
for Gelons dog; For a good man's Dog has broken his leg over a less
style, he altering the person says, Page 33.
I fear your good dog has broken his leg. And as for the Noddy, the
Couentree Cappe, and the Tobacco pipe, he bandies them up and down, as if the
Tennis-court would afford him no other balls. Thus does he play Tom Skull,
reuerberating according to his Rhetorical skill the same syllables without any
variety of invention.


Ma. Sir, It was well observed. I now see Nicks report was grounded upon good
warrant. Ishmael is a perfect Atomist, there cannot a Mote pass his fingers,
he notes the very Page 7.
number of the lines. Sir Edward cites a part of two verses out of a known
Poet, only with alteration of one word, vizt, -- stulta est clementia --
perituro parcere funi. Whereupon Rabshacheh tells his reader, that the Knight
makes a verse that Page 4.
exceeds no less in fury then in feet.


Nick. He has not only a quarrel to my Masters Poetry, but for want of
better stuff he scannes his Page 27.
woods also upon his fingers, and finds them too short by many feet. Yet I
dare undertake there are Oaks enough left standing to bear a millon of as
stout Scar-crowes as Rabshacheh.


Min. That which galleth him is, that the Knight now Page 84.
possesses the lands, which were formerly in the Terram inimicoru^
possedebitis.
tenure of Romish Catholics.


Nick. Now you speak of that, you put me in mind of a merry answer which I
heard my Master make touching that point. The Woods (quoth he) standing upon
holy ground, he has little reason to find fault if I gave them prim^m
Tonsuram; withal he concluded, that he was not a little glad he had power so
to order them; and the rather, for that such Dawes and Puttocks might be
disappointed for building their nests there.


Ma. The ^elling of those Woods* (as I have heard) will be the rai^ing of a
more charitable work: But of what timber are those fellows made, who with
their goggle eyes prye into every man's private affairs? Is this the next way
to further Purgatories Triumph? but amongst other things, I mu^e how T. H.
scapes his fingers, seeing his revolt first bredde this quarrel; it is a wonder
he does so quietly part with his prey, and tread so tenderly in that path,
with so kind a respect.


Nick. Assure your self there is a pad in the straw. It is either for fear of
some foul discovery, or for hope of his recovery: he finds it his best
course, to sooth him with the acknowledgement of a Page 90.
learned and pithy Treatise, and to free him from the vices of vulgar life.


Min. We will not diue so deep in his thoughts. I warrant the Knight laughes
his heart sore at the Page 37. 179.
Black-moore wench, which Ishmaels invention has lately landed on our English
coast.


Nick. Laugh! I protest there comes not a friend to visit him, but he tells
him of the Negro, and how friendly Rabshakeh has promised to bring him to the
Page 38.
house where she is to be Petrus de Palude in Ser. de Innocent.
found: only he fears she is some cast wench; and if the Friar her Ghostly
Father, by whom she was converted, have blown upon her, he has passed his
word to turn her over to Nick Groom. And shall not I (think you) be well
promoted with the Iaponians reuersion? But the best is he coniures them all not
to acquaint the Ladies by any means, lest they suspect his neglect of their
attractiue beauties, whose smiles he holds in high esteem.


Ma. If the Knight should make use of Rabshacheh his courtesy in this, he shall
have good cause to confess that there is a Purgatory indeed. When he shall
meet with Plutoes Niece upon Earth, he will give the more credit to those
singing flames, and ghastly Ghosts in the after World.


Min. I have heard good Philosophers affirm, that dreams most commonly arise,
either Ex praeuia cogitatione, so says Isidor, Petrus de palude in ser. de
Inocent.
Saepe quae in die cogitamus, in nocte cognoscimus; or Ex cerebri
perturbatione, and then, Mira and inaudita somniamus, secundum vaporem cellulam
phantasticam inficientem; or else ex sanguinis infectione, and then somniant se
ambulare per loca immunda. Now perhaps I. R. having an ill brain, and worse
blood, had been reading of Ixion, and his Cloud: or of Helides, or else the
Poet Nicaeus, who had both fair daughters of Negroes^ or of Alexander and his
Egyptian Cleopatra, and so having a spleen at the Knight, does with a strong
imagination fasten the supposed crimes upon him, as if he had bin peccant in
that kind.


Nick. Peccant in that kind; I heard him say one day in the Stable, he would
give 20. pound Rabshacheh had said troth, wishing that all rich widows near
London might read his book: for then they would hold him fierce, and crave no
other testimony for the approbation of his courage and virility.


Ma. The like fable the Licaonite coyneth to disgrace one I. D. whom he
describes to be one of the Knights fellow Page 17.
tobaccaean Wrighters; who (says the Cecropidan) with morning and evening
devotions, did prostrate himself on the ground to the Picture of his
Mistress, with this prayer; Illumina tenebras meas: Lighten my darnesse sweet
Lady.


Nick. O notable figment! this is invented to cry quittance for our Ladies
borrowed face, mentioned in the Letter to the Collapsed Ladies.


Min. As I am a true man, I cannot imagine that so impious an affection can
harbor in any Protestant breast: but I remember I met not long since with a
pretty Epigram, not altogether dissonant from this purpose, made upon the
credible relation of a Gentleman who had traveled foreign parts: which as
near as I can hit it, runs thus.

Euthycrates, Veneris, puerique Cupidinis vna
Clarus Apellaea finxerat ora manu:
Vidit vt haec Monachus, flectens, ecce Alma Maria,
Ecce puer casta virgin natus, ait!
Eccipit hunc risu Pictor, non falleris, inquit
Ista, Maria tua est; Christus, et iste, tuus.

Nick. I promise you this is more then an inch beyond the reach of my Latin: I
would it were Englished.


Min. On the sudden I cannot render it better then thus.

Euthycrates by matchless Art had drawn this toye,
Loves fairest Queen dandling her lovely boy:
This did a Shaueling spy, and doucking low he said,
Hail Princely Babe, hail Mary spotless Maid:
The Painter smiles, and says, you need not change your Creed,
This is thy Mary, this thy Christ indeed.

Nick. If my doublet had no better buttons then Page 137.
John Clements of Bruxels had, I should crack them all with laughing at this
conceit. I trow Ishmaels darkness will be sufficiently enlightened with this
more passable probability. If he have any spark of shame he will not
hereafter seek such glowworms, which show themselves in the blackness of
ugly untruth, when they are once brought to the light of Trial.


Ma. Surely his brain is very like the soil of Africa, which (as
Cosmographers say) yields every Moon, a new supply of strange Monsters, and
deformed creatures, not to be paraleld by any former praesidents. But all this
while we have ouerslipped his positive degree. What says he to the Knights
valor?


Min. In my opinion he might well have given over that chase, as having
received a modest, short sufficient, and discreet Counters. page, 19.
answer. Yet says he, Page 4.
your letter gave me just cause to suspect your valor. For you confess that
the horror of the gun-pouder plot does lively represent before you, even in
your dreams, and imprint in your most serious thoughts, that furious blast,
which your self, your poor self should have sensibly felt. Had you trembled at
the bloody massacres of many worthy Peers, such a fit might have beseemed a
Knight: Now the only cause of your fears and tears was the immoderate
feeling of your own private danger; And what if your eyes had bin put out with
that powder, should the Commonwealth have lost any whit of her sight.


Nick. It were better the Crows should pick out the eyes of ten thousand
such Ishmaelites, who are not only as so many motes, but huge Eijce trabem.
Luc. 6, 42,
beams blemishing the sight of the body polliticke. Though he think there is
not such a Page 66.
doting Justice of peace again in a country, holding him no wiser then Page 24.
Mr. T. D. not so politic as the Non equidem inuideo.
Statist deceased, yet it is well known his approved sufficiencies need no
such trumpet to commend him in the gates.


Ma. You have no reason to take it in ill part, he serves all Justices of
peace alike, glauncing at them as Page 197. Meaning Intergatories to seditious
Jesuits.
good for nothing but to wast paper and ink in frivolous questions.


Min. Nicke, passion has almost drawn us aside from the first Cavil
pretended against the Knights courage, which was the immoderate sense of his
own private danger.


Ma. You say well; he builds upon that Adage, Degeneres animos timor arguit,
which might be easily salued with that authentic Maxim, Charitas incipit a
seipso. It is an old saying and a true, Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? He that is
regardlesse of his own soul, life, and state, is no fit guardian for a
Commonweal. But see how purblind this Page 4.
eye-maker is; when he has a purpose to play the counterfeit. He that was so
quick-sighted to spy a marginall note ninty two pages off to serve his own
turn, will not now see that which is directly opposite, being directed
thereunto with the letter K, wherewith he has not been unacquainted Page 9.
since he could number thrice five years of his life; for had he but cast his
eye (O partial eye) aside, he might have seen Let. to T. H. page 3.
Lucretius bedewing his cheeks with this lament, Vna dies dabit exitio,
multosque per annos Sustentata ruet moles et machina regni. So that if the
question be how it could stand with the Knights valor to imprint the horror of
that furious blast in his most serious thoughts, he brings in Lucretius
epitomizng that, which himself through the amazement of a so monstrous project
was (...) le^es (...), ma^s s^upent.
unable to particularize to the full: vizt. that the glorious fabrike of this
ancient and famous Kingdom should have lain flat on the ground.


Min. Hinc illae lachrimae. This wind no doubt raised the storm of the
Knights passion, whereof that the reader might entertain more then a general,
or cursory apprehension, he gives him an hint by himself, and his own
friends, what every true Britain should have either corporally or relatiuely
felt.


Nick. Had he made an enumeration of the worthy Peers, whose massacre was
murtherously intended, then would he have charged him (as I hear he does for
his Apology in the behalf of the most renowned, and ever memorable Page 192.
Archbishop) with Page 195.
base devotion, fawning, flattering conceits, foolish fidling in their
praises, and what not? Or else you should have seen them all summed up, with
one and the same regardlesse account, that had the powder put out these Page 4.
Quod singulis congruit id etia^ species.
I. Is. the Commonwealth had not lost any whit of her sight.


Ma. It is very probable, howsoever he speak of some of his own profession
who detest that bloody plot more, and for higher respects then the Knight, yet
it seems this Libeller is none of that number: for albeit there was an
impossibility that Sir Edward should have gone to the pot alone, without the
company of many noble Lords, and the rest his worthy associates there
assembled, he sticks not to say, that if that powder had blown him up, the
Commonwealth should have had no cause to bewail her loss. Thus does the
Iabal Rachil bewray his true intention in the (...). ^rist. Occon lib. 1. c. 2.
particular, which policy advises him to color and conceal in the De
similibus idem et iudici^.
general.


Min. Iabal Rachil! here is a new Hierogliphicke, spick and spanne, from the
mint: you have on the sudden given him as fit a name as the best Linguist
could possibly have invented. These two words do import as much as Fluuius
Detractionis, a Flood of Slanders; the first of which has no nearer affinity
with his name, then the other with his nature, as being rerum falsarum
hamaxarins, so regardlesse of Kiffe and Kin, that he will be easily drawn,
according to the Proverb Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. Victa tacet p^^tas.
(with speed) to libell against his own Father and nearest of blood.


Nick. As I am true Groom. I thought Mr. Mayor had called him Rake-hell, which
he might well have warranted; For whatsoever Malice could invent, Sophistry
suggest, Hypocrisy pretend, or Impudency maintain, his crooked finger has
raked together, out of the bogs of Hell, to cramme this his railing Pamphlet
withal.


Min. You have not yet heard al he has to say, for the degrading of the
Knights valor, who (says Iabal) shows no small want of Page 4.
nobility and valor, in desiring that the most superlatiue severity might be
practiced in the sharpest research of that viperous brood, those merci-lesse
hell hounds, the Priests and Jesuits, whom Mercy it self should be thought
cruel ever to forgive.


Ma. Were he not past all shame, he would have swallowed down that morsel
with silence; The more he rubs that sore, the more he renewes the memory of
that Tragical end of Henry the fourth of France, whose princely breast
carried to his grave the Characters of their graceless, and ungrateful
disloyalty. Their murder of Kings, their garboyles raised in free States, and
their alienating the hearts of subjects from their obliged obedience, must not
in any hand in them be held treason, but devotion; whereas on the contrary it
is not Courage, but Cowardice, to seek by the execution of penal laws (which
are now grown rusty for want of use) to free the country from such Wolves, who
make themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints, playing with imperial
Globes, as Whales do with barrels, which they toss up and down at their
pleasures.


Min. Yet as if these things were nifles, no whit prejudicial to a
Commonweal, he complains of want of the Knights Charity, Page 5.
Can any noble blood (says he) harbor in that heart, that is so greedy of
Innocent blood? The Lion spares his prostrate enemy, whereas you long to
tear out our hearts, in which you cannot find any sin, besides an
ouer-feruent desire to Viam Veritatis nescierunt.
help you to heaven.


Ma. An ouer-feruent desire indeed. Calescunt plus satis. Rather then fail,
if there be any powder in a Country, they will send fiery Chariots to hoise us
up into the Clouds.


Nick. It were better in my opinion to travel thither on foot; he shall be
sure to lose much lether who spurs Cut so fast: but by his leave I will not
hyre such a blind Guide at so dear a rate. When I come to St Omers, Doway or
Rome, he will bear me in hand, that I have a little further to travel, as
being in the Suburbs of Paradise, whereas (God wot) I shall have gone so far
out of my way, and then stand in need of a new help, to bring me out of the
Devils mouth.


Min. We shall hear anon what ghostly directions he will give us to further
us in this voyage: In the mean season it is not amiss to observe what skill
he uses in perverting the Knights meaning. The Knight indeed professes
irreconcilable detestation; but of whom? Of the Incendiaries of the Romish
forge. He proclaims not war against the Inueagled Ladies, and other poor
seduced souls; his discretion has taught him not to bind the nocent and
innocent in one bundle. They are Incendiaries whom he brandeth as worthy
perpetual detestation. Et quamdiu tales, as long as they deserve that
denomination, I cannot see how the most regular Charity dare bid them God
speed; neither does he maliciously desire, but rather upon more then probable
conjecture by way of caution foretell the Page 6.
damnation of their souls who second those hellish Pyoners, in those devilish
courses, which are so odious in the sight of God and man. Reason he had to
express his dislike as pathetically as he could; for that he feared the like
encouragements, and meritorious attributes, to such future attempts from the
Papal Sea, by whose Agents that plot is now (in show) disclaimed; though
rather for the Proditionem amant Proditores infelices odisse simulant.
contrary success, then the barbarous immanity thereof.


Ma. I am verily persuaded the most Christian Charity would not stick to
profess eternal opposition to that viperous brood, whose hearts harbor
dangerous factions, whose tongues are tip'd with malicious scandalls, whose
hands are imbrued in a Sea of innocent blood. If the great Judge have Foris
canes, Apoc. 22.15.
shut the gates of heaven against such inueterate, and impenitent Murderers, I
cannot see how mercy can be hired by the Popes Indulgences to lend them a key
for their entrance into life.


Nick. Tempora mutantur. It was no cruelty of yore to cast a poor harmless
Acts and Monuments.
infant springing from the scorched womb of the mother, into the fiery flames,
there to be consumed; but now the very speech of Parliament severity against
notorious traitors, and matchless Malefactors, argues want of Nobility and
valor: the truth is, our Justices may be well suspected for both, as being
according to Iabals account Page 8.
taller men of their tongues, then of their hands. Did they employ their
authority in suppressing them in their particular Shires, as well as they use
their wits in decreeing against them in the Parliament house, they should gain
more honor, and the Country reap far more good.


Min. Quae supra nos nihil ad nos. I dare say you long till you hear how he
lays about him in the defense of Purgatory, but his meaning is to try your
patience. The second part of his Apology touching certain exceptions against
himself, takes up the remainder of his first Chapter. For the dispatch of
these Page 11.
toys (so he terms them) as if he were challenging his Copes-mate at tria
sequuntur tria, he does methodically divide this sequel into Flies, Fies and
Lies.


Nick. The rhyme may well beseem Skeleton the Poet, or There was a wife of
Croyden And she rid a stroyden, etc.
Elderton the Ballad-maker; but I would gladly see the reason; what means he
by Flies?


Ma. Sir Edward (I remember) to abate the pride of his spurtling quill in
blemishing the worth of other men's lines, gives him a taste of such an
indecorum, wouen throughout that work, as would enforce true Literature to
blush at the very first sight thereof, there being very few leaves wherein the
Reader shall not meet with a Cobweb, a Spider or a Fly. Some of which he there
paged to save himself a labor in the discovery of those many other
Solaecismes, Incongruities, and Iobbing Parentheses, which any curious eye
without the help of Spectacles might easily discern.


Nick. And what flappe has he gotten to free his paper from these magotting
creatures, whose blowing has made his periods so unsavory?


Ma. He does confess, and avoid. He forsooth had rather utter his mind in a
crabbed then a new created phrase; as being Page 12.
more curious that his doctrine be true, then his speech smooth.


Ma. He that will take upon him to Minorize the learning of Authors, and to
dedicate his works unto persons of that extraordinary note, and superlatiue
judgment, must not only weigh his positions in the balance of the sanctuary,
that they be consonant to the truth, but Omne tulit (...) qui mis^^ v^ile
dulci.
polish them also with a Rhetorical file, that they want not those comely
Oratoris proprium, apt, distinct, ornateque dicere.
ornaments which are requisite in the Professors of Art. The fabric of
Theological work ought to be raised ex lapidibus politis. Ragged and rugged
stones are fitter for the wild Quarry then to stand in the beautiful gate. To
run a poor silly heartlesse Metaphor out of Crambe bis cocta.
breath, argues little variety of wit and less solidity of judgment.


Min. Will you see wit play her prize? then listen how pretily Rachil can
defend Solacismes. Page 14.
Such seeming faults (says he) are by indicious censures esteemed not to be
blemishes, but rather ornaments in the purest Writers. The style is childish
which still fears the rod, not daring to depart one syllable from the rules
of Grammar. As in a Consort of sweet voices, a Discord now and then does make
the Music more pleasing, so the worthiest writers have let some jobs pass in
their works, which rather delight then offend a Judicious Reader.


Nick. Here is a Ladde for the nonce to help a lame dog over a style. O
thou rarely patronized Page 180.
Barbarity, down on thy marrow-bones, prostrate thy self at the foot of this
thy valorous Champion borne in Page 171. Margent.
Brinitania, who has stretched his five wits on the Tenter-hooks to maintain
thy worth. It Is great pity that this lusty Iuuentus came so raw from the
ferula; had he continued a little longer at School by this time he would have
made the Welkin roar.


Ma. I know not how other men stand affected: for my own part, I have ever
held that Fiddler worthy to be turned out of doors among the rascal company,
(though he have a badge on his sleeue as broad as my hand) who still harpes
upon one string, and dwells upon one tune, be it the best horne-pipe, that ever
Lincolnshire affoorded. Does not one harsh bleating voice disgrace a whole
quire? Does not one unsavory herb give a relish to the whole pot of pottage? A
discord I grant may be admitted with some grace, but not continued without some
intolerable disgust. In a word, if one fly mar a box of sweetest ointment, I
cannot see what credit this multiplicity of Spiders, Cobwebs, and Flies can
bring to Iabals book.


Nick. I hope we shall find better stuff in the rest; how does he shake off
the flies? they stick I fear so close to his skin, (maugre his Page 11.
Neapolitan perfume) that they will hardly out of the bone.


Min. He Page 15.
blusters mainly that the Knight should cry, Fie upon his genericall and
accidental Christning of Bells, relative honor of Images, and metaphorical
division of the Kingdom between God and the Virgin.


Ma. Is he so impudent as to stand in the defense of these uncouth and
ridiculous fopperies, which can show no other pedigree but heathenish folly,
and Idolatrous superstition to countenance them from exploding contempt?


Min. As touching the first practice; he does not say that Bells are Page 15.
Formula baptizandi campanas apud Durand. de Rit. lib. 1. ca. 22.
Christened; but that the Blessing of bells has some genericall similitude with
the Christning of a Child.


Ma. Whether it be a similitude, or an Tantundem dat tantidem.
Identity I am not so cunning a Logician to distinguish. It skils not much how
they please to tear me it, who are driven to their shifts in seeking some
colorable mantle to shroud it from the inglorious note of heathenish bastardy.
The question is, quo iure, what warrant he has for this genericall similitude,
(which he confesses) between the Blessing of Bells, and the Christning of a
Child.


Min. Nay there he leaves you to your own search. If you can neither find
Scripture, Father, nor ancient Council to warrant this practice, he means
not to be your Informer. It suffices him being between Hawke and Buzzard to
turn it over with a witless and uncivil jest, which he deuideth between his
old familiars the Page 15.
Buzzard and the Ass.


Nick. I have heard some say there was once much ado about the Eras. Adag.
shadow of an Ass: but there being store of that breed at Doway, Iabal is now
grown so nice, that he will not be seen upon the back of his old animal,
wherefore the poor wearied Ass is feign to ride him.


Ma. It Is pity they should part companies; yet did I never see man more
troubled with the mare in his sleep; then Rachil is at midday with the Ass,
of whom he groans to be disburdened. Feign would he have the Page 16.
Printer bear part of his luggage; but seeing it is now more then a year and
a day since the Lazi-as was found as a stray, and cried in open Mart by
Rabshakeh, the custom of the Manor ( secundum vsum Sarum) makes it his own,
without cutting off either mane or Page 47.
tail.


Min. My masters I am glad to see your wits so frolic; yet I must needs say
it is but Lex talionis: besides, his reasoning approoues more then you say. For
admit a Venetian Pander, should put on the Popes robes, his Triple Crown, his
slipper, come with S. Peter's keys, sit down in the Conclaue on the Chair
appropriated to his Holiness: and that he should in his passage be saluted by
the Vulgar as Pope (bearing those ensigns with which that Deity alone is
dignified) Should he not be sure to be called Coram, and pay dear for this his
genericall, and accidental resemblance? Will it serve his turn to say, Alas
no man heard me say that I was Paulus Quintus, I did but wear his vestiments,
and a little counterfeit his state.


Nick. I will give him my word he shall find it better to play the Devil,
then so to immitate the Pope.


Ma. The case is of the same nature. The blessing of Bells is no less
presumptuously accompanied with the sacred rites, and ceremonies of Baptism,
(yea with greater solemnities) then the Christning of Children: so that the
Lay people know not how to distinguish them. Now mark how Iabal plays the
Pandar, he does not say that Page 15.
Bells are Christened, only this, The blessing of Bells has some general
resemblance with Christning. Neither is the Venetian Pandar Pope, though
habited like the Pope: Shall he not be sure to have this peale or the like rung
in his ears, by one Eun^ch. Act. 3 Scen. 5.
Antipho or other. Quo pergis ganeo? vnde emergis, vestitum hunc nactus? quid
tibi quaeris? Satin' sanus? quid sibi hic vestitus quaerit? I have so
charitable an opinion of Rachil, that his reverent respect to the Primate of
the Romish Sea, would make him say, Fie upon such a Pope. Yet (see how blind
devotion ouer-swaies th'equity of his judgment in the like) he quarrels with
the Knight for saying, Fie upon your genericall and accidental Christening of
Bells.


Nick. Sets he no better gloss upon his relative honor of Images?


Min. He begs the question, and wonders any man should be so Page 16.
dull, not to understand that which even children conceive, that honor done to
the Image is no injury to the person, or that a Christian will deny to Christ
in his Image, what any honorable person may challenge to his. Page 17.
You (says he) that cry fie upon the relative honor of our Savior in his
Cross, how would you have snarled at the noble Ladies of the Primitive Church,
that did lick with their religious tongues the dust of that thrice Venerable
Relic. Page 18.
O glorious cause, which by such Epicureans is impugned, who worship Bacchus or
Cupid in their Chambers.


Nick. In their Chambers? It Is well he has gotten the ground of Imaginary
Chamber-worke, to support the glory of his superstitious Church-work.


Ma. It would make any pious breast bleed, to recount those infinite and
strange pollutions, wherewith their religious houses have been (as appears
upon authentic Records) monstrously infected. I hope our chambers compared
with their Monasteries, are as Chappells paralelled with impure Styes.


Nick. Sir, it is our happiness that he can challenge us only with the Page 16
and 17 Pulchra puella placet displicet vmbra tibi.
pictures of fair Ladies. Had not their Chambers housed the living creatures
themselves, I doubt whether he should have had so great cause to brag as he
does of the Page 195. and 183.
works of devotion. There was a Benefactor called Satisfactory Penance, who
builded more Hospitalls, etc. then all the Voluntaries besides.


Ma. Yet put them all together, we are able to instance as many charitable
Willet his catalogue of charitable works.
works done in England within these 60. years, as I think were seen in many
more before, especially if you compare the prizes, and rates, with those of
former and less peopled times.


Min. Let not his taunts make us lose the conclusion; Our Relative love of
senceles pictures (which he causelessly fears cannot patronize the Relative
honor of Images,) Non fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri sed per
occupationem mentis.
he Idolatrously practices, and illiterately defends. For if he challenge
no more honor for his Images, then noble persons to their pictures, (as he
pretends) we will pass his suite, as a motion sauouring of equity: but it is
more then either a civil reverence, or an historical remembrance for which he
labors, wherein his instance of the Matron Paula will not succor him:
Hieron. Epitaph. Paulae. ad Eustochiam Virg.
She lying prostrate before the cross kissed (as S. Hierome says) the stone
of the Sepulcher, which the Angel removed; yea she licked the place where the
Lord had lain.


Ma. This I think is not to be disallowed: in the kissing of those sacred
Relics, she gave testimony of her holy zeal, faith, and love to Christ. But
did she deem them as Instruments, by the touch whereof she expected any
effusion, or influence of grace?


Min. Iabal would ^aine wrest it to his purpose, by mistranslation: She did use
(says he) to lie prostrate before the Cross, therein with a lively faith
adoring Christ: whereas Hieromes words run thus. Prostrating her self
before the Cross, she did adore, as if she had seen the Lord hanging thereon.
Hierome says not, she used to lie prostrate before the cross; but that now
being come to Jerusalem, where she met with the real Cross, she prostrated
her self, and how? before it, not unto it: Neither does he say that therein
she adored Christ (there Iabal is out) but Prostrating her self before the
Cross of Christ, she did adore, as if she had seen the Lord hanging thereon;
that is, she fixed her remembrance upon Christ crucified, whom only she did
adore. So that this being not the Image of the Cross, but the Cross it self,
concludes not that honor of Images, which the Non sunt duae adorationes sed
vna. Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 4.
Romanists maintain, who doctrinally auerre, that the Image, and the pattern
of the Image, ought to be honored with one, and the same honor of Bellar. de
cult. Imag.
Latria; making the Image partaker of Divine worship, (at the least
accidentally) whereas Divine worship is in no part, or semblance, appliable to
any, but to a Divine Essence.


Ma. In my conceit Iabal is desirous to pick a quarrel with the Knight, who
does not condemn all relative Adoration, which his own Church practices in
the receiving of the Communion, where we do divinely remember, and adore
Christ, as dying upon the Cross, that being unto us a sacred remembrance of
his death, until his coming: but he lays the Fie upon that Relative honor,
wherein the dumb creature, is made more then a demi-god, and honored with
Vows and Supplications, as if one and the same Saint could be present in all
places, where his pictures are worshipped, to take notice of those particular
homages, which whilst he was living upon the earth, he would never have
permitted to be done to his own person. These Prayers and Offerings, neither
did Paula practice, neither had the Knight reason to allow. Besides, we must
beg leave to put a difference between an historical relation, and a
determinatiue position, the one being de facto, the other de iure.


Min. To take Iabal in his right sense, (I mean his Antemeridian,) I would
feign know whether the Pagans that worshipped the Images of the heathen Gods
did not worship them by a Non materias veneramur, non ipsa simulachra, sed eos
in his colimus, quos dedicatio infert sacra. Haec ratio a Paganis quoque
adferri solebat. Cassan. Consul. Art. 21. page 153.
relative adoration.


Ma. Nay under your correction, I have read in Strabo, and Herodotus, that the
Persians did neither rear Statues, nor Altars to their Gods. The Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 2. c. 22.
Egyptians did scoff at their folly, who represented their Gods by Images.
Lycurgus, though otherwise very ceremonious, did utterly disallow, that the
glorious feature of the immortal Gods, should be counterfeited by any mortal
shapes. Yea I have heard a good Divine allege S. Lib. de ciuit. dei. ^. c. 31.
ex Varrone.
Augustines authority, that the ancient Romans for 170. years did worship
their Gods without any Image.


Min. I grant there was a time, when Images were not at all, at least not so
universal; they that were the first founders of them, Aug. ibid.
Ciuitatibus suis metum dempserunt, et errorem addiderunt: which made those of
the deepest reach positiuely forbid them, Ne Deorum maiestas simulachrorum
stoliditate contemnerentur: least the majesty of the Gods might grow into
contempt, through the foolish inventions, and base metal, or matter, wherein
they were represented; But I speak of those nations, and those times, wherein
Images were in most request.


Nick. Either I heard a lie, or else there was a Philosopher, who having in his
house a wooden Image of Hercules, did so highly esteem it, that when fiering
grew very scarce, he first cleft it, and then laid it along under the pot,
saying; Epiphan. in Ancorato de Diagora.
Now Hercules thy labors shall amount to a full Bakers dozen: thy ^centh labor
shall be to sees a Calfes head for my dinner. This was the relative honor,
wherewith he honored his Idol.


Ma. I can tell you as pretty a Tale as that: there have not been yet three
moons, since a dainty collapsed creature, sold a very fair Crucifixe to buy
her self a Fan; and being reproved by a double-chind Mastix, her best answer
was this: that she meant to have another engraven upon the handle, (in stead
of her Arms) which should still be in her sight.


Min. I will not say she made a more useful exchange; for such pictures may
well serve as historical monuments, by way of representation. But their
admired Lib. 9. Epist. 9 Indict. 4.
Gregory absolutely excludes them from all manner of worship, and adoration.
Adorare Imagines omnibus modis deuita. In any case (says he) beware thou
worship not Images. Polyd. Virg. lib. 6. Invent. c. 13.
S. Hierome (if Polidore may be credited) assigns the reason, Ob metum
Idololatriae, for fear of Idolatry, which by this means has spread it self
too far among the ruder sort.


Ma. Then I perceive the distinction of relative, and improper honor, is
hatched only for an evasion, least they seem to oppugn Antiquity, by their
idolatrous practice.


Min. The ghostly Fathers, the Priests, have long sat upon it, but yet it is
not fledge, Lib. 2. de Imag. c. 21. and 22.
Bellarmine mars all that they have made; he allows more then relative honor.
Imagines Christi, et Sanctorum, (says he) venerandae sunt, non solum per
accidens, et improprie, sed etiam per se, and proprie etc. non solum vt vicem
gerunt exemplaris. The Images of Christ, and of his Saints are to be
worshipped, not only accidentally, and improperly, but simply and properly:
that is, not only as they are resemblances of the Prototype, but as they are
considered in themselves. On the contrary, Non tantum si quis pre^es
simulachris offerat, verum etia cum id aliquis simulat. Aduers. Celsum. lib. 7.
vt Cassander consult. Art. 2. page 153.

Quid te ad falsas imagines inclinas? Quid ad inepta simulachra corpus in
curnas etc.

In supernis Deum quaere, vt carere inferis possi^. Claud. Taurinen. aduer.
Theodem.


Origin holds it no better then a foolish and adulterous Profanation, even
outwardly to seem to worship an Image. How is it possible to set these agreed,
that are so much at ods.


Ma. I do not find that the Cherubins (having a divine and special
institution) were ever applied by the Jews unto holy worship; wherefore there
is less color for this relative honor of Images, whose erection is
arbitrary, whose form has little or no certainty, whose Quid inter se tam
contrarium quam Statuariu^ dispicere statuam adorare? Senec. in Moral.
makers are persons contemptible, and of small regard.


Min. Now you speak of the form of these Images, you put me in mind of the
confession of their own Stapulensis, who in his book De vna ex tribus Maria,
writes thus: Fateor equidem libere, picturae aliquot caenae Domini mihi
displicuere, et etiam ea quae, nisi memoria me fallit, visitur Mediolani, etc.
I do indeed freely confess, that I have been sometimes scarce pleased with
certain pictures of our Lords Supper, even with that which, if I be not
mistaken, is yet to be seen in a certain Monastery at Mediolanum; not that I
disliked the Painters skill, which was very rare, but because he kept no good
decorum: Quandoquidem Iohannem magis puellam referentem, quam virum, et quam
Apostolum ad Christi latus collocauit. Forsooth he placed John by Christ's
side, more like a maid, then a man, or an Apostle.


Nick. We have the like picture in our Parlour at the Black Friars, but I
warrant I should have looked upon it till doomes day, before I should have
noted that Quirke. I promise you Faber shows himself a right honest man, to
let them see their own Incongruous absurdity.


Ma. In my opinion Iabal should have done well to have specified the extensiue,
and intensiue degrees of this relative honor; for I have been informed by
sundry travelers, landed in this Port, that one and the same Saint has not
always one and the same degree of honor, being more or less respected, with
concourse, offerings, and adorations, according to the Credunt eas sanctiores
quae pretiosiores.
trimnesse of the form, richness of the matter, or the celebrity of the
place, wherein the statue is erected.


Nick. This is right like one of our neighbors Girls: if the Baby have not
the holliday partlet, all the fat is in the fire, she is in the powt, all a
mort.


Min. Such is the simplicity of ignorant people, they are carried away by these
impostors with outward shows: which made the poor Clarke in Saint Omers
secretly to remove the picture of the blessed Virgin, from an obscure seat,
into a more conspicuous place of the Church: making as if the picture had in
discontent of the former neglect, removed it self to a Site fitter for
adoration. He saw there was no other feate but this, to improoue his vailes.


Ma. And had not Avarice whispered in Rachils ear, his pen would not have
been half so violent in the defense of this heathenish, and relative honor,
wherein he shows himself no less senseless then the braine-lesse pictures,
for which he is hired to plead.


Min. Well at length we are arrived at Puddle wharfe, I mean at the last Fie.
In this squeamish vein (says he) you cast a Fie upon my saying, that by
Metaphor God may be said to have Diuisum imperium cum Jove Diua tenet.
divided his kingdom with the Virgin: What if I had said God had given her his
whole Kingdom, his Throne, Scepter; that Christ in person did wait on her,
sitting at the table of glory; how would your Carre have been mad at these
Metaphors?


Nick. My Master thought he had to do with a Divine, but I perceive he has
met with a bangling Sophister.


Ma. It seems Iaball has not yet put his Page 112.
nose into the sweet cup of Gods glory, who has so dull a sent in winding
heavenly things.


Min. His argument is drawn a minore ad maius, and carries this sense. If all
the faithful servants of God shall be partakers of this so great honor, then
much more that glorious creature, who has a pre-eminence above them all. But
Christ has promised the society of the faithful not only to Luc. 22. v. 29.
Dispono vobis sicut etc.
appoint unto them a kingdom, as his Father had appointed to him: but also to
make them sit Luc. 12. v. 37.
down at Table, to come forth to minister unto them. Therefore the Virgin may
be said to have his whole Kingdom, Scepter and Throne.


Ma. If this collection b^e good, every Christian shall have the like
Sovereignty: for this Charter, as far as I perceive, runs with a vobis.
Psalm. 149. v. 9.
Such honor have all his Saints. The Mensa hic accipitur pro coelestis vitae
gloria. Gorrand. Mensa rotunda aeternitatis cuius in circuitu erimus sicut
nouellae oliuarum.
table which our Savior mentions is an Emblem of that rest, and satiety of
joys wherewith we shall at his coming be all replenished. His serving us is
not ministerium obsequij, to be taken as an act of humility: but rather
ministerium suffragij, sen beneficij, as an act of his fatherly bounty, in Qui
in terra fuit dator virtutum in coelo est distributor praemiorum.
crowning us with more high advancement, then if the poorest vassal upon
earth, should have the greatest Monarch to wait at his trencher. Neither do I
take Sicut to be a note of equality, but of likeness, either in the order, or
in the participation, of so much of his glory, as shall suffice for their
perfect happiness.


Min. Iabal makes no question of this; he is not ignorant, that where it is
said, he shall set the Mat. 25.33.
sheep on his right hand, we are to understand the participation not Nulla
comparatio inter Creaturas et Deum cadit, quia finiti ad infinitu^ nulla est
Proportio. Petrus Ierem.
an equality; much less any priority of his glory. He acknowledges these to
be Page 19.
Metaphors, wherewith God does use to exaggerate the happy estate of meaner
Saints then his Mother: neither has he any other meaning by this
Metaphorical division of the Kingdom, between God and the Virgin, but that
Ouerth. page 168. and 169. Ad dextram ponere aliquem est honorare personam
sicut legitur de Matre Salomonis. 1. Reg. ca. 2 v. 19.
she is in greatest favor with God: so potent in her intercession, that she
delivers from dangers, and bestows favors, and graces on whom she pleases;
as one who by favor and friendship, does both overrule the Court of justice,
stopping such processes against us, as our sins do deserve, and rule the
Court of mercy, being able by her intercession to obtain for us in that Court,
whatsoever we do either need, or can reasonably desire.


Nick. I have heard the scholars of Oxford talk much of a non sequitur; were
there any of them here he would put Iabal to prove this inference. The
blessed Virgin is in great favor with God, therefore she is Queen Regent in
the Court of heaven: Gloriam mea^ alteri non dabo. Isa 42. v. 8.
ergo to be inuocated, ergo to be adored.


Min. Indeed this plea could not free the Epiph. in Haeres.
Collirydians from the blur of Epiphanius his pen, by which they are branded
with the infamous note of heretical Idolatry: and not without just cause, for
albeit the Saints are invested in the glory of immortality, yet does the Lord
reserve the glory of his divinity as proper to himself, whereof he is so
jealous, that he can in no hand endure such Luciferian spirits as shall
attempt to Nemo hunc honorem sumat.
rob him of any of his peculiar claymes: as Vows, Prayers, Sacrifice, and the
like religious homages. He it is alone, who searches the hearts, and the
reins, whose mercy is above all his works. It is honor enough for the
blessed Virgin to behold the face of her Savior, to have a prime mansion in
that spacious house, to cry Alleluiah before the throne: but to erect a Court
of special Possumus prouocare a foro iustitiae Dei, ad Curiam. B. Maria.
Bernardinus in Marial.
appeal, to summon suitors to prostrate themselves before her Si quis a filio
terreatur quia Iudex est, Mariam adeat quia Medicina est Holcot. in lib. Sap.
Lect. 36.
throne, is more then either Astitit regina a dextris, or Dispono vobis regnum,
dare probably avouch. Such positive conclusions built upon Metaphorical
grounds, do prove little better then fallacies, a dicto secundum quid, ad
dictum simpliciter.


Ma. You say right. For Christ's sovereign power over the whole world is
incommunicable, and cannot be conueighed to the person of any creature: but the
fruit and benefit of this power every one that is in Christ reapeth in his
salvation: being exalted thereby, to sit in the heavenly places, as a partaker
of Christ's glory; and having power from thence, even in his own person, to
triumph over Sin, Death, and Hell, and to break them in pieces as the Apoc.
2.27.
Vessels of a potter. This is the royalty there intended: if Iaball set this
string any higher, it will break, and fly in his face.


Min. The stretching of those Metaphors to reach own sense occasioned De
invent. l. 6. c. 13.
Polydores complaint. Been multi rudiores (says he) imaginibus magis fidunt,
quam Christo. Very many simple folk repose more confidence in Images, then in
Christ. And that of In Aug. de ciuit. lib. vlt. c. vlt.
Viues, Multi Christiani in re bona plerumque peccant, quod Diuos Diuasque non
aliter venerantur, quam Deum. Many worship the Saints with the same honor,
which is due unto God. Had it not been for these superstitious, and unbounded
Encomiastiques, and metaphorical doxologyes, this Idolatry had not found the
way into the Church door: but when the people were taught that God had given
the Virgin the better half of his Kingdom, (which they understood to be a
subordinate Jurisdiction) then you must think they spared no Altaria fumant.
cost at her Shryne: then were they as willing to set out the picture like a
Goldy-locks, with Rebatoes, red Satin Petticotes, and loose Gowns, as they
were to prancke up her child, with a Velvet Cappe and Feather.


Ma. This homage seems to have some countenance, from the acknowledgement of
the four and twenty Elders, who speak Apoc. 5.10.
thus unto the Lamb. Thou have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we
shall reign upon the earth; by which they intimate a kind of Regal
Jurisdiction, over those that breath upon this terrestrial Globe, which if it
be granted, there can no cost be thought too much, either in the honor of her
statue, or the purchase of her favor, who by all likelihood, is of highest
esteem in the Court of heaven,


Min. Iabal has this Ouerth. page 168.
text by the end, but (God wot) it will stand him in little steed: for those
four and twenty Elders, do not represent the state of the Saints in heaven,
but of the Compared with Apoc. c. 1. ver. 6.
Church militant upon earth, Richardus de Sancto Vict. expounds the harpes in
their hands, to be the good works of the Saints, whose sweet harmony and
delightful sound draws others with whom they converse, to the contemplation
and liking of heavenly things: their ordinary Gloss understands by them the
mortification of the flesh. Their Ignatian Blas. Vieg. in Apo. page 247.
Viegas takes these harps to signify the commemoration of Divine praises,
which (says he) the four and twenty Elders do set forth two manner of ways,
viz. mortificatione passionu^, and diuini verbi praedicatione: by the
mortification of their passions, and the preaching of the divine word; both
which actions are to be performed by the living, and no way appliable to the
departed, who feel neither the reluctation of the flesh, nor the Imperfectum
abolebitur.
defect of knowledge. As for the golden vialls full of odours, he understands
by them the hearts of the Saints, shining and glittering with Charity,
wherewith they are so Ausbertus.
replenished, that they pray not only for their friends, but also for their
enemies (which duty our Savior imposes upon his living Disciples) who are
subject to the Cross, from which those which are deceased are free.


Ma. These expositions seem to ratify your sense: but how are those Elders
then said to be before the Lamb, to be about the Throne, and to reign upon
the earth, seeing the children of God are here Per aenigma.
sepositi, and depositi, wanting the glorious Deum nemo vidit vnquam.
light of Gods vision, and the pre-eminence of the worlds graceful Purgamenta
mundi. 1. Cor. c. 4. v. 13
estimation?


Min. The Lord who has promised not to leave us, but to be with us unto the
end of the world, is daily resident in the midst of his sanctuary; where we
enjoy the sweet comforts of his presence, as sensibly as if he were visible
amongst us. We offer unto him from the Vialls of our hearts the sweet odours,
and pleasing incense of our hearty prayers: by virtue also of his spirit we are
enabled to overcome the Regnabimus super terram id est super corpus nostrum
quod de terra est. Gorrand.
concupiscence of the flesh, and all carnal desires. Thus do we not only
perform the offices of our spiritual Priesthood, but also by the law of
virtue Hamo.
reign like Kings upon the earth; which is the royal praerogatiue there
specified.


Nick. Then I see Iabals Relative honor of Images, and his figurative division
of Gods kingdom to the Virgin, had need bespeake a new pair of Stilts, his
old Crutches will not carry him out of the reach of that Fie, by which he is
justly attached for no less then petty-treason, in adulterating the general,
and genuine sense of holy Writ. The Paper he has spent in this pettish
vein, would have made excellent prouender for Page 137.
Dunne.


Min. Yet will he make you stop your nose a little longer. He presents us
further with a Posye of such rank flowers, as are able to poison a quick
sent: We must be feign to trace him one round more about this Dunghill of
unsavory Fyes, which noisome Weeds he binds up, as if they were so many
sweet Violets, or wholesome hony-suckles.


Ma. I would gladly hear what his Appendix has to say.


Min. Page 19.
You think (quoth he) you have brought me to a baye, when you force me to
confess that our Church Hymns are figurative Poems: but are not the Psalms
of David the chiefest Hymns of God his Church? and are not these Poems full of
figurative speeches? Why then may not a Theological invocation be uttered in
a fuguratiue speech?


Nick. My Master has been a piece of a Poet in his days, therefore I cannot
think he would debar that commendable Science from her most laudable use.


Min. That which the Knight distasted was this: whereas Rabshacheh could not
be ignorant of the general position, and practice of his fellow Cacoliques,
in adoring, and inuocating the Virgin Mary with these and the like oraysons. In
prosa Missae de concep.
Tu spes certa miserorum, Vera Matter Orphanorum, Tu leuamen oppressorum,
medicamen infirmorum, omnibus es omnia; And again, Gaude Matrona caelica etc.
Tu ancilla Jesus Christi vocari voluisti, sed vt docet lex diuina, tu ipsius es
Iure matris impera. Horar. Secund. chorum. Augustensem.
Domina, nam ius habet et ratio matrem praeesse filio etc. He notwithstanding
plays the coward, and leaves Sedulius in the lurch, who does descant upon the
same playne-song; answering the exceptions taken against his Ouerth. p. 40
Scribanius for the like blasphemies, with this colorable evasion. Such is the
notorious folly of your Preacher Ouerth. praef. page 37.
says he, that he gathers a Gospel out of a Poem, and that not written
historically, or doctrinally, but in patheticall verse, full of Metaphors,
Metonomies, Apostrophs, Prosopopeis, and other as well rhethoricall figures, as
Poetical flowers, which to take in a proper and of rigorous sense, is folly,
to urge them as points and articles faith, is such a solemn foolery, that it
may seem the next degree to madness. Ouerth. page 40.
He should know the difference betwixt an Evangelist, and a Poet, a Gospel
and a Poem, rigid truth, and figurative speech, Articles of Faith, and
poetical fancies.


Ma. Is not this to shift off their Idolatrous appeals, their mental, and
Ouerth. page 44.
imaginary petitions to the Poets pen? Does he not plainly proclaim their
Church Hymns to be Ibid.
figurative poems, and poetical fancies? Thus for all the world did his
Grandsire Harding play his prize, saying it was not blasphemy, but spiritual
dalliance, to bid the Virgin command her Son, and to show her self to be a
mother.


Nick. Calls he this dalliance? there is no jesting with edge-tooles: their So
he styles the Author of this poem.
grave, learned, and venerable Fathers I see are merry men, to dally with the
Queen of Heaven, as children with puppets, to whom they speak in as sober
sadness, as if they did understand what goshipping meant.


Min. Then does IABAL dance after his pipe. The verses which Master Crashawe
taxed for too much sauciness were these. Ouerth. page 38
Say to thy mother seeing brothers thirst,
Mother your milk would ease him at the first, etc.
This speech, says IABAL, is imagined to show the great familiarity, betwixt
Christ, and his blessed Mother, that she has a special interest in the joys,
and comforts (metaphorically termed milk) that flow into the Soul, by the
devout contemplation of her blessed breasts; which comforts are not granted,
but to whom she does singularly favor, nor given without her consent.


Nick. Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum: this exposition is far fetched,
dear bought, and fit for his Ladies tooth.


Min. Indeed he Ouerth. page 40.
confesses that herein the recreation of some Catholics was especially
intended: as if any true Christian heart could take any comfort, to see Christ
so degraded, as to become a suppliant to his (...).
Mother: so debarred that he cannot grant spiritual comforts, but by her
consent.


Nick. He plays the Tinker up and down; he stops one hole, and makes two.


Ma. It is an old saying, Iniquum petas vt aequum feras: Because he would have
no question made, but that the Virgin may be solicited to be a mediator to her
son, he takes it for granted, that in contemplation Christ may be imagined to
sue unto her; as if religious meditation had no better ground, then impossible
and unwarranted supposition.


Min. What do you talk of contemplation? For that he puts Ouerth. page 44.
Riccius and Puentes to school: Will you hear his positions? When one does
meditate (says he) on the Virgins Ouerth. page 41.
breasts as she is Gods mother, the object is equal to the object we think
of in the wounds and blood of Christ. And why? Because in the breasts of the
Virgin, as she is Gods mother, we must needs contemplate and behold Christ in
her Virginal arms. Nay more, For a man to run to Christ's blood, which was
shed to cleanse sinners; is a token that he does acknowledge himself a sinner,
and a needy suppliant: but to Ouerth. page 47.
approach the Virgins breasts, which were not filled with milk, but only to
nurse the Son of God, and comfort th'especiall devoted to Christ's blessed
childhood, might seem to savor of pride, and arrogancy.


Ma. The very relation of these uncouth phrases, is a sufficient confutation.
His divinity me thinks speaks a strange language: The A poetical conceit,
says he, may be raised of small ground or fancy. Ouerth. pa. 47.
object of the Virgins breasts is equal to the object of Christ's wounds; To
run to Christ's blood is humility, to approach the Virgins breasts
arrogancy; these are new Positions, neither have they been long acquainted,
for the one is at daggers drawing with the other. If the objects be equal, they
cannot but admit like access to a religious mind. But is there no difference
between that which is an object terminatiue per se, as the Scire Christum
crucifixum
wounds of Christ, and that which is an object relative per accidens, as the
Virgins breasts? Is the Finis coronat opus.
consummation, or the Initiation of more esteem? Quod efficit tale magis est
tale. If there were any such imaginary virtue as Iabal supposes in the
Virgins breasts, whence did it proceed, but from the child of her womb, for
whom alone (he says) it was prepared? If for him alone, then are they like to
find her a dry Nurse and to get a simple soap; that come so long after the
weaning. I would gladly be informed what Scriptures we have to draw us to this
object.


Nick. Iabal will not be found in his Chamber at Page 199.
Cacopolis, when he should bring in his authority; It must be feign to stay
upon the first Ouerth. page 44.
operation of his own understanding. His she-pupills must apprehendit, without
Ibid.
judging it to be so as they apprehend.


Min. He would feign countenance this his imaginary dream, with an instance
of Ouerth. page 41
Saint Austens devotion, who brake out into these words: In medio positus, quo
me vertam nescio: Hinc pascor a vulnere: Hinc lactor ab vbere; where that holy
Father was at a stand, Whether he should more admire his Savior bleeding on
the Cross, or sucking of his mothers Causa sine qua non.
breasts. So comfortable, and meritorious was his ineffable humility in
the one, and his matchless Charity in the other, that he speaks
Metonymically (naming the breasts for him that sucked the breasts) it is to be
attributed to the like tone and cadence, which his sentences do ordinarily
affect: for on the sudden I cannot call to mind where he directs us to repair
to the Virgins breasts for spiritual comforts.


Ma. If it savor of pride and arrogancy to approach unto them, we will be
content to leave them to the pontificiall soaring spirits: our humility shall
content it self to know Christ and him crucified. Had not the blessed Virgin
her self fed upon this object, the milk of her breasts would not have slaked
the thirst of her soul:


Nick. Had I been at his elbow, I could have helped him to a merry Fable,
which I once heard related out of Friar In sermon. Dom. prim. post. Oct. Epiph.
page 25.
Jeremy. That there was a certain man, who every day devoutly saluted the
Virgin with an Aue Marie, dying notwithstanding in mortal sin afterward: And
when, (I tremble to speak) the Devils would have seized upon his soul, the
Angels, (O comfortable message) bad them stay, till sentence were given by
Christ. Then were all his sins put in one Scale, (marry he told me not by
whom the Balance was held) and the Ideo dicit Ecclesia ad ipsam in Him.
Monstra ^e esse matrem.
Aue Mary's in the other: upon which the Blessed Virgin no sooner laid her
helping hand, but it over weiged the first by many ounces. And so the Virgin
obtained that he might be restored to life again, to do further penance.
Here had bin a proof for Iabal, begond D. la. sol.


Min. Unless we were sure of a day, as long Nox facta est longior, Plaut.
as Alcmenaes night, we must make more have. Iabal has with a pretty slight
drawn us into a Labyrinth: for whereas the Counter snarle branded his Poets
pen, with reference to his Overthrow. page 37. he cunningly fetches a Page
20.
circuit, and meets him page 164. and takes that which was quoted of Sedulius
the Poet, to be meant of Bernardinus the Preacher.


Nick. Rachil knows how to turn the Cat in the pan, to sing two parts in
one, as well as the best Chaunter in the Popes Quire: wherefore that we may at
last take our tune in a right Key, let us hear what he has to justify
Sedulius his figurative invocation of the All hayle O Cross.
Cross; What can it say for it self, why it should pass without a fie?


Mi. He has gotten a protection from the practice of the Prophet Cap. 45. v. 8.
Isayah, who by the like figure, speaks to the heavens and clouds, to send
down the Savior of Mankind. O you heavens, (says he) pour down your dew,
and let the clouds rain down the Savior: This prayer (says Iabal) is meant
unto God that rules in the Heavens, and the Clouds; though seemingly directed
to the very Heavens and Clouds.


Nick. He might have learned from the Counter-snarle to have distinguished
between an hyperbolicall exaggeration and a superstitious obsecration. Yet does
he come over my Master with a why not, saying, Why may not a Theological
invocation be uttered in a figurative speech?


Ma. First let him prove Invocation to be due to the Pari ratione Adorentur
pu^llae virgins praesepia, veteres panni: adorentur naues, adorentur Asini
quia Asellum insidendo ad Jerusalem vsque peruenit. Claud. Taurinen.
Cross, and then will we not stand with him for the figure. Figures are to
be used as ornaments of the truth, not as shelters of falsehood. Did Isaiah
fall down to the Clouds, and worship them, as they the Cross? Did he say All
hail O Clouds, as they, All hail O Cross, increase Justice and
Righteousness in godly men, and grant pardon to the guilty. If not, then
quorsum haec? as just as Germans lips, nine mile a sunder.


Min. His Seraphicall Doctor Thomas Thomas super Isayam. cap. 45.
Aquinas made no such collection out of that text of Isayah: his words are
these, Hic describit natiuitatem Cyri sub Metaphora fructus arboris, ad cuius
generationem requiritur humor terrae and pluuia, and ros de coelo. Here he
describes the birth of Cyrus, by the metaphor of the fruit of a tree, to the
ripening whereof there must concur, the moistnes of the earth, and the dew of
heaven. The truth is, let him take the words in what sense he will, either
literally of Cyrus, or according to Saint Hierome, Tipically of Christ, the
context makes it evident, that the Prophet speaks not in his own person as a
Non sunt verba hominis precantis, sed Dei imperantis.
suppliant, but in the person of God, whose imperative mandamus, for the
comfort of all true Israelites, he there Prophetically records.


Ma. If this be his best color, a little shoure will wash it of; We do not
find that the Prophet prayed unto the Angels, wherefore it is not probable, he
would either worship or direct religious petitions to the senseless Clouds.
Indeed he Isay c. 1. v. 2. (...).
elsewhere calls upon the Heavens, and the Earth to hear; but with what intent?
only to vpbraid the stupiditie of the graceless people, who stopped their
ears like the death Adder: Super Isayam. Cap. 45.
Inuocatur Creatura (says Thomas) vt arbiter trangressionis in iudicium, quae
fuit testis obligationis ad praeceptum.


Nick. If this be his doughtie argument it is like to prove but a wooden
Cross. Iabal must cast a better figure, if he mean to raise any spiritual
adoration thereunto. To put no difference between speaking to the clouds, and
praying to the Cross argues a dull Dowist indeed. But are we not yet past his
odoriferous Fyes? I verily think Augaeus did not put Hercules to more
drudgerie in emptying his stable, then he has done us, in turning over this
unsavory trash.


Min. Yes, he now brings in his Compurgators to free him from th'imputation
of those slanderous Lies, wherewith he is justly charged.


Ma. They must be of his own rank or else he must give us leave to put them
by.


Nick. Then must we expect a goodly Fraternitic, rather then fail he will
foist in a Page 27
Knight of the Post to back his false Assertions, or else some of those
Friars, whose portraiture Stephen Gardener delineateth in this form. The
Devil Against Joy. page 5.
quoth he, to have man idle, and void of good works, procured out Pardons from
Rome, wherein Heaven was sold for a little money: And for to retaile that
Merchandise, he used Friars for his Ministers. Now they be gone, with all their
trumpery, both the Merchandise is abhorred, and the Ministers also; We cannot
away with the Friars, ne can abide the name. So that we have reason to except
against these.


Min. I persuade my self he will hardly find any so brazen-faced, as to auerre
that In Ouerth. page 239.
England Ministers sometimes presume to give Baptism in the juice of herbs,
or flowers, as in Rose water, which Iabal scandalously professes, that he has
credibly heard.


Ma. Malice it self cannot be so purblind, as not to discern in what Limbeck
this water was distilled, which has so strong a relish of a Cretian brain. If
this be not a Lie in Folio, we must confess, there can nothing but truth
drop from a Shauelings pen.


Nick. The fume of the holy water, wherewith he besprinckled his Ladies, was in
his nose when he breathed out this notorious fiction. Yet of the twain, I had
rather be dipped over head and ears in Rosewater, then have such a goatish
Gorgonius to spit in my mouth.


Min. There is no remedy but his imaginary supposals must pass as current
Oracles. If the Pope can not err, you must think a Priest cannot lie. If he
tax our Ministers as being Page 27.
skillful in taking of purses, or as ordinary students in Ouerth. page 53.
impure books, his creatures under peril of a praemunire, are bound to second
his leaden Legends, with their credulous assent.


Ma. He would not be so busy in blasting our Ministers, did he remember the
letter, which a Friar brought from hell to certain Priests of his own Order;
the tenor whereof was this. Principes tenebrarum, Principibus Ecclesiarum
Salutem. Gratias vobis referimus, quia quot vobis commissi, tot sunt nobis
missi.


Min. You say well, Friar In sermon de f^^to Sancti ^las^ page 36. b.
Jeremy has registered it upon record, wherefore Iabal has reason to believe
it: but I fear the poor Friar is like to have but a simple fee for his pains.


Nick. Rachil shall be sure to have my voice for the whetstone; he dwells among
such kind neighbors that he has a credible author always at hand, to set
wings upon his deprauing quill, which he cannot endure to be stopped in the
praecipitate flight.


Min. It sore grieved the heart of honest Helmetius to see the profaneness of
that tribe. Henr. Helmetiu^ T^m. 3. Ser. Se^n dic^r^^e^s.
Heu, heu, (says he) ipsis lenonibus impudentiores, et carnaliores sunt multi
Sacerdotes, et Scurris secleratiores. It Is well he has nothing to charge us
withal, but that which he gathers from factious rumors spread by maleuelous
spirits, to bring our persons and doctrine into contempt. Yet as if his cares
were made of touchston to try the truth, he stands to justify whatsoeu^r he
has heard, though it swell ten times bigger by the touch of his venomous
pen. Hark how he takes on with the Knight: You cannot Fides non cogitur.
believe (says he) that a Gentleman of honor, from my Lord De la Wares own
mouth brought me news, that he could not get of your Universities, more then
one Minister, to go to the Evangelical voyage of Virginia.


Ma. The Knight should be ill advised to cope with such a Chimney-sweeper as
this Rachil is, from whom he shall get nothing but soot, though he give him the
foil. What hope can there be of good dealing from him, who is never destitute
of some honorable person or other, to Father his misbegotten fictions? who
will not believe the testimony of a Gentleman of Honor? the very title gains
credit wheresoever it goes. Thus will he coin what he please, with
th'impresse of his own sinister imagination. But first let us have assurance
of his good behavior, if he would have us believe, that he has such a
familiar converse, with men of that note: otherwise we cannot but suspect his
authors wit, in the prodigal emptying of news to such a blabbe, who has no
more hold of his tongue, then he would seem to have of his Page 27.
purse.


Nick. Well; because he shall be beholding unto us, let us grant first that
the founder was honorable, though perhaps no better man then Iabal: Secondly
that the relation was true, which my Master does not gainsay; what will he
thence infer?


Min. Nay for Logical deductions let him alone, he will hale his intent with
a Cart-rope of forced Absurdities, rather then fail of his purpose; Witness
these consequences: Sir Edward is said to love Preface
Wine and Sugar; Ergo when he wrote, the Page 56.
single Lamp doubled in his eye, which happens to them that love wine, when
they have their Cup in their hand. Ergo in Father Page 94.
Ennius case. Again, Sir Edward can repeat more then a piece of Augustine
without a prompter; Ergo he has the large Page 3.
Volumes of that learned Father without book. And his Page 85.
nose did not smoke so much as his Chimneys, Ergo he has a big nose: with a
million of such sandy Well beseeming a Bangoring disputant. Page 168.
Enthymems.


Nick. Is this the Page 84.
rigor of Logic? this is right, Baculus stat in angulo. Ergo, Tobies Dog
wagg'd his tail. If this be the validity of his invincible arguments, he must
be feign to sell his Preface.
cloth of silver, and costly merchandise, or else he will hardly maintain
those halt and maimed reasons, which will loose their limbs in this conflict.
His best way will be to give them a Pasport to beg for relief.


Ma. He professes that he did Page 13.
seriously undertake this task, therefore I would gladly be informed what
disparagement can be fastened upon our Ministry, from the Paucity of Virginean
Preachers.


Min. Marry want of zeal, as rather Ouerth. page 320.
converting themselves to their wives, then bringing Heathens, and Savages,
unto God. For my part (says he) I make no doubt but had there been a married
Ministry in the Church in former ages, most nations had been unconverted at
this day.


Ma. As if our Academicks, who are Fellows of Colleges (whom he vpbraideth)
were married men, then had he spoken somewhat to the purpose: but (not to put
him besides his opinionatiue conjecture) he should rather have commended their
discretion. For though they had neither wives nor parochial charges to detain
them, yet might they well think to do little good, the language of that people
being not yet understood by those of the first plantation. Moreover it is not
fit that students in Divinity should be of Iabalis gadding humor, to run
rashly into foreign parts, without the Campian had order from his Provost, as
he professes before he undertook his voyage.
command of authority; Neither had authority reason to send, before they had
lawful power of command in the Territoryes of the Infidells. As soon as
Commerce has bred greater familiarity, he may assure himself, the Laborers
shall not be few. And for the conversion of the Indies, wherewith he seems to
confront us, the Christian world has taken sufficient notice. It was wrought
rather ore gladij, then Gladio oris, with the point of the sword, then with the
dint of argument; otherwise their tyrannous and auaricious proiects had been
enough to drive them from the faith; though they had been somewhat addicted
thereunto before.


Min. These and many more reasons might the Knight have alleged, which he
rather chose to leave to his manuring, to whose purchase that subject did
appertain. The Libellers inquisitiue curiosity, in stuffing his book with
heare-sayes, and reports, was that against which he did inueigh, as holding it
not fit for a private obscure fellow, to intermeddle in the Secrecies of privy
Counselors, much less in the managing of public affairs, wherein there are
many abstruse mysteries far above common reach.


Nick. But did he not term his Countrymen Ouerth. page 81.
Parlamentariens? Did he not covertly exclude that glorious Queens Ghost,
from the company of her Ancestors? Dares he put a mentiri also upon these?


Ma. Howsoever he understand the word Nec tales alibi s^cile (...) tot. Aug.
Con. Iul.
Parlamentarians, we may count it the great happiness of our English nation,
that they who deserved the greatest interest in that name, have testified their
religious and well disposed minds in such a kind, as Iaball will either
unwillingly hear, or hardly believe. S. Margarets Church at Westminster (where
upon the seventeenth of April last, To the number of 409. that day present.
the whole house of Commons then arrived, by their own voluntary order
received the Communion together) can sufficiently testify the unanimity of
their consent, the piety, loyalty, and charity of their affections; Neither was
any after admitted into that house, until he had given testimony of his
sincerity by seconding the same.


Nick. If this be the fruit of Parlamentarians, then out of doubt the Popes
cake is dow: Antichrist will be soon out of heart and hope, for ever
displaying his holy banner upon Britains Soil. It is not the supposed
rusticity of one man's pen, that can make that nation be reputed either
Clownish or infamous, which has variety of such worthy and well disposed
Burgesses. But let us hear how he shifts off that implicit censure, whereby
he debarred the late Queens soul from accompanying her predecessors. His
words are yet extant in this form. This Queen is now gathered to her Father (
Ouerth. page 104.
I cannot say Fathers) seeing not one of her noble Ancestors besides him, were
of her faith, nor he but in part.)


Min. Iabal shows himself a man of valor, he will not budge an inch from
his word, he now Page 25.
bounds this his shameless Parenthesis with a strong fence. Why should his
company (says he) seem dishonorable to that Saint? Do you fear he may marry
with his daughter in that world, as it is Mark his old Demonstration.
reported he did in this? Or do you glaunce at the doubtfulnesse of her blood,
that perchance not the King, but some other put to death with her mother, was
indeed her true father?


Nick. He mends the matter well, and speaks like a grave Divine: this is a
right model of Romish charity. Had Iabals Grandfather blurted out half so
much, his head would have been soon set higher then his hands could have well
reached, his clothes would have dropped into the hang man's budget.


Ma. The wrong complained of was in consorting her with her Father, but in
sequestring them both from the rest of their royal progenitors, though it
please him to cast doubts with his wit, for his Catholic partiality to
decide. But if none of her forefathers were of her Faith, then was there no
small injustice in the Pope to Vide Doctor Whites defense. ca. 6. Numb. 3.
depose, and murder so many of them, by his regular Agents. No marvel if
fear compelled many of them to conceal their Faith, where there was such
appearance of hazarding their Crowns.


Min. We must confess her Father was a man, and so subject to infirmities,
which yet had bin much less, had they not been fuelled by the Popes
temporizing dispensations. He was also a potent King, and so subject to unjust
detractions. But were old Bishop Longland his Confessor now alive, he would
take up Iabal for Hawks-meate, and teach him a trick for blowing the dust of
dead Princes into the eyes of living posterity.


Ma. What was the opinion of that reverend Prelate, touching that King, whom
Iabal collyeth with his sinister and causlesse doubts.


Min. You shall hear him deliver his mind in his own In Epist. praesi^. Psalm.
penitent.
phrase. Huius eruditio singularis, prudentia summa, moderatio certa,
temperantia mira, patientia firma, benignitas absoluta, pietas admiranda,
iudicium grave, perspicax, solidum, et perfectum, virtutum omnium exercitatio
quotidiana. Thus does he extol that King, whose renown Iabal seeks so to
eclipse, by the interposition of an incestuous crime. Nay he does not stick
to say, Psalmorum quos David octo beatitudinibus praeditus conscripsit
interpretationes, ad Henricum eius nominis Octauum inuictissimum Angliae regem
spectant: concluding that whatsoever was eminent in David's virtues, was every
way appliable to Henry the eight; Cui (says he) cum caeteris earundem
beatitudinum candidatis, in octaua illa aetate salus et gloria non dubitanter
expectantur. So that till Iabals credit be held equivalent with the Bishops
worth; we must crave leave to believe him, to whom the King was best known.


Ma. Had he not named Henry the eight, I should verily have thought, I had
heard a viue description of that Noble Lady, that Match-lesse Princess Queen
Elizabeth in whom all these rare qualities had such a visible essence: and had
her Father been silent, she should yet have been Ex quouis ligno non fit
Mercurius.
more then probably judged, to be the royal Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis.
daughter of so great a King.


Nick. I would not wish his brother the Iewsewite of Portugal to stir this
Pamphletter too much, if he do he will not spare to impeach his own mothers
honesty to prove him illegitimate. If all men were of my mind, there should
none vow Virginity, seeing there is so little respect of a Virgin Queen.


Ma. You see how tender his conscience is, in bolting out his own conjectures
against the dead, the hemme of whose garments he was unworthy to touch; What
has he more to say? Let us hear him out to the last period.


Min. He will not yield that he was hired by the Page 27.
Ladies liberal purse-promises; this is a base surmise: Education has made
him too proud, to stoop to such base cares. He (good man) is content with the
inexhaust treasure of his providence, who feeds the birds of the air.


Ma. It Is well experience has yet at last made those honorable Ladies wiser,
then to wast their husbands patrimonies upon such Epicures, whose bellies are
deeper then the bottom less pit. Let them once rid their hands of these
Locustes, and I dare undertake their Lords will turn purchasers: Whersoeuer
these lean Kine come, they will soon devour the fattest Manor: both head,
hide, and hoof; they will make no bones of a Lordship. It must be an inexhaust
treasure indeed, that can stop a Popelings mouth; witness those infinite
revenues, not far inferior to those of the Crown, which that Antichristian
beast did suck, out of this little I Will. I think the Popes have been well
paid for their pretended conversion of this Land, so that it is now injustice
for their hirelings to Ouerth. page 323.
twit us in the teeth therewith any more being answered to the full.


Nick. Sure Rachil has better fortune then all his fellows, that he is grown
so careless of coin: his poor Camragues of Doway (who think themselves not
inferior) complain of their Preface to the Dowy Bible.
poor estate in banishment. Had they had Iabals purse, their translation of
the old testament should not have lien so long upon their hands.


Ma. There is great reason they should Socij laboris participes mercedis.
part stakes. But do you observe their iugling? when they would have their
Ladies strech their purse-strings, then they complain of poor estate,
pretending extreme poverty; though they have enough of the old store, to fee
the traitorous Agents to weary the press with scandalous untruths, and to
trouble whole States, with seditious garboiles: but when they are accused as
mercenarie hirelings, aiming rather at the disgrace of particular persons, then
the trial of the truth; then forsooth they scorn the motion, then Page 27.
our Ministers are more skillful in taking other men's purses, then they are in
keeping their own.


Min. He professes, if he may be credited upon his word, that he was not a
penny richer by that deceased Lady, who was thought to give the first
pecuniarie encouragement to his pen.


Nick. Me thinks I smell a Rat, for a wager here is a cast of equivocation.
He was not a penny richer by her. vizt. after she renounced the Romish
trash: and with this reservation, I dare swear Rachil speaks truth.


Min. Nay he heard a Well fare Nicholas Nemo he will help at a pinch. Page 22.
namelesse Knight of better credit then your Master, avouch that she died in
the Catholic faith.


Nick. That is in the faith which Protestants hold to be Catholic: Otherwise
she would never have sought for new servants, of another lare, to be placed
about her; neither would she have heard divine Service (though secretly)
according to our English Lyturgie, nor refused confession: happily she was not
thoroughly resolved in all points, neither was it Omnis subita mutatio
periculosa.
possible, that an habit so long continued, should be so suddenly removed. The
truth is, she found her self so wearied with the Ignatian fopperies, that she
could not endure their access, which some of them did not well digest.


Min. Then here is the Catastrophe of this Scene: his next Chapter is wholly
Elenchticall; but seeing he can no better defend him self, there is no great
likelihood he should much offend us. By my consent in this his next material
tract, Ne inquam and inquit saepius interponerentur. Cic.

Non tam seruiendum venustati Dialogorum quam materiae commoditati, cum stultum
foret maiorem vtilitatem propter minorem negligere. Laur. Val. de. vol. lib. 3


Iabal shall have a course to speak in his own person, so shall our Dialogue
make a full mess.


Nick. Then enter Doctor Iabal, thou shall have my good leave to play the
Proloquutor.


PVRGATORIES KNELL.
CHAP. II. The Macchabees vnthronized.
Iabal I Page 26.
should not match my self with such contemptible adversaries, by whose
overthrow, profit (and that eternal) may accrue unto them, small praise redound
to my self, by the conquest of scolding and feminine Antagonists; Yet Page 3.
now seeing you provoke me thereunto, I will Page 29.
boldly survey the Knights Hell, or Letter against Purgatory. The Pref.
Judicious Reader will not wonder that your rude hammering with heavy
reproaches on the Rock of truth, does fetch out some lively sparks of just
disdain.


Nick. What! contemptible adversaries? Quod efficit tale magis tale.
scolding and feminine Antagonists? rude hammering? Just disdain? so blunt at
the first dash? are these your Doway salutations? It Is well, Master Mayor, we
have your company to keep the peace. Out of doubt the Doctor has pissed on a
nettle: his Nurse was too blame, she should have given him more stamped
Grunsill in his milk, he is so exceedingly troubled with the fret.


Ma. Surely Sir (with your favor) I see no such reason for your contemptuous
disdain. If you stand upon your Schollershippe, I dare say our Vicar has gone
as long to School; If upon your place, I would you should know, I am not the
meanest man in my Corporation; Or if the opinion of your wit, have blown up
the empty bladder of this your swollen conceit, here is honest Nick a boon
Lad, one that Nouit and is lepidas audire et reddere voces.
knows how to take, and return a jest, as well as the best youth in the
Parish. I dare undertake he shall hold you play to the last cast: always
provided that there do no Pref.
smoakie mists of personal Scoffs against the Knight his Master vampe from
your marish mouth, for then he will be as hot as a toste, you shall find he
will carry no coals, if once you touch his copie-hold.


Min. Then shall we not need to decline this survey Singulis pro persona and
dignitate orationem assignauinius.
th'opponent being thus fitted ad omnia quare; whether he be material, facete,
or verbal, he shall be met withal upon equal terms with his own weapons in
his own kind: Wherefore Domine IABAL rem aggredere: what page 29.
Folly and Falsehood can you discover in the Knights Letter to T. H?


Iab. If page 30.
lying kills the soul, what are the Knights leaves but a dead letter,
wherein there are gross and inexcusable corruptions of the most learned of the
Ancient Fathers, concerning a point of highest importance, to wit the
Canonical authority of the Book of Macchabees, where Purgatory, and other
points of Catholic Doctrine, which you peremptorily deny, are directly
proved.


Ma. I cannot blame you for so high esteeming the Book of Macchabees. If that
Lock be once cut off, your strength for the maintenance of Purgatory will
soon fail. If that Cesterne yield you no water, your tongue will cleave to
the roof of your mouth, for want of that moisture, which now makes it so
glibbe; your Prayer for the dead will be then soon put to silence, and
enforced to beg Patronage from the Legends. Well I doubt not but you will be
driven from that Hold before this combat be at an end. In the mean season
you may do well to acquaint us with the gross, and inexcusable corruptions,
wherewith you charge the Knights Letter, as injurious to the most learned of
the Ancient Fathers.


Iab. His Page 34.
Letter to prove that the Machabees were Canonical in Saint Aug. Judgment
says in this sort. It is not our surmise, that Saint Augustine seems to
signify so much, who elsewhere, to wit, in the Book De Mirabilibus sacrae
Scripturae does plainly and determinately say, That they are not of the divine
Canon.


Ma. Nay good Doctor, let us have fair play. Show me where he endeauours to
prove that the Macchabees were Canonical? and we will be easily entreated to
yield you the bucklers: he pleades and proves the contrary throughout his
discourse. Besides it is no honest dealing to insert a Parenthesis into your
Adversaries text. These words (to wit in the Book De mirabilibus sacrae
Scripturae) bear the counterfeit stamp of your own will. The Knight says
only, that Saint Aug. elsewhere excludes them from the Divine Canon; for
proof whereof he does in the same page cite his words Contra Gaudent. and for
the better passage hereof, he premiseth a testimony out of the book De
Mirabilibus, written Anno Domini 627. which he margents with Saint Augustines
name, as being to be found only amongst his tomes.


Iab. Ouerth. page 134.
Was not Sir Edward (think you) here bobbed by the Bachelor or some Lecturer?
He Ouerth. page 133.
cites the Book de Mirabilibus by their directions as Saint Augustines, which
all learned men with one consent discard from the number, as a Book of no
account. Can Ouerth. page 134.
any stain to his Knighthood be greater, then to be thought so notorious a
Falsifier of so great and learned a Father, even in print?


Min. Is this so inexpiable an error, that no satisfaction may redeem? I had
thought his many reasons alleged in the Counter-snarle would have given
content to any judicious eye, but I perceive malice will hold the least
advantage with tooth and nail.


Iab. Did Page 34.
he only note in the margent where that Book and sentence might be found, and
not resolutely auerre in his text, that it was plainly, and determinately his
saying?


Min. I must be your Echo, He did only note in the margent. And you must know
there is great difference, between a cursorie marginall note, and a resolute
textuall assertion. It might have sufficed you, that that Book was very near
a thousand year old long (as he tells you) before Luther was born; and of such
esteem that it was annexed to his writings, who was then most eminent. So
ancient a testimony could not but give a great Shake to the Macchabees.


Iab. But Page 34.
why did he cite it for Saint Augustines, against his conscience and
knowledge, as he since confesses?


Min. You may as well ask Ludouicus Viualdus why in the very text of his
Tractate, De Veritate Contritionis. page 31. he cites the same father for a
saying taken out of the Book De duodecim Abusionum gradibus, saying, Haec
Augustinus: whereas in the 42. page of the said Book he makes this
acknowledgement of the same work; Hic liber a quibusdam ascribitur Hugoni de
Sancto Victore, Alij vero tribuunt Cypriano. You might have done well to have
taken him to school, and taught him never to have cited that Book, without
that tedious Appendix. So should Augustine have been well attended, with a man
or two still waiting at his heels.


Ma. Verily the good man would have taken it ill at his hands who should have
laid Ignorance or Fraud to his charge: To have taxed him with Page 37.
Reseruations, and Equivocations in his writings about matters of Religion, to
deceive his less wary Readers, had been an irrecompensable wrong; Yet is he
in the same praedicament with the Knight. Every pen (especially in marginall
directs) is not patient at all times of such tedious circumlocutions. The
quoting of the place where the sentence may be found, freeth the Author from
the suspicion of fraudulent tricks. It was neither his Ignorance nor Fraud
that he so quoted it, but a strong presumption of his Adversaries skill, whom
he deemed no stranger to the worst retainor to Saint Augustines works.


Nick. I would gladly be informed how you would have had my master allege that
place. Had the margent been blanke, the coherence perhaps would have carried it
as S. Augustines speech, whereas now the Reader has a reference to the place,
here he may be informed, both of the Antiquity and credit of the Author, and
so pass his censure as he shall find cause.


Iab. Page 31.
Had it been any discredit to have confessed those quotations were by some
Minister suggested unto him? your valiant writer and Deane Doctor Morton, was
he not driven die his adversaries to acknowledge that he had taken some
corrupted testimonies of our Authors upon the credit of John Stock, and R. C?


Nick. See how modesty creepes upon Doctor Smooth-bootes. O how jealous he
would seem to be of my masters credit, which he spares not to ouerlay at his
pleasure, with Cart-loades of kitchin-stuffe scraped from the sluttish sides of
his own greazie kettles!


Ma. How corrupt the testimonies of your own Authors are I will not take upon
me to judge, but (as I have heard) R. Stock has satisfied for himself, and
these eyes have seen a sufficient discharge for the other in a late learned
Encounter against Master Parsons; so that the Obiector has little cause to
glory, unless it be in his own shame. As for the Knight, howsoever you may
think him beholding unto you Page 31.
for devising in his defense such an honorable excuse, he needs neither
your device nor defense, that being no less prejudicial to the sincerity of
his entendments, then this In beneficio habendum non est, sub honoris specie
contumeliam pati.
dishonorable to his personal endowments. Your quaint devises (fittest for
cracked causes) will I fear be too thin to fence your own head from a
fatal blow.


Min. He shall not need to Father this quotation upon any Minister: what will
you say Doctor Iabal, if the Knight be able to produce this book so fathered
upon S. Augustine, without your distinction of Page 38.
Anonymi cuiusdam, even by your own disputants? I hope you will then confess,
this Reservation was worth the concealing, to hit the nail home to the head at
the last blow.


Nick. What Iabal! who has cast milk in your face? never change countenance
for the matter.


Iab. Page 30.
All learned men by one consent discard it from that number as a book of no
account. It is a most gross and inexcusable Corruption suggested by some
notorious falsificator, trencher Schoolmasters, or Mercenary Lecturer,
perchance even by Master Crashaw himself.


Min. Your aim then is this: whosoever alleges the book De Mirabilibus
under S. Augustines name, is a Notorious etc. But being some two months since
with Sir Edward upon occasion of a Kentish Library which was to be sold, he
showed me the same book so cited, not only by Confess. Augustine. l. 4. c. 10.
Sect. 6.
Hierom Torrensis, to prove Enoch in viuis adhuc esse, et vnemquemque recipere
spiritum sanctum in baptismo; but also by your renowned Confess. Petrikon. ca.
80.
Hosius, to prove Esdram restituisse libros legis. Now Nick make you the
conclusion.


Nick. Ergo Iabals consorts must divide the Notorious falsifier between them:
Ergo Iabal might have spared a number of wast words: Ergo these Popinians have
more skill of Page 33.
trenchers then of Authors: Ergo the Church of Rome has played many such false
tricks: Ergo, it was either their Page 36.
ignorance that indeed they thought that book was his; or their fraud which
made them utter what they knew was false, to deceive the Reader: Ergo their
Editions both ancient and Modern, do either not at all, or not so visibly,
distinguish these supposititious works from those of the ancient Fathers, with
Anonymi cuiusdam in every page, as our Page 38.
Bibles do disioyne the Apocrypha from the Canonical Scriptures; Ergo, if
Iabal have the least grain of wit, or grace, he will give no more such swinge
to his unruly and pettish pen.


Ma. Doctor Iabal, unless you be partial, these inferences must needs be
granted, they are your own upon the like supposition. It Is fit every bird
should have her own feathers. That which you dare not disallow in your own
writers, must not so severely be prosecuted against ours. It pitties me to see
how you are plunged. The Knight is able to teach twenty such fabling
disputants. I cannot but smile to think how artificially he has trayn'd you
along to bewray your want of Wit, and surplusage of malice. Let this be a
warning unto you, in your next work to be more considerate. For now the
notorious falsehood (wherewith you have been so enraged) Page 41.
cleaues so fast to your fingers, that unless you have somewhat else of
greater moment to say, you must be feign to rub them rudely upon your own Coat.


Iab. The Ibid.
second place he brought out of S. Augustine against the book of Machabees,
was a sentence in his book against the Epistle to Gaudentius, against which my
accusation was that his Minister had added the last sentence, containing the
substance of the matter, unto Saint Augustine.


Ma. You should rather tell us how honest and modest an answer you received.
This last clause (says he) I wonder how it should pass my sight in the
review: for perusing my first draught I find go written short in another
letter, to distinguish my inference from Augustines proof. It seems either
my Manuaries have, or the Printers misprision has turned go into sed, as if
the same had been continued, which former error made them omit (consequently)
in the English reddition.


Iab. That there was a short go in his first draught seems not very probable,
for Page 42.
what likeness is there between go and sed that his Manuary or printer should
take the one for the other?


Min. Nay read it with Sed as it was printed; and then you shall hardly find
common sense. Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab ecclesia non inutiliter, si
sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, maxim propter istos Martyrs Macchabaeos, sed ob
hanc causam in Canone morum non fidei censcriposset, This sed ob hanc causam
does not relish of a Scholars pen, which should rather be, et ob hanc
causam. So that you may well think the Knight was not so simple, in so gross
a manner wittingly to make that sweet Father speak gibbrish in a Dialect so
unlike his own; you are a happy man whose lines do pass the Press without
any scarre.


Nick. I pray you what likeness is there between Sacer dotes and Scortatores?
yet as I have heard my master say; in one Edition of the new Testament set out
at Coleyn, in steed of these words. 1. Cor. 6.9.
Neque Scortatores regnu^ dei possidebunt, he has found it thus printed: Neque
Sacerdotes regnum dei possidebunt. I hope you will not challenge the Printer
for allusion to your old trade. I persuade my self it was his misprision,
though some have thought he did it to cry quittance with his wives Confessor.
I hope this was more then the change of one poor syllable, the tail of the g
being the same with a Roman s: and a running o. not improbably to be supposed
to have lost the head of a d. through have of a speedy pen. To put vt for at is
no such capital crime.


Ma. You should rather demand of him, what likeness there is between 34. and
42. 169. and 168. 176. and 172. Such errors are so frequent in his book, that
it must of necessity cause wrong quotations: yet in my conscience I do not
think the Doctor was accessory to these, or the like scapes wherewith his
lines do abound. It Is like the Printer thought he had no great good match of
your book: Had he not misdoubted the current sale thereof, he would have had
a more vigilant eye over the press: this his presage made him put Page 63. N.
43 lin. 6.
give for deny. Io. lin. 8.
Indeleble for undeniable. Page 92: N. 3.
Edition for Reddition. Page 101. N. 13.
Devised for divided. Page 52. N. 29
long for low. Page 129. N. 6.
Joined for moved. Page 180. N. 27,
Burned for drowned, Pa. 40. N. 15
was for (his old serviceable attendant) As. The surplusage, and defect of many
other words gives us just cause to suspect either the Printers care, or the
Authors skill: so that you may well wink at such small faults, as the escape of
a Monosyllable or two.


Iab. Why Page 42.
should he make his Inference in Latin, writing in English? what English Author
uses that idle manner of Writing but himself?


Min. As if a Scholar being in his own Element may not be easily carried away
with a strong imagination that he is in the Schools, especially writing to a
Scholar about Theological questions. This I have many times observed in the
Knight, that it is yrksom unto him to write any thing Verbatim, which has
passed his pen before, neither does he without urgent necessity render that
authority in English, which he has quoted in Latin. All wits have not the
patience alike to endure the repetition of the same things, and such for the
most part take that first, which first offers it self and may be dispatched
with fewest Characters taking up the least room.


Ma. Whether his Inference were in Latin or English, it is litigium de forma;
I am sure he vouched S. Hieromes In praef. lib. Sal
authority, that the Church read the book of Machabees for the edification of
the common people, but received them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures, for
the authorizing of Ecclesiastical decrees: which was as much as the Knight
intended by secluding them from the Canon of Faith.


Iab. This is nothing to the purpose Page 43.
to prove S. Augustine did reject them, who might be contrary to S. Hierome in
this point, not being then defined by any general Council.


Ma. S. Hierome contrary to S. Augustine? Is not this goodly Rhetorique to draw
the Ladies to build their faith upon the writings of the ancient Fathers? Is
there any more then one truth? Either the book of Machabees is Canonical, or
not. You say S. Augustine auerrs it; we prove that S. Hierome, Lyra, Brito,
Rabanus, Caietan, etc. deny it. Whom shall your Creatures believe? Will you
suffer them to have such reeling and tottering Consciences?


Iab. Page 44.
Caietan, whom he cites, iumps not altogether with your conceit, and though he
did, his sayings are not oracles with us.


Min. This kind of disputing will neither get you a Miter, nor a Cardinals
Hatte. Set you so light by the head-men of your parish? Good Dctour let us know
to whose verdit you will stand: dare you say to S. Augustines? are all his
sayings Oracles in your Church? Nay says In Act. Apost. cap. 1. p. 9. a.
Lorinus, Augustinus incertum putat an Iste Theophilus idem sit, cui Lucas
Euangelium et Acta nuncupauerit: Atqui res certa videtur. The Divines of (...).
De Trinit. l. 9. c. 2. in Marg.
Louane lay Sophistry to his charge. So likewise writes your Jesuit Comment.
in Johan. 6.53.
Maldonate, Augustini et Innocentij primi sententia fuit, quae sexcentos fere
annos viguit in ecclesia, Eucharistiam etiam infantibus necessariam esse, quae
tandem ab ecclesia reiecta est. The opinion of Augustine and Innocentius the
first, which was received in the Church well nigh six hundred years, was
this: that the Eucharist was necessarily to be ministered unto Infants, which
at length is rejected by the church. Negare non possumus, says In Thom. disp
154. cap. 2. and 3.
Vazquez, praedictam opinionem fuisse Augustini et Fulgentij, a qua non multum
Gregorius Magnus abhorret, tamen meo iudicio probabilior, eos nulla alia paena
quam damni, id est priuatione beatitudinis, puniri. Albeit we cannot deny that
Ser. 14. de verb. Apost. et l. 5. cont. Iulia^. c. 8.
Aug. and Fulgentius did teach that Infants dying without Baptism did
presently descend into the place of the damned, to be sensibly tormented in
hellfire, yet notwithstanding in my judgment it is more probable that they
undergo no other punishment, then the loss and privation of beatitude. The
like censure does Concor. Euang. tom. 1. lib. 7. ca. 8,
Barradius pass upon Euthymius. Hocloco (says he) Euthymius non recte de
Virgin sanctissima haec scripsit: Non credidit sicut Zacharias etc. Procul a
Christiano pectore et auribus huiusmodi sint verba. Thus does your Church
sponge out the opinions of the ancient Fathers, upon whom you seem so
steadfastly to rely.


Ma. Then it seems the matter is not great, what S. Augustines opinion was
touching the Legitimation of the Machabees, seeing his words are no Oracles,
even with the Doctors of the Romish Church; and the rather because the book
(according to Iabals confession) was not then naturalized, by the consent of
any Occumenicall Couacell.


Nick. This is a pretty slight: The Fathers are but as feathers when they do
not stick to the Popelings. I trow Saint Hierome shall find more favor at your
hands.


Iab. Saint Page 43.
Hierome may seem to speak acoording to the opinion of the Hebrews, as he
uses to do, not in his own.


Ma. This shift is fetched beyond the circumference of all probable
Appararance. He speaks in the In Pref. l^b. Salomonis.
present (not in the preterperfect) tense of the Church then being: Legit
ECCLESIA, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit. Yea by way of
toleration he delivers his mind permissiuely thus, Legate Ecclesia ad
edificationem plebis, (yet with this Limitation) non ad authoritatem dogmatum
Ecclesiasticorum confirmandam. De Ciuit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 38.
Yea S. Augustine himself confesses that one and the same man may write some
things historica diligentia, which (though proceeding from himself) may serve
ad vbertatem cognitionis: and other things ex inspiratione diuina, which must
be received ad authoritatem religionis.


Iab. Those Page 43.
words come short of your sum, to prove your Protestant distinction of the
Canon of Manners, and Canon of faith.


Ma. I grant Saint Hieromes sentence does not deliver these words in so many
explicit sillables, yet does it necessarily imply as much in the implicit
sense. The Church reads them for the edification of the people, therefore
they are in the Canon of Manners, and serve to the bettering of knowledge: The
Church receives them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures, Therefore they
are not in the Canon of faith, as tending to the authority of Religion.


Iab. Every book Ibid.
that may be read for edification in the Church, may not be termed a rule of
Manners. What is just with the rule of Manners, is certainly good; But actions
aacording to these books we speak of, the Knight grants may be wicked.
For example, to kill himself, is a thing unlawful, yet it is conformable to
those actions, that he says are praised in the Macchabees: How then can they
be the Canon and Rule of Manners?


Min. Besides the Primarie and Divine Canon of Manners, properly so called (I
mean the Canonical Scripture) which is absolutely to be received, as wholly
authentical, by and in it self, there is also a Subordinate Ecclesiastical
rule, which by virtue of Concordance, is so far to be admitted for a rule,
as it is consonant to the first. Thus the Macchabees from So we call that
awedge of Gold wherein there is some dross.
the best and greatest part, (which is certainly good) may deriuatiuely receive
the Denomination of the Canon of Manners, albeit some little portion thereof be
not leuelled and squared according to the first vnerrable squire. This
Deuiation though it exclude not the reading of the rest, which may serve as a
Subsidiarie promoter of edification, yet can it not but debar the whole from
the Supremacy of In Apocriphis etsi inuenitur aliqua veritas tamen propter
multa falsa nulla est Canonica authoritas. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 23.
Canonical esteem.


Ma. Sir, It is your courtesy thus to explane your self. Yet under correction
you do not well to fly after the Doctors Lure. It is sufficient for you that
Saint A Diuo Hieronimo extra Canonicos libros supputantur, and inter Apocripha
locantur, etc. Ad Hieronimi lima^ reducenda sunt tam verba Conciliorum quam
Doctorum. Caietan. ad fin. comment. in l. hist. Vet. Test.
Hieromes undeniable testimony has explaned Saint Augustines, Si Sobrie: by
which, though the toleration of the Macchabees be permitted, yet the
Canonization is utterly Maxim propter istos Martyrs Machabaeos.
disanulled. It belongs to his task to prove them to be of the Divine
Canon, which he shall more easily attempt, then accomplish, seeing Saint
Augustine himself confesses, that the Ancient Jews (vtriusque tabulae
custodes) did not receive them, as they did the Law, the Prophets, and the
Psalms: So that it will be a point of no small difficulty (without some
Night-Ghosts revelation) to show by what warrant or means the Church of Christ
was after moved to adopt them.


Iab. I could Page 58.
join with Saint Augustine other Fathers, no less ancient then he,
canonizing the same books, but his testimony may suffice alone, which
brings with it the authority of the Church in his days.


Nick. Alas poor Doctor Brag, this is but a coppie of your countenance: you
will make but a mean living, by singing Solus cum Solo; I trow Master Vicar
wilbee able to vie fathers, as fast as you. Your Mastershippe may perhaps find
a Counter for the Post, but you dare not for your ears be in at the Pair.


Ma. Verily I think Clichtoueus was more then half a Prophet, he does so
visibly deschipher the guise of our Disputant, as if he were here present.
Iudocus Clictoueus in Epist. ad Franciscum Molinum.
Alij sunt (says he) qui non nisi suo credunt consilio, and quod semel
asseruerunt, volunt oraculo solidius vt haberi. Alij autem authoritatula vna,
aut vnius scribentis dicto, vt equus capistro retinentur, and caeteros
aspernaentur, qui ea de re aut dixerunt aut scripserunt.


Min. Sir, it is fair play to till this gamester on by reserving the best card
till the last trick. The Ancient records of the Church shall be produced when
they shall strike all dead; for the present, I think I shall sufficiently
discharge my part, if I make good the Knights argument out of S. Augustines
ground to ratify our conclusion.


Ma. Herein shall you not bestow your pains amiss.


Min. Then thus: Counters. pa. 41
In Holy Canonical Scripture there is no Divine precept or permission to be
found, that either to gain Immortality, or to escape any peril, we may
Placuit vt hi qui per ferrum aut praecipitium sibi ipsis mortem inferunt nulla
pro illis in oblatione commemoratio fiat. Council. Bracaren. 1. ca. 34
make away with our selves, But Razias (mentioned in the Macchabees) is
commended for a fact of this kind: Ergo His non adhibetur fides in quibus etiam
contra fidem librorum Canonicorum quaedam leguntur. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 18.
cap. 38
they are not Canonical.


Iab. It was Page 49.
far from Saint Augustines gravity to read the Macchabees with so little
Sobriety, as to think that Razias was praised for killing himself: Page 51.
writing against the Circumcellians, he does often teach, and largely prove,
that Razias was not commendable for that fact, which the Scripture did report,
not praise.


Min. I will not press you with tautologies, neither would I willingly bring
Lyram ad Asinum, unless you were a better Musician. Lyraes record is extant,
that Lyra in 2. Match. cap. 14
the Scripture of that Book which is received by the Church to be read for the
Information of Manners, does not seem to reprove Razias, but rather to
commend him, for killing himself, etc.


Iab. This is Page 51.
false, and against the mind of Saint Augustine who denies it expressly, Page
49
neither is Lyraes Doctrine to the purpose.


Min. If you grant that Saint Augustine was one of the principal Doctors of
the Church, then listen a while to Ludouicus Viualdus De veritate co^tritiouis.
fol. 52.
De Razia (says he) nobilissimo milite legimus in 2. lib. Match, etc. quod
scipsum (...).
animose ac magnifice in mortem dederit, cuius mors commendatur, ac landibus
extollitur A DOCTORIBVS CATHOLICIS, eo quod ob reuerentiam Dei, atque ob
salutem boni publici consummata fuerit. We read of Razias, etc. Whose death is
commended, and highly extolled by the CATHOLIQVE DOCTORS.


Ma. Was this the opinion of Catholic Doctors in Viualdus his age? then it
seems Saint Augustine was either not well understood, or not reputed in that
rank, or that those Doctors have since changed their minds: Howsoever the
Minor, viz. that Razias is commended for that fact, has the warrant of the
Catholic Doctors, as also of Ludouicus and Lyra, maugre the spurning of your
Wild Asses Page 62
Colt: Therefore the conclusion, that the Macchabees are not Canonical, must
by virtue of Augustines ground be returned with the Page 46.
Goose and Woodcock unto your own keeping.


Nick. Saint Ibid.
Augustines Eagle has already picked out their eyes, and put them to flight;
they begin to droop and hang the wings, so that they will have little maw to
show their heads any more on this Coast.


Iab. Is Page 58
it not credible that some fathers who deny these books were ignorant of the
Churches warrant rather then Saint Aug. so rash and presumptuous as to canonize
them without it.


Ma. Lord what shift the Doctor makes to get loose! his struggling makes me
remember the complaint of an Laurent. Valla de volup. l. 1.
elegant writer which may well beseem Master Rachils ears: Quid facias prauis
ingenijs quae tergiuer santur, and manifestis rationibus repugnant, nec se a
veritate capi sinunt?


Min. Nay on my word he begins to deal more plainly, then I expected. For
whereas before he did set Saint Hierome and Sant Augustine at odds, making no
more account of Caietans pearls then ordinary pebbles, it is to be attributed
to the chollericke fit, wherewith he was overtaken: But now upon better and
more mature deliberation he speaks by the book, and tells us that some Fathers
deny these books. Yet herein he is not well advised, in that to free S
Augustine from rashness and presumption, he sticks not to charge the rest
with ignorance.


Ma. In very deed Doctor, you are an ungracious child, not worthy of your
Mothers blessing. Will you make the Fathers of your Church ignorant in the
warrant of your Church? Shall they be admitted to teach others in doubtful
controversies of faith, who are themselves to seek in the Canon of
Hagiographicall Scripture, which is the ground of faith? I cannot think, that
if the four first general Councels had received these books into the Canon,
they would have been either so ignorant, or so rash and presumptuous, as to
have disallowed them.


Iab. Why Page 50.
should not the Books of Machabees be sacred, though they praise Razias for
this fact, as well as the Book of Judges, where Sampson is praised, who did
the like? If this be Saint Augustines sentence which the Knight cites out Ibid.
of Lyra, that he did that fact by special instinct of the Holy Ghost, who
does not see that your argument to prove the Machabees not to be Scripture, is
not worth a rush?


Min. Whether Saint Augustine were of this mind or no, the Knight referred it
to Lyraes report, who there relates (as he Counters. p. 45
says) either the very words, or the received sense. The Knight does not
peremptorily take upon him to justify the words to have proceeded from
Augustines pen: he only presumed so far upon the Readers patience, as to
write out what Lyra there wrote (without any distinction of Character) touching
the general opinion of the commendation of Razias his fact: wherein as Lyra
Lyra in 2. Match. cap. 14
speaks, some thought Saint Augustine did bear a part.


Nick. Whether it were Augustines assertion, or Lyraes relation, it was
sufficient to prove the Minor, viz. That Razias his murder was there praised.
But how will you answer the like of Sampson, which Iabal brings out of the
Book of Judges? this may seem to infer a secret addition to Augustine his
ground. Where he says No Canonical Book does commend or praise killing ones
self, Iabal by way of supposition annexeth this clause, viz. without special
instinct of the Holy Ghost.


Ma. Master Vicar you think Beggars have no Lice. Who would have looked for
this from the Groom? It is fit you should stop this gap.


Min. Had Razias killed himself by that special instinct, then would not
Saint Augustine have ventured to censure this fact as worthy reproof: but (as
you say) he proves against the Circumcellians, that Razias was Page 51.
not commendable for that fact, which the Scripture did report, not praise.
Besides, the text ascribes it to his own choice, saying, Eligens potius
nobiliter mori: that he chose rather to die 2. Match cap. 14. verse 42.
nobly. Thomas Aquinas also frees the spirit from that motion in this verdit.
Quidam (says he) seipsos Secund. 2 Quaest. 64. art. 5. ad Quint.
interfecerunt, aestimantes se fortiter agere, de quorum numero Razias fuit:
non tamen est vera fortitudo, sed magis quaedam mollities animi. Thus does he
brand it as an aberration from true fortitude, which defect is not incident to
that spirit, which leads into all truth.


Ma. You may spare your pains for any further proof, the Doctor I think is
of your mind in this. It pleased him by occasion of that report which the
Knight laid upon Lyraes pen, touching some men's construction of Augustines
sense, and Razias his fact, to play the Questionist, and to make a doubt of
that, wherein it seems by his silence he holds himself now satisfied.


Nick. Then cannot the Book of Machabees be sacred, which both by evidence of
the text, and the assent of the Catholic Doctors, does praise Razias for
that, whch true fortitude does disclaim, and Canonical Scripture disallow.


Iab. Truly Saint Augustine Page 52.
does so often clearly and peremptorily avouch the Charter of the Machabees,
which confirms Purgatory, to be sacred, that I wonder any man that has
read his works, will undertake to prove the contrary. When he makes the
Catalogue of Canonical Books, does not he rank these with the rest? Did he
not subscribe to the Council of Carthage where those Books were canonized?


Ma. This is that which the Knight did wisely foresee and cautelously labor to
prevent. He feared least his adversary might be ouer-swayed by mistaking of
the word Canonical, which is sometimes taken largely, to signfie as well the
Books that might concern the Rule of Manners, as those which serve for the
foundation of the doctrine of Faith, in which sense your Father and Council
are to be understood: whereas the same word in the strict and proper
signification, does only comprehend the Books, which agree with the Canon of
the Hebrews, according to the general consent of the Ancient Fathers of all
Churches, before the days of Saint Augustine. To this end, he sent no worse
Letter to T.H. page 62.
Messenger to clear this doubt; then a person, eminent, both by name and
place; I mean that famous Cardinal Cajetan. Ne turberis Nouitie (says he) Si
alicubi reperias libros istos inter Canonicos supputari. Cum hac distinctione
poteris discernere dicta Augustini, and scripta in Concilio Prouinciali
Carthaginensi. He tells you that they are thus to be understood, as also that
none but Nouices in the writing of the Ancient Fathers will trouble themselves,
by making any question in so apparent a truth.


Nick. Iabal has well requited him for his pains: I trow he has sent the
Cardinal away with a flea in his ear. If Caietan had been Pope, he would
have been twice advised, before he had so rudely rejected his Oracles. My
fellow Jack Footeman would have no great Maw, to carry a Message to such a
currish Swain, from whom he expects no better entertainment.


Min. Caietan I wis, had more wit in his little finger, then Iabal in his whole
body, Beati Pacifici was his aim. Should such hot-spurres as our Nouice have
been made Arbitrators, there would have been such a broyle amongst the
Fathers as would not be easily reconciled. For if you take away this favorable
and most probable distinction, you should soon see a field pitched between
Vide Admon. praefix. Concord. Bibliorum per haered. Wecheli.
Cyril, Cyprian, Origin, Si quid extra haec inuenitur, inter adulterinos libros
numerandum est. Greg. Nazian.
Nazian zene, Anthonin. Sum. mayor. Part. 3. tit. 18. cap. 6. 2.
Hierome, Alij libri sunt qui non Canonici sed Ecclesiastici a maioribus
appellati sunt: eiusdem ordinis Tobiae, Judith et Machabaeorum libri. Ruffi. in
Symbol. fol. 575.
Ruffinus, Epiphanius, Sunt Canonici veteris testamenti libri viginti duo
l^teris baebraicis numero par^s. A^ban. ex Synopsi.
Athanasius, Eusebius, and Gregory, on the one side discarding them: and
Augustine, the Council of Carthage, and Trent, on the other part defending
them. When this pitched battle should have been fought, the Romanists might
have sought our valiant Sanga under the Trundle-bedde, till the hurly burly had
been at at end: unless they had plucked him out by the heels, no persuasion
would have drawn him to show his face; they are all so peremptory and plain,
against the Canonizing of these Apogriphall books. This was not unknown to
the Cardinal: who was thereby induced to think that S. Augustine took the
word Canonical in the larger sense, as comprehending the Ecclesiastical
writings, within the verge thereof.


Ma. Had it been an error an the Jews not to have received these books, as
they did the Law, and the Prophets; I cannot think, but that Christ or his
Apostles would surely have reproved so notable a crime, seeing they were not
meale-mouthed in the reprehension of lesser faults. And whereas we receive this
maine benefit by the Apostasy of the Jews, that thereby the world (seeing them
enemies unto the Messiah) cannot but give the greater credence to the books of
the old Testament, without suspect of partiality, which otherwise might have
been doubted: the adopting of these other Apocriphall into the Canon, were as
much as in us lies to vilify the authority of their authentic records, who
may not improbably be thought to have taken in those that were adulterine, as
well as to have degraded those that are found to have been divine.


Min. If all other reasons were mute, me thinks the Author, Matter, and Manner
of the history, might well make an ingenuous person very sparing in the
defense. The Author, if we may credit the Vide Zanch. de divine. attrib. lib.
4. ca. 4.
enlarging Epitomizer of these books, is 2. Mac. 2.23.
Jason Cirenaeus a Spiritu sancto inspirati loquuti sunt sancti Dei homines. 2.
Pet. cap. 1. v. 21.
heathen man (for-sooth) a fit Secretary for the Court of heaven. It seems
penmen were then as scanty, (as sometimes 1. Sam. c. 13. v. 19.
Smiths) in Palestine. This must needs be (...) which requires so much 2.
Mac. 2. v. 26.
watching, sweating, and pains in the refining. Calamus Scribae velociter
scribentis, would have eased all this toil, which is not to be feared, where
the Omniscient spirit is the Dictator. As touching the matter, it is wouen in a
web of such palpable contradictions, that a man who regards his credit
would be sorry at his heart, to be taken tripping in such contrary tales. One
while 1. Match. c. 6. v. 16.
Antiochus died for grief in Babylon. Another while he was slain in the
Temple of 2. Mac. c. 1. v. 13.
Nanea, where his head was cut off. And yet is not Antiochus out of his pain;
As if he had as many lives as a Cat, you shall see him stalk once more upon
this historical Stage; and then at last fall down and dye, with a most
noisome stinking smell, consumed with 2. Match. c. 9. v. 9.

Ducit ad inferos and^ educit.


worms. Indeed I must needs say he is very modest in the delivery: He writes
not Math. 7. v. 29.
(...) as one who had the custody of the mint, to warrant the mettle whereunto
he had put his stamp, but (...), for the (...).
pleasure, and recreation of the reader. Had he had the warrant of the spirit,
he would have spared the labor of begging favor, and suing out a pardon, for
which he is feign to crowch to the Readers gentleness.


Ma. Then had the holy Father S. Augustine good cause to say, that they are
received profitably if they be read Soberly. For if they should be read with
a precipitate opinion as Canonical Scriptures in the strict sense: the many
leakes which are transparant in them, would go very near to sink
the authority of the rest.


Iab. It appears by that testimony against the Epistle of Gaudentius, that
the Christians gave that authority to those Page 55.
books, which the Jews did not grant unto them: that the Church did set them
up in the throne, from which the Synagogue had kept them; which was the
Imperial throne of sacred Authority. Otherwise S. Augustins opposition, The
Jews did not, but The Church does, were vain.


Ma. The opposition (if any) stands not in the degree, but rather bears the
sense of a prevention. For as much as the Jews, from whom the old sacred
records were originally derived, would not enter them into the Divine Canon, it
could not but occasion many considerate Christians utterly to cashere them. For
the avoiding hereof S. Augustine, seeing they might tend to some good use,
tells us that albeit the Jews did not receive them as Canonical, yet the
Church received them not unprofitably, if they be read soberly. He says not,
that the Church received them into higher authority then the Jews: but as
books which might serve to as good purpose, if they were read warily amongst
us, as they did among the Jews. Neither does he say Recipienda est Scriptura
Machabeorum, as implying an undeniable necessity; but recepta est non
mutiliter, as noting a voluntary acceptance upon a probable end, with
th'addition of this Prouiso, if they be read soberly: which, howsoever you
otherwise deem, cannot be fitly spoken of Canonical writ, which is
necessarily to be embraced, and is always profitable to the Church, which
evermore brings Sobriety to the reading thereof: neither is it any less
behoofull to the Church, though it be perverted by reprobates to their own
damnation. But as for humane writings, the case is otherwise: they are then
only received profitably by the Church, when they are read warily. A good man
by attributing too much to an unwarrantable ground (of which sort the sacred
writ affoordeth none) may make a faulty inference: which moved Saint Augustine
to insinuate, that there are rocks by which he would have us warily to sail.


Nick. What if we admit (for disputation sake) that S. Augustine delivers
this, as his resolute opinion in Iabals sense? I would gladly learn what
reason he can yield, why this should ouer-sway the joint judgment, and
consent, of so many far more ancient Fathers, who teach the contrary.


Iab. Page 59.
Calvin does allow him the style of the best and most faithful witness of
Antiquity: how can he then be excused from great temerity, if herein he
erred?


Ma. Errare humanum est: The spirit of God alone is free from error. The It
was lawful to contradict the Fathers and doubt of them. Guido de Haeres. c. 7.
Church even in his days was somewhat clowded with the mists of superstition.
Had he not an Eagles eye, he could hardly have discovered those beams, which
Antichrist had then laid in the way: It was hard, if not impossible, for one
man to discern every mote, which then houered in the air of the Papal
regiment.


Iab. Page 60.
This sentence may suffice alone, to give any Judicious ear to understand your
opposition with S. Augustine.


Ma. We honor his memory as a blessed Saint, from whose pen the Church of God
has received ineffable good, and we account it not the least part of our
happiness, that for one seeming testimony, which you wrest to serve your own
turn, we are able to show a million to right our cause.


Iab. Can you deny that S. Augustine taught our Catholic doctrine concerning
the point of Merit? Page 62.
Does he not say, that as the wages due to sin is death: so the wages due to
righteousness is life eternal? And again, The reward cannot go before
merits, nor be given before a man be worthy thereof: yea that God should be
unjust, if he that is truly just be not admitted into his kingdom, Can any
Catholic speak more plainly then he does of Merits?


Min. These places do not any whit cross our doctrine against merit: The
Analogy which he makes between Sin and Death, Righteousness and life,
consists not in the quality of Desert, but of the Deest gratiae qui^ quid
meritis deputas: Nolo meritum quod gratiam excludit. B^^n. super. Caen. Ser. 67.
effect: Augustine says not that the wages of righteousness, which is Heaven,
is as due as the wages of sin, which is death: the Analogy is in regard of
the consequent effect, to signify, that heaven, the wages which is due to
righteousness, shall as truly be bestowed upon the faithful, as Hell or
Death, shall be inflicted upon the wicked. For if we consider th'equality of
desert, and condignity; there is according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, a
threefold disproportion. One in respect of the Rewarder, whose rewarding of
sin with eternal torment is the proper act of Justice in it self: Whereas
his rewarding of Righteousness, upon them whom he has accepted unto Grace, is
only the Justice of his merciful In illis opera saa glorificant: In ^^les
opera non sua condemnant Fulgen. ad Mon. lib. 1.
promise. Secondly in respect of the Subject: for the Sin which a wicked man
commits is properly his own, but the righteousness of the Regenerate is
the gift Opera bona habemus non ex nobis nata, sed a Deo donata. Fulg. ibidem.
of God: so that the reward of death is more properly due to sin, then is the
reward of life unto righteousness: Thirdly in regard of the object: because
the sin of the wicked is perfectly imperfect, but the righteousness of the
most godly is imperfectly perfect, that is but a stained goodness, wherefore
there cannot be an equal condignity in both.


Ma. We grant that the reward cannot go before merits, nor be given before a
man be worthy thereof: but Iabal must learn that these merits are Mors eius
meritum meum. Aug. in Manual. c. 22.
Christ's, by the Imputation whereof, we that are altogether unworthy of our
selves, are made through Gods gracious acceptance of his sons obedience,
worthy of this reward. Otherwise Non sunt condignae passiones, our greatest
sufferings are not worthy of the least degree of glory which shall be revealed
to the sons of God. Ephesians. 2. v. 8.
Gratia enim saluatis estis, says the Apostle: For you are saved by Grace
through Faith, and that not of your selves.


Min. Fulgentius makes the case plain in this golden sentence De praedest.
(...) Mont^tum. lib. 1
Vnus Deus est qui gratis et vocat praedestinatos, et iustificat vocatos, et
glorificat iustificatos: and again, Ibid.
Sicut gratiae ipsius opus est cum facit iustos, sic gratiae ipsius erit cum
faciet gloriosos Aug. in. Psalm. 83.
Debitorem se ipse Dominus fecit, says S. Augustine, non accipiendo, sed
promittendo: non ei dicitur, Read quod accepisli, sed quod promisisti. God
has made himself a Debtor, not by receiving any thing from us, but by the
passing of his promise unto us: we say not to him, Render that thou have
received, but give that which thou have promised. And the same Tract. 3. in
Johan.
Father, Non pro merito acciptes vitam aeternam, sed pro gratia. Thou shall not
receive life eternal for merit, but for grace.


Nick. How think you now of S. Augustines opinion touching merit? were you not
utterly deuoid of all shame, you would never have cited him in this cause,
wherein you find him wholly averse. You were better scanne my Masters Letter,
and let S. Augustine alone.


Iab. How Page 61.
much reason I had to term his Letter unlearned, you may judge, by his laying
together on an heap the points of Catholic Doctrine, which he mislikes.
Whereof he thinks Purgatory to be the groundworke. Is it not a learned
enumeration, to make Merits, Masses, Vigils, Superaltaries, Noone-day-Lampes,
Grains, Holy Water, Oil, Salt, Spittle, etc. to have not only mutual
reference, but fundamental dependence on Purgatory? What has Salt, Oil,
Spittle, to do with Purgatory? Though Purgatory should be ouerthrown, I see
not why the former things, as also Merits, Christning, and Burial Tapers,
might not remain, and be used as they are.


Nick. The deeper the foundation, the surer the building. My Master could lay
their foundation no lower then Purgatory, unless he should have set the
corner stones in hell.


Ma. The Knight saw how Ieiunely his Adversary pleaded for Purgatory, wherefore
to induce him the better to ransack his utmost endeauours, he thought fit some
what hyperbolically to exaggerate the necessity of that defense, upon the
soliditie whereof so many other points had their whole dependence.


Min. Sir I perceive you will stand to your friend at a pinch. But in this case
the Knight needs not your help. I hope the Doctor will be judged by Eckbertus,
who stands as stiff for Purgatory, and knew all the Creekes of that Channel,
as well as the best Sculler that belongs to that River. He writing against the
Cathari speaks thus; Eckbertus aduers. Cathar. Sermon. 1.
Non recipient (says he) esse purgatorias poenas, etc. Propterea ergo
arbitrantur supersluum et vanum esse orare pro mortuis, Eleemosynas dare,
Missas celebrare, and irrident pulsationes campanarum. They do not hold that
there are Purgatory pains: Therefore they think it vain and superfluous, to
pray for the dead, to give Alms, to celebrate Masses, and they deride the
tolling, or chiming of Bells. Who would think that the tolling of a Bell had
any dependence upon Purgatory? Yet does your own Author infer the derision
of them, as a Consequent upon the refusal of the other, with a propterea ergo,
which is more then a single Illatiue, Implying that if they had had any respect
of Purgatory, they would not have made so light of Dirges and Bells.


Ma. It is an old Maxim, vitia, (...). Macarius. Hom. 40
esse concathenata. Errors and vices are linked together, like Sampsons Foxes,
by one end or other. If you take away Purgatory, the charge and pains which
many superstitious persons are at, about Indulgencies, Pilgrimages,
Crosse-creepings, Oblations, Satisfactions, Lamps, Grains, Pictures, Holy
water, Oil, and other (which they call holy) uses, for the easement of
the afflicted souls of their deceased friends, would either in toto or in tanto
be abated. Besides I do not think the Doctor can show me any mention of this
Riffe Raffe trash (according to the Romish ridiculous practice) till such time
as Purgatory was set on foot.


Iab. What say you to the Macchabees, and the whole Church of God in those
days that did practice prayers for souls in Purgatory?


Ma. I had thought Master Vicar had put you out of hope of all succor from the
Machabees. Will you never leave begging the question? I would you would take
the pains to read Macarius his 22. Homily (...), there should you find the
opinion of the Church in diebus illis. When the Soul (says he) steeteth out
of the body, if it be guilty of sin, the Devils come, and the powers of
darkness take it away: But as for the Saints and children of God, when their
souls depart, the Quire of Angels are ready to receive them, and bring them
unto the Lord. So that the prayer for the dead which you urge, did not
presuppose Purgatory, as being rather a Commemoration and thanksgiving for
the Saints departed, which we do not deny.


Nick. Perhaps Iabal means that Church, I mean that Ship which is steered by
the supposed Papae stereus aurum putant Arabicum.
successor of Peter.


Min. If that be all, Prayer for the dead will not hold out, unless the Quod
adimitur principali adimitur accessorio.
Pope can be proved greater then Peter. What Peter's charter was, we find in
Bishop Longland in Ps. 101. p. 569. B.
Longlands records upon those words, Tu es Petrus and super hanc petram, etc.
upon which he comments thus. Notanter dixit super hanc petram, non super hunc
Petrum, id est, non super vnum priuatum hominem, sed super hanc petram, hoc
est, super stabilem huius fidei firmitatem, quam tu iam confessus es, and super
fundamentum neutiquam vacillans; vel aliter, super eam petram, quam iamiudum
confessus est Petrus, nimirum super ipsum Christum. So that a Popes Decree may
be fundamentum vacillans, and implies not the laudable practice of the Church.


Nick. Now is the Doctor almost besides the saddle. He has lost one of his
Stirrops: the authority of the Machabees, and the head of his Church have
received a foul foil. Well Doctor, if this been the first of your five
Victories, then has your Purgatories Jack a Lent lost one of his best legs,
and now stands upon four lame feet. It shall cost me the best point at my
hose, but I will have one flurt at his Iacket, and turn him on his back.


CHAP. III. Purgatories Deduction Logically and Theologically disproued.
MAster Vicar, let me crave one word in your ear. Me thinks Doctor Triumph
stands now like the Emblem of Suretiship, with his head out of the little end
of the home. He had an easy entrance into this argument: but being
disappointed of his hold on the Machabees, he sticks by the sholders, and
cannot get out; you may do well to lend him your hand, or else this Parle will
be all dashed.

Min. Sir, seeing you have taken upon you Purgatories quarrel, and the Motists
defense, we would gladly hear what you have to say against the Knights
answer, touching the deduction of Purgatory from the words of Christ, Mat.
12.32. upon which your fellow Romanists do especially rely.


Iab. Christ in that Page 65.
place says of sin against the Holy Ghost, that it shall be forgiven neither
in this world, nor in the world to come, whence Catholics infer that some
sins may be pardoned in the next World. For this text contains both a
distinction of two sorts of sins, some remissible, others irremissible; and
of two places where remission may be had, namely, in this present world, and
the world to come; signifying that some sins may be remitted in the one
place, some in the other, but Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost in neither.
Whence follows, seeing the next world is the time of Justice, that God does
not there remit sins, without exacting and inflicting the due punishment unto
the Authors, which is the Purgatory the Catholic Church does, and has ever
taught. This exposition no sooner sounds in his ear, but his tongue waggeth
in this sort. I protest I thought as much, you have turned up Noddy.


Ma. Doubtless you read the Knights book with a perspectiue glass, otherwise
the Noddy which was six pages distant from the first proposal of this
argument, would not have sat so close upon your brow. First, to she the
vanity of this Inference, he tells you that Saint Mark handling the same
theme renders Saint Matthewes disjunctive in this plain Collectiue, that who
so blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, as being
culpable of eternal damnation: secondly, to prove that this was (no simple but)
an approved gloss in those days, he alleges Athanasius, Hierome, Hillarie,
and Ambrose, who made no other construction of those words, then that this
Sin should be never forgiven: Thirdly, by way of Concession he gives
allowance (in part) to your Inference, that some sins may be said to be
pardoned in the world to come, viz. per Remissionis promulgationem, And so
concludes Letter to T.H. page 32.
that the Sin against the Holy Ghost is here exaggerated by opposition to
other Sins, in the deprivation of that double benefit whereof other Sinners
penitent are capable. Now because he saw his Adversary did put the words on
the Rack, making them speak that which was far from the scope of the place,
viz. that some Sins remissible are pardoned in the world to come, which were
not formerly forgiven in this world, he tells him indeed that in adding this
last clause, he had turned up Noddy; which gaming Metaphor was not unfitly
applied to so trifling a disputant.


Iab. Page 65
He discourses more like a Carpet Knight, then a sober Divine, showing more
skill at Cards, then of Scriptures.


Ma. Indeed he has taught you a New Cut, viz. to deal more mercifully with
the Scriptures, and more charitably with the Souls of your poor brethren. If
either the rules of Logic, or the verdict of Ancients be of any account, he
has turned this your deduction many specks out. And for ought I see, the more
you draw, the further you are gone.


Min. How absurd the Inference is, it will easily appear by the scope of the
text, and the sense of the words. Our Savior there speaks de reatu peccati,
of the guilt of Sin, saying, (non remittetur) and does not specify any pain
to be suffered for such sins, whose fault is forgiven in this present life.
Had he said, He that sins against the Holy Ghost shall not be unpunished in
this world, nor in the world to come, the Inference had not been amiss: Ergo
some sins are punished in the world to come, which are not punished in this
world. But when he says, it shall be forgiven neither in this World nor in
the World to come, it is a mere fallacy, to draw the speech from the guilt
to the punishment, inferring that some sins shall be punished in the next
world, whose offense is forgiven in this. The remission (from which that
Superlatiue Sinner is debarred) is an act of mercy, wherein man is considered as
a Patient, and therefore cannot be suitable to that time, and act of Justice,
whereof the Doctor dreameth* neither can a sin be said properly to be
remitted, the due punishment whereof the offender has condignely sustained. He
that pays the utmost farthing, is very little beholding for the forgiveness
of his debt. But if you will needs uncase this sentence of the figure wherewith
it is beautified, I demand whether does our Savior speak of the guilt or of
the punishment, or of both. If he say the guilt shall not be forgiven in this
world, nor in the world to come, then your deduction must be this, Ergo the
guilt of some mortal sins shall be remitted in the next world, which is not
remitted in this; and so your Purgatory (presupposing a former assoylement
from the guilt) will have no subsistence. If he speak of the punishment, you
must infer, Ergo some sins shall be punished in the next world, which are not
punished in this: which as all men confess, so does it afford no advantage to
your cause. If you say that he speaks of both Guilt and Punishment, then as
well the Guilt as the Punishment of some mortal sins shall be then remitted,
which your Page 79
Suarez does disclaim. So that you are very nimble thus to fetch a cross
caper making the Lord of truth to speak of Guilt in the former, and of
Punishment in the latter part, to serve your turn.


Nick. I would be loath to fast till Iabal get out of this Maze; should I stay
for a solution, the pi^d Nag I fear would not come at James Park this grass.
But you were in hand to speak something concerning the sense of the words.


Min. Well remembered, I was about to show the Doctor his error in making the
World to come (which signifies Mar^. 1^.^^.
the last day) to note that middle space of time, which is now in present
being, As long as time lasts, this present world continues: the world to
come, comes not till the date of time be clean extinct, and then their own
confession (making a full Jail delivery) casheireth Purgatory, as of no
longer use. Had our Savior said, It shall be forgiven neither in this life,
nor in the life to come, there had been some better color for this Inference,
but by mentioning the world to come, (which being opposed to this present
world, has relation to the day of Judgment, when no remission is to be
expected) he implies a necessary Nullitie of any future forgiveness after
this life.


Nick. Under correction, I think a man might as well reason thus: If the time
present be in respect of those that are deceased to be termed the World to
come; then much more may that Eternity be so called, which follows the day
of the Lords last aduent. And so by virtue of this place taken properly in
Iabals sense, some sins may then also be forgiven, which were not formerly
remitted: by which kind of pleading, a man might easily merit Origens fee.
Besides should it be granted that some sins are remitted in Iabals world,
yet is there no necessary consequence of the Satisfactorie fire of Purgatory.


Iab. You cannot deny but this our Inference and exposition of the former
place is taught by Page 66.
five or six Ancient and Holy Doctors, which the T. H.
Motist cites. Will your wisdom term them Noddies? Shall Saint Bernard,
Venerable Bede, Saint Isidore be put in the number of Noddies? If you be an
English Christian you cannot deny Saint Gregory to be your Father. Hear what
he says. We must believe that for some light faults there is a purgatory
fire before the day of Judgment, because the truth does say, If any shall
utter Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven in this
World, nor in the world to come. In which saying we are given to understand
that some sins may be forgiven in this world, and some in the next, for what
is denied of one, it is clear that consequently it is granted of the other.
Thus did thou write (blessed Saint) a thousand years ago, even when thy
heart was fullest of comfort, for the conversion of our Country. It would not a
little have allayed thy joy had thou foreseen that


Ma. Such idle Rhetoricians, such seditious Jesuits, such superstitious
Priests, such pompous successors, such traiterous and bloody Popinians should
have corrupted that faith, and made that Sea so infamous amongst the most
remote nations, which both by heart and hand thou tookest so great pains to
promote. This would have allaid his joy indeed.


Min. As for your five or six ancient Doctors, you shall have your answer
both in weight and tale. In the mean while for this of Gregory (if it be his
own) it may more then evidently appear unto your second survey of these his
Dialogues; that he was by certain idle apparitions and fantastical Ghosts
some what too easily induced (if not seduced) to favor and further this opinion.
Yet if you will be pleased to let Gregory answer Gregory, listen what he Greg
in 7. c. Job. lib. 8. c. 8.
elsewhere speaks. Cum humani casus tempore sieve sanctus, sieve malignus
spiritus, egredientem animum claustra carnis acceperit, in aeternum secum sine
vlla permutatione retinebit, vt nec exaltata ad supplicium proruat, nec mer sa
aeternis supplicijs vltra ad remedium ereptionis ascendat. To the same purpose
is Gregory alleged by Nilus lib. de Purg.
Nilus, auerring that the time after this life is for punition, not for
purgation. In hac vita tantum, says S. Sermon. 66.
Augustine, poenitentiae patet libertas, post mortem nulla correction is
licentia. Hoc tempus est poenitentiae, illud iudicij, says S. In Sermon de Euch.
in Eucaen.
Chrysostom: hoc agonum, illud coronarum, hoc laboris, illud relaxationis. The
same father Hom de Lazar.
further tells us, Dum hic fuerimus, spes habemus praeclaras,simulac vero
discesserimus non est postea in nobis situm poenitere, neque commissa diluere.
Here we have hope, but when we are once deceased, it is neither in our power to
repent, nor to make satisfaction for those things which we have done.


Iab. What think you of that Father whom the Knight named a Page 67.
marble pillar, that euer-admired Augustine? Thus he writes upon our place of
Scripture. It could not be truly said of some men, that their sins should not
be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, unless there should be
some men, who though they are not pardoned in this world, yet they should be
pardoned in the world to come.


Ma. This the Knight removed with a writ under the hand of Viues, who auerreth
that these words are wanting in some ancient copies. So that just suspicion may
not improbably deem them to have been inserted by a second hand.


Iab. Yet Page 68.69.
Viues adds, Tamen stilus non abhorret ab Augustiniano: The style dissenteth
not from S. Augustines. Yea further he says, that either in other copies of
Saint Augustine the former words are found, or taken from some other work of
this Father they were here inserted.


Ma. He is a very simple Impostour that cannot iumpe with S. Augustines style
for a sentence or two. But is not here old handy pandy, when sentences shall
be tossed from one place to another, without the Authors advise? This inserting
of sentences in wrong places, raises a different sense, and puts all out of
joint. So that the Knight was not ill advised to say, that it were ill with the
Church if her says were pinned Let. to T.H. page 7^.
on S. Augustines sleeue: not that he misdoubted that holy fathers sincerity,
but because he was too well acquainted with these Ioyners interlacing subtilty.
And have we not then great reason to stand to the sole trial of the Scriptures?
or is it possible these brabbles should have an end, as long as such
authorities are urged, which are elsewhere contradicted by the authors
themselves?


Min. If we grant that this authority has the right stamp of S. Augustines
pen, yet will it not afford fuel for the kindling (much less the
maintaining) of Purgatory fire. He tells us, (as you have often heard) that the
Catholic faith knew but Aug. in lib. 5. ^ypognost.
two receptacles of souls departed, The kingdom of Heaven, and Hell. As for
any third place he says penitus ignoramus, we know none; neither find we any
such mentioned in the holy Scriptures. And in his eighteenth Sermon, De verbis
Apostoli, Duae habitationes sunt, vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno.
So that howsoever there was in his days some wavering conceit, yet was not the
doctrine of Purgatory held then as a matter of Faith. And to that purpose he
Euchirid. c. 69
speaks saying, It is not incred^ble that such a thing should chance after
this life, and whether it be so or no it may be questioned: and again De
ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 26.
non redarguo quia forsan verum est, I do not deny it, because perhaps it is
true. Thus have you purchased a second forsitan to accompany that which was
freely given you by Viues his pen. As for other places where it is not
expressed, it is necessarily to be understood; for had he delivered his mind
elsewhere positiuely, and apodectically herein, I cannot see what should move
him here to shake his own foundation, by making others to doubt of that,
whereof himself was certainly assured. The best men (in which number S.
Bernard may be reckoned) have had through the corruption of time their
pardonable errors. Sometimes they were led with the blazing star of
conjecture, and not always with the day star of truth. So that we have no
warrant further to follow them (though they were Angels) then the guidance of
Gods word.


Iab. Page 70.
What can be sacred and certain amongst Christians, if an unlearned Knight may
be permitted to deride that, which the most famous Divines, and Fathers of
former ages, do without the contradiction of any peremptorily deliver, as an
undoubted verity?


Nick. Lord how the Noddy rumbles in Iabals stomach! how feign would he
disgorge it on the bosom of the Fathers, of whom never man spoke with greater
respect then my master! As for those that are of our Doctors rank, I must
needs say he casts the Noddy amongst them without a forsitan.


Iab. Indeed he does Hierogliphick my name of Preface.
I.R. in English, Latin, and Hebrew, making me in the one Jack Rogue, in the
other Iscarioth de Rubigine, and Ishmael Rashacheh in the third, wherewith he
joins the Sirn^me of Cecropidan Licaonite.


Nick. He saw you were I.R.F.
Trium literarum homo, therefore (for want of a better godfather) he made
bold to fit your Appellation according to your praedominant quality. And seeing
there was no one word or single language able sufficiently to express your
worth, he thought fit by his variety, to make you known for a viperous
Sesquipedalian in every coast, where the frothy Libell of such a namelesse
miscreant should arrive.


Min. Had you said (shameless) you had given him no more then his due. What
will he not spare to speak, who dares auerre that the Fathers of former ages
do without the contradiction of any peremptorily deliver the doctrine of
Purgatory, and the same exposition of this place, touching pardon in the next
world? How waueringly S. Augustine speaks, his Forsitan backed with an
Ignoranius does sufficiently declare. Macarius his dicotomy of two sole
receptacles, does exclude any opinion of a third. Chrysostom. tells us that God
In Pre. e. in Isay.
quando peccata abolet, nullam reliquam facit cicatricem: Tertullian ioynes in
the same peremptory assertion, Tertul. de Ba^t.
exempt to reatu eximitur et poena. What think you of S. Hierome? does he
deserve to stand in your Calendar of Fathers? As he crossed you in your
foundation of the Machabees, so does he mar your market and raze your whole
building with this In Psalm. 31.
gradation. Quod tegitur non videtur, quod non videtur non imputatur, quod non
imputatur non punietur. That which is covered, is not seen, that which is not
seen, is not imputed, that which is not imputed shall not be punished. Where
is now the generality of consent? Is this your certainty without contradiction?
Does S. Chrysostom expound this place of Matthew otherwise then thus? Non
effugient poenam, they shall surely be punished. Speaks he one word to
countenance your sense? You should have showed your self far more Ingenuous
in answering to this; as Durandus and Antonius in the behalf of Indulgncees. De
Indulgentijs (say they) pauca dici possunt per certitudine^, quia nec scriptura
express de eis loquitur, Sancti etia^ patres Ambrosius, Hilarious, Hieronimus,
Augustinus minime loquuntur de Indulgentijs. Touching Indulgences (the
inseparable Per modum Causae.
Concomitants of purgatory) little can be said by way of certainty, because
neither Scripture does expressly mention them, neither do the holy Fathers
speak of them at all. With the like speech did the Knight present you out of
Roff^a^tic. 18. contra Luth. Let. to T. H. page 77.
Roffensis, vizt. whosoever shall read the Greek Fathers, shall find very
rare or no mention of Purgatory.


Ma. It seems the Doctor has either a better pair of spectacles, or a more
piercing sight. Shall we imagine he has been more industrious in the perusal
of th'auncient Records, then that eminent Bishop? or have we not rather just
cause to think him too much devoted to Lensaeus his lines? which he renders
word for word, without any further perusal of the truth. It is the customary
Motive T. H. page 169. in M^rg.
trade of the Romanists to vouch opinions when they want the Authors books. The
view of the Fathers writings would have stopped the passage, and curtold the
Philactery of this his insolent brag.


Min. How willing they are to misunderstand the Fathers, their like collection
in wresting the words of S. Paul, 1. Corin. 3.13. does sufficiently proclaim.
There the Apostle tells us, that Every man's work shall be made manifest, for
the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by the fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. From this Metaphorical
speech, they Motive T. H. page 110.
would infer a litterall necessity of Purgatory fire. But their grand Doctor
saw so little color for this, that he is driven to put them beside this
plancke: Patres aliqui (says Bellar. de Purg. lib. 2. ca. 1.
he) per ignem non intelligunt ignem purgatorij, sed ignem diuini iudicij.
Some of the Fathers do not by fire under stand the fire of Purgatory, but the
fire of Divine Judgment. When the Ancients speak of this fire, the
Catholic spirits traduce their words, and think they have gotten a great
purchase. Sure it is the fire whereof S. Paul there speaks, has no affinity
with the fire of Purgatory: for that tries every man's work, this only
purges some men's persons: every man's work is subject to that fire, as well
gold, silver, and precious stones, as timber, hay, and stubble, but as for the
fire of Purgatory, they make it capable of no other fuel then timber, hay, and
stubble, the defilements of venial and mortal sins. S. Paul's fire makes
every man's work manifest, the Popes fire burning in an obscure place is
without all luster and light. Besides if they understand the Apostle as
speaking of a real fire, they must also grant that he speaks of material
gold and silver, etc. If the one be Metaphorical, there is no reason they
should deny the other to be Allegorical.


Ma. Your Inference has the warrant of Quintilian. In Allegoria (says he)
tenendum est illud, vt quo ex genere rerum coeperis eodem desinas, secus
Inconsequentia foedissima erit. But as I remember I have read sundry fathers
alleged Motive. T.H. page 110.
that the Apostle does there intimate the fire of Purgatory.


Min. Those testimonies of the Fathers which speak of the fire of the day of
doom, or of Divine Judgment (which is ignis proba^s, non purgans) these
wrangling Sophisters take with the left hand to support the purging and
tormenting flames which the bellows of their superstition has kindled in the
forge of credulity. As for this fire here specified In Locum.
sermo Christi est, says S. Amb. It is the word of Christ: In Psalm. 118. Ser.
18.3.
opus quod ardere dicitur mala doctrina est, The work which is said to burn
is evil doctrine. S. Bernard (though elsewhere somewhat ouerswayed with the
current of those times) is yet content to imforme Bern. sermon. de Lig. foen.
Stipul.
us, That the bitterness of the soul, the confession of the mouth, the
punishment of the body (which are all in this life) are that fire whereby the
loose and negligent builder shall be saved. Lib. 2. aduers. I^uin.
S. Hierome by this fire understands the furnace of tentation, whereby a man
is tried in this life.


Iab. The fathers may sometimes Page 78.
bring places of Scripture, which have other sense, yea perhaps the sense that
one or other does give may not be the best, which is to err according to the
Analogy of place, not of faith.


Ma. The Knights answer is not yet refelled. If the Doctrine of true faith
depend upon the soliditie of exposition, it cannot be but they, who may errein
the Analogy of exposition of place, may likewise fail in the Analogy of faith.
Laeso fu^damine nutat Tota dom^.


Iab. This Distinction you Ibid.
understand not: when many Fathers of the Church agree in the same exposition
of Scripture without the contradiction of any, the same is to be thought the
undeniable sense of that place.


Ma. The Doctrine of the Romish Church is far more strict then you seem to
allow: If the credit of the Ihesuite Chauasius Profess. orth. sid.. 37
may bear any sway, you are to stand to that exposition of Scripture (and that
upon oath) which is Secundum vnanimem consensum Patrum, whereas you content
your self with the agreeable consent of many Ad quem ibimus?
Fathers in the same exposition of Scripture. How you will avoid perjurie or
what time you had need take, to the making of a Sermon, following this rule, I
refer me to your most serious and sober thoughts: he had need have a good
Library that will avoid the censure of your Church; yea he may perchance burn
all his books, before he shall set them agreed. In this point we will give
allowance to your position, having produced more demonstratiue authorities for
the nullifying, then you for the ratifying of Purgatory. I confess it will
be no easy matter for us to prove a contradiction in the exposition of the
place, especially amongst those who never heard of that Commentitious figment:
for how should they gain say that which was not so much as questioned in the
more Ancient times? It suffices us that your sense has no general
justification in neither of your grounds, which are otherwise interpreted by
the most, and not peremptorily paraphrased for your purpose by any of the best
rank.


Iab. Caluins Page 70
Arianizing wit (though he may find some plausible evasion) cannot be excused
of haereticali call rashness, who dares expound this text of Scripture Ego
and Pater vnum sumus, I and the father are one, of unity, of consent, and
will, not of nature, and substance; adding that the Ancients did abuse the
same, to prove the consubstantialitie of the Son of God. Seeing the uniform
consent of Fathers have canonized that meaning of the words, he cannot be a
true Christian, that will not (neither was Calvin that did not) submit his
Judgment thereunto.


Ma. May the Fathers, to prove this or that Catholic verity, bring in places
of Scripture that have other sense, yea may the sense that one or other does
give not be the best, though the Doctrine thereby proved be true? then judge
how base and injurious an imputation you lay upon Calvin, fetching him by force
within the compass of heretical Arianizme, (who was ever most adverse to that
viperous brood) having no other crime to challenge him withal, besides a
religious modesty in forbearing to rack a parcel of Scripture for the
uttering of that evidence, which was more naturally deputed to the delivery of
other places. The sacred writ is so plentiful in proofs for the confutation
of that devilish surmise, that he held it no good discretion, to raise a
suspicion of penury or doubt, by insisting upon that, which (being not fully
pregnant) might be avoided by the indifferent sense of another clause, where
the same phrase did occur. You may as well challenge Bellarmine, Valentianus,
and other Ihesuites, who in their Treatises concerning the Trinity, do not
approve of many interpretations of Scripture, which were by the Fathers
(somewhat too liberally) produced, against the same Heresy of Arianisme. As
for the place now questioned, the judgment of Calvin is, that the word vnum
cannot absolutely euince an Indiuidual unity of Essence, because in the
seuententh of John verse. 22. Christ prays unto his father concerning the
elect, that they may be one as we are one, where the word vnum cannot enforce
an unity of Essence in respect of the elect, and therefore not infer an
Indiuidual unity in respect of the father. This Inducement of Calvin thus
grounded upon Analogy of Scripture, does at least acquit him from your
Taxation of Rashness. Might it stand with your leisure to peruse his diverse
confutations of Arianisme, you should find him plentiful in alleging many
other more direct places to that end.


Iab. He cannot be a true Christian that would not submit his Judgment to
the uniform consent of the Fathers.


Ma. This is your usual ostentation, this is one of the bombasted Articles of
your new Romish faith. If this may be allowed as the touch stone of
Christianity, all the sort of you will soon appear to be most professedly
perjured above all other Votaries in the world. There are diverse places of
Scripture expounded with uniform consent of Fathers (in cases of no small
moment) which are at this day D. M^rta. de Iurisdict. part. 4. page ^73.
Maldon. com. in Mat. 19. Platin. in Steph. vita.
rejected by your Church. When you pull out this beam of Perjury out of your
own eye, you may with better license point at the mote of Rashness, which you
cast upon Caluins brow.


Iab. The uniform consent of Fathers Page 71
does not require that every one, none excepted, should expressly teach the
same Doctrine, (for then scarce in any point could this uniform consent be
proved) seeing all write not of the same point, but it suffices that many
have taught it without the contradiction of the rest: and such is the
exposition of this place for Purgatory, and for the dead in the next world.


Nick. O how curious the Doctor is in his limitations and preuentions! he
would have made a good Lawyer, able to set all his neighbors together by the
ears: He is content to chop Logic with you by the clock; but to keep
himself from push of Pike, he sets a dead hedge, and a double quick set in
the way. When he boasts of uniform consent, he means not every father, none
excepted; when he speaks of teaching, he supposes it may be collaterally,
and not expressly. Besides he would have you learn, that all who expound the
same place, do not write of the same point. Nay more, if the corruptions of
latter times have put a Quillet upon any learned man's pen, unless it be
contradicted by the writers of former ages, (who did not so much as suspect any
such vnhatched Novelties) it must pass as current not to be opposed whithout
the tincture of heretical rashness. This I take to be the project of Iabals
mazed speech.


Ma. By my white Staff (the earnest of my neighbors love, and the Ensign of
mine office) well noted. He would lead us into a Labyrinth, and wot you what?
the tail of his assertion sauors more of absurdity, then the whole body
thereof, which you have anatomized, viz. Such is the exposition of this place
for Purgatory, and for the dead in the next World. Such is the exposition of
the place so spectrically raised, and so dubitatiuely propounded by the
Interpreters themselves, and so thwarted by a whole Jury of Catholic Doctors
(even of the Latin Church) that it affords no settled abode for his future
Remission to repose it self.


Iab. S. Chrisostomes exposition is Non effugient poenam.
not contrary to this, for first it is not sure and certain that universally al
such sinners are punished in this world, many times they flourish, prosper and
spend their whole lives in great Iollity, as diverse persecutors, Sodomites
Apostates, have done, which the Knight. names as sins Irremissible, and calls their
autors sinners in grain. Besides sin never to be remitted, is more then to be
punished in this world and in the next: for as S. August. Page 71
says, one may be punished both in this, and in the world to come, and yet
have his sin forgiven at last. The meaning then of S. Chrysostom is, they
shall be punished in this world without pardon, and in the next world likewise
without remission.


Min. Master Rachil you have made so worthy a speech, that I know not whether
I should admire the volubilitie of your tongue, the sublimity of your spirit,
or the quintessence of your wit: first because you would have somewhat to
say, you inform us that S. Chrisostomes exposition is not contrary to this;
where as it was only related as a different sense, wherewith you might well
have contented your self, for as much as so worthy a father, and so faithful
an Interpreter, did therein discover not so much as a glimpse of forgiveness
in the after-world, which (no doubt) had it been so necessarily obuious as you
pretend, he would in no wise have omitted. Secondly, whereas Saint Chrysostom
says that some capital Malefactors are both tortured in this life, and
tormented in the life to come, You are so saucie as to instruct him, that this
is not universally true, which if it hold in any (as no probability can exempt
those Blasphemers, in whom our Savior instanceth, at least Infidelitas ^psa
poena magna est sib^. G^^ 3. cap. Joan.
from the griping of an unquiet Conscience) the fathers distribution must not
be subject to your check. Thirdly, such is your quaint conceit that you tax
him for coming short of our Saviors sense, Sin never to be remitted is more
(say you) then to be punished in this World and in the next: which is as much
as if you should say. Alas good Father Chrysostom where is now thy Eagles
eyes, wherewith thou wast wont to penetrate the most abstruse mysteries? how
far art thou unlike thy self in thy Commentary upon this place? Shall Aug.
de Ciuit. Dei li. 21. cap. 13
Virgil and Plato by the light of nature find out a Purgatory, and are thy
eyes so dim not to discern it in this Disjunctive? What will become of Page
72 Etiam in ^ac quidem vita mortali purgatori as poenas essa confitemur. Aug.
de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 21. c. 13.
Purgatory- Clemency if nec in hoc saeculo nec in futuro be thus senced.
Had thou written thus upon Mark 3.29. (...).
it had been somewhat tolerable, but in ouerslipping such an opportunity of
backing us in the principal ground of so gainefull a position (to say the
truth) you were not well advised. Thus unkindly, though more covertly, do you
handle Saint Chrysostom.


Nick. He makes some part of amends with his newfound distinction. The
meaning of Saint Chrysostom (if his word may be taken) is this: They shall
be punished in this World without pardon, and in the World to come likewise
without remission.


Ma. I have read of certain Marinors, who upon extremity for want of ropes,
were feign to shave a company of women, and make Cordage of their hair. To
the like exigent is the Doctor driven. For want of better tackling, he has
shaued a bald Friar to borrow the shreads of a silly Distinction, which he has
trimmed without skill, and applied without art.


Nick. What difference is there I pray you between Skill and Art?


Ma. As much as between Pardon and Remission. The Doctors memory is
answerable to his wit: Erewhile he said, It is not sure that universally all
such sins are punished in this World: now he recants, saying They shall be
punished in this world yea without pardon. And to make up the ^ime he adds, In
the next likewise without remission; as if some sins (not before forgiven)
were then remitted, which is the point now in question. Is not this a neat
Extinguisher?


Iab. The Knight has a distinction devised by himself or his Ministers: which
he opposes against our Catholic exposition. He will grant Page 72.
sins pardoned in the next world, and yet not yield one penny to our
Purgatory box. In this world (says he) sins are fully pardoned, quoad
remission is applicationem, and the self same sins shall be pardoned in the
next World, per Remissionis promulgationem. This he thinks is the five
fingers which will carry ^way the set from the Fathers. Yet I dare say a man
that has been conversant in the Scriptures, will judge it no better then
Noddie.


Ma. Quod facis Ingrato perit. Your friendly Nod well requites the Knights
courtesy. His Adversary was desirous to conclude out of the former ground,
that Some sins were remitted in the world to come. This Sir Edward (for
quietness sake) was content to admit with the most favorable construction he
could possibly find: acknowledging that as sins are here loosed by virtue of
the Keys, through the particular application of the general promises; So at
the restoration of the body in the last day, the pardon formerly granted
shall take full effect, through the promulgation of the last joyful sentence.
As it is here sealed to the conscience, so shall it there be published to the
World. This he proves by the rule of contraries: the unbelieving Reprobate is
John. 3. v. 18.
said to be condemned Per excaecationem vel propter certitudinem. Gorran.
already, yet at the time of his dissolution, he is awarded his pain, nor can
it be denied by any one acquainted with the Divine Oracles, but that he shall
receive a further condemnation at the general Doom, when it shall be said,
Mat. 25.41.
Discedite a me Maledicti in ignem aeternum. In like manner though the Believer
be here redeemed by the blood of the immaculate Lamb, yet his Savior
speaking of the last day, tells him that his Luc. 21.28.
redemption draws near. And as Saint Paul says, Romans 8.23.
We that have the first fruits of the Spirit, do even sigh waiting for our
adoption, even the Redemption of our body.


Min. The Doctor speaks better then he is aware in terming this distinction
the five fingers: For the hand of Gods mercy (whereunto it has reference) in
extending grace to his chosen children has five fingers indeed. First, there
is Salus decreta, the pardon decreed in the eternal Counsel of God. Secondly
there is Salus oblata, Grace offered, in the ministry of the word: Thirdly,
there is Salus recepta, the Pardon received, by faith, which is the gift of
God. Fourthly, there is Salus obsignata, the Pardon sealed, in the due
Administration of the Sacraments. And lastly there is Salus consu^mata, the
pardon proclaimed, at their perfect admission into eternal bliss. All these
fingers does the Lord ordinarily lay on the heads of his elect, before they can
be thoroughly blessed.


Iab. Page 73.
You preach very learnedly as you think, though God knows to little purpose.
You can bring no express testimony of Scripture, that may give the least
color or probability to this your new fancy.


Min. The purpose I confess suits not with your humor, which debarres it not
from agreement with the truth: My drift was to let you understand that there
belongs Nunc recreamur continuo i^^amine medicaminis, tunc frucmur aeterna
plenitudine sanitatis. Fulg. de Praedest. ad Monimum lib. 1.
more to the absolution of a penitent, then you seem willing to conceive; As
his sins are loosed on earth, so shall they be loosed in heaven. Our pardon is
fully and absolutely purchased Agnus occisus ab origin mu^d^.
before we were, and it is ours potentially in the purpose of God, who has
decreed to give it us: but as it is not sealed unto us actually till we
believe, so neither do we fully and plenarily receive the benefit and effect
thereof, till our bodies shall arise at the great and general day of the Lord,
2. These. 1.20.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous
in all them that believe; When the book of Reu. 20.12.
life shall be opened, and when God shall judge the Romans 2.16.
secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Though we have here 2. Cor. 5.19.
(...). The word of Reconciliation, yet are we further to expect Romans 2 5.
(...) the day of declaration. Now are we the sons of God (says 1. John. 3.2.
Saint John) but yet it does not appear what we shall be.


Iab. This is a new devise not backed by the authority of any Father, which
therefore may justly be suspected. Page 72, 73.
If all sins must have double pardon, one in this world, another in the next,
why should not all sinners have a double condemnation, one in this world,
another in the next?


Min. The pardon is one and the same, the difference is only in the manner and
time. Quod nunc sancti credunt, tunc videbunt, says De praedest. ad Monimum.
lib. 1.
Fulgentius. That grace and mercy which the Saints do now believe, they shall
then hear and see. And again, Iste est in homine ordo diuinae redemption is
etc. Vt nunc iustificatus credat quod tunc glorificatus accipiat. So that
besides that assurance of Remission, which we call pignus iustitiae, the pledge
of righteousness, there is also that which S. Paul styles Coronam iustitiae,
the Crown of Righteousness, which is yet reserved for us in the heavens. S.
Augustine co^menting upon these words of the Psalmist In Psalm. 36.
Educet quasi lumen Iustitiam tuam, He will bring forth thy righteousness as
the light, and thy Judgment as the nooneday, has these words: Modo abscondita
est iustitia tua. In fide res est, et nondum in specie. Thy righteousness
(which presupposes Remission) is now hidden, apprehended by faith, and not as
yet by sight. Nondum vides quod credis, cum autem caeperis videre quod
credidisti, tunc educetur in Lumine iustitia tua. Thou do not yet see that
which thou beleeuest, but when thou shall begin to see that which thou have
believed, then shall thy righteousness (formerly apprehended) be brought
forth in the light. Promissorem adhuc tenes, exhibitorem expectas. To make this
point yet more clear, he proceeds in this wise. Quale sit iudicium tuum
adhuc non apparet: In isto saeculo quasi nox est; Quando educet Iudicium tuum
velut meridiem? Cum Christus apparuerit, vita vestra etc. What thy judgment
is, yet ^t appears not: In this world it is as it were night, when will he
bring forth thy judgment as the noone day? when Christ your life shall
appear. This is one of those reasons which the Vide Thom. in Sup. 3. part. Qu.
8^. Art. 1.
Fathers allege why there should be a general Judgment, notwithstanding the
particular doom which the soul receives at the hour of death; that so the
sentence of Benediction, and Malediction, which was before private and in part,
might be then more general and complete. Have you forgotten S. Augustines
ground? De ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. ca. 14.
Quaedam diuina vis aderit (says he) qua fiet vt cuncta peccata in memoriam
reuocentur. There will be a certain divine power, by which we (even Peccata
^^storum app^rebunt in Coel^. Stel. in ^^. c. 21
the elect) shall be then put in mind of all our sins. Wherefore seeing sins
formerly cancelled shall be there remembered and Oportet ad hoc quod iusta
sententia appareat quod omnibus sententiam cognoscentibus merita and den. erita
(...) Thom. in Sup. 3. part. Quaest 87. Art. 2.
published, it is no new fancy to think that the pardon formerly granted
shall be then also publicly ratified and acknowledged.


Iab. You mistake your Card, and seem not to know the very principles of
Christian Divinity. Page 74.
That is not the day of mercy, but of justice, to give to every man according
to his works, not to forgive any man his wicked works. That shall not be the
general Jail Delivery as the Knight surmiseth, but rather then shall be the
general fi^ing of the Jail with all sinners, to be locked up in misery
everlasting.


Ma. The Jail delivery, of which the Knight speaks, does glance at your
supposed Purgatory, which by your own confession shall be then broken and
annihilated: Implying that this Implication of future Remission (if any) may
rather be understood of that general publication of pardon, when your
imaginary flames shall be clean extinct; as if our Savior had said, they
shall neither have the seal of redemption in this world, nor the sentence of
absolution in the world to come. Besides if you be well advised, you may further
remember that the Children of God shall then be all delivered from the (...).
Apoc. 7. v. 14.
bondage and misery of this world, wherein they are imprisoned.


Min. But is that the day of Justice, and not of mercy? remember the true
opposition betwixt the just and the wicked, and your opinion will be soon
altered. In respect of the greater part, it is indeed a dreadful day of severe
justice, but if we consider the better part, it is the Luc. 21.28.
gladsome accomplishment of his most abundant mercy. Unto those it is dies
terroris, unto these it is Esaias 26.19.
dies laetitiae: unto those it is a day of perdition, unto these a day of
Redemption. Will he not then be made marvelous in the free salvation of his
Saints, as well as glorious in the deserved destruction of the wicked. There is
2. Tim. ^.8.
laid up for me (says S. Paul) the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. Ad mo^^^ lib. 1.
Gratia est et illa iusta retributio says Fulgenti^. That is also a work of
Grace which belongs unto that day. As we find our thoughts Romans 2.15.
accusing or excusing us, so shall we hear the Lord assoyling or condemning
us. But not to quarrel about the word. I would gladly understand why it should
not be a point of as great justice to proclaim pardon unto them, unto whom it
was formerly granted, and by whom it was thankfully embraced, as to denounce
sentence of death upon those, by whom this proffered mercy was so gracelesly
rejected, Is it not as great Justice in the Lord to ratify his word in
blessing the one, as in accursing the other. So that this publication of
remission does rather build up, then destroy, the justice and equity of the
supreme Judge.


Iab. It may Page 74.
not be termed a Pardon, but rather a Triumph, and victory over sin. If the
bare proclamation of Pardon may be termed Pardon, I see not why the
proclamation of Vid. Mat. 21.25.
Baptism may not be called Baptism.


Ma. Are not your proclamations of Indulgences called Indulgences and Pardons?
Is not a King said to come unto the Crown, when he is proclaimed, though the
day of his Coronation be deferd? Is it sencelessnes to use figurative speeches?


Nick. May Page 75.
not they who are absolved in the Court of Conscience be afterward pardoned in
the exterior Court, by undergoing public penance and humiliation in the
face of the Church for a sin already forgiven?


Iab. Those Ibid.
sins were not fully forgiven, the penalty of this disgrace being still
reserved: so that your exposition crosses the whole course of Scripture, not
having any congruity with the phrase thereof.


Min. How great a stranger would you seem to be in Bellarmines works? Will
it please you to take notice of his Thesis? It is this, De purgatorio.
Culpa remissa manet poena luenda. Though the fault be remitted, yet is the
punishment to be sustained, Take away this, and what color can you have for
the defense of Purgatory? this your answer puts the nose of your Priestdome
clean out of joint. When you absolve a penitent, inioyning him satisfaction in
way of penance, whether are his sins remitted before satisfaction, or not?
If they be not, how can you term your form of Remission an absolution? If
they be remitted, then may sins be forgiven, and a kind of penalty still
reserved. Choose whether part you will; If the first, you have answered
nothing. If the second, you have thwarted your own solution, and answered more
then you would.


Nick. As far as I am able to conceive, the point in question may fitly be
explicated thus. A King out of his royal compassion, first grants, then
signeth the pardon of a malefactor: yet does the party remain in durance, and
vndeliuered, till the same be published to the Country, at the Assizes: when it
is publicly read, does not the Judge say to the Prisoner at the bar, Lo
here the King gives thee thy pardon, though it were under seal some months
before? Nay do not they who are unacquainted with the Kings former grant, when
they see the bolt and fetters stricken off, use words to this purpose, This
fellow has his pardon, or else he had bin trussed up amongst his Mates at the
last execution? So likewise an Apprentice, at the expiration of his years is
free by covenant; yet is he not so taken by the Company, neither may he set
up Shop for himself, till he be entered into the Hall-booke, at which time he
is said to be made free. Will you say therefore that the one had three pardons,
or the other two freedoms? As the pardon, so also the freedom is but one. One
and the same act, keeps one and the same denomination: though it be
differenced by more or less perspicuity of circumstances, as of time and
place. I see no reason why that should be vnapplyable to the consummation of
any thing, which is attributed to the Initiation thereof.


Min. Trust me truly, Nick speaks to good purpose, marry you must not
understand him of such transient acts, as are both begun and finished at once
without any possibility of Iteration. As for example, a man aged thirty years
cannot properly be said to be then borne, because there is no possibility of a
second natural birth; neither may a true Christian man formerlie initiated
with the Sacrament of Baptism, be afterward said to be at any other time
sacramentally baptized, because one and the same person is only once capable
of that sacred rite. Of these and the like we speak only in praeterito,
that such a one was borne and baptized. But in such permanent acts as may be
repealed, renewed, or either in matter or manner, by a proceeding progress
perfected, the case is otherwise: they retain their prime denomination, till
they attain their full end and consummation. Of this kind were those
instances, which the Groom delivered, very agreeable to the Remisson of our
sins, for which we are every day petitioners: yea often times we Ezec. 18.24.
deprive our selves of the benefit of our former pardon, and then our suit is
to have it again confirmed. In a word, the world can take no certain notice
of every particular man's spiritual estate, wherefore the publication thereof is
reserved to the great and general day, Si nulla peccata remitterentur in
Iudicio illo nouissimo puto etc. Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 6. ca. 5.
when the handwriting which was against us shall be evidently seen to be
cancelled, and our enlargement from the power of sin and Satan fully
accomplished.


Iab. Such windings and turnings the Knights Mininisters have taught him to
elude the force of Christ's words. Page 75.
And to the end you may the better perceive his precipitation in censuring our
former deduction as Nody, and that the force of our Argument may more appear,
I will particularly examine his Cauils.


Nick. Now is Dame Purgatory giving up the Ghost, oh how she stareth, pants,
strugleth, and gaspeth, as unwilling to leave the world: when this pillow is
plucked from under her head she will be soon out of her pain. Good Doctor
speak not so loud, lest yo call her again into a second, and more fierce
agony.


Iab. His first assault is by examples. A Page 75.76.
Kentish Gentleman (says he) not purposing to make his heir a great Clark
says thus, My eldest Son shall neither be Student in Oxford nor Cambridge;
were not he an excellent Artist that should thence infer, Ergo some of his
other Sons shall go to Cambridge? Or if he should say, My Son shall
neither be Scholar in Eaton, nor Fellow of Kings College: were not he out
of his wits that should hence conclude, Ergo a man may be Fellow of Kings
College Being against the foundation.
that was never Scholar of Eaton?


Ma. Amongst millions of stones and faces, it is impossible to find two so a
like, that there shall be no difference. Similitudes are not of equal size in
every part, it is sufficient if they agree in the maine scope. What can be more
pregnant to show the folly of your Deduction? The two English Universities,
answer the two Worlds, the Gentleman's speech is only touching his eldest
Son, as our Saviors assertion touching one kind of sinners; the Inference
concerning his other sons is against art, your Consequence touching other
Sinners (being no part of Christ's scope) cannot free it self from unmannerly
intrusion.


Iab, He shows Page 79.
himself such an excellent Artist that he brings examples that make against
his purpose. For the Kentish Gentleman's speech that his eldest Son shall not
be Student in Oxford or Cambridge, nor Scholar in Eaton, nor Fellow of Kings
College, though it do not import, that either his second, or third, or fourth
Son shall be Student in Cambridge, or Fellow of Kings College, yet this does
follow, that some youths may and use to be students in Cambridge, some men
Fellows of Kings College, else it were foolish to make that special
exception against his first Son, which is general to all other men's
children.


Ma. See how your wit runs a wooll-gathering! while you seek to contradict
the Knight, you give evidence against your self. The immediate question
between the Knight and his Adversary in this place, was this: Whether the
words of our Savior in this Scripture, did necessarily imply forgiveness in
the World to come, touching sins of a lesser growth and degree? You answer
to a speech of like nature, that it does not import, that his second or third
son, etc. shall be Student in Cambridge: which is all one as if you should
say, Our Saviors speech does not determine that Sinners of another nature
shall be forgiven in the world to come, which is as much as we crave.


Iab. Yet this seems to follow, That some youths may and use to be Students
in Cambridge, etc. else it were foolish to make special exception against his
first Son.


Ma. Though it be true that there are Students there, yet it does not
necessarily follow, from the Gentleman's speech: for he might send his son to
be a Student in Queenborrow Castle, or any other place, where the Arts were
never read before. Indeed if there were no such place as Cambridge, then his
speech might have seemed absurd. So likewise it follows from our Saviors
speech that there is a world to come: but that other sins (not formerly
remitted) shall be there forgiven, you confess it does not import.


Iab. Should this Gentleman say, Ibid.
My eldest Son shall not be an University Scholar, neither in Oxford nor in
Queenborough Castle, were not his speech absurd? Why I pray you, but because
Queenborough is no University?


Nick. You mean when my Master is away: but I can tell you when he is there,
you would swear it is a little University. I may speak it to my credit, I
have often wished those bookish Disputants a good way off, their arguing has
made us wait so long for our dinner. And when they are risen, it is one bodies
work to run up and down with Books to set them agreed.


Ma. It Is well done Nick, to stand pro aris and focis, Had we a good
Towne-stocke, thou should have a pension, for thy good spoake.


Min. Nay listen a while to the Doctor, (who was neither an University
Scholar in Oxford, Cambridge, nor Queenborrough Castle) how does he conclude?
Were not the speech (says he) absurd, seeing Queenborrough Castle is no
University? as if there were no difference between a Horse-Mill, and a
Mill-Horse, between a specificall difference crossely applied, and an
accidental attribute figuratively continued. The absurdity of your speech
savors of the Mint, where it was coined; yea it has little or no agreement,
with the phrase in hand. For there is a necessary succeeding dependence,
between this world and the next, which is not to be found between Oxford and
Queenborrough Castle: wherefore the Negative is most improper in the one, which
is tolerable and significant in the other. Yet if any man should so speak, we
are probably to understand, that he had no intention to make his son an
Academick, yea scarce a Country Scholar, seeing Queenborrough is no place of
note destinated for that purpose. So when our Savior says, It shall neither
be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come (which is not found
capable by the Scriptures prerogative, of any such effect) it is plain, his
intent is, that it shall not be forgiven at all; neither does it imply, that
other Sinners are there to be forgiven, as you would wrest the sense, contrary
to your former acknowledgement.


Iab. Except there be Page 77
some remission of sins in the World to come, the speech of Christ should be
senseless, and absurd against one sin, that it shall be remitted neither in
this world, nor in the next, except some sins may be remitted in the world to
come: wherefore to make the speech of Christ discreet and wise, we must needs
grant, that some sins are pardoned in the world to come.


Nick. Itque reditque viam toties. This is right Sellengers round, forward and
backward. A great Horse that could trot the Ring so well, were worth much
money. The speech indeed cannot but be discreet and wise, if it come once to
your making.


Min. He paceth foot by foot after De Purgatorio. cap. 13
Lensaeus: his words are these; We say that Christ did not use this
distribution lightly ridiculously, or without weighty reason. And we say that
he speaks figuratively, gravely, and pathetically, (...).
aggravating the sin by th'eternitie of remediless punishment: excluding it
from the present remission, which is incident to other sins, and debarring
the person so obnoxious from the hope of future joy, which other sinners after
their timely repentance are to receive. It is no unusual thing in the Holy
Scriptures to put the cause Ezech. 36.27
for the effect; wherefore seeing there is no other place to warrant your
construction, I am the rather induced to think, that Remission is here put for
the fruit and effect thereof, which is peace of conscience, joy in the Holy
Ghost, and exemption from penalty; of all which this notorious sinner is
pronounced incapable, partly in this, and partly in the next World, which is a
sufficient disparitie, differencing him from others which enjoy both. Wherefore
the last clause in our sense, is not superfluous and senseless, as you deem:
seeing it extends it self to a further effect of the former Remission,
whereof the Blasphemer has no hope.


Ma. Were the speech senseless, if one should say, that the Doctor buildes
Castles in the Air? The speech is usual amongst the wisest men: should he
not then show himself a worthy Logician, hence to conclude, Ergo material
Castles may be built in the Air, or else the phrase cannot be discreet and
wise? If borrowed Elegances were literally, and properly to be construed, then
unless the sky fall, we should have no Larkes, because the Proverb says,
When the sky falls we shall have Larkes. This Doctrine would have driven the
Larke-taker to seek a new occupation: and then your Ladies could not say by
experience, that the pestle of a Lark were better then the whole body of a
Ki^e.


Nick. Do you not think that the Doctor was lap'd in his Mothers smock? he
is so womanish, that he will never give over, till he have the last word. I had
thought my master had given him his Belly full, when he told him that
Theomisus should be his Schoolmasters, neither quick, nor dead; which speech
he would not have so to be understood, as if Lectures were read to men when
they are in their graves.


Iab. The Page 84
example to illustrate the matter, though it be not against the Logic he got
in Paruies, yet it would not beseem the mouth of wisdom: to me it seems a
spice of Blasphemy, for him to bring his phrases, which he confesses are
neither in mood nor figure, to declare the speech of Christ, whose words are
in number, weight and measure.


Ma. It Is true, Quot apices, tot sententiae. Every sill^ble issuing from the
Word of Wisdom is a sentence. Yet does he not always deliver his mind in
explicit Syllogismes; neither does mood, and figure, still attend the most
sanctified and industrious pen. But if it be blasphemy for a man to bring
his own phrases to declare the speech of Christ, then is Lyra, with the rest of
your Cherubicall Expositors, to be put in silence: and why? forsooth it is
blasphemy to declare Christ's speech, by their own phrases and consequently
the Doctor when he has read his Text, must come out of the Pulpit, and play
least in sight, right mumme budget, making up the rest with signs and faces,
for in no hand must he declare Christ's speech with his own phrases.


Nick. Did I not tell you that Purgatory was almost at the last cast? When he
has no other evasion, then he cries Blasphemy, We may now sit down, and
decline victus throughout all cases.


Min. Nay it will be to our disadvantage, to give him time to breath, let us
rather spur him this question, What sins they are which are forgiven in the
world to come?


Iab. They are such as were not Page 77
formally, fully, and perfectly pardoned in this life: for the sins that were
wholly pardoned in this Life, need no Remission in the next.


Min. See how you are ensnared in your answer. Dare you stand to this? Then I
demand when you absolve a man upon his deathbed, now giving up the Ghost, and
guilty of mortal sins, whether, (when he is dead) can he be suiect to
Purgatory torment or not? If he may, then is your Priestly absolution no
formal remission of sin, even by your own ground. If he be not, then do
you utterly quench the fire of Purgatory: for how shall he be punished, that
had his sins before formally, fully, and perfectly, remitted? You have no
shift, except you will say that Sins mortal are translated into Sins
venial, and that eternal punishment belonging unto mortal sin be changed
into temporal, which you count proper unto venial sins. But this were to
overthrow the Law of God, which cannot but judge that to be mortal which is
mortal, and accordingly award punishment eternal.


Iab. Out of Page 79
the former text of Scripture it is gathered clearly that some sins are
remitted in the World to come, but what those sins be, venial, or mortal,
likewise the manner of the pardon, whether it be according to the sin, or
penalty, or both, cannot hence be proved: but out of other passages of Gods
word, these verities are to be searched.


Nick. He sends you to seek a needle in a bottle of hay; by like he thinks
you want work, you may do well to dismiss him to make this search himself;
when he has found these verities, he shall have audience; in the mean time
let him make a Syllogism in Celarent.


Ma. Honest Nick, I will owe thee a pound of thanks, for an ounce of patience;
perhaps he has somewhat else to say, touching the Knights other Logical
assaults.


Iab. He Page 78
thinks to put us to a plunge, by returning our Parologisme (as he terms it)
upon us.


Min. Thus Let. page 34
he disputes. The sin against the Holy Ghost shall neither be forgiven,
quoad culpam, aut quoad poenam, in this World, nor in the World to come: Ergo,
according to your Logical inference, the text equally intending both guilt and
punishment, some mortal sins shallbe remitted and quoad Culpam and quoad
Poenam in the World to come. If you grant this sequel, you cross the position
of Tom. 4. Dis. 45 1. page 557.
Suarez, who tells us that the remission of mortal sins in the world to come
cannot be understood as touching the guilt, but in regard of the punishment,
and consequently display the inualiditie of your own Collection.


Nick. Either now or never must Iabal show of what house he comes; now one
flash my noble spark. Has all thy powder taken wet? what not one squib to make
a Crack?


Iab. He returns arguments as children do stones they are not able well to
lift, which they let fall on their head or foot.


Nick. Profoundly answered.


Iab. It is Page 78.
not against the doctrine of our Church, that some sins are forgiven in the
world to come, and quoad Culpam and poenam, both according to the guilt of
sin, and the guilt of pain. Yea Catholic Divines commonly teach that
venial sins are remitted in the next world, according to both guilts, though
of mortal sins Suarez says, that Remissio mortalium, the remission of
mortal sins in the next world, cannot be understood, quoad Culpam, according
to the sin, but only quoad paenam, according to some penalty due unto it.


Min. If our Sauiour-speake as well (if not more plainly) of mortal as of
venial sins, then the conclusion according to your manner of deduction must
indifferently hold, touching mortal sins, in both guiltes, which seeing
Suarez does deny, it sufficiently bewraies the vanity of your partial
inference. It had been your better course to have denied Suarez authority: for
by yielding that the guilt of punishment remains in mortal sins, to be
done away after the remission of the guilt of sin, you unsay that, which is
yet scarce out of your mouth, viz. that sins formally pardoned in this life
need no Remission in the next. So that the stone does now give a double bound
upon your pate, weakening the force of your inference, and discountenancing the
doctrine of your Church; for if the sin be remitted in the next world, you
confess it was not formallie forgiven, in this present life. It would trouble
Sisyphus himself to roll away this stone.


Iab. Should Page 79
a young Gentleman say that he will neither study in the Innes of Court, nor
in the Universities, one may infer, except the speech be senseless, that in
both places studies are professed: but he that would infer that Common Law is
studied in Oxford, or Divinity professed in London, were he not absurd? So
likewise the speech of Christ does only signify in general, Remission in the
world to come, not distinctly explicate the manner thereof, nor the quality of
sins there purged.


Ma. What Doctor! will you take upon you to declare Christ's speech in your own
phrases? beware of blasphemy. But conceive it aright, the case is not alike;
for first you speak of two places; he only of one and the next world.
Secondly these two places are known to be liable to two different kinds of
study, whereas you all confess, that both the guilt of sin and punishment
are included in the latter part of our Saviors speech, touching the
Blasphemer, which the Knight does thus assume. That which is negatiuely spoken
of that one sin, has, you say, a contrary reference to other mortal and
venial sins: but the sin against the holy Ghost shall in neither respect
be remitted in the world to come, Ergo, other mortal sins shall be then
remitted in both, which your Suarez denies: and so your like inference
bleedeth even to death, with the bruise of this stone. If your young Gentleman
should say, I will neither study Seton nor Aristotle in Oxford, presupposing
that both were appointed to be read there; it might be probably inferred, that
other Students of the better sort do peruse the one, as well as the other.


Iab. Fain Page 80.
would the Knight find some parallel in Scripture, to this speech of our
Savior. For want of better, he brings that of S. Cap. 1.
Matthew concerning Joseph, That he knew her not, until she had brought forth
her first born Son. If out of this place (says he) we should come upon you,
Ergo he knew her after she had borne him, you would think that blessed and
holy Virgin irrecompensably disparaged. And yet (...) seems to imply as much.


Ma. With what due respect he speaks of that chosen Vessel, I refer the
trial to his own lines, which are the best witnesses of his religious
thoughts Far was he from giving any countenance to the Heluidian Inference.
Only he proposes it to show, that if Scripture should be interpreted
according to the first seeming blush, there would often times arise an
incongruous sense, not unlike this of yours, which is too servile to the
letter, without the warrant (nay contrary to the tenor) of the whole Scripture,
which does neither generally signify any future remission, nor distinctly
explicate the manner thereof, nor the quality of the sins that you suppose
there to be purged.


Iab. He has Page 82.
one shift more, which is a rule of Logic. Quod de vno negatur, non semper de
diuersis affirmatur, et e contra. His reason is this, Potest idem praedicatum
de diuersis subiectis praedicari? as thus, Eos qui foris sunt Deus iudicabit;
And this is as true, Eos qui intus sunt indicabit Deus: Where subiectum does
differ, the praedicatum being all one. Neither may we argue thus, they are to
be judged of God; Ergo, not by the Magistrate: And yet you (says he) stick
not to conclude thus. This sin is not remitted in this world, nor in the world
to come. Ergo some sins shall be forgiven in the world to come.


Nick. What flaw can you find in this?


Iab. His Page 84.
Logical rule (though the examples wherewith he declares it be childish) we
deny not to be true, that what is denied of one thing is not therefore said of
another: So by the rigor of Logic it does not follow, that Remission of sin
in the next world is granted of some sins, when it is denied unto one kind of
sins.


Ma. This is all we ask, the Helena for which we have so long contended. Why
do you then use this kind of arguing, which Logic the rule of reason
disalloweth?


Iab. It Ibid.
follows by the rules of prudencie, because otherwise such a speech, though
not false, yet should be idle and senseless, against rules of wisdom.


Min. Shall we never have done with your idle and senceles repetitions? The
speech of Christ must be idle and Haec cratio defenda videtur ^^bus qui nor
^ntelligunt.
senseless, unless it serve for your advantage. Is it not rather rigor in
you to take a Praed'cate as spoken of one thing not intended, because it is
purposely denied of another? What Father has feed you to sue a divorce
between the rules of Logic, and Prudency, which would not willingly be
sundred? When did ever Prudency open her mouth to utter that wherein the assent
of Hanc artem nun quam doctrina christiana reformidat. Aug. cont^ Craes^on. lib
1. cap. 20.
Logical consequence did not bear a part? Should you thus answer in the
Schools, you would be h^ssed out (with your natural and artificial Page 85.
nose) for an imprudent and irrational Ass. I confess there are great
Mysteries (in their own supernatural essence) far above the reach of Logic;
but in their deliverance and conueighance into our understanding they are
always attended with one or other instrument of this Art, which is (...) the
most methodical disposer, and faithfullest diuider of the most abstruse
mystical context. Disputationis disciplina (says S. De doctria. Christ. l. 2.
c. 31.
Aug.) adomnia genera quaestionu^ quae in literis sanctis sunt penetranda, et
dissoluenda, plurimum valet: and in the latter part of the sentence he touches
your compeers to the quick, with this Prouiso, Tantu^ ibi cauenda est libido
rixand, and puerilis quaeda^ ostentatio decipiendi aduersarium, which is the
whole employment of your Logical fragments.


Ma. You give him this fatherly aduertisment in good time; for me thought I
heard him very captious about the examples of the Knights ground, which he
termed childish.


Iab. He talks Page 82.
like a great Doctor when he has an ignorant reader. Is he not a Nody
Logician, a young gamester in that Art, that cannot distinguish betwixt
praedicatum, and subiectum, but takes the one for the other? The praedicatum
in his two propositions is not the same, the subject being different, as he
says, but the contrary, to wit, two different praedicates are spoken of the
some subject. The thing spoken is, Judge of those without, Judge of those
within, which are diverse titles, praedicates, and properties; the thing of
which it is spoken is God, one and the self same subject, on whom both those
titles light. And seeing Subiectum in a speech, is that which goes before the
verb, Praedicatum that which follows, the boys of Eaton may serve to laugh
him out of his witless bragging.


Min. Now do I believe you have as little Logic as Divinity. Unless you had
a purpose to show Midas his ears, and to be hooted out of your Lions skin, I
cannot see what should move you thus grossly to bewray your captious folly.
The Knight propounds his proposition, as it lies in the text, 1. Cor. 5.13.
Eos qui foris sunt deus iudicabit, which he matcheth with another as true,
and so placed, Eos qui intus sunt Deus iudicabit. Now the question is, which is
the Praedicate, and which are the subjects, of these two propositions. Let them
be Logically reduced as they lie, and then they stand thus: Nomen ex pluribus
^ocibus combinatum debet ad vnicam simplicem vocem reduci.
Ethnici sunt a Or Subijciuntur iud^cio diuino.
Deo iudicandi; Christiani sunt a Deo iudicandi. Is not the Praedicate which
comes after the Copula, the same in both propositions? are not the Subjects
(which go before) different? Is it not spoken as well of those that are
without, as of those who are within, that they are liable to the judgment of
one and the same God? The thing spoken is to be judged of God, which is one
selfsame attribute; the Subjects of which it is spoken are different, viz.
those that are without, those that are within. If Judging those without,
Judging those within, be the Praedicates, then are you to seek a Copula.
Wherefore you should first make your proposition Logical, according to the
Interpretatio facienda est ex dicentis vel ser^entis primaria intention.
Propounders sense, before you had passed so rash and childish a Censure. I
confess you may by a Cripticall disposition, and Grammatical construction,
turn the Cat in the pan, and change the places; which made the Knight add E
contra, to the proposal of his ground. But the former enunciation, as it was
directly mentioned by the Knight, so is it more Propria praedicatio est, quando
superius de suo inferiore enunciatur.
proper; the Judge being superior to the thing judged. Besides, the Knight did
not so much direct his Reader to the placing and marshalling of the words, in
the Proposition, as to their order and reference in Argumentation, implying
that it is no good consequence to argue thus; They that are without shall be
judged by God, Ergo They that are within shall not be judged by God: because
both are indifferently Illud in propositione est verum et natural Subiectum,
quod extra propositionem (...) ipsa reru^ natura subijcitur
subject to the sentence of that great Judge, whose Judgment may be most
truly spoken of them, as comprizing both within the generality of the verge
thereof.


Nick. The Doctor is so studious in the rules of Prudency, that he is to seek
even in the Principles of Logic. Many a one talks of Robin-Hood who never shot
in his bow: his meaning is to lead us over hedge and ditch (right the
wild-goose chase) that so by stooping to these trifles, we might loose the
sent of the question. Does not my Masters ground, exemplified with these
instances nullify your deduction?


Iab. He must take Page 85. 86.
to himself the Nody he laid upon our Exposition. That must needs be the
meaning of the words which taken away, leaves them in an empty sound, void of
grave, and full sense: the speech should be absurd, for want of sense or
mystery should he express a truth in a Disjunctive speech, one clause whereof
is senseless; This superfluity of speech, we take it a great blasphemy in you
to suspect in the Doctrine of Christ.


Min. We hold it no superfluity, but rather a weighty enforcement of Divine
elegancy. Thus when the Evangelist speaking of Christ, says Mat. 5.2.
Aperiens os suum aocebat eos, opening his mouth he taught them: we may not
infer, that a man may speak without opening his mouth, or else one clause is
idle and senseless; the setting out of one and the same thing, in a diverse
phrase, gives a Tanquam magna and profunda sed aperta dicturus. Gorran.
weight to that which is spoken. Vbicunque legitur Dominus aperuisse os (says
S. De Sermon. domini in monte.
Augustine) inspiciendum est, quia magna sunt quae sequuntur. Illud diligenter
notandum (says In Psalm. 1.
Bellarmine) Consuetudinem Dauidis et aliorum Prophetarum esse, vt id ipsum bis
repetant, ita vt vna pars versiculi sit repetitio and explicatio alterius. This
is diligently to be noted, that it is the custom of David and the other
Prophets to repeat the same thing twice, so that the one part of a verse is the
repetition, and explication of the other. It Is an ordinary phrase in the
Scripture to say, Psalm. 72. v. 5.
As long as the Sun and Moon endures. May he hence imagine, that therefore
the Moon shall endure after the Sun? or shall we tax the Prophet for a
superfluous speech? Id ipsum explicat verbis idem significantibus, (says
Bellarmine) of the like. He expresses the same thing in other words tending
to the same sense. So here when he says, nec in hoc saeculo nec in futuro,
the words do Rhetorically, and Emphatically, give life unto the assertion in
the former verse, viz. Mat. 12.31.
Non remittetur, it shall not be forgiven him: which this annexed Disjunctive
explayneth to signify as much as never.


Ma. The Doctor I presume is not ignorant, that there were in those days not a
few highly renowned Saduces who denied the Act. 23.8
Resurrection, and by consequence any after-life. Wherefore the addition of the
latter part, touching the World to come, were in no sort to be deemed idle, had
it only reference to the abating of the courage of these Heretics, who
confining their joys and sorrows within the compass of this present life,
were not like greatly to pass for any threat, which had no further Extent then
the date of this World. Wherefore in this respect alone, it were no absurdity
for our Savior to give them a Cooling Card, by letting them know, not only
that there is a World to come, but also that their obstinate and wilful
Blasphemy shall be there punished, without expectation of Remission, or hope
of ease.


Nick. Sir, you have won the spurs, the Doctor is off the hooks, the nose of
his Deduction is now set clean awrie; the supposed Idleness of the most
Divine speech, is demostratiuely removed; Purgatory has fetched her last
breath. It is in vain for the Doctor to froate the Key-cold Carcass any
longer. If he power in a pint of Doctor Stephens water, it will not move a
joint. Me thinks I see the Mortuarie Suffrages, and moath-eaten Miracles
lamenting about the coarse. Kind hearts; I think they are all agreed to Vnica
defunctas tres continet urna sorores.
die for company.


CHAP. IIII. The Scriptures authority and sufficiency warranted, against
prayer for the dead, and other Romish Traditions.
Iab. THat short and Page 90
pithie treatise, which the Knight sought to disgrace with froathie lines,
alleged for Purgatory the Custom of the Church to pray for the dead, and
their relief in the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar: which custom he proves was
perpetual, even from the blessed Apostles.


Ma. What that Author (then carried with the precipitate motion of your
superior and irregular Spheres) was enforced to write, he has now upon his
second settled, and more deliberate thoughts, found sufficient cause to
disclaim. Your confident suggesting made him somewhat too credulous in
believing. Having lost his Anchor-hold, he was the more easily driven upon
those quicksands, by the violence of a swelling Doli fabricator Epeus.
Flood. His stayed Judgment has since taught him, to think Pigmalion a fool,
for doting so much upon his senseless feature, which has neither breath nor
life.


Nick. Give Iabal leave to lick his own whelpe. When he has done all he
can, it will prove but a deformed lump; his apish dandling will hazard the
thriuing. Never did I see the spawne of a Crab-fish prove good Sturgeon.


Min. Seeing you attribute such pithinesse to a shaking reed, we are content
to see you brandish your own spear: the weapons that came out of your own
Armorie, may happily serve best for your own use; And though we could wish
you to make experiment of your valor in spiritual assaults, yet (rather then
our discourse should shrinck in the wetting) we are not unwilling to hear you
press your own arguments, touching the Churches Page 91
perpetual Tradition to pray for Saints in Purgatory in the next life.


Iab. Saint Cyril Page 91
Archbishop of Jerusalem, living in Constantine the Great his time, writes of
that practice in this sort. When we offer up Sacrifice, we pray for our
deceased Fathers and Bishops, and finally for all men departed amongst us, for
we believe that this is a great help for the souls of them, in whose behalf
we offer that Holy and fearful Sacrifice, which is laid upon the Altar.
Saint Chrysostom says as much, that it was not unadvisedly decreed by the
Apostles, that in the fearful Mysteries, there should be a commemoration of
the dead, for they knew the dead received great benefit and utility thereby.


Ma. Your Pinfold of Purgatory is no whit the stronger, for either of these
testimonies. It is not once named, nor presupposed. If you confess that the
Fathers, Bishops, and all men departed (for whom they) prayed were pinned up
in that Coope, then is your argument of some force. But seeing your Charity
dare not pass so rash a Censure, their general practice Suffragia ^uiusmodi
non prosunt animabus in vita aeterna. Iniuriam facit Martyri qui orat pro
Martyr. Pet Ierem. Ser 25. de Suffragijs mortuorum.
cannot establish your particular dream. Saint Chrysostom tells you that
these Sacrifices and Prayers, whereof Cyril speaks, were Commemorations of
the dead, which you may be the better induced to believe, because they prayed
for All: whereof some were Patriarchs, some Martyrs, some Confessors, and
many of them blessed Saints, already invested with Celestial glory. Saint
Cyrils Sacrifice in the behalf of these could be no other, then the Sacrifice
of Praise; which seeing he attributes (without distinction) to all the
faithful departed alike, your differenced Purgatorie-paines are not at all
eased, by this ancient, pious, and laudable practice.


Nick. There was a time when the Romanists also Pet. Ieremias ibid.
prayed for the Vessels in glory, in this manner: Annue nobis Domine vt animae
famuli tui Leonis haec prosit oblatio. But being better advised, (least praying
for the Saints in glory they might nullify the presupposall of Purgatory
Indigence) they have changed it thus, Annue Domine quaesumus intercessione
Beati Leonis haec nobis prosit oblatio.


Min. It is most true that the Greek Church prayed for the dead, yet make they
no mention of Purgatory; Apol. graec. page 119.
We have not received (say they) from our Doctors, that there is any such
temporary punishment by fire, and we know that the East Church never thought
so.


Nick. Yet does he produce Cyril, that this is a great help for the souls of
them, in whose behalf we offer that Holy Sacrifice.


Min. You shall not need to have this knot cut, which may be so easily untied.
It was then generally received amongst those ancient Fathers, Bart. Medin.
Six. Senens. Bibl. lib. 6. anno. 344.
that the souls of the Saints being received into an outward Court of Heaven
called Abraham's bosom, did not see God until the day of judgment; from this
groundless Supposition, proceeded their mortuarie oblations, whereby they were
petitioners for the hastening of their remove into the highest Heaven, not for
the lessening or mitigation of any scorching agonies, the fear whereof the
Popes pecuniarie Hobgoblinets (under the conduct of superstitious devotion) did
afterward raise. Your argument drawn from tradition, as it has error for her
original, so has it Sophistry for the Abettor. They prayed for the Martyrs,
and for all the righteous from Abel; and yet you say with Cyprian, Falce
Martyrij omnia peccata creduntur purgata. They prayed for the consummation of
their glory, as De obit. Theodos.
Ambrose for Theodosius and Valentinian, whom he had pronounced as undoubted
heirs of the Heavenly Jerusalem: and Augustine for his mother Monica, the
safety of whose soul was not so much as questioned; whereas your oblations
are of another Dye, being neither Congratulations for their present joys, nor
testifications of your Christian hope but imaginary reliefes from that place,
which Scripture does not specify, and from those pains which 1. Cor. 13.67.
Charity has no warrantise to misdoubt.


Nick. If they will draw in a Purgatory perforce, in my mind they should do
better (for the avoiding of partiality) to let the body, (which has not the
least part in the pleasure and fomenting of sin) have a turn or two in those
flames, as well as the soul: Shall the terrestrial part sleep in peace, and
shall the spiritual part pay so dear, for the works of the flesh? This were
to give the body a Pares in culpa. Pares in poena.
privilege and prerogative above the soul.


Min. Nick You digress: I was about to crave his answer to Art. 18. page 86. b.
Roffensis his relation, who says that the Greeks to this day do not believe
there is a Purgatory, and that in their Commentaries there is very little or
no mention thereof at all. Yea the Latins (says he) did not all of them
together receive the truth of this matter, but by little and little; Whereunto
Polydore also seems to assent.


Iab. You Page 92
omit that which you have in your Latin Original, Quantum opinor, as I now
think or guess, says that Bishop, which is less then a new nothing to hang
on your sleeue. For though Roffensis at that time had such a thought, not
having then so fully perused the Grecian Fathers, yet afterward in that
very Book, when he comes to speak of Purgatory, he does affirm the
contrary in express terms.


Ma. He has a very simple Naperie, who is feign to wipe his nose with a Foxes
tail. Did that Bishop write in such have, (without perusal) that he had no
leisure to give a dash to so short a sentence, in a point so material, having
before the finishing of his work found the bush, that could stop so maine a
gappe? Did his wisdom give such reins to his unruly pen, to say and unsay
without a check? What ancient Greek Father does he nominate to contradict his
former opinion?


Iab. Whereas Page 93
Luther did object, that the Greek Church did not believe Purgatory, he
makes this answer: I take it you mean the vulgar multitude of that Nation,
not the Fathers of the Grecian Church; for that the Grecian Fathers favor
Purgatory, the works they left behind them do witness.


Min. Without all question Purgatory was greatly in their favor, when they
could not so much as once vouchsafe to name it, throughout their many books.
Had they beeleued it, their Charity would have compelled them to reveal it.
Your Roffensis I perceive was then in a desperate case; least Tradition should
be also wrung out of his clutches, he is enforced to try his wits: and lo how
gaily he distinguishes, I take it you mean the vulgar multitude of that
Nation, not the Fathers, as if they would not have received it, if their
Doctors had delivered it. Is it not a rare Jest, to search for the Records of
faith inter Idiotas? Could they have been raised from their graves to testify
that by word of mouth, which they were before unable to write, the Bishops
surmise had been more reasonable. And what tokens of love does he bring from
those Fathers to Purgatory? forsooth they mention Sacrifice and Prayer for the
dead; that so the souls departed being yet (as they thought) somewhat recluse,
might more speedily enjoy the beatificall vision of God; as also that condign
praise might be rendered to the Almighty, by the aid of whose grace they were
enabled to die in the faith.


Iab. Whereas Ibid.
Luther obiecteth that Purgatory could not be proved out of the Scripture,
Roffensis replieth, that to pray for souls in Purgatory is a most Ancient
custom of the Church.


Nick. I promise you a witty answer, and to good purpose. It Is an ill Horse
that can neither wey-hey, nor wagge his tail. Your faction were little
beholding to him, if he would not say that it is a most ancient custom. All
the craft lies in the catching of this swift-wing'd proof. Could the Doctor
come to lay salt upon the tail of it, we should soon have it in our dish.


Min. Saint Paul who was rapt up into the third Heaven, should know as much
concerning the most abstruse mysteries, as the best. He writing ex professo to
the 1. These. 4.
Thessalonians touching the state of the dead, and prefacing his speech with
Nolumus vos ignorare de dormientibus, speaks not one word of this newfound
Land, nor of any ransom to be paid for their enlargement, who are there
imprisoned. Yea more, he closes that discourse with this Epilogue, that he
would have them comfort one another with these sayings: which had not been so
properly, or seasonably spoken, were there a Purgatory, and penal
satisfaction to be undergone after this life. The foolish Virgins that cried,
Mat. 25.8.
Date nobis de oleo vestro, were non-suted with a neno^ sufficiat nobis and
vobis. So that the deceased estate of your declining Purgatory, receiving so
small a subsidiarie supply from that high and sacred Court of the Apostolical
Synod, must be feign to stand to Roffensis his temporizing credulity.


Iab. You Page 93. 94
have the whole Army of the Christian Church in all ages set in battaile-aray
against you: the blessed Apostles with pikes (as I may say) of Divine
authority standing in the forefront.


Ma. Indeed if Roffensis were an Apostle, the Set is yours. He says it is a
most ancient custom of the Church; but he falters in his evidence.


Iab. To impeach Page 91.
the authority of the Church is the badge of heresy, to condemn her custom
is insolent madness.


Nick. This is your Ladies A.B.C. your Church is as much beholding unto you, as
was Pythagoras to his Scholars. In stead of Ipse dixit, you will have Ipsa
dixit.


Iab. What man Page 94. 95.
that has any bit, either of divinity in his head, or Christianity in his
heart, or Sobriety in his tongue, would accuse Catholics for esteeming the
Ipsa dixit of the Church, as much as the Pythagorians did the Ipse dixit of
their Master? Why should not this Ipsa, the Mother of Christians, the Spousesse
of the Holy Ghost, this Pillar and Foundation of truth, this Daughter of God
the Father, washed with the blood of his Son, that she might in her doctrine
have no blemish of error: Why should not her word (I say) be more esteemed of
by her children, then the saying of Pythagoras a Pagan Philosopher was with his
Scholars?


Nick. I ask the banes of matrimony between Water and Woort. Do you think to
out-swagger us with your Rhetorique? then I tell you Doctor, your Romish Church
is not the right subject for those sweet attributes. She is not the Mother of
Christians, but the Foster-dame of Heretics: Not the Spouse of the holy
Ghost, but the Minion of Antichrist: Not the Pillar, but the Poller of truth:
Not the Daughter of God the Father, but the Bastard of Satan: Not washed in
the blood of his Son, but polluted with the loathsome stains of Heathenish
Idolatry. If words will carry it, we will roll in our figures as well as you.


Iab. Oh what Page 95.
glorious Fathers and Doctors could I name, famous in former ages for sanctity
and learning, that submitted their judgments to the sayings of the Church.


Ma. O what a glorious Church were your Antichristian Synagogue, did it not
dissent from that primitive purity of doctrine, whereunto those famous Doctors,
and holy Fathers did subscribe; then were it insolent madness in any, to
reject her authority.


Iab. Little Page 96.
Judgment or piety do you show in your jest at our Ladies A. B. C: as if the
authority of the Church were not the Alphabet and Christ-Crosse row, in which
all Christians ought, and all ancient Christians did learn, to read and
believe the Scriptures. S. Augustine the Phoenix of wits, the Mirror of
learning, did he not learn in this book? Truly (says he) I would not
believe the Gospel, did not the Churches authority move me unto it.


Min. Sooner shall you persuade us that a foul noisome Stye is a fair princely
palace, then that your Romish Seminary is that Church, of which S. Augustine
spoke. And yet must that holy Father be Non disputas ad idem.
rightly understood; He spekes there of his Introduction to the faith, not of
the Foundation thereof. Being before a Manichy, he could not of himself have
found the way, out of the darkness of that blind heresy, unless the
Catholic Church had lent him her hand, to conduct him to those Crystal
streams, by the Ecclesia proposuit Euangelium Euangeliu composuit fidem.
virtue whereof his eyes were opened, and his mind enlightened. He had been
like enough to have passed by that Living fountain without regard, had not
their Causa sine qua non.
direction, who had made trial of the sovereignty thereof, persuaded him to
make his repair thither for the like success. Wherefore he should have been
very ungrateful for so irrequitable a benefit, had he concealed the means
whereby that his so great happiness was so luckily occasioned. What good he
received from the Church, he freely acknowledges; yet is he not so unjust as
to make his requital with the Scriptures Non dicit, Nisi me Ecclesiae
authoritas Moueret: sed Commoueret.
wrong. Yea so far is he from subiecting those infallible Oracles to the
Judgment of Men, that in the fourth Chapter of the same Aug. Cont. Epist.
funda.
book, he challenges the Manichyes to produce Scripture, for their
opinionatiue error, with protestation that he would then forsake the name of
the Church, the Consent of people and Nations, and return unto them. So that
howsoever the authority of the Church was an allectiue inducement, to draw him
to the Gospel, yet was the Gospel a far more potent instrument in the
founding, and settling of the spiritual edifice of his faith, upon the
solidity whereof he did principally, and most confidently depend.


Ma. If it had not been for the tidings of the little 2. Reg. 5.3.
Maid, Naaman had not gone to the Prophet in Samaria, by whose praescript he
was healed. Shall we therefore say, that she had any hand in the curing of his
leprosy? No doubt her courtesy was not forgotten; but the main homage and
reward was offered to the man of God. Had it not been for the Ioh. 4.42.
Woman, the Samaritans had not come unto Christ: but they heard him speak,
before they knew him to be Christ; then (lo) they believed, not because of her
words, but because themselves had heard him.


Iab: The Page 57.
Ladies of your Church learn forsooth of the spirit: they trust to ipse dixit,
who will teach them which is the Scripture. They are the sheep of Christ, and
know his voice, from that of strangers. These are your Ministers fair
promises; Yet I dare give them my word: though they have the best spirit that
ever possessed any man of your Church, notwithstanding they may err damnably,
mistacke Scripture, thinck that to be true translation, which is indeed
erroneous. I see Page 98.
no remedy for them, if they mean to be saved from the Deluge of errors, but
to fly to the Ark of Noah printed at Venice; Your sheep must learn in an
hebrew Grammar, to understand their Pastors; they must nibble on those roots
of Jury, wherewith it would be great pity your rare Creatures should be
troubled.


Min. As touching our translations of the Bible, though they admit a variety of
style and phrase, yet they concur in a Sympathizing unity of matter and
sense. They all accord in one issue without contradiction: they all direct by
one and the same way, to one and the same end; so that the most unlearned, if
he have not a desire to go astray, cannot tread amiss. There being but one
choice of truth proposed, there is hardly any possibility of being deceived.
The Ladies are not ignorant, with what princely Cost and Care that Work has
been lately reuised, by such grave, learned, and industrious persons, who for
knowledge in the original tongues were best esteemed, and for their sincerity
least to be suspected. Wherefore, this having past the test of strictest
discuss, being allowed by the Church, and uncontrolled by the most prying and
Censorious adversary, they are assured of the infallible truth thereof. By the
sweetness of the fruit they evidently see, that it sprang from a sound Root:
by the illumination of the 1. Ioh. 2.20.
spirit which leads into all truth: by the ministry of the word of God,
ratifyed with the In Euangelijs omnis veritas, and omnis manifestatio veritatis
Origin.
agreement, and explaned with the perspicuous reasons, of the Scripture it
self: by the efficacy thereof in captiuating their understandings unto the
divine will, and their carnal affections to the regiment of a supernatural
law: by often reading, which begets experience, and by hearty prayer, which
has a promise of effectuating their zealous desires; they are infallibly sure,
that their translation is true, and their understanding agreeable to the rule of
faith. Moreover, the principles of faith, with are absolutely, and necessarily
to be known, believed, and practiced of all men, are there blazed with such a
Aug de doct. chris. l. 2. c. 9.
radiant luster, that (without affected ignorance) they are obuious to every
eye. Though perhaps the genuine interpretation of some places of less
consequence be sometimes mistaken, yet is not the foundation raced; so that
their error is neither pernicious, nor damnable.


Ma. If our Ladies thus furnished in their mother tongue, having no recourse to
the hebrew text, be in such danger of error; in what a pitiful plight are
those creatures, who are tied to their vulgar latin translation, which they
understand not? How shall they try the spirits of their teachers, having so
crooked a rule, which they know not how to use? May not such a Pilot as Dr.
Iabal steer their vessels upon the rocks and sands? how shall they know
that this or that is the sense or Tradition of the Catholic church? I see no
remedy for them but to fly to Socrates, Zozomen, Eusebius, Theodoret and the
other Antiquaries for releife, and then they must be well skilled in the
tongues.


Nick. If there should be a grammar school erected for the feminine gender, it
would be a brave world: Iabal would sue for the Vsher-shipp; O how featly would
he discipline their Albes! There would be Tollo, tollis, sustuli. The Girls
will never consent to so harsh a motion; they had rather speak true english at
home, then make false latin at School, under such an yll-faced Tutor.


Iab. Had not Page 58.
Luther the first fruits of the protestants spirit? Yet he erred most
grossly: that even Zuinglius his fellow-witnes against the Pope, does give
this testimony against him; Thou Luther do corrupt the word of God, thou
art seen to be a manifest corrupter of the holy Scriptures. If he be so
corrupt, what translation or spirit of your church may your Ladies trust?


Ma. These are not the first fruits of your witless malice, neither was
Luther the first Coyner of our protestant faith, which does carry the right
stamp of the most ancient, sacred, and primitive truth. Let the Scripture be
the arbitrator of his writings, then will your slander be soon silenced and
suppressed with shame. As he was a man, he might be subject to some particular
error, which if Zuinglius reproved by warrant of the Scriptures, it proceeded
from his love to the truth, not out of hatred to his person. And have there not
been worse broils among your scholasticall Divines? Have not the positive
Constitutions of former Counsels been repealed by those that succeeded? Have
not the Popes Decrees been censured and discarded by their successors? Where
was your Catholic spirit all that while? It is in vain to look for a Foelix
qui minimis vrgetur.
heaven upon earth. Shall the whole fabric be pulled down, because a Wyndowe,
or a Chimney, or a Tyle is misplaced? He is a good Architect that leaves
nothing to mend. Zuinglius his reproof may inform you, that our Church is
more devoted to the Scriptures verity, then to the most prime man's authority.


Iab. This is Page 98. 99.
the felicity of our Catholic Ladies, that by the word of the Church, they
know certainly, which is the letter of the scripture: Which your Ladies like
stray-sheepe must seek on the topp of craggy mountains, as the Knight
terms the Hebrew language, not without eminent danger of an eternal
downfall.


Nick. Here is a do with the Ladies falling If you were their Gentleman Usher,
should they not have a stout supporter? Stand to your tackling good Doctor.


Iab. There is such a Ibid.
confusion in your Church, that as Irenaeus noted of ancient Heretics, one
shall scarce find two that will spell the same sense out of the same words.


Ma. Why has God given such diversity of guiftes to his Church, but that there
should be Quid in diuinis eloquiis largius and vberius potuit diuinitus
prouideri, quam vt e^dem verba pluribus inte ligantur modu. Aug. de Doct.
Chris. lib. 3.
variety of applications? Is not the Kings Daughter in fimbrijs aureis
circumamicta Psalm. 45.14.
varietatibus: Clad in a vesture wrought about with diverse colors? If the
stuff be the same, it is no great matter though the lace and embrodery be not
laid in all alike. What contradictions can can you specify in their expositions?


Iab. These four Page 99.
words, Hoc est corpus meum, containing not above fourteen letters, you have
devised above four times forty expositions, so different, as the Authors of
the one, damn the Favorers of the other to Hell.


Ma. A fit receptacle for all such loud liars, who care not what Crudityes
they vomit, upon the bosom of the most eminent and innocent persons, without
either fear or shame.


Min. They that are conversant in the writings of your Catholic Authors, know
that there is almost as much difference among them, about the three letters of
this one syllable, Hoc, as is amongst the Protestants, in the whole sentence.


Ma. If Mercury himself were amongst them with his rodd of truce, all his
Rhetorique would hardly teach them their Quid them? quid non them? renuis tu,
quod iubet alter.
Concordes. Iabal forgets how Leo the second condemned Pope In Epist. ad
Imperat. ad fin. 6. Synod.
Honorius for an Heretic. Had Zuinglius served Luthers books, as Pope
Platina in Sabin. and Senens. lib. 4. page 23.
Sabinian did the works of Gregory his predecessor, we should have an outcry
against fiery spirits; then he might more tolerably have demanded, What shall
your poor Ladies do in this combat?


Iab. They may Page 99.
rashly persuade themselves, that this or that exposition is the best, but
certain of any thing they can never be, till they admit the Catholic Ladies
A.B.C. the Churches authority, learning of her the sense, of whom they took
the text.


Nick. When the men of Thessalonica Act. 17.11
tried the Apostles Doctrine, whether it were true or no: did they send a
Legate to learn the judgment of the Church of Rome? Unto whom did they
repair, but unto Scrutabantur Scripturas.
him, that had the words of life? Our Ladies are not so raw in the Scriptures,
but that (if there were such difference amongst our Ministers as you suppose)
they can take that which does best agree with the Analogy of Faith, and the
Rule of Charity. The spirit of God is not so fixed to the Doctors chair, but
that it is most free, to make even them of the lowest form Super Senes
intellexi: quia mandata tua quaesiui, Psa. 119 v. 100.
wise unto salvation:


Ma. I have heard a worthy speech of Panormitan often alleged to this
purpose, that there is more credit to be given to one Plus credendum viro Laico
afferenti Scripturas, etc.
Laick that brings Scripture then to a general Council, representing the
universal Church, if it have not the warrant of the word. It is not long time
since I read how Paphnutius by this means prevailed against a whole Synod,
and stopped the passage of the warrantlesse superstition of single life. And
not without great reason. For if antiquity be to be respected, or consent to
be regarded, the Prophets and Apostles have the superioririe in both.


Min. Whereas he complains of confusion and danger of misinterpretation, for
the magnifying of Tradition, he forgets the censure of Lib. 3. Cap. 2
Irenaeus upon the prime Heretics, for the same quarrel. Difficilis
paucisque conueniens eruditis. Aug. aduers. Julian. l. 5. c. 1
Julian the Pelagian thought, by objecting the perplexed difficulty of the
Scriptures, to have brought his cause to a foreign bar. Notable is that
speech of Cyprian, so much applauded by Saint In Epist. ad Pomperanum cont.
Epist. Stephani.
Augustine, In compendio est (says he) apud religiosaes mentes and errorem
deponere, and inuenire atque erure veritatem. Si ad diuinae traditionis caput
and originem reuertamur, cessat error humanus. Si canalis aquae deficiat, nonne
ad fontem pergitur? Si in aliquo nutauerit veritas, ad originem Dominicam and
Euangelicam and Apostolicam traditionem reuertamur. Inde surgat actus nostri
ratio, vnde and ordo and origo surrexit. Saint Ambrose denies your pretended
difficulty. Paulus (says he) in plerisque ita se ipse in suis exponit
Sermonibus, vt is qui tractat nihil inueniat quod adijciat suum, aut si velit
aliquid dicere, Grammatici potius quam Disputatoris fungatur munere. When as
Cresconius pressed Saint Augustine with Cyprians authority, what was his
answer? Literas Cypriani (says Cont. Crescon. li. 2. c. 32
he) non vt Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex Canonicis censidero, and quod in eis
diuinarum Scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum laud eius recipto, quod autem
non congruit respuo. The same Father writing upon the seven and fiftieth
Psalm, shows the like resolution. Auferantur chartae nostrae, procedatin
medium Codex Dei. Let our Writings stand aside, and let the book of God be
brought forth. This was that Vmpier unto whose authoritatiue sentence Extant
Apostolici libri and Prophetarum Sanctiones, quae nos erudiunt quid de rebus
sacris sent^re debeamus. Theodoret. lib. c. 7.
Constantine wished the Bishops to stand, for the appeasing of the differences
which arose amongst them in the Council of Nice. This is that 2. Pet. 1.19
shining light, whereunto Saint Peter wills us to attend; and hereunto we are
the rather encouraged, because Christ himself has promised, Joan. 7. v. 17
that he who has a faithful heart, and an obedient mind to do his will:
cognascet de Doctrina vtrum ex Deo sit. So that if the Gospel be hid 2. Cor.
1.3 Non propter seruos fidelis sed propter fines diuitiae Scripturarum sub
figillo clauduntu^. Aquin. in Apoc. cap. 1. ex Ambrosio.
it is to them that perish; whose minds the God of this world has blinded,
that the light of the Gospel should not shine unto them.


Nick. You have given him Towe enough for this Distaffe. If I might be now so
bold as to interpose a question, I would request the Doctor to resolve me in
this. Our Savior at his last Supper gave the Cup, saying, Mat. 26.27.
Bibite ex hoc omnes. The Romish Interpreters appropriate it, to the Priest
only. Saint Paul teaches that marriage is Heb. 13.4
honorable amongst all men; they say that it is dishonorable to the Clergy.
Christ tells his Apostles that the Kings of the Nations bear rule over them:
vos autem non sic; They say that Cardinals are more than Papa Sceptra ligonibus
equat.
Kings fellows, and that the Pope has power in his great toe, to spurn them
from their regiments. The Law of God teaches us that Images are not to be
worshipped; they make their Proselytes fall prostrate before them. Saint Paul
says, Nemo vos iudicet in cibo and potu: they make it more capital then
adultery, to eat flesh upon Video preceptum esse ieiunti^, quibus autem diebus
in Euangelicis l^teris non video definitum. Aug. Epist. 86
friday. The Scripture is peremptory that we are justified by faith, without
the works of the Law; they magnify the sufficiency, yea the surplussage of
works. Now in this combat, what shall your poor Ladies do? whom shall they
believe? If the Church be Ephesians. 2.20
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, then are these the
Judges, by whom the truth must be tried.


Iab. You Page 99
need I fear the remembrance Zeno gave to a talker, that was often laughed at
for his folly; Loqui lingua in mentem intincta; to speak with your tongue
dipped in wit, not in wine.


Nick. You have lapp'd so long (with your saucie tongue) in the Bowl of wit,
that you are now feign to feed upon very dry conceits. If your perished
brains were taken out and washed in a neat cup of white wine, your wit would
be far more brisk. Have you forgot the old Friars complaint, In Cratere meo
Thetis est coniuncta Lyaeo,
Est Dea iuncta Deo, sed Dea mayor eo.
Nil valet is vel eanisi cum fuerint Pharisaea
Haec duo, propterea sit Deus absque Dea?
Bacchus and Thetis in my Cup are met:
Bacchus and Thetis strive, she winnes the set.
Nor God nor Goddess please me mixed in one,
I should like Bacchus, were pale Thetis gone.
Does not your Iouiall Genius fall once a month into such a vein?


Ma. My Masters, I fear we had need send for a Stickler to part the fray; Your
iangling will make Master Vicar forget what he was about to say. Me thought I
heard him naming Saint Ambrose.


Min. That which I had thought to produce as an vpshot of the point in hand
from that Father, was this. Amb. de virg. lib. 4.
Nos noua omnia (says he) quae Christus non docuit, iure damnabimus, quia
Fidelibus Christus via est. Si ergo Christus no^ docuit, quod docemus etiam
nos, detestabile iudicus. S. Chrysostom also tells In Romans hom. vlt.
us, that there would be no offenses nor differences, unless some opinion
were broathed, contrary to the Apostolical Doctrine. And In Mat. hom. 25 and
similiter in Leuit. cap. 5
Origens words are these, Sicut omne aurum quod fuerit extra templum non est
sanctificatum: Sic omnis sensus qui fuerit extra diuinam Scripturam, quamuis
admirabilis videatur quibusdam, non est sanctus. As the gold which was without
the Temple, was not hallowed: So neither is the sense, which is without the
verge of scripture, to be approved. So that touching prayer for the dead, we
say with Saint Hierome, Hieron in Titum.
Sine authoritate Scripturarum garrulitas non habet fidem. And with S. De
officijs l. 1
Ambrose, Quae in Scripturis Sacris non reperimus, quemadmodum volumus vsurpare
possimus. And with Tertullian Nobis curiositate opus non est post Iesum
Christum, nec inquisitione post Euangelium: Cum credimus, nihil desideramus
vltra credere. Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod vltra credere debemus:
And with In Decret. 11 Quaest. 3.
Gratian, Is qui praeter voluntatem Dei, vel praeter id quod in Sanctis
Scripturis euidenter praecipitur, vel dicit aliquid imperat, tanquam falsus
testis Dei aut Sacrilegus habeatur. Which Censure. I can hardly perceive how
the Doctor will shun seeing that without either evidence of Scripture, or
warrant of any Primitive Father, he would Stamen flaccidum arancosi pertexit.
Basil.
impose us (under the glorious title of his Church) so super-stitious a Custom.


Nick. Their Romish Church is Magna Diana Ephesiorum, of more principality,
then the rest; her authority must out-sway Scriptures, Fathers, and whatsoever
else is of most sacred esteem.


Iab. Saint Irenaeus a Page 120.
most Ancient Bishop and Martyr, who lived immediately after the Apostles
days, does give the former style to the Roman Church, planted by the most
glorious Apostles Peter and Paul Ad quam propter potentiorem principalitatem,
necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam; which principalit^e you cannot imagine
what else it may be, besides the Primacie of Peter, to whom Christ did make
subject all other Pastors and Churches; by the light of which singular
privilege bestowed on this Church in her first Pastor, she does shine, Velut
inter ignes Luna minores And in this respect the Roman Church may be termed
Diana.


Nick. It is not unlike, for she has turned you into a fugitive, and
senseless Creature; If you be wearied in the Chase, you know whom to thank.


Ma. In my opinion Iabal is taken in his own toil: and tript in his own turn.
The Roman Church (says he) shines, as the Moon amongst the lesser stars. He
does well to say, as the Moon; which is still in the change. She that was a
beautiful Fuimus Troes.
Queen, in the days of Irenaeus, is now become a painted Peiora nouissima
primis.
Harlot, prostituted to all manner of Impuritie? Superstition has blown upon
Dianas Nymphs, so that they can now no longer stand upon terms of
virginity. She that was Princess amongst the Churches is made tributarie to
Satan; her light is ecclipsed with Idolatrous positions, and Antichristian
practices. She has changed her Tune lignei calices and aurei Sacerdotes: Nunc
aurei calices and lignei Sacerdotes. Bernard.
wodden Chalices; but she has lost her golden Priests.


Min. Had Irenaeus taken Principality in your sense, for an absolute
spiritual, and universal pre-eminence, and jurisdiction, over al other
Churches, he would not have been so bold, as to control that great Victor,
chief Superintendent of so predominant a Sea; You may probably imagine he
intended no such necessary subjection thereunto, (as would serve your turn)
seeing he Eusebius. li. 5. c. 23
joined with those, who did communicate with the Asian Churches,
notwithstanding the excommunication, which the Pope had denounced against them.
The Church of Rome was then in the full, (glittering with splendencie of
Martyrdom) wherefore he sends the Heretics, (with whom he was confronted)
thither for light, where the brightest rays of orient truth were most
conspicuous. Had he lived to see Turbanus that man of sin (with the
furze-bush of superstitious Trumperies at his back) seated in your Moon, he
would have blessed himself at the sight, of so strange a Metamorphosis.


Iab. Heretics Page ^01
in all ages have been condemned, by the Judgment of the Roman See; by the
light of her authority, they were forced to see the deformity of their
hellish pride. This consideration moved Saint Augustine to say, that the
Catholic Church derived from the Apostolic See partly by the authority of
Councels, partly by the Consent of the World, partly in the Majesty of
Miracles, had obtained the height of authority, frustra circum latrantibus
haereticis.


Nick. Forward Children are seldom long-liued; Welfare him that has a
winter-witte long a ripening. Did you ever hear such an vnmellow kind of
arguing? That which Saint Augustine speaks of the Catholic Church, he
applies to his Romish Synagogue. Admit he had spoken of Iabals Apostolic See,
as it then was; Whence did it obtain the height of authority, but from the
Consent of Propter quod vnumquodque tale illud magis tale.
Councels, and from the majesty of truth? Does this make any thing for the
Principality of Rome innouated, which is now so far from taking her
authority from Councels, that she disanulleth, and ouerswayeth them at her
pleasure? So far from receiving countenance from the truth, that she
discardeth the most sacred verity, which bears not the Impresse of her
partial senses. If I be not deceived, Heretics have been also confuted, and
condemned, by Damascene, Epiphanius, Irenaeus, and other Greek Fathers as
sufficiently, as by the Popes of Rome. It were well if you would now dippe the
tippe of your tongue in one dram of wit, to give a better relish to your
speech.


Min. Whilst Rome (being the most opulent, populous, and eminent City of
Christendom) held forth the burning Taper of Gods truth, there was great
reason she should be held in especial regard; but now, (the Candlestick
being removed) it is as just, that her authority should be lessened. Saint
Lib. de peccat. merit. and remis. cap. 27.
Augustine was not so Parasiticall, as to flatter her in her errors. There was
a Case wherein be did not stick to say, Magis me mouet authoritas Ecclesiarum
Orientalium. And Aeneas Siluius is not afraid to say, that before the Nicene
Council, there was no great respect had of Rome. So thar it is not the person
of Peter, but her Constancy in the faith of Peter, that did make her great.
Besides, the greatness whereof S. Augustine does speak, is not ascribed to the
Roman, but to the whole Catholic Church.


Ma. I do not remember that we received either Scriptures, Creed, or the
four first general Councels, or any foundation of faith from the Roman Church.


Iab. Perhaps Page 102.
your reason is, because these Counsels were held, not in Europe but in
Greece: but the cause was the purity of one, never falling into heresy, and the
infelicity of the other, never to be without the inuentors of such Monsters.
Those heresies against which such Counsels were called, did spring up in
Greece. This was the cause that the Orthodoxall Bishops of Greece in defense of
truth, were often forced to fly for succor to the Roman.


Ma. Had there been such Principality in the Papal Sea as you surmise, those
Heretics would rather have been cited to the Romish Consistory, and there
received their doom. Those worthy Patriarchs, Athanasius and Paulus, sent
not unto the Pope, as unto one Supreme under God upon earth, over the flock
of Christ; but as unto a Christian Bishop, who was bound to interpose his best
aid, for the Peace of the Church. Besides those of Rome, there also were other
Bishops, whose presence was there also required; I hope you will not say there
was a superiority in all.


Min. Nay In vita Bonifacij 3.
Platina tells us, that the whole Greek Church was so far from yiedling to
the Popes It differed also in the observation of the feast of Easter.
Supremacy, that they complained, when Phocas conferred it upon Boniface. It
is an incredible happiness, which you ascribe to the Roman Church, that it never
fell into heresy, when as the 2. These. 2.7.
mystery of iniquity began to work, even in the age of the Apostles. Then was
Job. Mar. belg. page 441.
Petrarch too blame for calling Rome the Whore of Babylon, and Hist. page 535.
Matthew Paris for saying, she was a shameless, common, and prostituted whore.
Did not Marcellinus commit Idolatry, in offering sacrifice to Jupiter? Did not
Pope Liberius fall into Arianisme, when Athanasius stood upon his right feet?
I am sure you have heard that Honorius the first was a Monotholite, holding
that Christ had but one will, and one nature.


Iab. The Page 102.
sincerity of doctrine, as Ruffinus notes, is the cause that the Church of
Rome did never add, any word or syllable to the Creed: but kept the same
entire without addition.


Ma. Then you grant as much as we crave: that those principal Jewels, which
the Catholic Church prizest most, came not out of Rooms Treasury. Me thincks
you should blush, when you name Ruffinus: for how have you degenerated from
that ancient Rome, who have not been ashamed to add not only sillables, but
more then eleven articles, to the Apostolical Creed? Reckon them upon your
fingers, and you shall neither find the Popes Supremacy nor Purgatory etc.
which you have added as points of like necessity to be believed.


Nick. Then have they little affinity with the true Church, for Let. to T. H.
page 68.
she takes not upon her to control the holy Scripture her mother, from whom
she drew her first breath: She opens not her mouth, till her Mother have
delivered her mind; she comes not of her own head* with a sleeuelesse
arrant.


Iab. You Page 104.
describe the Spouse of Christ, as a mannerly young maid brought up in Luthers
school. You deserve a Page 106.
coat with four sleeves for this Metaphor, which makes the Church Scripture
Daughter.


Nick. Are these the Praef.
Cumaean sopps you promised? take heed least you pluck an old house over your
ears. Such liueries best befitt your indigent followers. Let him wear your
fooles-coate with four sleeves, that is free of your company. You may cut as
large a thonge as you list of your own hide.


Ma. The Metaphor is sacred, and does not deserve so ridiculous a weed. S.
Peter uses it, saying, that we are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of
immortal, 1. Pet. 1.23. Romans 10.17.
by the word of God. I have begotten you says S. Paul 1. Cor. 4.15.
by the Gospel. The Church being begotten and gathered by the word, must not
stand upon terms of seniority with her progenitor.


Iab. The Page 107.
Church of the old testament, was some thousand years before scripture: the
Church of the new testament did flourish many years, before any Ghospel was
written. S. Irenaeus Page 106. 107
writes that many Churches in his time had never read any word of Scripture,
yet did they flourish, by keeping the Tradition of Christian doctrine in their
hearts.


Ma. A man might pose you; should he demand what proof you have for your
Negative, that there were no sacred books, before those five written by Moses:
seeing he mentions a Number. 21.14
Book of the wars of the Lord, and the Joshua. 10.13
Book of the Just; what can you show to the contrary, why those books might
not be written, by some of the Patriarchs? Does not St. Verse. 14.
Jude allege a testimony out of the prophecy of Enoch?


Min. Let us not contend with him for this. What if we grant that the
unwritten word was more ancient? the difference was not in the matter, but in
the manner. It was unto them (being ratifyed by the Prophets, and confirmed by
extraordinary revelations) in the nature of a written word. And when that
word was expressed in visible Caracters, Traditions Mat. 15.3.
were of no longer use. As for the Gospel, it was written before the Race of
eyewitnesses was extinct: and what they preached, the same things they
registered. So that it was one and the Proliteris spiritus Sancti gratiam se
illis daturum repromisit. Chrisost. bom. 1. in Mat.
same word, by which the Church in all ages has been gathered. For as Eusebius.
l. 3. 20.
Irenaeus says of Polycarpus, he delivered those things, which he had learned
of them, who had seen the word of life, (...), wholly agreeable to that which
is written. The same Father Irenaeus l. 3. c. 1
also informs us, that the Apostles left in writing to the Church the same
Gospel, which they had formerly preached by word of mouth: that it might be
a foundation and pillar of our faith; yea of that true and lively says, which
the Church has received from them, and does prescribe to her Children. As they
preached, (says S. Hierom.) for the confirmation of faith; so was it necessary
they should write, for the confusion of Heretics. Contra insidiosos errores
(says S. In Epist. Ioh. 1. tract. 2.
Augustine) voluit Deus ponere firmamentum in Scripturis. Seeing then the aim
of Gods spirit, in the delivery of divine Scripture, (which is 2. Tim. 3.15.
able to make a man wise unto Salvation) was (as Theophilact writes) to
prevent haereses pullulaturas: what do they but open a gappe for all heresies,
which give way to unwritten, uncertain, and unnecessary Traditions? Considera
quam sit extremae dementiae (says S. Hom. 1. in Mat.
Chrysostom) nos qui primam illam dignitatem perdidimus, ne secundo remedio
vti velle ad salutem, sed coelestia scripta quasi frustra ac vane posita
dispicere: Consider what extreme Vide Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. de Papiae
Paradoxis traditione fulcitis.
madness it is, that we who have lost that first dignity, (of purity) should
refuse to use the second remedy for our Salvation, by contemning those heavenly
writings, as if they were given in vain, and for no use. Thus in stead of the
folly which you object, S. Chrysostom requites you with the note of no less
then extreme madness.


Iab. Where is the perpetual Page 104. 105.
Virginity of the B. Mother, after the sacred birth of the Son of God,
written in the Scripture? What is it but a perpetual tradition of Gods Church?
S. Augustine says it cannot be clearly proved out of Scripture, that
Heretics returning to the Church should not be rebaptized, and yet the Church
has forbidden the same; Shall we term this prohibition sleeuelesse?


Ma. The perpetual Virginity of the blessed Mother, is no matter of salvation,
whether we believe it or no. Yet are we of that opinion: because as we read not
any thing to the contrary, so it sorteth best with her honor, who was the
Mother of our Savior. As for rebaptizing of those, who were baptized by
Efficacia Sacramenti est ex institutioni ordinansis, non ex sanctitate
min^strantis.

Baptismus talis est qual^s ille i^ c^ius potestate datur, non quali^ percuius
ministerium datur. Aug. in Ioh. ^.


Heretics, we rather follow Augustine then Cyprian; yet not because he has
taught it, but for that as him self says, Ex Euangelio profero certa
documenta: I have sure Ephesians 4.5.
proofs out of the Gospel. Yea he pronounces a Cont. lit. Petil. lib. 3. ca
6.
curse upon all such as teach any thing, either of Christ or his Church, or
any other matter of faith besides that which is received, from the Legal and
Evangelical Scriptures. I once heard a Papist exceedingly puzzled, with a
speeck of his to Ad Max. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Maximinus. Neque ego Synodum Nicaenam, nectu Ariminensem debes tanquam
praeiudicaturus afferre. Nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris.
Scripturarum auctoritatibus, non quorumcumque proprijs, sed vtrisque communibus
testibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione certet.


Min. Irenaeus and Tertullian, who had to do with such refractory Heretics,
as either denied the purity of the Scriptures, or traduced the perspicuity of
them: did both of them appeal to Tradition, because they where challenged at
that weapon, by their adversaries. And by what Compass did they sail? first
they prove that alone to be true, and authentical Tradition, which was
delivered by Christ to the Apostles, and by them to the Church; by whom it was
successively derived to posterity. Secondly they stand for no other Traditions,
but for the very same articles of faith, which were contained in the written
word. Peruse Irenae. lib. 1. cap. 2.3. and lib. 3. cap. 4. Tertul. lib. de
praescrip. haeret.
both their several, and specificall Enumerations of Traditions, which the
Church has successively continued, and you shall find them to iumpe in all
respects, with the Apostles Creed. It Is true they might have proved them before
competent Judges, by the authority of Scripture, but as the Case stood, the
authority of the Church was thought more preualent; and the rather, that they
might show the harmony thereof, with the holy Scriptures. Wherefore if you
stand for such Traditions as they urge, it is fit your Bill should pass,
otherwise you must not take it ill, if your Grace be stopped.


Iab. Do but Page 105.
read your learned Author Hierome Zanchius, who will give you a newer tune,
then that you have piped unto us. That Author teaches that diverse unwritten
Traditions, concerning Doctrine and Manners, are in the Church, which are not
only profitable, but in a manner necessary, which we must reverence and obey,
else we contemn the authority of the Church, which is very displeasing unto
God. Your Dr. Field grauntes that Papists have good reason to equal their
Traditions to the written word, if they can prove any such unwritten verities.


Ma. Zanchius means not your Lenten fast, your Ecclesiastical orders of
Acolothytes and Exorcists: your Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, which you
will sooner prove to be dreams, then Apostolical Traditions; but the very
same which Tertullian and Irenaeus have recorded for such. Dr. Feildes (If)
touching the point in question, carries the sense of an impossible Supposition:
which we have reason to suspect, till your Purgatory show a better pedigree.
If you can prove this, to be one of those unwritten Traditions, whereof
Zanchius speaks, then we will (according to Dr. Feildes advise) not much
dissent from your Conclusion, till then we must crave pardon.


Iab. The Page 107.
places which the Knight alleges to prove the Churches Doctrine in this
point to be a Sathanicall figment, disgraceful unto the great mercy of God,
and euacuating the Cross of Christ, are many: but either so triuiall and
known, together with the Catholics aunsweres, or else so ridiculously
applied, wrung and wrested to your purpose, that their very sound is able to
break a learned man's head.


Nick. Then had you need of a good head-peice, to bear off the weight of the
blow, whose sound makes so great a battery. Yet if none but learned men's
heads be in danger of breaking, your rough-hewen skonce need fear the less.
Well, seeing my Mr. is arrested for bloodshed, he means to answer the
action upon Bail. And for want of a better Atorney, let me crave a Copy of
your Plea.


Iab. Shall Page 108.
I make the Analisis of his Rhetorical arguments? They be three Enthymems I
think. The first, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church,
ergo there is no Purgatory. The second, The scule of Christ went down to the
nethermost hell; ergo, no Purgatory can be found. The third, Christ bound the
strong man, and took his Fortress; ergo, Purgatory must vanish away.


Ma. The argument that once passes your fingers, is not dismissed without a
torn fleece: but seeing we must take it as you present it, let us hear your
exceptions, why it should undergo so triuiall and ridiculous a censure.


Iab. Can you Ibid.
deny but many of your praedestinate and Elect are, for robbing and stealing,
and other such crimes, locked up in London Gaoles? What shall not Hell-gate
prevail against them? and shall the wall of a prison mew them up? Has the soul
of Christ gone down into the nether-most Hell, and made no passage through
Newgates Limbo, where sometimes your Elect are kept? Has he bound the strong
man, that he should not harm, and shall now a Hangman put them to death? You
perceive I hope the vanity of your Inferences.


Ma. He that looks upon them through your spectacles, may read Absurdity
indeed. But that you may know the falsenesse of your Glass, by the misshapen
Representation which it gives to so well a proportioned face; you must be
advertised, that the Knights argument was neither so Wide-mouthed, nor so
Goggle-eyed, as the picture which you have drawn (according to your own Idaea)
to resemble it. He speaks of the state of the elect in the after-world,
according to the intendement of the Scriptures alleged; you wrest it to their
corrections in this life, which have their profitable use. His scope looks to
the satisfying of Gods Justice, which Christ has fully accomplished: and not
to those Chastisements (which are as spurs to drive men to lay hold upon that
all-sufficient Sacrifice) at which your Squint-eyed supposition does glance.


Min. There are sundry reasons, why the Lord suffers his Elect to undergo
those bodily penalties. First, for the manifestation of his own Justice:
Secondly, for their Correction, humiliation, and amendment, that their Spirits
may be saved in the day of the Lord: Thirdly, for the Caution and Example of
others: Fourthly, for the maintenance of public tranquillity, and politic
Society, which could not subsist, without these and the like Judicial
proceedings. But why their souls should be stopped in the passage to eternal
bliss, (the Cinders of original Concupiscence being quite extinguished by
death, and the Guilt of their former sins clean defaced by the merit of
Christ) there can no reason be yielded, from the warrant of the word, which
debarreth the strong man from surprising, and the gates of Hell from prevailing
against them which die in the Lord. So that the light of these Illustrations is
not so easily ecclipsed, by the interposition of your Duskish conceit.


Ma. They that Let. page 87
die in the faith have peace toward God: they that have peace toward God,
are justified by Christ: they that are justified by Christ are free from the
Law: and being free from the Law, Quis accusabit? Who shall late any thing to
their charge?


Iab. I could Page 109
cast your Elect into Hell from the first step of your Ladder. For they that
die in the faith have not peace toward God, except their faith be joined with
good works. Your Protestant faith is so light-footed, or lightheaded rather,
to believe that you shall be saved, and your Charity so heauie-heeled to do
good works, by which men must be saved: that an eternity of torments may
pass, before your works overtake your faith.


Ma. This shows under whom you serve. Apoc. 9.11
Ab^ddon is your Tutor, and he has a destroyer (a bad one indeed) to his
Pupil. I thought you had not been so near a kin to that evil spirit
mentioned in Saint Lukes Luc. 4 35.
Gospel, who brake the strongest chains, casting the poor Demoniack down,
sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the water. All that Satan himself
could do, was to Mat. 4.6.8.9.
persuade our Savior to cast himself down: but now we have met with a
stronger then he, one that will undertake to throw the Elect from the highest
pinnacle of their assured peace with God, into the fire of Purgatory.


Min. The amity that is between a Justifying says and good works, is such:
that the linckes of their indissoluble coherence cannot possibly (not in
thought) admit any separation. Yet do you contrary to the express text of
Scripture, labor a Divorce, making a Nullitie of our peace toward God,
albeit we die in the faith: by intruding a needless exception of
Ioynt-workes, with which a lively faith is always in separably accompanied.
Were he not worthy to be laughed out of his fools Coat, that should say the
Sun does not ripen and refresh the fruits of the earth, except his light be
joined with heat? The Case is not much unlike; there being the same impossible
supposition, that a Christian faith should be destitute of good works, as that
the Sun should want heat. He that dies in the faith has not only peace with
his own conscience, arising from the testimony of his godly conversation: but
also peace toward God, through the merit of Christ, upon whom he solely and
steadfastly relieth. This peace toward God, though it receive augmentation of
certainty, and degree from works annexed; yet has it the prime being, and
fundamental Subsistence, from the virtue of the object which is apprehended.


Nick. He forgets Saint Paul's rule of not judging, when he takes upon him to
be the Auditor of our works. If he would put on his Holliday eyes at his own
home, he may happily there discover, as great penury of charitable devotion,
as he lays to our charge. You may know these Pharisaicall Trumpeters, by
their puffed cheeks, swollen tongues, and Rheumatique mouths: they are full of
ostentation; but pluck of their sleeves, and you shall find their arms
withered, and their hands as dry as the Pumice-stone, which will sooner grate
off the skin, then yield a drop of any comfortable moisture.


Iab. You say your Page 109.110.
Elect are free from the Law: If you understand it in Luthers sense, then
though they commit whoredoms or murders, a thousand times a day, they need not
care; the blood of Christ freeth them from the Law.


Ma. Luther had great reason to attribute as much to the blood of Christ, as
your Ianizaries do to the Pardons, that are granted by the Pope. Yet is he
far more sparing: he gives not encouragement to any subject, to lay violent
and sacrilegious hands upon his natural, sacred, and anointed Prince, with
assurance that the blood of Christ will absolve him, from all danger of the
Divine Law, for so horrible a fact; according to the tenor of your immature,
Sinne-kindling, and Soule-killing Indulgences. He only administreth a word of
comfort in due season, to raise up distressed consciences from despair,
assuring them (by the authority of our Saviors Proclamation) if by true
repentance, and a lively faith they come unto him their, Ne formides adhuc
^^^pes reliquiest, ^uit I hanne Euangelista latronum daci. Eusebius. lib. 3 cap. 17
burdens shall be eased, their thirst refreshed, and their Souls freed from
the condemnation of the Law. I see you have not yet left your old Spiders
quality: Were you not of a venomous constitution, you would not draw so
presumptuous a Conclusion from so sweet and justifiable a Cordial.


Iab. You should understand Page 110
freedom from the Law in the Catholic sense, that the spirit of Christ makes
that yoke easy, and the burden light, that in the Spirit of love we may
keep the Law with great ease, as Saint John says: His Commandments are not
hard. But I dare say your Protestant faith has little of that Spirit, that
dilateth the heart to run the way of Gods precepts, that it will never be
able to get up this Ladder. Let them be indeed just, let them be Saints that
keep the Law.


Min. Quis idoneus ad haec? The Spirit I confess helps our infirmity: the
more we grow in grace, the higher we climb; yet as long as the weight of
flesh hangs about us, there is no such facility of climbing this ladder of
the law, as you plead. While we are here upon this glassie Sea, our feet are
set in slipperie places still subject to slide. One horse Supe^a^euadere ad
auras -Hoc opus, hic labor est.
will draw faster down a hill, then ten upward. But if your Saints can so easily
keep the law how do they need so often confession, which was not only ordained
for venial, but also for mortal sins? Is not this your supposed easiness in
fulfilling the Law, the next way to make Purgatory of no use?


Iab. Doubtless Page 10.
the iustest man falls seven times a day: Who can say that his heart is pure
from vain and impertinent thoughts? His tongue clean from idle and
unprofitable speech? His hands not defiled at least with emissions in Gods
service? Do you see your just cannot be in this life without dust?


Ma. Modo ais, modo negas. What is now become of your Ladder with the steps,
whereof your Catholic feet are so inured? Is all come to this, that the just
are but dust? Have the iustest some dross to be purged? then if ever you mean
to get into Heaven, you must climb by another Ladder: by the merit and
mediation of that sweet smelling Sacrifice, without which we can never (through
our own legal obedience) be advanced into the presence of God.


Nick. The Doctor may do well when he presents my Master with the next Pref.
Purgative Sallet, to add these two Ingredients, which are far better then
his Page 129
Ladies gloves; I mean the herb of grace, and the flower of Iesse: He that
feeds well upon these shall not stand in need of any other Purgation; he
shall be thoroughly clean.


Min. Though we dare not hold Justification by the Law, yet do we not deny
the laudable and necessary use thereof: being not only Speculum, A Looking
Glass to dress our lives by; but also Spiculum, A Piercing Dart, to let out
the wild blood of self-conceit. Notwithstanding, to disrobe God of his mercy,
and Christ of his merit, by attributing that to the Law which belongs to S^
Christ S^a Christ.
him, that is the end of the Law, we can find no reason, unless we would
wilfully hinder the Evangelical progress of our salvation, by laboring to be
found in our own righteousness.


Ma. Saint Paul speaking of the former and present estate of his Corinthians,
tells them how they came to be washed, sanctified, and justified: viz., not by
the works which they had done, but by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.


Iab. Thus Page 110.111.
does the Knight allege Scriptures for his purpose; He talks of washing and
cleansing, yet had his lips still need to be purged, which he seldom
wettes (I fear) in the bath of tears and penance.


Nick. What! more Phylacteries! Have you deserved such trust as to be made of
his Counsel? Our Savior has taught him to shut his Chamber doors, against
such vainglorious spies, when he addresseth himself to his pious devotions.
His tears are laid up in a bottle, that is not so full of leakes. Plenus
rimarumes, ^ac and illac diffluis.


Iab. Is he Page 111
not skillful at Scriptures, who applies that sentence which was spoken of
gross sins, as whordome, theft, extortion, and the like, which the
Corinthians before baptism committed, and from which by baptism they were
cleansed, to the daily venial offenses, without which the just man does not
live.


Ma. Unless I have forgotten my Logic the argument follows affirmatively,
from the greater to the less. If by his blood our gross sins are purged,
then much more by it alone, must those that are venial be cleansed. The blood
of Christ (says Saint John) cleanses us, ab omni peccato, from all sin, of
what nature, condition or degree soever. Neither does Saint Paul say, that
Let. page 85.
faith is the ground of those things, that are to be suffered by our selves;
but of things to be hoped for from Christ.


Iab. I perceive your Page 111.
Protestant faith is very weak, we must not lay any great burden on it, of
things to be suffered by your selves, lest it break; but of things to be
suffered by others, as much as we will; You can easily endure that others
suffer, so you be well your selves. I do not now wonder you have rejected
Fastings, Pilgrimages, Disciplines, Haire-cloathes, Lying on the ground, Rising
in the night, Living in perpetual Chastity, wrestling with the lusts of the
flesh; Your faith is not a ground of penance, nor of any mortifications, to be
undergone by your selves.


Ma. Our Protestant faith needs not your superstitious supporters, which bend
in the hammes, as altogether unable to bear the massy weight of the least
sin. Scio cui credidi, was Saint Paul's anchor, which stayed him amidst the
most tempestuous storms; he desired to know nothing but Christ Jesus and him
crucified. We content our selves with his wisdom, and build upon his ground.
We hold it the most beneficial Pilgrimage, for a man to travail out of the
confidence, and love of himself: the best Haire-cloath, is the meditation of
his sufferings; the best Chastity is, not to defile our souls with spiritual
fornications, nor our bodies with lawless lusts. Though we hold it a necessary
fruit of our Faith, to be zealous in the continual practice of prayer, fasting,
Discipline, and other goood works, yet does Christian humility teach us, not to
vant of them; and their insufficiency forbids us, to repose any trust in them.
For 1. Tim. 4.6.
bodily exercise profits nothing: The Abac. 2.4.
just man lives by his own faith.


Iab. Christ must Page 111.122
suffer all for you: you will not be partners with him in his passion, yet you
will share with him in his comforts; You will not by your good will, have your
finger ache for his love, nor taste the least drop of vinegar to purge your
sinful humors, yet will you be as bold as any other, except his Justice
keep you back, to put your nose into the sweet cup of his glory.


Min. Were our resolution no better, then your charitable opinion, it were
indeed no small empeachement to the solidity of our faith. But the Records of
our Judicial Courts, are able to silence your unmannerly Metaphor. Your botle
nose hangs so in your light, that you cannot see the numberless names of those
our glorious Martyrs, who were ready not only to be bound, but to suffer the
most dreadful torments, that tyranny and heresy could invent, for the faith
of Christ, and testimony of a good conscience. They kissed the stake, and
embraced the flames, whereby they were made conformable to the sufferings of
our Savior; Neither do I doubt but the same faith would (if occasion so
required) still show it self by the like effects.


Iab. True faith is a Ibid.
ground not only of hope, but also of fear. As it teaches us to expect a full
reward, if we fulfill gods Commanndements; So likewise to be sure of heavy
punishments, if we contemn them.


Min. If you speak of a servile fear, in regard of heavy punishments, faith
leaves that to the Law, which is the Minister of death. But admit you mean
a filial sear, though it arise from faith, yet is it as a consequent of hope,
from which it is necessarily derived.


Iab. Faith is Ibid.
defined the ground of things to be hoped for, not of things to be suffered by
us, or of things suffered by Christ: because Christ's sufferings for us, and
ours in love and imitation of him, are but means to conduct us to God, the
blessed end hope aymeth at.


Ma. I think it would trouble Aquinas himself to distill the Quintessence of
congruity, from this sentence. First, you confess that for which we we have
so long contended: that faith is not the ground of things suffered by Lachrymas
Petri lego, satisfactionem non lego.
us. Secondly, you displace Christ's sufferings; and why? because they, in love
and imitation of him, are but means to conduct us unto God. Methinks you
speak very improperly, confounding the object and the effect. I would you
would be your own Oedipus.


Iab. Hope and Page 112.
Faith being Theological virtues, have for their objects not Christ's
sufferings, nor our own, but God alone; Other things faith and hope does
regard only, as they are pertinent to God.


Ma. If you speak of the Ia. 2.19.
Devils faith, then indeed God alone is the object: but if you keep your
self to the faith of the Elect, (now questioned) then is Christ Crucified the
immediate object, and God is the end. Are we not saved by faith in his blood?
Can we come unto the Father, but by the Son? He is the brazen serpent, which
the eye of Faith does principally behold.


Iab. My Page 112
answers I fear are too grave, both for your head and faith: neither will the
one understand, nor the other believe my discourse. I labor in vain either to
build penance or Purgatory on your faith, or to beat true learning and
divinity into your head.


Nick. Nemo suae fortunae faber. We must content our selves with that measure
of understanding, which the great Giver of his undeserved Talents, has
imparted unto us. It it is sufficient we conceive how improperly you speak,
and how idely you discourse. Is the Let. page 86
Summer livery of everlasting life given unto us, with this Prouiso, that
unless we play the Tailors our selves, and make it up by our Purgations, it
must never come on our backs?


Iab. Much do you Pa. 113
fear I see, least you be forced to play the Tailor with a Discipline, to
pleasure therewith your shoulders: and out of the broad-cloath of Christ's
merits, with that sharp pair of sheeres, to cut out a Purgatory garment for
your own back.


Nick. No doubt you would prove a good Spinster, so well do you lengthen the
course thread of this homely Allegory. The whirle of your wheeling wit casts
about beyond admiration.


Iab. S. Paul Ibid.
was such a Tailor* he did not beat the air, but chastise his body, still
carried about with him the mortifications of Jesus Christ; to which
participation with Christ in pain he may seem to exhort, when he bids us
feel the same in our selves, that we see in Christ Jesus; who subjected
himself to the death of the Cross.


Ma. He had (as he says) the marks of his passion in his flesh, yet was he
not thereby justified. It is true that one speaks of the penitent thief: Non
promisit Paradisum nisi existenti in cruce. He promised not Paradise to any
but to his Crosse-companion. Yet notwithstanding the torments he there endured,
he was feign to come to Domine memento mei. Unless Christ had been merciful
unto him, his passion had sorted to no better effect, then his fellows did. So
that albeit there be necessarily required a Conformity to his death, (at least
by Seminemus hominibus exemplum bonum peraperta opera: Seminemus Angelis
gaudium magnum per occulla sufpiria. Ber. de benedict.
penitential works) which all true Christians ought willingly to undergo,
yet is it to be performed as an homage, (the reward whereof shall not through
the riches of his abundant grace be unrequited) not as a satisfaction to make
the least part of atonement, for the least sin; which being against an
infinite majesty, cannot be expiated by any finite punishment.


Iab. I assure Page 113.114
you that a discipline or a whipping for a quarter of an hour, would make you
conceive more deeply of Christ's bitter passion, then ever did any Protestants
Sermon you heard.


Nick. Had my Master known your mind, that you love whipping so well, he
would have saved you a labor. You should not have needed to travel so far
as Doway for a ierking; I dare undertake he would have taken order, that the
Bedles of Bridewell should have tawed your hide to the quick, far better
then any vizarded Substitute, whom your Lay-Catholiques use to hire, to lash
himself before the Congregation in their stead.


Iab. Had he Ibid.
tasted any drop of the sweetness of Christ crucified, he would never have said,
rejoicing in his competent patrimony, Ditescit cui Christus dulcescit: he
becomes rich, to whom Christ crucified becomes sweet.


Nick. Now you cavil against the hair. The competency of his patrimony moved
him (as he says) to seek rather his contentatio^ by Theological studies,
then his profit by the pursuit of politic affairs. Now lest you should
object, that many men are born to greater fortunes of the world then himself,
he margents thus, that he has riches enough who tastes the sweetness of
Christ; against which saying (no less pithy in sense then pleasant in the
original sound) there is no curre, (unless he came of an Atheistical litter)
would dare to bark.


Iab. Many Ibid.
born to greater fortuns of the world then he is, voluntarily made themselves
so poor, that their only demeanes was a wilderness, their palace a hole under
ground, their meat fasting, their attire contemptible, their music prayer,
their bed the bare ground, which life they did prefer before being kings in the
world: such was the sweetness they found in Christ crucified: such joy they had
to feel in themselves some little portion of that pain they beheld in him.


Nick. And have you learned your Cinque a pace? your phrase treads the measures
notably well. Legibus no^* exemplis Non minor est virtus quam quarere parti
tue^i.
viuendu^. What warrant they had to deprive themselves of the means of doing
good, or what account they could make unto him, who trusted them with so many
talents, which they committed to the manageme^t of others, we will not debate.
My answer is this. When the Pope imitates his Predecessors, leaving his Palace
for a Cave, his Cope for a skin, his Triple crown for a Cap of wool, then
will my Master follow these Presidents, and leave Iabal to be his steward. In
the mean Res mihi non me rebus submittere conor.
season, as he abounds not in delicacie, so will he not hoord or misimploy his
superfluity.


Iab. They did not Page 115.
doubt, but the garment of glory, out of the broad-cloth of Christ's merits, was
to be greater or lesser, according as they had more or less conformity with
the crucified Son of God; Neither did they believe that God gives it to us
ready made to our hands, but that those momentary and light sufferings work in
us eternal weight of glory.


Ma. And great reason they should believe the last clause: for every man shall
receive according to his works. The more good we do, the more glory,
immortality, and peace shall we receive. But that the garment of Christ's
sufferings is given us ready made, there was never any doubt made by any duly
considerate Christian. That Oblation being made once for all, can neither be
augmented nor diminished, in regard of it self, though in regard of us, the
benefit is either more or less, as we believe and express the virtue of our
faith, by the mortification of the flesh, and holy conversation of life. His
Wardrope affoords every believer a complete robe of righteousness; he that will
not take the pains to fit it to his soul, is not worthy to wear it. As we
grow in grace, the warmth of this garment increases; The nearer we come to his
sufferings, the greater shall we be in his glory, not that we deserve the
least degree, but because it has Coronat nos Deus in misericordia et
commiserationibus. Psalm. 103. v. 4.
pleased him, for the kindling of our frozen zeal, to propound the greatest
prize to the best runner: for so says S. Paul. Romans 9.16.
Nec volentis nec currentis. It is neither in him that wills, nor in him that
runs.


Iab. I fear the Knight Page 116.
plays not the Tailor aright, but cuts out of the Scripture favorable
sentences for himself as this is: Blessed are those that dye in the Lord, that
do concern others, whose lives do not much suit with Interdum vulgus recte
videt, est vbi peccat. Horace.
Dives daily banqueting, as his seems to do. Let him take heed he find not
a garment of another suite set on his back, when his Soul shall depart, more
naked of good deeds out of the body, then his body of Garments unto the Grave.


Nick. My Master is beholding to you for your extraordinary care. But if he
have not in all this time learned to play the Tailor aright, by my consent he
shall not be bound Prentize to such a Botcher, who cannot teach him to thread
his needle aright. When you fall once to trifling, I perceive your Vessel runs
low; Purgatory is out at the elbowes.


Ma. I would gladly hear how you answer the Knights arguments. He disputes
in this manner. Let. page 81.82.
The Souls in Purgatory are either punished for those sins, which Christ's
blood has wholly purged, or for those which he has not wholly purged. If for
those which Christ has wholly purged, then there must needs be injustice in
God to imprison them whose debts are fully discharged. If for sins that he
has not wholly purged, then it follows, either that he is not the Lamb that
takes away the sins of the world; or that man's satisfaction must go hand in
hand with Christ's merits.


Iab. He buts Page 117
against Purgatories walls with his horned arguments, which if it have any
force against Purgatory, will also break open the gates of hell, that the
damned may come out. For what debts are they kept in prisons Doubtless for
those for which Christ did offer his precious blood; which was a sufficient
redemption for the sins of the world. Is God then unjust to imprison them in
the dark Dungeon for ever, for whose sins Christ paid a full and rigorous
ransom?


Min. Has not this Dilemma brought you to a sore plunge? If you come upon
either side, you are sure to be gored; wherefore to get out of the reach of
both, you are feign to creep down to hell for an answer. And what is your
purchase? The death of Christ, though it is sufficient for all, ex abundantia
meriti: yet is it not sufficient to save all, ex defectu fidei, by reason of
the want of Faith; whereby that his sufficiency of merit, is particularly to
be applied. What is this to those that are in Christ, who die in the Lord?


Iab. It is Christ's Pa. 118.
holy will that in sins committed after Baptism, the whole guilt of pain be
not ever forgiven, but sometimes he reserueth a convenient task of temporal
pain.


Ma. This you speak confidently: could you prove it as soundly, the day were
yours. If temporal pains be reserved, how is the sin wholly forgiven? Dare
you say that God, who is perfection it self, performs the works of his
mercy (which surpass all the rest) by halfes? Are mortal sins with their
punishments wholly remitted, and must the greatest part of those that are
venial be reserved? The cause being taken away, the effect cease. If the
pain of mortal sins be remitted, then much more the penalty of venial
slips.


Iab. We daily Page 119.
see and feel that punishments and penalties may remain though the sin be
forgiven. What are death, hunger, thirst, and other miseries of this life, but
effects of original Sin? Is not sin forgiven unto Christians in Baptism?
Yet those that are baptized endure the former penalties. God pardoned DAVID'S
sin: but did all temporal punishment cease together with the sin? The
sin was remitted with a, But thou shall endure these and these afflictions,
because thou have made the name of God to be blasphemed.


Min. These are not properly punishments proceeding from severity, but
Chastisements sauouring of mercy: for punishments have respect unto a person
obnoxious to the Law, and to a Judge not satisfied for the breach of the Law;
But these are rather the effects of corrupt nature, then the Tribulatio piorum
non tam afflictiua, quam amoris diuini declaratiua, virtutis promotiua, and
culpae futurae cohibitiua. Aqui.
punishments of the persons regenerate. Otherwise you must confess that the
Blessed Virgin, because she died a natural death, was thereby punished for
her original sin; which you will not easily be drawn to admit. Were the Child
of God perfectly sanctified, as soon as he is justified, then were your
objection to some purpose: but you must know that notwithstanding Sin be
remitted, yet Concupiscence still remains; for the mortifying whereof these
Chastisements are sent. As it stands with the wisdom Omnia cooperantur in
bonum.
of God, to beat down this rebellious Law of our members: So is it disagreable
to his justice to Ezekiel. 18.33.
remember any more the sins of the repentant; yea such is his goodness,
that he repents him of the evil, that he had intended: So far is he from
punishing that Sin, which he has formerly remitted. Neither indeed is there
any proportion between temporal punishment, and the sin that is committed
against an infinite Majesty. As for that Chastisement which followed David's
absolution, it happened, (says Saint Augustine) vt pietas hominis in illa
humilitate exerceretur: not that he might be Imponit nobis poenam, non de
peccato sumens supplicium, sed ad futura nos corrigens. Chrysostom. Hom. de Poen.
punished, but that his godliness might be thereby proved. It was not
inconvenient, that the Child should die, both in respect of David, that his
watchfulness against the like sin might be increased, and others
admonished: as also in regard of those that were without, that their mouths
might be stopped, from blaspheming the justice of God.


Iab. I will not Page 119
stand to convince you out of Scriptures, nor out of Fathers, only because the
Knight stands upon Athanasius, whom he calls his Arbitrator, and says that he
will not afford us one syllable to save our lives: his ignorance shall receive
doom by his sentence, even in that very Treatise. Thus he writes. There is
great difference betwixt Penance and Baptism: he that repents cease to
sin, but still retains the Ergo, opera poenitentialia non sunt
satisfactoria.
skars of his wound; but he that is baptized, puts off the old man, is then
renewed from heaven, and as it were borne again, by the Spirit of grace. Do
you see how many sillables this Father lends us?


Ma. They will scarce make a number. I see not so much as a Cipher, that can
stand in your account. He neither names Purgatory nor any temporal
punishment, after the remission of the guilt of sin. Nay he rather seems to
dash these conceits against the wall. For if a man baptized be renewed from
Heaven, and retain no skarres, then the plaster of Purgatory may be cast out
upon the dunghill, as of no use to those, that continually make their repair,
by a thirsting faith, to those waters of comfort. Observe I pray you how
strangely you go to work. You have made a great show of exhorting us unto
penance, and now you bring in Athanasius affirming, that he that repents,
still retains the skars of his wound. Time was when you could say, In this
Page 115
penal Martyrdom, (namely the perpetual victory of our selves) if you
continue unto death in the true Catholic Church, I dare warrant you both from
Hell and Purgatory, and grant you an immediate passage unto Heaven. How comes
it now to pass, that notwithstanding this penal Martyrdom, there are skars
and wounds still remaining? May we be admitted to pass into Heaven
immediately, without these eye-sores in our souls? You should rather for the
effectuating of your purpose, have produced Saint Lib. de poeni.
Augustines Panigyrick, Poenitentia langueres sanat, Leprosos curat, Mortuos
suscitat. Or that of De Laud. poen. Cum homo compungitur Peccatum dispungitur.
Cyprian: O poenitentia quid de te noui referam. Omnia ligata tu soluis: Omnia
clausa tu reseras: Omnia contrita tusanas: Omnia confusa tu lucidas, etc. You
speak of the Skars very unseasonably in my mind.


Min. These Holy Fathers may be easily reconciled. Athanasius speaks of
Penance solely considered in it self, according to the work wrought: and in
this sense, though a man give his body to be burned, to satisfy for the
sin of his soul, the skar of his sin still remains. The other two speak
of Penance, not as it is opposed to Baptism, but as it is conjoined and made
operative by the virtue thereof; from whence the life and vigor of repentance
is derived. So that Athanasius says well, that unless a man be renewed from
Heaven, and be borne again by the Spirit of grace, his penance how great
soever, cannot do away the skarres of his wound.


Iab. I see not Page 120
what else can be imagined to remain after penance, and not after Baptism,
besides the guilt of temporal pain, which we must willingly undergo, to
satisfy for the sins after Baptism: which skars and wounds, if we heal not
in this life by plasters of penance, they must be scared in the next by
Purgatory fire.


Nick. Then must you be sure to have a turn in torrida Zona; for Athanasius
tells you, that notwithstanding your penance, you must still retain the skarres
of your wounds. Your better way were to fly to the waters of Jordan, where
you shall be sure to have your leprosy fully cured, then to trust to your
own penal satisfactions. Now (if you love me) meddle no more with my Masters
Arbitrator; if you do, your Comb will be soon cut.


Ma. It Is well he will now at length confess that the guilt of temporal pain
remains not after Baptism. It is not a quarter of an hour, since he was of
a contrary mind. Then Page 119
death, hunger, thirst, and other miseries, were the penalties of original
sin, forgiven unto Christians in Baptism. Now he Page 120
sees not what else can be imagined to remain after penance, and not after
Baptism, besides the guilt of temporal pain. But that the day wears away, I
would be bold to ask him this question: whether the virtue of Baptism be not
as great, throughout the whole life of a Christian, as it is at that moment,
when it is administered? I will not so much undervalue his sincerity, as to
fear his denial. I dare say he will not make the Sacrament of Regeneration
less beneficial unto us, then the Mother Earth was unto her Son Antaeus. As
often as he in the conflict with Hercules touched the earth, his strength was
renewed; and as often as we bath our Souls in those medicinable waters by a
Religious application of the blood of Christ, we are assured of the remission
of our sins, as well as if we were at the instant baptized, in that
purifying Lauer. So that the guilt of temporal pain does no more remain,
after the pious application, then it did after the first initiation; Christ and
his ordinances being the same, Yesterday, to day, and for ever. The cause taken
away, the effect cease.


Iab. This your Ibid.
Logical Axiom fails in a thousand examples. The Son is an effect of the
Causasociata.
Father: Cannot he live though his Father be dead? The fire causes heat, yet
we see that heat does remain long time after the fire is put out. That
Principle is only true, when not only the first being of the effect depends
on the cause but also the conservation thereof: as the light of the Sun,
which the Sun does not only bring forth, but also conserve, vanishes away
together with the same.


Nick. As I am a true Aristotelian, I heard him not speak so wise a word this
day: The Son who is an effect of the Father may live, Quatenus homo non
quatenus filius.
though his Father be dead. And yet in these days, filius pendet a patre in
esse and conseruari; or else they would go for the most part in thred*bare
coats.


Min. We doubt not but the Axiom admits many exceptions, by reason of the
diverse properties of causes, some being efficient, some material, some
formal, and some final. Amongst Efficients, some permanent, some transient,
some principal, some isntrumental, some conseruant etc. Yet must you not wind
away with your Sophistry: There is a certain Cause called, Causa solitaria
proxima adaequata, of which sort is Sin, in regard of punishment; for if the
question be why man is punished, it cannot possibly but be conceived, that it
is Ideo multi infirmi, etc- 1. Cor. 11.30 Miseros facit homines peccatum. Pro.
14.34. vir pro peccato suo. Thren. 3. v. 39.
because man has offended, or else if the punishment be without cause, it
should be without justice.


Iab. Punishment indeed Page 120
is the effect of sin: nothing but sin could produce that guilt in our
soul; yet when it is once in the soul, the conservation depends on the will
of God. It cannot cease, but when, and in what manner he will have it cease.


Min. Vnius Zabardib. de med. them.
effectus non est nisi vna causa proxima. When you prove that it is the will of
God to reserve some part of the penalty, after the remission of sin, then
will we confess your Axiom. But take heed, least while you coin a new Will,
you deface his old Justice, which was ever consonant to his truth. Whenever
he said, fides tua te saluum fecit, the bed was presently taken up. Sin no
more least a worse thing befall thee, shows there was no fear of smart for
the former sin. The impulsive Cause being removed, the effect ceased; for God
comes not with any willing desire, but as it were by compulsion to inflict
punishment upon the Model of his own Image, which he has repaired at so
high a price. We deny not but his Page 121.122
wisdom has thought it fit, (in regard of the succession of our daily
sins) for his honor, and our profit, to enable us to do some part of
penance our selves, by the help of his grace: that so we might conceive more
deeply the malice of sin, and Gods hatred against it; as also that we might
more carefully for the time to come avoid Sin. But that God should require
the debt, which he has formerly cancelled: or that man's greatest penance can
satisfy his Justice, for the least transgression, we desire further reason to
believe.


Ma. The question is not touching penance for the procuring of pardon for
sins not remitted, but whether it sort most with Gods will, for his own
glory and our profit, that we should be tormented with Purgatory flames, or
be freely and absolutely delivered. It cannot be more for our behoof, seeing
the souls departed are not in via, to receive any merit by their sufferings:
Neither can it suit so well with his grace, (upon which his glory is especially
reared) seeing that the more remission is scanted, the more is the luster of
his abundant grace lessened. Wherefore it is no less then extreme folly, to
dream of more means of expiation, when fewer (yea the Non deficit in
^cessar^s nec abun^at in superfluis.
alone passion of Christ) will Aeque been.
altogether as well serve the turn.


Nick. If there be such necessity of Purgatory, me thinks you should agree
upon the place; whether it be under the Earth, or in the Air. Page 125.
Quod vbique nullibi. It is in so many places that indeed it is in no place.


Iab. This is the Knights Page 125.126
onset by which he seeks to beat Purgatory out of the World. But the
Captain Mayor of his argument, if it be true, is able to beat God into
nothing, who cannot be conceived without Immensitie, or a being every where.
But taking your Proposition in the best sense, to wit, that the thing might be
justly thought not to be, which learned men cannot tell certainly and
determinately where it is, yet is the impiety thereof exceeding great. Do not
Divines disagree about the place of the Soul, after separation from the body?
About the part of the world where God shows himself to his Saints? May one
thence infer, Quod vbique nullibi? Do not learned Christians likewise
dissent about the Situation of Hell?


Ma. You might have well annexed to your inference, Ass for example: Primus
motor was ever exempt from the Confines both of Praedicaments, and Physical
Axioms. You should have done well to have given us some sublunarie instance,
then would we have applauded your wit. The meanest Grammar-Schollar has, Enter
presenter Deus hic and vbique potenter, at his fingers ends.


Min. As for Hell, though Learned men exactly know not the site thereof, yet
does the word of God plainly teach, that there is a Hell, and in some sort it
shadoweth the torments thereof; so that we are tied to a necessity of
belief. Neither are Learned men so much to study where it is, as to take
heed they come not there. But as for Purgatory, it is neither auerred nor
described in the Map of Gods word, wherefore we have reason to suspect the
being thereof: and the rather, because the first Founders could not agree where
to seat the foundation of it. Must God therefore be beaten into nothing, if a
man say that fained Purgatory is no where? Take heed least from a Papist, you
turn Atheist. Such examples savor of little Religion, and less fear of GOD.
I hope we may boldly say it is nullibi, when the Scripture concludes it to
be nus quam.


Nick. Such Atheistical inferences may chance make him feel where Hell is,
ere he be aware. If he will follow my counsel, he shall either get some
Ellebore to purge his brains, or a warm nightcap to keep in his wits.


Ma. The Knight puts him a question touching the Let. page 50
middle rank of offenders, who shall survive at the coming of Christ, when
Purgatory shall be clean extinct; whether they shall be saved without
further Purgation? Which if he grant, then must he admit partiality in the
Judge, in affoording them more favor, then those who daily depart this life.
If he deny it, then must he tax the Lord of injustice in denying the means
of purgation unto them, which he has always affoorded to those of their
rank. But the Doctor has no great mawe to touch either of these horns.


Nick. Well, we had need of a Saepe etiam est olitor verba opportuna locutus.
Moderator to close this act. I trust he will make us amends for his dry,
melancholy, and liuelesse discourse, with more pleasant and delightful
passages, in the maintenance of his grand Miracles, from which Purgatory has
had her best patronage. The Sun will leave us, and therefore Doctor, if you
mean we should see you open the budget of your iugling feats, you must be
nimble-handed; we have reason look at last for a fit of mirth.


CHAP. V Lipsian Miracles morterized.
Iab. NO where Page 127
does the Knight show his profaneness more, then in scoffing at the Miracles
of our blessed Lady of Hall registered by Lipsius, which he derides in sorude
a manner, as it may well seem he did both read Lipsius his story, and write
his own Letter, rosting Crabs by the fire side.


Ma. Had not your lips hung in your light, you might have easily discerned
the difference, which he puts between the counterfeit Image, and the
glorious person of our blessed Lady. If you mean to make good your injurious
censure, you must take some pains to resolve the Christian world, (which you
seek to delude with these miracles) how the same blessed Virgin can be simul
et semel, at one and the same time, at Hall, at Sichem, and in Heaven. One body
cannot be at one time in more places then one. Some of your Church (I
confess) hold the contrary of Christ's body; but who ever (saving your self)
thought so of the body of the blessed Virgin?


Nick. I have heard that the Lady at Hall has a sharper nose, a thinner
lip, and a quicker eye, then she that is worshipped at Sichem: who is much
broader visaged, and more corpulent then the other; travelers will hardly
believe they are sisters, so unlike is their feature. Is it possible for one
body to be so unlike it self? you must first agree which of them is our
Lady, and then the other shall be ever after held as her waiting woman, which
will be no disparagement at all. Unless you have authority from the Pope to
dubbe as many Ladies as you list, it is but folly to say they are Ladies both;
this pattent if you could show, O how welcome a man would you be to our
Chamber-Necessaries. All the pretty Lasses would flock to Doctor Iabal, yet
for your life should you not give them all content. Madam Susan would pout,
that my Lady Winifred must take the wall. She hops she has Page 136
stopped as many mustard-pots, as her Ladyship for her heart. Here would be old
reuel-rowt.


Iab. Such prophanenes Page 116.
and want of religion does the Knight show in his perpetual jesting at
Miracles, which confirm any point of religion, especially this of Purgatory,
which he terms such grave Miracles, that it would make a horse break his
halter to see them: and in the margent he says, Yea Bellarmines devout Mare;
which his wanton Hobby named only to beget a fool on her.


Nick. Now is your wit fallen within the Circumference of my Element. In all
your runnagate travels, knew you ever a Hobby to begette a foale on a Mare? and
yet I must say it is more probable, then that your Phoenix Garnet should
begette a face on a Straw.


Ma. If Bellarmines devout Mare did ever carry a fool, it was (as your own
stories report) unto the Mass.


Iab. He Ibid.
might better have turned his Hobby loose to Balaams Prudent Ass, where
perchance he might have learned this point of wisdom, that there is a God
whom even bruit beasts feel, and in their manner serve and adore, who is able
when he pleases to make them bray more wisely then you do speak.


Ma. It seems you have some command over the silly creature which you so
willingly name. You may do well seeing his Master is dead, to lead him to
Rome. I know no Prelate fitter to ride him then your Pope. Sure I am there does
none more often curse Gods people then he.


Min. I see no reason why one may not as well say, that the sight of your
Miracles would make a horse break his halter, as that Page 137.
John Clement brake his doublet in pieces by a Miracle.


Iab. Lipsius does Page 127.
elegantly and religiously relate a miracle, concerning a Falconer delivered
from death, by the Lady of Hall her merciful intercession; which the Knight or
his Minister does mar with reeling and lettering phrases. His ^g. 102
Lord swore by no beggars that he would make him look through a halter, if
he found not the Falcon, etc. Thus does he play the Summist of Lipsius.


Ma. That he wrote elegantlie no man denies; the question is, whether his wit
might not have been better employed then in playing the Scummist of Ouids
Metamorphosis. It was your cunning in a desperate cause to abuse his eloquence,
to the bombasting of your forged and incredible fopperies. Were it not more for
the quaintness of his style, then the truth of his Miracles, his leaves would
be soon turned to the Glouers disposing.


Min. It was a heavy judgment of God upon him for his Apostacy, that in his
old age he should put his pen to sale, and prostitute the beauty of his wit,
to the boulstring of such idolatrous and Commentitious trumperies.


Iab. Yet I Page 128.
wonder the Knight omitted a story which followed in the same Chapter with John
Swickius, to wit, about another Protestant Swaggerer John Rysselman, who
reuiling that blessed Lady, swering that he would take her town and burn her
picture, publicly in Bruxells stricken with a Bullet, lost the best tongue in
his head, the best chinne in his face; and not long after yielded up (though a
bad one) yet the best soul in his body.


Nick. You say right, they are both birds of a Crimine ab vno disce omnes.
feather, and therefore deserve to fly together: but the truth is, one hair
is too much in a pen; though Lipsius was so regardlesse of his credit, as to
add the full period to that Chaos of untruths, yet was my Masters pen so
bashful, that it was hardly drawn so much as to mention the one, so far was
he from relating the other; especially at the second hand. He that will
venture upon a lie shall show little wit, unless he be the prime inuentor;
the first Author may gain some of that credit, by the quaintness of his
invention, which he loses by the incredibilitie of his fabulous assertion. It
stood with Lipsius his policy to balance his fictions, that so they might
seem to carry the even weight of truth. Had not Rysselman been put in the
other scale, Swickius his miracle had gone to the ground.


Ma. Why may not this miracle of Risselman be as true, as that of our Lady at
Lucca in Italy? There was a witty Ladde that had lost all his Counters at Mum
chance, and having no means to renew his stock, he bethought himself of this
stratagem: He goes out into the backside, and as if he had bin one of the
forlorn hope throws his dice in the face of our Ladies Image that stood there
in the Towne-wall; immediately by a nimble slight which he had formerly gotten,
he wreathes his arm backward, and comes in all a mort, as if he had lost the
use of his best cheating instrument. After some few days he returns, as one
that had been stricken with remorse, and prays before the Lady (you must
imagine she did wink for fear of the like cast) and lo; his arm was She
was glad to be rid of ^h dangerous mates
instantly restored. The rumor hereof being blazed abroad as far as Rome,
Pope Clement the eighth takes order, to have the image removed (for this
notable piece of service) into the Church. Will you hear what followed? This
Iugler the first founder of this erection, was well greazed by those of the
Church with the oil of Argent, and slides away to the trial of other
fortunes. But it was not long before his pictures had lost all their faces; his
coin was not so fraudulently gotten, but it was as riotously spent, whereupon
being driven to an exigent, he turns Vltimum, saltem penultimum re^^gium.
tapster (I had almost said hangman) in an Inn at Poggio Bunchi, between
Florence and Siena. As God would have it, there came into that hostelry,
certain Sr. Tho. Challoner. Mr. Tho. Aw^ley.
noble Country men of ours, when my new fill-pot was more then halfe-seas
over: being then in his iollity, he breaks out (amongst other panigyricall
narrations of his quicksilver wit) to tell with what lucky success he had
gulled the inhabitants of Lucca, and how much our Ladies image was beholding
unto him, for her warm winter standing; which made the Gentlemen so much
mirth, that for that time they thought they might well spare the fiddlers
company.


Nick. Well fare your heart; you have now paid him interest enough for the
forbearance of Rysselman; story, which is no way comparable to this.


Min. Is it not a wondrous Apud veteres miracula pro monsiris atque ^orreadis
sumuntur. Donat.
miracle that Rysselman a Soldier, should be shot through the cheeks with a
bullet in a skirmish? forsooth it was for swaggering with the wooden Image of
our Lady. I had thought the blessed Virgin had long ago learned this lesson of
her son: to forgive her enemies; to pray for them that revile her; and not to
shoot bullets through their cheeks; to cut out their tongues; and strike off
their noses. If this relation be true, your Lady of Hall is a hard-hearted
Saint. Had the Caruer so little choice, that he must needs make her of such a
knotty piece? Did not Lipsius a good days work think you, when he thus
stained her reputation? we took her all this while for a kind wench, good at a
dead lift. I am verily persuaded your Historian did more harm to that Saint
with his pen, then the Image did to Risselmans nose with the shot. If you
tell us whether the Image were Master Gunner, or the Gunners Mate, under whose
Colors, and in what rank it did serve, we will give way for fear of a bloody
nose.


Iab. I much Page 128
doubt whether the aforenamed Rysselman, or that famous His heresy was more
directly against the personal and hypostaticall union of her son, whose two
natures he divided
Nestorius, an Arch-enemie of Gods mother, which both miraculouslie lost their
tongues for blasphemy against her, did more deserve that penal forfeiture then
the Knight has done, who sticks not to term the glorious Queen of Angels,
whose miracles Lipsius does profess to write, the mother of God, as her
picture with the King of the world in her arms does witness, a kind wench,
good at a dead lift, which sounds of a more foul blasphemy, then ever any
heretic before dreamed of.


Ma. We believe that the blessed Virgin Mary is at rest in the kingdom of
heaven: we acknowledge her to be the Mother of God; though no Goddess, nor
Queen of Angels, yet a glorious Saint; though no Savior, nor Mediatrix, yet
worthy of all love, reverence and imitation. Our souls with hers Luc. 1*47
rejoice in God our Savior. But as for this liuelesse Image, we know not
whence it is. It may represent one of the Popes Concubines, for ought we can
say to the contrary. Psalm. 135.18
They that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in them.


Nick. As sure as we live, Lipsius was not his crafts master; had he no
stranger news to tell us, then that a Soldier lost his nose valiantly in the
field, with an Instrument of war? When all was done, the Image had as dull
sent as he. If the truth were known, I believe there is many a one in Hall,
even amongst the devout Marianists, who has lost the best ornament of his face
in a worse quarrel, and in a more dishonorable service. If Rysselman had
spoken in the nose, I should have liked it worse.


Iab. Merciful Page 129
Lord in what a drunken age do we live, that such foul blasphemies against
Gods mother may pass to the print? that such witnessed testimonies of Gods
infinite power (which had they been done in Tirus and Sidon would perhaps have
joined them to have done penance in Sackcloath) may be blasphemed, derided,
and rejected, even in print, as lewd lies, incredible falsehoods, without any
syllable of proof or reason in the World, but only because they list not to
believe them.


Ma. You do well to cry unto the Lord for mercy, for were you well in your
They were long since drowned in the red Sea at Claretto.
wits, you would not dare to publish in print, that the wooden Idol of Hall is
the blessed mother of God. Had you not a cup too much, you would not parallel
Lipsius his lying fables with our Saviors sacred Miracles. Had Simon Magus
lived in Lipsius his days, it would have bin a question, whether Simon Peter
or he had been the better man. Elimaes would have been a gay subject for his
Omnia commutat sise in miracula rerum.
flying pen. I would advise you to consider (if your considering Cap be not
at pawn) whether you do not more dishonor the Blessed Virgin then the Jews;
they defy her, you deifie her. I will say unto you as Solomon said unto his
Mother touching Adoniah. 1. Reg. 2.22
Why do thou ask this for the Virgin? Ask for her the Kingdom also. The
time will come, when you shall Apoc. 16.10 11. etc. 9.20 Abac. 2.19
gnaw your tongues for sorrow, who worship Idols of Gold, of silver, of
brass, of stone, and of wood, which can neither see, hear, nor go.


Iab. These miracles Page 129
which may seem like the herb called our Ladies gloves, adorn her Virginal
hands, signs they are of her wedding to the eternal King, and of her being
crowned Ier. 44.17
Queen of Heaven and Earth.


Nick. Her Virginal hands never taught Lipsius to strike that key, which makes
the worship of God sound so much out of tune, even in the ears of the Jews.
He is a very simple Musician, that cannot make such Iackes as you skip,
according to the motion of his fingers. So he make a sound, you care not how
much he neglect the Chords of truth.


Iab. Lipsius whom you revile was like the Swanne, whose dying notes are
sweetest; He crowned his famous writings with a History of her miraculous
stories, and hung up before her Altar his renowned pen* the wing of his wit,
the flight whereof made him Admiratio ab ignorantia descendit Donat.
admirable in his age.

Our Ladies gloves about his forehead wreathe,
That no foul mouth dare on this Author breathe.

Nick. Had I been his Herald, he should have borne a Lady cow for his Crest;
It had been a fit Emblem for a fair outside. Though his pen made him
admirable in his age, yet did his Dumque moror mirorque simul fugit omnis in
vndas.
miraculous lies make him ridiculous in his dotage.

Suspendit calamum Marianae Lipsius arae - Suspendi meruit, etc.
Well did his pen deserve to hang at Mary's Altar,
But of the twain himself did best deserve the haltar:
He best deserved the whetstone for his lying,
That could not leave the trade-when he was dying.

Ma. When Lipsius wrote, did he sit, stand, kneel or lean?
He did lie most, that's flat, witness his last Scene.

Min. Then I see you mean not to die in Iabals debt for an Epigram. In lieu of
his Ladies gloves you have returned him a Cow, with two pretty Calves by her
side. Lipsius will never be dead as long as they live.


Iab. Among many Page 130
devises the enemy of Mankind has set abroach in this age, to infect the
world with Irreligion and Atheism, none seems to me more potent, then the
denial of miracles, together with those shifts which Heresy has invented, to
discard those both of ancient and fresh memory, which please not your taste.


Ma. That it does so seem unto you, seems not strange unto us, who do assure
our selves of your forwardness, in advancing the state and dignity of your
grand Bel-peor. The point is, whether our Savior, his Apostles, and the
Fathers of the Church held the denial of your vpstart Lapsian miracles such a
potent means, to infect the World with Atheism and Irreligion? If you will
be tried by these, hold up your Ecce purissimas meas manus Praeceptor, quoth
the boy with the scabbed fingers.
hand? A match. Does not Moses Deuteronomy. 13.2.6
forbid us to judge of the Doctrine by miracles? Says he not that if any man
shall give us a sign or a wonder which he told of should come to pass, yet we
must not hearken unto him, if he once say, Come and let us go serve other
Gods? The Ier. 23
Prophet complains in the person of Almighty God, against these
Miracle-mongers, Seduxerunt populum meum in mendacijs suis, and in miraculis
suis. Our Savior Mat. 24. v. 23.24.25
forewarneth us not to believe such. For there shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and they shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if
it were possible they shall deceive the very Elect. Saint 2. The. 2.9.10
Paul prophetically auerreth, that the coming of the man of sin shall be
after the working of Satan, with all powers and signs, and lying wonders: And
with all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. And that for this
cause, God shall send strong Delusion, that they should believe a lie. What
greater contrariety can be imagined then there is between your position, and
these textuall verities?


Min. The Ancient Fathers have likewise joined their forces in the same
Encounter. Does not Saint In Mat. h^. 49
Chrysostom manacle these Quack-saluers for playing their Leger-de-main
tricks? Per signacognoscebatur (says he) qui essent very Christiani, qui
falsi. Nunc autem signorum operatio omnino leuata est; magis autem inuenitur
apud cos qui falsi sunt Christiani. Saint De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8
Augustine makes a monster of him who does now desire wonders, for the kindling
of his faith, after so clear a demonstration of Evangelical miracles.
Contraistos Mirabiliarios (says In Johan. tract. 13.
he) cautum me fecit Deus meus. My God has armed me against such. To what
end does he say, Behold I have told you before, but that his Spouse should
not be entrap'd with such Sophistical miracle,? Yea, he blasteth both Lipsius
and his Shrine, with a Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 19.
Remoueantur, Away (says he) with this gear, Miracula fiut aliquaado humana
procuratione, aliquando diabolica operatione. Al. Hale. Quast. 53. Art. 3
which is either the iugling of deceitful men, or the Illusion of lying
Devils. It is in my opinion the next way to make men Atheists, to see Papists
so much distrust the efficacy of the word, and the soliditie of Evangelical
truths, that they are every day driven to seek new supporters of their
faith, which they easily discern to be hammered by the hand of fraud.


Iab. As no Page 130
age since the Creation has been without profane fellows, prone to deny
Gods providence over mankind, to jest and scoff at his servants; so likewise
the same providence has not permitted any age to pass without Miracles and
marks of his power, keeping the impious in awe by punishments, miraculously
inflicted upon their mates, and comforting his true worshippers, with
extraordinary favors and benefits bestowed on them above natures reach.


Ma. What authority you have to Canonize them, that worship your Lady of
Hall, for true worshippers, (as your supposition intends) we will not
dispute. It would put you to a plunge to prove Image-worshippers true
worshippers. Christ Ioh. 4.23 Da medium lunae Solemn simul and canis iram.
says that the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth:
and not the Mother of Hall in stock or stone. Not to stand upon this; I do
not see how you can excuse your presumption, in aduenturing to teach the A
posse ad esse non sequitur argumentum.
Almighty, how he should awe the impious, and comfort his servants. The state
of the Church were in a lamentable case; if there were no other means for the
producing of these effects, besides the working of new Miracula persequentes
fugiunt, fugientes persequuntur. Aeneas Siluius.
miracles. The persecutors of Gods people may be stricken with terror, when
they hear the success which Pharao, Antiochus, Senacharib, Herod, and the
rest had. If with the Adder they stop their ears against these; neither
would they believe, though an Angel should come with a fiery sword from
Heaven. The Lord is able by his secret Judgments, to prevent their malice, and
confound their devices. The patience which he gives unto his servants is a
miracle which more astonisheth their Enemies, and adds a greater measure to
their own glorious reward, then if they were rescued by a miraculous supply.
To you that desire fire and bullets, to strike off the noses of your Enemies, I
may say with our Savior in the like case. Nescitis cuius spiritus sitis.


Iab. In what Page 131
age since the coming of Christ has either piety more needed a spur, or
impiety a curb, then in this we live in? The Wolf is said to be so
stiffnecked and greedy of his prey, that he never looks back, but when
thunderclaps from Heaven affright him. When did such a troop of stiffnecked
Wolves, void of conscience and fear of God, range so vncontrouledly over the
Christian World, as now they do, though in the clothing of sheep, vested
with the name of Christians?


Nick. Doctor you mistake; the proximitie of the right object duls your sense.
They bear the names of Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, that pluck the skin
over the ears of the Lords sheep. These were those ravenous Wolves, who gaped
so wide in the year eighty eight, that it was thought this whole Island would
scarce have Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo.
stopped their mouths. The Parisian Massacre, and the Gunpowder Soeuire in
sui^ genus plus quam belluinum.
Treason are sufficient witnesses of their boundless cruelty. That they were
prevented and subverted, they will not say it was a miracle; yet did they find
and feel to their cost, that the hands of God were not bound. The thunderclap
of Gods just* vengeance, turned back their Antichristian adherents, and
frustrated their Sathanicall designs. If you long so much after wonders, here
is matter of undeniable admiration. This was the Lords doing, and it is
wonderful in our eyes.


Iab. The stiffest-necked Page 1^2
Wolves, the prophanest Heretics, when they hear the miracles done in the
Church so great and so witnessed, as those we stand upon are, I make no doubt
but sometimes they tremble, and though they set a good face on the matter, yet
their hearts pant in their breasts. These perchance may be melancholy fits,
that Lipsius his story caused in the Knights breast, which to drive away, he
read his Book rosting Crabs by the fire side, with a pipe of Tobacco in his
hand, still calling for more wine,


Ma. The miracles that were done in the true Church, serve vndoubtely for the
terror of all profane persons in future ages. This was the aim of their
exhibition Their number, evidence, and sufficiency was such, that where they
are published, they need not be renewed. Where the miracles of Jesus be
neglected, Saint-miracles will not be much regarded. But whether yours bear
the same impresse with those, that is further to be debated.


Nick. I should account it no small wonder, if Iabal would once learn to
speak truth. Does my Master say, that Lipsius his story drove him into a
melancholy fit? He delivers the contrary; that if a man were in a melancholy
fit, Lipsius were as good as a Crab feast in a winters night; better then a
thousand Sir John Mandeuils, to pass away the time with mirth in grain. What
will he not wonder at who makes so strange, that a man holds a Tobacco pipe in
his hand? If he had held it in his foot, that had been more worthy the
noting. And yet if John Clement had been prescribed that Physic Page 137
his feet being turned (by a monstrous composition) toward the forepart of
his breast, he had been as like to have used his toes as his fingers in that
service. Had it been but for Lipsius sake, he might have swallowed the smoke
of his tobacco jest. It Is well known that he used many a pipe, in the penning
of his holy book. Iabal is of their humor, who will rather loose their friend
then their jest; but if he could as thoroughly leave his fiction, as my Master
has that Indian fumigation, his book would have had fewer leaves, and his
leaves less lines.


Iab. I would wish Page 132.
when his smiling sobriety has gotten a more stayed countenance, he would in
sober sadness set down, what condition or witnesses are required to make a
history credible, which of the conditions do fail in Lipsius relation; In
what other histories they are found, if they want in his.


Ma. Since you take upon you this Priestly gravity to Catechize him, that has
more learning and sobriety then his examiner, I will in his stead (though none
of your parochial charge) yield you an account of my faith in this point.


Min. Let me be so bold as to save you that labor; when he moved the question,
he looked wistly upon me. He has a spi^e at the Page 123.
Ministers pen and the Minstrels pipe, neither am I unwilling to interrupt my
intended silence. To make a true miracle, there are these necessary requisites;
first the fact must be Vt illud quod sit, ^ solo Deo sicri p^ssit. Oliver
Maillard. Sermon. de Conuers. Pauli.
rarum, arduum, and insolitum, unusual and above the common or ordinary course
of nature: cum in natura nulla sit dispositio propinqua ad susceptionem illius
formae. Secondly, it must be done by the Almighty power of God in the name of
Act. 4.^0.30 Mar. 16.17. Ac. 3.6.
Christ. Thirdly the end thereof must be to confirm true John 5.36. John 17.4.
doctrine, to draw men to believe in Gods word, and to ascribe unto him al
spiritual worship and glory. Fourthly it must be Mat. 12.33. and 16.1. and.
11.4.5.
openly done, there must be neither deceptio visus, nor fascinatio sensus.
Lastly it must serve rather for Infidels then believers, to gain their assent
to the truth of the word; to which purpose the Apostle says, that tongues are
for a sign, 1. Cor. 14.22
not to the faithful, but to the unbelieving.


Iab. Which of these conditions Page 132.
do fail in Lipsius his relations?


Ma. Nay rather which of them can he produce to patronize his fables? his
miracles do all savor of a Cretian forge. To instance in the example which you
think Sobriety cannot deride; When I consider the miracle of the Faulcon, it
seems to me half a miracle, that any Christian Master should be so
heathenish, nay more, so sauagely brutish, as to hang his man for so small a
escape, as the loosing of a Hawke, having no evidence to the contrary, but that
the bird took flight without his Lure or leave. Was his Lord a Catholic?
then much may be; Yet wise men make a doubt whether the Laws of his Country
would permit such cruelty. We must also believe that his Falconer was of a
mild spirit, so patiently to submit himself to the hang-mans courtesy. One
would have thought his Master should have taken some pity on him, before the
Lady of Hall had sent him the Hawke. We dare not say the Master and man might
be trim-tram and confederate, in the effecting of this miracle. Yet I hope we
may without offense ask what there was more in this miracle, then was in
Mahomets Pigeon, which in the Peoples sight would fly to his ear, because he
had accustomed there to feed her with corn.


Min. Were Lipsius his miracles wrought in the name of Christ, Iabal were more
praiseworthy for standing in their defense. But Mary carries away the Bell, I
mean her supposed Image, which though it have a mouth was never heard yet to
pray. Perhaps she learned this lesson of S. Bernard, not to speak in the
Congregation. So that your dumb Virgin doing these wonders, neither in the
name of Jesus, nor by prayer, is no less then a forestaller of divine glory,
which the Lord has protested he will not give to Psalm. 42.8.
graven Images. And what are the Doctrines which your Hall wonders serve to
confirm? are they not Culinarian Theorems which they strive to support?
Forsooth they are the buttresses of Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Worshipping
of Images, Prayer for the dead, and of that divine honor, which is
sacrilegiously ascribed to the Virgin Mary. Say we not truly that these are
the doctrines of Devils? Can it stand with common sense, to give that adoration
to carved images, which the most glorious Angels refused? or rather, is it not
most apparent that their miracles are the signs of the Antichristian beast?


Nick. That which is most worth the noting is this, that all your Ladies
prodigies are wrought in angulo, where but few, and those selected are
assembled. Seldom shall you read that their spirits spoke, or that their
Images came down Non qui mira sed qui male agit odit lucem loan. 3.30.
by day. S. Greg. dial. lil. 1. ca. 4.
Equitius was guelded by an Angel in his sleep. The Maid that crushed the
Devil between her teeth in the Lettice, had no other witness in her mouth,
besides her tongue, unless happily she had a little Embrio in her womb. I
do not well remember, whether Ignatius Layola did in the day or in the night,
open the obstructions of the wench that was troubled with the stone. He was a
Soldier, and therefore perhaps durst do more then ordinary in the day. This
I am sure of, I could never hear yet by any credible report what tune it was,
which S. Fasciculus temporum de anno. 754.
Gingoffs wife did sing with her nether-lippes; whether voluntary, Salengers
round, or Hunts-vp. Iabal is a good Musician, his nose would have been as good
as a Recorder to have borne a part; and then his tongue would have made a more
certain relation, then the Carmelite does.


Ma. A man would hardly believe that there were in the Catholic town of Hall
so many Infidels, as Lipsius by his multiplicitie of miracles would make the
world believe. Were not the greatest part unbelievers, those many miracles
would be altogether superfluous. Wherefore seeing your Ladies miracles are
defective in all, and every of these conditions which give essence to a true
miracle, their motto may be this. Dea picta, Miracula ficta. So that we may say
unto you, as S. Aug. cont. Faustum lib. 13.
Augustine spoke unto the Manichyes. Miracula non facitis, quae si faceretis,
tamen ipsain vobis caueremus. And no marvel, for either the Sacrist, which is
the veriest knave you can get, plays his part in the Vestry, or else some
beggarlie fellow iumbles under the Eaues of the Church.


Iab. In what Page 132.
other histories are they found, if they want in Lipsius?


Min. In the histories of Moses, the Prophets, the four Evangelists, and the
Acts of the Apostles, We Pet. 1.19.
have a most sure word, to the which you shall do well to take heed. This
word (says the Heb. 2.^.4
Apostle) at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto
us by them that heard him. God also bearing them witness, hoth with signs and
wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost. So much of
Christ's miracles and doctrine is written in the holy Scriptures, that we John
20.31.
might believe that Jesus is the true Christ, the son of God, and that
believing in him we might have eternal life. What can we desire more? What
need is there of Goody Hals miracles? does the spirit of God purposely omit
many of our Saviors miracles? and may we plead the necessity of Hals wonders?
Are not those that are written sufficient, or rather, are not yours
superfluous? If your Lipsianists may be believed, the dead Image of the Mother
has doubled the miracles of her living Son.


Iab. Lipsius does Page 132.133.
protest that he read the Gests and Records, out of which he chose those which
he judged most worthy of the print; Will not al men (says he) believe these
things, done in the sight of many, confirmed by sworn witnesses, etc. If any
man after such inquiry, be not moved to believe such credible histories, I may
apply that unto him of Homer.

Thou have ears to hear, that wants both wit and shame.


Nick. Homers verse, had I been his translator, should rather have run thus
The Author that such lies did write, believe me, was too blame,
For why? the world did see his pen did want both truth and shame.



Ma. Did your Author choose such as he judged most worthy of the print? It
seems then he thought some unworthy. It had been more for his reputation, if
he had thought so of all.


Nick. Oh not of all; Lipsius protests that some were true.


Ma. I might answer with a non sequitur. What grounds has he for his
protestation? Forsooth he read the Gests and Records; and so have I Gesta
Romanorum. Their authority is much alike. If there were any difference, the
later were in print, whereas Lipsius scraped his out of scribled and moth-eaten
Coppies. What has Lipsius to say for his Hall and Sichem wonders, which the
followers of Antichrist may not allege more probably, in the defense of the
stratagems of their Lord, which by all likelihood are to be more conspicuous?
and yet we are forewarned not to believe them.


Min. How much those Saint-canonizing Records are to be suspected, we may judge
by the caution that Gregory gives us in his Decretals. Greg. 9. lib. 3 Decret.
1. de Reliquijs et venerati me sanctorum cap. 1.
Audiuimus (says he) quod quidam intervos diabolica fraud decepti, hominem
quendam in potatione et ebrietate occisum, quasi sanctum, more Infidelium
venerantur. And again, Ibid. cap. 2.
Cum ex eo quod quidam sanctorum reliquias exponunt venales, veleas passim
ostendunt, christianae religioni detractum sit saepius: Ne in posterum
detrahatur, presenti decreto statuimus, vt antiquae reliquiae amodo extra
capsam nullatenus ostendantur etc. And he concludes, Praelati non admittant
eos: The Prelates may not suffer those that come to their Churches to worship,
to be deceived with the variety of figments or false relations, as it is
accustomed to be done in most places for gains sake. Now if Hall and Sichem
be within the Site of that continent which Gregory taxes, there is no doubt
but they who were to reap the profit by the concourse of Contributors, would
set Lipsius pen in a large field, where he might have sea-roome enough to hoyse
up all the sails that his wit could bear. They would be sure to present him
Gests enough, though indeed they were no better then Jests, as all wise men
account them.


Iab. If bare denial Page 133.
without proof, stubborn Incredulity without reason, profane jesting without
sobriety, may make histories witnessed by the consent of learned, judicious,
and pious nations; what place will be left for humane history, or divine faith,
or religious piety, in humane kind? Have not heathens in former times, may they
not at this resent, overthrow the miracles of Christ by these Engines?


Ma. They neither have nor are able to supplant them, though all the powers of
the gates of hell should bandy against them. These things were not done in a
Corner. The heathen Oracles were enforced to give place. The Centurions and
Roman Soldiers were eyewitnesses: the Eclipse of the Sun: the moving of
the earth: the dispersion of the Jews, with other secular histories, are able
to stop the mouth of Atheism in their behalf. If it be not more then a spice
of blasphemy, to cast these figurative doubts, I appeal to the Judgment of
your superiors.


Iab. What can Ibid.
be said within the composse of humane credibility for the certainty of those
stories, wherein Christianity is grounded, which may not most clearly in
defense of these?


Min. It may not only be said but proved, that the penne-men of those sacred
histories wrote those things which they had heard and seen, in the presence of
many witnesses; their enemies being Judges. Most of them sealed their writings
with their blood; all of them joined in one issue. So that to make the least
doubt of them, were to question whether the Sun does shine at noone day. Were
there not a Apoc. 13.5.
mouth given unto you to speak great things and blasphemies, you would tremble
to match your fabulous reports, with those undeniable verities, which have the
testimony of God, Angels, and men.


Iab. Those were done Page 134.
openly that whole multitudes did behold them, so were these; Those were
wrought his enemies being present, the like did happen in many of these. Those
were written with circumstances, naming the time, the persons the places, and
other particularities, with the like particularities does Lipsius report the
miracles of our Lady.


Ma. Your own Ouerth. Page 126.
Bel-wether will stop his Masters mouth. Where God has his Church, has not
the Devil his Chapel? Is not Fraus Simia veritatis.
fraud the Counterfeit of truth? Is falsehood to learn how to contriue
circumstances, to gain the probability of real verity? It is hard I confess
to prove a negative; but seeing you grant the certainty of the Evangelical
histories, we need not travel far in the inquiry; for as much as the signs of
true miracles, which we have fetched from thence, have laid your Dagon flat on
his face before the Arc.


Nick. Shall I take the Doctor in his own spell? Let me hear how he can
disprooue Lib. 1. cap. 29
Aelians like relation. In the field of one Nicippus (says he) as the
Inhabitants of Coos do relate, there was an Ewe that did yeane a Lion. And
again; Lib. 4. cap. 17
When Pythagoras passed over the River Nessus, he was saluted by the River,
saying, Salve Pythagora. These things are very strange; and why may not they
be as true as Lipsius his reports? Shall they be justified because no man
traveled into those parts, to discover them? I hope he names the places, the
persons, the accidents, and the testimony of the borderers. Shall we therefore
cry out, what humane credibilitie can be current, if these be capable of the
blurre? Aelian is content we should laugh at these, and therefore Lipsius
needs not take a poor smile in snuff.


Iab. The story of Page 124 Balaams Ass cannot teach him to make congruitie
of this sentence.
John Swickius who lost his best nose, could any falsehood be more conspicuous,
if he still kept a good on his face? Lipsius tells the year of our Lord
when the same did happen, within thirty three years since the Knights
remembrance, the place where he lived in Brussels. How easy would it be to
trace the steps of this story, and find the falsehood thereof were it a fable?


Ma. And have not Aelian and Herodotus the same buttresses, to uphold the
bulwarks of their Histories? Had it pleased God for the punishment of our
sins, to have given way to the Powder Treason, which of these Circumstances
would have been wanting, to have made it a Grand-miracle? Your Lipsians would
have set down the place Westminster, the day the fifth of November, the year
of our Lord 1605. the persons, his Royal Majesty, the Young Prince, the Lords
and Commons of Parliament, the witnesses London, Lambeth, and other Towns many
miles distant, which would have trembled with the violence of that infernal
clap. Then would you have deafed the World with this vociferation, How easy
would it be to trace the steps of this story, and find the falsehood
thereof, were it a fable? This is your Enginers craft by cunning semblances, to
cast such a fog, that their knauerie shall be hardly espied. It had been no
less then death for any man, to have called the truth of this miracle in
question.


Min. I never heard before that a mild Lady did cut off so many Gentlemen's
noses. I rather wonder, if this of Swickius be true in modo and forma, how it
came to pass when Popish Idols were suppressed in England, that no one man
lost his nose, nor received any harm, though many such wooden Ladies then
lost their heads! Had they had such a General as Lipsius, they would have
made old havoc.


Iab. This jesting Page 134. 135
at miracles done in our Church so credibly reported, overthrows the bulwark
of humane authority, which Christianity does presuppose, and opens a wide
gappe for Atheism and Infidelity to enter.


Ma. If a man be once found false, ei non est credendum, etiamsi per plurimos
Deos iurauerit. The Scripture is a sufficient shelter against Atheism, were
the Block-houses of your Miracles battered to the ground If the waiting maid
be Fucata pedissequa dominam arguit impudicam.
painted, the chastity of the Mistress will be shrewdly suspected. The
Evangelical miracles scorn the attendance of your babble trumperies, by which
their sincerity is more like to be derided, then honored.


Nick. Iabal should do well to remember, how the holy Maid of Kent (as good a
Maid as Dolls bucken tub) was taken napping. He forgets how soon the five
wounds were healed. I do not think but he has read how Acts Mon. fol. 648
Duke Humphrie uncased a fellow, who came from B^rwick, as if he had been
borne blind, unto Saint Albons, (where King Henry the sixth then kept his
Court) and there received his sight. Have you not heard of the four Langij
Chron. ad annum. 1509
Iacobin Friars who raised Ulcers in the feet, hands, and side, of a simple
man, that so they might get somewhat by the sight of a new Saint Francis?
Lib. 9
Sleidan can tell you how the Cordeliers of Orleance put a Nouice over the
vault of their Church, pitifully sighing and lamenting, as if he had been
the soul of the Prouosts wife, who died without giving any thing to the
Church. Why may not Lipsius his penthouse be thatched with the same Fascinatio
nugacitatis.
reeds? They are all eiusdem farinae. Had there been so prudent an Examiner as
Duke Humphrie in Hall and Sichem, Iabal would not now wonder at so triuiall a
figment, which is not worth a straw, easily blown away with the least blast
of a considerate thought.


Min. The greatest sort of Romish miracles are, either such as may be
accomplished by art, or suborned by fraud. Yet does not their tyranny spare
to impose credence upon Christian souls, for their Coffer-aduantage. It Is not
many months since I read in Part. 4. Sum. mayor. tit. 14. c 1. 10. de
Septemp. purg.. 7
Antoninus of certain Fishermen, who drawing their Net to land, found therein
a massy piece of Ice, whereof they were not a little glad, because they knew
it would be a welcome present to Theobald their Bishop, who was exceedingly
tormented, with a burning heat in his feet; neither were they deceived, for
it stood him in great stead. One day amongst the rest, as he was cooling his
goutie toe, he heard a voice come out of the Ice, whereupon he conjures it to
tell, who or what it was. The voice answers, I am a Piscater^s animarum.
soul afflicted for my sins in this Ice, and unless you say thirty Masses
for me, thirty whole days together, I shall not be delivered. Theobald
instantly betakes him to his beads, and begins his task. Whilst he was at
his work, there is news brought of an Army approaching to sack the Town.
The Bishop is driven to give over his devotion for that time. When the hurly
burly was past, he falls to his business the second time, but with as ill
success; for then there arose a civil commotion in the Town. The third time
he means to make all sure: but see, (as the Devil would have it) the whole
City with the Bishops Palace, was all on a light fire; His servants were
importunate with him to cast away his book, and to provide for his own
safety. Do what they could, they could not prevail. All the answer they get
is this, that though the Town should be burnt to the ground, he is resolved
not to give over, till he had made an end. To be short, he was as good as
his word. Would you hear the issue? He had no sooner finished, but the Ice
melted, the soul was delivered, and the fire vanished; neither was there any
damage at all received. If this be not true ask the Fishermen; poor souls
they little thought, they had taken such a booty.


Ma. There was none in the Town but must needs take notice of this strange
accident. But shall I quit your tale wirh another, out of In fest. Johan.
Euang. ant. port. Lat.
Friar Jeremy? There was a certain holy man, who was troubled as he
traveled with a boisterous wind, insomuch that forgetting himself, he falls a
cursing and poxing Aeolus, for his uncharitable dealing. Well, when he comes
to his journies end, he bethinkes himself what a sin he had committed; and
is so touched with compunction, that he locks himself up in an house and
casts the The like in the life of S. Eugin. Abbot of Euesham.
key into the Sea, vowing never to come out, till the same key were found. I
dare say Iabal would be loath to be pend up so long; but this was the penance
of that age; and see how it succeeded. He had not been there a year and a
day, but he had a fish given him, in whose belly this key was found. You must
think it was a dear morsel to the poor Trowte: no marvel though she could
not swim away, with such an Iron weight.


Nick. Had it been an Estrich, I should sooner have believed it. We must
imagine it was a very hungry season. What jolly Laddes are these? they scorn
petty miracles. It was worthily thought a great matter, that a fish should
bring Peter a piece of Mat. 17.2
twenty pence; but Friar Ieremies nogging fish puts that clean down, she
swallowed a whole key at a gobbet. His Sobriety is of a very dull temper,
that cannot find a laughter for these enchanted devices. And yet this is
nothing to that I once heard a Catholic deliver, of one Pref^n opera Dionis.
Areop.
Dionisius a Martyr, who when his head was cut off with a sword, took it up in
his hands, and went with it in that manner the space of two miles, till he met
with a woman, with whom he left it in trust. Let Nicephorus deliver it with a
Ferunt; you shall have those that will show it you, and swear it is the same
head. If he had stumbled by the way; a good face might perchance have been
mard.


Iab. The persons and Page 136. 137
places named in most of Lipsius his stories are famous, Flanders, Bruxels,
Louaine: examine persons and places, we desire no favor, truth seeks no
corners; For example, the famous miracle of John Clement, that he was lame from
his nativity, and of a monstrous composition of body, his thighs and feet
contracted, and turned toward the forepart of his breast, so as his knees did
grow, and stick thereto, his body was round, or in a manner Sphericall, unfit
to stand, lie, or walk, this the whole City of Bruxels can witness. Being
carried to our Ladies Chapel at Sichem in a wagon, and having confessed his
sins, and received the blessed Sacrament, he did in the end, find his
contracted and bound feet to be loosed, and stretched forth with such
strength, that his doublet that stayed them was broken in pieces, so as
presently he stood on his feet himself, the beholders being amazed thereat.


Nick. They would have been more astonished had they seen another stand upon
his feet. It Is well your Lady can make crooked Catholics stand alone. It may
be the Tailor sowed the seames of Clements doublet, with a hot needle and a
burnt thread.


Iab. Can you Ibid.
say that this is a Miracle of the maker? You cannot with any truth, except you
mean the maker of Mankind, who by the intercession of his Mother, reformed
that monstrous error of nature.


Nick. You talk so much of your Lady, that you will make her right ear glow
ere you have done. They that are acquainted with your Gipsie-trickes, will not
at all be amazed, at this setting of Clement on his feet; they will scarce
wonder if she had made him go on his head. Your fascinations and devices are
such, that they pass common sense. This would be better proved by witnesses,
then Lipsius his bare assertion.


Iab. I have heard Page 138.
that those potent, pious, and prudent Princes, whom the Knight so commends,
did show this miraculous Creature, and monument of Gods infinite power, and
goodness, to that noble personage he waited on in that Embassage, assuring him
upon their knowledge, who knew the party, both before and after the cure, that
the miracle was most undoubted; at which sight it is very probable the Knight
was present.


Nick. Nay then we will no more meddle with your miracles; Have you the face
to bear us down, with such shameless Quid domini facient, audent cum ta^a
fures?
falsehoods? What will he not undertake, who thinks to make a man believe he
saw that, which he did not so much as hear? Shall I tell you? upon my faith
and credit, I saw an answer written from that noble Earl of Hertford.
Earl unto my Master, the tenor whereof was this. I received your Letter on
Satterday, by my servant Gregory Boys, etc. What you account to be a favor, I
esteem as a due of honor, to give witness to the truth, when it is
questioned, etc. My answer unto your request, for your full satisfastion is
this. When it pleased his Majesty to employ my service in the Low Countries,
(all things considered very unworthy any way, for such an Embassage unto
those great Personages) the name of John Clement was not known to me by any
occasion whatsoever, nor I think from the best, to the meanest of my troop;
much less did I hear any word, from the mouth of either of those great
Princes, the Infanta, or the Archduke, at any time, no not when I had the
freest converse with them, which was at the dinner I was invited unto by their
Highnesses, etc. So that by this you must give us leave to guess of your
sincerity, in the rest of your ridiculous Legends.


Iab. I cannot wonder Page 138
enough, at the miraculous impudency of your Ministers, who having accused
such famous miracles, as ours are, for false, dare set to sale their own toys
and trifles, as most credible things.


Ma. You shall do well to tell us who those Ministers be, and what those
trifles are.


Iab. Joseph Page 138. 139.
Hall brings you a miraculous tongue, which he got in his travels in the Low
Countries. A Graphie^e told him that a certain Heretic being condemned to be
burned, went singing to the stake, for which the Magistrate caused his tongue
to be cut out; and in punishment hereof, the Magistrates son that was borne
afterward, had his tongue hanging down upon his chinne like a Dear after a
long chase.


Ma. Mirabilia sunt opera tua domine. The right hand of the Lord brings
mighty things to pass. Such is his Justice that he oftentimes retaliateth
cruelty in the like kind. An eye for an eye, and a tongue for a tongue. But
seeing the Author does not Iurare in verba magistri, if you will not believe it
you have it as good cheap as he; he does not deny, but that his mother might
loose her longing for a neates tongue. That which he credibly surmizeth is
this, that Lypsius would have made a great matter of a less hint, had there
bin a shadow of half this probability to serve his turn.


Min. Iabals partiality is worth the noting. We must believe that Capgraue.
Austen the Monk obtained by prayer, that certain men of Dorset, and all
their posterity should have tails, for hanging fish tails in scorn at his
back; and that Thomas Becket furnished our Kentishmen with the like
Pickadillies, for cutting off his horse tail. These mushrumps (grounded upon a
less motive) may not be questioned, though nothing so evident as a blareing
label-lolling tongue, which without the help of a Muffler, could not be so
well concealed.


Iab. How would Page 135.
these hens cackle, could they lay an egg worth the finding, that thus
brag of a shell full of wind?


Ma. Where such demonstrations of Gods justice do occur, they are not to be
smothered. When the scout you send into those parts shall disprove the
relation, we will say the Graphiere was a knave: till then we have reason to
conceive the best; neither do we doubt but the general good opinion of Doctor
Halls sincerity, will turn Lipsius his credit out of the Hall into the Kitchen.


Iab. John Fox brings a Page 140.
dainty and rare dish, Cranmers own heart, which in the fire, his whole body
being consumed into ashes, was sound whole and entire. which wonder seems to
me the greater; in regard of the tenderness of your Martyrs heart, more
flexible then wax to any religion, which the Prince would have him bend unto:


Ma. Si satis Seneca.
sit accusasse, quis erit innocens? Cranmers Epistles sent to the Queen, his
confession of the true Faith, with detestation of Popery, found in his bosom
at the time of his execution, and the revenge which he showed in burning the
hand that through frailty and cruel usage, had inconsiderately subscribed, do
sufficiently free him from the suspicion, both of irreligious leuity (which the
voluntary neglect of his worldly dignities, for the maintenance of the Faith,
and a good conscience, does evidently disprooue) as also of all proditory or
treacherous entendments, wherewith your Garnetian brood is so generally and
notoriously inured.


Iab. By whom I Page 140. 141
pray you was that heart found? by Catholics? why are they not named? by
Protestants? why did they not take it up? Did they fear to scorch their
Protestant fingers in the ashes of that fire, that spared a Protestant heart?
If they took it up, what is become of it? where is it kept?


Nick. It Is fit indeed you should be made acquainted. Would you serve Cranmers
heart as your associates did Bucers bones? If the fire would not burn it, you
would try what the Butchers chopping-knife could do. I have heard good Divines
say, that the body of Moses was purposely concealed, least it should have been
Idolatrouslie worshipped; neither did it stand with the wisdom or safety of
those professors, by whom this heart was discovered, to make proclamation
thereof, least the subtlety or cruelty of your Jesuits might have exposed it,
to a second ignominious doom. Wheresoever it is, it is safe enough from the
scorching of your scandalous pen.


Min. Touching this holy man's heart, I will say unto thee, as the Angel of
the Lord spoke unto the Devil. Zach. 3, 2.
The Lord rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?


Iab. It is not Page 141.
wisdom for any man's faith to feed ouerhastily, upon so dangerous a dish of
meat.


Min. Have we not the like instance of Gods powerful providence, in the
preservation of Zuinglius his heart, from the fiery flames? Oswaldus Myconius in
the description of his life writes thus. Hostibus digressis, post diem tertium
accedunt amantes Zuinglij, si quid reliqutarum eius offenderent, et ecce Cor
(mirabile dictu) se offert e medijs cineribus integrum et illaesum. This also
does Henricus Lupulus witness in his Epitaph. Cor cui flamma potens pepercit,
et quod pallentem in cinerem nequit resolui etc.


Ma. These Relics will not relish with Iabals palate, because his Lady of Hall
and Siche^ had their gloves on, when these things were acted. William And.
Capgraue.
Malmsb. gives you a daintier morsel, with which your queasie stomach is better
acquainted; I mean the Relic which S. Dunstane found, when he took up the
body of the Chaste Editha. After he had a while raked in her ashes, what do
you think he found? Her The like of John Trauers his thumb and two
forefingers. Britannomodia. Page 179.
thumb, as being most hardened with continual use; and what else? Nick will
blush to hear it. A Male olet.
thing in the Suburbs of her belly, like the Circumference of a giants eye. You
know what I mean? a piece of a buffe-ierkin. Is not this goodly geere? these
are your sweet Relics, which your Catholic Gallants must adore.


Iab. Some of your Page 143.
Writers, seeing our relations to be authentical, as none can be more, have
not brazen faces to deny the stories, yet their heart and tongue is no less
impious, not fearing to affirm that these miracles are the miracles of the
Devil, and Antichrists lying wonders.


Min. In fine In Mat. hom. 49.
temporis (says Chrysostom) concedenda est potestas Diabolo vt faciat signa
vtilia. In the latter times shall there not come strong delusions, such as were
those of Exo. 7.12.13.
Iannes and Iambres? Is the Devil think you grown a nouice in his old trade?
our comfort is this; As Aarons rod swallowed up the rods of the Magicians,
so (says Ad Algasiam
Hierom) mendacium Antichristi, Christi veritas deuorabit.


Nick. Let their miracles be brought to the test, and then let the world
judge, whether they be not either the miracles of the Devil, or Antichrists
lying wonders.


Ma. What think you of the Merchant; S. Iam. Legend. Numb. 94.
who praying to S. James to be released out of prison, was so powerful in his
zeal, that the high tower wherein he was caged, bowed it self so low, quod
ipsius sublimitas terrae aequalis fuit, that it lay even with the ground, and
so he escaped, neither was he seen by those which pursued him, though they
were hard by him. Here was an invisible miracle; me thinks they might have
followed him by the sent, for surely he was in a feting case. Was not S.
George a mighty man, who made a Maid lead a Dragon in a string? Was S.
George. O Strange!
he not of a very cold constitution, who thought himself in a bath, when
Datianus put him in a drying pan, full of boiling lead? I trow he had a tough
hide. The very Children can tell, how Pope Siluester bound up a dragons mouth
with a Is it possible?
thread, and signed it with the sign of the cross. Mary you must think it
was either a weak Dragon, or a strong thread.


Nick. Perhaps the cross wherewith he sealed him was a good iron hammer; and
yet we read that S. Legend. 137.
Iustina with the sign of the cross, made the Devil melt like wax. Was not
this a flexible Devil? she was of a stronger metal, for being put into a pan
full of pitch and wax, presently the fire went out, neither have we any
notice in the history, that she did leak. The best jest is of S. Petrus de
Natalibus.
Margaret, she (forsooth) was swallowed up of the Devil, being in the form
of a Dragon, and being in his belly, she made the sign of the Cross,
instantly his belly brake, and thence came a Saint out of his side. But it was
not long before she cried quittance with him; upon a time she took him at an
advantage, and caught him by the hair of his head, cast him down, and set her
right foot upon his neck. In those days they had the Devil at a beck. S.
Daem^n fluxu ventris ^iectus est.

Legend. Lob. 213


Genoueua cast him forth in her close stool. Though it were a kind of sluttish
dispossession, yet could not the Devil complain of hard lodging. He lay worse
when Pet. de Natal. lib. 8. de sanc. cap. 20.
Lupus (spying him to be crept into a tub of water) cast a cushion upon him,
and kept him fast in; then says my author, tota nocte vlulabat, he roared all
night.


Min. He screamed worse when Saint Dunstan caught him by the nose with hot
burning pincers. This Dunstan was a stout ladd. If a Church stood awry, he made
no more ado but put his shoulder to it, and so set it right East and West, as
he would have it stand. One commendable property he had was this, that he was
very musical: Nay more, his harp that hung upon the wall, without the touch
of any man's fingers, would play an Antheme, and sing of it self this ditty,
Gaudent in coelis animae Sanctorum. You must not imagine that any Irish or
Welsh monkish harper played on the other side of the wall; for I can tell you
S. Dunstans harp needed no consorts. Amongst other merriments, we must not
forget the good deed, that S. Capgraue. Legend.
Wolstan did to a poor man, who had his stones cut, and his eyes put out, by
his enemies. This forlorn wretch, praying to this Saint, got new stones, and
better eyes then he had before.


Ma. Are these the holy and undoubted miracles, unto which our credence must
stoop, as Bonellus his Statim Asina genua flexit, et capite inclinato
reuerentiam exhibuit.

Came not Bellarmines Ma^^ of the same Sire.


ass to the consecrated host? If we deny these, he asks Page 133.
What place will be left for humane history or divine faith? nay he sticks
not to move this question, What can be said within the compass of humane
credibility, for the certainty of those stories whereon Christianity is
grounded, which may not most clearly be proved in defense of these? There is
no evasion but we must be branded with his Cognizance, as brazen-faced
heretics, if we deny these Page 143.
Relations to be so authentical as none can be more,


Min. Cassianus Johan. Cass. Praes. lib. 4. z. A. a.
does highly extol the humility and obedience of one called holy John, who
raised no small admiration by his obsequious conformity to his superiors
behe^ts. Among other trialls of his loyalty, the Senior set him this task.
There was in the wood-yard of the Monastery an old stock, which had more then a
twelue-moneth before been cut for fiering. This he takes and sets into the
ground in the sight of Puny John, and commands him every day to water it, till
it took new root, and began to sprowt. The Nouice is not slack in the
performance of this imposed duty, no sickness, no festival stays him, but
as soon as the Sun was up, he trudges two miles for water, to moysten
this rotten plant. To be short, at the end of two years the old Monk comes to
the place, inquires and asks John whether his stock had yet taken root; but
herein John cannot resolve him; wherefore as if he meant to try the success
of John's labor, he puts to his hand, and at the first pluck pulls it clean
out of the earth, willing him to water it no more. Here was an end of an old
song. When I read it, I was in doubt whether I should more admire his humility,
or his stupidity.


Nick. Iabal wonders to what purpose you tell this tale, seeing the miracle
failed,


Ma. Had he any wit he might easily resolve himself. How think you? Is he
not somewhat of kin to puny John? The dry stock which he has bin all this
while a watering, at the command of his superiors, is the point of Purgatory
and Miracles; a dead stock God-wotte, fitter for the fire then his pains. He
has with great labor fetched his water as far as Hall and Sichem, more then
two miles off, yet all to little purpose, the stock has neither gained
verdure nor juice, but is as Non proficit hilum.
loose in the riuet as before. Wherefore his superiors may do well, either to
set him a more hopeful plant, or to ease him of his bootlesse pains; for all
that he shall get by his industry in this kind, is the opinion of obedience:
and herein he has gotten a Triumph indeed; which whether it sort more with
his credit or shame, I leave to the censure of more judicious surueyors.


Iab. The sight of Page 146
the bleeding wafer-cake at Bruxels, seems to have made the Knights ears
glow, but what stories of the like miracles might he read, were he conversant
in ancient Ecclesiastical histories?


Min. You mean about the adoration of the Divine sacrament; but heerin are we
satisfied by Part. 4. qu. 53 memb. 4. art. 3. fol. 2
Alexander of Hales. In Sacramento (says he) apparet caro, interdum humana
procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica. In the Sacrament there appears
oftentimes flesh, sometimes by the slight of man, sometimes by the operation of
the devil. This In ca. 14. Dan.
Lyra confirms, as he is ^itly alleged by the Knight, Fit aliquando in
Ecclesia maxima deceptio populi in miraculis fictis a Sacerdotibus, propter
lucrum temporale. Wherefore in what Monastery, or on what Altar soever you
pretend to show Christ in the flesh (whom we know to keep his corporal
residence on the right hand of God, in the highest Heavens) we are forewarned
and forearmed not only to suspect, but utterly to reject such fabulous
untruths. If any man shall say unto us, Lo Mat. 24. v. 23.
here is Christ, we must not believe, for there shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders.


Nick. It Is time for Iabal to leave off watering this rotten stock; nor six
reasons, nor six hundred buckets full of Holy water, will make M^^e ruit sua.
it thrive. If he have any thing to say touching our conversion by Gregory,
or any excuse for his Delegates insolency, which has not been formerly
answered, let him say on. I brake my fast very early, and now I feel my
stomach begin to wamble. Perge Domine Doctor.


CHAP. VI. Great Gregory's proud Delegate dismounted, and Popish pretended
devotion uncased.
Iab. I Might here end Page 154
Purgatories Triumph, but that in his Counter-snarle the Knight quarrels with
me about the first Conversion of the English Nation unto Christian Religion,
which I said in my Treatise, was performed by Saint Gregory and those holy
Monks he sent.


Nick. If your monstrous Hidra have yet any more heads, we shall not want
keen weapons to cut them off, as soon as they begin to sprout. The garland
which you have prepared, may be converted to some better use; for Gregory's
supposed Conversion will be no great furtherance to that Trophey, which you
have a desire to rear. If your Roman stage plays (consisting of dumb shows,
and colorable miracles) cannot prevail, the Sabine Ladies will never be won.


Ma. Suppose it should be granted, that the Christian faith of our English
Nation was kindled at Romes light; I have often seen that Lamp which has made
others to shine, choked and dimmed, either with want or surplussage of Oil.
But this seems to me very strange, that they who teach their Catholic
Pupils to build upon Antiquity, will not suffer them now to fetch the Pedigree
of their Conversion, beyond the modern arrival of Augustine the Monk.


Min. The view of all Ancient Records free us from the fear of this needless
supposition. The Let. to T.H. Page 92.
testimonies of Gildas, Theodoret, Nicephorus, and Baronius have been urged by
the Knight to prove that the Inhabitants of this Island were converted, either
by the Apostles, or Apostolic persons. Yea he proves by the acknowledgement
of their own Of three conuersions.
Author, that from the time of King Lucius, until the coming of Augustine,
the Brittons did not alter their faith; which was one and the self same in all
substantial and material points, with that which Augustine brought.


Iab. The Page 166.
Brittons were Christians when Saint Augustine came; does it therefore follow,
that the Saxons were not Heathens? The Mountains unto which the Brittons
retired, were full of Christian Churches; might not the rest of the Land be
full of Idols? is any man so silly as not to perceive your Consequent to be
ridiculous? Why Page 165.
might not Saint Augustine convert the English unto Christ, though the Brittons
were Christians before? And if by his entrance, and preaching he did convert
them, why should not the same be styled the Conversion of the English Nation?
The Page 167
Conuersions named by the Knight, truly understood of Brittons only, are
impertinentlie brought to prove, that Saint Gregory and Saint Augustine his
Delegate were not Authors of Christianity amongst the English. Suppose Page
168.
the two thousand of Bangor had been a Million of Monks, yet being Brittons,
quid ad Rombum? may he not be justly thought a Bangoring disputant that does
thence infer, that at that time the Saxons were not Heathens?


Nick. Did not Augustine find an Arch-Bishoppe, and seven Bishops, when he
arrived amongst the English Saxons?


Iab. These Ibid.
were not Professors and Preachers of Christian faith among the English Saxons.
They neither preached unto them, nor lived amongst them, as Saint Gregory
does expresselie say in his Epistle to Saint Augustine: In Anglorum gente tu
solus Episcopus; thou art the only Bishop among the English. If you Page 167
mean that before Augustines arrival, the Saxons, some of them at least, were
Christians, your Assertion is evidently false, against all histories.


Nick. Solus and vnus, more Superlatiuorum accipiuntur. Gregory being far
remote, wrote perhaps as he was informed by the Letters of his Agents, whose
pens were tipped with partiality, and wholly bent to promote their masters fame,
and the success of their own voyage.


Min. That not only in Wales and Scotland, but even in the vmbilique of the
Saxons Dominion, there was a conception of Christian faith; I am the rather
persuaded of, because King Ethelbert, who then reigned in Kent, had a Christian
Lady to his wife; as also in regard of the Aliquid boni propter vicinum bonum.
vicinitie of those bordering Brittons, with whom, both in the time of war
and peace, they could not but have converse. Neither is it probable but that
the Saxons, who were to stand to the courtesy of Vortiger, for their peaceable
abode, would somewhat conform themselves to the Religion of the king, upon
whose favor they were to depend.


Iab. Into Page 173.
what desperate absurdities does malice against the Sea of Rome drive you?


Min. The ground of this surmise is originally raised from S. Gregory's pen;
we can have no better witness then himself, who writing to Theodoricus and
Theodibertus Kings of the French, speaks in this manner. Greg. lib. 5. epist.
158.
Peruenit ad nos Anglorum gentem ad fidem Christianam desideranter velle
conuerti, sed sacerdotes tuos e vicino negligere, et desideria eorum cessare
sua adhortatione succendere. And writing at the same time to Brunchilda Queen
of the French, he says thus. Epist. 159.
Indicamus ad nos peruenisse Anglorum gentem, deo annuente, velle fieri
christianam, sed sacerdotes qui in vicino sunt pastoralem erga eos
sollicitudinem non habere etc. By which it appears, that the Saxons growing
weary of their idolatry (as being incited by the example of the Brittanes,
among whom Christ was still professed, or by the means of Bertha then wife of
King Ethelbert, and the Christian company wherewith she was attended) had
intimated their Ignoti nulla cupido.
desire to be matriculated into the womb of the Christian Church; as also,
that had not the Borderers, either for fear or hate, refused to put to their
helping hands, your Gregory had had the least share in this business. The
first of which will be more conspicuous, if you call to mind the Veni, vidi,
vici.
speedy success which the Monk found at his arrival; For first the King
takes order that he should be furnished with all competent necessaries, then
at the hearing of the first Sermon, he gives command for other liberal
entertainment, licencing them by their preaching, to join unto the faith so
many as they could; neither was it long before the King himself was baptized,
which was no small allectiue to the rest of the people. Had not the way been
trodden before, could he, think you, with so swift steps have accomplished his
desire? So great a conquest over a settled Idolatrous people could hardly have
been gained, had there not been a former breach made.


Ma. These conjectures are not improbable, neither is the matter great
howsoever. For if the first place whence the Gospel was derived, be therefore
to be magnified beyond other Cities, then should Jerusalem and the Patriarch
thereof be most highly esteemed, as being incomparably honored with the
residence, Sermons and Passion of our Savior; as also with the Master- miracle
of the fiery tongues, whereby the Apostles were enabled to propagate the glad
tidings of the Gospel to the most remote nations.


Min. This argument puts me in mind of Saint 1. Cor. 1.12. cap. 3. 4.
Paul's care in preventing such inconveniences as might accrue upon the like
affected Supremacy. He would by no means endure that they, whether Paul Cephas
or Apollos, whom God had used as his instruments to gain others to the
profession of Christ, should thereupon arrogate to themselves any opinion,
whereby their partial Scholars should rather adhere unto them then unto
others. Yet will you not be persuaded, but that this part of the world must
have a necessary dependence upon Rome, from whence it received an addition of
that light, which at least by a glimmering notion (as I have proved) it so much
coueted. Could you show that the Bishops of Rome, who after K. Lucius embraced
the faith, did for 400. years intrude themselves into the management of our
Country affairs, your inference would bear a better gloss; but it is
evident by the Epistle of Elutherius to that King, that he never dreamed of
any Jurisdiction over him or his Realm, albeit as a religious Bishop he
willingly condiscended unto his desire, in furthering him toward the Kingdom
of God; neither did the Brittanes seek to the Sea of Rome for the suppressing
of Pelagius his heresy, but to the neighbor Church of France. It is unlike
Germanus and Lupus would have adventured without the Popes priuity to interpose
their sickle, had the Harvest belonged unto Rome.


Ma. Your instances in my opinion are very preualent, if their supposed
original Conversion were granted. But seeing we are descended not only of
the Saxons, but rather from the Britains, who were the Ancient Inhabitants
of this Land; the Heathenisme of the Saxons first entrance, cannot abrogate the
antiquity of our faith. As our Country has the same denomination, so is the
Qu^ semeles^ imbuta recens s^ruabit odorem Terra dus.
descent of our Noble King, and of our Ancient nobility, lineally drawn from
the prime stock of the old Brittanes; neither is there any likelihood by
consent of history, but that the British blood runs in all our History of
Cambria by H. ^boyd. Brittanni Saxones, Normann^, ^e permi^^i. Cambden. Brit.
veins.


Nick. Are you content that First part c. 99. of Cl^deueus.
Fabians Chronicle shall decide this controversy? His words are these. It
appears that Christ's faith was by a long time honored in Britain, ere it
was honored in France, except that such as hold the foresaid opinion, account
the first coming of Christ's faith into Britain, at the first Conversion of
the Saxons, when it was preached by Saint Augustine and his followers, which is
not to the purpose. Was it not to the purpose in the Controversy between
France and us? then will it but a little promote our alleagiance to Rome. I
would gladly understand by Iabal, whether he hold himself a Britain, or no.
If he deny it, his mother I dare say will hold him unworthy of his breath,
and his Country of his being. If he confess it, then has his own mouth
given sentence against him, that the Britains were Christians when Augustine
came. The regiment of the Saxons had at length a consumption, and then the
natural blood returned into the former and more proper parts, from whence it
was unwillingly retired, as being by violence withhelde in too narrow a strait.


Ma. Has the Doctor never seen his Majesty's Quos Deus comunxit nemo separet.
impresse with this Motto, Faciam eos in gentem vnam? Why does he then go
about seditiously by a frivolous distinction of the heptarchy, to separate that
people, whom the providence of the Almighty has miraculously joined with one
heart, under one King? Scotland and Wales are one with us, and we with them. So
that the question being when we received the faith, we must have one and the
same recourse to the original plantation thereof in this Land, and not to the
Noua gentium nomina extinctis prioribus oriuntur.

Quotid^ aliquid in tom magno orb mutatur. Senec. de cons. ad Albinum.


recovery thereof in some particular parts.


Nick. It would be a difficult task for the Doctor to prove that the Nation of
those Saxons, who were entertained by Ethelbert, had not formerly received the
faith, seeing Saint Colloss. 1.6
Paul says, that even in his age the Evangelical message did fructificare in
vniuerso mundo. If he answer that at their arrival they were Infidels, the
like may be said of those seven Churches unto whom Saint John writes. If he
will not stand upon the Which Fabia^ in the life of Vortiger thinks to be
Germany, first converted by Lucius of Cirene Paul's kinsman and companion.
Auentinus in Annal. Boiorum.
Nation, from which in tract of time the Candle-stick might be removed, but
instance in that part of the Land, which they in the state of Infidelity did
subdue; my Master has proved by sundry instances, that this Island was
Christian many years, before Gregory drew his Mothers milk.


Min. Saint Hom. 4. in Ezech.
Origin puts that clean out of doubt. Terra Britanniae (says he) consensit in
religionem Christi. And again, Hom. Quod Christus sit Deu^.
insulae Britanniae extra hoc mare sitae, and in Oceano ipso positae, sensere
virtutem verbi Dei.


Iab. That which we Page 173
affirm is, that Christianity was never in the English Nation, before God by
Saint Gregory's prayers and Augustines preaching planted the same in their
hearts.


Ma. It is most likely that Lethardus the Frenchman, the Queens Chaplain, was
not idle Bonum est sui d^ss^st^.
all the while before Augustine came. Will you say of him as of the Page 168
Britains, that he could by no Yet the Bishops were brought before Augustine
by the means of Edelbert. Fab. Part. 5. cap. 119.
means be brought to preach the faith of Christ to the Saxons? By all
probability, being graced with the Royal countenance of his Mistress, he had
greater Vnde scis mulier, si virum saluum facies. 1. Cor. 7.16
opportunity of beginning this work, then Augustine who came as a stranger,
without those means, which Lethardus could not want.


Iab. This is against all Page 173. 174
authors of our Country. S. Bid says expressly that the King upon Augustines
coming gave leave for the preching of the gospel. A sign that none did nor
durst preach, without his leave, specially one that was so nigh about him as
the Queens Chaplain, who thereby might bring both himself and the Queen in
danger.


Ma. If you be so good at signs, you shall do me a favor to hold my Cards
at Mawe. At Augustines coming Page 173.
the King gave leave for the preaching of the Gospel. Ergo, he gave no leave
before, non sequitur.


Iab. If he Page 174.
converted any it is most likely they were noble men; but this thing could not
have bin hidden from the King. Had any been secretly baptized before S.
Augustines arrival by Lethardus, doubtless they would have manifested
themselves at his entrance, when the King granted unto his Subjects to profess
the Christian faith, which had been a thing remarkable, and would not have
been concealed by Bid in his history.


Ma. Are these your coniecturall Demonstrations? In my opinion this consequent
had been more reasonable. Did the King so easily condescend to a stranger,
then could he not be adverse to the Hi ambo cum in regia suae religionis ritu^
quotidie seruarent haud dubie principis animum in alta caligine haerentem
sensim cael^stis lucis radijs illustrare caeperunt, inclinaruntque ad
Euangelicam disciplinam quam ille libens m^x recepit. Polyd. hist. lib. 4.
wife of his bosom, and her Chaplain who was selected by the French State, as
a man most eminent for his discretion and devotion Did he love his Queen so
ill, as to ingrosse the service of the whole Nobility to himself, allotting
none for her attendance? By your leave sir, there are many noble Gentlemen
troubled with Collapsed Ladies, who could find in their hearts to turn their
popish seruitors out of doors, and yet dare as well take a Bear by the tooth,
as give them a frown. Have you never heard of Scimmington? I have known him
in my time beat the Constable out of doors. And do you take the French Lady
for a sheep? especially being received by the King upon Fabian. in Ethelbert.
5. part. cap. 119.
condition, that he should suffer her to live after her own Law. Lib. 9. Ep.
59.
Gregory himself graceth her with the title of a second Helena, in respect of
the good which her Lord reaped by her christian inducements.


Iab. This manner Page 176.
of speaking is a sign that the desire, not of truth, but of our disgrace, is
the Bias of your tongues: which make you not fear to speak any falsehoods, how
improbable soever.


Nick. If you begin blind man's buffe, groping at likeli-hoods, you must not be
angry if we hold you play. Imagination is as free for us as you. The point is
not of any great import, seeing that you grant that our ancestors Galfridus
Monumetensis. lib. 8. ca. 4. de Britannorum gestis.
the Britains were Christians, long before Augustine came to alter their
Easter feast, The Pope smelt the fatness of the land, and therefore he thought
by hook or crook, to have his finger in the pie. And who must be a
Superintendent in this expedition, but Insolent Augustine? and what stuff did
he bring? Forsooth a Banner, Crosses, Images, Relics, and other frivolous and
trifling ceremonies.


Iab. When S. Page 179.
Augustine did deliver his errand to King Edelbert, I find in S. Bid this
tenor thereof; that he came from Rome, and brought a most Fistula dulce canit
volucrem dum decipit auceps.
joyful message, which whosoever should obey, should have eternal joys in
heaven.


Ma. No doubt he would set the best face before. He might well promise
celestial joys in the land of the living, who gaped for the fairest living in
the land. So he might be hugged in gremio matris; in the best skirts of their
mother earth, he would not spare to promise the simple people millions of
absolutions and heavenly joys in sinu patris, in the bosom of his heavenly
Father. If you be so conversant in Bid as you would seem, you may take this
note, that the first question which he propounds to Gregory, his Master, was
Lib. 1. cap. 27
de fidelium oblationibus quae accedunt altari. What should be done with the
peoples offerings. Do you smell a rat?


Iab. These are Page 179.
gross untruths full of ingratitude. Heresy has made Englishmen more savage,
then those were, whom that blessed Delegate found at his entrance.


Ma. Experientia matter stultorum. The Wolf was then in Sheep clothing, and
might more easily deceive; but since she has played her part in her proper
kind, and bitten Ictus piscator sapit.
Englishmen to the bone: the aim of your Romish Embassies has been long
since discovered by the bitter fruit. Considerate quid de gregibus agatur,
quando Lupi pastores fiunt, says S. Gregory; and again, Custodiam gregis
suscipiunt, qui insidiari gregi dominico non metuunt. Susceptae benedictionis
ministerium, vertunt ad ambitionis augmentum.


Iab. As for the conversion Page 181. 182.
of our Country by Saint Albertus Pighius translates this glory to Honorius.
Ipsius cura et studio, praedicatione autem Pauli ab eo missi Episcopi Eudinum
Britannorem regem verbum salutis cum sua gente suscepisse. De Act. 6. Synod.
Page 277.
Augustines means, what, not Ciuility alone, but also sanctity with an heavenly
(not humane only) kind of life, he planted amongst us our histories do relate,
which is such, as I wonder this new Gospel, which Ambition and Emulation, Wine
and Women gave the beginning unto, dare boast of their modesty, ciuility, and
sanctity in her presence.


Nick. Iabal iumpes as if he were in one of Simon Fitz-Magus his Irish bogges.
If he had gone but one Parenthesis further, surely he would have stuck in the
midst. There is in his clause not only, one lie, but also a whole packet of
imaginary untruths. I think he means to win the quicksilver tongue from
Lipsius. Henry Fitz-Simon and he may well part stakes: they are the fittest to
write a history of Giants and enchanted Castles, that ever I knew. If fictions
may be admitted, they will outride the Constable; and yet I dare lay a wager
Fl^gitia quae non inuenit excogitat. Britannomachia. page 286.
Fitz-Magus will be at Manchester first.


Ma. They must needs ride then with Scarfes and Vizards: the one I am sure has
little reason to show his face there, he has broached so many opprobrious
calumnies, in the disgrace of diverse reverend persons of that quartar, whose
learning, pains and blameless conversation, is graced with such general
approbation, that the most settled Papists are ashamed of his impudency, and
do not stick to publish their hearty dislike of such shameless and
injurious dealing. As for the other, who with a brazen face does not only
basely parallel, but also insolently ouermatch the foundation, modesty,
civility, and sanctity of our Religion, I will say unto him no more but this,
If our faith be of men, wine, or women, (as your Minerua does dictate) then
could it not have withstood those gates of hell, wherewith it has been
opposed. But if it be miraculously planted by the hand of the Almighty,
grounded upon his sacred word, and embelished with most Christian virtues, Thou
art then inexcusable, O thou false tongue. To justify the wicked, and condemn
the innocent, are both abominable.


Iab. If the Page 192. 193.
tree may be judged by the fruit, what a noble and worthy tree was that
conversion, from the root whereof such innumerable Saints and excellent workers
of piety in such abundance did spring?


Ma. Wise men are of opinion, that Papal policy, rather then true Christian
piety, brought forth the greatest part of your gilded devotion. What would
they spare, who were frighted with Purgatory, and assured of Heaven for their
works sake? The Scriptures being imprisoned in the Monks Cell, it could not
otherwise be but that Ignorance must be the mother of their devotion: neither
is it enough to make an action praise-worthie, that the thing done be ^onum,
but both in manner and end it must be done been: otherwise it is but spendidum
peccatum. The building of the Prophets Sepulchers, though wrought with great
expense, did not prove the Jews to be true Israelites; neither does the
multiplicitie of your Monasteries warrant the integrity of your faith. Nay
more, let me be bold to say that which I am able to prove: Had not your
Popelings fed upon the peoples sins, there had not been half so many
Abbey-lubbers as lived most idly and deliciously in our Cloisters, and sucked
the marrow of our Land. To omit other instances: The Chronicle writing of
Edgars unlawful leacherie, as also of the erection of sundry holy-houses,
makes this close. For Fabian. part. 6. cap. 193.
these insolent and wanton deeds it is said, that by the counsel of S.
Dunstane, he builded and repaired so many Abbeys and houses of Religion as
above is rehearsed. By this you may guess, whether your devotion or ours had*
the beginning from wine and women.


Min. The Doctor has ill luck with his comparisons. If he will deigne to
peruse D. Willets Inventory of religious works under the Gospel, he shall
find that she whom he accounts barren, has more children then that
Concubine of Antichrist, whose offspring he so much admireth.


Iab. Compare the Page 193.
Monasteries the one builded, with those the other threw down, the riches
which the one gave, with those the other took from Churches and holy uses. Let
the Humility, Piety, fear of God, reverence to his Church, contempt of the
world, which the one caused in great and mighty Monarkes, be paralelled with
the contrary effects your Religion bred in those Princes that first
entertained the same in their Kingdoms.


Ma. And what then? Do you think the Triumph will be yours? Who I pray you
did first put the axe to the tree? Was it not your own Woolsey.
Cardinal? Did not he begin to demolish the lesser erections? Who was the
overthrow of the In the time of Edw. the Second.
Templers? Was it not the French King? and did not your Holy Father give way to
the extirpation of these? How can you persuade the world, that his Holiness
believes there is a Purgatory, seeing he makes so little conscience of prayers
for their souls, by whose deluded charity these lesser monuments of devotion
were to that end first founded? As there is no respect of persons with God, so
is the least mite thrown in his Treasury, as well accepted as the greatest
talent of the most mighty Potentate. Why then should the Pope be so partial
as to neglect the relief of the poorer sort, by passing license to the
ambitious Cardinal, for the pulling down of lesser Houses, founded with as
great Charity, to make princely walls for his pride? How will he escape the
dreadful execrations of the first Founders? A thousand Iabalites will not
bail him. As for Henry the eight, he is far more excusable, because he
followed the president of the Popes Legate, whom he thought he might boldly
imitate. And when the lands came to the spoil, your own Catholics had not
the least share.


N^ck. He that shall read the Records of those times, shall find the
villainies of the Monastiques so transcendent, that no religious King could with
a safe conscience any longer tolerate them. When you shall call to mind how
6000.
many childrens heads Gregory saw at the drawing of a fish pond, you will
think he has small reason to boast of their piety, fear of God, and
contempt of the world. And were your religious persons thus tainted: then must
the secular needs be worse infected. When their purse would purchase their
pardon with a Quodlibet, they that had the fairest means, were likely to
harbor the foulest sins.


Ma. And as for humility, which was the second branch of his maimed
comparison, as often as he thinks of Augustines pride, me thinks he should
turn his face aside when he names it.


Iab. The Page 189.
chief reason that made this blessed Saint to jar with the British Bishops,
was their want of Christian charity toward the English, not yielding to
preach Christ and Christianity unto them.


Ma. It Is strange he should be so inconsiderate, as to fall out with them before
he heard them speak. Besides, he could not but hear how many worthy
Britains had been treacherously slain by Hengystus and his Fabian. part. 1.
cap. 89.
adherents, both upon Ambry or Salisburie Plain, and at a banquet, where they
expected a better welcome. So that his Fatherhood should first have procured
hostages for their safety, and then if they had gainsaied his religious
motion, they had been more liable to his choleric censure. That for which
his ambition is principally noted, is the stately Prologue of his greeting, in
his surly and Pseudo episcopal carriage toward his poor brethren, who had
been his Seniors in this Seignorie. The countenance is a token of the heart.


Iab. I confess Page 190.
it is so, yet but an uncertain and fallible token, whereupon to frame a
resolute and determinate judgment in the condemnation of any, is against
Christ's express Commandment. Do not judge according to the face.


Ma. S. James explanes our Saviors meaning, when he admonishes us not to
reject the Saepe sub sordido palliolo latitat sapientia.
poor Saint for the meannesse of his habit, nor to respect the proud devil
for the richness of his vesture. Our Saviors prohibition extends it self
to worldly additaments, and outward hypocritical semblances; it excludes not
the censure of the tree by the fruit, by which he says we shall know them. I
confess vice does often times bear the counterfeit of virtue, but never did I
see yet Christian humility so base minded, as to stoop to the imitation of
pride. They are the agents of Papa nemini mortalium reuerentiam facit,
assurgendo aut caput inclinando seu detegendo.
Antichrist, that are pontifical in their carriage, and lofty in their
looks. The Disciples of Christ do learn of him to be humble and meek.
Though it be rashness to judge of any man's final estate, before the time of
our Lord come, yet it is a point of Christian wisdom to Libritui totum te
nobis exhibent. Aug. in Epist. 9.
discern between a thistle and an olive branch.


Iab. How often Page 190.
do godly and discreet Superiors show anger, state, gravity, and severity in
their countenance, when their hearts are full of humility, compassion, and
meeknes?


Ma. I perceive you are better acquainted with State policy, then Church
piety. There may be just occasions for Magistrates to be sometimes sharper in
words, and more austere in their countenance, then willingly they would: but if
by State you understand disdainful insolency, it is in no hand to be
suffered, especially in those that should be parternes to the flock of Christ.
Christianity does always presuppose common civility. Had Minimus Apostolorum.
S. Paul been in Augustines room, would he have sat as if he had been
nailed to his chair? would he not rather have prostrated himself before
them, beseeching them as their servant in Christ Jesus to be reconciled?
Unless you shut your eyes, you may easily judge of the domineering spirit of
this new Delegate.


Min. Either you must condemn the Discite a me, quia mitis sum, and humilis
cord
ground of holy Scripture, upon which that worthy and much reverenced Heremite
(to whom they repaired for counsel) did build his direction, or his
judgment, in the Si homo Dei est, sequimini illum. Si aduentantibus ass^rgat,
seruus Dei est.
inference and application, wherein he did prophetically divine of the future
event. Otherwise your Augustine cannot shake of the generally received opinion
of arrogancy.


Nick. Gregory being wise discovered the hautinesse of his disposition well
enough, as appears by his Lib. 9. Epist. 58
Epistle sent unto him, and therefore he took a safe course, for being
troubled with him at Rome, to send him into these remote parts, where he might
domineere alone, without check-mate. It would make you smile to read how he
encouraged him in his voyage, when as upon his return he would have feign
stayed at home.


Min. Were there no other demonstration of his pride, but the crossing of his
Masters charge, that alone were sufficient. So that he might set up his own
Ceremonies, he did not much set by Gregory's advertisement.


Iab. Did not Page 184.
Gregory by his Delegate plant the present Roman faith that we now profess?
I think you say it more with your tongue, then with your heart.


Min. Gregory had formerly written to him, that the same Ceremonies were not
necessarily to be exacted in all Churches; and he gives him his reason, Non
Bid. lib. 1. cap. 27.
pro locis res, sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda sunt. Notwithstanding he
abateth not one grain of his violence in changing the observation of their
Easter-tide.


Ma. Is not Gregory's doctrine suitable to that which is now holden by the
Romanists? Did not he allow of Images, the Supremacy, and Necessarium est
trepidare de merito, religiosum est gaudere de dono. Leo.
merit of good works, which they so superstitiously maintain? If not, then it
seems Augustine went beyond the limits of his commission indeed.


Min. For that I will refer you unto the Appeal, wherein all those points
are clearly proved to be extrauagant digressions from S. Gregory's faith. For
my self, I was never so conceited of my own skill, as to take upon me to
better the dressing of that, Quod alius condiuit Coquus, which is already so
well seasoned.


Iab. M. Morton Page, 138.
in his Catholic Apology places Gregory in his lists of Papists.


Min. He that is willing to be deceived, will easily mistake. He sets him
there down as he is challenged by the Papists, to have been a singular Patron
of their now Romish faith, not that he so deemed him, whom he proves to have
been nothing less, in manifold articles, agreeable to our Protestant doctrine.


Nick. To what end should we spend any more breath upon him, whose wilfulness
will endure no end? Seeing Gregory's proud Delegate is now dismounted, and
their glorious Devotion uncased, hic terminus esto.


Iab. O unhappy Religion, Page 189.
the Professors whereof, can find no hope of salvation, without throwing down
into hell most eminent Saints, and amongst them the Conuerters of Nations! O
wonderful obstinacy against truth? that makes Christians that would be so
thought, prefer Paganism before Christian faith.


Nick. Salua res est, The Crane now begins to cry quacke. His last weapon is
exclamation. M. Mayor, you may do a deed of charity to make him the
Towne-cryer. He has a throat for the nonce; and besides, Palmas ad sydera
tollit. See how passionatelie he acts his last scene.


Ma. He looks I think for his Chariot, to be carried away in state: but his
reasons have failed in their attendance, and therefore I think a Dung-cart
will serve his turn. I may boldly say he has hardly earned a blew point for
his days work.


Nick. Sir, I would you would take some order with him. Let him be first
degraded, and then sent back upon his Ass with your pasport, as one of Dunces
disciples, to the place from whence he came, there to abide with his Copes-mate
Simon Fitz-Magus; till they be both converted into a Glouers shop, or a
past-board Cover.


Ma. You have given him a right doom, (whereof Iabal has already Hold the
Couers of his libels against the light, and there shall you find to what use his
Stationer has put his leaves.
tasted) and that very seasonably; for lo how they return thick and
threefold from the fair. What a noise do their Iewes-trumpes, pipes, rattles,
and fiddles make?


Nick. All is for joy of Iabals Triumph; they make a May Game at his Conquest,
and would gladly drive him out of his melancholy mood. It were pity he should
die of the Sullens.


Min. I see Nick begins to look toward the Castle; and it is high time for
good husbands, to make more have home; Iabals blazing-star has now spent it
self, in an infectious vapor. This days chat will serve as a perfume. He did
well to bury his name in the frontispice of his book, as presaging that his
Triumph should be interred in eternal disgrace.


Nick. If God send me life and health, my memory shall much fail me, but I
will make a Clapper of a quill to ring his Knell. Interealoci, vas valete et
plaudite.


Tertull. aduers. Valen. cap. 6. Congruit veritati ridere, quia laetans.
De aemulis suis ludere, quia secura est.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 16. line 23. Ma. left out. Page 23. lin. 17. in, for into Page 29. lin.
11. (the) to be left out before Iabal. Page 53. lin. 2. (of) to be left out
before rigorous. Page 66. lin. 18. (not) left out between was, and in. Page
74. lin. 4. will, for wit. Page 86. lin. 29. leave out vt after solidius. Page
104 lin. 28. she, for show. Page 76. lin. vlt. R. Stock, for I. Stock. Page
99. lin. 15. saluatis, for saluati, s too much. Page 188. lin. 1. for must, put
may. Page 206. lin. 15. before look, add to. Page 240. Margent,
Britannom^dia, for Britannomachia.


