AN ANTIDOTARIE Chyrurgicall, containing great variety and choice of all sorts
of medicines that commonly fall into the Chyrurgions use: partly taken out of
Authors, old and new, printed or written: partly obtained by free gift of
sundry worthy men of this Profession within this Land.

BY John Banester Master in Chirurgerie.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man. 1589.

To the right honorable, my very good Lord and Master, Ambrose Earl of
Warwick, Baron Lisle, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, General
of all the Queens Majesty's Ordinance, and one of the Lords of her Highness
most honorable Privy Counsel.
AS my desire (right honorable) and so also my endeavor, has to this day
been, both to profit my country, by a faithful usage of my hand in healing
many members thereof, in my life time; as also, by public writings, to
furnish numbers, to greter fitnes in that service; even so likewise at this
time, by this present book, I have continued my purpose. Heretofore I have set
forth, first Anatomi^, largly showing the making, number, situation, office,
and utility of the parts of man's body, being and abiding according to the
rule of nature. Then also I printed a general and particular handling and order
of healing such diseases as are incide^t to the same parts, subject to the
Chirurgio^s cure and administration. And now, lest for lack of choice of
medicines in all those cases, the soil of this worthy Art should seem to be
barren, and not able to yield plentiful variety, to satisfy every reasonable
intention of the Artist, in the most high and difficult cures; I have gathered
and published this manual Antidotarie, furnished as a fruitful meadow, with
some things serving to necessity only, and other things affording delight
besides: also as a fair forest which (besides the large scopes and delitesome
chases) contains trees likewise of all growths, and required uses: for in
like manner, here are medicines, some of the^ bitter, biting and painful, serving
where neither ease, nor delight of taste, but recovery of health requires to
be cared for. Yea here are medicines, differing in grows, making, and
strength: some of speedy, others of longer preparation, some for new-grown,
other for inueterat diseases; some for simple, others for malign and depraved
affects; some to be chosen for the tender and delicate, and others more fit for
the rusticall or harder natured bodies. Again, whereas men's liking of
writings, and tasting of wines, are things very agreeable to be brought into
comparison: (for one says of new inventions; these are of none auctority, the
ancient devises are better: another says of the old, these are stale, the
later are fitter for our times and bodies) I have endeavored (as far forth as
I might) to satisfy both affections: for which cause I have not only
collected out of the best written practices both of old and late years, and
obtained of my friends, very rare and tried medicines, as many as I could, but
also, have (as it were) emptied my self of mine own peculiar furniture, and
delivered of the very secrets of my practice; lest any thing should be wanting,
on my part, to the fullness of the work. Now if it shall please your Honor (my
good Lord) to voutsafe it a place amongst those things, that are graced with
your worthy name and Patrocine, my encouragement shall be much increased. And my
hope is the stronger herein; not only in respect of that free favor which your
Honor has vouchsafed me (in taking me in to the number of your servants, and
partaking unto me your H. good countenance and protection; but also in regard,
that so necessary a profession, as is this Art of Chirurgerie, may by this book
receive much furtherance and enlargement: which is a thing that cannot fa^le of
good affection from your Honor, in so much that your noble mind has ever
delighted in the public profit of your country. Only this shall be my humble
suit with all, that these my present labors, may for this time serve unto your
Honor, and be acknowledged as a true pledge, and assured sign, of that entire
affection, and dutiful mind, which I keep ready to be showed in whatsoever,
even far greter service, your H. shall employ me in; or else until by the
multiplying blessing of the Lord, my self may be able to offer some greter
honor unto your renowned name. Mean time, r^co^mending your H. in my daily
prayers unto the L. of Lords, and laboring here, to avoid the tediousnes of a
long tale, I humbly take my leave: the 10. of August. 1589.

Your ^. in all duty, and serviceable affection. John Banester.

To his very loving friend, and worthy Brother in the Art of Chirurgerie, John
Banester: William Goodrus wishes all health and happiness.
HE is counted a worthy Magistrate, who is seen a long time prudently and
happily to govern his charge; and he is reputed for an excellent captain,
that many times returns out of the field with victory. But yet that
Magistrate and Captain shall far shine above the other in glory, and
universal applause of al sorts, that beside performing of their own parts
excellently, do also by true and exactlie digested precepts teach many to be
like them. So must I needs say and confess, concerning you, (my good friend:)
that albeit it might be said by many of us of this profession, that there is
much love and favor due unto us of our Country, for well acquitting our
callings in healing and releeuing many pained and miserable persons, yet much
more unto such as you, and above all the rest: seeing that over and besides the
well accomplishing of your own particular charge, you have also by public
writings, (and herein without all comparison excelling the rest of your
countrymen) striuen to fill this flourishing Land with most cunning
Chirurgions. It were a manifest malignitie not to impute it to your loving
mind, and sincere affection to your Country: and so were it as detestable an
ingratitude, not to render you like love again for it. For mine own part
therefore, as I do unfeignedly and from my heart acknowledge all this that I
have said of you, and therefore have reached unto you the right hand of love
and friendship to continue whilst we live; so I earnestly wish and desire,
that such as are not so minded toward you, may either very happily change
their minds, as becomes them: or else most vnhappelie fail of their seeking,
as they are worthy. What their malice has been able to atchieue against you
hethertoo, you have good experience; it is not to be hoped of them, that time
to come will bring more prosperous winds for their sailing, although they
threaten, fear them not: A wise man said, Those that proudly threaten others,
do either supp^se themselves to be Gods, or else think that those things
which they threaten others with, cannot fall upon themselves. They are but the
Scholars of Medius, one of Alexanders parasites, whose persuasion to his
familiars ever was, that they should never fear, nor make nice, what crime
they laid upon any man, having always for his wicked precept, this proper
reason: for howsoever (says he) the wound heals again, yet there always
remains some scarre: the Quail is said to be most delighted to feed on
venomous seeds: and so is the evil tonged man in casting forth venomous
speeches, thus envy always traceth virtue, and treads upon her heels.
Arrogancy also fears, lest every praise that another deserves, diminishes
somewhat of theirs, and obscureth their glory: those therefore, that are sick
of this disease, will detract from you what they can; but this arrogancy
commonly springs of ignorance, for as the wheat ear, while it is green and
unripe: is most full, swelling, and looks hie; but when it is replenished with
ripe grain, then it is more shrunk in, and hangs down the head; even so
shall you see him that is emptiest of good gifts, or rawest in knoweledg, ever
lift his crest higher, and bear the stouter show: but he contrariwise that is
best laden, holds his head lower; having indeed the substance of grain, when
he is tri^d. Pliny says, the Camelae^n has very great lunges, but nothing
else within her body, so (says he) there be some, that beside their bosting
and swelling ostentation, have nothing to be found in them: these are a kind of
men, that (I hope) you will not care for, if they will needs meddle with you,
allow them but time, and their own course will confound themselves; the Aspe
were an inevitable evil, if she were not by nature dim sighted: so I
grant, were your enemy, pestilentlie dangerous, if according to their wicked
desire, they had also other answerable parts, whereby they might approach you:
but like as the herb Maidenhaire, though it be sprinkled or dipped in water,
will nevertheless look still as though it were dry; no more shall reproach and
infamy (though it be notably attempted) cleave or stick unto a good man.
These things had I, (good Master Banester (at the publishing of your
Antidotarie, to write as an Antidote unto your self: desiring, that according
to the nature of such medicines, which both expel poisons already received,
and also keep and preserve the heart, against all new infections; so this may
both rid you of the present perplexities, and likewise defend you from
future, against all your enemies.

Your loving and assured for ever, W. Goodrus.

Salutem in Christo Gulielmus Clowes.
I Read that Seneca the wise Philosopher demands, What man is he that would
wish to live in this transitory world, so full of mischiefs, calamities and
miseries, without faithful familiarity and unfeigned friendship? It may be
answered in a word, None, but the proud person, and the malicious and envious
man, whose words and deeds discover the evil that is hatched in his heart. So
that no firm friendship nor steadfast amity can once so much as appear in his
life and conversation: but frames himself with every mocking Parasite to
throw out the venime and poison of his heart, to the discrediting of those that
any thing excel him, either in knowledge or practice. Such a vile person was
one Antiphilos said to be, who professed great friendship to Apelles, seeming
both to reverence him for his skill, and honor him for his Art: yet when he
did see that he grew in favor with all, so that his fame spread to the Court of
Alexander, (who hearing of his skill in Painting, gave forth a commandment,
that none should paint his Picture but only Apelles) this wicked Antiphilos
(the very shape of shame, and fellow to all dissemblers and flatterers) with
forged and false accusations practiced privily to bring Apelles into
displeasure and disgrace with King Ptolomeus, (who also dearly loved Apelles,
and had him in great estimation). Yet he could not bring to pass his purposed
practice: for the King through his deep wisdom examined the thing by the
rule of reason, and soon found out the secret purpose and dishonest attempt of
that perilous Pick-thanke, which sought by unjust means to have Apelles
banished, and so to live as a man defamed: therefore upon due consideration had
of the innocence of Apelles cause, the King neither satisfied the leaud
^xpectation of Antiphilos, nor winked at his injurious and wrongful
accusations, but perceiving the ^ilthie liqu^r that came forth of that stinking
vessel, presently he tamed his tongue with the bridle of bondage, and beat
down his malicious proud heart with the sharp scourge of continual slavery,
condemning him justly, and command^ng him straightly to serve as a bondslaue
to Apelles all the days of his life^ In like manner, Master Banester my dee^e
and loving friend^ it is not unknown unto many good men, how under the color
of faithful friendship^ you have been as it were compassed about, and deeply
bitten with such like Antipholoses, whom you have nouseled in your bosom:
whose ill behavior is such, that no good and wholesome laws can bridle or tame
their piercing tongues. And one chief cause of their great impatience is for
publishing of such like works as is this your Antidotarie, saying forsooth,
that only their mere practice is sufficient without so many books: as if
amongst blind-men he that has but one eye might be a King. But contrariwise,
to the good liking of the learned, and men of judgment, you have performed and
publ^shed this your Antidotarie to your great fame and commendation. It is most
certain that the thing of it self deserves praise: for they that read it
with consideration shall find in it varitie, brevity, sound judgment and
variety, being full fraught and s^uft with many singular, good and approved
practices, so that you justly merit praise of al true and faithful professors
of this noble Art of Chyrurgerie, yet you know full well, it will be hard for
you to cast off the burden and yoke of leawd reproaches. For no work can be so
eloquently handled, but some Aristrachus or other (whose filthy stomachs,
being inflamed with cholar) will improve the same: either for the slenderness
of the argument, impropernesse of the phrase, heavy and obscure reasons, false
ortographie, faults escaped, incke-horne terms, or some imperfection for
want of knowledge in tongues: yet you for your part have prevented such vain
pratlings, and I have good hope that this your Antidotarie will yield a
sufficient medicine to cure that old vlcered malady, which has so far
infected their mouths, and tainted their tongues: insomuch, that if now they
find faults, you and all may think, that either it is the vain humors of
certain scoffing spirits, or else too much frequenting the hot-house, has
sweat out all their wits. Themistocles a renowned Captain of the Greeks,
being upon a time very pensive and heavy, there came unto him a very
familiar friend of his, and in secret manner demanded of him, what might be
the cause that he was at that time so sorrowful and sad? If you will needs
know (said he) the cause of this my present sadness, it is, for that many
years being past since I was borne, I perceive not that I have as yet done
any good thing worthy of memory for the benefit of my Country and Common
weal, being (by this reason) heereunto persuaded, that I know no man in all
Athens that hates or bears me envy. Now since such a famous and most valiant
Captain supposed it better to be envied and hated of the malicious, than to
live in idleness of life, and baseness of mind, without doing of some good
thing, (worthy of memory) for the profit and benefit of his Country and
Common wealth wherein he lived: then let none of our proclaimers of infamy,
(which are destitute of truth and godli^esse) once dismaie you with their
injurious vexations, which are neither pleasant in the hearing, nor yet
profitable in the answering: for it is not the^r boorish or caluish bleatings,
neither yet their impudent facings upon their rotten and confused Pamphlets,
that so pleasantly they sport themselves withal, and which now shortly
shall come forth like monsters without perfect shape, (at least if they
proceed according to their boasting) can hurt any: for they are lanternes void
of light, moved with malice and defame: and do but deck their crow with
other birds feathers. Although they counterfeit what they can, their long
ears will discover them to come of Midas progeny. And when their time serves
they will try the dignity of their wits therein: for they pretend we shall be
shortl^e utterly drowned in an unknown whirlepoole. But let such idiots
resemble themselves: it skilleth not, since many of our ancients have tasted of
such slanderers furious rages. And therefore they shall walk with Antiphilos,
as bondslaues all the days of their life. And here I protest my self an open
enemy to all such your wicked adversaries whatsoever: and I must confess that
I am bound many ways so to do, not only in respect of our old
acquaintance, or for that it has pleas^d God to prosper and bless our labor,
(being oftent^mes called to diverse great and dangerous cures: but chi^felie,
for that we both do serve under the right Honorable Earl of Warwick our very
good Lord and Master, whom God long preserve in health to his good will and
pleasure. These causes aforesaid do bind me in faithful and unfeigned
friendship unto the uttermost of my power: the which I will perform, if it so
please the Lord: who prosper al your lawful proceedings in this our Art of
Chyrurgerie. Amen.

Yours: WILLIAM CLOVVES.

An Antidotarie of all sorts of Medicines, serving to the Chirurgions use,
gathered out of the best practices and Authors, who^e names are set to every
Receipt.
Balmes.
A Balm for all tumors coming of cold and windy matter.
REc. Olei aneti.viij. olei laurini, rutacei, spicae, and masticis, ana.iij.
olei communis,.vj. absynthij, origani, calamenti, centaurij, agrimoniae,
ana.m.ss. seminis anisi, faeniculi, carui-, cumini, ameos, gariophylorum,
baccarum lauri, radicum gentianae, rubiae tinctorum, ana..j.ss. aquae
vitae.iiij. croci.iij. seminis dauci.j. seminis petroselini,.ij. Bruise the
herbs and seed together, and mix them all with the rest, and let them boil
as if it were in Balneo, and when it is cold, strain it strongly, and
distill it in a glass body.

A Balm for green wounds.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. gummi elemi, galbani ana..ij. gummi hederae, thuris,
masticis, myrrhae, ana..ij. aloes, xyloaloes, gariophylorum, galangae,
cinamomi, nucis moscatae, cubebarum, ana..j. aquae vitae..iij. Powder those
which are to be powdered, and let them infuse together one day and a night.
Afterward distill them twice, and keep the Oil distilled as a precious Balm.

A Balm that in eight days heals any indifferent wound.
Andernacus.
Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae lib. ij. olei de semine lini, lib.j. resinae
pini.vj. thuris, myrrhae, aloes, masticis, sarcocollae, ana..ij macis, croci,
ligni aloes, ana..j.ss. Mix them together, and put them into a narrow mouthed
vessel, and distill them with an easy fire, till the water be extracted:
then make a stronger fire, till the oil be also sublimated, and reserve it to
your use.

A Balm for wounds.
Rec. Resinae lariceae,.ij. Dissolve it in white wine, Andernacus.
and strain it through a cloth: after melte them on the fire together with
olei oliuarum lib.j. Then add to them amoniaci, galbani, oppoponacis, ana..j.
gu^mi AEthiopici,.ij. Distill them with an easy fire till the Balm be
extracted.

A Balm that heals wounds speedily.
Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae, lib.j. resinae purae, lib.ss. thuris
masculi.iiij. masticis, myrrhae, ana..j. olibani.j.ss. sarcocol..j. gu^mi
elemi.ss. aloes epaticae.j. euphorbij..ij. ammoniaci.iij. galbani.ss.
aloes.iiij. nucis moscatae.j. galangae.j. macis..ij. cinamomi.j.ss. laudani.j.
croci.ij.ss. gariophylorum.ss. spicaenardi.j. cubebarum.ij. Iridis.j^ saluiae
virescentis contusae, m.j. olei magistralis.v. olei liliacei, lib. ss. olei
communis.xii. olei laurini,.iiij.ss. olei lumbricorum.ij. mellis.iiij.ss. aquae
co^positae.iij. Powder those which are to be powdered, and infuse them
altogether four and twenty hours, separating the water from the oil,
distill them according to art.

A Balm to conglutinate wounds with speed.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. masticis.j. olibani.iiij. gummi hederae.ij.
sarcocollae.iij. aloes epaticae.ss. myrrhae.ij. aloes cicatrinae,.ss.
galbani.j.ss. gummi elemi,.iiij. ammoniaci.ss. nucis moscatae, galangae, radic.
gentianae, tormentillae and symphiti maio. cubebarum, mummiae, ana..ij. olei
communis lib.ij. Powder what are to be powdered, and dissolve the gummes in
white wine: after mix them together and let them boil in balneo mariae four
and twenty hours, then distill them in a Copper Still, seperating the Water
from the Oil.

A Balm to heal green wounds very speedily.
Rec. Aquae vitae lib j. vini cretici lib.ss. terebinthinae venetiae lib.
ij.ss. ammoniaci.iij. sarcocollae.iiij. masticis.ij. olibani.j. myrrhae.ij.ss.
laudani.j. belzoini, styracis calamitae, aloes epat. ana..iij. gummi elemi.j.
gummi hederae.ss. resinae pini.iij gummi arabic. dragaganti ana..ij.ss.
oppoponacis.j. nucis moscatae, gariophylorum, macis, galangae, cinamomi,
zedoariae, ana..j.ss. mummiae.iij. cubebarum.j. mellis puri lib. ss. croci.ij.
symphiti ma. mi. and med. ana..iij.ss. Bruise the herbs, powder that which is
to be powdered, dissolve the gummes in aqua vitae, and infuse them altogether
four and twenty hours, then put them into a copper Still well luted, and let
the Balm be extracted: augmenting and diminishing the fire according to art,
till the Balm and Oil be severally sublimated.

A yellowe Balm that heals wounds with speed.
Rec. Gummi elemi,.iij. myrrhae.ij. olibani, sarcocollae, ana..j. Powder the
myrrha and olibanum, and put them into a double glass vessel, with twelve
ounces of aqua vitae made with Malmesie, and let them stand in balneo mariae
four days. After add thereto oil of Terebinthinae.viij. olei balsami
very,.v. croci,.ss. So let them boil again in balneo mariae, until the aqua
vitae be wasted: and in the end strain it and reserve it to your use.

A black Balm confectionated of singular operation to agglutinate wounds.
Rec. Mummiae, Banester.
.iij. aloes epaticae.ij. picis naualis.ss. sarcocollae, gummi hederae,
masticis, myrrhae, ana..j. Powder those which are to be powdered subtillie, and
mix them with twelve ounces of aqua vitae prepared for wounds. Let them boil
in a double glass vessel in balneo mariae three days: which done, add
thereto olei terebinthinae.ix. balsami Banest. distillati,.iiij. then boil
them again till the aqua vitae be wasted, and reserve it to your use.

Balsamum Banesteri.
Rec. Terebinthinae clarissimae lib. viij. vini nigri lib. ij. succi consolidae
ma. lib.ss. cydoneorum minutissime incisorum numero x. prunellorum siluestrium
lib.ss. rad. consolidae maioris.iiij. gummi amoniaci,.ij. olibani..j. gummi
elemi.j.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, ana..ij. aloes epaticae, myrrhae, mummiae,
ana..ij.ss. cinamomi.j.ss. cassiae ligneae.vj. sanguinis draconis.j.ss. boli
armeni.j..vj. malecorij.vj. balaustiorum.ij. hippocistidis, santalorum
rubrorum, ana..j.ss. nucis moscatae, cypressi, ana..iij. myrtillorum.ss.
puluerizentur puluerizenda and in balneo mariae per biduum macerata
distillentur.

Glanfields Balm.
Glanfield.
Rec. Terebinthinae venetae, gummi elemij ana..iiij. olei lumbricorum lib. ss.
aquae vitae.j. Boil them to the consumption of the aqua vitae, then strain
them and add aloes epaticae, and cynnabrij opt. pulu. ana.j. Fiat Balsamum.

Fowlers Balm, by him greatly used both in wounds and ulcers, to make
iniections of, namely for the mouth and yard or otherwise.
Rec. Mellis lib.ij. succi saniculae,.viij. viridis aeris.iiij. Boil the^
according to art.

An excellent Balm for wounds and cancerous ulcers.
Rec. Terebint. clarae, Barnardus a Portu.
olei lini opt. ana. lib.j. Boil them at a gentle fire, and skumme it, then
remove it from the fire, and add thereto viridis aeris puri and purgati.j.
Afterward let it s^ande again upon a gentle fire for a little space. Last of
all strain it. The Plaster belonging to this Balm, is to be sought in his
proper place.

Balm of Hipericon.
Rec. Ol. terebint. lib.iiij. aqu. vitae. lib.j. florum hyperici. lib. iij.ss.
gummi elemi, Banester.
rubiae tinctorum, ana.iiij. croci.j. myrrhae, gum. hederae, masticis,
sarcocollae, ana.iij. vitellorum ouorum numero xxiiij. Incisis and contusis,
fiat secundum artem Balsamum.

A Balm that was given me for a great Jewel.
Rec. Ol. com. lib.iij. terebint. lib.j. gum. karabae,.vj. masticis, mirrhae,
olibani, sarcocollae, ana.ij. salis nitrae,.ij.ss. aquae vitae, lib.j. Powder
those things that are to be powdered, distill them at a gentle fire, and
receive the Water with a thin Oil swimming aloft: which separate apart by it
self. But the thickest Oil in the bottom separate by straining: which is that
excellent Balm here mentioned. The Water quickens the eyesight, and the
Oil is good against contraction and stiffnesse of members.

Another.
Rec. Gum. karabae, lib.j. masticis, olibam, ana.iiij. terebinthinae.vj. olei
com. lib.j.ss. aqua vitae, lib.j.ss. Powther those that are to be powdered,
sees them together to the consumption of the aqua vitae, after strain them.

The golden Balm.
Banester.
Rec. Olei terebint. lib.iiij. myrrhae,.ij.ss. masticis,.j. sarcocollae,.iiij.
gummi elemi,.vj. gum. vel pinguedinis palmae,.vij. Mix them together in a
strong glass, and infuse them in balneo mariae x. days. Afterward put too
olei communis lib.j. terebin. puriss..iiij. This will be of a fine golden
color, but if you put some of it into a silver bottle it will become as pure a
green.

A singular Balm for wounds made with Gunshot.
Rec. Visci herbae paeti and consolidae, Quercetanus.
ana lib.ss. and terebinthinae lib.ij. florum hyperici and verbasci, ana
m.iiij. pomorum vlmi,.vj. acinorum populi arboris, lib.ss. spiritus vini,
lib.iij. Let them digest in horse-dung, or let them stand in a stooue close
stopped in a glass vessel for a month, the^ strain them: after add to it,
thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana iiij. sanguinis draconis..j. mummiae,.xij.
terebinthinae, lib.i. benioni,.ij. Let them circulate in a pelican eight
days: then at a moderate fire draw forth the sprites of wine, and there will
remain in the bottom a precious Balm.

A Balm of Nicotian most fragrant and effectual.
Rec. Folia nicotianae q. voles. AEgidius Euerartus.
Stamp them and strain forth their juice, mix it cum olei oliuarum aequa
portione: stop it and cere it up in a glass vessel very close, and set it
to the Sun, or in balneo mariae, or in fimo equino, for xl. days: (but renew
your fimus as need is). At the xl. days end, you shall find a Balm (says
the Author) of no less force for all purposes, than the Quintessence of
Nicotian.

Another also of excellent note for wounds with gunshot, ceasing pain, and
concocting speedily.
Goodrus.
Rec. Olei communis, lib.iiij. vermium terrestrium praeparatorum, lib.j.
foliorum Nicotianae contusorum, lib.ij. Boil them in a double vessel according
to Art; after set them in the Sun xv. days, then strain it through a thin
strainer, and keep it.

Balsameleum Clousium most excellent and approved in all wounds.
Clowes.
Rec. Agrimoniae, alchimillae, androsaemi, aschyri, betonicae, bifolij,
prunellae, calendulae, capri folij, consolidae maioris, cruciatae, hypericonis,
^aceae herbae, lauendulae, meliloti, millefolij, nummulariae, origani,
perfoliatae, pilosellae, plantaginis, quinque neruiae, quinque folij,
rosmarini, veronicae, violae nigrae, violae luteae, violae matronalis, ana m.j.
Let these be gathered each one in his time and kind, and let them be stamped
with sweet oil Olive, and so kept ever as you get your herbs, from time to
time, till at length all be gotten, and the whole quantity of oil be come to
a gallon. So let it stand the space of a month in a pot well nealed, close
covered and set in horse dung, mean time prepare these following. viz. Gummi
ammoniaci, galbani, bdellij, masticis, myrrhae, olibani, oppoponacis, resinae
pini, sarcocollae, sag apeni, styracis calamitae, thuris, ana.j. gariophylorum,
maceris, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, ana^.j.ss. Powder those that are to be
powdered, dissolve the gummes in good white wine, then set your infusion upon
the fire in a fair brazen vessel to boil, putting to it, vini maluat.
lib.iiij. vermium terrestrium vino albo lotorum and depuratorum, lib.iij. Let
it thus boil at a soft fire diligently stirring it till the wine and juice be
wasted, and that the oil have a fair green color of the herbs: after
strain it out strongly: last of al put in your gummes and spices, and three
pints more of your muscadel or malmesey with terebinth. clariss.lib.j. Boil
them till the wine be consumed. This cures wounds very speedily and
effectually, it heals scabbes and wheales in the face and hands, and makes
those parts fair. It is very excellent in wounds of the sinews and joints,
and staieth the muscilage and gleeting water. If you will distill this in a
Stillatorie according to Art, you shall first have a fine water, secondly a
most pure oil, thirdly the balm, which is most excellent in all wounds, as
also in ulcers of the fundament, etc. The oil precious against all aches and
goutes, the water preserves from venom and pestilence.

Another.
Rec. Terebinth. lib.j. gum. elemij,.vj. olei laurini,.iiij. myrrhae, aloes,
olibani, masticis, ana.j.ss. olei hyperici cum gum..iij. vitellorum ouorum
coctorum..viij. croci,.ij. aqu. vitae,.vj. Infuse these xxiiii. hours, and
after boil them in balneo mariae till the aqua vitae be consumed. Then take
it of, and let it be strongly strained, and reserve it to your use. But if you
will distill it according to Art, then must it be done with an easy fire,
separating the Water from the Balm, till the Balm be wholly extracted.

A Balm decocted.
Rec. Terebint. puriss. lib.ij. gumm. elemi,.iiij. boli Armeni, sang. draconis,
ana.j. olei hyperici descriptionis Iohannis de Vigo,.iij. aqu. vitae,.ij.
ireos, aloes, masticis, myrrhae, ana.j. Mix them according to Art.

A Balm for the palsy in wounded persons.
Rec. Rad. iridis and aristolochiae, Calmeteus^
ana.ij. symphiti maioris, iuae ar^eticae, herbae paralisis, pimpinellae,
rutae, saluiae, ana m.j. baccarum lauri, and Iuniperi, ana.vj. florum staecados
and anthos, ana p.j.ss. galangae, zedoariae, zinzibris, gariophiloru^, nucis
moscatae, cinamomi, ana.iij. ligni aloes,.j. thuris, masticis, ana.x. myrrhae,
aloes, bdelij, sarcocollae, galbani, ammoniaci, ana.j.ss. castorei,.ss. gummi
elemi,.ij. Diachylonis iriati,.iij. aquae vitae,.iiij. Broose what are to be
bruised, and powder what are to be powdered, and cast them into a Limbecke to
distill at an easy fire, till a certain licour flow forth like unto a Balm.

A Balm for the palsy in wounds.
Rec. Myrrhae, aloes epaticae, Liquor balsamites, Ihoannis Mesuae.
spicae nardi, sanguinis draconis, thuris, mummiae, opobalsami, bdellij,
carpobalsami, ammoniaci, sarcocollae, croci, masticis, gumm. arab. styracis,
calamitae, ana.ij. laudani electi, succi castorei, ana.ij.ss. mosci,.ss.
terebinthinae optimae ad pondus omnium. Powder what are to be powdered, and
mix them altogether with Terpentine, then put them into a Limbecke, and
distill them at an easy fire, and when the liquor is sublimated by
distillation, reserve it in a strong vessel.

A Balm artificial for wounds and ulcers.
Andernacus.
Rec. myrrhae, aloes, spicae, sanguinis draconis, thuris, mummiae, oppoponacis,
ammoniaci, carpobalsami, sarcocollae, croci orientalis, masticis, gum. arabic.
styracis calamitae ana..ij. laudani.j.ss. resinae abiectinae, lib.j.
terebinthinae lib.viij. vini generosi lib.ss. Put al these in a narrow mouthed
vessel and distill them: and after it is distilled put into the liquor xv.
grains of pure Musk.

A Balm which will cicatrize and consolidate wounds and ulcers marvelously.
Rec. Terebinthinae purg..iij. myrrhae.iiij. styracis, mummiae, sarcocollae
ana..j. masticis, thuris, ana..iij. gummi hederae.iij.ss. aloes lotae.
aristolog. vtriusque, aluminis vsti, ana..ij.ss. malicorij.ss. hypocist.
balaustiorum, sanguinis draconis, nucum cupressi ana..ij. boracis,.iij.
camphorae.ss. Powder that is to be powdered, and let them all infuse together
one night, and distill them through a glass Still.

A Balm for wounds given by sharp poynted weapons.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib.ss. aquae vitae lib.j. thuris.j. sarcocollae,.j.ss.
myrrhae.ij. masticis.vj. gummi hederae.ss. euphorbij.ji. oppoponacis.iij. gummi
elemi,.j.ss. resinae pini,.iij. succi symphiti vtriusque, ana..ss. nucis
moscatae, cinamomi ana.ij. croci.ij. aloes epaticae, mummiae, ana..j.ss Powder
what are to be powdered, and let them stand a while, then distill them in a
copper still, until by sublimation the Water be separated from the Oil.

A Balm for the pricking of any sharp poynted weapon.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib. iij.ss. myrrhae.iij. sarcocollae.iiij. thuris.ij.
gummi elemi.ij.ss. masticis, olibani, ana..iij. gummi arab. and dragagant.
ana..j. gummi hederae, euphorbij ana..ss. aloes epat..ss. croci.v. malecorij,
galangae, gariophylorum xyloaloes, cubebarum, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, ana..j.
Powder what are to be powdered very finely, and infuse them xii. hours, then
distill them through a glass Still, and receive the liquor.

Another.
Rec. Terebinth. larignae lib.ij. masticis,.viij. aquae vitae.vj. Powder that
is to be powdered, and draw them through a copper Still, augmenting and
diminishing your fire, according to Art, till the Water be separated from the
Balm.

A Balm to heal wounds of the biting of venomous beasts.
Rec. succi cardui benedicti, valerianae, saluiae, hyperici, ana..iiij. olei
com. lib.ij. terebinth. lib. j. myrrhae.iiij. sarcocollae.vj. euphorbij.ss.
olibani, masticis, ana..j.ss. gummi elemi.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. Powder that
is to be powdered, and let them boil in a vessel till the iuyces be
consumed: then put them all into a Copper Still, and distill them first with an
easy fire, after with a stronger, till the Water and the Oil be separated.

A Balm for the biting of venomous beasts: or otherwise it is necessary for
the Palsy, Crampe, Rumes, weakness of the memory, collicke, toothache and
worms, and may be taken inwardly.
Rec. Terebinthinae, lib. v. aquae vitae lib.ij. succi saluiae, draconcellae,
scabiosae, cardui benedicti, hyperici, melissophili, ana..ij. galbani,
oppoponacis, ammoniaci, serapini, euphorbij, ana.iij. masticis, sarcocollae,
myrrhae, aloes epaticae, laudani, belzoini, gummi hederae, ana.ij. rad.
zedoariae, helenij, gentianae, iunci odorati, dictami, rubae tinctoru^,
angellicae, ana..j. vermium terrestrium.ij. baccarum lauri, iuniperi, and
hederae, ana..ij. cinamomi, casiae ligneae, zinzibris, cardamomi, nucis
moscatae, ana..j. piperis, cubebarum, carpobalsami, xylobalsami, cort. citri,
santali citrini, rhabarb. ana..j. gra. vj. malecorij ij. seminis anisi,
feniculi, dauci, carui, cumini, petroselini, saxifragiae, ana..ij.
balaustiorum.j.ss. Powder what is to be powdered, and dissolve the gummes in
aqua vitae prepared for wounds, and in Malmsey: so let them infuse six days,
and after at an easy fire, seperating the Water from the Oil, distill them
through a Limbecke. When you will use it for any inward affect, take three
drops of the Oil with sweet wine: when you use the Water, take half a
spoonefull with four spoonefulles of some pleasant wine. And for the Palsy
take.ss. of the oil with six drammes of oleum euphorbij; For debilitie of
memory, take three drammes of the Balm, with olei castorei,.ss. therewith
annoint the nape of the neck and hinder part of the head. Finally, for
wounds, take of the Balm.j. olei lumbricorum.j. olei rosarum.ij. In other like
affects use it with discretion, but it is not to be used simply, by reason of
his heat.

A Balm to agglutinate wounds, and defend from pain and inflammation.
Balthrop.
Rec. Boli armeniae, ij. farinae volatilis.j. sang. draconis, terrae
sigillatae, ana..j. terebinthinae.iij. Put all these in fine powder into olei
rosarum lib.iij. mingle them and warm them together over the fire a little.
Put it up in a pewter bottle: and when you use it shake first the bottle, then
put out your quantity, warm it; and therein dippe both tents, pledgets, and
linen beds to lay upon all, as also above the wound in stead of a defensive:
so roll it up. Use this Balm but for the first dressing only.

A green decocted Balm.
Rec. Olei rosac. lib.j. aquae vitae lib. ss. Balthrop.
lumbricorum purgatorum.iiij. Boil these together until the aquae vitae be
in a manner consumed: strain it, and in the cooling put to olei petrolei.j.
terebinthinae venetae.vj. floris aeris.ss. Fiat.

An excellent Balm of Earthwormes for the speedy curing of al manner of
wounds, especially those of the joints, sinews, tendons, and about the head.
It cures pricks according to the first intention, and is profitable also
against Palsies, Crampes, numnesse, and such like.
Rec. Olei Terebinthinae lib. v. vermium Banester.
terrestriu^ praeparat. lib.ij.ss. myrrhae.ij.ss. masticis, sarcocollae,
olibani.iij. galbani, gummi ammoniaci, ana..j. bdellij,.ij. gum. elemij,.iij.
gariophylor..iij. olei co^munis, lib.ij. olei lumbricor. nostrae inuentionis
lib.j. terebinthinae puriss. lib.j. Put altogether, except the Oil of worms
and common oil, into the oil of Terpentine, (but the gummes being first
finely minced, and the rest powdered, and so let them stand thirty days: then
power out by it self the clearer part; but the thicker part with all the
grounds, put into your boiling vessel together with a pint of Malmsey or Sack,
and the other two Oils that before were excepted. Let these thus boil
together the space of three hours, always stirring it least it burn to the
bottom. At length when the thick parts begin to swim aloft, take it from
the fire, and put into it the oil of Terpentine that before was cleared from
it. Last of all strain it purely, and keep it to your use.

A Balm for wounds in the joints.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.j. vini nigerrimi pontici, lib.iij. Distill them and
add to them olei hypericonis.vj. liquoris de nummia.iiij. Distill them again
according to Art, and reserve it to your use.

A Balm of wounds in the joints, it is also good for the Crampe, Palsy, and
pain in the joints.
Rondeletius.
Rec. Olei vermium terrestrium lib.j. olei hypericonis lib.ss. terebinthinae
lib.j.ss. aquae vitae lib.ss. colophoniae lib.ss. euphorbij.iij gummi
hederae.ij. gariophylorum, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, cubebarum, galangae,
xyloaloes, ana,.j. masticis.iiij. myrrhae,.iij.ss. gummi elemi.iij. galbani,
olibani, ana..ij. croci.ij. sanguinis draconis.iij. Powder what is to be
powdered, and dissolve what is to be dissolved in the aqua vitae, and put them
all mixed into a copper Still, and draw out the Balm first with a gentle
fire, and after with a stronger.

A Balm artificial for to cure wounds in the sinews.
Rec. terebinthinae opt. lib.j. olei laurini, Vesalius.
.iiij. galbani.iij. gummi elemi.iij.ss. thuris, myrrhae, gummi hederae,
gariophylorum, symphiti minoris, cinamomi, nucis moscatae, zedoariae,
zinziberis, dictami albi, ana..j. olei vermium terrestrium,.ij. aquae vitae
lib.vj. Powder what are to be powdered, and infuse them altogether in aquae
vitae six days. Afterward with a slack fire draw them by a retort well
luted, from whence you must receive three liquors: whereof the first is very
subtle, watrie and passing clear: the second of a yellowe color and very
subtle: the third is the artificial Balm, which bears a red and purple
color.

A Balm to heal and conglutinate wounds chiefly of the head, without pain.
Fallopius.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. thuris, masticis, myrrhae, sarcocollae ana..j. aquae
vitae.viij. Put them all into a Retort well luted: distill them with hot ashes,
seperating the Water from the Oil.

A Balm for wounds and ulcers, very comfortable.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib. j.ss. aquae vitae, lib.ss. galbani, oppoponacis,
ammoniaci, ana..ss. gummi elemi.j. cinamomi.iiij. laudani.iij. olibani.j.
thuris.j.ss. macis,.ij. resinae pini,.ij. masticis,.ss. myrrhae,.vj.
mummiae,.ij. aloes.iij.ss. nucis moscatae,.ss. gummi hederae,.v. galangae.iiij.
boracis.iij. gariophylorum.iij.ss. sarcocollae,.ss. Infuse them together twelve
hours, being grosely powdered, and distill them according to Art, seperating
the Water from the Balm.

A green Balm available also for hollow ulcers.
Rec. Galbani.iij.ss. oppoponacis, sagapeni, ana..j. masticis, thuris,
ana..j.ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana..ss. Powder what is to be powdered, and
put altogether into a double glass vessel with twelve ounces of aqua vitae
for wounds, and let it stand three days in balneo mariae: After add thereto
olei terebinthinae lib.ss. olei balsami very.iiij. Boil them to the
consumption of the aqua vitae, then strain it, and add thereto viridis
aeris.ss. in powder, and reserve it to your use.

A Balm very convenient against the Gowt.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib. iiij. masticis, myrrhae, thuris, oppoponacis, laudani,
ana..x. malecorij.ss. cerae flauae.ij. sagapeni, ammoniaci, ana..ij.ss. mellis
crudi.i.ss gariophylorum.ij.ss. croci..ij. aquae vitae,.ij. cerusae.j.ss. olei
laurini.ij.ss. olei lumbricorum, rosacei, ana..ij.ss. vrinae pueri,.ij. Mix
and distill them according to Art.

A Balm for the gowt in any part.
Rec. Saluiae, rutae, hyssopi, cinamomi, florum genistae, absynthij, ana.m.ss.
Ireos,.ij. olei rosarum lib.ss. olei cymini, olei laurini, ana..ij. butyri
recent..iiij. medullae crurum bouis lib.ss. auxungiae porcinae,.vj. rad.
altheae.iiij. foenugraeci.iij. t^rebinthinae lib.j.ss. ammoniaci.ij.
galbani.iiij. oppoponacis, bdellij, ana..j. vini sanguinei, lib.j. Bruise the
herbs and mix them all together, then boil them in a close vessel twenty
hours, foreseeing that in the cooling, the mouth of the pot be not opened.
Afterward in the strayning add to it croci subtilliter triti.iij. sulphuris
viui.iiij. salis puri.ij.opij.iiij. Thus being mixed together put them into a
glass body well luted, and draw the Oil from the Water, and annoint
therewith the place affected (the body being duly purged before) three or
four times in a day, a little quantity at once. Note that the gummes which
are to be dissolved must dissolve in aquae vitae.

A Balm for the Palsy in wounded persons.
Rec. Ligni aloes, oppoponacis, resinae pini, bdellij, galbani, myrrhae,
masticis, sarcocollae, ana..ss. olei benedicti.j.ss. laudani.j. carpobalsami,
xylobalsami, opobalsami, ana..ss. olibani, sanguinis draconis, castorei, spicae
nardi, galangae, cubebarum, maceris, cinamomi, cardamomi, cort. citri. ana..ss.
olei terebinthinae ad pondus omni. olei veteris lib.j.ss. Powder the gummes
very subtillie, and put so much spirits of wine upon them as will cover them.
Then put them in balneo mariae, and suffer them three days there to dissolve.
Afterward add to your other things which are to be powdered in fine powder,
and put to your Oils. Let them dissolve in balneo mariae, or in horse dung
again xiiii. days, in the end distill them in hot embers with a slack fire
till the Balm be sublimated.

A Balm to resolve hardness of sinews.
Rec. Galbani lib.ss. gummi hederae.iij. Andernacus.
Bruise, mix and distill them, then take the liquor that is distilled, and put
thereto terebinthinae lib.j. olei laurini, despica, ana..j. Put them in a
narrow mouthed vessel, and distill them till the Water and Oil be all
distilled.

Bathes.
A Bath for inflammation.
Andernacus.
REc. Plantaginis, polygoni. foliorum rubi, ana.m.iij. malecorij.ij. Boil them
in sufficient water.

A Bath for members inflamed.
Andernacus.
Rec. Maluae domesticae, maluae siluaticae, meliloti, ana. m.ij. sem. lini.iij.
faenugraeci.ij. With sufficient water make a Bath.

A Bath for the Hemrhoydes.
Vigo.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, parietariae, altheae, tapsibarbati cum radicis
ana. m.ij. seminis cidoniorum.vj. hordei mundi m.j.ss. furfuris m.iij. seminis
lini, foenugraeci, ana..iiij. pomoru^ dulcium aliquantulum confractorum nu.xij.
linguae passerinae, bursae pastoris, ana.m.j. Boil them in sufficient
quantity of water, adding to them Chamomell, Melilote, and Dill, of each one a
handful and a half, and so boil them to the consumption of the third part.

A Bath for a Rupture.
Rec. Cort. granatorum, balaustiorum, Calme^cus^
cupulorum glandium, sumac, ana,.j. herbae herniosae, calcatrapae, and
symphiti, ana. m.j. hypocistidos, gallarum, aluminis, ana..ij. rosarum,
chamaemeli, aneti, ana. p.ij. Boil them in equal portions of red wine and
Smithes water. With the decoction bathe the place affected.

A Bath for the Itch and Scabbes.
Rec. Fol. maluae, violarum, betae, elebori Vesalius.
nigr. fumariae, ana. m.iij. hordei, m.vj. Mix them and boil them in
sufficient water for a Bath.

A Bath for Scabbes and Itch.
Rec. Rad. and fol. lapathi acuti m.iij. rad. Calmeteus.
helenij, lib.ss. rad. acori and brioniae, ana. lib.j. maluarum, violarum,
fumariae, scabiosae, saponariae, calaminthae, hederae, ana. m.ij. hordei
integri, lupinorum, fabarum, lentium, ana. lib.j.ss. furfuris lib.j. elebori,
m.ij. Boil them in sufficient water for a Bath.

A Bath for Scabbes.
Vigo.
Rec. Maluarum, violarum, hordei, furfuris, capill. veneris, gallitrici,
polytrici, fumariae ana. m.j. pomorum acetosorum nu. x. fol. senniae, epithimi,
ana..ss. Boil all ( beside the epithimum and senna) in sufficient water till
the third part be wasted, then put in the rest, and let them boil a little
more, and use it.

A Bath for Scabbes.
Victor. Fauentinus.
Rec. Fol. lapathi aculi, fumariae, maluae, cum radicibus, boraginis ana.m.iij.
Boil them in sufficient quantity of water, and after euacuation command the
use thereof.

A Bath for Itch, Scabbes, and such like affects.
Andernacus.
Rec. Rad. brioniae, oxylapathi, ari, serpentariae, ana lib.j. rad. asphodeli,
gentian. ana..j. saponariae, parietariae, absynthij, scabiosae, boraginis,
ana.m.j. florum centaurij.iij. rosarum, p.ij. lupinorum, fabarum integrarum,
ana. lib.ss. Boil them all in sufficient water for a Bath.

A Bath for Itch and Scabbes.
Rec. Aquae fontaneae lib.xl. aceti lib.iiij. aluminis lib.ss. sulphuris viui
pulu..vj. fol. saluiae, rosmarini, scabiosae, hyssopi, hyoscyami, plantaginis,
tanaceti siluatici, foeniculi, helenij, melissophili, ebuli, ana.m.iiij.
tartari albi lib.j. Let them boil all to ten pound.

A Bath for brannie scales in the head.
Rec. Rad. lapathi acuti, Weckerus.
enulae, ana..iij. maluae, bismaluae, ciclae, parietariae, saponariae,
ana.m.iiij. lupinorum, fabarum integr. ana. lib.j. centaurij mino.p.iij.
furfuris vel hordei integri p.iij. Mixxe them in water sufficient for a Bath.

A Bath for brannie scales in the head.
Rec. Rad. lapathi acuti, helenij, Rondeletius.
.iiij. maluae, cyclaminis, bismaluae, parietariae, saponariae, ana.m.iiij.
lupinorum and fabarum integrarum, ana. lib.j. florum centaurij minoris p.iij.
hordei integri p.iiij. Boil them in sufficient quantity of water, and use it
for a Bath.

A Bath for the falling of the hair.
Rec. Rad. brioniae, cucumeris agrestis, Rondeletius.
ana. lib.ij. marrubij, abrotani, verbenacae, ana. m.iij. herbarum capillarium,
ana. m.j. lupinoru^ and fabarum integrarum, ana. lib.j. Boil them according to
art, and in the end add thereto florum anthos.

A Bath to be used in the cure of Alopecia Gallica.
Vigo.
Rec. Fumariae, rad. lapathi acuti, and foliorum eius, ana.m.j. hordei, lentium,
lupinorum, ana.m.ij. rad. helenij and ebuli, ana. lib. ss. elebori nigri
triturati,.ij. mellis. lib.j. sulphuris.iij. Boil them all in sufficient
quantity of water, till the third part be wasted. Let the patient therein
sweat, and be washed in a stewe or hote-house.

A Bath for Alopecia Gallica.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Rad. and foliorum helenij, lapathi acuti, altheae, maluae, scabiosae,
fumariae, lupuli, rostri porcini, agrimoniae, buglossae, violarum ana.m.j.
lentium, lupinorum, hordei, ana.p.ij. all bruised, elebori nigri triti,.ij.
sulphuris viui,.j. Boil them in sufficient quantity of water, wherein let the
patient bathe himself long before supper, and sweat after it when he is in
bed.

A Bath for the falling of hair.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Rad. and fol. helenij, oxylapathi, altheae, maluae, ana.m.ij. rad.
lilio^um, lib.ss. rad. ebuli, pedis columbini, ana,.iij. violarum, brancae
vrsinae, fumariae, scabiosae, ana. m.ij. seminis melonum, and raphani,
ana..j.ss. seminis li^i, and foenugraeci, ana..ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti,
violarum, rosarum, nimphaeae, ana.p.j. Make a Bath with sufficient water.

A Bath to be used in the lousy disease.
Rec. Ciclae, absynthij, marrubij, Weckerus^
betonicae, ana.m.j. centaurij minoris, florum stoechados, ana.p.ij. lupinorum
p.iij. staphidis agriae, lib.j. aristolog. lib.ss. Mix them and boil them in
Lee, and add thereto salis lib.iiij.

A Bath in the Leprosy.
Rec. Fumariae, lapathi acuti, scabiosae, Guydo.
chamaemeli, meliloti, staphidis agriae, sinapis, piperis longi, nucis
moscatae, sulphuris nitri, aloes, auripigmenti, ana. q.s. Boil them in water
and viniger sufficient.

A Bath for diseases in the legs called malum mortuum.
Rec. Lapathi acuti, fumariae, Vigo.
ana. m.ij. nepitae, m.j. furfuris hordei, lupinorum ana. m.j.ss. violaru^,
maluarum, ana.m.ss. elebori albi and nigri, ana..j.ss. mellis.ij. Let them
boil in sufficient quantity of water till the third part be wasted, and use
it.

A Bath for ulcers in the legs.
Rec. Vrinae pueri lib.iiij. seri lactis lib. viij. aquae pluuialis lib.vij.
rad. lapathi acuti lib.j. fol. maluarum, quinque folij, plantag. chamameli
absynthij, brioniae, helenij, ana. m.iij. mellis crudi lib.j. aluminis.ij.
furfuris triticei m.ij. Boil them to the consumption of four pound: then
bathe the place affected therewith, before you apply any plaster thereto, and
dry it well after.

A Bath for the Crampe and hardness of sinews.
Rec. Rad. bismaluae, liliorum ana. lib.j. radic. iridis, lib.ss. maluae,
bismaluae, ciclae, brancae vrsinae, geranij maio ana.m.iij. florum chamameli,
meliloti, sambuci, ana. p.iiij. florum scoenanthi, anthos, ana.p.j. florum
lini, foenugraeci ana. lib.ij. sem. bismaluae, anethi, sesami, ana..j.ss.
florum narcissi p.ij. Make a decoction in sufficient quantity of water and use
it.

A Bath for contracted or lame members.
Rec. Cort. rad. altheae, vlmi, brioniae, Alfonsus Ferrius.
cucumeris asinini, enulae campanae, acori, vtriusque lilij, ana. lib.ss.
foenugraeci sem. lini, pinguiu^ ficuum ac dactylor. ana. lib.j. pedes arietinos
vel bubulos been mundatos nu.x. intestinorum pinguium ac diligenter mundatorum
ex arietinis vel bouillis lib. iiij. capita arietina ij. In sufficient water
boil them all in pieces: then strain it, and bathe the member therewith twice
a day; rubbing, handling, and moving it as much as it well may bear. After
dry the member, and annoint it with some ointment for such purpose. Amongst
others, there is one amongst the liniments of Alfonsus Ferrius description,
directly for this purpose.

A Bath for hardness of sinews.
Rec. Chamaem^li, meliloti, ana.m.j. rad. althaeae lib.j. sem. foenugraeci and
lini, ana..iiij Boil them in sufficient water together with the head and feet
of a Weather, until half be consumed.

A Bath for the debilitie of eyesight.
Vesalius.
Rec. potentillae m.iij. parietariae, eupatorij, verbenae, chamaemeli, sabinae,
ana.m.ij. Boil them in sufficient quantity of water. In this the legs must be
bathed two hours in the morning, and three hours at night. In the m^ane while
put into the patients eye the water of Fennel, with Pigeons blood: taking
after this powder following. Rec. radicum scabiosae, herbae henrici, ana..j.ss.
sem. rutae and foenug. ana..j. rad. galang^e.iij. Make it in fine powder.

A Bath for sweat of the arme-holes.
Rec. Rosmarini m.j. maioranae, ozimi, gariophylorum, ana.m.j.ss. absynthij,
arthemisiae, rosarum rub. ana.m.ij. myrtillorum m.ss. squinanti, staechados
arab. ana..iij. nucum cupressi nu. vj. coriandri praeparati.j. sem. maratri.ss.
mellis,.vj. aluminis crudi.ij.ss. salis.ss. vini cretici, lib. iiij. aceti
rosarum lib.ss. aqua pluuialis, lib. xiiij. Boil them till the half be
consumed.

A Bath for the outward affects of Lue Venerea.
Rec. Florum chamaemeli, meliloti, fumiterrae, anethi, lapathi acuti, rosarum
rubr. ^iccatarum, herbae paralysis, absynthij, menthae, pulegij, chamaedryos,
ana.m.iij.ss. foenugraeci, sem. lini, ana.m.iij. nitri, aluminis, ana..vj.
sulphuris viui,.iiij. Bruise the herbs and seeds, powder the rest, and boil
them in sufficient quantity of water to the halfe^ So use it.

A Ba^h for all Itch and Scabbes proc^eding ex lue Venerea.
Rec. Rad. and foliorum lapatij acuti m.iij. rad. enulae campanae, Rennerus.
lib. v. rad. acori. rad. brioniae, ana. lib.j. maluae, violariae, scabiosae,
fumariae, chelidoniae, saponariae, hederae, calaminti, ana.m.ij. hordei
integri, lupinorum, fabarum, lentium, ana. lib.j.s. furfuris, lib.j. hellebori
m.ij. Boil all these in water sufficient to make a Bath.

Cataplasmes.
A Cataplasme against Inflammations.
Vesalius.
REc. Cort. rad. althaeae, radic. erigeri, fol. maluae, ana.m.j. far.
^riticeae.j.ss. farinae sem. lini,.j. axungiae suillae recentis lib.ss. Boil
the herbs and roots in suffi^ient quantity of water, and beat them with
the rest in a mortar according to Art.

A Cataplasme for the beginning of an Inflammation.
Andernacus.
Rec. Parietariae, attriplicis, lactucae, cucurbitae, maluae, ana. m.ss.
semperuiui.m. tertiam partem, glaucij,.ij. cort. mali punici.ss. farinae
hordei.ij. Boil them in so much water as will ouer-couer them the thickness
of two fingers, till they be tender, and so make it.

Another for the same.
Pareus.
Rec. Plantaginis, solatri, hyoschiami, ana.m.ij. caudae equinae, tapsi barbati,
centinodij, ana.m.j. Boil them in water and vinegar, stamp them and strain
them. Afterward add myrtillorum, nucis cupressi, rosarum rubr.
puluerizatarum, ana..iij. farinae fabarum,.ij. olei rosarum, olei cydoneorum,
ana..j.ss. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme for an Inflammation in the augmentation.
Rec. Rosarum rubr. p.ij. chamaemeli, meliloti, Andernacus.
ana..ss. semperuiui, cucurbitae, lactucae, parietariae, ana.m.j. cort. mali
punici, sumac^ ana..ss. farinae hordei p.ij. Boil them in water to the
thickness of a Cataplasme.

Another for the same.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, absynthij, plantaginis, Pareus.
ana.m.iij. Sees them in water and vinegar, and when they are stamped and
strained put to them farinae fabar., and hordei ana..j^ pulu. rosarum, and
absynthij, ana..ij. olei rosarum, and chamaemeli, ana..j. Fiat.

A Cataplasme to be used in oedema, or other cold tumors, from the beginning to
the state.
Rec. Nucum cupressi, squinanti, Calmeteu^.
farinae hordei and lupinorum, ana..ss. blactae bizantiae, aluminis, ana..ij.
sem. papaueris cornuti,.iij. aloes, myrrhae, ana..j. croci,.ss. succi brassicae
and aceti, q.s. Mix them well, and make a Cataplasme in good form.

A Cataplasme for an Inflammation in the state.
Pareus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae,.iiij. maluarum, parietariae, ana.m.ij. Roast them under the
ashes, then add farinae fabarum, and lentium, ana..ij. pulueris chamaemeli,
and meliloti, ana..ss. olei rosarum, and chamaemeli ana..j. axungiae
gallinae.ij. Fiat.

A Cataplasme for an Inflammation in the declination.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Farinae seminis lini, fo^nugraeci, ana.iij. farinae orobi,.j. ^lorum
chamaemeli, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.ss. rosarum rubraru^.ij.fol. an^ti.iiij.
pulueris iridis florentini.ss. Boil them in sufficient quantity of pleasant
wine, or the juice of smallage. After mix them with three ounces of the
dregs of oil of Lillies, and two ounces of oil of Lillies, and make it.

A Cataplasme for an Inflammation in the declination.
Andernacus.
Rec. Althaeae, maluae, ana. m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, rosarum, ana.p.j.
rad. liliorum, alb. althaeae, ana,.j. seminis lini. foenugraeci, ana..ss. ficum
ping. number.x. furfuris farinae triticeae p.ij. Boil the herbs in water till
they be tender: then stamp them, and add to the straining olei chamaemeli,
adipis suillae, ana..ss. Make of them a Cataplasme.

Another for the same.
Rec. Rad. brioniae, and cucumeris agrestis, Pareus.
ana..ij. florum chamaemeli, and meliloti, ana.m.iij. Boil them in honey and
water, then add seminis lini, and foenugra^ci, ana..ij. olei anethi, axungiae
anseris, and anatis, ana..j. Fiat.

A Cataplasme for an Inflammation.
Rec. Succi semperuiui, plantag. solani, Calmeteu^^
aq. lenticulae, ana. quart.j. aceti.j. olei rosarum vel nymphaeae.j.ss.
farinae hordei.ij. Boil them to the form of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for pain and Inflammation.
Rec. Rad. althaeae.iij. maluae cum radicibus, Andernacus.
violarum, in puluerem redactorum, furfuris, ana.p.j. Boil them in fat broth,
or else add to them axungiae porcinae lib.ss Stamp, strain and boil them to
a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to suppurate Tumors.
^a^me^^us.
Rec. Rad. liliorum and althaeae, ana..iiij. fol. malu. violarum, brancae
vrsinae, erigeri ana.m.iij.ss. caricarum pinguium, passularum mundat. ana. par.
viij. farinae triticeae.iiij. farinae seminis lini.ss. Boil, stamp and
strain them, add thereto adipis suillae vel bubulini.iij. olei liliorum,
chamaemeli, ana..iij. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme to suppurate a cold tumor or oedema.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae, liliorum, ana..iiij. rad. brioniae and cucumeris agrestis,
ana..iij. olei liliacei lib. ss. olei costini,.iiij. vini.ij. Boil them until
the wine be consumed: and after it is strained, add thereto farinae seminis
lini, and foenugraeci, ana..ij. fermenti,.j.ss. ping. anseris, and anatis,
ana..iij. Mix them to the form of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for an oedematous or cold tumor.
Par^us,
Rec. Farinae hordei,.iiij. Sees it in common Lee, add thereto pulueris nucis
cupressi, cort. granatorum, balaustiorum, ana..j. myrrhae, aloes, aluminis,
ana..ss. olei myrtillorum.ij. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme to mollify, dissolve, and assuage tumors proceeding of phlegm
and blood, without inflammation.
Rec. Fol. malu. althaeae, violarum, Andernacus.
ana.m.j.rad. althaeae, liliorum alb. and iridis, ana..ss. florum chamaemeli,
meliloti, anethi comae, ana.p.j. seminis lini, hordei, ana..ss. cumini.j.
baccarum lauri,.ij. croci.j. adipis anatis, anseris, medullae crurium vituli,
bu^yri recentis, olei irini, liliorum, ana..ss. Or as much as is sufficient to
make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain in Tumors.
Rec. Lactis vaccini lib.viij. medullae panis triteceae, lib.j.ss. rad.
liliorum.vj. fol. malu. violarum, arthemisiae, chamaemeli, ebuli, sambuci,
ana.m.ss. seminis lini, and foenugraeci, ana..j. iridis.iij. pingued. capi,
axungiae porcinae, butyri recentis, ana..iij far. fabarum.ij.ss. Boil them to
a thickness, in the end add too four yolks of Eggs, and croci.ij. Fiat.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain in a hot cause.
Rec. Lactis vaccini lib.ij. seri lactis lib.ij medullae panis triticeae
lib.j.ss. pulpae pomorum dulcium lib.j. fol. maluarum, violarum, ana.m.j.
florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana.p.iiij. Bruise the herbs, and powder the
flowers, then boil them to a thickness, adding thereto olei violarum.ss.
butyri recentis.j.ss. croci,.ij. vitellos duos. So mix them.

A Cataplasme to ripen tumors proceeding of a hot matter.
Rec. Maluae, violarum, mercurialis, althaeae, solatri, chamaemeli, florum
liliorum, sambuci, hyosciami, ana.m.j. Boil them in sufficient water with the
head of a Weather, till they be tender, then cut them very small and boil
them in milk, adding thereto farinae fabarum.iiij. farinae lini, and
foenugraeci, ana..iij. olei aneti, chamaemeli, and meliloti, ana..j. ping. capi
and anseris, ana..ij. axungiae suillae.iiij. micarum panis triticeae.iiij.ss.
vitellos iij. Make them in form of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, althaeae, sambuci, chamaemeli, ana. lib.ss.
Boil them in eight pintes of fountain water till the third part be wasted,
then strain them and add thereto vng. rosati.ij. ping. capi, and anatis,
ana..ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, ana..j. farinae foenugraeci, and lini,
ana..ij. medullae panis triticeae.ij. Boil them all in milk, and add thereto
vitellos trium ouorum.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain and suppurate tumors.
Rec. Fol. maluae m.ij. erigeri m.j. Bind them in a linen cloth, and boil
them in Ueale broth till they be tender, then stamp them very small, and add
thereto of new Cream half a pound, micarum panis albi,.vij. seui ouilis
frustatim incisi, lib.ss. olei rosarum.iiij. Boil them till it be thick, and
in the cooling add thereto vitellos duorum ouorum.

A maturatiue Cataplasme.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, florum violarum, meliloti, chamaemeli, lactucae, ana. m.j.
Boil them in sufficient water till they be tender, and when they be bruised
and strained, add to the straining, farinae lentium, ^ritici, lini, and
foenugraeci, ana..j. medullae panis.iij. axungiae porci, ping. capi, butyri
recentis, ana..iij.ss. Boil them altogether to the form of a Cataplasme,
stirring it well, and in the end add to the yolks of two Eggs, and croci.ij.

A Cataplasme to maturate gross and slimie matter in any part of the body.
Rec. Fol. Mercurialis, maluarum, chamaemeli, bismaluae, betae, aneti, sambuci,
erigeri, ana.m.j.ss. Boil them in salt broth till they be tender, then
stamp them and boil them again in Whey, adding thereto micarum panis.viij.
farinae lini.iij. farinae lupinorum.j. farinae hordeaceae,.iiij. axungiae
suillae lib. ss. butyri recentis.x. and mixing them well make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for a pestiferous Bubo or Carbuncle.
Calmeteus.
Rec. rad. lilij.ij. maluae, bismaluae, violarum, ana.m.j. farinae seminis lini,
hordei and tritici, ana..j. caricarum paria ij. florum chamaemeli, and
violarum, ana.p.j. florum sambuci.ss. Boil them and strain them through a
cloth, add thereto axungiae suillae, gallinae, et vituli, ana..j.ss. olei
amygdalarum dulcium vel lilij, ana..iij. croci,.ss. Make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for Anthrax or Carbuncles.
Rec. Theriacae.i. axungiae suillae.ss. Idem.
succi scabiosae, vel modicum symphiti vel symphytum cum sale and oui vitello.
And to make the escar to fall away, Rec. maluae, althaeae, violarum, ana.m.ss.
farinae tritici and adipis suillae, ana..ij. vitellos ij. Make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for tumors or swellings in women's breasts.
Rec^ rad. althaeae.iiij. maluae, violarum, Idem.
ana. m.j. farinae tritici, and hordei, ana..j. Boil them in sufficient water,
til the herbs be tender, then stamp them and strain them, adding to them
butyri salis experti.iij. axungiae suillae.ij. vitellos duorum ouorum. And so
make it to Art.

A Cataplasme to put away the tumors in women's breasts, proceeding of the
coagulation of milk.
Rec. Olei rosarum lib.j. olei seminis lini,.iij. olei chamaemeli, medullae
crurium vaccarum.iiij. pulu. cort. rad. althaeae,.iij. seminis anisi.ss.
farinae fabarum.vj. vini rubr..vij. gum. arab. in vino dissoluti.j. Mix them
to a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for a swelling in the throat or neck.
Valeriola.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, althaeae, cum suis radicibus, ana. ij. fol. caulium rubr.
violar. hyssopi, ana.m.j. caricarum pinguium, nu. xxx. florum chamaemeli,
meliloti, ana.p.j. seminis lini and foenugraeci, ana..ij. capitum liliorum
alborum.ij. furfuris p.j. Boil them all in water sufficient, stamp them and
strain them, and put to the straining, nidi hirundinis, ( boiled before in
oleo liliaceo, and with the whole steeped in a mortar, and after strained).iij.
farinae seminis lini and foenugraeci, far. frumenti, ana..j. Boil the meals
with oximell to a convenient thickness, then add thereto axungiae gallinae
recentis, butyri recentis, ana..j. croci j olei liliacei iij. Mix them to a
Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to be used in Bronchocele, or the swelling in the throat.
Calmet^us.
Rec. rad. liliorum, brioniae, cucumeris agrestis,ana..iij. ficuum maturarum
paria vj. amydal. amararum.ij. scyllae,.j.ss. colocynthidis.ss. Let them boil
in equal portions of Oil and Malmsey, to the consumption of the wine, then
stamp and strain them, and add to the straining farinae fabarum and orobi,
ana..ij.ss. farinae lini and foenugraeci, medullae crurium bubuli, ana..iiij
olei nucum vel de piperibus, vel irini.q.s. Mix them, and make them in form
of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for a swelling in the throat to be applied to the outward part of
the neck.
Rec. Rad. althaeae, liliorum, and brioniae, Idem.
ana..iiij. maluae, violarum, and parietariae, ana.m.j.ss. Boil them with a
Swallows neast in sufficient water: which being stamped and strained, add
thereto axungiae suillae veteris salis expertis ^iiij. axungiae gallinae and
anseris, ana..j. farinae foenugraeci and lini, ana..ss. fermenti acris.j.ss.
olei liliorum, chamaemeli, ana..ij. Mix them and make a Cataplasme to be
applied twice a day.

A Cataplasme for the tumor and inflammation in the Coddes.
Idem.
Rec. Rad. althaeae.iij. rad. liliorum.ij. rad. cucumeris agrestis.j.ss. maluae,
violarum, branchae vrsinae, rosarum, ana.m.j. sumitatum absynthij m.ss. florum
violarum, p.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.j. Boil them in
sufficient water, and stamp them, and add to the strayning farinae hordei,
and fabarum, ana..ij. axungiae gallinae.j.ss. olei chamaemeli, and rosarum,
ana..ij. croci.ss. Make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for a tumor in the fundament.
Idem.
Ric. Lentium p.iij. florum chamaemeli, sambuci, ana.p.ij. Boil them and stamp
them, then to the straining add farinae seminis lini and foenugraeci, ana..j.
butyri recentis.ij. ping. anseris.j. cerebrum eiusdem, vitellum oui, croci
modicum. Mix them and make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme to maturate the tumor in the flank called Bubo venereus.
Andernacus.
Rec. Medullae panis.j. vuarum passarum enucleatarum.j. butyri recentis,
axungiae, ana..vj. fermenti.v. lactis vaccini.ij. croci.j. Make a Cataplasme to
be applied twice ^ ^ay.

A Ca^aplasme for a watrie tumor.
Re^. Farinae fabarum, orobi, Pareus.
ana..iij. (...) them in decocto pulegij, origani, ca^aminthae, saluiae, and
add to it pulueris chamaemeli and meliloti, ana.ss. sulphuris viui pulu..ij.
olei aneti, and chamaemeli, ana..j.ss. Fiat.

A Cataplasme for watrie tumors and hydropick bodies.
Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.ij. fimi caprini, Plinius secundus.
seminis apij, ana..iij. samsuci.iiij. nitri, gummi ammoniaci puriss. ana..ij.
foenugraeci, baccarum lauri, ana..iij. piperis albi.ij. terebinthinae.iiij.
olei ciprini q.s. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain in wounds and to comfort them.
Rec. Farinae fabarum hordei, lentium, Valeriola.
and lupinorum, ana..iij. farinae seminis lini, and foenugraeci, ana..ij.
farinae orobi.j. croci,.ij. Boil the meals with a little vinegar and honey to
the consistence of a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for a co^^used and bruised wound.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.ss. malu^^^m and violarum, ana.m.j. Stamp, boil and
strain them, adding to the straining butyri, olei com. ana..iij. tres ouorum
vitellos, croc^ modicum, farinae tritici and hordei q.s. Make a Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for the biting of a mad Dog.
Valeriola.
Rec. Caepas albas number iij. Make them a little hollow, fill up the hollow
again cum theriaca, and set on their couers again, roast them under the coals
until they be soft: then stamp them and strain them through a Searce. After
add to pulu. vtriusque aristolochiae, ana..ij. galbani, bdellij, myrrhae,
ana..ss. pulu. cancrorum fluuial..v. Mix them together in form of a
Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for contused flesh, coming of some fall or stripe.
Rec. absynthij virescentis m.j. olei rosaracei.ij. lactis mulieris.j. aquae
rosarum, album. ouorum, ana..j. Mix them to a thickness.

A Cataplasme against ulcers in the yard.
Rec. aquae vel succi plantag. aquae rosarum, Andreas Lacuna.
ana..iiij. aceti rosati,.ij. album. ouorum duorum, pulu. boli armenij, sang.
draconis, coralli, rosarum, myrtillorum, cort. mali punici, That is terra
lemnia. See Gal. simp. fac. lib. 9.
terrae spragitidos ana..ij. Labor them in a mortar to the form of a
Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme for vlcerations in in women's breasts.
Rec. Maluae, absynthij, ana. lib.j.ss. Boil them in water till they be
tender, then bruise them finely, and add to them axungiae suillae lib. j. vini
maluat. lib.j. pull. centaurij,.iij. helenij.iiij. gariophylorum.j. Boil them
until the wine be wasted, then put in the herbs stirring them well. When all
is cold put to it cumini in fine powder three ounces, and make it to Art.

A Cataplasme to assuage pain.
Rec. Micae panis in lacte vaccinae infusae lib.j.ss. Pareus.
Let it heat upon the fire, then add olei violarum, and rosarum, ana..iij.
vitellos ouorum nu.iiij. pulueris rosarum rubr. chamaemeli, and meliloti,
ana..ij. farinae fabarum and hordei, ana..j. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme to appease pains in the joints, and cease inflammations.
Clowes.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, ana.m.ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, rosarum,
ana m.j.ss. Boil these in the broth of Ueale, Chicken or new Milk, till the
herbs be tender, then stamp them and put to olei rosac. amygdalini,
ana..j.ss. farinae fabarum,.iij. farinae hordei.ij. medullae panis q.s.
croci.ij. vitellorum ouorum nu. iij. And viii. ounces of this Muscilage: to
wit, Rec. rad. althaeae m.ij. seminis lini and p^ylij, ana..iij.
foenugraeci.i.ss. Infuse these in fair water and white wine of each lib.j. for
xii. hours, then boil it and strain it to a Muscilage. Make a Cataplasme.

A most effectual Cataplasme for hydrocele.
Banester.
Rec. Stercoris vaccae lib.j. baccarum lauri.ij. myrrhae,.j. cymini.ss. sem.
petroselini,.iij. ireos.ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, hypericonis, ana.p.ij.
farinae lupino^um.j.ss. farinae fabarum,.j. farinae orobi.j. sulphuris.ij.
lixiuij lib.ij. olei hypericonis and chamaemeli, ana.q.s. Fia^ Cataplasma.
Adding to in the end Mithridati.ij.

A Cataplasme for the asswaging of pain in inflammation of the eyes.
Rec. Fol. papaueris albi sub cineribus coctorum, carnis pomorum dulcium
similiter coctorum, ana..ij. croci.j. farinae sem. foenugraeci.ss. lactis
mulieris.j.ss. olei rosarum q.s. Fiat Cataplasma.

A Cataplasme for Erisypelas where it is properly called the Shingles.
Rec. fimi columbini, Ex ^anuscripto.
recentis q.s. misceantur cum farina triticea. Apply it as a Pulteis; but
cold, and cover it with a colwort leaf for three days. Within three or four
dressings it cures.

A Cataplasme for a wrench or strain.
Rec. Cepaeae, apij. senecionis, Ex manuscrip^o.
ana.q.s. seui ouini as much as you judge sufficient for the proportion of your
herbs, chop them small together and boil them in urine, and so, hot, apply
them upon a blewe cloth (says the Author).

A Cataplasme for a Felon.
Ex furfure and aceto, Carey.
boiled together to a Pulteis and hot applied.

Another.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Acetosae, fol. calthae, ana. m.ss. rad. lillij albi.j. Stamp them a
little together; lap them in a Docke leaf, roste them under the embers, then
take and bind them hot to the place. This will break and heal it.

An excellent Cataplasme for Bubo to draw and suppurate.
D Foster.
Rec. Rad. brioniae lib.ss. cepam j. rad. althaeae recentis.iiij. fol. maluarum
siccarum p.j. hydropiperis m.j. ficuum, passularum enucleatarum, ana..j. Boil
them very well, then stamp them, and add fermenti, axungiae suillae
insulsae, butyri recentis, ana..ij. euphorbij pulu..j. Mix them according to
Art.

A Cataplasme which you may have always ready to repel phlegmon and all
flux of choleric humors in the beginning.
Balthrop.
Rec. Oximel. simpl..xiij. nucis cupressi.ij. Powder the latter very fine, and
then boil both together to the form of a Cataplasme. Spread it somewhat
thick when you apply it.

Cataplasma ad strumas and scrofulas egregium.
Rec. Lanceolatae, plantaginis, caprifo. ^ij, D. Foster.
bursae pastoris, betonicae, graminis leucanthemi, scabiosae, solani,
agrimoniae, ana.m.iij. Beat them together in a mortar, and strain out the
juice. Take as much mel as of those iuyces, also as much succi apij as of all
the rest, and again as much mel as of that: boil altogether, and put too as
much farinae hordei as is sufficient to make it in ^it form.

Caustickes.
A Ruptorie of great force to open an Aposteme, mortify a Fistula, etc.
Arnaldu.
REc. Cineris fabarum two parts, calcis viuae pulu. partem tertiam. Put to
them water and make a lee: which is never strong enough until it will bear up
an Egg, therefore strengthen and renew your first order until you have it
fit for your purpose. When you have your lee strong enough, resolve therein
calcem viuam puluerizatam, auripigmentum, saponem saracenicum, as much of each
as you see good, and mix them all to the form of an Unguent.

Another Causticke.
A Doct. Fostero.
Rec. Pulueris sublimati.ij. succi hyosciami.j. Mix them and dry them
together: afterward make them into most fine powder.

A most excellent Ruptorie.
Balthrop.
Rec. Calcis viui opt. lib.j. Burn the same again in a fire of charre coals
three or four ^oures: after powder it finely. Put it in lixiuij barbitonsoris
lib.ij. and boil them together in a brass pan until they be thick. Hereof
make tents and Trochisces round, flat, and every form that may serve your
purpose. When you will occupy them, wet one side of them with spettle and lay
it to the place, and in one hour it will pierce the thickness of half an
inch. Keep them in a glass close stopped.

An excellent and proved Causticke that rooteth out all callous of Fistulaes
and foul spongious growings of cancerous ulcers.
Rec. Vitri antimonij, M. Ma^thias.
what quantity you will, grind it exceedingly fine, then put upon it succi
apij, and mellis rosacei, of each a little, proportionablie; grind them so
together, increasing your liquid quantities still proportionablie, until you
have brought all to the form of a thin Unguent.

An Unguent to cauterize a vein that will not otherwise stay bleeding.
Rec. Vng. populei,.ss. vitrioli vsti,.ij. mercurij sublimati.iij. Fiat
vnguentum.

Another strong Ruptorie or deep Causticke.
Rec. Calcis non extinctae.ix. cinerem Incerto auctore.
de cerro (which Diers use) on these power as much water as will cover them,
and two fingers breadth above: steep them so long till the ashes and calx have
yielded their for^e: then clear out the water and put to it new calx and
cineres as before. Do thus eight times. Rec. capitelli istius cyathum j. olei
cyathum j. and boil them together to the wasting of the Lee at a gentle fire.

Another Ruptorie more gentle.
Rec. Lixiuij fortis lib.ij. vitrioli albi.iiij. calcis viuae optime combustae
q.s. Mix and boil them at a gentle fire to the form of an unguent.

Cerotes.
A Cerote that does mundifie and resolve in the cure of Nodus.
REc. Muscilag. althaeae, lini foenugraeci, Vigo.
and ficuum siccarum ana. lib.j. olei chamaemeli, liliorum and comynis,
ana^.ij. ping. gallinae, anseris, and porci liquaefactae, terebinthinae, sepi
castrati liquefacti, ana..ij.ss. litharg. auri.viij. Boil them to the
consumption of the Muscilage, and with sufficient white Wax make a Cerote,
first adding thereto, gummi ammoniaci, galbani, in aceto dissolutorum, ana..j.
iridis recentis, subtilliter triturati.j.ss. Boil them together and reserve it
to your use.

A Cerote to be used in the cure of Nodus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae decoct. and cribellat. Vigo.
.iiij olei liliacei, chamaemeli and rosacei ana..j. ping. gallinae, anseris,
olei amygdalarum, ana..vj. seui vitulini, medullae crurium vituli, ana..x.
terebinthinae.j.ss. diachylonis albi sine gummi.ij. litharg. auri and argenti
ana..ij.ss. Boil them at the fire, stirring it well till it have obtained a
black color, then put in white Wax sufficient for a Cerote.

A most excellent Cerote to dissolve all manner of hard knottes and ganglious
tumors.
Banester.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci,.vj. radicum althaeae and brioniae, ana..j. turpeti
mineralis,.ss. butyri recentis.j.ss. Dissolve the gum in vinegar, powder and
searse the roots: mix altogether, and with cerae albae.j. make it a Cerote.

A Cerote to be applied to nodes or knots proceeding ex lue Gallica.
Rennerus.
Rec. Rhabarb. electi.ij. aloes optimae,.ss. bdellij, ammoniaci, ana..j.ss.
saponis vene..vj. terebint..ij.ss. Dissolve your gummes in vinegar, your Soap
in simple aqua vitae, beat the rest into powder, and so mix them according to
Art. When you will use it take a thin plate of lead, lay it in soke in strong
vinegar and salt, and lay it upon the plai^ter, shifting it twice a day during
the space of a month.

A Cerote for women's breasts not cancerated.
Vigo.
Rec. Diachylonis albi gummati.ij. ping. gallinae, medullae crurium vituli, and
vaccarum, ana..vj. olei amygdalarum dulcium, butyri recentis ana..v. olei
chamaemeli, aneti, and liliorum, ana..ss. ping. anseris and anatis, ana..vj.ss.
muscilag. althaeae and sem. lini, ana. lib.ss. Boil them to the consumption of
the Muscilages, strain them, and with white Wax make a Cerote.

A C^rote for the tumor in the breast called Sephiros.
Rec. Olei rosat. violarum, vng. Galeni, Vigo.
ana.ij pinguedinis vituli, anatis, olei amygdalarum dulcium, ana..j. muscilag.
althaeae and psylij, ana..ij. muscilag. sem. cytoniorum.iij. Boil all to the
consumption of the Muscilages, strain them, and add too succi solatri and
plantag. ana..ij. Boil them again to the wasting of the iuyces, and strain
them again, adding white Wax sufficient for a Cerote, and last of all
litharg. auri and argenti, ana..ij. tutiae alexandrinae.j. camphorae ad arrtem
trituratae.j.ss. far. hordeaceae.j.ss. Mix them continually, stirring them
until it be cold.

A Cerote for a Canker.
Rec. Olei rosat. olei myrtini, ana. lib.ss. seui vituli and vaccae, ana..iiij.
succi plantag. and solatri ana..iij. Boil them together to the consumption of
the iuyces, and strain them, and add to them litharg. auri and arg. ana..ij.
boli armenij, terrae sigillatae, cerusae, minij, ana..j. Set them on the fire
again, stirring them well, and so in the end put too camphorae.j. Boil them
till it be black.

A Cerote for tumors in women's breasts.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae, coct. lib.ss. ping. anatis.j. medullae crurium vituli and
bouis, ana..vj. seui vaccini.iij^ olei rosarum.j. olei chamaemeli and aneti
ana..iij. olei liliorum.j.ss. Mix them, and with sufficient white Wax make a
Cerote.

A Cerote for swellings in women's breasts.
Rec. Olei sem. lini.viij. olei rosac..iij. mellis despumati.iiij. cerae
albae.ij. sarinae fabaru^.iiij. myrrhae.ss. ammoniaci.j. foenugraeci.j.ss.
lithargyrij.iij. saluiae si^cae.ss. Dissolve your gummes in vinegar, and make
your Cerote to Art.

A Cerote for hard tum^rs in women's breasts.
Rec. Olei sem. lini lib. ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, ana..iiij. olei
amygdalarum dulc. olei liliacei, ana..j. vini albi, lib.ss. axungiae suillae,
pingued. capi ana..j. cerae citrinae lib.j. ammoniaci.j. bdelli.ss. Dissolve
the gummes and boil them until the wine be wasted, and add thereto farinae
fabarum.xij. iridis.j. camphorae,.iij. florum chamaemeli and meliloti, ana..ss.
Powder what is to be powdered and make a Cerote in good form.

A Cerote for Bubo venereus.
Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.ss. capit. liliorum alborum.ij. Vigo.
Boil them all with the broth of flesh, and stamp and strain them, then set
them on the fire, and cum oleo chamaemeli.iiij. olei rosarum.j. ping. vituli
diachylonis alb. ana.ij. and with sufficient Wax make a Cerote.

A Cerote to be used in the cure of a Rupture.
Rec. Pulu. pro ramice, Vigo.
per Iho. Vigonem descripti and ^ particula pull. introducti.iij. symphiti
vtriusque.x. terebinthinae clarissimae.ij.ss. olei mastic. olei omphac.
ana..iij. olei terebinthinae, myrtini ana..ss. litharg. auri and arg. ana..vj.
seui hircini.v. Boil the Oils and Litharge with a little vinegar together
(till the same vinegar be wasted) at a strong fire, then let them boil a
little with the juice of Comfrey: after add too the Terebinthine, and boil
them at a gentle fire, stirring them well. Last of all with sufficient white
Wax, put in all the powders, and make a Cerote in good form.

A Cerote for the Rupture.
Rec. Litharg. auri, lapid. haematitis, sang. draconis, boli armenij, galbani,
thuris, costi dulcis, sarcocollae, masticis, mummiae, ammoniaci, ana..j.
vermium terrestr. picis naualis, colophoniae, propoleos ana.ij.
terebinthinae.iiij. rad. consol. ma. mi. and mediae, ana..vj. rosarum rubrarum,
myrrhae, aloes, ana..ss. gallarum contusarum, balaustiorum, aristolog. ro^^nd.
ana..j.ss. visci quercini,.ss. seui ouini lib.j. vini rubr. succi symphiti
maio. ana..iiij. Boil the iuyces with the sheep sewet and gummes to the
consumption of the iuyces and wine, then add to the^, being strained, all the
rest in powder.

A Cerote for the Hemrhoydes.
Rec. Chamaemeli, Vigo.
anethi, seminis lini, ana..iiij. olei de chrysomelis, and de amygdalis dulcis,
butyri ana..j.ss. seui vaccini and vituli ana..ij. ping. gallinae, anatis and
anseris, ana..j. muscilag. sem. and rad. althaeae, psylij, lini, maluae and
violarum, ana. lib.j.ss. litharg. auri.iiij. Mix them at the fire, and make a
soft Cerote in good form, adding thereto terebint. purg..ij.ss. and reserve it
to your use.

A Cerote for the Hemrhoydes.
Rec. Succi violarum, maluarum, parietariae, althaeae, tapsibarbati,
chamaemeli, meliloti, ana..iij. olei vitellorum ouorum.ss. olei seminis
lini.ij. olei chamaemeli.ss. olei amygdal. dulc. and aneti, ana..iij. ping.
anatis.ij. ping. capi and anseris, muscilaginis althaeae and psylij, ana..iij.
carnium pomorum dulc..iij. seui bouini and vitulini, ana..j. farinae
fabarum.j.ss. litharg. auri and arg. ana..v. Boil them to a true substance,
add to them terebint..iij.

A Cerote to be used in the cure of Vndimia.
Rec. Fol. malu. violarum, Vigo.
ana.m.j. rad. linguae bouinae.ij. rad. althaeae lib.ss. sem. cytoniorum.iiij.
hordei mundi m.ij. Boil them all in sufficient water until the Barley be
broken: strain them well, add to them olei rosac. myrtini and violacei, and
chamaemeli, ana..ij. vng. rosati, vng. Galeni, ana..j. seui vituli, haedi atque
caprini, ana..j.ss. Boil al together a little, then with white Wax sufficient
make a Cerote, adding thereto farinae fabar. farinae hordie, ana..j.

A Ce^ote to maturate tumors.
Rec. Cerae. rubr. lib.ss. resinae.iij. seui ceruini.viij.ss. butyri
recentis.ij. ammoniaci, dragaganti, arabicae, ana..ij. muscilag. althaeae.iij.
ping. capi and anseris, ana..iij. terebinthinae, masticis, ana..j.ss.
olibani,.ss. olei rosarum, chamaemeli, meliloti, violarum, ana.q.s. Make a
Cerote with pleasant wine.

A Cerote against inflammation.
Rec. Cerae albae.iiij. axungiae porcinae, in aqua plantag. lot..iij. olei
rosac..iij.ss. seui ceruini.ij. omnium santaloru^, ana..ij floru^
nymphaeae,.ij.ss. coralli albi, and rubr. ana..ss. spodij.ss. margaritarum.ss.
camphorae.j. rosarum rubr..j. Powder what are to be powdered, and make a Cerote
in good form.

Another for an inflammation.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum..ij. cerae purae.iiij. terebinthinae venetae in aqua
plantag. lotae.ss. lapid. calaminaris, tutie in vino albo extinctae, ana..ij.
plumbi albi, cerusae, ana..j. litharg. auri and arg. ana..ss. Mix them with
the juice of houseleeke sufficient and make a Cerote.

A Cerote to be used in Apostemes of the stomach.
Rec. Olei chamaemeli, Vigo.
absynthij, de spica ana..x. olei citri, and rosarum, ana..vj. pingued
gallinae, anatis, olei liliorum, ana..ss. matricariae, m.ss. anthos,
scaenanthi, ana. paru^, calami aromatici, cinamomi, ana..j. menthae romanae
paululum. Boil them altogether with sweet wine till it be consumed, then
strain it, and with white Wax sufficient make a Cerote, adding thereto
croci.ss.

A Cerote to be used in the cure of tumors in the hands, fingers and feet.
Rec. Rad. althaeae.iiij. rad. iridis.j. Vigo.
Boil them in water until they be tender, stamp and strain them: put too
diachylonis alb. gummati.iiij. ping. gallinae and anatis, ana.ss. olei
chamaemeli and liliorum, ana..vj. olei spicae and aneti, ana..v. ceroti issopi
gal..x. Mix them altogether on the fire, let them boil a little, then with
sufficient Wax make a Cerote.

A Cerote of Betonie to heal in all outward parts being mundified.
Vesalius.
Rec. Fol. pimpinellae, betonicae, pilosellae eupatorij, saluiae, pulegij,
millefolij, consolid. ma. mi. and mediae, caprifolij, ana..vj. thuris masticis,
ana..ss. iridis, aristolog. rotund. ana..vj. cerae albae.iiij. gummi elemi.ij.
resinae pini.v. terebint. olei aneti, ana..vij. vini albi odorati q.s. Bruise
the herbs and infuse altogether eight days in wine, then boil them at a
gentle fire until two parts be wasted, stirring them well: after strain and
cool it, then work it with hands in water: and let it lie in four pints of
Milk, either of Goats or Sheep, (first being made into roules) one whole
day. Lastly, labor it well with hands, and reserve it to your use.

A Cerote for wounds in the head or other parts.
Rec. Terebint. lotae in vino cretico.iiij. resinae pini.iij. cerae
citrinae.iiij.ss. ammoniaci.ij. myrrhae.j. masticis, ^huris, mummiae, ana..ss.
olei rosarum.iij. succi betonicae lib.ss. olei rosac..iij. Boil the Wax,
Rosine, Oil and iuyces together to the consumption of the iuyces, then add
too the ammoniacum dissolved in Malmesey, after that, the other powders, and
last of all the Terebinthine.

A Cerote to be used in wounds of the arms, hands or feet.
Rec. Olei rosarum, violarum, chamaemeli, ana..ij. ^eui vituli lib. ss.
axungiae suillae,.ij. ping. gallinae, medullae crurium vituli, ana..j. vermium
terrest. lot. cum vino albo.ij. butyri recentis.j.ss. muscilag. althaeae lib.j.
Boil all to the consumption of the Muscilages with an easy fire: then strain
them through a strong canuas cloth, whereto add, litharg. auri, and argent.
ana..ij.ss. minij.vj. With sufficient white Wax make a Cerote at the fire in
good order, and put thereto terebint. abietinae.ij.ss. masticis.j. Let them
boil a walme, and make the Cerote in good form.

A Cerote for contusions in the head.
Rec. Sarcocollae, masticis, terebinthinae, ana..j. gummi elemi.x. colophoniae,
resinae pini, ana..ss. ammoniaci.ij. succi betonicae, symphiti vtriusque,
ana..j. succi apij.vj. Boil them in vini albi odoriferi lib. iiij. till the
wine be wasted, strain it strongly, add to it cerae albae and olei
mastichini q.s. So make a Cerote in good form.

A Cerote for the pricking of nerves and strokes of the joints.
Rec. Cerae albae lib.ss farinae orobi, and lupinorum, ana..iiij.
euphorbi^..ss. olibani.j. ve^mium terres^r. in pulu..iij.ss. farinae
fabarum.ij. bdellij.iij. sarcocollae.iij. sagapeni.ij. matricariae, caudae
aequinae, ana..ss. succi florum chamaemeli.j. cort. rad althaeae
desiccat..iiij. rad. lilior..iiij. vini rubr..vij. olei rosarum.iiij. olei
euphorbij.^j^ olei lumbricorum.iij. olei liliacei.ij.ss. olei aneti and
amygdalar. dulc. ana..j.ss. mellis rosarum.iiij. butyri recentis.iiij. Powder
what is to be powdered, dissolve the gummes in vinegar, then boil altogether
until the wine be consumed, and so make it.

A Cerote to cleanse bones, and cause flesh in ulcers.
Rec. pulu. peucedani, Vesalius^
aristol. ro^und. oppoponacis, euphorbij, ana..j. terebinthinae.iij. cerae.j.
aceti.ij. Mix and boil them to the substance of a Cerote.

A Cerote to restore broken bones.
Rec. Sigilli salomonis.iiij. rad. althaeae.viij. fol. plantag. m.ij. Vigo.
Boil them till they be tender, then stamp them, and with sufficient white
Wax make a soft Cerote, adding thereto olei rosarum and myrtini, ana..ij.
terebint. clarae.j.ss. vng. agrippae and dialthaeae, ana..ss. boli armenij.vj.
sang. draconis.iij. thuris.j. santal. omnium.ij. This Cerote may be applied
after the vii. day, if need be.

A Cerote for fractures.
Rec. Rad. althaeae lib.j. pedu^vituli number. ij. Vigo.
Boil them in water and pleasant wine, then strain the roots, and to the
straining add olei myrtini, omphacini, ana..iiij. olei mastichini.j.ss.
terebint. clariss..x. croci subt. triti.ss. sang. draconis, terrae sigillat.
ana..ss. thuris.ij. farinae fabarum.j.ss. Mix them, and with sufficient white
Wax make a Cerote in good consistence.

A Cerote to comfort a fractured member.
Vigo.
Rec. Rad. enulae and sigilli salomonis decoctorum and cribellatorum, ana..iij.
rad. althaeae decoct. and crib..ss. olei chamaemeli, aneti, myrt. ana..j.ss.
agrippae and dialthaeae, ana..vj. olei mastichini.ss. vermium terrestrium, lot.
cum vino.j.ss. chamaemeli, scha^^nanti, rosarum, absynthij, ana. parum, vini
odoriferi, cyathum^j. Boil all till the wine be wasted, then being strained
add to them farinae fabarum, hordei, pulu. rubi, ana..vj. sang. draconis,
mummiae, ana..iij. croci.j. sandal. omnium ana..j.ss. terebint. clariss..j.
Boil them with sufficient white Wax, and the strainings of the roots to the
form of a Cerote.

A Cerote for fractures which does not only stop humors, but also
consolidate.
Rec. Olei rosarum lib.j. olei myrtini lib.j boli armeni.ij.ss. sang.
draconis.j. mummiae.ss. nucis cupressi,.iij. radic. symphitima..vj. gummi arab.
dragaganti, thuris, masticis, sarcocollae, ana..iij. farinae volat..ss. farinae
fabarum.iij.ss balaust. malecorij, ana..j.ss. terrae sigillat. lapid.
calaminaris, litharg. auri and arg. ana..ij. sandal. alb. and citrin. ana..j.
seui ceruini.iiij. cerae albae,.iij.ss. resinae.iij. ros. rub. sicc..ss. aceti
rosacei.j. alb. ouorum.iiij. Melt those which are to be melted, then put too
the powders, and when it is cold, put in the whites of Eggs, and make a
Cerote.

A Cerote recovering members weakened for default of nourishment.
Rec. Ping. capi, anatis. anseris and cygni, ana..j. butyri recent..ij. olei
vulpini.j. olei liliacei.ss. olei myrt..ij. olei sambuci and euphorbij,
ana..ss. picis nigri.iiij. colophoniae.ij. resinae pini.j.ss. ammoniaci.ij.ss.
tereb..ij. saluiae, rosmarini, ana.m.j. Bruise the herbs, and boil them to the
consumption of the iuyces, then strain it, and add thereto cerae nouae.j.

A Cerote for a member consumed for lack of nourishment.
Rec. Olei vulpini, olei. mygdal. dull. and liliorum, ana..j. olei chamaemeli
and aneti, ana..ss. olei euphorbij, olei saluiae, olei rosmarini, marini,
ana..ij. olei sambuci.vj. pingued. capi, anatis, and anseris, ana..ss. succi
dauci.ss. picis nigri.iij. colophoniae, resinae pini ana..ij. myrrhae.j. vini
^retici lib.j. Boil them to the consumption of the wine to the form of a
Cerote.

A Cerote for the Gowte.
Weckerus.
Rec. Succi rad. ebuli,.iij. resinae pini.ss ^erebint..ss. olei vulp.
chamaemeli^ ana..ij. cremoris seminis althaeae, cremoris seminis lini and
foenugraeci, ana..ij.ss. oppoponacis, sagapeni, ammoniaci, in aceto
dissolutorum, ana..ss. croci.j. cerae q.s. Mix them and make a Cerote in good
form.

A Cerote to be used for pain in the joints.
Vigo.
Rec. Enulae in aqua decoctorum, pistorum and cribellatorum lib.j. sigilli
salomonis, rad. ebuli, ana..iiij. olei myrtini, chamaemeli, petroselini,
ana..j. olei tereb..j.ss tereb. purg..ij. olei vulpini, liliorum, spicae,
laurini and sambuci, ana..x. cerae albae..j.ss. Boil them to a soft Cerote,
adding in the end farinae fabarum, and cicerum, ana..iiij.ss. styracis
liquidae.j. thuris.iij. Mix them well together, and make a Cerote in good
order.

A Cerote very good against the Gowt or Sciatica.
Rec. Cerae.x. visci quercini.j. tereb..j.ss. ammoniaci, galbani, myrrhae,
ana..ss. picis naualis.j. olei genistae, chamaemeli, anetini, rosac. ana..ij.
colophoniae.j. succi plantag. succi amaraci, ana..ij. vini odorati lib.ss. seui
vitulini, caprini, ana..j. Boil the^ to the consumption of the wine, adding
thereto rosarum rubr..ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti and genistae, ana..ss.
croci.iij.ss. cassiae extractae.iij. muscilag. sem. lini, foenugraeci, and rad.
althaeae, ana..ij. muscilag. sem. lini, foenugraeci, and rad. althaeae,
ana..ij. muscilag. psyllij.j.ss. Dissolve the gums and powder what is to be
powdered, framing your Cerote according to Art.

A Cerote to comfort the sinews and assuage pain.
Rec. Chamaemeli, meliloti, aneti, arthemisiae, ana.m.j. cremoris, rad.
althaeae lib.ss. pulu. rad. althaeae.v. medullae crurum vaccarum.iiij. pingued.
capri et anatis, ana..j ammoniaci dissoluti in vino maluaticae,.iiij. bu^^ri
recentis.j.ss. olei aneti and lilioru^, ana..iij. cerae.vj. ^erebint..iij.
furfuris tritici torrefacti lib.ss. Bruise the herbs finely, and put to the
branne, then melt the Wax, Oil, and fatts together, and make a Cerote in good
form.

A Cerote to mollify tumors and assuage pain in the gowt.
Rec. Olei liliacei, anethini, ana..iij. olei rosarum.ij. olei chamaemeli.j.
gummi ammoniaci.vj. bdellij dissolut. in oleo liliaceo.ij.ss. cassiae extractae
cum decoctione chamaemeli, maioranae and absynthij.ij. opij.j. oesypi.ij.
micarum panis.j. myrtillorum.ss. croci.ij. cremoris psylij.ss. medullae cruriu^
vaccarum.ij.ss. pingued. capi, anatis, anseris, butyri recentis, ana..iij. vini
albi.iiij. cerae albae.vij. terebint..iiij Melt the Wax, Oil, Butter, and
Marrowe together: then put in the Cassia and bread crummes, and last of all the
rest, so make a Cerote in good form.

A very good Cerote for cancerous ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Emplastri diachalciteos lib.j. vng. hyoschiami, vng. populnei, vng.
rosacei ana..iij. plumbi vsti and loti.j tutiae praeparatae.ij. succi plantag.
and solani, ana..iiij. camforae ^j. Powder that which is to be powdered very
finely, mix them together at a gentle fire, and at the end put too as much
Wax as needs to make a Cerote.

A very good Cerote for all inflammations, also to cease pain and take away the
sharp biting humor of virulent ulcers.
Rec. Cerae citrinae, ceui ouini, Banester.
ana. lib.ij. resinae lib.j. butyri recentis.vj. lumbricorum praeparat. lib.ss.
opij inaceto dissoluti,.j. croci.ss. hyosciami m.iiij. aceti lib.j. Stamp the
herbs and boil it with the rest (except the opium and crocus) to the wasting
of the liquors: then add the rest and make it according to Art.

A Cerote to be used by order of sparadrap, and is notably approved in all
ulcers.
Rec. Minij lib.j. cerussae lib.ss. saponis albi.iiij. olei lib.ij. cerae.ij.
Imparted by W. Martin.
Mix them according to Art. Many have been healed hereby, with admiration. It
does mundifie, incarne, cease pain, and cicatrize: and remoueth the hard edges
of ulcers. Obtained of a Doctor of the Chauncerie.

A Cerote that moderatly wipeth, but forcibly dries and cicatrizeth both
wounds and ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Olei oliuarum.xij. seui ouini vel ceruini,.xij. seui hircini,.iij^ succi
prassij,.xij. Boil these to the consumption of the juice; then add cinabrij.j.
cerusae.vj. litharg. auri.iiij. Boil them again to a black color,
continually stirring them. Lastly, add terebinthinae.ij. cerae albae,.xij.
Fiat Ceratum molle.

A Cerote to assuage pain of inflammations, gowtes, or otherwise.
Baker.
Rec. Cerae albae.j. croci.j. opij.iiij. olei rosac. q.s. Opiu^ and crocus in
aceto macerentur: Then incorporate them with the Wax and Oil to a Cerote.
Apply it to the place it self; and also for a good compass about it. Shift
it often.

Clisters.
A Clister mollificatiue in the cure of Phlegmon.
REc. Althaeae totius, maluae, attriplicis, Calmeteus.
violarum, parietariae, branchae vrsinae, lactucae, ana.m.j. quatuor sem. frig.
contusorum, ana..iij. sem. anisi, foeniculi, ana..j. prunorum dulc. paria vj.
florum violar. buglossae, nymphaeae, ana.p.j. Boil them and take of the
decoction after it is strained one pound and a half, sacchari, mellis rosati
colati, ana. quart. ss. olei violarum.iij.ss. salis tantillum. Let this be
ministered long before meat.

A Clister for the going forth of the navel.
Rec. Anisi, cymini, ameos, Weckerus.
ana..j. rutae m.j.ss. Boil them in water sufficient, and take of the
decoction.x. put thereto olei rutacei, laurini, ana..j.ss. salis indi, salis
gemmae, ana..ss. sacchari rubr..j.ss. Make of them a Clister to be ministered
every day before meat.

A Clister for the inflammation of Uvula.
Rec. Herbarum mollientium, Calmeteus.
ana.m.j. betonicae, melissae, ana.m.ss. florum cha^maemeli, staechados,
sambuci, ana.p.j. prunorum and caricarum pinguium, ana. paria vj. seminis anisi
and faeniculi, ana..ij. sem. cartami contusi.j. agarici trochisc..iij. sem.
lini and foenugraeci, ana..ss. colocynthid..j.ss. Boil them in water
sufficient, then in one pound and half of the strained decoction, dissolve
cassiae cum zaccharo and catholico, ana..ss. elect. indi maioris vel
benedictiz. vj. olei de lilijs.iij. succi cyclaminis, mellis rosati colati,
ana..j.ss. vitellos duos ouorum, salis parum. Fiat Clister.

A Clister for a flux of choler chauncing about wounds.
Vesalius.
Rec. Fol. mercurialis, betarum, caulium ana.q.s.sem. cartami fol. centaurij
minoris violarum ana..j. Boil them in sufficient water: and take of the
decoction one pound and a half, or one pound, hierae simpl. cassiae extractae,
ana..ij. mellis rosati colati,.iiij. salis cochleare vnum, olei violei.iij.
Fiat.

A Clister for the biting of a mad dog.
Valeriola.
Rec. Maluae, althaeae amborum cum radicibus, matrum violarum, branchae vrsinae,
mercurialis, melissophylli, ana.m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti and rosmarini,
ana. p.j. epithymi.ss. furfuris p.j. Boil them all in the broth of a Weathers
head, and fat guts, sufficient until they come to the measure of a pint,
then strained add thereto catholici,.j. confectionis hamech,.iij. olei
violacei.iiij. sacchari rub..j. Fiat Clister.

A Clister for wounds in the belly and side.
Rec. malu. althaeae, mercurialis, betae, Valeriola.
caulium rubrorum, ana. m.j. thymi m.ss. satureiae tantundem, florum
chamaemeli, et meliloti, ana. p.j. sem. lini, foenugraeci, anisi, aneti,
ana..iij. furfuris p.j. Boil and strain them, dissolve in one pound of the
straining catholici.j. hierae picrae Gal.z.iij. olei violacei,.iij. zacchari
rubr..j. Fiat.

A Clister for erosion of the intrailles in the cure of Alopecia Gallica.
Rec. Hordei integri lib.ss. maluaru^, Calme^eus.
violaru^, ana.m.ij. Make a decoction, in a pound thereof dissolve vitellorum
ouorum nu.ij. olei violacei.iij. ping. caprae,.ij. olei rosarum.j.ss. Make the
Clister, which must be put in warm, that the fat be not cold, and cast it in
often if need do require.

A Clister to be used in the cure of the ulcers in the yard.
Andreas Lacuna.
Rec. Fol. maluarum, violarum, parie^ariae, and lactucae, ana.m.j. hordei
mundati, prunorum damascenorum, ana.p.j. Boil them in sufficient water, add
to the strained decoction pulpae cassiae.j. thodomelitis, olei violacei,
ana..ij. etc.

Colleries.
A Collerie to comfort and stay the flux of humors in the eyes.
REc. Boliarmenij,.j. tutiae, sang. draconis, Vesalius.
dragaganti, gummi arab. ana..ss. Grind them with aquae rosaceae lib.j. which
being mixed together, put them into a narrow mouthed vial of glass well
stopped: and let them boil in balneo mariae the space of an hour: then remove
it from the fire, and put into the same vini granatorum.ij. This done, strain
it, and drop it into the sore eye warm twice a day.

A Collerie for the matter contained in the eyes between Cornea and Vuea.
Rec. Aquae rosarum, Vigo.
aquae myrtillorum vel plantag. ana..j. aquae faeniculi, vini alb. ana..ss.
sarcoc. cum lacte mulieris nutritae, tutiae praeparatae ana..ij. sacchari candi
de syrupo rosarum.j. myrob. citrinorum.ss. sief albi sine opio, sief de thure,
ana..j.ss. Work all together finely in a mortar, and use it.

A Collerie for the eyes.
Rec. Aquae faeniculi, rosarum, Vesaliu^.
euphragiae, ana..j. cremoris foenugraeci.ij. Wherewith mix tutiae optimae
praepar..ij. Make it, and use it warm.

Another.
Vigo.
Rec. Aquae rosarum, plantag. ana..j. tutiae praeparatae.j.ss. aqua florum
myrtillorum.j.ss. fol. semperviui.x. album. ouorum aliquantulum sub prunis
decoctorum number.iij. sief. alb. sine opio.j.ss. camphorae gran.iij. Let them
stand four hours. Use it warm.

A Collerie for redness and running of the eyes.
Guydo.
Rec. tutiae praeparatae.j. aloes cicotrinae.ss. camphorae.j. aquae rosac.
lib.j.ss. vini granatorum lib.ss. Powder what is to be powdered, mix them with
the rest, and sees them a little on the coals, and strain it to your use.

A Collerie for Opthalmia in the state.
Galen.
Rec. Cerusae dilutae.viij. amyli.iiij. cadmiae vst. lot..ij. gummi arab.
olibani, ana..j. opij.ss. Mix them with rain water sufficient for a Collerie.

Collyrium album Rhasis.
Rhazes.
Rec. Cerusae ablutae.viij. amyli.iij. sarcocollae nutritae cum lacte asinino,
gummi arab. dragaganti ana..ij. opij.v. Mix them with rain water, and make a
Collerie.

A Collerie for any bloody suffusion in the eye.
Rec. Haematitis ablutae.iij. aeris vsti.ij. Guydo.
corallij, margarit perforatar. ana..ss. gummi arabic. and dragaganti,
ana..ij.ss. piperis,.ij. cerusae lotae.j. arsenici rubr. sang. draconis, croci,
carabae, ana..ss. Mix them with the blood of a Hen, and use it with women's
milk that suckleth a maid child.

A Collerie in the beginning of Opthalmia, if the matter be cold.
Rec. Sarcocollae,.v. spicae.ij. rosarum, Mesuae.
croci, ana..ij. amyli, aloes, gummi arab. dragag. ana..j. opij..ss. Mix them
with rain water, and apply thereon a plaster of Mallows and Dill sodden
with wine.

A Collerie for Opthalmia in his declination.
Rec. Tutiae praeparatae, Montispesul.
.ss. lapid. calaminaris praeparatae,.ij. gariophyllor. number.v mellis.j. vini
albi.ij. aquae rosar. quart.j. camphorae.j. Mix it to Art.

A Collerie for wounds in or about the eyes.
Rec. Aquae rosarum.ij.ss. lactis mulieris.iiij. vini albi odoriferi.ij.ss.
sarcocollae, myrrhae, aloes epaticae, zacchari candi, ana..iiij.ss. tutiae
praeparatae.ij. mellis rosaru^..ij. sief. albi sine opio.j. Dissolve the sief,
Sugar, and Gum, in woman's milk with the rose water and wine, then put in the
sief with tutia finely powdered, but not before all the rest be strained.

A Collerie for a Fistula.
Weckerus
Rec. Aquae vitae.ij. vini maluat..j. mellis rosati colat..x. myrrhae, radicum
peucedani triti, ana..ij. sarcocol. aloes, ana..j.ss. Mix them, and let them
boil one walme, use it with a syringe.

A Collerie to cicatrize an ulcer in the yard.
Andreas Lacuna.
Rec. Aquae plantag. and rosac. ana..iiij. sacchari lapidiscentis,.j. cerusae,
argenti spumae, aluminis rochae, ana..j.ss. camphorae.ss. Make a Collerie.

A Collerie for an ulcer in the yard.
Idem.
Rec. Rad. althaeae, sem. lini, foenugraeci, ana..ij. Boil them in three
quarters of a pint of water, till the third part be wasted, then strain the
muscilage through a cloth, and put thereto olei amygdal. dulc..iij. and so
make it.

A Collerie to be used in an ulcer in the yard.
Ide^.
Rec. Centauriae minoris, apij, caudae aequinae, ana.m.ss. hordei contus..j.
Boil them in two pound of pure water till the half be wasted, then strain
it, and add thereto rhodomelitis, vel mellis centauriae.ij. Fiatque.

A Collerie for ulcers in the eyes.
Rec. Aquae rosar..ij. aqu. caudae aequinae.j.ss. sief de thure.ss. Vigo.
Then strain it, and with the sief make a Collerie, adding thereto vini
odoriferi.ss.

A Collerie for ulcers about the huckle bone.
Rec. Vini albi lib.j. aq. plantag. aq. rosar. Lanfrancus
ana. quart.j. auripigmenti.ij. floris aeris.j Grind them finely, and mix them
with the rest, and make a Collerie to be administered by a syringe.

A Collerie which does mundifie and incarnate a rotten and filthy ulcer.
Rec. Aquae vitae.ij. myrrhae, aloes, Vigo.
ana..ij. thuris.j.ss. croci.j. peucedani, sarcocollae, ana..j.ss. Mix them
and use it.

To clarify the eyesight.
Rec. Fellis porci, fellis anguillae, Ex manuscripto.
fellis galli gallinacei, ana even portions: temper the^ cum melle and aqua
fontanea limpidissima: so keep it in a brazen vessel, and put thereof into
the eyes.

Decoctions, Diet, and wound drinks.
A Drink to wast Scrophules and kernellie knots.
Petrus His. Io. Liebault.
SVccus herbae sanctae mariae and agrimoniae, mixed cum vino rubro, and given
every day to drink from the beginning of March to August.

Another often proved.
Petrus His. Io. Lieb.
Succus agrimoniae, and serum lactis given on an empty stomach for ix. days
together every decreasing time of the Moon.

A Decoction or Drink to cure the Rupture.
Rosa Anglicana.
Rec. Plantag. rosarum, iaceae alb. and nigrae, consolidae ma. and mino.
auentiae, ( that is, gariophyllatae) valerianae, caudae equinae, verbenae,
ana.m.j. epatic. m.ij. cinamomi, nucis moscatae, corallij albi and rubr.
ana..ss. zacchari vel mellis, ana. lib.ss. vel.q.s. Hereof make your decoction,
and if there be added sumac. radix brusci, and quinque neruia, it will be more
available.

A Drink for green wounds.
Rec. Vini albi lib.viij. aquae com. lib.x. Clowes.
zacchari albi lib.ij. consolidae vtriusque, filicis aquaticae, calendulae,
ophioglossi, chelidonij, polipodij quercini, nummulariae, lilij conuallij,
sanamundae, diapensiae, veronicae, verbenacae, pimpinellae, ana.m.j. Boil all
these in balneo mariae five hours, and so let it rest till it be cold. Let
the patient drink thereof three times a day, but especially morning and
evening.

A vulnerarie Drink to be used the first seven days.
Rec. Consolidae vtriusque, veronicae, Quercetanus.
cyclamini, ana. m.j. astacos ex purgatos nu. iiij. vini albi. mensuras ij.
Circulate them in balneo three days, after that strain them, and hereof give
a spoonefull in the morning.

Another.
Rec. Oculorum cancri pulu..ss. mummiae.ij. boli armeni,.j.ss. agrimoniae,
ophioglossi, veronicae and cyclamini, ana.m.j. spermatis ceti.j. Let them mix
and macerate together with white wine all one night in balneo mariae. Hereof
give two spoonefuls morning, and evening also if need be. These drive away
inflammations, and are convenient where are burnings.

A wound drink to be used after those first seven days.
Quercetanus.
Rec. Macis, oculoru^ cancri, zedoariae, ana..iij. mu^miae, galangae minoris,
ana^.ij. nucis vomicae.j.ss. To these being gross beaten and put into a glass
vessel, power upon them vini albi men's. j.ss. Macerate them in a most gentle
heat two days. The quantity is one spoonful morning and evening: the virtue
cannot be sufficiently commended.

A wound drink for poisoned shot.
Quercetanus.
Rec. Florum vincae, peruincae, lilij conuallij, ana. p.j. galangae, zedoariae,
ana..ij. boli armeniae verae, mu^miae, ana..j. spermatis ce^i.ss. vini albi
men's.ij. Digest and circulate them in bal. mariae four days. Use it one
spoonefull at morning and evening.

A wound drink to be used where bones are fractured by gunshot.
Quercetanus.
Rec. Aristolochiae, cyclaminis, serpentariae, co^solidae vtriusque, geranij
ana.m.j. sabini m.ss. macis, zedoariae and oculorum cancri, ana..ss. mu^miae,
galangae minor. ana..j.ss. Shred and stamp the herbs finely, the rest make
into gross powder, boil them in a double vessel four hours cum vini albi
men's. j. and use it morning and evening. This (says the author) is better than
all those splints wherewith some are sore tormented.

A wound drink.
Rec. Saniculae, sanamundae, rumicis, Gilbertus.
canabis, sem. caulium rubr. consolidae minoris, rubiae maioris, of each a
quantity: bruise them and boil them in wine perfectly, and let them abide in
the wine all one night after: in the morning strain it and give part thereof.
This cures any wound laying aloft but a plantaine leaf.

Another.
Rec. Caulium rub. canabis, apij, Gilbertus.
rubiae ma. ana. a like quantity, and make it in manner aforesaid.

Another.
Which is to be made exapio, Gilbertus.
arnoglossa, lanceolata, sanamunda, consolida, vtraque rubia and caul.

Another.
Ex sanamunda, pimpinella, saluia, Gilbertus.
carduo benedicto, agrimonia, pede columbino, plantagine, centinodio, lingua
auis, and spergula.

Another.
Gilbertus.
Ex sanamunda, betonica, saluia, hedera terrestri, agrimonia, pilosella,
pimpinella, violaria, plantagine, melagine. Draw out the juice of these
herbs, and boil it with your wine, then give it to drin^e: but mark that you
withdraw daily of the quantity of your melag. which was added, least the
wound should at first too suddenly close together.

Another.
Gilbert.
Ex angellica, betonica, agrimonia, pilosella, hedera terrestris, septem
neruia, violaria, but least of the angellica. Boil them in wine, let the
patient drink of it thrice a day, and the oft^er the sooner whole.

Another.
Gilbert.
Rec. Betonicae, agrimoniae, fragariae, asari, violariae, linguae bouis,
ambrosij, plantaginis, quinque folij, hyperici, spicae, linguae auis,
pimpinellae, ana. m.j. Stamp them and boil them in wine, strain them and put
too honey, and a hundred grains of pepper, if the party have no fever.

Another which he much commends.
Is to be made ex caul rubr. and rubia, Gilbert.
and teneritatibus rumicis and sem. canabis vel teneritate ipsius herbae and
sanamunda, and consolida minore and sanicula, of each a like proportion, save
that you must take a double portion of the rubia, stamp your herbs and sees
them in wine to the wasting of the third part. This may you also sweeten with
honey or sugar for delicate persons, and give thereof morning and evening.

Certain rules which the author observed in the ordaining of the drinks.
1 That if there were danger of a fever, then these drinks were made with
water and sugar, and not with wine and honey.

2 That the patients diet should be free from milk, cheese, eggs, fruits,
and flesh of vngelded beasts or fowls, and that he should eat unleavened
bread. As for carnal copulation all other authors forbid.

A more extraordinary practice by wounddrinkes, which the same author
delivers.
Rec. Succum pilosillae, give to the patient (that is wounded in what place
soever) to drink: if he cast it again, he shall dye: if he retain it, he
shall live, and then for the first day give him to drink plantaginem and
fragariam, the second day give him to drink those and gariophyllatae, the third
day add to those three pilosellam, and give him so to the fifth: the fifth day
put too the former hederam terrestrem till the seventh day. After which you
shall in the same order begin to withdraw, till you come to the herbs of the
first day, wherewith you began.

Another order which Gilbertus shows to have been practiced by some.
First they wash the wound with warm water, next they apply the lard of Bacon
stamped with wormwood for three days: after that whites of Eggs with flax
for four days. In the mean time they give also a drink made ex vino vel
ceruisia and medie^ate mellis, with which also is boiled succus consolidae mi.
and saniculae, and absynthij, and foeniculi, of which they gave every morning a
full cup fasting, which would issue out by the wound and mitigate pain: then
applied they to consolidate the wound when it was mundified. Rec. olibani,
sarcocollae, ana. pares portiones, aloes quantum est medium istorum. Make these
in fine powder, which then shall consolidate the wound in ii. days, though it
be very large. Also puluis cornu ceruini shuts up a wound, and takes away
the moist disposition.

A drink to prove the curablenes of a wounded patient.
Rec. De succo pimpinellae quantum testa oui capit. Rosa Ang.
Give it to the wounded patient to drink: if he cast it again he shall dye;
otherwise not, but it shall go all forth at the wound green. Some draw forth
the juice with white wine, and so give it to drink.

Another.
Rec. Betonicae, leuistici, nepitae, prouencae, ana..j. Rosa Ang.
Mix them with a little honey and give it: if it go forth by the wound he
shall live; if not, he shall dye.

Another.
Rec. Rubiae maioris, Rosa A^g.
sumitatum canabis cum semine tanaceti siluestris and oleris rubei, and give it
to drink: if it go all forth by the wound ^e shall live: if not, he shall dye.

A healing drink.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Pimpinellae, buglossae, sanamundae, agrimoniae, ana.m.ss. Pound them and
mix them with water, wine or ale, and so give it. It will go forth by the
wound and heal well.

Another.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Sanamundae, fol. canabis, fol. caulis rub. pilosellae, buglossae, nardi
celticae vel gallicae, ^aliuncae, ana.m.ss. seminis canabis.j. Pound them in a
mortar with very good wine, and decoct them a little, and thereof give three
spoonefuls in the morning, and three a good while after dinner.

Another.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Pedis columbini cum radice sua. radic. consolidae, radicum osmundae,
ozimi, cardui benedicti, senationis, fabariae, sumitat. rubi, ana.q.s. Bruise
them and put them into a pot, and power upon them white wine or ale, and give
it morning and evening for nine days. It cures any wound or rupture.

Another.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Plantag. gariophyllatae, sem. canabis, ana.q.s. rubiae maioris plus. If
there be a bone broken, add con^olidae minoris in double quantity. If the
wound be in the head, boil them in water; if in the bulk of the body, boil
them in ale; and if the hurt be beneath the navel, then sees them in wine.

A wound drink in case that nature needs relief and strengthening.
Rec. Zinzibris albi, galangae, Rosa Angl.
cinamomi, cardamomi, ana..j. piperis longi.ss. gentianae.ss. croci.j. Make
your infusion in very good wine, and give of it twice a day for three days.

The like is made.
Ex vino optimo and cinamomo and spica, Rosa Angl.
and zinzibre and cubebis, gariophyllis, nuce moscata, calamo aromatico and
saluia. And it excellently comfort and refreshes wounded persons. But in
wounds of the breast put in his drink, hyssope, liquorice, reasins and sugar:
give also diapenidion and diadragagantum.

A wound drink.
Rec. Ceruisiae recent. coctae, Paracelsus.
mensuras xx. succi herbae cornu cerui mensuram j. Let them purge, and fine
together to be drunk, three times a day.

Another chief one.
Is, ex succo de cornibus cerui distillato.

Another.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Rad. cyclaminis.ss. diapensiae m.j. consolidae mediae m.ss. Boil them in
lib.ss. vini to the consumption of the third part: to these may be added in
this sort for to give, Rec. decocti.iij. olei cariophyllorum distillati.j. Mix
them, and hereof give three times a day to drink.

Another.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Saniculae, pyrolae, centaureae, betonicae, ana.m.j. consolidae regalis,
agrimoniae, ana.m.ij. Boil them in old white wine in balneo mariae one hour
or two so stopped as there be no breathing out.

Another.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Ophioglossi m.iij. alchimillae m.ij. pirolae minoris m j. periclimeni
m.j.ss. rhabarbari.j. reupontici.iij. Boil all together in wine, in manner
aforesaid.

Another.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Angellicae.ss. mummiae.j. spermatis ceti.ij. glandium.ij. consolidae
minoris m.ij. cyclaminis.ij. pyrolae vtriusque ana.m.ij. vini q.s. whereto you
may add a third part of water, or as you see good.

Another.
Rec. Baccarum iuniperi lib.ij. well bruised with these following: Paracelsus.
pyrolae vtriusque, periclimeni, saniculae alb. radic. ana.m.ss. ophioglossi,
m.j.ss. consolidae ma. aristolochiae, ana..v. persicariae.iiij. Distill them
all together, and after in that water sees what vulnerarie herbs you will;
adding too baccas iuniperinas cum cinamomo.

Another.
Rec. Flor. spicae, m.j. hypericonis, Paracelsus.
m.iiij. verbasci m.ij. betonicae, centaurij minoris, prunellae, ana.m.ss. Of
these prepare your drink in manner aforesaid.

Another excellent wound drink.
Rec. Equiseti (that kind which is called Hippuris) filicis floridae, Iarre^^
ana.m.j. musci clauati, lychenis, ana.m.ss. centaurij maioris, prunellae,
consolidae mediae, rubiaetinctorum, saniculae, cariophyllatae (both roots and
leaves) geranij cretici, betonicae, virgae aureae, ana.m.j. Stamp all these
herbs, and put them into an earthen po^ with vini albi lib.xij. and boil them
on a gentle fire to the consumption of the half, then strain it, and put to
it mellis depurati and opt. lib. vj. Let it boil a little, hereof give ii.
spoonefuls at morning, and as much at night in the distilled water of the
greater Comfrey.

Another excellent distilled wound drink for delicate persons, whose taste and
eye must both be satisfied.
Banester.
Rec. Hyperici m.ij. scabiosae, m.j. agrimoniae, m.j.ss. consolidae ma. and mi.
ana.m.ij.ss. saluiae, hyssopi, ana.m.j. polypodij.iiij rad. consolidae ma..ij.
rad. helenij.v. glycyrrhizae.vj. mellis despumati lib.ss. (vel zacchari) vini
cretici lib.vj stillatitij liquoris cardui benedicti and scabiosae, ana. lib.j.
Simul contundantur and reponantur in vase figulino per 10. dies: Then with a
glass limbeck distill it at a gentle fire, and give thereof.iij. early in the
morning, as much before dinner, and again as much before supper one hour.
Also use the same for a fomentation or iniection to the wound.

A wound drink for the head.
Quercetanus.
Rec. Florum lilij conuallij and betonicae, ana.p.j. galangae, macis, ana..iij.
persicariae, chelidonij, vincae peruincae, veronicae, and centaurij, ana.m.ss.
Macerate them, and use them morning and evening.

A wound drink for the breast.
Rec. Succi verbenae, betonicae, Quercetanus.
veronicae ana..ij. aquae cinamomi lib.j. Macerate them as before.

Another for that purpose.
Rec. Consolidae maioris and mediae, Schylandrus.
sani^ulae, betonicae, ana.m.j. ophioglossi, agrimoniae, ana.m.ss.
rhabarbari.ss. mummiae sincerae.ij. spermatis ceti.j. Decoct them in a double
vessel close stopped, give ten drammes at a draught morning and evening.

A vulnerarie drink for wounds in the belly.
Rec. Boli armeni.ss. consolidae vtriusque, Quercetanus.
ana.m.j. galangae,.ij. Temper them with wine as aforesaid.

A decoction for wounds in the head.
Rec. Passularum enucleatarum, glycyrrhizae, ana..j. tamarindorum, iuiubarum,
iridis, hyssopi ana..ss. hordei.ij. foenugraeci.ij. capillorum veneris.^s.
Boil them in a pottle of rain water till half be wasted, and keep it to
your use.

Another.
Rec. Hordei mundim.ij glycyrrhizae razae.iij. sem. foeniculi.j.ss. iuiubarum
and sebesten, ana. nu.x. passularum enucleatarum.j. sacchari candi.iiij.
hyssopi m.j. capillorum veneris.j. sacchari rosarum.j. Boil them in sufficient
quantity of water till half be consumed, then strain it and clarify it
with the white of an Egg, and in the end add thereto loch de pino.j. and use
it.

A wound drink especially against fistulous dispositions of wounds in the
breast.
Alfonsus ^^rrius.
Rec. Pilosellae, pimpinellae cum radicibus gariophyllatae, rad. gentianae,
atque arthemisiae, matrum violarum subrubentiu^, brassicae veterum foliorum,
cymarum canabis, senationum, rubiae, quae been mundata sint, ana.m.j. cinamomi,
galangae, cardamomi, meligettae, gariophyllorum, ana..ss. vini albi odorati
lib.xx. When these have boiled to the half strain them, and put too mellis
despumati lib. ij. Again, sees them at a soft fire in a glass vessel to the
wasting of a pint more. Hereof give lib. ss. or.iiij. in the morning four
hours before dinner.

A drink for the curing of ulcers.
Rec. Vitrioli.v. Paracelsus.
Hang it in a vessel with twenty measures of wine: so let them work, and
fine together. Give a spoonefull at a time.

Another.
Rec. Vini recentis mensuras xl. Paracelsus.
Let it purge with liquoris tartari distillati lib.j. And hereof give one
spoonefull at a time.

Another.
Macerate the herb centaurium in aqua ardente, Paracelsu^.
and after draw out his quintessence after the common manner. Of this
extraction, give x. grains in one spoonful of some vulnerarie distilled water.

Another.
Sees Esula, herb, Paracelsus.
root and seed in sero lactis, till you have his substance, then strain it,
and after sees away all his liquor gently, and keep the thick remainder,
whereof give a little every day in the morning to drink.

A Fistula drink of great commendation.
Petrus His. Io Liebault.
Rec. Caulium rub. foeniculi, abrotani, tanaceti, fragariae, fol. rubiae
maioris, herbae Roberti, plantaginis, apij, foliorum canabis, ana like
quantity, artus muris. Boil them in white wine, and add too honey: hereof
both give to drink, and iniect also into the ulcer.

Another to be used in like sort, being of manifold experience.
Petrus His. Io. Lieb.
Rec. Rad. and fol. vel sem. sinapis, sumitatum lapatij acuti, rad. althaeae,
ma. pimpinellae, fol. caulis rub. ana like quantity, tanaceti q.s. Decoct them
in wine, strain them and put in some honey.

A decoction for a hydropike body that has ulcers.
Rec. Ligni sancti lib. j.ss. rad. chinae.j. aquae fontanae lib. xvj. vini albi
lib.ij. cui addas radicum asparagi, foeniculi, apij petroselini, graminis,
rusci, rubiae tinctorum, iridis recentis, ana..ij. radicum azari, cort. rad.
tormentillae, tamarisci, capparis, ana..j agrimoniae, cychoriae, ceteracis,
capill. ven. ana, m.j. soldanellae m.j.ss. anisorum, passularum enucleatarum
number. xx. cinamomi electi.iij. cicerum rubr.p.ij. trium florum cordialiu^,
ana.p.ij. maratri, ameos, ana..iij. sem. melonum contus..j. bulliant ad consum.
vnius partis, deinde exprime and add sir. de eupatorio.iij. Clarify and make
it sweet cum santalo citrino, cinamomo and iride, ana..j. Make your decoction
for four days.

A great decoction to provoke sweat, called syrupus Sancti Ambrosij.
Rec. Milij excorticati p.j. aquae pluuialis lib. j.ss. D. Foster.
Boil them till the seed do break, then put to them vini albi veteris
lib.ss. then give them a heat together, and after strain them. Hereof give
six ounces at a draught morning and evening after euacuation. This shall
provoke sweat, yet more strongly if ramentum cornu taurini be boiled also cum
milio.

A decoction for such as are weak and addicted to melancholy, being affected
with lues venerea.
Rec. Ligni aloes.ij. cinamomi.j. coriandri praeparati.iij. sebesten, Matthiolus
iuiubarum, ana..j. glycyrrhizae razae.j. florum cordialium m.j. haec omnia ex
aquae lib.x. vsque ad tertias concoquantur, inde colentur and addatur
sacchari.vj.

A drink or Almond milk for such as have ulcers in the yard.
Andreas Lacuna.
Rec. Amygdalarum dulcium a pelliculis mundatarum.j. sem. frigidorum ma.
recent. and mundat. ana..ss. seminis papaueris albi.j. Beat them together and
steep them in the decoction of liquorice, and after the milk is strained out
and made indifferent warm, add thereto sacchari clarissimi.j. to make it
sweet, and so minister it.

A decoction for a Fistula.
Rosa Anglicana.
Rec. Cardui benedicti, pedis columbini, ana.m.j. eupatorij, summitatu^ rubi
ana. m.ss. Decoct them, and with honey make it as a syrup, which give the
patient to drink, and lay upon the Fistula the substance of the herbs.

A drink for the Fistula in the inner parts.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Agrimoniae, tapsibarbati, sanamundae, chelidonij, absynthij, brioniae,
fol. caulis rub. herbae Roberti, pedis columbini, summitatu^ rubi, pimpinellae,
saluiae, cardui benedicti, lanceolatae, hyssopi, plantaginis, gallitrici,
abrotani, marrubij albi, millefolij, caprifolij, scolopendriae, ana. parts
aequales, boil them in water, wine, and honey, and give it to drink morning
and evening.

A drink for the Fistula.
Rec. Aquarum cyclaminis, Paracelsus.
de folijs serpentinae, sophiae, ana..iiij. Mix them for a draught, of such
give four ounces for a quantity morning and evening unto the end.

Another.
Rec. Aquarum de cornibus cerui, Paracelsus.
centaureae, consolidae aureae, ana..iij. parthenionis.iiij.ss. To these add
rhabarbari, mannae electae, spermatis ceti, ana..j. This mixture standing in a
vessel must be oftentimes stirred together, and give thereof to drink morning
and evening one spooneful, and three spoonefulles of wine immediately upon that.

A drink for the biting of a mad dog.
Rec. Rutae, Ex manuscripto.
p.j. allij.ss. nucleorum nucum auellanarum m.j. Stamp them and strain them
with stale ale, add thereto theriacae opt..j. Give it the patient warm, and
the dregs strained from it apply to the sore.

To tame and kill the Canker by inward cure.
Ius cancrorum fluuialium ex lacte asinino v. diebus exhibitus, Altimarus.
ita vt totidem subinde diebus ipsimet cancri comedantur. Such a course (says
the author) being seven times performed, makes the Cancer in a woman most
gentle and tractable, so as the rest may be performed by the use of simple
epithemes.

Defensatiues.
A Defensatiue to be used in the cure of Gangraena.
REc. Olei rosarum, omphacini, Guydo.
olei myrtini, violarum, ana..j. aceti acerrimi.ij succi plantag. solani,
absynthij, scabiosae, consolidae minoris, ana..j. Boil all together to the
consumption of the iuyces, then add thereto boli armenij, sang. draconis, omn.
sandalorum, macis, cinamomi, squinanti, ciperi, ana..j. Mix them together, and
with Wax sufficient make it in a good form.

Another for the same.
Rec. Olei rosati, myrtini, Weckerus.
ana..iiij.ss. succi plantag. et solatri, ana..ij. Boil them to the
consumption of the iuy^es, and add to the straining cerae albae.j.ss. farinae
fabarum, hordei and lentium ana..ss. sandalorum omn. ana..ij.ss^ boli armeni.j
pulueris myrti,.j. Mix them and make a defensatiue to be applied round about
the place.

A defensatiue for wounds.
Rec. Olei rosac. lib.j. olei cham..iiij. butyri recentis.iiij. cerusae, terrae
sigillatae, ana..iiij. sandali alb. and citr. ana..ij. lapid. tutiae.j. quatuor
sem. frigidorum maioru^, ana..j. coralli albi.iij. albumin. ouorum nu. ij.
aceti rosacei.j. sang. draconis.iij. Powder which are to be powdered, and melt
the rest with viniger: and after it is removed from the fire, put in the rest
of the powders, stirring them well until they be cold.

Another.
Clowes.
Rec. Empl. diachalciteos lib.j.ss. succi semperuiui, plantag. solani,
ana..j.ss. olei ros..ij.ss. olei myrtini j. albuminu^ ouor. nu.ij. aceti
ros..j. Misce.

A Defensatiue to be used in wounds in the arms.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei rosati, olei myrtini, ana..iij. olei chamaemeli,.ij. farinae fabarum
and hordei, ana..j. boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana..vj. sandalorum omnium,
ana..ij. rosarum, myrtillor. ana..j.ss. cerae albae..j.ss. aceti rosac..iij.
succi plantag. succi solatri, and lactucae, ana..ss. Melt the Wax with the
Oil and the iuyces, and let them boil one walme, and make it to the manner of
a plaster.

A Defensatiue for an ulcer.
Valeriola.
Rec. Vnguenti de bolo,.vj. omn. sandalorum.j.ss. pulueris myrtillorum, and
rosarum, ana..ij. olei rosac. et myrtini, ana..j.ss aceti rosarum.ij. albumen
vnius oui. Mix them well together, and use it.

A Defensatiue to be used when any of the vertebres are broken.
Rec. Olei myrtini, olei rosarum, Vesaliu^.
ana..iij. cerae albae.j.ss. Melt the Wax with the Oils at a gentle fire, and
before it be cold add thereto boli armenij.j. omnium sandalorum.j farinae
fabaceae.x. farinae hordeaceae.j.ss. Mix them, and apply them in place of a
Cerote.

A Defensatiue to be applied in the taking of a member.
Rec. Boli armenij.iiij. terrae sigillatae, plumbi vsti, ana..iiij.ss.
semperuiui, succi plantag. and absynthij, ana..j. aceti rosacei, albuminum
ouorum, ana.q.s.

A Defensatiue very comfortable.
Rec. Olei myrtini.ij.ss. olei rosarum.ij. seui ceruini.iij. cinabrij..j
cerusae.j.ss. Mix them and boil them till they be black, adding thereto
cerae alb..ss. camphorae.iij. tutiae in aquae plantaginis praeparatae.ij.
Stir it well together till it be cold, and make a plaster.

A defensatiue for wa^ring eyes.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Cineris lanae non lotae and cum albumine oui, apply it as a plaster
upon the forhead and temples. It takes away the flux and pain of the eyes.

An excellent Defensive in all wounds.
Goodrus.
Rec. Diapalmae.viij. olei ros. succi solani, and plantag. ana.ij. vnguenti
populeonis.j.ss. Let these be boiled with a soft fire till the juice be
consumed, putting in the juice by little and little, and last of all your
Populeon.

A defensatiue to keep back all flux of humors flowing to any part.
Renne^us.
Rec. Crassulae ma. and minoris, plantaginis maioris, solani, fol. hyosciami,
semperviui, rostri ciconiae, ana.m.ij. Stamp all these together, then boil
them in three pound of oil Olive till all the liquor be consumed. Strain it.
Rec. olei huius lib.ij.ss. lapidis calaminaris praeparati, terrae sigillatae,
ana.ij. cerussae.iiij. lithargyrij.iij. caphurae.j. cerae albae, aceti rosacei,
ana. lib.ss. Melt your wax and oil together, put in the rest made in very
fine powder, and lastly the viniger, labor them in a mortar until it come to
the form of an unguent.

Digestiues.
A Digestive for contused wounds.
REc. Terebinthinae lotae.ij. mellis rosacei.iiij. butyri recent..vj. radic.
iridis, aloes, sarcocollae, myrrhae, ana..j.ss. aristolochiae rotundae.ss.
Powder which are to be powdered, and make it to Art.

A Digestive proper for wounds.
Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae.iij.ss. mellis rosarum.j. olei lumbricorum.ss.
vitellos duos ouorum, olei rosarum.ss. myrrhae.ij. masticis.j. sarcocollae.ss.
farinae hordei.ss. Powder which are to be powdered, and make it to Art.

A Digestive.
Rec. Terebint^ lotae in aqua vitae, Clowes^
.iiij. vitellos ouorum duos, vng. populei simpl..ij. olei rosarum.ss. mercurij
praecipitati,.ij. croci.j. Mix them.

A Digestive for hollow ulcers and Impostumes.
Rec. Olei rosarum.iiij. olei lumbricorum and hypericonis, ana..ij.ss. mellis
rosarum,.v. cerae, resinae pini, resinae, butyri recentis, ana..iij. terebint.
purae.vj. succi apij and plantaginis, ana..iiij. Melt them at the fire, and
add thereto sarcocollae.j. myrrhae.iij. croci.ss. aloes epatic..ss. Powder
what is to be powdered, and with the yolks of four Eggs make it to Art.

Another very good.
Rec. Mellis Rosac..viij. sarcocollae.ss. myrrhae, thuris, ana..iij. succi
apij.iij. olei rosarum.j.ss. vitellos tres ouorum, terebint..j. farinae
hordei.ss. Mix them to Art.

A Digestive to remove an escar.
Rec. Terebinthinae,.iiij. vitellos ouorum nu.ij. mellis rosacei.ss. olei
liliacei, olei amygdalarum dulcium, pinguedinis capi, ana..j.ss. butyri
recent..j. Make it to Art.

Electuaries.
An Electuarie for the Canker not vlcerated.
REc. Pulueris cancrorum.iij. pulueris ranarum, Weckeru^.
pulueris de limacibus, ana..ij. cort. citri conditi.ss. rasurae eboris, ossis
de cord cerui, ana..iij. xylobalsami, ligni aloes, sandali moscat. coralli
rubr. limaturae chalybis, ana..ij. sem. acetosae, sem. citri and endiuiae,
ana..j. ambrae.ss. conseruae boraginis, buglossae, and anthos, ana..ij. Mix
them for an Electuarie, whereof you may give any hour at your pleasure.

Another.
Rec. Confectionis de hyacintho.j.ss. confectionis alchermes, Weckerus.
.iij. conseru. rosarum, conseru. radic. buglossae ana..j. syrupi de pomis
quant. sufficit. Fiat Electuarium. Whereof give three times a week ii. hours
before meat the value of a nut, drinking upon it a little good wine delayed
with buglosse water.

An Electuarie to be used in the cure of a rupture.
Rec. Conseruae symphiti maioris, Calmeteus.
and rosarum antiquae, corticum citri, saccharo conditorum, ana..j. figillae
mariae, iaceae albae and nigrae, ana..ij. boli armenij in aqua rosarum loti,
sanguinis draconis, ana..ij.ss. acaciae, hypocistidos, ana..j.ss. carnium
citoniorum saccharo conditarum sieve aromatibus.ij. limaturae chalybis,.j.
syrupi myrtini q.s. Make it an electuarie.

An Electuarie to digest the humor in the cure of Bubo.
Vesalius.
Rec. Sanguinis siccati anatis masculi, anatis foemininae, sanguinis anseris and
haedi, rutae siluestris, seminis foeniculi, cumini, anethi, sem. naporum,
ana..iij. radicum gentianae, trifolij, squinanti, thuris, rosarum rub.
ana..iiij. piperis albi and longi, phu, costi, cinamomi, anisi, ana..ij.
myrrhae electae, spicae nardi, ana..vj. asari, ammoniaci, amaraci, agarici,
ana..ij. carpobalsami gra.xx. iridis, croci, rhabarbari, gingibris, masticis,
ana..j. stoechados,.v. haec omnia misce and paretur puluis subtilissimus, and
cum lib. iiij. mellis de^pumati optimi misceantur. And make it an Electuarie.

An Electuarie for vomiting of blood by reason of a bruise or otherwise.
Rec. Conseruae rosarum, and symphiti maioris ana...j. boli armenij loti in
aqua rosarum, lapidis haematitis, ana..j. coralli rubri.ss. acaciae, baccarum
myrti, ana..j. penidiarum.ss. zacchari.iiij. Fiat Elect. dosis est.ss. with red
wine in the morning or before meat.

An Electuarie for the palsy and crampe, happening to wounded patients, being
void of learned counsel.
Rec. Diasatyrionis vel radicum eius conditorum.j. radicum eryngij condit..ss.
diamosci dulcis.j. specierum electuarij de gemmis.j. dianisi.ss. diagalangae,
diatrion pipereon, ana..ss. radicu^ acori and paeoniae, ana..ss.
mithridatij.ij. conseruae herbae paralysis.iij. conseruae anthos.ij.
sacchari.vj. cum aqua saluiae. Fiat Electuarium.

An Electuarie for one that is wounded and affected with the Crampe.
Rec. Dianisi, diamoscu dulcis, dianthos, ana..iiij. diagalangae.ss.
mithridatij.iij. corticum citri.ss. radicum acori.ij. foliorum saluiae
siccae.ss. conseruae anthos.j. zacchari.vj. cum aqua saluiae; Fiat Electuarium.

An Electuarie very excellent for the diseases of the stomach happening after
green wounds or long ulcers.
Rec. Capillorum veneris tussilaginis, pulegij, hyssopi, calaminthae, ana..j.
iuiub. and sebesten. ana. number.x. glycyrrhizae.ij. iridis.ij. caricarum pinguium
number.vj. seminis foeniculi.j. foenugraeci,.ij. quatuor sem. frigidorum maiorum,
ana.j. polypodij quercini.j.ss. Bulliant in lib.j.ss. aquae purissimae vsque
ad.vj. coletur and colaturae addatur carnium passularum extract. cum decoctione
predicta, penidiaru^.iiij. nucleorum pini.ss. dia-ireos simplicis.ij pulmonis
vulpis praeparat..ss. d^adragaganti frigid..j.ss. dia calaminthae,.ij.
glycyrrhizae.ss. myrrhae.j. zinzibris albi.ij piperis longi.j. dia hyssopi.j.
zacchari candi.vj. Misce. Dosis est.j. To take at any time.

An Electuarie confortatiue for rebellious ulcers to be used after sweats,
purgations and such like.
Rec. Letificantis Galeni.iij. diamosci dulcis.vj. gariophyllorum.j. electuarij
regum.iiij. elect. de gemmis.ij. conseruae boraginis, buglossae, citoniorum,
ana..j. syrupi de pomis, as much as shall suffice for an Electuarie, of which
give in a morning.ij. or one spoonefull.

An Electuarie against vomiting and weakness of stomach after the cure of
ulcers.
Rec. Succi citoniorum depurat. lib.j. vel eius loco miuae citoniorum, lib.ss.
aceti rosarum.iiij. zacchari lib.ss. Bulliant ad spissitudinem, cui addas
diacinamomi.ij. aromatici rosati.j. diambrae, dianisi dulcis, ana..j.
diacoralli.ss. zinzibris, galangae, piperis albi, ana..ss. Misce and fiat
mixtura, cuius dosis est.ss. To be taken on an empty stomach in the morning,
or before meats, and after,.ij. at a time.

An Electuarie to provoke sleep in dismembring any part, but not without
learned counsel.
Rec. Decoctionis lactucae and portulacae vehementer expressae,.ij. syrupi
papaueris.j. diamarg. frigid..ij. dispermaton,.ij. sem. papaueris albi.ij.
croci.ss. opij.iiij hyosciami.ij. quatuor sem. frigidorum ma. ana..j. succi
glycyrrhizae.ss. gum. arabici, galangae, dragaganti, ana..j. amyli.iij Boil
Sugar together with the decoction and syrup to the consistence of an
Electuarie, or rather higher: then add too the rest in fine powder, but last
of all the crocus, mel, and opium, stirring them long time together. The doss.
est.j.

An Electuarie to resist the malignitie of a festring and stinking Canker.
Anton. Montaguana.
Rec. Pulueris cancrorum fluuialium vel marinarum in lacte suffocatorum, and in
clibano ex siccatorum,.iiij. pulueris canarum, limaciarum, erinaceorum, ana..j.
corticum citri conditorum.ij. rasurae eboris, ossis de cord cerui, ana..iij.
xylobalsami, xyloaloes, santalorum, corallorum, limaturae calybis praeparatae,
ana..ij. sem. acetos. citri, pulu. cardui benedicti, scordij, citrach ana..j.
ambrae, mosci, ana^gra.ij. conseruae boraginis, buglossi, acetosae, sonchi
ana..ij. sir. de pomis ^impl.q.s. Fiat Electuarium. Whereof let the patient
take the quantity of a Chestnut three hours before meat.

Embrocations.
An Embrocation for the creeping Herpes.
REc. Centinodij, plantaginis, solani, Weckerus.
ana. m.j. cupulorum glandium, vel nucum cupressi, ana. paria.x. baccarum et
foliorum myrthi, malicorij, balaustiorum, ana..j. acaciae, hypocistid, ana..vj.
myrrhae, thuris, ana..v. Boil them in Smithes water, and wash the ulcer
therewith and bathe it.

An Embrocation for an oedematous or cold tumor.
Rec. Cinerum sarmentorum vitis, Weckerus.
ficus brassicae, tamarisci, ana.p.j. foliorum ebuli, tamarisci, ana.m.ss. boli
armenij.j.ss. aquae in qua ferrum fuerit extinctum lib.iij. aceti.iiij. Boil
them till the third part be wasted, with the which you shall bathe the tumor,
and bind upon a sponge wet therein.

An Embrocation to maturate Impostumes.
Rec. Radicum althaeae, capitum lilioru^, ana. lib.j. ficuum siccarum nu.x.
violarum, maluarum, ana.m.j. foenugraeci, seminis lini ana..j. Boil them in
sufficient quantity of water, with wheat meal, butter, and oil of sweet
Almonds, of each a small quantity, and make it upon the fire.

An Embrocation against windiness.
Rec. Chamaemeli meliloti, aneti, ana. m.j. sem. maratri, and anisi, ana..ss.
cumini.ij. furfuris.ij. farinae fabarum m.j.ss. milij solis m.ij. Boil them
together with lee and red wine as much as is sufficient.

An Embrocation to be used for asswaging pain of the head in lue venerea.
Augerius Ferr^rius.
Rec. Ramentorum tenuissimorum ligni Indi.ij. saluiae, staecados, ruthae,
ana.m.j. vini antiqui flauescentis opt. lib.ss. olei antiqui lib.j.ss. Decoct
them to the consumption of the half, and with the strained part make
Embrocation.

Fomentations.
A Fomentation for oedema.
REc. Nucum cupressi, granorum sumach, Ambros. Pareus.
balaustij, ana..j. saluiae, origani, calamenti, hyssopi, melissae, ana.m.j.
absynthij, plantag. caudae equinae, tapsi barbati, centinodij, ana. m.ss.
aluminis, tartari and salis communis, ana..j. Boil them in lixiuio communi,
and so use it with spunges.

A Fomentation for suffusion of the eyes.
Rec. Foenugraeci loti.ij. florum chamaemeli p.ss. sem. rutae.iij. Andernacus.
Boil them in sufficient water and use it.

A Fomentation against the enlarging of the apple of the eye.
Rec. Rosarum, myrtillorum, Vigo.
ana. m.j. meliloti, anthos, ana.m.ss. nucum cupressi, nu.ij. vini nigri spissi
lib.j.ss. aquae ros. aquae myrtillorum, ana..iij. Bruise what is to be bruised,
and boil them to the half of the wine and waters. Use it with a sponge.

A fomentation to be used with a sponge when Bubo lurketh in the flesh.
Vesalius.
Rec. Specierum cordialium temperatarum.ss. mosci, ambrae, ana. gra.xx.
camphorae gra.j sandalorum omnium, ana..ss. ligni aloes.j. laudani.ij. vini
maluatici, aquae rosarum, aquae florum myrti, aquae florum arantiorum, ana.
q.s. aceti parum. Bruise the aforesaid things, and mix them with the waters,
wherein you shall dippe a sponge and apply it.

A fomentation for the swelling in the belly, or tumor in the flank called
Bubo venereus.
Valeriola.
Rec. Foliorum absynthij, maioranae, eupatorij very, origani, pulegij,
calaminthae, rutae, ana.m.ss. fol. ebuli, sambuci and cauliu^ rubr. ana.m.j.
fol. querci, lentisci, rubi, and cupressi, ana.m.ss. thymelaeae, soldanellae,
ana. m.j. florum chamaemeli and meliloti, ana.p.j. sem. anisi, anethi, maratri,
cumini conquassatorum, ana..j. nucum cupressi, gallarum omnium contritarum,
ana. paria iiij. aluminis lib.ss. salis communis tantundem. Boil all in lee
made of oak ashes and the stalks of colewortes, then bathe the belly with a
sponge dipped therein.

A fomentation to be used in the cure of a rupture.
Rec. Vini nigri stiptici, Vigo.
lib.iiij. rosarum, balaustiorum, foliorum myrtillorum and granorum eius,
sumach, fol. plantag. hyperici, matri siluae, ana.m.j. radicum, symphiti
vtriusque and foliorum eusdem, ana.m.ss. radicum althaeae.ij. nucum cupressi
nu.iij. hypocisthid..ss. aluminis rochae.ij. aceti rosarum.ij.ss. lycij.iij.
myrrhae, thuris, ana..v. glutinis piscium.j. Boil all together in the
aforesaid wine till half be wasted, then strain it, and with a sponge apply
it.

A fomentation for the windy rupture.
Rec. Cumini, Weckerus.
baccarum lauri, seselios, rutae, ana..j. Boil them in sufficient gentle
binding wine and lee, wherewith you shall bathe the place affected.

A fomentation to dissolve wind in the windy rupture.
Rec. Radicum bistortae, radic. symphiti vtriusque, ana..j.ss. hyperici,
polygoni, foliorum rubi, ana.m.j. sem. cumini, anisi, ana.j. nasturtij
torrefacti.ss. florum staechados, anthos, and centaurij, ana.p.ij. Boil them
in sufficient rain water and wine, and use it with spunges.

A Fomentation for the cold apostume called vndimia in the arms and legs.
Rec. Chamaemeli, meliloti, foliorum myrthi, ana.m.ij. absynthij. squinanti,
staechados, rosarum, matricariae, ana.m.j. coriandri, maratri, ana.m.j. mellis
lib.ss. salis, aluminis rochae, ana..ij.ss. Boil them in water to the
consumption of the third part and use it.

A fomentation for a watrie rupture.
Rec. Lixiuij barbitonsoris, lib.iiij. in quo bulliant seminis cumini.ij. semen
petroselini and apij, ana..ss. salis com. lib.j. And make a Foment.

A fomentation for the hemrhoydes.
Rec. Maluae, bismaluae, brancae vrsinae, ana.m.ij. chamaemeli, staechados
arabici and citrini, ana.m.j. Mix them together and boil them in water
sufficient, and with a sponge foment the place affected.

A fomentation to dissolve, scatter, and vent forth contused blood, making a
bunch or knobbe in the flesh, the skin being whole.
Rec. Vini nigri lib.iij. lixiuij barbitonsoris Vigo.
lib.j.ss. nucum cupressi aliquantulum trituratarum nu.x. myrtillorum, rosarum,
absynthij, ana.m.ss. aluminis rochae.ss. coriandrorum, cymini, calami
aromatici, ana..ij. Boil them all together to the wasting of a third part. A
sponge wet herein warm must be bound to the place, and daily renewed. It
resolves (says the author) marvelously.

Another, which being applied at first, within two dressings (at furthest)
dispatcheth the matter.
Rec. Albumen oui vehementer agitatatum, Arccus.
add hereunto olei myrtini and pulu. myrtillorum, ana..j. Stir them well
together, and with a linen stuph first wet in vinegar and water equal
portions, wrung out again, apply this mixture to the place.

A fomentation for wounds and ulcers, which does comfort and heal.
Rec. Seri lactis lib.iiij. vini sanguinei lib. iiij. vini maluatici, lib.j.
rosaru^ rubrar..iiij. florum anthos, chamaemeli, betonicae, hyperici, meliloti,
saluiae, valerianae, ana.p.iij. mellis rosarum.iiij. rad. symphiti maioris.ss.
aloes epaticae.iiij. vermium terrestr..j. aluminis.ij.ss. iridis.ij.
cinamomi.iij thuris.ij. Powder what is to be powdered and boil them to the
consumption of one pound. Then distill them, and with that liquor bath the
wound or ulcer.

A fomentation against vomiting in the cure of wounds and ulcers or bruses.
Rec. Absynthij, musci odorati, rosarum rubrarum, ana.m.ss. cariophyllorum,
masticis, macis, ana..ij. cinamomi, nucis mosc. ciperi, ana..j. Boil them in
red wine, and being warm moist a sponge therein, and bathe the region of the
ventricle therewith morning and evening.

A fomentation against vomiting after the healing of old ulcers.
Rec. Absynthij, menthae, rosarum rubr. ana..j. galangae, cinamomi, ana..iij
calami odorati.j. masticis.iiij. squinanti.j..j. florum chamaemeli.vj. florum
anthos.iij. zedoariae,.ij. mosci,.j. First bruise the herbs, and then the rest,
and put them in a cloth, and boil them in ii. pound of malmsie, and
rose water three ounces, with the pulpe of one quince, till half be wasted,
and with a sponge foment the region of your stomach indifferently warm; after
that apply the herbs which were sodden, in manner of a cushion, and when it
begins to be cold, renew it warm, especially in the morning and before
meals.

A fomentation for virulent, corrosiue and rebellious ulcers.
Rec. Aquae plantag. aquae rosarum, Vigo.
ana..iij. balaustiorum, myrtillorum, ana. paru^, myrabolanorum citrinorum.ij.
aluminis rochae,.ij.ss. terrae sigillatae,.iij. santalorum omnium, ana..j.
aquae endiuiae,.ij. mellis ros.j. Boil them to the consumption of the third
part. S^raine it, and use it.

A fomentation to dry an ulcer, and to bring it to cicatrization.
Rec. Foliorum plantag. m.ij. Valeri^la.
absynthij m.ss. foliorum oliuae, lentisci, summitatum rubi, ana. m.j. foliorum
betonicae m.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, anthos, hyperici, staechados,
rosarum rubrarum, foliorum ac granorum myrti, ana. m.j. Make your decoction in
water sufficient, and in the end add thereto vini rubri astringentis
lib.iiij. and use it.

A fomentation for an ulcer in the yard.
Andreas Lacuna.
Rec. Foliorum ma^uarum m.j. radicum apij, althaeae, and foeniculi, ana..iiij.
sem. lini, citoniorum, and foenugraeci, ana..j. florum chamaemeli, s^aechados,
meliloti, pulegij, origani, ana.p.ij. caricarum pinguium.j.ss. Boil them
together till the roots be tender, and use it.

A fomentation to dissolve, mollify, and drive away wind.
Andernacus.
Rec. Maluarum cum radic. m.j. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana.p.j. sem.
lini.j. anisorum.ss. ficus nu. xl. Boil them in water, till the third part be
wasted, and fill a bladder with the decoction, and apply it to the side
affected once or twice.

A fomentation for pain in the huckle bone.
Weckerus.
Rec. Radic. and foliorum ebuli, althaeae, ana.m.j. rutae, saluiae, sambuci,
pulegij, ana. m.ss. chamaemeli, and meliloti, ana.p.j.ss. foenugraeci p.j.ss.
Boil them in three parts of Oil, and one of Wine, and with a sponge moystened
therein foment the place affected.

A fomentation for the gowte in the hands.
Rec. and faclixiuium ex cineribus quercus, Calmeteus.
ficus, sarmentorum, cort^ fabarum, in quo concoques, radicum ebuli,.ij.ss.
caulium rubrorum m.iij. lupinorum, foenugraeci, ana.p.iij. florum sambuci and
staechados, ana.p.ij. aluminis, sulphuris, ana..ij. salis.iiij. aceti.v. And
with this decoction foment the hands.

An effectual fomentation for cold tumors.
Rec. Lixiuij ex cineribus Guiaci lib. Banester.
viij. florum chamaemeli, m.j. florum meliloti and hyperici, ana. m.ss. fol.
and rad. althaeae ana.m.j. rosarum rub.m.ss. sem. foenugraeci.iij. farinae
lupinorum.ij. myrrhae.j.ss. sulphuris viui.j. Let all be somewhat bruised, and
boil them together at a soft fire to the half, then put in vini albi
lib.j.ss. After it is cold strain i

An excellent fomentation for Gangraena.
Banester.
Rec. Lixiuij lib.iiij. aquae vitae lib.j. oxymel. simpl. lib.j. myrrhae.ij.
salis torrefacti.j.ss. lupinorum.j. ireos.iiij. absynthij m.j. florum
chamaemeli, hyperici, staechadis ana..j. cymini.ss. Powder them grossly, and
sees all to the consuming of one pint. So strain it.

An excellent fomentation for the beginning and augmentation of an inflammation.
Victor^ Fauentinus.
Rec. Vrinae pueri masculi decimum annum non attingentis lib.j. albuminum ouorum
number.iij. aceti albi lib.ss. aquae ros..ij. Mix them, and warm, with clothes
or flax, apply it.

A fomentation for an Ache.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Apij, leuistici, solatri, ana.m.j. or ij. seui ouini, q.s. coquantur ex
foecibus vini albi, vel aceti albi, vel ceruisiae bonae, Lap them after in a
cloth, and so foment and bind them to the part.

A fomentation to remove the extreme itch that happens in the purse of the
Testicles.
Balthrop.
Rec. Lactis a cremore separati and aquae ana parts aequales. florum rosarum
m.j. Heat them together, and let them cool again, wet clothes therein, and
apply them cold, renewing them still as they dry for xxiiii. hours.

A fomentation to mollify the car^uncle.
Rec. Fol. and rad. maluarum, Frederick.
fol. and rad. althaeae, saponariae, parietariae, ana.m.j. radicem lilij albi,
caput veruecis cum pelle and lana, ficuum pinguium nu. xij. Boil all these a
good space, and let the patient sit over it and receive the fume thereof, or
with a sponge let it be warm applied for seven or eight days.

Fumigations.
A fume to cure ulcers proceeding of lues venerea, or Alopecia Gallica.
Rondeletius.
REc. Cinabrij.j. belzoini, styracis, myrrhae, olibani, and oppoponacis,
ana..ss. masticis, thuris, ana..ij. Mix them with Turpentine, and make them up
in small balls.

A fumigation to provoke sweat.
Rondeletius.
R^c. Cinabrij.j. styracis rubei and calamitae, nucis moscatae, ana..iij.
belzoini.ss. And with Terpentine make them in small balls of two drammes a
piece.

A fume to cleanse the body of foul and filthy skabbes proceeding of the
pockes.
Rec. Cinabrij.j. merc. sublimati.j. myrrhae, masticis, thuris, styracis calam.
ana..v. gummi iuniperi, terebint. laudani ana.q.s. Fiant trochisci.

Another for the same.
John Iarret.
Rec. Cinabrij, lapid. haematitis, ana. parts aequales misceantur.

Another.
Rec. Cinabrij.j.ss. belzoini, styracis, Clowes.
myrrhae, rad. ireos, florentiae, masticis, olibani, ana..ss. nucis mosc.
maceris, ana..iij. theriacae.ij. accipiantur terebinthinae q.s. and fiant
^rochisci.

A fume for the ulcers of the nose proceeding of Alopecia Gallica.
Rec Cort. thuris, masticis, olibani, myrrhae, styracis, gummi iuniperi,
ana..ss. rosarum rubrarum, sandalorum omnium, ana..ij. auripigmenti rubri.iij.
lapidis pyritis.ij. And with the muscilage of gum. dragagant. make them in
Trochisces.

A fume for contracted members.
Rec. Olei oliuarum, olei iuniperi, Paracelsus.
ana..v masticis lib.ss. terebinthinae.iiij.ss. Mix them: the lame member, be
it leg or arm, must be enclosed in a vessel of wood, large, and for that
purpose, to be shut close also that no fume go forth. Underneath kindle this
receipt of fume now described, and maintain it so half a day together. This
vapor will thicken into a water, as such things do in a lembecke, and pearce
and warm the member, cherish the veins and humor of life, and bring again
the member to natural liuelihood. This process is to be held as long as the
infirmity endures.

Another.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Taxi pinguedinis, olei oliuarum, adipis ranae minimae, viridis, calamites
appellatae, ana lib.j. myrrhae, masticis, terebinthinae, ana. lib.ss. Use it as
before.

Gargarismes.
A Gargarisme for Squinantie in the augmentation.
REc. Rosarum, sumach, ana.m.j. hordei, Vigo.
passularum. ana.m.ss. ficuum siccarum number.vj. iuiubarum number.x. Boil them all
with sufficient water until the third part be wasted, adding thereto
diamoron.iiij. mellis rosarum.j.ss.

A Gargarisme for swelling in the throat in the augmentation.
Rec. Balaustij.j. caricas pingues^vj. dactylos ij. sem. lini, Calmeteus.
and foenugraeci, ana..ss. Boil them to one pound, and dissolve therein,
cassiae.ss. myrrhae.ij. croci.ss. lactis mulieris.ij.

A Gargarisme for Angina in his augmentation.
Rec. Summitatu^ rubi, lentisci, Valeriola.
and plantaginis, ana.m.j. glycyrrhizae rasae and contusae.j. passularum
enucleatarum.j.ss. caricarum pinguium number.x. hordei cum cortice p.j. Boil them
all together, and in one pound of the decoction dissolve diamoron.j. mellis
rosati colati, syrupi violati, ana..ij. Mix them for a Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for Angina or swelling in the throat in the augmentation.
Rondeletius.
Rec. Rosarum rubrarum, foliorum myrthi, vel lentisci, ana. m.j. glycyrrhizae.j.
passularum mundatarum, ficuum, ana. nu. xx. hordei integri p.j. Boil them, and
in one pound dissolve mellis rosati, and diamoronis, ana..j. Mix them, and
make it according to Art.

A Gargarisme for Angina in his beginning.
Valeriola.
Rec. Diamoron.iij. aceti rosati.j. succi granator^m musorum.ij. aquae
plantaginis, solani, vel caprifolij, ana..iiij. sacchari candi albiss..j. Make
this Gargarisme, and use it every hour, as occasion serves.

A Gargarisme for the swelling of the throat in the beginning.
Valeriola.
Rec. Foliorum plantaginis, and myrthi, ana. m.ss. granorum sumach rubentium,
lentium, ana.p.j. mali punici cum suo putamine and granis internis contusi
nu.j. hordei cum cortice p.j. Boil them in water sufficient until there
remain but one pound: and after the straining dissolve therein diamoron.iij.
succi granatorum musorum, mellis rosarum ana..ij. Make it in good order.

A Gargarisme for Squinantia in the state.
Rec. Radicum althaeae.iiij. Vigo.
ficuum siccarum nu.x. passularum.ij. fur^uris m.ss. hordei m.j.
glycyrrhizae.x. nidi hirundinis lib.ss. pullorum hirundinis nu.iij. Boil them
all in broth of a Weather, until the third part be wasted, adding thereto
after it be strained mellis rosati.j. sacchari rubri.j.ss. croci.j. syrupi de
duabus radicibus.x.

A Gargarisme for Angina in his state.
Rec. Hyssopi, calaminthae, Val^riola.
ana.m.ss. glycyrrhizae rasae.j. caricarum pinguium nu. xij. passularum
exacinatarum, nu.xx. hordei integri, p.j. Make your decoction, and in one pound
dissolve mellis rosati, oxymelitis simplicis, ana..ij. sapae dulcis.iij.
dianucum.j. Make it according to Art.

A Gargarisme for the Squinancie in the beginning.
Rec. Rosarum rubrar. myrtilloru^, passularum enucleatarum, ana..ij. Boil them
in the waters of Endive, Roses, and Plantai^e of each three ounces, until the
third part be wasted, then strain it, and add to the straining syrupi acidi
simplicis, diamoron, ana..j.ss. Make a gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for the swelling in the throat in the beginning.
Rec. Diamoronis.iij. aceti rosacei.j. succi granatorum musorum,.ij. aquarum
plantaginis, solani, vel caprifolij, ana..iiij. zacchari candi.j. Make a
Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for the inflammation of the mouth and throat.
Rondeletius.
Rec. Hordei integri p.j. glycyrrhizae rasae.j. passularum cum arillis
contusarum paria xx. rosarum rubrarum p.j. Put them into cesterne water, and in
one pound of the decoction, dissolve sapae, vel mellis rosarum, vel
diamoron,.iiij. So make a Gargarisme for the increase and state.

A Gargarisme for the inflammation of Uvula.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Radicum acori, vel galangae crassae, iridis, ana..j. verbenae, agrimoniae,
brassicae, ana.m.ss. foliorum oleastri, plantag. and summitatu^ rubi, ana.m.j.
serpilli and pulegij ana. tertiam partem m.j. baccarum myrti,.j.ss. rosarum
rubrarum p.j. myrrhae, thuris, ana.ij. Make your decoction to one pound and a
half, and in the straining dissolve sacchari rosacei,.iij. mellis
rosati.ij.ss. Make a Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for Apostumes of the jaws.
Rec. Ficuum siccarum, dactylorum, Vigo.
ana nu. xij. passularum.j. radic. althaeae.iij. hordei mundi, furfuris, ana.
m.j. sem. citoniorum,.iij. iuiubarum number.xx. Boil them all in sufficient
quantity of the broth of a hen until two parts be wasted, then strain it,
and add to the straining sacchari.iiij. mellis rosarum.j.ss. Then let them
boil one walme, and use it actuallie hot.

A Gargarisme for them that be roof fallen, commonly called the Uvula.
Rec. Balaustiorum, gallarum, ana..ss. gummi tragagant. thuris, masticis,
ana..j. Boil them with water suffici^^t, and add thereto, mellis rosati,
diamoronis, and aceti, ana. q.s.

A Gargarisme to draw phlegm out of the head, but not without counsel.
Rec. Saluiae, hyssopi, ana.m.ss. pyrethri, zinzibris, gariophyllorum ana..j.
Boil them until one part be wasted, and add thereto oxymelitis
simplicis.ij. Fiat Gargarisma.

A Gargarisme to be used in the cure of Alopecia Callica.
Vigo.
Rec. Hordei mundi, rosarum, sumach, ana.m.j. aquae ferratae lib.vj. Boil them
together until two parts be wasted of three; then strain them, and add
thereto syrupi rosarum.iij. mellis rosarum,.ij. aluminis rochae.x. So boil
them a little again, and reserve it to your use.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth proceeding of Alopecia Gallica.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Pilosellae, plantag. solani, caprifolij, agrimoniae, summitatum oleae,
rubi, mori, caudae equinae, ana.m.j. fol. myrthi cum baccis, ana..j. licij.iij.
nucu^ cupr. nu. iiij. lentiu^ p.j.ss. M^^e your decoction in Smithes water,
then strain it, and in one pound and half of the straining, dissolve succi
citoniorum and rosarum, ana..ij.ss. mellis rosati, vel diamoron.ij.
aluminis.ss. Make this Gargarisme according to art.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth, being caused with unguents after
sweating.
Rec. Foliorum oleae, myrthi, lentisci, Rondeletius.
ana m.j. plantag.m.ss. rosarum p.ss. hordei p.ij. Boil them to two pound, and
in the straining dissolve vini granat..ij. syrupi laxatiui rosati, and
diamoron, ana..j. Mix them for a Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for an immoderate f^uxe at the mouth after the unction.
Rec. Ceruisiae lactis suffocatae lib.j.ss. Banester.
dianucum.iiij. sir. de papauere nigro,.iij sir. violarum.ij. Misceantur.

Another for the same purpose more forcible.
Rec. Aquae hordei, rosacei and caprifolij, Banester.
ana. lib.ss. sir. violarum,.ij. sir. rosarum siccarum, diamoron, ana..j.
zacchari christallini.iiij. laudani Paracelsi gra.vj. Mix them to a Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth of lues venerea.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Pilosellae, plantag. summitatu^ oleae, rubi, lentisci, ana.m.j.
glycyrrhizae.j. hordei mundi p.j. Boil them to one pound, and dissolve therein
mellis rosati vel syrupi rosati, vel nimphaeae according to the greatness of
the affect.iiij. succi mali punici.ij Make this Gargarisme according to Art.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth of lues venerea.
Banester.
Rec. Plantag^ caudae equinae, ana.m.j. rosarum, balaustiorum, summitatum
absynthij and salicis, ana.p.j. hordei integri.j. lenticularum, sumach, nucum
cupressi, ana..iij. Decoct them sufficiently in ten parts of water and one
of vinegar. In the straining dissolve mellis rosati, vini granatorum and
diamori, ana..j. Fiat Gargarisma.

Another.
Banester.
Rec. Aquarum plantaginis, rosarum, caprifolij, ana..ij. aquae portulacae and
diamori, ana..j. rob. de Ribes, mellis rosac. omphacij, ana..ss. Mix them for
a Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for all excoriations and ulcers in the mouth proceeding ex lue
venerea.
Rec. Plantag. consol. med. cynoglos. prunellae, rutae, ana.m.v. balaustij.ij.
nucum cupressi, gallarum, ana..ss. nucleor. glandium nu. vj. aquae fontanae
lib. iiij. Bruise them all, and boil them in the water to the half, then
strain it, and add rob. nucum, mellis rosati, ana..j.ss. Make a Gargarisme,
and use it.

A Gargarisme for ulcers or excoriations in the throat or mouth.
Rec. Agrimoniae, Rennerus.
fol. plantag. vtriusque, florum rosarum rubrar. ana.m.j. hordei excorticati,
corticum berberor. ana.m.ss. Mix these, and boil them in three pints of water
to the half, then strain it, and dissolve therein dyamoron, mellis rosati,
ana..j.ss. pulu. aluminis.ss. Make a Gargarisme, and so use it.

A Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth by taking of poison.
Rec. Folioru^ oxalydis, Valeriola.
portulacae, plantaginis, centinodij, and lentisci, ana.m.ss. lentium, rosarum
rubrarum, ana.p.j. sem. sumach and plantag. ana..j. hordei cum cortice p.j.
Boil them all to one pound, and dissolve therein after it is strained, syrupi
citoniorum, succi granatorum musorum, syrupi de berberis, ana..ij. And make a
Gargarisme.

A Gargarisme for vlceration in the mouth called water Canker.
Vigo.
Rec. Vini granatorum, aquae plantaginis, ana..ij. fol. oliuarum aliquantulum
contritarum m.ss. vng. AEgyptiaci.x. lycij.j. Boil them till two parts of
three be wasted. So strain it.

Another.
Vigo.
Rec. Hordei mund. sumach, balaustij, fol. oliuarum, cimarum rubi, fol.
plantaginis, lentium, ana.m.ss. granatorum amborum numero ij. aquae rosarum,
aquae plantaginis, lycii, diamoron, mellis rosacei, ana..ij. aluminis
rochae,.x. myrabol. citrinorum.ss. caudae equinae m.ss. Boil them all to the
consumption of a third part.

An excellent Gargarisme for ulcers in the mouth.
Rec. Hordei integri p.ij. eupatorij, Julius Palmarius.
nicotiani, plantaginis, morsus gallinae, rosarum rub. ana. m.j. Boil them in
aquae lib. iiij. ad lib. iij. and strain it: adding thereto mellis rosarum,
syrupi ros. siccarum, ana..iij. aluminis vsti, chalcanti vsti, ana..ss. Fiat.

Iniections.
An Iniection for wounds made with gunshot.
Valeriola.
REc. Agrimonie, centaurij minoris, pimpinellae, absynthij, plantag. ana.m.ss.
radicum aristolog. rotundae,.ij. iridis florentini.iij. Boil them all in
strong and pure wine unto one pound and a half, and in the cooling add to the
expression aloes epaticae.iij. mellis rosati.ij. Boil them again one walme,
and reserve it to your use.

An Iniection for wounds or ulcers.
Rec. Aquae hordei.iij. aquae rosarum.ss. aquae plantag..v. vini albi.iij.
mellis rosacei.iij.ss. aluminis crudi.iiij.ss. Boil them together, and use it
warm.

An Iniection for hollow wounds.
Rec. Aquae fontanae lib. vij. ac^ti lib.j. chelidonij, saluiae, hyperici,
ana.m.ss. radicum helenij.iiij. Boil them until the half be consumed, and
add thereto mellis despumati lib.j. aloes cicatrinae.iiij. Powder what is to
be powdered, and let them boil twenty walmes, after strain them and use it.

Another for the same.
Rec. Aquae hordei lib. iiij. agrimoniae, Pareus.
centaurij minoris, pimpinellae, absynthij, plantag. ana.m.ss. aristolochiae
rotundae,.ss. Fiat decoctio ad lib.j. colatura dissolve aloes epaticae.iij.
mellis rosacei.ij. Boil them sufficiently, and so make it.

An Iniection for hollow and rotten wounds if neither abstersiues or
incarnatiues will avail in them.
Rec. Lixiuij.iiij. aquae pluuialis lib.ss. vini odoriferi lib.j.
glycyrrhizae.ij. hordei excorticati m.j. plantaginis, verbenae, agrimoniae,
symphiti vtriusque, c^ntaurij, millefolij, ana.m.ss. thuris, myrrhae, ana..iij.
sarcocollae.j.ss. sacchari rubri.ij. mellis rosati.iij. Boil them all together
until the half be consumed, and keep it to your use.

A stipticke Iniection to be used after that, mundifieng going before.
Rec. Rosarum, balaustiorum, cimarum, Vigo.
rubi, myrtillorum, sumach, ana.m.j. hypocistid. myrabolanoru^ citrinorum,
ana..ij. mellis rosarum.ij. Boil them with sufficient plantaine water and wine
of Pomegranards, until the third be wasted, and use it.

An Iniection for wounds in the throat.
Vigo.
Rec. Radicum gentianae.ss. lupinorum, lentium, ana..ij. plantag. agrimoniae,
ana. m.ss. thuris, myrrhae, ana..j. mellis rosarum parum. Boil them with wine
and make an Iniection.

An Iniection to conglutinate wounds in the belly.
Calmeteus^
Rec. Vini cidoniorum, thuris, and masticis q.s. Boil them and use it.

Item, aqua plantaginis c^m ^hure and mastice plurimum auxiliatur.

An Iniection for wounds in the bladder.
Vigo.
Rec. Aquae rosarum.iiij. aquae plantag. lib. ss. aquae caudae equinae, lib. ij.
hordei mundi, lentium, rosarum, ana.m.ss. myrabolanorum citrinorum,
hypocistidis, balaustiorum, myrtillorum, ana..j. sumach, cinerum rubi, foliorum
oleastri, symphiti maioris, ana.m.ss. glycyrrhizae mundae.x. sacchari rubri.ij.
aloes epaticae, sanguinis draconis, boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana..ij.
Boil them all together to the consumption of the third part.

An Iniection to mundifie ulcers.
Rec. Foliorum plantaginis, Valeriola.
and hederae recentis, ana.p.j. rosarum rubrarum, p.j. granorum myrthi
conquassati p.j.ss. foliorum and florum centaurij minoris p.j. aluminis
rupini.j. corticum granatorum.j.ss. Boil them in water, and make an Iniection.

An Iniection for hollow ulcers.
Rec. Aquae plantaginis, aquae peculi rorasarum, Weckerus.
ana..iiij. vini.ij. aluminis vsti,.ss. baccarum myrthi, aloes, ana..j. Mix
them, and after they be well boiled make an Iniection.

Another for the same.
Rec. Foliorum plantaginis m.ij. agrimoniae, Valeriola.
herbae roberti, foliorum pentaphylli, ana.m.j. summitatum absynthij, number.iij.
symphiti vtriusque, caudae equinae, cetrach, hyperici ana. m.ss. betonicae m.j.
Boil them in water, and in the end add thereto vini rubri astringentis
lib.ij. rosarum rubrarum, foliorum myrthi, ana.p.ij. hordei integri p.ij. Take
three pound of the decoction strained, and add thereto farinae fabarum.j.
farinae orobi.ss. thuris, masticis, sarcocollae, resinae pini, ana..j. myrrhae,
aristolochiae rotundae, ana..vj. iridis florentini.ss. mellis rosati
colati.iij. Make this according to art for an Iniection.

An Iniection for venomous and rebellious ulcers.
Rec. Decoctionis hordei lib.j. vini cretici lib.ss. radicum gentianae.ij.
lupinoru^, lentium, ana..j. plantag. caudae equinae, eupatorij, ana. m.ss.
glycyrrhizae.ss. thuris masculi.j. myrrhae ^j.ss. aloes epaticae.ij. mellis
rosarum.j. boracis.ss. Boy^e these until the half be wasted, and reserve the
rest to your use.

An Iniection for fistulated and hollow ulcers.
Rec. Mellis. lib.j. fellis bouis.iiij. aquae vi^ae.iiij. succi plantaginis,
linguae caninae, absyn^hij, apij and vrinae pueri, ana..iij. Boil these almost
to the substance of a syrup, adding thereto aluminis vsti.iij.
sarcocollae.j.ss.

An Iniection for cankerous and fistulated ulcers.
Rec. Aquae fontanae lib.iiij. vini albi lib. ij. guaiaci in puluere^ redacti
lib.j. aluminis.ij. Boil them until the half be wasted, then add unto ii.
pound and a half of the decoction, succi saluiae, succi plantaginis, pedis
columbini, tapsibarbati, linguae caninae, apij and caprifolij, ana..iiij.
Depurentur, addeque preterea, aquae vitae lib.ss. sarcocollae, masticis, aloes,
ana..ss. mellis despumati lib.ij.ss. Boil them a little and use it.

An Iniection for hollow ulcers.
Rec. Hordei integri p.j.ss. cetrach, agrimoniae, Weckerus.
ana. m.j. centaurij maioris, absynthij, ana.m.ss. Boil them in sufficient
honey and water for an Iniection.

A Iulep to be used as an Iniection for ulcers.
Rec. Lixiuij facti de cineribus foeniculi lib.j. mellis despumati lib.j.ss.
succi plantaginis, absynthij, symphiti maioris and saluiae ana..j. aquae vitae
lib.ss. myrrhae.ss. sarcocollae.j. masticis.ss. terebinthinae lib.ss. Boil all
together according to art.

An Iniection for worms in the ears.
Vesalius.
Rec. Absynthij, centaurij, marubij, calaminthae montanae, ana..j. aquae
pluuialis q.s. Mix and sees them till half be wasted: strain it, and put
too a pound of this decoction mellis lib.ss. and use it.

Another that kills worms in ulcers of the ears.
Rec. Rad. ellebori albi, co^ticum capparis, gentianae, dictami albi, ana..ss.
aquae pluuialis, q.s. Boil them according to art, and to one pound of the
decoction strained add vrinae humanae veteris, succi absynthij ana..ij. vng.
Egypt..j. and fiat.

An Iniection for ulcers in the breast.
Weckerus.
Rec. Radicum asari, iridis, gentianae, aristolochiae, ana..j. agrimoniae,
pentaphylli, pedis columbini, cetrach, centaurij minoris, hyperici, ana. m.j.
myrrhae.ss. Boil them in equal portions of wine and water sufficient, and in
two pound of the straining dissolve, mellis rosarum.vj. and use it.

An Iniection for an ulcer in the yard.
Rec. Plantag. and rosacei, Andreas Lacuna.
ana..iiij. seri lactis caprilli,.ij. cerusae.vj. aluminis rochae, marmoris
candidissimi, spodij, crystalli, ana..j.ss. caphurae.j. Powder what is to be
powdered, very finely, and searce them through a fine cloth, and mix them
with the rest for an Iniection.

An Iniection for ulcers in the mouth.
Rec. Aquae hordei lib.iij. vini albi lib.ij. foliorum plantag. m.j. caprifolij
m.ss. saluiae, rosmarini, ana. p. ij. myrtillorum.ss. nucum cupressi.ss.
malicorij.j. caudae equinae, m.j.ss. mellis rosacei.vj. aluminis.ij. Boil them
until half be consumed, adding thereto diamoronis.ij. Fiatque.

An Iniection for ulcers in the yard, which will heal and assuage pain.
Rec. Decoctionis hordei, in qua folia plantaginis, fragariae, violarum,
symphiti mino. and foeniculi decocta fuerint lib. j. cui decoctioni, addas
aluminis vsti,.iij.ss. zacchari rubri,.ss. mellis rosarum,.iiij. camphorae.j.
cassiae nouiter extract..j.ss. Mix them according to Art, and use it as an
Iniection.

An Iniection for the burning of urine.
Rec. Aquae fontanae lib.iiij. passularum exacinataru^.v. fol. plantag.m.j.
quinquefolij, fragariae, polygoni, rosarum rubr. ana. m.ss. quatuor sem.
frigidorum maiorum mundatorum, ana..j. aluminis.iij. Boil them, and add
thereto of the decoction two pound, mellis rosati colati.vj.

An Iniection to consume the Caruncle.
F^ederick.
Rec. Lithargirij auri and plumbi, aquae viridis (wherewith the Goldsmith has
separated gold or silver) ana..j. argenti viui extincti and been loti.ij. Put
the water and argent. viuum into an earthen pan, and set it on a fire of
coals, and stir it with an earthen ladle or spatula, and when it begins
to be hot, add the rest of the powder, continually stirring it until it
become of a sea color, then beat it into fine powder, and take thereof.j.
aquae ros. aquae plantaginis, aquae solani, ana..iiij. (steel being quenched
in the waters four or five times) add also diamoron, sir. ex rosis siccis,
mellis rosati, ana..j. Mix all these togethe^ and keep it in a glass close
stopped, and iniect it upon the caruncle through a hollow instrument of silver
or lead.

An Iniection to be used when the Caruncle is taken down.
Rec. Aquae fabrorum, plantaginis, solatri, Frederick.
rosati, ana. lib.j. psidiarum, balaustiorum, nucu^ cupressi, aloes, sumach,
ana..j.ss aluminis.ij. fol. ros. m.ss. floris aeris well prepared.ij. croci
martis.iiij. Boil all these together a good space. Strain it, and let it
settle, then power off the cleerest, add to it sacchari candi.j. sir. ex rosis
siccis.ij. sir. absynthij,.ss Fiat Iniectio.

An Iniection for the Caruncle to cool, assuage pain, and cicatrize.
Rec. Fol. rosarum siccarum p.j. sem. canabis, Frederick.
maluarum, ana..ss. sem. frig. ma. papaueris albi, ana..ij. sem. hyosciami.ss.
gran. alchachengi nu.x. Boil them in aquae fontanae lib. ij. to the half,
add to them trocischorum alcachengi.ij. sacchari candi.j. caphurae.j. lactis
mulieris.iiij. aquae albuminis ouorum.ij. sir. rosarum, mellis rosarum,
ana..vj. Fiat Iniectio.

Liniments.
A Liniment for a Canker.
Calmeteus. and Paulus AEgineta.
REc. Testarum cancrorum fluuialium combustarum.j. pulueris ranaru^.iij.
lithargyrij auri.j. plumbi vsti and loti, tutiae praeparatae, ana..ij. cerusae
in aqua rosarum lotae.j.ss. succi bursae pastoris and arnoglossae, ana..iij.ss.
olei rosarum omphacini, vel myrtini.iiij. Labor these well in a leaden mortar
to the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment for Warts.
Weckerus.
Rec. Floris aeris, chartae vstae, ana..v. colocynthidis, boracis, ana..vj.
salis armoniaci.ss. salis alkali, arsenici citrini, fellis vaccini, ana..vj.
vsneae persici.vij. Powder what is to be powdered, and with soap lee make this
Liniment.

A Liniment to be used in the beginning of Phlegmon or inflammation.
Vesalius.
Rec. Sa^dali albi and rubri, ana..iij. glaucij,.ij. terrae chimoliae, boli
armeni, ana..j.ss. Make them all in very fine powder, and searce them, and
after with the juice of houseleeke, or purselaine, or lettice, sufficient to
make a Liniment.

A Liniment for an Oedematous tumor or swelling proceeding of cold matter.
Rec. Succi ebuli, Weckeru^^
sambuci, oxylapathi, succi leuistici, foeniculi, ana..j. vnguenti
dialthaeae.iij. mellis.j. olei chamaemeli.ij. Boil them to the consumption of
the iuyces, and make a Liniment according to Art.

A maturatiue liniment which will assuage pain in a tumor, or Impostume.
Rec. Farinae hordei, Vesalius.
pulueris florum chamaemeli, ana..v. hyssopi humidi,.iiij. olei rosacei,
lumbricorum, and chamaemeli, ana..j. sapae dulcis.xx. Mix them according to
Art and make a Liniment.

A Liniment for S. Anthonies fire.
Rec. Olei rosarum.iij. olei nymphaeae.ij. sandali citrini and rubri, Weckeru^.
ana..ij. trochisc. de camphora.j. succi solatri, aceti, ana..j. Make a
Liniment according to art.

Another for the same.
Rec. Succi plantaginis, Idem^
.j. rosacei.iij. lythargirij nutriti,.j. cerusae lotae.iij. lactis mulieris.ss.
Mix them in a leaden mortar, and incorporate them to the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment to mollify all tumors or swellings.
Rec. Seui ouini lib. j. colophoniae.ij. ammoniaci, bdellij, oppoponacis,
galbani, ana..iij. pinguedinis capi, anseris, cygni, axungiae suillae, ana..ss.
oleorum anethi, chamaemeli, amygdalarum dulcium, ana..iij.ss. medullae crurium
vaccarum,.ij. succi maluarum and mercurialis, ana..iiij. Boil them to the
consumption of the iuyces, and make a Liniment in good form.

A Liniment for red pimples in the face, proceeding of salt phlegm.
Vigo.
Rec. Lapathi acuti, succi plantaginis, asphodelorum, ana.j.ss. olei vitellorum
ouorum.x. terebinthinae clarae,.ss. succi limonum.iij. aluminis combusti.j.
argenti viui extincti.ss. olei myrthini, omphacini, ana..v.ss. Mix them in a
mortar of lead all together, save only the argentum viuum, because that will
cleave to the lead, laboring them two hours: afterward incorporate your
argentum viuum.

A Liniment for pustules or spots in the face, specially of lues venerea.
Rec. Albumen vnius oui recentis, Auge^ius Ferr^^ius.
beat it perfectly, then add to it sublimati and camphorae, ana. gra. iiij.
Stir and mix them together to the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment to cease pain in Erysipelas.
Rec. Succi hyoschiami, Pareus.
cicutae and solani, ana..j. alb. ouorum nu.ij. aceti.ss. opij, caphurae, ana.
gra. iiij. croci.ss. muccaginis sem. psyllij and foenugraeci extractae in aqua
rosarum and plantag. ana..j. olei de papauere.ij. Make your Liniment, adding
unto it vnguenti refrigerantis Gal.q.s.

A Liniment for a rupture.
Rec. Foliorum consolidae maioris, minoris and mediae, ana.m.j. arnoglossae,
caudae equinae, centinodiae, sigilli salamonis, ana. m.ss. radicum symphiti and
valerianae, ana..iij. vermium terrestrium.j. aristolochiae vtriusque, ana..j.
florum citoniorum.ij. vini nigri lib. j. axungiae porcinae lib. ij.ss.
masticis, sarcocollae, ana..ij. Bruise them small, and let them soke in a
vessel, and infuse them ten days, then boil them and strain them to your
use for a Liniment.

A Liniment for brusings and con^usions.
Rec. Olei masticis.vij. theriacae optimae.ij. aquae vitae.j.ss. Make this
Liniment according to Art.

A Liniment for wounds in the eyes.
Rondeletius.
Rec. Myrrhae, sarcocollae nutritae in lacte mulieris, ana..ss. tutiae
praeparatae.j. mellis parum: Mix them and make a Liniment in good form. But
if the patient do complain somewhat of the pain thereof, mix therewith a
little of the white of an Egg and Rose Water.

A Liniment to be used in the cure of Alopecia gallica.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Radicum helenij and liliorum alborum, ana..j.ss. summitatum absynthij,
lupuli, fumariae, scabiosae, ana.m.ss. cicerum, lentium, hordei, ana.p.j.
florum chamaemeli, meliloti, sambuci, ana.p.j. Make your decoction in
sufficient water, and of the decoction strained one pound and a half, add too
olei rosarum.ij. olei masticis, and laurini, ana..iiij. butyri recent.v.
axungiae suillae salis expertis lib.ss. Boil them together till the
consumption of the decoction, and after mix therewith thuris, masticis,
myrrhae, ana..j.ss. sarcocollae and cerusae, ana..j. aluminis.vj.
lithargyrij.j.ss. terebinthinae,.iij. styracis liquidae.x. argenti viui in
succo limonum extincti.iij. vel plus vel minus pro aegrotantis viribus. Labor
them very well in a mortar for a Liniment.

A Liniment for the falling of hair.
Rec. Succi myrthi, Heben Mesue.
succi oliuae siluestris, ana..ij. rosarum siccarum.ss. absynthij.ij. Boil
them all in half a pound of vinegar, until the half be wasted; then strain
it, and infuse therein laudani.ij. and let them stand two days, then power
upon them oleum myrtinum, and vinum stipticum, until it be brought unto the
substance of honey: after that make it sweet, adding thereto aliptae moscatae,
galliae moscatae, ana..j. and make a Liniment.

A Liniment for the same.
Vigo.
Rec. Succi apij, succ. foeniculi and petroselini, ana..j. succi enulae.vj.
succi apij risi.ij. olei sambuci, terebinthinae, ana..x. picis naualis.j. picis
graecae and liquidae, ana..v. diachylonis gummati.j.ss. matricariae, abrotani,
aliquantulum contrit. rosmarini, capillorum veneris, subtiliter contrit. ana.
tertiam partem m.j. vini odoriferi cyathu^ medium, aceti.ij. Boil them all
together until the iuyces, vinegar and wine be wasted, then strain them, and
put thereto cerae nouae q.s. and make a Liniment, adding thereto croci.ss.
iridis.j.ss.

A Liniment for all skabbes and itch.
Banester.
Rec. Olei rosarum lib.ss. floris sulphuris.iiij. mercurij sublimati gra.vj.
camphorae.ss. Labor these together by the space of two hours in an Alabaster
or marble mortar, and use it both evening and morning after the body is purged.

Another.
Ex manu^c^ipto.
Rec. Picis liquidae, mellis depurati, and ceui ouini vel ceruini, of each a
like quantity. Fiat.

A Liniment for a Canker, or skald head.
Rec. Olei rosarum.ix. or else half so much; Apollonius
put it into a leaden mortar with a piece of lead; labor it therewith until
it become thick and black like unto lead, then beat severally Litharge and
white lead, of each lib.j. or lib.ss. Mingle them with the oil and frame your
Liniment.

A Liniment to delay pain in malignant cancerous ulcers.
Rec. Cinerum cupressi, Theodorus
lotorum and resiccatorum, plumbi albi combusti and lot^ succi rosarum,
ana..ss. Frame it with oil of Roses to your use.

A juice contrived to the form and use of a Liniment, of wonderful force to
r^ote (...) a malicious, gnawing and fretting Cank^r.
Rec. Sumach, AEtius.
vel rhu coriariorum lib.iij. pilul. cupressi,.iij. gallarum imaturarum
cassiae, ana..j.ss. Beat them together, steep them in five pintes of old red
wine; after boil them, continually stir^i^^^ them with a Cipresse slice till
the thir^ part b^e ^^^sumed. This done, s^raine (...) forth and (...) away the
dross: bu^ (...) the iuy^^ till it (...) of consistence like to honey, and so
keep it in a glass. If in keeping this wax thick, you may put to it a
little wine.

A Liniment to be used in Alop^cia Gallica.
Vigo.
Rec. Pingued. porcinae liquefactae lib.j. olei chamaemeli and anethi, ana..j.
olei mastichini and laurini, ana..j. styracis liquidae.x. radicum helenij
aliquantulum conquassatorum, radicum ebuli, ana..iiij. squinanti, staechados,
ana. parum, euphorbij pisti.ss. vini odoriferi lib.j.ss. Boil them together
until the wine be wasted; after strain them, and add thereto lithargyrij
auri.vij. thuris, masticis, ana..vj. resinae pini.j.ss. terebinthinae clarae.j.
argenti viui extincti cum saliua.iiij. cerae albae.j.ss Melt the Oils with the
Wax, and incorporate them together to a Liniment.

A Liniment approved for baldness, to cause hair to grow in any part with
speed.
Leuinus Lemnius.
Rec. Radicum canae, brioniae, betae, raphani, ireos, cepae, ana..iiij. ficus
pingues numero vj. capillorum veneris, abrotani, anethi, ana.m.j. Bruise all
these together very small, and boil them in malmesie sufficient, until the
wasting of the third part, then strain it very well, and add thereto butyri
recentis, mellis despumati, ana..ij. olei amygdalarum dulcium and amararum,
olei sesamini, ana..j. farinae foenugraeci, farinae seminis lini, nigellae
romanae puluerizatae, ana.p.j. laudani.j. Mix them, and set them on the fire,
stirring it continually, and let it boil to the form of a Liniment, using it
according to Art after the body is euacuated.

A Liniment for the falling of hair.
Rec. Olei myrthini, olei amygdalarum dulcium, olei lini, ana..j.ss. laudani.j.
euphorbij.ss. spumae marinae.iij. ellebori albi.j. rutae siluestris.j.ss. fimi
columbini.ss. sulphuris viui.j.ss. amygdalarum amararu^ combustarum
spicaenardi, cassiae ligneae, ana..j. Boil them to the consumption of the
wine, and strain them, adding thereto mellis despumati.j. And so mixing them
together make a Liniment.

A Liniment for the falling of hair.
Rec. Foliorum salicis, foliorum myrthi, seminum sumach, ana..ij. rosarum
rubrarum.ss. myrabolanorum emblicorum,.ij.ss. laudani.j. mellis crudi.ss. olei
myrtillorum.vj. vini nigri.iij. Bruise which are to be bruised, mix them
together, and boil them till the wine be consumed in a close vessel, and
after the straining use it.

A Liniment for the perfect restoration of the pannicles that cover the
brain, after their blacknes be removed by use of mel rosarum.
Arceus.
Rec. Syrupi rosati ex infusione.j.ss. florum and fol. hypericonis, florum
rosmarini, granae, ana parum, terebinthinae, vini odoriferi, ana..ij. olei
omphacini,.iiij.ss. croci parum: Boil all together, except the saffron, which
you shall make in fine powder, and add to them in the end.

A Liniment for salt phlegm and itch.
Vigo.
Rec. Succi lapathi acuti, succi plantaginis, ana..ss. pingued, porcinae
liquefactae, vnguenti populeonis, ana..ij. olei rosacei, omphacini, olei
myrtillorum, ana..j. vitellorum ouorum,.x. lithargyrij auri and argenti,
ana..j.ss. tutiae.ss. plumbi vsti.vj. cerusae.x. argenti viui.ix. Mix them and
make a Liniment according to Art.

A Liniment for itch and scabbes.
Rec. Sulphuris triti and ter ex aqua rosarum abluti, Vesalius.
.j.ss. laridi saliti lib.j. Beat it diligently and wash it thrice with
Rosewater, succi limonum.ij. Mix them for a Liniment.

Another for the same.
Rec. Lithargyrij, Constantinus.
aceti fortis, ana..vj. olei ros..xij. argenti viui extinct. in aceto
rosarum.iij. Fiat Linimentum.

A Liniment to be used in morbo pediculari.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum amarum.ij. olei Weckerus.
rutae.j. staphidis agriae.j. centaurij minoris.ij. myrrhae.iij. argenti
viui.ij. axungiae rancidae salitae.iij. aceti parum: Mix them and make a
Liniment according to Art.

A Liniment for burning and skalding.
Rec. Foliorum maluarum, violarum, fragariae, consolidae mediae and radicum
eius, quinque folij, plantaginis, foliorum sambuci, semperuiui, hederae
terrestris, solatri^ ana.m.ss. Bruise them small, and infuse them ten days in
four pounds of Swines grease, olei seminis lini lib.ss. mellis lib.ss.
resinae puluerizatae lib.j. Mix them well, and put them in an earthen vessel
close stopped, and so keep it to your use.

A Liniment to be used in the cure of small brannie skales in the head.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei vitellorum ouorum.x. olei seminis lini.ss. olei masticis, olei
lau^ini, ana..ss. lardi porcini liquefacti, pingued. vituli, ana..iiij.
terebinthinae clarae.j.ss. foliorum plantag. oliuarum siluestrium, fumariae,
lapathi acuti, mali granati integri acetosi, and caudae equinae, ana.m.j.
foliorum hed^rae m.ss. Bruise the herbs, and let them boil with the oil and
grease, aforesaid, till the juice be consumed, then strain them, and add to
the straining lithargyrij auri and argenti, ana..ij. cerusae.x. calcis decies
loti, aluminis combusti, ana..vj. a^genti viui extincti cum saliua hominis.v.
Mix them, and with white Wax sufficient make a Liniment.

A Liniment for burning in the face.
Rec. Corticum interiorum sambuci, Io. Baptista Montanus.
olei rosati, completi, ana..ss. cerusae.ss. Misce, and cum modico cerae, fiat
Liniment.

A Liniment to kill worms in ulcers of the ears.
Rec. Cerusae, Ex Archigene.
polij montani, ana..ij. picis naualis liquidae quod sat est. Mix them very
well in a mortar to the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment to be put into the ears that are pained.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium.ij. croci.j. myrrhae.ij. opij.ss. Misceantur.

A Liniment for the breaking out of childrens heads or elder folks, commonly
called a scaule.
Rec. Aceti lib.j. radicum helenij, chelidonij, centaurij, ana..ij. olei
laurini lib. j. sulphuris lib. j. mellis lib. ss. aloes, floris aeris, olibani,
ana...iiij. Bruise which are to be bruised, and boil them to the consumption of
the iuyces and vinegar, then add too the rest made in fine powder, and boil
them a little after, then strain them to your use. But first you must wash the
affected head with the decoction of the roots of enula campana, and the leaves
of Centaurie boiled in child's urine before the place be anointed.

A Liniment for a member that is weakened by wounds.
Io. Baptista Montanus.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium, adipis porcini recentis sine sale.ij. bdellij,
myrrhae, ana..j. croci.j. Dissolve the gummes in viniger, then mix them
together and make a Liniment.

A Liniment very good for a member that is wholly consumed, although it have
been so a long time.
Rec. Unguent. populeonis.iiij. olei laurini.vj. unguent. dialthaeae.v.ss.
picis nigrae.iiij. olei communis lib.ss. pingued. capi, cygni, anseris and
anatis, ana..iii. butyri recentis.v.j. axungiae porcinae lib.ss. olei de
pedibus vaccinis.iiij. maluarum, althaeae, meliloti, arthemisiae, tapsibarbati,
valerianae, and sambuci, ana.m.ss. Bruise the herbs, and boil them together
till the iuyces be wasted, and reserve it to your use.

A Liniment to assuage pain.
Rec. Olei masticis lib.ss. aquae vitae.iiij theriacae.iij. Mix them, and
boil them in a double vessel six hours, and strain them to your use.

A Liniment to mollify and assuage pain.
Rec. Maluarum, bismalu. althaeae, mer^urialis, arthemisiae, meliloti,
chamaemeli, sambuci, violarum, erigeri, hyosciami, ana. m.ss. pingued. capi and
anseris, ana..iiij. axungiae porcinae lib. j.ss. axungiae humanae,.ij. Bruise
them and infuse them together twenty days, and after it is strained reserve
it to your use.

A Liniment for pain proceeding of cold matter.
Rec. Lardi porcini, lib.iiij. vini cretic. lib. j.ss. cariophyllorum.iij.
radicum helenij,.iij. cardui benedicti.iij. rosmarini, saluiae, ana..ij.ss.
myrrhae.v. theriacae lib.j. Bruise the herbs, strain them, and make the other
in gross powder, and boil them together till the wasting of the wine, then
strain them, and make it to the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment for cold aches or pains.
Rec. Saluiae, tanaceti, menthae, melissae, rutae, absynthij, abrotani,
chamaemeli, arthemisiae, lauendulae, satureiae, nasturtij aquatici, foeniculi,
foliorum pyrethri, chamaedryos, ana. m.ss. axungiae porcinae lib. iij. axungiae
humanae lib.ss. vini cretici lib.j. seminis anisi.iiij. Bruise them together,
and infuse them ten days, then strain them and keep it to your use.

A Liniment for pain of the joints proceeding of a cold cause.
Rec. Pingued. humanae lib.j. pingued. capi, anseris, anatis, and cygni,
ana..iiij. vini cretici lib.ss. florum anthos lib.ij. vermium terrestrium
preparatorum lib. ss. Bruise them, stamp them three hours together, and infuse
them in a vessel well bound eight days, then let the^ boil to the
consumption of the wine and to the strength of the flowers, and add to the
straining olei terebinthinae.vj. Make a Liniment in good form.

A Liniment to assuage pain about wounds and ulcers.
Rec. Pingued. capi.iiij. medullae crurium vaccarum.iiij. terebinthinae.iij.ss.
olei rosarum.iij. olei chamaemeli.iiij. vermium terrestrium praeparatoru^.iij.
Misceantur and bulliant ad inuicem, and in fine add cerae albae.iiij. And make
a Liniment to the precepts of Art.

A Liniment to assuage pain of the head in lues venerea, to be anointed on
the inside of the arms, especially where vena Cephalica runs.
Rec. Succi enulae, succi brioniae, Fracastorius.
styracis liquidae, terebinthinae, ana..j. gummi elemij.ss. pingued. vrsi,
anseris, butyri, ana..j.ss. thuris, iridis, ana..iij. olei irini q.s. argenti
viui the eight part. Misce, and fiat Linimentum.

To abate spongie flesh with ease.
Rec. Aquarum solani, plantag. rosarum, Vesalius.
ana..iiij. opij.j. medullae panis optimae coctae,.ij. argenti sublimati.iiij.
Grind them upon a marble stone, then mix them, and boil them until the
half be consumed, then strain it through a thin cloth, and put in some
scraped line, boil them a little together, then take them out and strain it,
and so keep it to your use.

A good Liniment for conuulsion of sinews.
Vesalius.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium ping. gallinae, medullae crurium vituli,
ana..ix. olei violarum.vj. pingued. haedi, and vituli, ana..xv. Boil them all
together in the decoction of malu. rad. althaeae, and sem. citoniorum, as much
as is sufficient, until they be all consumed, then strain it, and make it to
the form of a Liniment.

A Liniment against lamenes of the legs after the gowt.
Val^riola.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, bdellij, in aquae vitae dissolut ana..ij. axung. taxis,
anseris, anatis, and vulpis, ana..iij. pulueris iridis.x. foliorum rutae,
betonicae, herbae paralisis siccarum, ana..j. florum staechados and rosmarini,
ana. p.j. florum chamaemeli, and meliloti, ana. p.ss. styracis calamitae and
benioin, ana..ij. cariophyllorum, olibani, nucis moscatae, ana..j. olei vulpini
lumbricati et de costo, ana..iiij. faecis olei liliorum.ij. cerae q.s. Make a
Liniment in good form.

A Liniment for pain of the joints.
Rec. Pingued^ capi, anatis, anseris, and cygni, ana..iiij. vini cretici
lib.ss. florum anthos lib.j. Bruise the flowers and incorporate them together
three hours, then let them stand in the Sun twenty days, and boil them in
a vessel well stopped to the consumption of the wine, and strain them to your
use.

A Liniment for contracted or lame members to be used after the Bath.
Rec. Axungiae gallinae, anseris, anatis, Alfonsus Ferrius.
suis, asini, muli, vrsi, gliris, vulturis, leonis, medullae crurum vituli,
equi, asini, cerui, butyri recentis, vtriusque lilij, olei vulpini compositi,
amygdalarum dulcium, sesamini, laurini, nucis indicae, muscelini, styracis,
benioini, mucilaginis rad althaeae, foenugraeci, sem. lini, ana..j croci
tenuissime triti.ss. aquae vitae lib.ss. fiat Linimentum. After the annoynting
lap up the member in a Fox or Hares skin.

A Liniment against numnesse, palsies and resolutions of sinews, with lamenes
of members that grow thereby.
Rec. Radicis angelicae minoris lib.x. Turneisserus.
cut it very small, and decoct it in vino generoso and forti to a viscous
thicknes, then strain it out, and put to it saponis optimi lib.ij. resoluti in
vino sublimato, in this manner: Your soap must be made into very thin and
small pieces or shauings, then put six pints of your spirit of wine into an
earthen pot well nealed, let it heat till it begin to boil, but not boil
outright: after put in your shauings of soap, and stir all about until the
soap be melted and vanished. This done, mix them with the liquor strained from
the root aforesaid, and sees them to the wasting of the half. Last of all,
boil it with olei communis recentis lib.ij. to an ointment.

A Liniment for Oedematous tumors, namely in scroto.
Banester.
Rec. Olei terebinthinae.vj. caphurae pulu..iij. Dissolve the Camfer in the
oil, add olei myrtillorum and cydoniorum ana..j.ss. olei laurini opt..ij.
olei succini,.iij. olei absynthij chymici.ss. cerae parum. Fiat Linimentum.

A Liniment for inflammation and hardening in women's breasts by crudding of
their milk.
Banester.
Rec. Olei lini.iiij. olei rosacei.iij.ss. olei ouorum,.ij. cerae citrinae.j.
Fiat Linimentum.

A Liniment of Swallows for all manner of aches and strains.
Rec. Hirundines xxiiij. fragariae with his Ex manuscripto.
strings m.ij. rosmarini, fol. violariae, lauendulae albae, spicae lauendulae,
absynthij, ana. m.j. Stamp all these herbs and Swallows together till they
be as one, put them into an earthen pot, and let them stand nine days covered:
then put unto them butyri maialis lib. iiij. or lib.v. (set the herbs in the
heat of the Sun and never washed) boil them very gently two hours
together, then let them stand from the fire two or three days: after set it
over the fire again until it be ready to sees, then strain it through a
fair linen cloth with great force.

An Excellent Liniment for cold aches, shronk withered, and benumbed members.
Rec. Vng. Martiati,.j.vng. dialthaeae, Martin^
.iij. axungiae canis.j. axungiae vulpis, olei vulpini, ana..ij. olei nardini,
olei chamaemeli, ana..j. olei petrolei.ss. Mix them according to Art.

Lotions.
A Lotion for a tumor in Inguine, called Bubo venereus.
Vigo.
REc. Hordei mundi, rosarum, ana.m.j. foliorum plantaginis, m.ij. sumach,
lentium, ana.m.ss. sem. citoniorum.ss. Boil them in sufficient water till
half be wasted, and use it often.

A Lotion for wounds and ulcers.
Rec. Vini albi.ss. aquae vitae.ij. mellis rosarum.iij. aluminis vsti.ss. Mix
them and preserve it to your use.

A Lotion for falling of hair.
Vigo.
Rec. Fabarum, lupinorum, ana.m.j. passularum, ficuum siccarum, ana..ij. radic.
lapathi acuti lib.ss. fumiterrae, foliorum ebuli, capillorum veneris,
ana.m.j.ss. pomorum acetosorum numero x. furfuris m.ij. hordei mundi.iij.
glycyrrhizae.j.ss. Boil them all together with as much Barbers lee as is
sufficient, till the third part be wasted, adding thereto mellis rosarum.iiij.

Another Lotion for the same purpose.
Rec. myrtillorum, spicae nardi, Augerius Ferrerius.
radicis asphodeli, corticis pini, ana..j. laudani, sem. apij, fol. senae,
cyperi, ana..ss. sem. papaueris albi, corticis tamaricis, sem. absynthij, ros.
alb. sem. hederae, ana..iij. Let them infuse with astringent wine in a double
vessel on the fire, and so use it.

A Lotion for hollow ulcers and Cankers.
Rec. mellis crudi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.j. vini albi lib.ss. fellis
boui.iiij. aluminis rochae.iij. myrrhae, masticis, olibani, ana..ss.
sarcocollae.ij. succi apij, and saluiae, ana..iij. Powder the gummes and steep
them in aqua vitae, then sees them four hours, and keep it to your use.

A Lotion for deep and hollow ulcers.
Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini rubri, ana. lib. ij.ss. rosarum rubrarum.iiij.
balaustiorum, malicorij, ana..ij.ss. sem. sumach.ij. saluiae m.j. symphiti
vtriusque, ana.m.ss. aluminis lib.ss. sarcocollae,.iij. olibani.j. mastic..ij
mellis lib.j. aquae terebinthinae lib.j.ss. Bruise which are to be bruised, mix
them and distill them according to Art.

A Lotion to cicatrize ulcers in the mouth, proceeding of Alopecia Gallica.
Vigo.
Rec. Aquae plantaginis lib.j. cimarum rubi, foliorum o^iuarum siluestrium,
caudae equinae, ana.m.ss. aquae hordeaceae lib.j.ss. lycij..ij. mellis
rosarum.iij. aluminis rochae.vj. Boil them all till half be wasted, and keep
it to your use.

A Lotion for pustules on virga.
Augerius Ferrerius.
Rec. Tutiae cum aqua ros. praeparatae, aeruginis, ana..ij. anethi combusti,
abrotani vsti, ana..j. Boil them in Rose and Plantaine waters one walme:
afterward clear it without expression.

Another stronger in more malign cases.
Augerrius Ferrerius.
Rec. aeruginis, aluminis, pulueris mercurialis, ana..j. vini albi.ss. aquarum
plantag. and ros. ana..j. Boil them softly, and strain them not.

A Lotion for a fracture.
Vigo.
R^c. Rosarum rubrarum, myrtillorum, granatorum and foliorum caprifolij,
mille^olij, ana.m.j. radic. fraxini and foliorum eius ana.m.ij. nucum cupressi
aliquantulu^ contritarum, number. vj. radic. althaeae aliquant. contrit..iij.
chamaemeli, meliloti, absynthij ana.m.ss. mellis.iiij. lycij.ij. sarcocollae,
myrrhae, thuris, ana..ss. Boil them all in sufficient water and thick red
wine, till the half be wasted, and bathe the member.

A Lotion to resolve the stiffness of the legs.
Rec. Betonicae, sambuci, rutae, saluiae, Valeriola.
summitatum lauri, ana.m.ij. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, rosmarini and
staechados, ana.p.j. radic. ebuli and acori, ana..ij. sulphuris igne^ non
experti.iiij. salis.iij. aluminis.j. furfuris p.ij. cariophyllorum
contusorum.ss. Boil them all in white wine and lee equal portions, and use it.

Oils.
An Oil for green wounds.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Olei communis in quo fuerint extincti lateres recentes lib.ss. olei
amygdalarum amararu^.ij. olei papaueris albi.j.ss. thuris, masticis, ana..j.
ammoniaci, galbani in aceto dissolutorum ana..ij. resinae.ss. terebint..ij.
AEruginis rasilis.ij. When the gummes be dissolved, put them to the Oil,
Thus, and Masticke, and let them boil after a little, then add too the
resina, and after them the aerugo, at the last strain it, and keep it to your
use: wherewith you shall dress the wound, and apply upon it an agglutinatiue
plaster.

Another oil for green wounds.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Olei com. lib.j. florum hyperici lib. ss. conijciantur in oleum, and
aliquot dies sub dio macerentur, postea flores exprimantur, and alij in idem
oleum inijciantur. Thus use it four or five times, then add thereto, gummi
elemi,.iij. Then let it stand certain days in the Sun and use it.

An Oleum Magistrale for wounds.
Rec. Olei vitellorum ouorum.vj. olei rosarum, Vigo.
omphacini,.ij. croci.j. vini odoriferi.j.ss. terebinthinae clarae.ij. seminis
hypericonis, florum anthos, ana.m.j. masticis.ij.ss. succi plantag..j. lactis
mulieris.ss. seui vituli.x. olei sambuci.ss. olei rosacei completi.j.ss.
vermium terrestrium lotorum in vino.x. Boil them all together at a gentle fire
till the consumption of the wine and juice, then strain them and use it in the
wound.

A yellowe oil which does wonderfully cause flesh in wounds, and does
mitigate pain, and causes good matter.
Rec. Olei com. lib.ij.ss. olei rosarum lib. ss. amygdalarum dulcium, olei
liliorum, ana..iiij. vini albi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. terebinthinae
venetae lib.ij. sarcocollae lib.ss. myrrhae.iiij. gummi elemi,.vj.
olibani,.iij. masticis.ij.ss. aloes epaticae, benioini, styracis calamitae,
gummi hederae, ana..iij. resinae pini.ij. nucis moscat..ij. spicae.j.
galangae.ss. croci.ss. ammoniaci.j. oppoponacis.ss. Powder which are to be
powdered, and dissolve the gummes in wine, and put them together, letting them
stand in the Sun xx. days, then boil them at a gentle fire in a pot close
stopped the space of xiiii. hours, and let it stand in the Sun other twenty
days, and at the last strain it and keep it as a secret.

An oil for hollow wounds and fistulaes.
Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. galbani.j. ammoniaci.ss. terebinthinae.vj. vini
albi.viij. succi apij and plantaginis, ana..j. fellis bouis.ij. aquae
vitae.ij.ss. resinae pini.ss. masticis, sarcocollae, ana..ij. aluminis
vsti,.iij. Mix them, and let them boil to the consumption of the iuyces and
wine, but first dissolve your gummes in aqua vitae, and boil them in another
vessel twelve hours, adding thereto in the end viridis aeris.ij. and make it
according to Art.

An oil for green wounds, much commended.
Rec. Olei lumbricorum, olei masticis, olei hypericonis, ana..iiij. olei
communis lib.j.ss. sarcocollae lib.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. olei terebinthinae
lib. j. florum anthos lib.ss. Powder that is to be powdered, and boil them
together in balneo mariae xii. hours, then set them in the Sun forty days:
after boil them again, and reserve the oil to your use.

Another.
Rec. Olei communis lib. ij. vini cretici, lib.j. radicum helenij.iiij. in
puluerem redact. saluiae, hypericonis, ana m.j. masticis.iiij.
cariophyllorum.iij. Mix them, and boil them in a vessel strongly bound, to
the consumption of the wine and iuyces, and after the straining keep it to
your use.

Another.
Rec. Olei lumbricorum, olei hypericonis, ana..xij. olei masticis.iiij. olei
com..vj. aquae vitae lib.ss. vini maluatici.iiij. sarcocollae lib.ss.
mastic..iij. myrrhae.iij. florum chamaemeli.ss. cariophylloru^.ij.
terebinthinae venetae.iiij. Bruise what is to be bruised, and boil them to the
consumption of the wine and water, and reserve the oil strained out to your
use.

An oil to agglutinate wounds with speed.
Rec. Boracis.vij. sarcocollae.vj. mastic..iiij. cariophylloru^.j. olibani.ij.
myrrhae.ij.ss. Make them al in powder, and infuse the^ in aquae vitae.xx. and
add thereto after the infusion olei hyperici, vel communis lib iiij.
terebinthinae venetae lib.j.ss. succi symphiti minoris lib.ss. vini nigri
lib.j. ^huris.j Boil them at an easy fire twenty hours, then put in the
infused gummes, and boil them in a brazen vessel close stopped other xxiiii.
hours, then as you remove it from the fire, stir it till it be cold, and put
it into a glass, adding thereto olei terebinthinae, lib.ss. masticis,
sarcocollae, florum hypericonis puluerizat. ana..ij. Then let them stand in the
Sun, and reserve it to your use.

Another.
Rec. Olei nardini.iiij. olei hyperici.vij olei com. lib.j. vini cretici lib.j.
sarcocollae,.vj. mastic..ij. olibani.iij.ss. myrrhae.ss. terebinthinae
purae.vij. florum saluiae.iiij florum rosmarini.iij. florum hyperici.vj
cariophyllorum.iiij. Powder what is to be powdered, and boil the oil, wine,
flowers and cloves in a vessel close stopped xii. hours; after that let them
steep in the same vessel xii. days, which being done, add to the rest, and
boil them together twenty hours, and last of al, let them stand in the Sun
twelve days, and strain it to your use.

An oil of S. John's wort for wounds.
Rec. Summitatum hyperici contusi lib. j.ss. vini maluat. lib..iij.ss. olei
oliuarum lib.iij. Mix them, and set them in the sun ten days, then boil
them in balneo mariae twelve hours, and strain them, adding thereto florum
hyperici lib.j. Infuse them other ten days, and last of all add to them
terebinthinae venetae lib.ss. masticis.j.ss. sarcocollae, cariophylloru^,
ana..ij. myrrhae.j. macis.vj. vermium terrestrium.iij. Powder what is to be
powdered, and boil them to the consumption of the wine and juice of the herbs,
and after the straining reserve it to your use.

Another very excellent.
Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.iij. vini albi lib.ij. florum, John I^^re^.
foliorum and sem. hyperici, lib.j. valerianae graecae, saniculae guttatae,
diapensiae, solidaginis saracenicae, prunellae, ana.m.ss. Stamp the herbs and
infuse them in the wine and oil xxiiii. hours, then boil them at a soft fire
to the consumption of a great part of the wine and juice, then strain it, and
put thereto terebinthinae venetae lib.j.ss olei terebinthinae.vj. olibani.v.
myrrhae.iij. masticis.j. sanguinis draconis.j. roots of Alkanet.ss. (being
first bruised and infused in a little oil ii. hours) When all is boiled
together gently and sufficiently, put it up to your use. It is the best that
ever I found.

Note.
Whereas others put hereto earth worms to amend the same, I have found it by
experience, that it will not work so well with worms as without them.

An oil for green wounds.
Rec. Olei communis lib.iiij. vini rubri, aquae vitae, ana. lib.j.
terebinthinae lib.j. sarcocollae lib.ss. masticis.j. olibani.ij. consolidae
maioris m.iiij. Bruise the herbs and mix them with the oil, wine, and aqua
vitae, and infuse them together twelve days, then boil them in balneo mariae
sixteen hours, and after they be cold put too consolidae maioris recentis
m.iij. letting them infuse other ten days, then add too the turpentine, and
boil them together twenty days, and when they be strained put too the
sarcocolla and the rest made in fine powder.

Another.
Rec. Aquae vitae optimae lib.ij. sacchari albiss. lib.ss. olei com. puri
lib.iiij. terebinthinae purae.xx. sarcocollae.viij. masticis, myrrhae, ana.j.
Powder which are to be powdered, mix them, and put them in a pot with a
narrow mouth, letting them stand in balneo mariae xxiiij. hours, then set it
in the Sun ten days, which being done let them boil again twelve hours,
and when it is cold and strained, reserve it to your use.

Oleum Hyperici with Gumines.
Rec. Vini albi lib.ij. olei veteris lib.iiij. olei terebinthinae lib.ij.
florum hyperici recentium cum semine q.s. Clowes.
The flowers being bruised, put them into a glass with the oils and wine, and
set the glass in the Sun seven days, then boil it six or seven hours
in balneo mariae, after strain it, and put too again fresh flowers and
seeds: sun it seven days, and boil them as before. Repeat this course so
often till the oil be red and the wine consumed, then strain it, and put
thereto aloes hepaticae, myrrhae, masticis, mummiae, olibani, ana..j.
gariophyllorum, macis, nucis moscatae, cinamomi, ana..ss. croci.j. granorum
tinctorum.ss. vermium terrestriu^.iiij. Let the worms be purely purged in
white wine, then put all these together with the oil into a double glass, and
set it in the Sun a month. Last of all, boil them again in balneo twelve
hours, the glass being close stopped, then take it from the fire, and when it
is almost cold, strain it, and put it up to your use.

An oil excellent for wounds and ulcers, especially when the ulcers be well
mundified: it does also incarnate, assuage pain, comfort, and speedily
conglutinate.
Rec. Olei com. lib.iiij. vini albi lib.ij. aquae vitae lib.j.ss. saluiae m.ij.
cardui benedicti, m.j.ss. valor. m.j. hyperici m.j.ss. melissophylli m.ss.
meliloti m.j. betonicae, centaurij, scabiosae, dictami, sambuci, ana.p.iij.
Bruise the herbs and infuse them twenty days, then strain them strongly,
and boil them to the consumption of the wine and juice of the herbs, adding
thereto terebinthinae purgatae lib.j.ss. masticis.j. olibani.ij. myrrhae,.j.
sarcocollae.ij. euphorbij..iij. nucis moscatae.ss. cariophyllorum,.vj.
iridis.j. resinae pini.iij. oppoponacis.iij. croci, camphorae ana..j. vermium
terrestr..ss. theriacae optimae.j. florum hyperici.iiij. rosarum rubr..ij.ss.
rubiae tinctorum.ss. Powder what is to be powdered, and boil them together one
hour, and put them in a vessel close stopped twenty days, and put thereto
the gummes dissolved in malmsey, then let them boil at an easy fire
altogether four or five hours, and in the end strain them, and reserve it
to your use.

An oil to heal both green wounds and old ulcers very well.
Rec. Olei communis lib.j. vini cretici lib.j. terebint..iiij.ss. bdellij.iij.
myrrhae.iij.ss. sarcocollae.j. thuris.iij.ss. masticis.ss. Powder what is to
be powdered, mix them, and boil them upon a clear fire till the wine be
consumed.

Another of like nature.
Rec. Olei mastichini lib.ss. olei com.lib.j. aquae vitae lib.ss.
sarcocollae.vj. sanguinis draconis.ij. mastic..iij. myrrhae.ij. cinamomi.ss.
nucis moscatae.j. boracis.ij. aloes epaticae.ss. aquae caprifolij.vj. succi
symphiti vtriusque, ana..iij. aquae mellis.iiij. Make it to your use.

An oil for green wounds.
Rec. Olei communis lib.iiij. vini albi lib. ij. aquae vitae lib.j. succi
absynthij, valerianae, pimpinellae, hyperici, cardui benedicti, saluiae, apij,
consolidae maioris, minoris and mediae, plantaginis, millefolij, ana..ij.ss.
Bruise the herbs, mix them, and steep them twelve hours, then boil them in
a vessel close stopped, till the wine and iuyces be wasted, adding thereto
terebinthinae purgatae lib.j.ss. myrrhae.iiij. sarcocollae,.iiij.ss.
olibani.ij. masticis.ij.ss. sanguinis draconis, thuris, ana..iij. gummi
elemi.iij.ss. cariophyllorum.j. nucis moscatae.j.ss. cinamomi.j.ss.
galangae^.ss. carpobalsami.j.ss. croci.ss. Powder which are to be powdered,
and bruise what is to be bruised, boil them together four and twenty hours,
and after it is strained keep it to your use.

An oil to mollify hardness in or about wounds.
Rec. Terebinthinae lib. j.ss. styracis liquidae.ss. styracis calamitae,
benioini, ana..ij. thuris.j. nucis moscat..ij. laudani.ss. galbani.ij. gummi
elemi.ss. ammoniaci.ij^ oppoponacis, gummi hederae, sagapeni, ana..ss. olei
laurini.iiij. resinae pini.ij. aquae vitae lib.ss. Mix them, and make an oil
in good form.

An oil for wounds.
Rec. Olei laurini.ij. olei communis.iij. olei lumbricorum.ij.ss. olei
hypericonis.ij. olei benedicti.j. olei rosacei.iij. terebinthinae lib. j.
euphorbij.j. styracis calamitae.j.ss. resinae pini lib.ss. galbani.iij.
sarcocollae.j. gummi ammoniaci, bdellij, oppoponacis gum. hederae, ana..j.ss.
laudani.ss. masticis.ij. olibani.iij. thuris.ij. nucis moscatae.ij. mummiae.ss.
cariophyllorum.ss. Powder what is to b^e powdered, and make an oil in good
form.

An oil very good for wounds in any part of the body.
Rec. Olei communis lib.j.ss. olei rosarum lib.ss. vermium terrestrium.iiij.
florum hyperici.iij. rosmarini.j. terebinthinae venetae lib. ss. vini albi
lib.ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana..ij. masticis.j.ss. euphorbij.j. iridis.j.
Powder what is to be powdered, and boil them to the consumption of the wine,
then strain it to your use.

The true making of Oleum Aparitij, commonly called Oleum Magistrale, which
has been untruly published heretofor^ by G. B.
Ex libro Hispanico.
Rec. Olei rosarum lib. iij. terebinthinae abietinae, lib.ij. myrrhae, thuris,
ana..iiij. ^ritici viridis m.ss. radicum vel foliorum valerianae, cardui
benedicti, ana..iiij. hyperici.vj. vini albi (understand) hispanici, lib.ij.
Let the herbs and wheat be a little bruised and put into a glass with a
narrow mouth, pouring upon them your wine: so infuse them for four hours,
after that put too your oil, and boil al together in a double vessel till
the wine be consumed. Lastly, add your turpentine, myrrh and incense, and so
boil and strain them.

An oil called Oleum Magistrale, to be used in wounds of the neck or throat.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei rosarum omphacini.j. olei terebinthinae.ss. terebinthinae clariss..x.
vermium terrestrium lotorum cum vino.j.ss. masticis.iij. florum anthos m.ij.
sem. hypericonis m.j. centaurij vtriusque, millefolij, cynoglossae, ana.
tertiam partem m.j. plantag.m.ss. croci.ss. vini odoriferi cyathum vnum. Boil
all together to the consumption of the wine, then strain them through a thick
cloth, and add thereto olei hypericonis.j.ss.

An oil to be used in the wounds of the ankles and feet.
Rec. Olei terebinthinae, Vigo.
olei rosati omphac. ana..ij. terebint. clarissimae.x. vermium
terrestrium.j.ss. mastic..vj. gum. elemi.iij. ammoniaci cum vino
dissoluti.j.ss^ croci.j. florum hypericonis m.j.ss. centaurij maioris m.j. olei
seminis lini.vj. Boil them all together a little, and strain them through a
thick canuas cloth, then let them stand in the Sun one month, adding unto
them a little of the flowers of Hypericon, changing it from week to week.

An oil for conuulsion of nerves.
Rec. Olei amygdalarum dulcium, olei liliorum, violarum, chamaemeli, ana..vj.
oppoponacis.iij. ammoniaci.iiij. myrrhae.ij. oesypi.iij. olei pedum vaccarum.v.
fellis bouis.iij. pingued. capi, anatis, an^eris and cygni, medullae cruris
aequini, ana..j.ss. succi hyosciami.ss. aqua vitae.vj. butyri recentis, succi
maluarum, brancae vrsinae, ana..ij.ss. succi althaeae, sambuci, ana..iij.
Dissolve the gummes in aqua vitae, and boil them all to the consumption of the
iuyces, and reserve it to your use.

An oil for pricking of sinews.
Rec. Olei hypericonis, sambuci, euphorbij, ana..iij.ss. sulphuris.x. gummi
ammoniaci, bdellij, serapini, ana..ij. aceti albi, cyathi medium, vermium
terrestrium.j.ss Make it according to Art.

An oil of Earth-wormes, which is good for wounds in the sinews, or other
places.
Banester.
Rec. Vermium terrestrium praeparat. lib.j olei communis lib.ij.ss. vini.viij.
euphorbij.iij. terebinthinae venetae.j. Make an oil according to Art.

An oil to incarnate wounds, and to comfort the sinews.
Rec. Olei terebinthinae, rosarum, ana..iiij.ss. olei lumbricorum, masticis,
ana..iij. olei seminis lini.iij.ss. vermium terrestrium.j. terebinthinae
clarae.iiij. masticis, myrrhae, ana..ss. gummi elemi, ammoniaci, ana..ij.ss.
sarcocollae.j. croci.j. Dissolve the gummes in vinegar, and add thereto
centaurij maioris m.j. Bruise the herbs and boil all together in a double
vessel, and when it is strained set it in the Sun.

An oil very good for wounds in the sinewie parts or joints.
Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. vini odoriferi lib.j. rosmarini, m.ij. symphiti
maioris, plantaginis, ana.m.j. aquae vitae.vj. Bruise them small and strain it,
and add thereto terebinthinae venetae lib.j. sarcocollae lib.ss.
masticis.iiij. Let them boil till the gummes be well dissolved and the iuyces
wasted, then strain it, and set it in the sun twenty days.

An oil of secret operation in ulcers, Cankers and Fistulaes.
Rec. Apij, marrubij, millefolij, plantaginis, absynthij, saluiae,
tapfibarbati, chelidoniae, valerianae, hyperici, ana. m.j. olei communis
lib.ij. terebinthinae.viij. galbani.ij. aluminis rochae.j.ss. theriacae.j.
viridis aeris.ij. thuris.j. gentianae, aristolochiae rotundae, ana..j. resinae
pini.xij. Powder what is to be powdered, and boil them together till the
consumption of the iuyces of the herbs, and in the cooling add thereto the
viride aeris in fi^e powder, stirring it strongly.

An oil for hollow ulcers.
Rec. Olei oliuarum lib.ij. olei laurini lib. ss. galbani.iiij. aquae vitae
lib.j. myrrhae.j. viridis aeris.iiij. in puluerem subtiliss. redact. Dissolve
the galbanum in aqua vitae, and boil it with the oils ten hours at an
easy fire, and in the end put too the viride aeris, incorporate them well
together, and stir them three hours, in the end strai^e it, and reserve it
to your use.

An excellent good oil for hollow ulcers.
Rec. Olei magis^ralis.ij. olei lumbricorum.j.ss. olei benedicti.ss. olei
terebinthinae.iiij. olei rosarum.ij. terebinthinae purgatae.ij. masticis.ij.
sarcocollae.iij myrrhae.j. ammoniaci, galbani, ana..j.ss. gummi elemi.iij.ss.
resinae pini.ss. succi plantag. solatri, apij, ana..j. vini albi.iij. Boil
them in a double vessel, well stopped, till the consumption of the wine and
iuyces, then strain them strongly, and reserve it to your use.

A green oil to mundifie ulcers.
Rec. Olei magistralis.ii.ss. olei communis.iij. succi plantag. apij, solani,
ana..j. olei lumbricorum.j. olei benedicti.ss. Boil them to the consumption of
the iuyces, and add thereto terebinthinae purgatae.j.ss. sarcocollae.ij.
masticis.j. olibani.ij.ss. thuris.j. resinae pini.ss. myrrhae,.j. gummi
elemi.ij. croci.ss. viridis aeris.j. Mix them together.

An oil for fistulated and cankered ulcers.
Rec. Olei com. lib.ij. terebinthinae lib.ss. myrrhae.iiij. sarcocollae.iij.
aquae vitae, aceti op^. ana..iij. aluminis crud^ puluerizat..j.ss. vitrioli.ss.
boracis.ss. Boil them to the consumption of the vinegar and aqua vitae, adding
thereto viridis aeris in pulu..j. Boil it again, strain it, and reserve it
in a glass vessel.

An oil for the morphew and spots of the face.
Valeriola.
Rec. Olei abietis.j.ss. thuris masculi.j. succi limonum lib. j. Bruise the
Incense, and mix them with the rest, and let them infuse in balneo mariae
twelve hours with an easy fire, then distill it, and keep the water to wash
the face, and the oil to annoint the same.

A proved oil against the Crampe, happening in a wound, or otherwise.
Rec. Olei nardini.ss. olei rutacei.j.ss. olei masticis.ij. olei
terebinthinae.j.ss. vini cretici, cochlear.iiij. aquae vitae, coch.ij. Mix
them, and boil them to the consump^ion of the liquors.

An excellent good oil for pain in the gowt.
Rec. Olei communis lib.j.ss. olei rosati, chamaemeli, ana. lib.j. olei spicae,
vulpini, hypericonis, ana..ij. olei anethi.j.ss. chamaemeli, absynthij, anthos,
matricariae, calaminthae, ana.m.j. squinanthi m.ss. seminis hypericonis m.j.ss.
pingued. anatis and anseris, ana..iij. medullae crurium vituli, et vaccarum,
ana..x. radicum ebuli and helenij, ana..iiij. ranarumnu.viij. vermiu^ terrestr.
lotorum cum vino.iiij. Bruise them all, and mix them together with white wine,
and infuse them xxiiii. hours, then boil them at an easy fire till the wine
be wasted, and after it is strained, add thereto terebinthinae.ij.ss.
croci.ij. cerae nouae.ss. Mix them according to Art.

An oil of great efficacy for pains in the joints of lues Venerea.
Rec. xl. ouorum vitellos coctione induratos et dissipatos, Augerius Ferrerius.
cum.vj. pyrethri in puluerem redacti, Mix them, and distill them by a Retort,
first with a gentle fire, and afterward with a stronger; the liquor that you so
receive mix again cum castorei.j. and thuris albi.ss. hermodactylorum.vj. and
distill them. When you have received that liquor, mingle it with the feces
again, putting too lauri-baccas, and draw it out. This course if you repeat
yet oftener, you shall make an oil that shall be incomparable in this case.

An oil to cure shrinking of the sinews.
Rec. Olei ex pedibus bouinis lib.ij. Ex manuscripto.
fellis bouini, lib.j. aquae vitae, aquae rosac. ana. lib.ss. Put them in a
brass pan, with camphoratae ( we call it lauender cotton) fol. lauri,
ana.m.j. rosmarini, spicae lauendulae, fol. fragariae cum filamentis: the
herbs being bruised, boil with the rest, and after strain it as Art requires.

A most proved oil for the itch, and moist or mattrie scabbe.
Arnaldu^.
Rec. Succi oleandri lib.j. olei rosac. lib.ss. Mingle and boil them gently,
until the oil only remain, then strain it, and add to it (if you will make
it most effectual) sulphuris puluerizati.j.

Oleum Hyosciami magistrale, of notable use, both for wounds, ulcers, gowtes
and other pains.
Banester.
Rec. Olei communis lib.viij. vini albi lib.ij. summitatum hyosciami and seminum
eius viridium lib.iij.ss. vermium terrestr. gariophyllorum, ana..iiij. croci.j.
opij.ss Choppe and stamp the herb very small: then mix all the rest with it,
and set them in the Sun twelve days: after boil them to the consumption of
the wine and juice, then strain it and keep it to your use. For painful
wounds or bruses use it thus. Rec. olei hyosciami magistrale,.iiij. olei
hyperici.j. olei lumbricorum.ss. gummi elemi.vj. terebinthinae lotae in lacte
mulieris.vij. Mix them. If you would have it in the form of an Unguent, and
use it to painful ulcers, Rec. olei hyosciami magistralis.iiij. resinae pini,
resinae ana..iij. vnguenti ros..vj. cerae albae.ss. Heereto also may be added
a little Myrrh and a few drops of oil of Sulphur, or Antimonie, as the
malignitie requires. To make a soft plaster or sparadrap of it, do thus. Rec.
olei hyosciami magistr..vj. vnguenti hyosciami.iiij. resinae.ij. cerae
citrinae.iij. Mix them.

Oleum Antimonij, or sanguis Stibij, most excellent for creeping and malign
ulcers.
Rec. Regulum antimonij (the manner of making whereof also follows) grind it
most finely upon a marble, Fallopiu^.
pouring still unto it a little distilled vinegar. When it is perfectly
grinded, put it into a Felt, and power of your viniger upon it, until it have
dissolved and carried through all the Antimonie into the vessel that stands
under to receive it: then put all that liquor into a Limbecke, and distill it
out; the feces remaining in the bottom will be red, which take and put in a
cloth, hang the same in some moist place, with a receiver under it to drop
into, and that which so resolves and droppeth down is oleum antimonij: and
because it is red, is called sanguis antimonij.

Your Regulus is thus made.
Take your stibium, and melt it, let it cool again, then melt it and cool it
again, and being so done five or ^ixe times, it is called Regulus.

An oil entitled (of secret operation) for ulcers, and namely Cankers and
Fistulaes.
Incerto aucthore.
Rec. apij, marrubij, millefolij, plantaginis, absynthij, saluiae, tapsibarbati,
chelidonij, valerianae, hyperici, ana.m.j. olei communis lib.ij. terebinthinae
lib.viij. galbani.ij. aluminis.j.ss. theriacae.j. viridis aeris.ij. thuris.j.
gentianae, aristol. rotundae, ana..j. vitrioli, tartari, ana..ij. myrrhae,
sarcocollae, ana..j. resinae pini.xij. Powder that which is to be powdered, and
boil them together to the wanting of the iuyces; put too your viride aeris in
the cooling.

An oil to stay the stench of a Canker.
Rec. Myrrhae, carpobalsami, Antonius Montaguana.
nucis miristicae, ana..ss. olei hyperici, olei de terebinthinae, ana..iij.
mosc. gra.iiij. ambrae tantundem, olei de lateribus.vij. Boil them in a double
vessel, and therewith annoint the place; if it bite, alay it cum olei rauino
vel lacte.

Powders.
A Powder to be used in the cure of a Rupture.
Vigo.
REc. Thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana..ij. aloes, sarcocollae, sanguinis
draconis, mummiae, ana..j.ss. boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana..ij.ss. gum.
tragaganti triturati, glutinis piscium, ana..j.ss. balaustiorum, nucum
cupressi, myrabolanorum critrinorum, hypocistidis, ana..iiij. laudani.iij.ss.
Make it in fine powder.

Another.
Rec. Radic. consolidae maioris.j. valerianae.j. mummiae.j. coriandri
praeparat..ss. crassulae ma..iij. zacchari.iiij. Make them in fine powder, and
take thereof every morning as Art requires.

A Powder to be taken inwardly for the cure of the Rupture.
Rosa Angl.
Rec. Myrtillorum, cinamomi, nucis moscatae, ana..ij. sanguinariae
desiccatae,.iiij. sem. plantaginis, sem. portulacae ana.iij. sem. nasturtij
hortulani,.j. corallorum rub..j.ss. Fiat puluis. Add thereunto Sugar as much
as will make it sweet: hereof give every morning daily, or at least every
other day the quantity of.j. or.ss. in wine, and not in broth, because it is
slipperie and hinders cons^lidation.

A powder to be used in the cure of the carbunculous pustule.
Rec. Aluminis combustae.ss. rosarum, Vigo.
myrtillorum, ana..ij. hermodact..j.ss. boli armeni.vj. myrabolanorum
citrinorum.iij. Make them in fine powder.

A powder for the swelling of the throat.
Rec. Satureiae, hyssopi, polij montani, We^kerus.
pulegij, spicaenardi ana..ij. cariophyllorum, nucis moscatae, ana..ss.
cinamomi.iij. sem. apij, and petroselini, ana.ij.ss. piperis longi, myrrhae,
ana..j.ss. Make them in fine powder, which must be used three times a week,
one dram at a time, three hours before meat, and the rather in winter.

A powder for hollow wounds with loss of substance.
Rec. Thuris, masticis, myrrhae, Weckerus.
sarcocollae, boli armeni, sanguinis draconis, farinae hordei ana. partem vnam.
Make them in fine powder, which you shall sprinkle upon the wound.

A powder to incarnate wounds.
Vigo..
Rec. Peucedani.ss. iridis,.v. myrrhae,.iij. centaurij maio. and mino. ana.ij.
aristolochiae rotundae, tutiae, oppoponacis, farinae orobi, ana.ij.ss. Make
them in fine powder.

Aother.
Rec. Sarcocollae.j. olibani.ij. aloes epat..iij. masticis.j. thuris.ij.
sanguinis draconis.j.ss. balaustiorum.ss. Mix them and make them in fine
powder.

Another.
Rec. Terebint. venetae. puluerizatae.iij. boracis.ij. sarcocollae.ss.
masticis.iij.ss. tragaganti.ij.ss. myrrhae.iij.ss. colophoniae ^ss. thuris.j.
aluminis vsti.ss. vitrioli adusti.j. mercurij praecipitati.ij. Mix them, and
make powder to be applied with Mel rosarum.

A powder to stanch blood.
Cal^^teus.
Rec. Lapidis haematitis.j. tutiae, masticis, boli armeni, gallarum viridium,
ranaru^ exiccatarum, gypsi, fuliginis, farinae volatilis, telae araneae
molendinariae ana.ij. vitrioli combusti, calcis viuae, tragaganti ana.iij.
chartae papyraceae, pilorum leporis, and bombacis torrefactorum ana.j.
stercoris a^ini.ss. Make it fine powder.

Another.
Rec. Boli armeni partem vnam, Galenus.
sanguinis draconis partem ss. thuris, masticis, aloes cicatrinae, ana partam
tertiam, pilorum leporis minutissime incisorum, partem quartam. Make them in
fine powder.

Another.
Rec. Boli armeni.vj. terrae sigillatae.ij. Calmeteus.
farinae volatilis.iij. gypsi, calcis viuae, ana.i^ij. thuris, aloes, ana.j.
Make a powder which you must apply with the white of an egg.

Another.
Rec. aloes epat. thuris, sarcocollae, ana.ij. Vigo.
terrae sigillatae, boliarmeni, litharg. auri and argenti, ana.ij. myrrhae.j.
pilorum leporis minutissime incisorum.j.ss. farinae volatilis, fabarum,
lentium, and hordei, ana.ij. Mix them, and make it in fine powder, which you
must strew upon it: and with a little of this incorporated with the white of an
egg make a plageat, and apply above it.

Auother.
Brunus.
Rec. Calcis viuae, sanguinis draconis, gipsei, aloes, thuris, vitrioli, ana
parts aequales: Make them in powder, and incorporate them with albumen oui
atque tela araniae, and apply it.

Another.
Rec. lapid. haematitis.iij. coralli rubri.j. thuris.ij. aloes epaticae.ss.
chartae papyraceae combustae.ij. sanguinis draconis.ij.ss. farinae
volatilis.iij. masticis.ij. boli armeni.ij.ss. vitrioli combusti.ss. terrae
sigillatae,.j.ss. Make them in fine powder, and when you apply it, let it not
be removed in three days.

Another.
Rec. Calcis viuae.ij. boli armeni.iij. sanguinis draconis, mumm^ae, lapid
haematitis, masticis, olibani, sarcocollae, ana..j.ss. aloes epaticae.iij.ss.
terrae sigillatae.j thuris.ss. farinae volatilis.iij. Make them in fine powder
and use it.

A powder consolidatiue for wounds.
Henricus.
Rec. Corticum pini,.i. lithargyrij, cerusae, ana..ss. nucum cupressi, centaurij
minoris, aristolochiae vstae, ana..ij. Make them in fine powder.

A powder to agglutinate wounds.
Rec. Radicum consolidae maioris.iij. masticis.ij. olibani.ij.ss. mummiae,
myrrhae, sarcocollae, aloes epaticae, colophoniae, ana..ij. sanguinis
draconis.j.ss. gummi tragaganti, arabici, ana..ij. Make them in fine powder and
use it.

A powder for wounds in the head.
Rec. Myrrhae.ss. sem. rubiae tinctorum, Andernacus.
cyperi, iridis, sarcocollae, ana..iij. Make these in powder, and you may well
add to them Saunders, and other drying things, for seeing the skin of the
head is hard and dry, it must be healed with like remedies.

Another.
Rec. Rad. aristolochiae, Weckerus.
iridis florentini, cort. thuris, sarcocollae, sanguinis draconis, ana..j.
nucum cupressi.ss. myrtilloru^.ss. centaurij minoris.j. coralli.ij. farinae
orobi.j. Make them in very fine powder, which you must apply upon pleagets,
and lay upon them Emplastr. bethonicae vel de caprifolio.

Another.
Rec. Sarcocollae, myrrhae, aloes epaticae, ana.iij. thuris,.j.ss. sanguinis
draconis.ij. croci. gr.xij. Make them in fine powder.

A red powder agglutinatiue for wounds in the lips.
Vesalius.
Rec. Boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana.vj. thuris, masticis, sarcocollae,
ana.ij.ss. myrrhae, aloes, ana.j.ss. tragaganti. sang. draconis ana.j. farinae
hordei and fabarum, ana.ss. Mix them and make them in fine powder, whereof you
shall incorporate some with the white of an egg to your use.

A powder adstrictiue to be used in stitching of wounds.
Rec. Farinae volatilis.iij. boli armeni, thuris, ana.ss. olibani, masticis,
myrrhae, ana.ij.ss. sanguinis draconis.iij.ss. lapidis haematitis.j. Make them
in fine powder, which you shall use with the white of an egg, and spread it upon
a cloth, and let it lie too one night, and on the morrow stitch the clothes,
whereby you may join the edges of the wounds.

A powder to cicatrize wounds and ulcers.
Rec. Corticum pini, nucum cupressi, ana.iij. masticis, thuris, sarcocollae,
aloes epaticae, mummiae, balaustiorum, malecorij, ana.ij. vitrioli combusti,
aluminis vsti, ana.ij.ss. chartae papyraceae.iij. saluiae siccae.ij. lapidis
calaminaris, lithargyrij argenti, cinabrij, sang. draconis ana.ij. sumacis.ij.
centaurij minoris.j.ss. myrrhae,.j. coralli rubri.iij. tutiae.j plumbi
vsti,.j.ss. Make them in fine powder to your use.

A powder to stay great fluxes of blood after a leg or arm is cut off.
Rec. Boli armeni.iij. sanguinis dracon. aloes epaticae, Clowes.
ana.j. terrae sigillatae, masticis, ana.ss. croci martis.ij. lapid.
haematitis.ss. calcis ex testis ouorum, mummiae, ana.j. gypsi.vj. farinae
volatile..iiij. Bring all these to a fine powder, and for applying thereof, mix
of it with the whites of eggs and Hares hairs clipte so short as is possible,
according to the quantity you need.

A powder for wounds in the nose.
Rec. Masticis, Vesalius.
thuris, myrrhae, tragaganti, gummi arabici, ana..ij. farinae foenugraeci.ss.
Make a powder and use it after good digestion, made with the yolke of an Egg
and Turpentine.

A powder to make trochisces to eat down superfluous flesh in ulcers.
Vesalius.
Rec. Auripigmenti.xij. sandaracae.vj. calcis viuae.viij. chartae papyraceae
combustae,.j. Make them in fine powder, and with the juice or decoction of
Myrtill form your Trochisces.

A corosiue powder for ulcers.
Rec. Mercurij praecipitati, argenti sublimati ana..ss. vitrioli combusti,
aluminis, ana..ij. floris aeris.j. coralli rubr..ss. cinabrij.ij. Make them in
fine powder.

A powder for a Fistula.
Rec. Mercurij praecipitati.ss. vitrioli combusti.iij. masticis, boli armeni,
ana..ij. Make them in fine powder, and use it according to Art.

Another for the same.
Rec. Vitrioli combusti.j. boli armeni.ij.ss. masticis,.j. Make them in fine
powder, and keep it to your use.

A powder to abate proud flesh, and lay open a filthy ulcer.
Rec. Mercurij sublimati.iij. boli armeni.ij.ss. masticis.j. Fiat puluis
subtiliss.

A powder to remove a scale of a corrupt bone.
Rec. Salis agarici and tartari vini albi, ana parts aequales. Fiat puluis
subtilissimus. Angelus Bologninus.


A powder to cause flesh in a hollow ulcer.
Rec. Aloes electae.ij. thuris and cort. eiusdem, Valcriola.
myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana..j. radicum iridis florentini.iiij. Make them in
fine powder.

A powder exiccatiue for ulcers.
Rec. Aloes, Galen.
olibani, sang. draconis, sarcocollae, ana..iij. aristolochiae adustae,
cerusae, corticum arboris spinae, centaurij minoris, ana..j. gallarum,
balaustiorum, ana..ij. Make them in fine powder.

A powder for dry ulcers.
Rec. Cerusae, Galenus.
rosarum, balaustiorum, ana..viij. sem. rosarum aluminis, gallaru^, ana..iij.
aristolochiae longae adustae,.iij. thuris.j. Make them in fine powder.

A powder to dry and cicatrize ulcers in moist bodies.
Rec. Thuris..j. aloes.iij. sang. draconis.ij. sarcocollae.j. aristolochiae
combust..ij.ss. ossis humanae combustae,.iij. corticum pini.ij. cerusae,
gallarum, balaustiorum, ana..iiij. aluminis vsti.vij. Mix them and make them
in fine powder.

A powder for moist and hollow ulcers.
Rec. Thuris.iij. masticis.j. myrrhae.ij. sarcocollae.iiij. farinae orobi.ss.
balaustiorum, malicorij, cinabrij, saluiae siccae, aristolochiae rotund.
ana..ss. aluminis vsti.iiij. vitrioli, combusti.iiij. Make them in fine powder.

A powder to cicatrize and heal ulcers, which must be dissolved in water.
Rec. Camphorae calcinatae.j. vitrioli combusti.j.ss. cinabrij,.iij. aluminis
vsti.ij. praecipitati.vj. boli armeni.iij. masticis.ij. thuris.ss.
sarcocollae.vj. Make them in fine powder, and when you will use it, take
Rose Water, white wine, and aqua vitae, of each half a pint, warm them at the
fire, and put to them of the powder one ounce, so let them remain ten hours,
then strain it to your use.

A powder to cicatrize ulcers.
Rec. Cineris anethi, plumbi vsti, terrae sigillatae, ana..ij. litharg.
argenti.j. cinabrij,.iij. balaustiorum.j.ss. aluminis vsti.j.ss cerusae.ij.
testarum cancrorum fluuialium.ij. chartae nigrae exiccatae.j. Make all in fine
powder.

A cicatrizing powder to be used in ulcers of the yard.
Rec. Lithargyrij auri and argenti, Vigo.
ana..j. tutiae.ss. boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, ana..j.ss. myrabol.
citrinorum, aluminis rochae combustae, ana..j. Mix them to your use.

A powder for ulcers in the priuities which does exiccate, mundifie, incarnate,
and agglutinate.
Rec. Cort. thuris, aloes lotae, myrrhae, Weckerus.
sarcocollae, gummi elemi, ana..ss. aneti vsti.j. corticum pini.ij. tutiae
praeparatae, antimonij, plumbi vsti, cerusae, ana..j. sang. draconis.ij. Make
them in fine powder, and use it.

A Corosiue powder very easy and profitable.
Rec. Merc. praecipitati.ss. cinabrij.j.ss vitrioli combust..ij. masticis.ij.
sarcocollae.j.ss. vermium terrestrium.ij.ss. Make them in fine powder.

A corosiue powder very good and stronger.
D. Foster.
Rec. Merc. praecipitati.ss. cinabrij.j. vitrioli combusti,.ss. aluminis vsti.j.
masticis.j. myrrhae.ss. sarcocollae.j. croci.ss. Make them in powder and keep
it to your use.

Another corosiue powder.
Rec. Mercurij praecipitati.ss. masticis,.ss. cinabrij.ij. sarcocollae.ij.ss.
aluminis vsti.j. Make them all in fine powder, and mix them together.

A Causticke powder.
Rec. Pulueris sublimati,.ij. succi hyosciami,.j. Mix them together, and let
them dry together: afterward make them to very fine powder.

A merueilous powder that by stool spendet^ away scrofulous tumors.
Arnaldus a magistro and Michaele Scoto.
Rec. Ligni aloes, margaritarum perforatarum, ossis de cord cerui, spicae
nardi, blattae bizantiae, nucis moscatae, cariophyllorum, galangae, thuris,
coria^dri, nucis moscatae, piperis, diagredij in pomo cocti, ana..j. ambrae
gra.ij. euphorbij.j.ss. Grind them all severally, and searse them finely, then
mix them, and hereof give a nutshell full at once cum aqua frigida. It gives
fifteen or twenty stools, and carries away the matter of scrofula.

Another serving in like manner for Botium or Bronchocele.
Rec. Spongiae adustae, Ex manuscripto.
gallae marinae adustae, bedeguar adust. corticis ouorum adusti, limaturae
martis praeparatae, prunicis, ossium sepiae, ana..ss. sem. plantaginis, nucis
moscatae, gariophyllorum, cinamomi, ana..j. piperis, zinziberis, salis gemmae,
turpeti hermodactyllorum, ana..j. aristolog^ long. and rotundae, ellebori alb.
and nigri, ana..ss. Fiat omnium puluis subtiliss. The Doss. is.j. morning and
evening.

A powder for preserving and quickening of the eyesight, to be used ordinarily
in the meats.
Rec. Leuistici, Ex manuscripto.
ameos, apij, sileris montani, cymini, saluiae, calamenti, anisi, cardamomi,
origani, aneti, carui, foeniculi, thymi, piperis, hyssopi, petroselini, ana.j.
cinamomi, gariophyllorum, galangae, croci, pulegei, ana..j. Make all to most
fine powder.

A powder to heal ulcers of hard curation in the tongue.
Balthrop.
Rec. Aluminis combusti,.ij. coccinei panni floccos, a pretty quantity, dry,
or rather parch them upon a new hot tile, until the color vade, then make
both in fine powder, and add pulueris gariophyllorum gra. iiij. Grind them
finely together, and keep it in a glass, it will be of an ash color, apply
it upon a little lint wet in plantaine, or red rose water, else rub the places
therewith.

A powder to take away warts in the secret parts.
Balthrop.
Rec. Auripigmenti, sabinae, ana.j. Make them together in fine powder.

Another.
Baker.
Rec. Sabinae siccatae.j. hermodactylorum torrefactorum, myrtillorum torrefact.
ana.iij. vitrioli romani, aluminis, ana..ij. auripigmenti rub..j. Make these
into most fine powder. If you add opij.j. it will work without pain.

An excellent powder to stay any flux of blood, and preserving the stitches of
a wound.
Rec. Colophoniae,.iiij. boli armeni.ij. Baker.
masticis, olibani, sanguinis draconis, ana..ss. rad. consolidae ma. rosarum,
ana..ij. Fiat. I have applied this powder with the hairs of a Hare and whites
of Eggs: as also with whites of Eggs alone.

A merueilous powder to be given inward, and applied outward, to resist the
malignitie of a Canker.
Rec. Auri and argenti foliatorum, Antonius Montagnana.
ana.ss lapidis bezoar.j. pulu. cancrorum marinorum.j.ss. Mix them to apply
it, grind thereof cum aqua scordij to the form a Liniment, and apply it.

Purgations by Potions.
A Potion for the Canker not vlcerated.
Weckerus.
REc. Fumariae m.j. senae, epithymi, ana..iij. florum anthos p.ij. Infuse them
in four ounces of Whey, then strain them, and dissolve therein, rhabarbari in
aqua buglossae infusi.j. cinamomi gra.iiij. mannae.j.ss. cassiae.vj. and so
make your Potion.

A Potion solutiue to be used in Erisipelas phlegmonides.
Vesalius.
Rec. Rhabarbari electi.iiij. florum violarum and boraginis, ana..j. decoctionis
tamarindorum q.s. Infuse the flowers and rhewbarbe ten hours, then strain
them, and in the straining dissolve therein diacatholici.iij. syrupi
rosarum.ij. And make a Potion according to Art.

A Potion for the swelling in the throat.
Weckerus.
Rec. Agarici trochiscati in oxymelite simplici infusi and expressi,.iiij.
turbith.j salis gemmae gra.vj. zinzibris gra.vj. syrupi rosarum solut..j.ss.
aquarum betonicae and melissae ana..ij. Mix them, and make a Potion.

A potion for a virulent and corosiue ulcer.
Rec. Floru^ boraginis and violaru^, Weckerus.
ana p.j. rad. cychorij.ss. passularu^.ss. polypodij glycyrrhizae, ana..ij.
prunorum paria.v. sebesten.ss. rhabarbari.iij. agarici.j.ss. sennae.x. spicae
indicae.j. salis gemmae.ss. zinzibris.j. Boil them in sufficient water, and
make a potion for two draughts, whereby you shall add syrupi rosati
laxatiui,.ij.

A potion for such as have ulcers in the yard.
Rec. Prunorum damascenorum, Andreas Lacuna.
glycyrrhizae razae, tamarindorum, hordei mundati, ana..iij. sem. frigid.
maiorum mundat. ana..ij.ss. trium florum cordialium, ana.p.j. Boil them
together, and in the decoction dissolve pulpae cassiae recenter extractae, and
diacatholici, ana..v. syrupi solutiui ex nona infusione rosarum.v. pulueris
electuarij trium sandalorum.j. Make it according to Art.

A gentle lenitiue potion for delicate persons in the cure of lues Venerea.
Rec. Syrupi rosarum.iij. mannae electae.j.ss. aquae violarum.ij. Fiat potio.
Matthiolus


Another more purging in the like case.
Matthiolus
Rec. Sir. rosarum solut. sir. cychorij compos. mannae electae, ana.j.
electuarij lenitiui.iij. electuarij de succo rosarum.ij.ss. rhabarb. pulu.
subtilis..ss. spicae gra.ij. cum decoctione florum and fructuu^ cordialium.
Fiat potio.

A purging decoction for such as are infected with lues Venerea.
Nicolaus Massa.
Rec. Fol. sennae.j.ss. fumiterrae.j. capill. veneris.ss. scolopendriae.ss.
epithymi, thymi, ana.vj. glycyrrhizae, rasae.iij. colocinthidis.ij. hellebori
nigri.j.ss. myrabol. indorum.vij. prunorum damascenorum numero xij. sebesten.
nu.x. Tamarindoru^.j. succi fumiterrae lib.j. aquae fumiterrae q.s. Make hereof
a decoction according to Art, and filtre it, and give it with appropriate
syrupes for the humors offending.

A decoction of guiacum to be used in lue Venerea.
Calme^eus.
Rec. Ligni sancti lib.j. cort. eiusdem lib.ss. aquae puriss. lib.x. Infuse
them and let them soke xxiiii. hours, and boil them to the third part, then
take radicum enulae campanae, dactylorum ab ossibus separatorum, ana lib.j.ss.
senae orientalis.j. Soke them in six pound of white wine xxiiii. hours upon
hot embers, so that the wine be almost ready to sees, then strain it, and
put the first decoction to this, and add sacchari lib. ss. cinamomi.j. and
four hours after let them run through a strainer, and every morning let the
pa^ient take five or six ounces, and before supper, or when he goes to bed
as much, and put to the residents of the first decoction, aquae purissimae,
lib.xv. and boil them to the consumption of the third part, and put to as much
Sugar and Cinnamon as is sufficient to make them acceptable.

A decoction to be used of vlcerated bodies.
Rad. Radicum helenij foliorum hederae ana.iiij. succi anthos, capillorum
ven^ris, mentastri, pulegij, gallitrici, pollitrici, matricariae, ana m.j. rad.
foeniculi, apij ana.ij. rad. cychoriae.iij. sennae.j.ss. polypodij quercini,
glycyrrhizae, ana.x. croci gra.iij. agaric. trochisc..j.ss. Boil them in ten
pound of rain water, and mellis puriss. lib.j. till two parts out of three be
wasted, and let him take thereof six ounces in the morning and sweat after it.

A decoction to be used in the cure of lues Venerea.
Rec. Radicum buglossae, capill. veneris, florum buglossae, ana.m.ss.
polypodij, epithymi, ana..vj. myrabolanorum nigrorum and chebulorum, ana..viij.
rhabarbari electi.iij. folliculorum senae.iij. agarici frustatim incisi,
chamaepyteos, chamaedryos, ana..ss. zinzibris.j.ss. vuarum passarum,
glycyrrhizae, ana..j. veratri nigri.j.ss. squinanti.ss. fumariae, m.j.
eupatorij.j.ss. Boil all but the epithimum and rhabarb. in five pound of Whey,
till the half be wasted, then put in the rest, and let them have one walme,
then strain them and clarify it, and add thereto oxymellitis simplicis and
zacchari, ana..j.ss. syrupi acetosi simplic. and composit. syrupi fumariae,
ana..ij.ss. Whereof he shall take every morning five ounces at a time.

A decoction for Palsies, Crampes, Rheumes, Scabbes and diseases proceeding of
moisture.
Rec. Ligni guaiaci.vj. cort. eiusdem.ij. sarsaeparillae.ij.ss. chinae.j. rad.
lapathi acuti.j. rhabarbari, turpeti albi and gummosi, agarici, ana..ss.
polypodij.iiij. medullae, sem. cartami.ss. cort. capparis.j. rad. aperientium,
ana..ss. saluiae m.iij. absynthij romani m.j.ss. anisoru^.ij.
glycyrrhizae.iiij. mellis lib.j. cinamomi.vj. vini albi lib.iiij. aquae
fontanae lib. xvj. Infuse them one night, and boil them twenty hours, then
strain it, and clarify it, and reserve it to your use in a vessel, of the
which decoction he shall take every morning fasting four ounces, before dinner
three ounces, and before supper three ounces; then boil the residents again
with so much water as before, vini albi, and mellis rosarum, ana. lib.ij. for
the patient to drink at his meals. This potion must be used thirty days, and
let him sweat ten days by the space of an hour in a day; and if his body
be not sufficiently purged, let him take three ounces of the first decoction,
mannae electae.j. syrupirosarum solutiui.ss. confectionis hamech.ij. For one
draught.

A purging decoction, or (as the author calls it) a soluble syrup of very
effectual work in strong vlcerate bodies, or such as are hard to work upon.
Rec. Saluiae, rosmarini, absynthij, Phiorauantius.
cichorij, cardui benedicti, vrticae, origani, ana.m.j ficuum, passularum,
dactylorum, amygdalarum dulciu^, salis gemmae ana.iiij. coloquintidae, aloes
hepat. cinamomi, myrabol. citrinorum, ana.ij. mellis puriss. lib.ij. stamp all
(besides the honey) in gross: infuse them in aquae font. lib.xviij. then boil
it to the half: after strain it, distill it by a filtre, add to it aquae
ros. opt. lib.j. and two carretes of Musk (says the Author) but I wish some
part of it to be kept without the Musk, for that some will not abide the
smell thereof. The quantity (says the Author) is from four ounces to six,
but you shall seldom need to go above three ounces.

Purgation by pills.
A purging pill for bodies infected with the pockes.
REc. Myrabol. omnium, Matthiolus
trochisc. colocynthid. masticis, diagredij, hermodactylorum, turpeti, agarici
praeparati, ana.j origani, cumini, ana.ss. rhabarbari.j.ss. spicaenardi,
zinzibris, ana, j. salis gemmi.j.ss. hellebori nigri.ij. polypodij quercini.j.
sem. ebuli.ij. pulueris hieraesymplic. diamoscu dulcis, ana.ij. aloes lotae.ij.
theriacae.ij. Pulu. subtilissime and cum syrupo fumiterrae q.s. fiat massa.

Pills to be used in the cure of Alopecia Gallica.
Rec. Rhabarbari, agarici, Rondeletius.
ana.ij. aloes.j argenti viui extincti in succo rosarum.iij. cinamomi, ambrae,
ana.j. myrrhae, masticis, ana.j. cum terebinthina excipiantur, and formentur
pillulae octo pro.j. capiat pro vna vice.j. Deinde.j.ss. postremo.j. pro
diuitibus add limaturae auri, vel pannorum auri.iiij.

Pills for the same.
Vigo.
Rec. Myrabolanorum emblicorum, bellericorum, indorum, ana..ij.ss. specierum
pillularum mastichinarum.ss. staechados, folliculorum sennae, epithymi, croci,
ana..ss. gentianae, anisorum ana..j. polypodij quercini, ellebori nigri,
ana..ij. turpeti albi and gummosi.j.ss. diagredij.iiij. zinzibris, serapini,
cinamomi, nucis moscatae, ligni aloes, tormentillae, dictami; cardui benedicti,
colocinthidis, ana..ij. agarici trochise rhabarbari electi, aloes lotae,
ana..ss. theriacae opt. galeni.vj. and with syrupo acetoso, make your mass.
Doss est.j. Whereof make five pills, and after them other five.

Pills for lues Venerea.
Rondeletius.
Rec. Laudani puri, hypocistidis, ana..j. aloes.j. ambrae, mosci, ana.j. argenti
viui loti in vino.ij. incorporentur simul cu^ syrupo rosato laxatiuo and fiant
pillulae. Whereof the patient shall take every morning one scruple, but these
Pills must not be taken before the body be euacuated.

An effectual pill to purge rusticall and foul vlcerated bodies.
Rec. Pulpae colocinthidis.v. aquae vitae optimae lib.ij. Phiarouantius and
Banester.
Let them stand to steep three days, then strain them strongly, and add to
the strained part aloes purissimae, veratri nigri. ana.j hermodactillorum.j.
agarici.ss. Let these in fine powder stand with the rest in a hot place till
it be almost dry: then put to it croci, cinamomi, diagredij, florum sulphuris,
ana. semis. Fiatque Mass.

Pills for pain in the joints proceeding of Alopecia Gallica, or Lues venerea.
Rec. Aloes.j. galangae, myrrhae, agarici, Rondeletius.
salis gemmae, ana.j. succi absynthij.j.ss. And with water of Wormwood make
your Mass, whereof the Patient shall take in the morning when he arises, one
dram, twice or thrice in a week.

A proved Pill that consumes the tumor Scrofula away by Stool.
Accipiatur Talpa: Henricus Anglicus.
boil it sufficiently, then dry it in the Sun, and bring it to a fine
searsed powder: then mingle it well cu^ melle albo. Hereof make pills of the
bigness of chiches, and give every day three or five with whey. It shall
consume the matter of the scrofulaes downward.

For inward medicines in this case see more among the powders and decoctions.

Magistrall pills of Turbith mineral of great use against the French pockes,
hard tumors, and rebellious ulcers. The first.
Banester.
Rec. Sagapeni in vino cretico dissoluti,.ij. salis guaiaci, colocynthidis,
diagredij. ana.j. turpeti mineralis.x. mosci.j. olei gariophylloru^ gran. xij.
Fiat Massa. Doss. from twelve grains to twenty.

Another.
Banester.
Rec. Extracti colocinthidis.iiij. extracti rhabarbari, extracti
hermodactylorum, ana.j. extracti veratri nigri.ij. sagapeni in aqua coelesti
dissoluti.vj. mosci and ambrae odoratissimae, ana gran.xij. Fiat massa. Doss. a
gran.x. ad gran.xvj. fortenne days together, or until the Patient flux
sufficiently at the mouth.

The third sort most safe and acceptable, devised and practiced with great
success in the most delicate young and tender persons.
Rec. Turpeti mineralis.iij.ss. fol. auri and argenti, Banester.
ana.j. soluti perlarum gran. xxvj. terrae samiae, boli orientalis, ana.ss.
cornu monocerotis gra.xv. lapidis Bezoardici.ss. ossis de cord cerui, rasurae
eboris, ana gr.xij. lapid. granati, rubentis, saphyri and smaragdi
praeparatorum ana gr.viij. coralli albi and rubri praeparat. ana gr.vj. mosci
gr.vij. ambrae odoratiss. gr.iiij. Fiat eorum omnium puluis subtillissimus.
Rec. huius pulueris gr.xviij. diagredij gr.xxxviij. conseruae berberis as much
as suffices to make your Mass. This quantity divide into six or twelve
pills (according as you judge fittest for the strength and such like
circumstances concerning your patient) and give one every night when the
party goes to bed, so long until there be flux at mouth, which in some
will not be in twelve, or perhaps in twenty days.

An extraction, purging all corrupt humors proceeding ex lue Gallica.
Rennerus.
Rec. Colocynt..vj..ij. turbethi, staechad. arab. ana..x. diagredij.v. agarici
albi.ss. rhabarbari electi.ij.. cinamo..iiij. azari, rosarum rubrarum, spicae
indicae, masticis, ligni aloes, styracis liquidae, ana..ij.ss. aloes
cicatrini.xiij. Make it according to Art.

Plasters.
A plaster to mollify and resolve a schyrrous tumor.
REc. Caricas pingues nu.xij. Calmeteus.
Boil them and stamp them, ammoniaci, bdellij, galbani, in aceto dissolutorum
ana..ij. styracis liquidae.j. muscilaginis althaeae, sem. lini and foenugraeci,
ana..ij. oesypi, butyri recentis, ana.j. olei ricinini, vel sesamini, vel
liliorum.iij. cerae q.s. Make a plaster according to Art.

A plaster to be used in the cure of scirrhus exquisitus.
Rec. Axungiae gallinae, Calmeteus,
.j.ss. taxi muli and asini ana..ij. medullae crurium vituli and cerui, ana.iij.
oesypi, styracis calamit. bdellij, ana. quart.ss. muscilag. sem. althaeae, lini
and foenugraeci, ana..ij. masticis, thuris, ana..ss. olei amygdalarum dulcium,
amureae, olei liliorum, ana.iij.ss. cerae q.s. to make a plaster.

A plaster to resolve hard tumors.
Rec. Serapini.iiij. ammoniaci.iij. bdellij.j. euphorbij.ij. galbani.ss.
Dissolve the gummes in malmesey, then add thereto ol. liliorum and ol.
amigdalarum dulcium, ana.j. propoleos.iiij.ss. Mix them for a plaster.

A plaster for a wenne.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Radic. brioniae, cyclaminis, cucumeris agrestis, althaeae, lilij coelestis
ana.ij. Boil them perfectly in white wine, and beat them; then add theretoo
ammoniaci in aceto scillitico dissoluti, bdellij and oppoponacis in oleo
sesamino dissolutorum, ana.j. stercoris columbini and caprini, ana.j. sem.
laudani, styracis calamitae, ana.ss. picis naualis quantum sufficit for a
plaster.

Another.
Weckerus.
Rec. Ol. liliorum vel laurini.xij. picis siccae.vj. laudani.iij.
lithargyrij.xij. galbani.iij. styracis.ij. aeruginis.xij. Mix them according
to Art, and make a plaster.

A plaster maturatiue for wennes.
Weckerus.
Rec. Radicum althaeae, liliorum ana lib. ss. Boil them in water, then stamp
them, and strain them, and add thereto allioru^ sub prunis coctorum, caeparum
coctarum ana.iij. olei liliorum, butyri ana.ij. pingued. suillae, anserinae,
ana.ij.ss. farinae triticeae, foenugreci, seminis lini, ana quantum sufficit,
vitellos duos ouorum. Mix them and make a plaster.

A plaster for a wenne.
Rec. Olei antiqui, vel liliorum, Calme^^u^.
vel laurini,.xij. picis siccae.vj. laudani.iij. lithargyrij.xij. galbani.iij.
styracis.ij. Boil the lytharge with the oil till it be thick: then add too
the pitch and other things being removed from the fire, and make a plaster.

A plaster for nodes and glandulous tumors.
Rec. Stercoris vaccarum.ij. radicu^ caulium, Auicen^^.
rad. capparis, squillae, ficuum pinguium ana.ss. lupinoru^, bdellij, ana.ij.
mellis, aceti, axungiae porcinae, amurcae, olei antiqui, ana quod sufficit.
Make a plaster in good form.

Another for the same.
Rec. Cerae citrin. lib.j. ammoniaci.xij. Banester.
oppoponacis, galbani, ana.j. butyri recentis.i.ss. pingued. caponis.j.
Dissolve the gummes in wine and make a plaster.

Another.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Radicum althaeae, and brioniae, coctarum and pistarum, ana..j. axungiae
suillae recentis.j.ss. pingued. gallinae, anseris and anatis, ana..ss. medullae
crurium vituli,.ij. olei lumbricorum, liliorum and vitellorum ouorum, ana..j.
styracis calamitae.j.ss. gummi arabici.ij. bdellij, gummi hederae ana..j.ss.
terebinthinae.iij. oesypi.vj. emplastri Io. de Vigo.ij. emplastri de meliloto
and diachylonis ireati, ana..j. mercurij in saliua hominis ieiuni extincti.ij.
Mix them together, and with your hands washed in aqua vitae: labor them well,
and make them in rolls.

A plaster for all knots.
Rec. Olibani.j.ss. masticis.j. myrrhae,.ss. thuris.ij. cerae..xij. resinae.iij
ss. euphorbij..iij. gummi ammoniaci.j. galbani,.ss. gummi arabici, dragaganti,
ana..iij. aloes epaticae.ij. laudani.j.ss. sagapeni, bdellij, ana..iij.
baccarum lauri.ij.ss. vnguenti dialthaeae.ij.ss. terebint..j. aquae
vitae.iij.ss. olei spicae.iij. axungiae porcinae^.ij.ss. theriacae.ss. rad.
ireos.ij.ss. cinabrij,.ij. argenti fugitiui mortificati.ij.ss. Make a plaster
to Art.

A notable plaster to resolve and spend away all nodes and knottie tumors,
especially coming of the pockes, if they be taken in time before they be
confirmed, and the bone foul.
Rec. Mercurij.viij. plumbi.vj. Banester.
Melte your plumbum first, and after a little cooling put too the mercury, and
shake them well together: put them so into cruciples, and when it is cold, take
thereof.vj. turpeti mineralis.j. cinabrij.iij. Labor them in a mortar of iron
the space of two hours, or until it be finely powdered: then have in readiness
gummi ammoniaci in aceto distillato dissoluti.xxx. pingued. viperarum.iiij. and
(for delicate persons) mosci.iiij. Mix altogether according to Art, and use it
to the places aforesaid.

Or thus more simply.
Rec. Plumbi mercuriati ( which is taught Banester.
in the receipt next before going) lib.j. turpeti mineralis.iiij. cinabrij..ij.
Grind them together very fine, and with gummi ammoniaci lib.ij. in aceto
dissoluti fiat emplastrum.

Another for wennes scrofulaes, and ganglious knottes.
Banester.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci inaceto dissoluti lib.ss. radic. brioniae pulu..j. turp.
mineralis.j. cinabrij.x. cerae.ij. Fiat.

Or thus no less effectual.
Banester.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci,.vj. radic. brioniae and althaeae, ana.j. turpeti
mineralis,.v. butyri recentis q.s. cerae albae.j. Fiat emplastrum.

Another very excellent and of great proof.
H. de Otthen.
Rec. Medullae radic. brioniae albae, per cocturam lixiuij extractae.ij. casei
antiquissimi in decocto pernae remolliti,.j.ss. ammoniaci, galbani, sagapeni in
aceto dissolutorum, ana.ss. medullae crurium vituli, axungiae humanae, ana.ij.
pyrethri, cardamomi, ana.ij.ss. euphorbij.iij. lapidis gagatis.ss. sulphuris
viui.vj. marcasitae verae.x. argenti viui saliua ieiuni hominis extincti,.ijss.
Cum cera citrina fiat emplastrum. But before you apply it, anoint the place
with this mixture following. Rec. medullae crurium vituli, olei petreolei, ana
parts aequales. Mix them.

A plaster for Ganglium.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci, sagapeni in aqua vitae dissoluti, ana.j. Put too it (
the aqua vitae vapored away) sulphuris viui subtiliter pulv..ss. And so make it
a plaster.

A plaster against nodes and pains in Lue venerea.
Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. resinae pini.iiij. axungiae humanae.iij. ol.
chamaemel..iiij. medullae crurium vaccarum lib.ss. gummi elemi.v. muccaginis
rad. althaeae, and sem. lini, ana.iiij. Mix them and boil them to the wasting
of the muscilages: add to the straining ammoniaci, galb. ana.vj. bdellij,
sagapeni in vino cret. dissolut. ana.iiij. rad. brioniae.j.ss. rad. enulae
campanae.ss. euphorbij.iij. cinabrij.vj. argenti viui extincti and incorporati
cum terebinthina and styrace liquida.viij. Fiat emplastrum.

Another.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.ij. olei communis lib.j.ss. radic. brioniae and
althaeae, ana lib.ss. vini albi lib.j. Infuse them x. days, then boil them to
the consumption of the liquor, so strain it: after put too lythargyrij
auri.xx. vitrioli..iij. Boil them to the form of a Cerote: put too it
galbani, ammoniaci, bdellij in aceto dissolutor. ana.viij. cerae citrinae
lib.ss. cinabrij.vj. terebinthinae.iij. euphorbij.ij. argenti viui extincti
lib.ss. myrrhae.ij. Fiat Emplastrum.

A plaster to mitigate pain in the cure of a Carbuncle.
Weckerus.
Rec. Maluarum, violarum, ana mani.ij. Sees them in water until they be
tender, then stamp them, adding theretoo farinae hordeacae.iij. butyri
recentis, olei recentis, ana.ij. vitellos duos ouorum. Mix them well for a
plaster.

A plaster to mollify the hardness of Phlegmon.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Radic. lilij and althaeae, ana.j.ss. radicum brioniae, cyclaminis,
cucumeris agrestis, ana.ij. Boil them in white wine, and beat them small: then
put theretoo stercoris columbini and caprini, ana.j.ss. gummi ammoniaci in
aceto dissoluti, bdellij and oppoponacis in oleo sesamino dissolutorum, ana.j.
laudani and styracis liquidae, ana.j. picis naualis q.s. Make a plaster in
good form.

A plaster repercussiue and desiccatiue to be used in the cure of the creeping
Herpes.
Weckerus.
Rec. Succi plantaginis and solani, ana.j. succi rad. lapathi.ss. balaustiorum
p.j. rosarum rubr..j.ss. alum..j. aceti.ij. Boil them till the juices and
vinegar be wasted, then grind them in a leaden mortar, and add theretoo
lithargyrij vtriusque ana.ij. cerusae.j tutiae.ij. floris aeris.j. Make a
plaster in good order.

A plaster for an Oedematous tumor. Weckerus.

Rec. Fol. ebuli, sambuci, absynt. ana m.j. aluminis, sulphuris, salis, ana.ss.
Boil the^ and beat them small, adding theretoo dialthaeae.ij.ss. axungiae
suillae.j.ss mellis.j. Mix them well for a plaster.

A Plaster for a windy tumor.
Rec. Propoleos lib.j.ss. micarum panis, Weckerus.
lib.ss. rosarum rubrarum.j. Boil them in white wine, then strain them, and
add theretoo piperis, cariophyllorum, nucis moscatae, zinzibris, ana.ij.
cumini, anis^, foeniculi, sem. apij, ameos, ana.ss. olei chamaemeli, anethi,
rutae, ana.ij. Make a plaster and apply it warm, the place being first well
scarrified in the top.

A pl^ister to be used in the beginning of Phlegmon.
Rec. Sandali albi and rub. ana.iij. boli armeni, Vesalius.
terrae sigillatae, ana.j.ss. ol. rosarum,.ij. fol. plantag. lactucae, semperv.
maioris, solani, ana q.s. puluer. sumach.ss. Powder what is to be powdered, and
make a plaster.

A plaster against inflammation.
Vesalius.
Rec. Maluae, parietariae, ana m.j. farinae volatilis, furfuris subtiliss. ana
p.j. aneti, foenugraeci, ana.ss. ol. chamaemeli.ij. Boil them in wine, and
work them till they be well incorporated.

A plaster for Gangraena.
V^salius.
Rec. Pulueris sem. sinapi.j. gariophyllorum.iij. ol. sem. lini, ol. nucum
iuglandium vetustiss. ana g.v. Mix them in a mortar, and make a plaster.

A plaster maturatiue in cold causes.
Rec. Radicum althaeae, capitum liliorum alborum, ana lib.ss. Boil them in
rain water till they be perfectly boiled, then stamp them, and add theretoo
farinae lini and foenugraeci, ana.iiij. farinae triticeae.ij. and with
sufficient of the former decoction to incorporate them and the rest, make a
soft plaster ever stirring them, and in the end adding thereto butyri sine
sale, pingued. porcinae, ana.iij. vitellum vnius oui. So let the^ boil a
little, and keep it to your use.

A plaster to mollify and abate swellings.
Rec. Cerae albae.ij.ss. terebint..j.ss. colophoniae.iiij. thuris.vij.
masticis.ss. myrrhae.iij. seui ceruini.iij. lapid. calaminaris in vino albo
extinct..x. lithargyrij auri.ij. lapid. tutiae.ij.ss. camphorae.ij. cerusae.vj.
Make it to a perfect Plaster or a Sparadrop.

A plaster resolutiue against all swellings and inflammations.
Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. seui ouini.vj. butyri rece^tis.j. pingued. capi,
anatis and anseris, ana.j. ol. liliacei.j.ss^ ol. chamaemeli, amygdalarum
dulcium, ol. sem. lini, ana.ss. ammoniaci,.v. bdellij,.iij. cremoris sem.
lini.vij. cremoris rad. althaeae lib.j. vini cretici lib.j.ss. resinae
purae.iiij. colophoniae.vj. Mix them together, and boil them to the
consumption of the juices and wine: then strain them, and add to the
straining minij lib.ss. Incorporate them together, and make them in rolls.

A plaster to be used for Hernia Intestinalis.
Rec. Picis naualis.v. coloph..iij. lithargyrij, Weckerus.
gum. ammonia. oppoponacis, bdellij, masticis, terebint. ana.j. boli armeni,
thuris, sang. draconis, sarcocollae, aloes, centaurij, symphiti, oxyca^thae,
pillul. cupressi, gallarum viridium, corticum mali punici, vermium terrest.
ana.ij. glutin. pellis taur nae vel arietinae madefactae and dilutae in aqua
chalybiata and aceto.ij. Mix them at an easy fire, and make a plaster
according to art.

A plaster to be used in impostumes in the ears.
Vigo.
Rec. Cepae albae sub prunis decoctae lib. ss. capitum lilioru^ alborum sub
prunis decoctorum.iiij. butyri recentis.iij. olei amygd. dulcium, ping.
gallinae and anseris, ana.vj. vitel. tres ouoru^. Then with the powder of
melilot, chamomill flowers and fenugreek make a plaster upon the fire with the
decoction of althaea according to the precepts of Art.

A plaster for Hernia Intestinalis.
Weckerus.
Rec. Masticis, sarcocollae, sang. dracon^s, blattae bizantiae, cortic. thuris,
aloes, boli armeni, gypsi, gall. virid. ana.ij. icthyocollae, tauri collae,
dissolutorum in aceto, ana.ij. Labor them well, and make a plaster in good
form.

A plaster to mollify the hardness in women's breasts.
Vigo.
Rec. furfuris, m.ij. chamaemeli m.ss. meliloti m.j. farinae fabarum.iiij ol.
cham. aneti and rosar. ana.j.ss. ping. gallinae, ol. violac. ana.x. Then with
suffic^e^t sweet wine make a soft plaster, adding theretoo croci.ij.

A plaster resolutiue to be used in Hernia Humoralis.
Rec. Foliorum caulium nigrorum, Vigo.
radi^um althaeae, chamaemeli, ana m.j. coriandri.ss. Boil them all in fat
broth of flesh, then in the decoction with the powder of Beans and Fitches
make a soft plaster, adding thereto olei chamaemeli, and aneti, ana.ij.
rosarum.j. croci.j. cumini (if the pla^e be not much inflamed).j.ss. and keep
it to your use.

A plaster to maturate a Fellon.
Rec. Radicum liliorum alborum.vj. Weckerus.
radic. buglossae,.ij. maluae, violarum, ana m.j. Sees them till they be
tender, then strain them, and add thereto farinae triticaeae.iij. butyri
rece^tis,.ij. olei dulcis.iiij. axungiae porcinae.ij.ss. vitellos duorum
ouorum, croci.j. Make a plaster to Art.

A plaster to maturate in Hernia Humoralis.
Rec. Foliorum maluarum, and violarum, Vigo.
ana m.ij. radicum althaeae, capitum liliorum alborum, ana.ij. Boil them in
water, then stamp them and strain them, and with Barley meal in the
decoction, make a soft plaster, adding thereto butyri recentis.iiij. vitellos
duos ouorum, olei oliuarum dulcium,.j.ss. Mix them, and with the straining
above named make a plaster.

A plaster consolidatiue for a Fellon.
Weckerus.
Rec. Diachylonis albi sine gummis.ij. terebinthinae clarae, pingued. porcinae,
ana.ii.ss. lithargyrij auri et argenti, ana.v. minij.v. cerusae.j. olei
rosacei.j.ss. Mix them upon the fire, stirring them well, and in the end put
to as much white Wax as is sufficient to make a plaster.

A plaster for a Fellon.
Calmeteus.
Rec. Picis naualis.j. adipis suilli expurgati.v. adipis taurini vel oesypi,
ana.ij. resinae pini.v. Melt them together, and add thereto, cerae.iij.

A plaster to resolve the cold tumors of the Coddes.
Vigo.
Rec. Farinae fabarum lib.ss. medullae panis.iij. cum decoctione althaeae,
meliloti, anethi, and chamaemeli, ac paululo cumini. Make a plaster over the
fire, adding thereto olei chamaemeli, aneti, pingued. anatis, ana.j.ss.
cumini.j.ss. Make it to your use.

A maturatiue plaster for swelling in the Coddes, proceeding of a cold cause.
Rec. Capitum liliorum alborum.iij. Vigo.
rad. althaeae.iiij. foliorum caulium nigrorum m.j. maluarum tantundem. Boil
them all in water, and stamp them, and strain them in the decoction with
wheat meal, linseed meal, and fenugreeke meal, of each equal portions: make
a soft plaster, adding thereto butyri recentis.iiij.

A plaster to mitigate pain of the Hemrhoides.
Rec. Boli armeni, gummi arabici, Galenu^.
sanguinis draconis, masticis, ana.iij. myrrhae, balaustiorum, rosarum rubrarum
siccarum, ana ^ij. Make these in fine powder, and searce them, then take
butyri.j. olei rosarum.iij. cerae.ij. succi foliorum porrorum colati.ij. Mix
them for a plaster.

A plaster for Hernia aquosa.
Rec. Rosarum, balaustiorum, Vigo.
nucum cupressi, ana m.j. farinae fabarum and orobi, ana.iiij. stercoris
caprini,.iij. And with sweet wine and Barbers lee sufficient make a plaster at
the fire.

A plaster to maturate tumors in women's breasts.
Auicenna.
Rec. Micarum panis.iij. farinae fabarum, radicis mal^auisci, ana.j.ss. farinae
foenugraeci.j. ouorum coctorum vitellos tres, adding thereto de croco, myrrha,
and assa faelida, and make a plaster.

A plaster for the Hemrhoides.
Vigo.
Rec. Rosarum, myrtillorum, foliorum plantaginis, linguae passerinae, ana m.j.
Boil them all in Smiths water, then beat them, and strain them in the end
with a little vinegar of Roses, and wine of Pomegranats make a plaster.

A plaster to maturate Bubo Venereus.
Weckerus.
Rec. Foliorum maluae, violaceae, ana m.ij. radicum althaeae lib.ss. capitum
liliorum alboru^.iiij. Boil them in sufficient quantity of water, and beat
them small^ adding thereto farinae triticeae vel hordeaceae, ana q.s. olei
communis, butyri, ana.iij. ping. porcinae.ij.ss^ vitellos duos ouorum. Mix
them for a plaster.

Another.
Vigo.
Rec. Capitum lilij, radicum althaeae, ana lib.j. decocta in aqua pistentur
cum.ij. ficuum siccarum pinguium, nucleorum nucum.j.ss. axungiae porcinae
lib.ss. Then adding thereto farinae lini, foenugraeci and tritici, with some of
the decoction make a plaster, and in the end put to it, butyri.iij. vitellos
duos ouorum been conquassatos.

A plaster for the swelling in the throat.
Rec. Radicum Brioniae, Wecker^^.
radic. cucumeris agrestis, ana.iij. ficuum immaturarum paria vj. amygdalarum
amararum.ij. scillae.j.ss. colo^ynthidis.ss. Boil them in equal portions of
old oil and malmesey, then stamp and strain them, adding thereto farinae
fabarum and orobi, ana.ij.ss. farinae seminis lini, and foenugraeci, ana.j.
croci.j.ss. Mix them to a soft plaster in form of a Cataplasme.

A plaster for the swelling of the Coddes.
Rec. Bdellij, oppoponacis, sagapeni in aceto dissolutorum ana.ss. muscilaginis
althaeae, lini and foenugraeci, ana.ij.ss. florum chamaemeli and meliloti,
ana.iij. farinae fabarum.iij. butyri.ss. And with the decoction of figs and
mallows make a plaster.

A plaster against the going out of the fundament.
Rec. Emplastri oxycrocei.j.ss. baccarum myrtillorum, gallarum, masticis,
ana.j.ss. Mix them and work them with oleum costinum, adding thereto bedeguar
puluerizati.ij. Make a plaster three fingers long, which must be applied
between the reins and the fundament.

A plaster for a Rupture.
Rec. Sarcocollae, masticis, sanguinis draconis, olibani, ichthyocollae,
ana.iij. radicum symphiti maioris, and osmundae, ana.ss. Dissolve the glue in
vinegar, and with oil of Masticke or of Myrtilles make a plaster.

Another.
Rec. Masticis, sarcocollae, olibani, thuris, gummi dragaganti, ichthyocollae,
ana.j. lapidis haematitis.iij. Dissolve the glewe and gummes in vinegar, and
make a plaster.

A plaster for a Rupture.
Rosa Anglicana.
Rec. Glutinis piscium, vel pellis arietinae decoct..iiij. picis graecae,.j.
picis naualis, armoniaci, ana.ij. aloes, masticis, thuris, rosarum, boli
armeni, sanguinis draconis, myrtillorum, ana.ss. aristolochiae longae, and
rotundae, consolidae maioris and minoris, ana.vj. gallarum, balaustiorum,
psidiarum, olibani, pilorum leporis, ana.iij. sanguinis humani lib.j. Mix them
altogether in water wherein a Ram skin has boiled, wool and all, and with
a little Wax make a plaster according to Art.

Another more easy.
Rec. Aloes, Rosa Ang.
masticis, ros. olibani, ana.ss. myrrhae, sanguinis draconis, boli armeni,
picis naualis, colofoniae and graecae, ana.ij. iacaeae nigrae, consolidae
vtriusque, plantaginis, balaustiorum, ematitis, fol. quercus, caudae equinae,
ana.iij. cerae.j.ss. Fiat cum laudano and terebinthina emplastrum optimum.
Apply it, the place being first anointed cu^ oleo mastichino, rosaceo,
myrtino and laudano. And upon this, the trusse applied, without remove
thereof, save from four days to four days.

A plaster for hot Apostumes in^ women's breasts.
Rec. Furfuris triticei m.ij. florum chamaemeli p.iij. florum meliloti p.ij.
farinae fabarum.iiij. olei chamaemeli, anethi, rosarum, ana.j.ss. pingued.
gallinae, olei violarum, ana..x. Mix them with sufficient sweet wine to make
a plaster.

A plaster to resolve cold and windy tumors in the joints and other parts.
Clowes.
Rec. Olei anethi lib.ss. resinae pini lib.ij. resinae lib.iij. cerae nouae
lib.j. The powders of Cummin and Bayberies, of each one pound, relent that
which is, to be relented, and in the end strain it, and so straw in your
powders.

A plaster for the biting of a mad dog.
Val^riola.
Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, sagapeni, ana.ss. euphorbij, iridis florentini,
aristolochiae rotundae, radicum gentianae, ana.j. cancrorum fluuialium.ij.
cerae q.s. terebinthinae.ij. Mix them, and make a plaster to your own
discretion.

A plaster for a biting.
Guydo.
Rec. Galbani, serapini, oppoponacis, assae fatidae, myrrhae, piperis,
sulphuris, ana.ss. calaminthae, mentastri, ana.j. stercoris columbini, anatis,
ana.ij. Dissolve the gummes in white wine, and mix them together with honey
and old oil sufficient for a plaster.

A plaster against all bitings.
Rec. Spumae argenti, Vesalius.
cerusae purae, ana lib.j. olei veteris lib.iij. cerae.vij. ammoniaci.iiij.
galbani, tantundem. Boil the Ceruse, Litharge and Oil, till they leave
cleaving to your hands, then dissolve the gummes and put them to.

A plaster against all poisoned wounds and biting, and stinging of Serpents.
Rec. Farinae hordei and fabarum, Haliabbas.
ana.x. glycyrrhizae, radic. althaeae, picis, ana.v. cerae albae, adipis
anserinae, ana.x. Incorporate them with old oil and child's urine of a maid
child, sufficient for a plaster.

A plaster to draw out a thorn or a prick in any place.
Rec. Fermenti, Auicenna.
mellis optimi aut aluearu^ sorditiei quam propoleos nominant, ana lib.ss.
visci quercini.iij. ammoniaci.j.ss. olei.iij. Mix them all and make a
plaster, which you shall apply upon the place.

A plaster to draw out splints, thorns, and such like in any place.
Rec. Fermenti lib.j. sorditiei oleoru^ lib. ss. succi centinodij, Democratus.
succi pulegij, aut eorundem puluerizatorum, ana.iij. terebinthinae lib.j.
visci quercini, ammoniaci, galbani in vino dissolutorum, ana.j. cerae.iiij.
Make a plaster according to Art.

A plaster to draw out arrow heads, or thorns.
Vigo.
Rec. Succi radic. ari, diachylonis gummati.j. aristolochiae longae.ij.
fermenti.x. terebinthinae.vj. galbani, ammoniaci, ana.iij. Dissolve the gummes
in vinegar, and mix altogether for a plaster.

A plaster of Betonie for wounds in the head, and to draw out spelles or
bones, it will recover loose flesh, it does very much mundifie, digest, and
dry.
Andernacus.
Rec. Betonicae viridis, pimpinellae, agrimonij, saluiae, pulegij, millefolij,
consolidae maioris, gallitrici, ana.vj. thuris, masticis, ana.iij. ireos,
aristolochiae rotundae, ana.vj. cerae albae, terebinthinae, ana.viij. gummi
oleae aethiopicae,.ij. resinae pini.vj. olei terebinthinae, vini albi, ana q.s.
Bruise the herbs, and steep them eight days in white wine, stir them often
and boil them, then strain it and boil it again till the third part be
wasted, and put in the oil of Turpentine, then the Wax being well molten,
after that the Rosine and gummes, and last of all the Turpentine: then being
somewhat cold put too the rest of the powders, and work them well with your
hands till all the moisture be out, then malaxe it in Goats milk, and make
it in rolls.

Emplastrum de gummo elemij for wounds in the head.
Rec. Gunimi elemij.iij. resinae pineae Arceus.
purissimae, armoniaci, gummi hederacei puluerizati, cerae, ana.ij.
terebinthinae.iij.ss. olei rosacei.j.ss. Boil them all, except the armoniacke,
in a quantity of fragrant wine to the wasting thereof. Lastly put in the
armoniacke, and work it up with wine and aqua vitae.

A plaster for an equal wound.
Rec. Lithargyrij. cerusae, Weckerus.
ana.vj. plumbi vsti, lapid. calaminaris, terrae sigillatae, ana.iiij.
colophoniae, picis naualis, resinae, ana.ij. resinae crudae, sarcocollae,
laudani, iridis, ana.j.ss. camphorae.ss. sem. porri.ij. olei rosarum lib.j.ss.
cerae albae.iiij. Mix them and make a plaster.

A mundificatiue plaster for a wound.
Rec. Mellis rosati colati.j. myrrhae, Vesalius.
thuris, sarcocollae, ana.ss. farinae hordei, foenugraeci, quod sufsicit ad
inspissandum, then make your plaster in good form.

A plaster for a simple wound.
Weckerus.
Rec. Terebinthinae.xij. resinae pini.iij. gummi elemi.v. aristolochiae
longae.j. sanguinis draconis.j. cerae parum. Powder what is to be powdered, and
make a plaster according to Art.

A plaster for the bruised blood under the skin.
Weckerus.
Rec symphiti vtriusque ana lib.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti ana p.ij.
croci.ss. farinae fabarum.iiij. farinae foenugraeci.v. butyri recentis.j. Boil
them indifferently, whereto if you add one ounce of the juice of Wormwood,
it shall more resolve and dry: mix them to Art for a plaster of good
substance.

A plaster consolidatiue both for wounds and ulcers approved.
Frederick.
Rec. Betonicae, verbenae, anagallidis, plantaginis, scabiosae, agrimoniae, ana
m.j. rad. consolidae min..iij. Stamp them together and boil them in vini albi
lib. viij. until half be consumed: strain it, and boil it again, and when
it is boiling add to it ceui ouini.iiij. picis, resinae, cerae, ana lib.ss.
Let it so boil a pretty while: in the cooling add olibani.j. masticis,.ij.
Stir them well together a good while: when it is cold enough add
terebinthinae.j. Stir it still, and work it well with woman's milk: so make
it up in rolls.

A plaster conglutinatiue for wounds.
Rec. Terebinthinae purgatae lib.j. resinae Calmeteus.
pini.vj. gum. elemi lib.ss. sarcocollae.iiij. masticis.iij. sanguinis
draconis.iij. aristolochiae longae.j. cerae albae.iiij. cerusae.ij. Make your
plaster in good form.

A plaster for wounds in the head, or depression of the skull in young children.
Rec. Centaurij per noctem in vino albo Vigo.
infusi m.vj. Boil them to the half, and after they be strained, boil them
again to the thickness of honey, take of this decoction three ounces, lactis
mulieris.ij. terebint. lib.j. resinae.ss. thuris, masticis, gummi arabici,
ana.j. cerae.iij. Mix them according to Art, and make your plaster.

A plaster to be used in contusions of childrens heads.
Rec. Olei myrtini, olei rosarum, olei absynthij, ana.j. pulueris rubri
restrictiui.x. farinae fabarum.j. furfuris been triturati.ss. nucum cupressi
been triturati, calami aromatici, ana.vj. chamaemeli absynthij, myrtillorum,
granorum and foliorum eius, ana m.ss. cumini.j.ss. cerae albae.j.ss. Powder
which are to be powdered, and with sufficient sweet wine make a plaster to Art.

A plaster attractiue for the depression of the skull and chiefly in children.
Weckerus.
Rec. Propoleos, vel cerae nouae sordidae.iij. mellis.iij. lapidis magnetis.ss.
lapidis pumicis.iij. absynthij, cumini, sulphuris, ana..ij. salis.j. furfuris
p.j. vini optimi.iiij. Mix them and make a plaster, which you must apply
warm to the patients head after the hairs be cut away.

A notable plaster for pricks in sinews.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei rosarum, violarum, chamaemeli, ana.j. sepi vituli.iij. axungiae
porcinae.j. pinguedinis gallinae, medullae crurium vituli, ana.ss. lumbricorum
lotorum in vino.j. butyri recentis.vj. muscilaginis lib.ss. Boil them at a
soft fire to the wasting of the Muscilages: after add to the straining
lithargyrij auri and argenti, ana.x. minij.iij. cum c^rae sufficienti fiat
cerotum, addendo in fine cocturae, resinae abietis.x. masticis.ss. After which
boil them again one walme.

An excellent plaster for a fracture in the skull where the skin is whole,
especially in children.
Rec. Furfuris exiccati and triturati lib.ss. Vigo.
farinae fabarum.viij. rosarum, myrtillorum, ana.j. cham. meliloti, ana m.j.
staech. scaenanthi, ana a third part of m.j. coriandri, anisi, ana.vj.
betonicae, periclimeni, anethi, ana m.ss. absynthij, m.ij. Al being braied and
mixed with sufficient quantity of cute, and a little malmesey, or in steed
thereof some other odoriferous wine; boil them unto a solid thickness, putting
to them in the end olei chamaemelini, anethini, rosacei atque myrtini,
ana.ij.ss. cerae albae.ij. croci.j.ss. Boil them again one walme; set it by,
and stir it until it be but warm; at which time put into it calami
aromatici been puluerizati.x. And so make it up.

Another greatly extolled for the same purpose.
Rec. Sordiciei aluearis apu^, Arceus.
or (if that can not be had) cerae nouae sordidae (that is soft and vnclered)
q.s. to the forming of the plaster mellis communis puluerizati.j. lapidis
ha^matitis in puluerem redacti.ss. pumicis lapidis, cymini, absynthij, furfuris
communis, ana.ij. Mix them all at the fire, and bring it to a plaster. This
must be applied two fingers breadth more compass than the place depressed. The
force of this plaster (says the Author) is wonderful, within twelve days it
lifts up the bones con^used and beaten down: so as he thinks no medicine
to be more excellent.

A plaster that proves whether there be a fracture in the skull, yea or no.
Arceus.
Rec. Cerae nouae citr. thuris, santali, ana.ij. terebinthinae, aceti fortiss.
farinae fabaceae, ana.j. Mix them at the fire, and make a plaster, shave the
head, and apply this as a cappe to the hole: for where the fracture is, in
that part shall you find the plaster diminished and dried up, and that will
it show in three days space: all other parts where no fracture is the
plaster will appear equal and uniform. And if the skull be all sound, so
accordingly will the plaster show it self in all places like.

The two famous plasters of Paracelsus, both for wounds and ulcers: this first
serving yet more particularly for the head.
Rec. Cerae, lithargyrij, ana lib.j. calaminaris, colophoniae, ana.ij.ss. olei
communis lib.j.ss. Melt the wax, colophonie and oil together at an easy
fire: afterput in by little and little the lytarge and calaminaris most finely
powdered. Boil the^ so without burning, to the thickness of a plaster. Which
done, add oppoponacis, serapini, bdellij, ammoniaci, galbani, ana.j. (But
first let them be prepared out of vinegar as the manner is) next these put in
corallorum alb. and rub. mu^miae, myrrhae, thuris, ana.j, antimonij.ss. croci
martis.ij. Last of all, mix with them a portion of terebinthine and masticke:
so pour it forth and malaxe or work it up cum oleo hypericonis and
lumbricino, with the addition of half an ounce of campher.

The other more co^monlie bearing the name of Emplastrum sticticum, and
universally practiced.
Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, ana.ij. ammoniaci, bdellij, ana.iij. Break the^
small, and macerate them one day and a night in strong wine vinegar. After
that decoct them at a gentle fire, so as the gummes by little and little may
melt, and strain them forth clean from their foeces. Decoct them again in a
fit vessel till the vinegar be vapored out: but stir them continually so
as the gummes may not burn. Having these ready, proceed to the making of
your plaster thus: Rec. Cerae nouae lib.ss. olei oliuarum lib.ij. Melt them by
little and little: then put in lithargyrij triti lib.j.ss. Stir them together
on the fire, till it look of a pale red, or bright bay color: at which time
begin to put in your gummes, which you must do by the quantity of a nut at
a time, until all be mixed in: (being wary in the mean time that they
ouer-heate not, seeing otherwise the gummes are hot of their own proper
nature). Lastly add aristolochiae vtriusque, calaminaris, myrrhae, thuris,
ana.j. terebinthinae purae.iiij. Boil them, stirring them together with great
diligence. When it is come to a consistence, pour them into water, and work
it up with oil of chamomill and roses three or four hours together. It
lasts xl. years in full virtue.

A plaster to cause flesh in hollow ulcers.
Rec. Lythargyrij auri.vj. ol. rosac. omphacini lib.j.ss. aceti rosarum lib.ss.
Valeriola.
Boil them together at an easy fire, stirring them continually until it
wax very black, and make it in rolls.

A plaster for filthy and rotten ulcers.
Rec. Galbani, oppoponacis, bdellij, Weckerus.
ammoniaci, ana.j. cerae nouae lib.j. ol. rosati lib. ij. resinae.iij.
lithargyrij auri lib.j.ss. olibani, myrrhae, aloes, thuris, masticis,
aristolochiae rotundae, ana.j.ss. styracis calamitae.ss. succi betonicae, succi
verbenae, caprifolij, plantaginis, pimpinellae, cynoglos^ae, ana.j. lapid.
haematitis.ij. aeruginis rasilis.j. Make a plaster according to Art.

A plaster of willow leaves which will cure ulcers of hard curation and
fistules.
Rec. Mys^os, aluminis rochae, chacitidis, Andernacus.
melantherij, aeruginis, aluminis scissilis, gallarum acerbarum, ana.vj.
cerusae, cerae, resinae frictae, picis naualis, bituminis, ol. omphacini,
foliorum salicis teneroru^, ana lib. ij. Boil the leaves in strong viner, the^
dry them, and make them in fine powder: melte the other, and strain them, and
put in the powders after it is cold.

A plaster to incarnate as well plain ulcers as wounds.
Rec. Cerae albae.viij. seui ceruini.iiij^ ss. resinae, resinae pini, ana.iiij.
myrrhae, masticis, ana.iiij. mellis.vj. terebinthinae.viij. vini albi lib.j.ss.
sanguinis draconis lib.j. Boil all but the sanguis draconis, and mix them to
the form of a plaster.

A plaster much prevailing against malignant ulcers.
Rec. Colophoniae.j. thuris, myrrhae ana.j.ss. masticis.j. terebint. lotae.ss.
aluminis vsti.ss. ol. hyosciami.ss. olei sulphuris proer campanam destillati.j.
cerae quantum sufficit. Fiat Emplastrum.

A plaster for a cankerous ulcer.
Pareus.
Rec. Cerae albae, olei rosarum, ana.ij.ss. succi granatorum and solani, ana.ij.
cerusae lotae.j. plumbi vsti loti, and tutiae praeparatae, ana.ss. thuris,
masticis, ana.ij. Fiat emplastrum.

A plaster to be applied to the reins, for him that has an ulcer in the yard.
Rec. Boli armeni, terrae sigillatae, Andreas Lacuna.
sanguinis draconis, coralli rubri, rosarum rubrarum, electri, spodij, sandali
citr. ana.ij. acaciae, thuris, masticis, ana.ss. picis naualis, colophoniae,
ana.j.ss. terebinthinae, cerae, ana ^j. rob. myrtini.ij. Make it in good order.

A plaster vesiccatorie for Tinea Capitis.
Rec. Ellebori albi.ss. apij risi.vj. lapathi Vigo.
acuti.j.ss. axung.j.ss. butyri.x. aluminis saccharini.v. fermenti.iiij.
furfuris.vj.ss. Bruise what are to be bruised very well: mix them together,
and apply them after the manner of a plaster.

A plaster to restore a broken bone.
Rec. Albumina trium ouorum, Vigo.
olei rosarum omphacini, olei rosarum completi, ana.x. olei myrtini.j.ss.
farinae volatilis, farinae hordei ana.vj. boli armeni, sanguinis draconis
ana.iij. Mix them, and work them together for a good formal plaster.

A plaster for a fracture.
Vigo.
Rec. Albumina ouorum number.iiij. terebint. clarissimae.ij. farinae volat..x.
pulv. myrtillorum, granorum and foliorum optime tritorum, farinae fabarum,
ana.vj. pulueris rubi.j. croci.ss. mumiae, tragaganti pisti, ana.ij. Mix them
to your use.

A plaster for fractures and dislocations.
Rec. Empl. oxycrocei.viij. boli armeni.j. farinae volatilis, lithargyrij auri
and arge^ti, ana.ss. cerae citrinae.iiij. ol. masticis.j. ol. rosarum.iiij.
medullae cruris vituli.iiij.ss. terebintinae.j. resinae.ss. ammoniaci.j.ss.
camphorae.iij. sarcocollae, bdellij, ana.iij. oesypi humidi.ij. Make a plaster.

A plaster to confirm luxations and dislocations.
Rec. Olei rosarum, nymphaeae, myrtini, ana.ij.ss. albumina ouorum v. boli
armeni^ terrae sigillatae, ana.vij. farinae volatilis and hordei, ana.j.
sanguinis draconis.ss. rosarum rubrarum.iij. granorum myrtilloru^,.v. succi
symphiti minoris, aceti rosacei, ana.ij. terebinthinae.j. cerae.ss.
resinae.iij.ss. mellis rosati.vj. Make a plaster according as Art shall teach
you.

A plaster resolutiue for contusions, luxations, and excess of pain.
Rec. Cerae albae lib.j.ss. gu^mi ammoniaci.x. oppoponacis.iiij. resinae.iiij.
seui ceruini.v. terebinthinae venetae.iij.ss. bdellij.ij. masticis.j.
olibani.j.ss. cerusae.iij. ca^phorae.ij. cremoris althaeae.vj. Dissolve the
gummes in vinegar and make your plaster according to Art.

A plaster for the fracture of the scull.
Rec. Radicum althaeae lib.ss. florum chamaemeli, meliloti, ana m.j. rosarum
rub.m.ss. Boil them in sufficient water till half be wasted, then adding to
the decoction farinae hordei quantum sufficit, sarcocollae.iij. ol. rosarum
omphacini.ij.ss. olei chamaemeli,.j.ss. croci.j. vitellos duos ouorum. Make a
plaster according to Art.

A plaster for luxation of the foot.
Rec. Olei myrtini, rosarum omphacini, Vesalius.
ana.ij. albumina ouorum nu.iij. quinque neruiae minutim incisae and trituratae
m.ij. farinae volatilis, farinae hordei cribellatae, farinae fabarum, ana.vj.
Mix them altogether and make a plaster.

A plaster to be used when as Coccix is broken.
Vesalius.
Rec. Albumina iiij. ouorum, olei myrtini, rosarum, ana.ij. terebinthinae
optimae.j.ss. thuris.iij. masticis.j.ss. myrrhae, aloes, ana.ij. sanguinis
draconis, boli armeni ana.ss. farinae volatilis.iij. Mix them for a plaster.

A plaster for the gowte.
Guydo.
Rec. Cerae, picis, diachylon, ana.iij. axungiae asini.j.ss. laudani, hyssopi
humidi, galbani, oppoponacis, ammoniaci, bdellij, styracis calamitae, masticis,
sarcocollae dissolut. in vino, ana.j. axungiae vrsi, struthionis, aquilae,
anguillae, amurcae, olei liliacei, terebinthinae, ana.ss. farinae foenugraeci
and lini, croci, ana..ij. Make a plaster to Art.

Emplastrum de ranis.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei chamaemeli, spicae, and lilioru^, ana.ij. olei croci.j. axungiae
porcinae lib. j. seui vitulini lib.ss. euphorbij.v. thuris,.x. olei
laurini.j.ss. pingued. viperae,.ij.ss. ranarum viuarum numero vj. vermium
terrestrium in vino lotorum.iij.ss. succi radicum ebuli and enulae campanae
ana.ij. squinanti, staechadis, matricariae, ana m.j. vini odoriferi lib.ij. Let
them sees altogether till the wine be consumed, then strain them: and put to
the straining lithargyrij auri lib.j. terebinthinae purae.ij. Make a Cerote
with sufficient white wax, after the manner of a Sparadrop, adding in the end
of the decoction styracis liquidae.j.ss. Then take the Cerote from the fire,
and stir it till it be luke warm: and afterward put thereunto argenti viui
extincti cum saliua,.iiij. and stir it about well till the quick silver be
incorporate. This Cerote is of more noble operation than Liniments, and more
delectable to the Patients: but we ought to note, that before the
administration of the Cerote and unction, it is necessary to mundifie the
place from all malignitie, and evil flesh.

A plaster to mollify, heal and assuage pain.
Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. plumbi albi Banester.
lib.j. Let them boil till they turn color, and add theretoo picis
naualis.xij. cerae citrinae.xiiij. Boil them to the stiffness of a plaster,
and in the end add to them terebinthinae.j. camphorae trituratae.ss. Labor
them well, and make them in rolls.

A Sparadrop plaster.
Rec. Olei communis lib.j. cerae albae.viij. plumbi albi.viij. Powder the lead,
and boil it to the form of a plaster.

A plaster to mitigate pain.
Rec. Olei communis lib.ij. galbani lib. ss. plumbi albi lib.j. cerae citrin.
lib.ss. Boil them to the substance of a plaster.

A plaster stupefactiue against exceeding pains.
Rec. Terebinthinae.ss. vnguenti diapompholygos.j. cerae albae.vj. axungiae
porcinae been lotae in aqua rosacea and nymphaea.iiij. resinae.ij. vnguenti
populeonis.iij. olei papaueris, olei menthae, ana.ij.ss. seminis papaueris
albi, hyosciami, ana.j.ss. seminis lactucae and portulacae, ana.ss. quatuor
seminum frigidorum maiorum ana.ss. succi solatri, succi lactucae, ana.iij.
cremoris psylij.ss. Bruise the seeds, and melte the oil, wax and grease
together: then put too the other things in powder, and last of all croci.iij.
opij^.iiij. Mix them all very well, and make a plaster, which you must
malaxe with woman's milk and vinegar.

A white muscilage plaster to assuage pain, and mollify hardness.
Rec. Cerae albae lib.j.ss. terebinthinae.iij. gummi ammoniaci.viij.
oppoponacis.ij.ss. masticis.j. bdellij.j.ss. gummi tragaganti.ss. cremoris
radicum althaeae, psylij, and seminis althaeae, ana.j. pingued. capi, anatis
and anseris, ana.ss. medullae c^ur. vaccini.iij. oesypi.j.ss. olei amygdalaru^
dulcium, olei rosati, ana.j.ss. Boil them to the form of a plaster, and
stir them strongly till it wexe white: and in the end add theretoo cerusae
quantum sufficit, camphorae.ss. And make it to Art.

A plaster to heal, cicatrize and assuage pain.
Rec. Olei rosacei lib.j. cerusae, minij, ana.ij. lithargyrij auri and argenti,
sanguinis draconis, lapidis calaminaris, boli armeni, ana.ss. camphorae,.iij.
Powder which are to be powdered, and with Cera alba make a plaster.

A plaster abstersive and very good to assuage pain.
Rec. Lithargyrij auri subtiliter puluerizati lib.j.ss. olei liliorum,
chamaemeli and amygdalarum dulcium, ana quantum sufficit. Then work them in a
hot mortar to a convenient substance, then put thertoo ammoniaci, bdellij,
ana.ss. oppoponacis.ij. galbani.j. myrrhae.ij.ss. Infuse the gums in wine and
melt them, adding theretoo baccarum lauri j. myrrhae.ss. mellis despumati.iij.
cerae rubrae lib.ss. terebinthinae.ij.ss. radicum iridis.j. In the end anoint
your hands with oil of lillies, and malaxe it to your use.

A plaster very excellent for the Sciatica.
Rec. Cerae flauae, resinae, resinae pini, ana lib.j. colophoniae lib.ss.
masticis, thuris, ana.ij. myrrhae.j. seui arie^ini lib.ss. gary^phyllorum,
macis ana.j. croci.ss. galbani, oppoponacis, bdellij, ana.j. vini rub. lib.ij.
aq. currentis lib.j. camph..iij. Make a plaster to Art.

A plaster against pain of the joints.
Rec. Herbae arthriticae, herbae paraliticae, pulegij, calamintae, samsuchi,
chamaemeli, meliloti, ana m.j. oppoponacis, bdellij, ammoniaci, serapini,
ana.j. farinae foenugraeci and lini, ana.j. Boil the herbs in sufficient
quantity of water till it be perfectly sodden: then stamp them, and with
oil of Bay, oil of Lillies, and oil of Turpentine as much as is sufficient
of every one, and adding the gumms dissolved in wine, make your plaster.

A plaster spiced against pain of the joints of a cold cause.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci.iiij. gummi hederae, oppoponacis, sarcocollae, galbani,
resinae pini, ana.j. bdellij.j.ss. masticis, olibani, sandarachae, carabae,
thuris, ana.ss..ij. macis, gariophyllorum, styracis calamitae, hermodactylorum,
ana.v. adipis cordis cerui.iij. c^rae flauae.ij.ss. cremoris faenugraeci, lini,
and caricarum pinguium extracti cu^ decoctione chamaemeli and meliloti, ana
q.s. terebint. parum. Make a plaster in good form as Art shall lead you.

A plaster for the gowte.
Rec. Pulpae radicum helenij decoctoru^ lib.j. sigilli salomonis, radicum
ebuli, ana.iiij. olei myrtini, chamaemeli, petrolaei, ana.j.ss. olei
terebinthinae.j. colophoniae, terebinthinae, ana.ij. olei vulpini, spicae,
liliorum, lauri and sambuci, ana.x. cerae albae.j.ss. With an easy fire make a
soft Cerote, and add theretoo farinae fabarum, and cicerum, ana.iiij.ss.
styracis liquidae.v. thuris.iij.

Another.
Rec. Farinae fabarum, lentium, ana.iiij. furfuris m.ij. chamaemeli, meliloti
pistaceorum, ana m.ss. absynthij, antiochiae, ana m. quart. rosarum.j. Mix
them at the fire, and with sufficient sweet wine, and wine of pomegranets make
a plaster, adding theretoo ol. rosarum and aneti, ana.vj. ol. myrtini and
camaemeli, ana.j. axungiae anseris, seui vitulini, ana.v. cerae albae.vj.
stercoris caprini.ij.ss. viniodoriferi.ij. Make it to Art in form of a
plaster.

A plaster for the gowte, and pain in the huckle bone.
Rec. Cort. rad. helenij lib.j. radic. althaeae lib.ss. Boil them till they
be tender, then stamp them very fine, and add thereto ol. camaemeli,
liliorum, anethi, amygdalaru^ dulcium, ana.ij. seui hircini and vitulini,
ana.iij. ol. rosati.ij.ss. cerae albae.iij. Make a soft plaster, and add
thereto farinae fabarum.ij. hermodactyloru^.j.ss. croci.ss. floru^ chamaemeli
and meliloti ana parum.

A plaster for ach and pains of the shoulders, arms, and other parts of the
body.
Rec. Cerae citrinae.xij. resinae.viij. picis Clowes.
naualis.j.ss. olibani.iiij. resin^^ pini li. j. seui ceruini.ij. croci.ij.
masticis.ss. garyophyllorum.ss. vini rubri lib.ij. Make it according to Art.

A red desiccatiue plaster.
Rec. Lithargyrij auri.iij. ol. rosacei, Andernacus.
ol. violacei, ana lib.ss. cerae.xij. lapid. calaminaris, terrae sigillatae,
minij, ana.iiij. camphorae.j. Make a plaster in a mortar.

A desiccatiue plaster.
Rec. Lapid. calaminaris, I. H.
.viij terrae sigillatae.iiij. cerusae.iiij. lithargyrij auri, lithargyrij
argenti, ana.ij. boli armeni orientalis.j. lithargyrij plumbi.ij. sanguinis
draconis.ss. terebinthinae.vj. cerae, seui hyrcini,.iiij. Fiat emplastrum.

Emplastrum de minio.
Rec. Ol. communis lib.j. minij subtilissime puluerizati lib.j. cerae albae.x.
resinae.iiij. saeui ceruini.iiij. Fiat emplastrum.

Emplastrum alterum de minio.
Banester.
Rec. Ol. rosacei optimi lib.iiij. minij subtilissime pulu. lib.ij. cerae albae
lib.ss. camphorae.iiij. Misce, and fiat emplastrum.

A plaster to stop humors flowing to the eyes.
Rec. Zinzibris albi puluerizati.iiij. vini cretici, aceti rosacei, aquae
rosarum, albuminu^ ouorum, ana.ss. Mix them together and make a plaster,
which must be applied to the temples and forhead when you go to bed.

A plaster for running of eyes.
Rec. Thuris.ss. sanguinis draconis.ij. sarcocollae.j. Make them in fine powder
and incorporate them with the white of an egg and a little vinegar and
rosewater to make a plaster.

A plaster to consolidate and cicatrize.
Rec. Gummi dragaganti, sang. drac. ana.iij. olibani, masticis, myrrhae,
ana.ij. boli armenij.j.ss. farinae volatilis,.ss. with the whites of Eggs make
them to a plaster.

A plaster which does heal, draw, mundifie, and resolve, and must be applied
three days.
Rec. Picis nigri.viij. picis graeci lib.j. galbani, bdellij, oppoponacis,
serapini, ammoniaci, ana.ss. resinae pini.ij. cerae albae.iiij. masticis,
thuris, ana.j. terebinthinae venetae,.ij. olei co^munis.j. vini albi.x.
Dissolve the gummes in wine, and melt the Wax, Pitch, Colophonie and oil
together, then add thereto the gummes and turpentine, and the rest in powder.

A plaster against all poison and virulent malignitie, either in wounds or
ulcers: yea that draws the same out of the inward parts of the body, being
outwardly applied.
Rec. Radicis ferulae that was gathered in the new of the moon, Turneisserus.
well dried and rasped small, lib.iij. aquae quae in destillatione
terebinthinae albicans secernitur, lib.ix. Stop them close in a vessel, and
set them to decoct xxiiii. hours; strain it out, and cast away the thick;
the other part digest and vapor away to the thicknes of honey: so done, add
unto it resinae clarificatae, masticis eodem modo praeparatae, and camphorae
dissolutae, ana.ij. ceui ceruini.x. adipis taxi,.vj. cerae.xiiij. Boil them in
a latten vessel to a perfect body.

A mollificatiue plaster.
Rec. Stercoris canis.iiij. farinae lentium.ij. farinae fabarum.j. terrae
sigillatae, boli armenij, ana.j.ss. cerusae, lithargyrij auri, ana.x. Mix them
with Goats milk, or with Cowes milk (in which hot iron has been quenched)
sufficient for a plaster.

A plaster resolutiue.
Rec. Fabarum farinae.iiij. farinae lini and foenugraeci, ana.j. florum
chamaemeli, and meliloti, ana.ss. medullae panis.iij. pulpae pomorum dulcium
sub prunis decoctoru^,.ij. butyri recentis, olei chamaemeli, ana.iiij.
pinguedinis capi.ij. mellis despumati.iij. Make a plaster.

A mollifying plaster.
Rec. Cerae citrinae lib.j. pingued. capi, anseris, and cygni, olei chamaemeli,
violacei, liliorum alborum and olei sem. lini, terebinthinae, ana.j.ss.
muscilaginis althaeae and seminis maluae, ana.ss. myrrhae.j. Boil them to the
consumption of the muscilages, and make a plaster.

A white plaster mollificatiue.
Rec. Propoleos lib.j. ammoniaci lib.ss. medullae crurium vaccarum,.iiij.
pingued. caponis.iij. colophoniae.j. masticis.vj. gummi arabici and dragag. ana
iij. plumbi albi abluti and cerusae dilutae, ana.ij. Make your plaster as Art
shall lead you.

Another plaster mollificatiue.
Rec. Medullae bouinae.v. diachylonis magni lib.iij. lithargyrij lib.iij.
terebinthinae lib.j. ireos.x. cerae.vj. axungiae porcinae q.s. Make it
according to Art.

Emplastrum de Rhabarbaro.
Rec. Rhabarbari electi.ss. aloes hepaticae Ioannes Manardus.
.j. lixiuij fortis lib.j. saponis veneti lib. ss. cerae.ij. decoquantur ad
duritiem iustam, etc^ This does dry, warm, dissolve, and spend out moist
matter.

A plaster for hardness of sinews.
Rec. Serapini.iij. castorij.ij. euphorbij.j.ss. bdellij, Galenus.
ammoniaci, ana.iiij. Bruise the gummes, and dissolve them in warm water,
adding thereto cerae albae.xv. olei sambuci.iij. And make a plaster according
to Art.

A plaster for pain in the huckle bone.
Weckerus.
Rec. Vnguenti martiati, agrippae, ana.j. olei rutacei.ij. galbani in aceto
dissoluti.ij. euphorbij.ss. pyrethri, staphidis agriae ana.j. resinae q.s. Mix
them and make a plaster in good form.

Empl. Hyosciami lutei.
Clowes.
Rec. Resinae lib.ij. cerae albae lib.j. adipis hyrcini.iiij. gummi elemi
lib.ss. aquae vitae lib.j. succi herbae lib.iiij. Mix them according to Art.

A green wax to be used, as in thin plates upon ulcers with hard edges, and
difficult to cicatrize: also to keep open an issue, etc.
Pareus.
Rec. Cerae albae.xij. viridis aeris.iiij.ss. sublimati.j. gummi elemij.j. Mix
them.

Emplastrum ad Hydrocelem.
Banester.
Rec. Empl. de baccis lauri, lib.ij. mithridati.iij. fimi columbini.iiij.
lupinorum.iij. baccarum lauri.ij. cymini.j. absynthij sicci.ss. florum
chamaemeli.j. florum hyperici.iij. aquae vitae.iiij. olei hyperici.vj. Fiat
Empl.

A most proved plaster for the Rupture.
Rec. Aloes citr..j.ss. sanguinis draconis Goodrus.
.j. myrrhae.j. masticis, boli armeni, gum. dragaganti, ana.iij. Powder them all
most subtillie, and cum viscositate limacum rubrarum. Fiat Emplastrum.

A plaster of great use for the asswaging of pain in any place, and
dissoluing of tumors.
Rec. Picis nigrae, Banester.
colophoniae, resinae pini, cerae, terebinthinae, ana.vj. galbani, ammoniaci,
sagapeni, ana.iij. bdellij, oppoponacis, ana.ij. opij.ij.ss. croci.ij. myrrhae,
thuris, sarcocollae, aloes, ana.j..ss. styracis calamitae, caphurae, ana.ij.
spermatis ceti.vj. sanguinis draconis, turpeti mineralis, ana.j.ss. croci
martis.ss. gummi elemi.j.ss. Dissolve the gummes in aceto hyosciami, and so
make your plaster according to Art.

A plaster that does notably comfort and warm a weak member, dissolve or
ripen Apostumes, and heal wounds or plain ulcers.
Rec. olei oliuarum lib.iiij. lithargyrij auri, Banester.
lib.j.ss. lapidis calaminaris lib.ss. cerae.xx. colophoniae.x. ammoniaci in
aceto dissol.lib.j. myrrhae.ij. masticis, thuris. ana.j. aristolochiae rotund.
succini ana.vj. terebinthinae, olei ex ouis, ana.iiij. Melt the Oil,
Colophonie and Wax together, then put in the Litharge and lapis calaminaris,
boil them so to some consistence, after that put in the gummes, then the
powders, and last of all the Terpentine and oil of Eggs.

A white gum plaster to resolve and spend away swellings.
Banester.
Rec. Gummi ammoniaci in aceto dissoluti lib.j. olei chamaemeli.ij. ireos opt.
pull..ij. cerae albae.vj. Fiat Empl.

Emplastrum sulphuratum for all malignant ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Colophoniae.ij. ammoniaci, galbani, ana.iiij. masticis.iij. thuris,
myrrhae, ana.iij. terebinthinae.j. aluminis vsti.j. olei hyosciami.j. olei
sulphuris.ij. olei ouorum.vi. cerae citrinae q.s. Fiat Empl.

A plaster against deafnes.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec^ Succi radicum raphani,.ss. succi porrorum.j. olei nardini, anetini,
amygdalarum amararum, ana.j.ss. interioris coloquintidae.j. aristolochiae rot.
costi, rutae, ana.j. castorei,.ss. aphronitrum, or spuma nitri
baurach.ij. euphorbij.j. Boil them to the wasting of the iuyces, and
emplaster the ear therewith.

A plaster for all putrefying, filthy, and stinking ulcers.
Rec. Lithargyrij auri lib.j. olei ros. lib.ij. vini albi lib.j. aceti, Ex
manuscripto.
vrinae pueri ana lib.ss. Boil them to the wasting of the liquors, putting
them in by order, and the urine last. When it draws to a form, put in cerae,
olibani, myrrhae, ana.j. So make it up.

Emplastrum flos vnguentorum.
Rec. Cerae citrinae, resinae, resinae pini, ana lib.j. colophoniae, ceui
ouini, ana lib.ss. masticis, olibani, myrrhae, ana.ij. terebinthinae.iij.
caphurae.j. Powder those that are to be powdered, melt the rest (except the
terpentine) in vini albi lib.j. and boil them to the wasting thereof, then add
the powders, after that the terpentine; but last of all the camfer well grinded
cum oleo rosaceo; power it out into white wine, and work it up.

Unguents.
An unguent to heal inflammations.
Keble.
REc. Vnguenti populeonis, vng. rosarum ana.j.ss. in aqua rosacea and plantag.
lotae q.s. olei rosarum.iiij. cerusae.ij. cerae albae q.s. terrae
sigillatae.j.ss. camphorae.ij opij.j. Mingle all and make an ointment.

An unguent for the Hemrhoydes.
Rec. Thuris.ss. lycij, myrrhae, croci, ana.iij. opij.j. Sees them in four
ounces of Goats milk, till the consumption of the third part, and then add
muscilaginis psylij.ss. olei rosacei.iij. vitellum vnius oui. Mingle all and
make an ointment.

An unguent for venomous wounds.
Quercetanus.
Rec. Olei carabes, terebinthinae, ana.j. iuniperi.ij. sem. vrticae, rad.
gentianae, ana.ij. olei sulphuris, vitriolati, ana.j.ss. coralli rubri.j. Fiat
vnguentum.

Another for the same purpose.
Quercetanus.
R^c. Lithargyrij.ij. galbani.ss. picis graecae, terebinthinae, ana.j. olei q.s.
Fiat vnguentum.

An excellent unguent for wounds that happen in pockie persons.
Rec. Mercurij.ij. Let it first stand in new milk three days, every hour
shaking it together, then let it stand in aceto rosarum three days, then
proceed taking terebinthinae purissimae.vj. Herewith mingle all your Mer^urie
upon a marble stone exactly, then keep it to be incorporated at length with
this mixture following.

Rec. Gummi elemij puriss..vij. resinae pini iij. sepi castrati,.iiij. pingued.
porci.iij.ss. olei hyperici.iiij. gummi hederae,.ij. masticis.j.ss. mercurij
praecipitati.viij. cerae albae.j.ss. Melt first of these, those that are to be
melted, and stamp them, then add to the gum. hederae, masticis and
praecipitate in fine powder; last of all join this and the former mixture
together.

An unguent for venomous bitings and wounds, of exceeding great praise.
Rec. Olei panacis heraclij.ij. olei cerae, Turneisserus.
terebinthini albi, ana.ss. Cum fimo canino fiat vnguentum.

An unguent that defends Dura matter from putrefaction.
Rec. Aquae vitae.ij.ss. croci.ss. sarcocollae.iij. resinae pini.ij.ss. mellis
rosacei.j.ss. succi apij and betonicae, ana.iij.ss. Boil them till half be
consumed, add thereunto, after it is strained, terebinthinae purgatae.iij.ss.
olei vitellorum ouorum.iij. myrrhae.j. aloes.j.ss. And so make it.

An unguent for over moist wounds, and gleeting humor of the tendons.
Turneisserus.
Ex butyro maiali and pimpinella, the herb chopped small and fried with the
butter till it become black; then after strain it and use it for your unguent.

An ointment for the Itch.
Banester.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae.iiij. olei laurini.ij. cerae albae.ss. olibani,
masticis, ana.iij. terebinthinae.ij.ss. salis grossi.ij. lithargyrij auri.ij.
succi lapathi acuti.j.ss. argenti viui.ij.ss. mortified with vinegar of
Squills. Powder that which is to be powdered in very fine powder, and make
hereof an ointment according to Art. With this ointment has been cured many
extreme Itches, over al parts of the body dispersed, annoynting only the
hands and feet against a fire, or bath of Oats.

Vnguentum fuscum much commended in wounds for the getting of good flesh and
clensing putrefaction.
Rec. Olei com. sepi arietini, Gilbertus.
ana lib.j. picis naualis lib.ss. picis graecae.iij. cerae (in summer).ij. (in
winter).j. masticis, olibani, galbani, ammoniaci, serapini, oppoponacis,
terebinthinae, ana.ss. Melt the liquid things in oil, and add the rest finely
powdered, stirring them very well together on the fire, only add the terpentine
when the rest are sufficiently decocted, so strain and reserve it.

An unguent for the biting of a mad dog, or other venomous creature.
Rec. Galbani, Vesaliu^.
oppoponacis ana.j. ammonicaci, terebinthinae, cerae, ana.j.ss. sagapeni.ij.
picis.ij.ss. Set them on a gentle fire, and in fit time put into them farinae
fabarum a little quantity, lithargyrij, croci, bdellij ana.j. myrrhae,
olibani, ana.ss. masticis.iiij. foenugraeci.j. Boil them all to a form, then
add olei rosac. and sesamini ana.ij. Make it up according to Art.

An unguent to draw forth darts, wood, or other things infixed in any part of
the body.
Vesalius.
Rec. Resinae pinae.ij. galbani.iij. lapidis calamithae.j. fellis bouini.j.ss.
terebinthinae.iij. cerae nouae.ij. First strain out the Rosine, Terpentin^ and
Wax: afterward mix them cum fell, and last of all add to the puluis lapidis
calaminthae. Fiat vnguentum.

C^rtaine excellent unguents of Paracelsus for wounds.
Rec. Mellis crudi lib.vj. *visci consolidae maioris lib.ij. croci martis
lib.ss. Mix them to an unguent.

This same * viscus is an extract made of herbs or roots in this sort. Steep
the leaves and roots of your herbs in white wine viii. days, then let them
sees or stand in hot horse dung three days. Afterward strain them, and
decoct the same strained liquor to the thicknes of honey.

Another unguent for virtue like Balm.
Rec. Terebinthinae, olei lini, ana lib.iij. florum aeris, croci martis, *salis
fusi, ana.j. liquoris parthenionis.iiij. Boil them to sufficient thicknes.

This is common * salt, first parched and powdered, then set it in a calcining
pot, and kept in a strong heat till it run and melt as glass, and be all a
clear cake, when it is cold.

Another.
Rec. Olei ouorum.x. olei nucum lib.j. olei lini.ss. carabies contusae.ij.
Decoct them to a thicknes, adding visci consolidae ma. and lumbricorum, ana.ss.

An unguent much praised for wounds in the sinews incised.
Rec. Centaurij mino. linguae canis, Tuga^l^ius
lanceolatae, pilosellae, consolidae ma. and mi. ana m.j. vermium terrestrium
lib.ss. olei com. lib.j. picis nigrae, resinae, ana.iij. gummi ammoniaci,
galbani, oppoponacis in aceto dissolutorum, ana.v. Boil them altogether at a
moderate fire to the was^ing of the wine and vinegar: so strain them, when
they are almost cold put too them ^er^binthinae.j.ss. thuris, masticis,
sarcocollae, ana.iij. croci.ij. Work them together in a mortar, and make an
unguent.

Another to the same purpose.
Rec. Pingued. vituli and vaccae, Marianus sanctus ex vigone.
ana lib.ss. olei rosati lib.j. terebinthinae clarae iiij. picis naualis and
graecae, resinae pini, ana.ss. lithargyrij argenti.iij.ss. vini odoriferi
cyathum j. lumbricorum.ij. meliloti, hyperici, rubiae tinctorum, anthos, ana
m.ss. Boil altogether (except the minerals and terpentine) to the wasting of
the wi^e; Strain them, then bring them to the fire again, and let them boil
with the litarge (stirring them well with a staff) to a very black color.
Lastly, add to your terpentine and cerae albae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

An excellent unguent for wounds in the head, which the Author calls his
digestive Balm.
Arceus.
Rec. Gummi elemij, terebinthinae abietinae ana.j.ss. sepi castrati antiqui and
liquefacti.ij. pingued. porcinae antiquae liquefactae,.j. Mix them at the fire
and make it. Sometime the Author put in, in stead of the gummi elemij so much
of the plaster de gummi elemi.

Vnguentum Basilicum magistrale of marvelous proof, for digesting,
mundifying, and swaging of pain.
Vigo.
Rec. Olei chamaemeli, olei rosati completi, ana.ij. olei masticis, olei de
terebinthinae olei de sem. lini ana.j.ss. terebinthinae clariss..iiij. s^pi
vituli, castrati, hyrcini, ana.ij.ss. rosmarini, betonicae, caudae equinae,
centaureae maioris ana m.j. vermium terrestrium washed in wine.iij. rubiae
tinctorum somewhat bruised.x. fol. and seminis hypericonis ana m.j. masticis,
gummi elemi ana.x. picis naualis, resinae pini recentis ana.j.ss. serapini,
galbani, ammoniaci ana.iij. These three gummes being dissolved in vinegar, and
those things bruised that are to be bruised; mix altogether with a cup of
pleasant wine, and let them stand so by for four and twenty hours;
afterward boil them to the wasting of the wine, then strain them clear, and
add too lithargyrij auri, and argenti, ana.ij.ss. minij.ij. Boil them again,
but first at a gentle fire, stirring them with a staf^e, after that increase
the fire until it come to a black or such like color. All which being done,
with sufficient new Wax make an unguent in good form.

Vnguentum mirabile serving both for ulcers and wounds, digesteth crude matter,
and asswageth pain even at once applying.
Rec. Pingued. veruecis.iij. pingued. taxi Vesalius.
.ij. pingued. cerui.j. pingued. muris montani.j.ss. pingued. gallinae and cati
siluestr. ana.ss. pingued. vrsi.ij.ss. medullae bouinae, vng. dialthaeae and
agrippae, ana.j. diaquilonis, diapostoliconis, ana.vj. cerae albae.vj.
olei.iiij. butyri.ij. axungiae porci masculi.v. resinae pini.iij.
terebinthinae.ij. farinae foenugraeci, far. sem. lini, ana.j. aeruginis.ij.
lithargyrij.j. succorum plantaginis, solani, violarum, betonicae, ana.ij. picis
naualis.ij. Make it an unguent, mixing first your iuyces, then your fattes, and
after that the rest.

Vnguentum capitale for ulcers or wounds of the head, principally where the
bones are broken.
Vesalius.
Rec. Betonicae, matrisiluae, pimpinellae, perforatae, cariophyllatae,
pilosellae, ana.ij. Steep them in vini stiptici lib.j.iii. days, after decoct
them to the third part, strain out the herbs and put to the liquor olei
rosacei.iiij. Sees them a little, then add too resinae pineae, cerae nouae,
ana.ij. Last of all terebinthinae albae.iij. Fiat vnguentum according to Art.

An unguent for vlc^rs of Lues Venerea.
Paracelsus.
Rec. Lithargyrij, minij, ana.ss. olei myrtilloru^.iij. aloes.j.ss. floru^ a^ris
praeparatorum.iij. terebinthinae.ij. Decoct them to an unguent.

Another for the like case.
Rec. Paracelsus.
This I gather to be Oleum axungiae humanae.
Ol. de mu^mia.iij..j. florum aeris.ss. masticis, myrrhae, thuris, mummiae.
ana.ij.ss. aloes epaticae q.s. terebinthinae lotae.iij.ss. Fiat vnguentum.

An unguent mundificatiue for ulcers
Rec. Terebinthinae lib.j. ouorum vitellos number.xx. Paracelsus.
Mix them with much stirring together, and add too mellis puri bonique as
much in quantity: stir and sees them together at a gentle fire to a duskie
colored unguent, herewith dress the ulcer twice a day.

An Addition heereunto for more efficacy when you see it good.
Rec. Mixturae praescriptae lib.j. terebinthinae lotae lib.ss. Mix them hot
but not to boil: also put in galbani, oppoponacis, ana.j. (but let them first
be prepared with vinegar as the manner of gums is) aristolochiae rotundae
pulu..ss. and so make it up.

An excellent unguent for ulcers new or old, it consolidateth, hinders the
breed of evil flesh, and too much matter, cures nerves or muscles wounded,
maturateth, draws out venime, also splints, iron or bones as much as is
possible, etc.
Vesalius.
Rec. Pimpinellae, betonicae, verbenae, ana m.j. Stamp them and steep them in
very good aqua vitae a whole day, afterward strain them and in the strained
liquor dissolve thuris.j. gumm. oliuae.vij. masticis.ss. resinae.vj.
terebinthinae lib.j. cerae albae.ss. lactis mulieris q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

Vnguentum de Thutia for cancrous, corosiue and fraudulent ulcers, especially
of the privy parts.
Vigo.
Rec. Ol. ros. odoriferi, ol. omphacini, ana lib.ss. ol. myrtini, vnguenti Gal.
vng. populeonis, ana.ij. fol. plantaginis and ^olatri, ana m.ij. Chop and stamp
the herbs, then mingle all together, and let them stand for a week: afterward
boil them a little, so strain them, and add too cerae albae q.s. To make it a
sof^ unguent take it from the fire, (stirring it always with a stick, as long
as it is warm) and lastly put into it lithargyrij^ auri and argenti been
triturati, ana.iij. thutiae.j.ss. cerusae.x. p^umbi vsti.vj. camphorae secundum
artem trituratae.j. Misce: incorporate and labor them together in a leaden
mortar by the space of an hour.

Another vng. de Thutia for cancrous ulcers, distempered with heat, and
difficult of cure.
Rec. Ol. ros. omphacini, Vigo.
ol. ros. completi odoriferi, ana lib.ss. sepi hircini, sepi vituli, vng.
rosati, vel vng. galeni, vng. populeonis, ana.ij.ss. succorum plantaginis,
solatri, acetosae, acetosellae, ana.j.ss. vini granatorum.ij.ss. Boil the^ all
at a soft ^ire to the wasting of the iuyces and wine, then strain them, and
add cerusae, lithargyrijauri and argenti ana.ij.ss. plumbi vsti, antimonij,
ana.x. thutiae alexandrinae.j.ss. camphorae secundum artem trituratae.j. cerae
albae q.s. Melt the wax in the former strained liquor, after put in the
mineralls, and work it two hours in a leaden mortar.

An unguent for the Canker.
Rec. Succi tapsibarbati, Petrus Hispanus.
boil it cum melle (still skimming it) until the juice be almost consumed,
Johannes Liebaltius.
the^ put in pulu. de psydijs and myrabolanorum, and make it as an unguent.

An unguent that very gently mundifieth and heals.
Martin.
Rec. Cerae albae, picis, resinae, ammoniaci, ana.j.ss. myrrhae, galbani,
ana.ss. oppoponacis.ij. bdellij, aristolochiae longae, thuris, ana.vj.
lithargyrij.j. floris aeris.ss. olei lib.j. Make hereof an unguent according
to Art.

An ointment for the Itch.
Adolphus Occo.
Rec. Styracis liquidae.j. terebinthinae lotae, butyri loti, ana.ij. succi
limonum.j.ss. cerusae lotae.j. salis.ij. Make hereof an ointment as before.

Another.
Baker.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.j. ol. terebinthinae.j argenti viui mortified with
oil of Bay.j. boli armeni.ss. ouorum vitellorum ouorum number.iiij. Let the
yolks of the eggs be roasted very hard, and then beaten first in the oil of
turpentine, and after add too the rest: beat all well together, and so reserve
it to your use.

Another.
Baker.
Rec. Butyri recentis.vij. cerae albae.ij. aceti vini albi lib.ss. sulphuris
viui.iij. aq. rosarum.ij. gariophyllorum.ij. Misceantur, and boil them (the
cloves being whole) to the wasting of the vinegar and rosewater: so strain it,
and use it by the fire three nights together.

An unguent or cerote for tettars, ringwormes and scabs.
Rec. Argenti viui extincti in aceto vini albi.iiij. succi saluiae.iij. sepi
castrati, Angelus Bologninus.
medullae bouis, ana.ss. thuris.j.ss. Fiat.

A magistrall unguent for burnings.
Rec. Ol. rosacei.viij. olei ouorum.ij. Weckerus.
nitri albi puluerizati.ij. cerae albae.j.ss. corticis medij sambuci m.j. Make
an ointment according to Art with a soft fire. This is a most singular ointment.

An unguent for burning.
Take alehoofe a good quantity, Keble.
plantain m.j. campaine leaves m.j. tutsan, selfeheale of each m.j. pimpernell
m.ss. Bruise al these together grossly, and let them stand eight days,
putting in a quantity of goose doong, and some wax. Boil al these till the
herbs have lost their color and then make it into an ointment.

Note.
With the leaves of Stramonium or Pomum spinosum, may be made cum butyro,
axungia porcina, or such like, (according to the common manner of herb
unguents) a most rare remedy, (and peradventure above all others that men yet
know) for all manner of burnings, yea though it be the most pearcing and
perilous kind, which is by lightning. Whereof a very famous Story was
delivered unto my friend Master John Iarret, who communicating the same also
unto me, was a means that for the public utility, the brute thereof might
thus go abroad unto all the land.

Vnguentum Apostolorum.
Rec. Cerae albae, terebinthinae, resinae, ammoniaci, ana.xiiij. aristolochiae
long. thuris, bdellij, ana.vj. myrrhae, galbani, ana.iiij. litharg..viij.
oppoponacis, aeruginis, ana.ij. olei communis lib.iij. Dissolve the gummes in
white wine vinegar, and boil the oil, wax, rosin, and turpentine unto the
co^sumption of the vinegar: then add the other (being finely powdered). It is
effectual against dangerous wounds, ulcers, and fistulaes; it consumes dead
flesh and breeds new; it softneth hard flesh, and heals wounds.

A mundifying unguent for inueterate ulcers.
Rec. Ammoniaci.j.ss. galbani.j. myrrhae Clowe^.
.ss. oppoponacis.iij.ss. sarcocollae.j. terebinthinae.iiij.ss. resinae pini.vj.
olibani.j. masticis.ss. cerae.x. ol. hypericonis lib.ss. ol. lumbricoru^.iij.
Let all the gums be dissolved in vinegar, in the end add thertoo viridis
aeris.j. and so make an ointment.

Vnguentum mundificatiuum magistrale.
Rec. mellis rosati colati.j.ss. terebinthinae clarae.iij. succi apij, succi
prassij, Weckerus.
ana.ss. succi absynthij.ij. Boil them all together, and then add farinae
hordei and fabaru^, ana.vj. farinae lupinorum, orobi, ana.iij. sarcocollae,
myrrhae, ana.j.ss. Make them in fine powder, and so make an ointment.

An unguent to procure flesh in ulcers.
Rec, Pulueris rad. arundinis, W^^kerus.
peucedani, ana.j.ss. thuris, masticis, myrrhae, ana.ij. pulu. iridis, pulu.
aristolochiae, ana.j. corticum pini.j.ss. vng. comitis.iij. mellis rosacei q.s.
Mix them according to Art^

An unguent for a Canker vlcerate.
Rec. Theriacae vet..j. succi cancroru^.ss. Ambros. Pareus.
succi lactucae, ol. rosac. ana.j.ss. vitellorum ouorum sub cineribus coctorum
number.ij. caphurae.ss. Pistentur omni^ in mortario plumbeo: and make an unguent.

An unguent most effectual against the canker, and other maladies in the
fundament.
Textor.
Rec. Lithargyrij.vj. thuris, oesypi, a^ungiae porc. recentis, butyri recentis,
cerae, ana.ij. ol. rosac..iiij. Beat the lytarge with the juice of garden
suckerie, and mingle it with the rest melted together.

Another more easy, especially for ulcers in the breast.
Textor.
Rec. Croci, succi papaueris albi, thuris, ana.j. litharg. plumbi combusti and
loti, ana.ij. plumbi albi praeparati.ss. cerae albae.ij. pingued. anseris,
butyri recentis, ana.iij. ol. rosac. opt..iiij. Beat the dry things with succo
solatri, and mingle them with the other when they are melted.

An unguent to mundifie and heal wounds or ulcers.
Rec. Butyri recentis lib. ij.ss. cerae citrinae, resinae pini, resinae puriss.
gummi elemi, ana lib.ss. masticis.vij. mercurij praecipitati.iij. cinabrij.ij.
cum modico olei rosarum. Fiat vnguentum.

A corosiue unguent to lay open an Impostume or filthi^ ulcer where the bone is
foul.
Rec. Mercurij sublimati.v. vng. Nicolaus Massa.
populeonis.vj. opij gran.x. lapid. haematitis.j Fiat vnguentum.

An unguent for Gangrena.
Rec. Mellis.ij. croci martis, Qu^rcetanus.
croci veneris ana ss. myrrhae, aristolochiae rotundae, ana.j. caphurae.j.ss.
phlegmatis vitrioli.vj. Boil them to the consistence of an unguent, then add
mercurij praecipitati.ss. Fiat vng.

Another.
Rec. Butyri arsenici fixi, Quercetanus.
.ij. mercurij praecipitati.ss. olei myrrhae.ij. Mix them with honey, being
first washed with succo chelidoniae.

An unguent for ulcers where the matter is thin and subtle.
Tec. Terebinthinae, cerae, Angelus Bologninus.
resinae ana.iij. olei rosac..iiij. pulu. aristoloch. rotundae, myrrhae,
olibani, aloes, masticis ana.ij.ss. Fiat vnguentum.

An unguent for a canker.
Rec. Boli armeni.iiij. aluminis rupei, lib.ss. mellis despumati q.s. Fiat
Vnguentum.

An unguent for burnings.
Clowes.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.iiij. ol. seminis lini lib.ij. ol. rosac. lib.j.ss.
fol. maluaru^, violariae, nymphaeae, plantag. prunellae, vmbelici veneris,
androsaemi, semperviui, ana m.j. haederae terrest.m.iiij. Infuse these six
days, the^ boil it at gentle fire til the herbs be parched: then strain it,
and put to them cerae albae lib.ss. nitri albi.vj. And if you put in whilst
they boil together, one pound of shoomakers piece grease, your unguent will
be the better.

An unguent for all manner of burnings.
Is made ex succo dauci germanici (both herb and root) mixed cum vernice,
cera, medulla bubula, and aceto rosaceo, all in equal weight to the
consistence of an Unguent.

Vnguentum de Peto vel Nicotiano, for ulcers, scabbes, and scrofulaes.
Rec. Fol. nicotianae lib.ij. axungiae porci recentis vel diligenter lotae
lib.j. Ioubertu^.
Bruise the herb, and steep it one night in vino rubro, in the morning boil
it with axungia to the wasting of the wine: then strain them, and put to them
succi nicotianae lib.ss. resinae abietinae.iiij. Boil them to the co^sumption
of the juice, putting too in the end radicis aristolochiae rotundae
puluerizatae.ij. cerae nouae q.s. Fiatque vnguentum.

Vnguentum Nicotiani most effectual for wounds, cancrous ulcers, creeping
tettars, and knobs in the face.
Rec. Folioru^ nicotianae, the fairest, AEgidius Euerardus.
greatest, greenest, most gummie, free from dust, and all outward wet of rain
and deawe lib.j. Stamp them in a marble or wooden mortar, and having in
readiness axungiae lib.ss. most purelie prepared and melted in a brass vessel,
put this whole herb and juice into it, then boil them over a trivet, at a
little soft fire, or else in balneo mariae until the watrish part of the juice
be consumed, and the rest come to the consistence of an unguent.

Orels.
It may be made by many infusions of the leaves of nicotian in oleo rosaceo,
and after add to the straining, succi eiusdem herbae, equal portion, and
cerae as much as shall be sufficient.

An unguent for ulcers in the yard.
A^dreas Lacuna.
Rec. Vng. rosacei and refrigerantis galeni ana.j. olei violacei.ss. pulu.
rosarum rubrarum, santalorum citrinorum, spodij ana.j. caphurae gra.xv. Mix
them diligently, and sprinkle among them a few drops of Rose-vineger.

An unguent for ulcers about the secret parts.
Benedict Victorius.
Rec. Vng. albi.iiij. aloes epaticae.j. tutiae praeparat..iij. caphurae gra.vj.
aluminis vsti.j.ss. viridis aeris.j. olei rosac..ss. in mortareo plumbeo fiat.

A drying unguent for the Hemrhoides in case when they are to be stayed.
Galenus.
Rec. Mellis.iij. aceti.ij. vitrioli vsti.j. tutiae praeparatae, lithargyrij,
plumbi vsti ana.j.ss. Let the mel and acetum boil together, mingle the rest
with them in a mortar of lead.

Vnguentum Rosarum.
Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib.j. Wash it nine times in hot water, Mesuae.
and as often in cold, and stamp it with red Roses lib.j. or more, let them
stand infused seven days, and then boil all with a gentle fire, then s^raine
it, and put too as much red Rose leaves, and let it stand other seven days,
and thus do three or four times, then add too of the juice of red Roses six
ounces, oil of sweet Almonds five ounces, sees altogether upon a gentle fire
till the juice of Roses be clean wasted, then strain it, and reserve it to
your use: and if you put to this ointment one dram of opium, it is the
better. It is a singular ointment to cool heates. It is good to annoint the
back, and cures Herpetes and Erisipelata. It is good for the ach of the head,
and for the liver and stomach, being distempered with heat.

Vnguentum populeon.
Rec. Oculorum populei lib.j.ss. foliorum papaueris nigri, fol. mandragorae,
solani, vermicularis, porri, bardanae, semperviui, vmbelici veneris, fol.
violarum, ana.iij. axungiae sine sale lib.iij. Stamp all these herbs small,
and mix them with axungia, and make it in great balls, and lay them a rotting
ten days, then add thereto a quart of white wine, and put it in a pan, and
boil altogether till the wine be consumed, and then strain it. This ointment
cease pains of great heat, stiffenesse, swellings of humors in the legs.

An ointment for cold aches.
Keble.
Rec. Olei chamaemeli, aneti, rutacei, meliloti, ana.j. olei laurini.ss. aquae
vitae.ij. olei nardini.vj. cerae citrinae.iiij. vnguenti martiati.vj. Melt all
these together, and when they be mel^ed strain them through a fair cloth,
and so reserve it to your use.

An ointment to mitigate pain.
Rec. Olei liliorum alborum.vj. olei aneti, chamaemeli, ana.ij. ol^i
amygdalarum dulcium.j. pingued. anatis and gallinae, ana.ij. cerae albae q.s.
Make hereof an ointment.

Vnguentum mercuriatum cum theriaca.
Adolphus Occo.
Rec. Butyri.ij. axungiae porcinae.viij. theriacae, mythridati, ana.ss. argenti
vi^i mortified.vij. lithargyrij, salis communis, ana.vj. croci.j. olei vermium
terrestrium aquae vitae, id est vini sublimati, ana.j. moschi gra.v. Mingle all
and make an ointment.

An unguent for an ach.
Rec. Saluiae mense Maio collectae, Ex manuscripto.
ebuli, and menthae odoratissimae, ana m.j. being chopped boil them in vini
albi lib.iiij. to lib.ij. then strain it out; add to that liquor olei
oliuarum lib.ij. cerae.iij. vel iiij. Boil them to the form of an unguent.

Vnguentum Dulce that represseth the swelling edges and distemperatnes about
wounds.
Rec. Ceui ouini, lib.iij. thuris lib.ss. aluminis roch..vj. vini albi lib.ij.
Balthrop.
Boil them till the wine be almost consumed; strain it, put too cerae
albae,.iiij. Stir it till it be cold.

Another.
Rec. Ceui ouini lib.iiij. ceui ceruini lib.ij. Clowe^.
aluminis rochae lib.j. resinae puluerizatae.xij. vini albi lib.j. Fiat
vnguentum.

A fine mundificatiue for Fistulaes and soul ulcers, about joints.
Rec. Mellis lib.ij. vitrioli albi.iiij. succi caprifolij lib.iiij. Ex
manuscripto.
First boil the honey and juice, and then the other with them, unto the
consistence of an unguent.

Another mundificatiue for ulcers in the mouth, coming of scorbutum.
Balthrop.
Rec. Mellis lib.ij. succi cochleariae lib.iiij. vitrioli albi.vj. Make it up as
the former unguent.

A green incarnatiue and mundificatiue.
Rec. Symphiti, violae flammeae vel tricoloris dodonei (we call it har^s ease,
Balthrop.
or pances) plantaginis, florum armeriae, (which we call sweet williams) ana
m.ij. Bruise these, and put them into ceui ceruini molten, and olei oliuarum ana
lib.j. Let them boil together until the strength of the herbs be received,
then strain it, and in the cooling put too terebinthinae venetae lib.ss. So
keep it.

An unguent which does mitigate pain, defends accidents, and consumes
tumors which happen in green wounds.
Rec. Seui ceruini lib.ij. seui ouini lib.iiij. aluminis rochi purissimi lib.j.
resinae clarae.xij. vini albi lib.j. Let all these be boiled on the fire to
the form of an unguent.

Vnguentum vulpinum very good against aches, and restores limbs and joints,
lamed through pains of the gowt, etc.
Take a Fox and draw out the entrails, Clowes.
then take sage, rosemarie, juniper leaves and berries, dill, wild marioram of
the garden, lauender, chamomill, of each half a pound. Stamp these herbs in
a mortar of stone very finely, and cut the Fox in pieces, and put the herbs
with the Fox into a vessel of eight gallons, and put too four pints of oil
olive, oil of neates feet one pound, calves suet, deeres suet, goose grease,
brockes grease, of each one pound and a half, of sea water three quarts, and
as much of good malmesey. Set altogether on the ^ire, and boil it till the
wine and water be consumed, and that the flesh and bones be separated asunder,
then let it be taken from the fire, and strained, and pressed through a strong
canuas cloth, and so reserve it to your use, as a precious ointment.

Vnguentum viride.
Rec. Olei lib.ij. cerae citrinea lib.j. resinae, pini, ana lib.j.
terebinthinae lib.j. viridis aeris.j. Make hereof an ointment according to Art.

Vnguentum mundificatiuum.
Rec. Terebinthinae.ij. mellis rosati.j. farinae hordei, myrrhae, masticis,
ana.ij. Mingle all and make an ointment.

Vnguentum AEgyptiacum.
Guydo.
Rec. Mellis lib.j. aceti optimi.vj. viridis aeris.j. aluminis.v. Make hereof
an ointment according to Art.

Another AEgyptiacum.
Rec. Mellis lib.ij. aceti fortis lib.j. viridis aeris.iiij. aluminis.iij.
Boil altogether till it come to a red color: but first grind your aeris
viride and alome unto very fine powder, and then mix altogether, and boil it
to the form of an ointment. It mundifieth ulcers and fistulaes, and abateth
spungerous flesh.

Another.
Mesuae.
Rec. AEruginis.v. mellis.xiiij. aceti albi.vij. Sees all and stir it till
it be red, then add calcanthi vsti.ij. olei rosati.iij. cerae q.s. Make of
all these an unguent. It is good for old wounds, it closes fistulaes, it
helps against rank flesh, and it dries exceedingly.

Another.
Vigo.
Rec. Aquae plantaginis, vini malorum granatorum, mellis, ana.ij. aluminis
rupis, aeruginis, ana.x. Sees it and stir it till it be red.

Vnguentum mundificatiuum.
Rec. Plantag. arthemisiae, absynthij, plantaginis mino. gariophyllatae,
caprifolij, bellis, meliloti, ana m.j. hyosciami, violarum, ana m.ss. bardanae,
trifolij, ana p.j. apij, as much as of all the rest. Juice all these, then take
as much honey as juice, and mingle altogether with a quart of wheat flower,
and turpentine four ounces. Set all these on the fire, and boil it to the
form of an ointment: and if it clod in the boiling by reason of the flower,
then strain it. This ointment mundifieth ulcers and fistulaes.

Vnguentum incarnatiuum.
Rec. Resinae.iiij.ss. terebinthinae lib.ss. mellis.iij. cerae flauae, Baker.
.v. thuris, masticis, myrrhae, sarcocollae, aloes, croci, ana.ij. Relent that
which is to be relented, and in the cooling put in the powders.

Another.
Rec. Olei rosarum.xii. resinae.xij. cerae citrinae.vj. terebinthinae.viij.
masticis.ij. olibani.iiij. croci.j. Mingle all, and make an ointment.

Another.
Rec. Resinae, cerae, ana lib.ss. terebinthinae.iiij. olibani, masticis, ana.j
myrrhae, sarcocollae, ana.iij.ss. olei masticis, mellis rosati colati ana.j.
farinae hordei.ij. Mingle all and make an ointment.

Vnguentum sanctorum Cosme and Damiani.
D. Foster.
Rec. Pimpinellae, verbenae, betonicae, ana m.j. Stamp them, and put to them
vini albi lib.ij.ss. Boil them together in a tinned vessel to the wasting of
three parts, then strain them, and set the strained part over the fire again
in a glased vessel, then Rec. terebinthinae been colatae.vj. resinae been
colatae, lib.j cerae nouae and albae.iiij. when they are melted altogether in
the same glased pot, add to them masticis been puluerizati.j. de lacte
mulierum lactantium masculum and foeminum, ana.ij. Boil them to their perfect
body. It avails for all wounds, and namely of the sinews: also for Cankers
Fistulaes, and S. Anthonies fire.

A singular secret for ulcers of the legs.
D. Foster.
Rec. Linteum lineum that has been three times wet in lixiuio forti, and dried
again in the shade. Take a piece thereof and spread upon the one side of it
vnguentum de cerusa following, then apply the wrong side, namely, the vnspread
side to the ulcer, and bind it too, and so shall it not cleave to the ulcer,
and yet cure it.

Vnguentum magistrale de cerusa.
Rec. Cerusae lotae, D. Foster.
.ij. lithargyrij.ix. olei ros. completi.v. succi solani.ij.ss. cerae albae.j.
thuris.ij.ss. Let the cerusa, oleum and succus be perfectly wrought together ^n
a mortar, and afterward add to the rest: Rec. huius vnguenti.ij. infrigidantis
gal..ij. Mix them to use.

This is good to defend from inflammations, and dries moderatly, but it must
be very new not past two days old, for otherwise it will get a sowrenes and
so hurt.

A marvelous unguent for burning with fire.
Rec. Olei rosati.viij. olei vitellorum D. Foster.
ouorum.ij. vitri albiss. subtiliss. triti and puluerizati.ij. cerae
albae.j.ss. corticis medianae virgularum sambuci m.j. Boil them and strain
them according to Art. Fiat vnguentum.

A very good unguent for the curing of old and painful ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Resinae pini, resinae communis puriss. colophoniae, terebinthinae, ceui
ceruini, cerae citrinae, ana lib.ss. olei communis, olei seminis lini, ana.xij.
vini albi lib.ij. Boil these altogether at a soft fire, until the wine be
consumed, then take it from the fire, and put to it viridis aeris in most fine
powder.j. Stir it well together, then strain it, and keep it to your use.

An unguent for pockie tettars and chinkes, or chappes of hands or feet.
D. Foster.
Rec. Sem. cardamomi, iuniperi, ana.ss. sulph. viui.ij. argenti viui.ss. succi
hepaticae.j. vng. ros..j.ss. Mix them in a leaden mortar three hours
together. Fiat vnguentum.

An excellent and proved unguent, either for wounds, ulcers, or open apostemes.
Given of Mistress Warren.
Rec. Hyperici, cardui benedicti, bellidis siluestris oculorum populi arboris,
plantaginis, lanceolatae, valerianae graecae, betonicae, prunellae, cepaeae,
semperviui, solani, ana m.iij. Choope them small, and stamp them very well
with axungiae porci, lib.iiij. Let them stand together in an earthen pot one
whole month in a celler: (says my copy, but in horse dung I would judge to
be better) at the months end (if it have stood in a celler) take off the
uncleanness above, for it will moule over, then boil it the space of two
hours. Afterward strain it out, put it again into your boiling pan, and with
it cerae lib.j.ss. resinae, terebinthinae, ana lib.j. herbarum omnium
praedictarum, an^a m.j. Stamp and strain out all their juice, which when you
have put in, boil altogether to the perfect body of an unguent, stirring them
all the while: if it fall out to want wax, you may add more according to your
discretion.

That which remains of one year may be refreshed with new herbs the next
year.

Vnguentum viride for old wounds or ulcers, consuming the evil flesh and
engendring good.
Rec. Celidonij, radicis alleluiae, Gilbertus. Arden adds Rue.
folioru^ centri galli, leuistici agrestis, scabiosae, ana m.j. cum sepi
arietini and olei com. ana lib.j. Let them (being bruised) be set to infuse for
nine days, then boil them until the herbs settle in the bottom, after
strain them, and add unto them cerae.iiij. (in summer or.ij. (in winter) which
being melted, put in likewise olibani, masticis, viridis aeris, all in very
fine powder, ana.ss. When it is boiled to the proof, and has a green color,
set it from the fire, and lastly add unto it aloes epaticae puluerizati.ss. So
strain the whole and keep it to your use.

An unguent that makes a firm foundation of flesh in healing.
Rosa Ang.
Rec. Succi apij, betonicae, sanamundae, osmundae, summitatum rubi, plantaginis,
ana quantum vis, mellis quod sufficit and resinae and cerae and olibani, and
sanguinis draconis, and rosarum, ana part.ss. Make it an unguent or cerote
according to Art.

An unguent for a Fistula.
Rosa Ang.
Rec. Lactis tithimalli duas parts, axungiae veteris tertiam partem. First
melt the axungia, and after put in your lac tithimalli, and boil them to the
third part: when it is taken from the fire add to it myrrhae a quantity in
fine powder when you will use it: arm your tent therewith that it may go down
to the bottom.

Vnguentum Basilicon.
Rec. Resinae, terebinthinae, adipis vaccini, picis naualis, thuris, ana lib.j.
cerae, olei communis ana lib.ij. Make hereof an ointment.

Tetrapharmacum Galeni.
Rec. Picis nigrae, resinae, cerae, adipis vaccini, ana quantum sufficit. Make
hereof an ointment. This does hea^e, moysten, cease pain, suppurateth and
causes matter.

Vnguentum Fusoum.
Rec. Olei lib.j.ss. cerae nouae.iiij. picis Nicolai.
graecae, picis nigrae, ana.ij. masticis, galbani, thuris, ana.j. Mingle and
make an ointment. This does both draw and heal.

A green unguent to cleanse and heal old ulcers.
Rec. Re^inae, resinae pini, colophoniae, Banester.
terebinthinae, ceui ceruini, cerae citrinae, ana lib.ss. olei com. olei lini,
ana.xij. vini albi lib.ij. viridis aeris.j. bulliant ad consumptionem vini,
fiat vng.

Vnguentum Resinae.
Rec. Mellis lib.j. resinae.v. terebinthinae lib.ss. myrrhae, sarcocollae
ana.j. seminis foenugraeci, seminis lini, ana.j. Let the seeds lie infused
four and twenty hours in white wine, take of that muscilage four ounces,
boil these to the consumption of the muscilage, and in the cooling put in the
myrrh and sarcocoll, etc. This ointment mundifieth wounds of the joints, and
staieth the muscilage and glee^ing humor that flows from the joints, etc.

Vnguentum sanatiuum.
Rec. Terrae sigillatae, lapidis calaminaris, lithargyrij auri, ana.iiij. oil
olive lib.vj. cerae.xii. camphorae.ij. Mingle all and make an ointment. This
ointment is good for hot ulcers of the legs, and defends evil humors in
any part of the body.

Another.
Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerae.vj. terebinthinae.iiij. lapidis calaminaris
lib.ss. boli armeni.ij. Mingle these and make thereof an ointment.

Another.
Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerae lib.ss. butyri maialis lib.ss. lapid.
calaminaris lib.ss. make hereof an ointment.

Another.
Rec. Lapid^ calaminaris lib.ss. seui ceruini, cerae albae, ana lib.ss. olei
rosati lib.j. camphorae.ss. Make an ointment.

Another.
Rec. Olei lib.j. resinae lib.j. cerae, seui ouini, ana lib.ss.
terebinthinae.xij. lapid. calaminaris lib.j. This is good for ulcers in any
part of the body.

Vnguentum Diapompholygos.
Rec. Olei rosac. cerae albae, Nicolaus.
ana.vj. succi solani q.s. cerusae, plumbi vsti and loti, pompholygis, thuris
puri, ana.j. Mingle all according to Art.

Vnguentum defensiuum magistrale.
Rec. Boli armeniaci, sanguinis draconis, Weckerus.
terrae sigillatae, ana.j. olei rosati.vj. cerae.j.ss. aceti.iiij. Sees the
oil, wax, and vinegar together, till the vinegar be consumed, then take it
from the fire, and when it begins to wax cold, add the other things being
beaten in small powder.

Vnguentum Nutritum, for all inflammations, excoriations and itching.
Rec. Lithargyrij auri.iiij. olei communis Goodrus.
opt. lib.j..iiij. aceti albi destillati.xij. First make the litharge in fine
powder: then first put to it two or three spoonefulles of your oil, and work
it well together till it wax thick, then put to it some vinegar, but less
than you did of the oil, labor them well together. Again, put in some oil,
and after also vinegar, so continuing, by course mingling and working them,
till al be perfectly mixed; which to do well will ask a whole days labor:
being well done, it is very white, thick, and in good form.

Note.
A portion of this may be brought to the form of a plaster, by continual
boiling and stirring of it at a soft fire to a black and perfect consistence,
which for his shining color I call Emplastrum lucidum.

Vnguentum rubrum, sieve de minio camphoratum.
Odulphus Occo.
Rec. Olei rosa^i lib.j.ss. lithargyrij.ij. minij.iij. cerusae.j.ss. tutiae,
camphorae, ana.iij. cerae alb. aestate.ij. hyeme.j. melt the wax with the oil
at a soft fire, mingle the^ in a leaden mortar with the other things most
finely powdered.

Vnguentum caphuratum album.
Wecker^s.
Rec. Olei rosati lib.j. cerusae.xij. cerae albae.iij. ouorum albumina, number.vj.
camphorae.ij. Being dissolved in Rose Water, mingle al and make an ointment
according to Art.

Vnguentum desiccatiuum.
Rec. Lapid. calaminaris, Galenus.
terrae sigillatae, lithargyrij auri, minij, ana.iiij. cerae.v. camphorae.j.
olei rosac. olei violarum, ana.v. oil of water lillies one ounce, olibanum and
mastick, of each one ounce, mingle all and make an ointment.

Vnguentum dialthaeae compositum.
Rec. Radicum althaeae lib.ij. seminis lini, Nicolaus.
foenugraeci, ana lib. j. pulpae scillae.vj. olei lib.iiij. cerae lib.j.
terebinthinae.ij. resinae, picis graecae, ana.vj. Make an ointment of the
former things, and then add the gums following, being dissolved in viniger,
and so mix altogether. This ointment swageth pains of the stomach coming of
cold, and does dissolve and mollify.

A singular unguent for Lues Venerea.
Rec^ Axungiae porcinae, lib.j. butyri recentis.vj. olei laurini.iiij. olei
vulpini, hypericonis, terebinthinae ana.v. styracis liquidae lotae cum aqua
chamaemeli and vino cretici.ij. olei sulphuris.ss. cinabrij.j.ss. mercurij
extincti.vj. sublimati.j. cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

Another.
Matthiolus
Rec. Vng. rosac. vng. tripharmaci in mortario plumbeo ex oleo ros. and aceto
rosac. prius subactorum ana lib.j. mercurij sublimati,.ij. caphurae.ss. argenti
viui extincti.vj. Fiat.

Another.
Matthiolus
Rec. Vnguenti rosarum Mesu. lib.j. butyri recentis.vj. vng. tripharmaci.iiij.
cerati santalini.ij. saponis nigri.iij. olei amygdalarum dulcium.ij. argenti
viui extincti.vij. sublimati.ij. succi brassicae, scabiosae, fumiterrae,
ana.iiij. Fiat.

A proved unguent for the malign and inueterated skabbe.
Petrus His. Johannes Liebaltius.
Rec. Sulphuris, ellebori albi, argenti viui, cumini, ana.ij.
staphidisagriae.ss. Incorporate them cum.vj. axungiae porcinae that is very old.

Another without mercury.
Petrus His. Io^ Liebault.
Rec. Succi summitatum raphani.vj. aceti, olei, ana.iij. With some addition of
aloes make it an ointment.

Likewise a plaster made de allijs a long time beaten cum axungia porci,
takes away all scabbes.

An unguent to mollify hard contracted sinews.
Rec. Meliloti.vj. floris chamaemeli, Vesali^^.
foenugraeci, lauri, althaeae, rad. absynthij ana.iiij. sinapi, agni casti,
ireos, cyperi, carui, spicae, cassiae ligneae, ameos, anisi, ana.v.
terebinthinae.j. ficuum number.xij. adipis caprae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

An unguent to strengthen the sinews.
Rec. Myrrhae, thuris, Vesalius.
ana.viij. ireos.ij. muscilaginis rad. althaeae, sem. foenugraeci, axungiae
gallinae and anseris, ana.j. aristolochiae rotundae.ij.ss. oppoponacis,
ammoniaci, sem. rutae, ana.j. spicae.ij. styracis liquidae.vj.ss. olei
chamaemeli and cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

A most excellent unguent for the pockes, whether vlcerate or otherwise.
Rec. Axungiae porci lib.j. olei laurini.vj. argenti viui extincti cum succo
saluiae, Clowes.
olei hyperici, irini, chamaemeli, lumbricorum, rosacei, and mastichini, ana.j.
theriacae opt..ss. vng. martiati, and vulpini, ana.ij. vng. hyrundmariae.j.ss.
vng. dialthaeae compos. vng. genistae, ana.j. terebinthinae venetae.j.ss. aquae
vitae.ij. lithargyrij auri^.iiij. cerusae.ss. plumbi vsti.j. masticis, myrrhae,
olibani, ana.ss. nucis moscatae, maceris, cariophyllorum, ana.vj. mosci
odoratiss..ss. Fiat.

A proved unguent without mercury for pains in the joints of Lues Venerea.
Augerius Ferrerius.
Rec. Vng. martiati, vng. resumptiui, vng. aragon, vng. dialthaeae, ana.iij.
pyrethri, hermodactylorum, nitri, zinzibris, ana.j. olei chamaemeli, vulpini,
laurini, ana.j. olei de lateribus, de terebinthina, and aqua vitae, ana.ss.
petrolei.iij. aristoloch. rot..j.ss. cerae q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

Another general vuguent for Lues Venerea.
Martin.
Rec. Axungiae porci lib.j.ss. vnguenti martiati.ij. euphorbij.j. staphidis
agriae.ij. lithargyrij auri,.iij. argenti viui extincti in succo limonum,.iiij.
Fiat vnctio.

An unguent for Lues Venerea, and for all skabbes, tetters, ringwormes, either
proceeding of that venomous humor, or any like.
Banester.
Re^^ Vng. rosarum lib.ss. vng. albi.vj. vng. populeon..iiij. olei laurini.iij.
salis nitri.ij. mercurij sublimati.ij. gum. Karabe, masticis, myrrhae, olibani
ana.ij. lithargyrij auri.j.ss. cerusae.j. aluminis vsti, vitrioli combusti,
ana.ij. mercurij crudi extincti cum succo limonum.v. cerae albae.ij.ss. Fiat
vnguentum.

An unguent of the juice of Ebulus for all pains of the joints proceeding ex
morbo Gallico.
Rec. Granorum ebuli nigror. and maturor..iij. foliorum ebuli, Rennerus.
fol. betonicae, ana m.iij. yuae artheticae, yuae muscatae, rorismarini,
lumbricorum terrest. lotorum cum vino albo lib. ss. terebinth. quinquies lotae
cu^ aqua saliuae.ij. radicum althaeae.iiij. olei communis lib.j.ss. vini optimi
lib.iij. Bruise all your herbs and worms, and boil them in the wine and the
rest, until the juice and wine be consumed: then strain it, adding theretoo
so much wax as will make an ointment.

An unguent against ^e^tars and ringwormes proceeding ex Lue Gallica.
Rec. Cepi ceruini.ij. saponis veneti ol. amyd. amarar. olei de iuglandib.
ana.ss. terebinthinae.vj. salis communis, Rennerus.
ellebori nigri, ana.j. lithargyrij praeparati, tartari, sulphuris praeparati,
ana.ij. argenti sublimati.j. Powder that which is to be powdered very fine,
and mix them together according to Art.

An unguent to cauterize a vein, that will not otherwise stay bleeding.
Angelus Bologninus.
Rec. Vngu. populei.ss. vitrioli vsti.ij. mercurij sublimati.iij. Fiat vnguentum.

An unguent that does cool, cease pain, and defend humors flowing to any
part.
Angel. Bologn.
Rec. Cerati albi.iiij. ol. rosac..x. santali alb. and rubr. rosarum rubr.
myrrhae, olibani, masticis, ana.ij. caphurae.ss. terebinthinae.ij.ss. Fiat
vnguentum.

An unguent that does dry and heal^.
Angel. Bologn.
Rec. Olibani, masticis, aloes, ana.ss. colophoniae.iij. aristolochiae longae
torrefactae.iij. ol. rosac..vj. terebinthinae, cerae albae, ana.iiij. Fiat
vnguentum.

An unguent that does mundifie where the matter is gross and slymie.
Angel. Bologn.
Rec. terebinthinae venetae.vj. mellis rosacei.iiij.ss. myrrhae, iridis,
aristoloch. longae, ana.ss. farinae hordei q.s. Fiat vnguentum.

An excellent unguent for ulcers in the joints.
Rec. Vini gypsati lib.ij. mellis rosati li. Banester.
j. zacchari candi albiss. lib.j. myrrhae.iiij. masticis.ij. Powder those which
are to be powdered, and mix them.

An unguent with the use of it to root out the caruncle.
Rec. Argenti viui.iij. aquae fortis.iiij. Set the^ to stand together in a
strong glass until the mercury be hardened (which is in three or four days)
after break the glass, and take it forth. Rec. etiam plumbi tenuissime
laminati, and in minimas particulas incisi lib.j. aquae fortiss. lib.j. set
them together, and bring it so to powder. These things being thus prepared,
Rec. Mercurij superius praeparati.j. plumbi praepar..iij. pingued. haedinae vel
agninae.vj. Boil them softly, and cum modico cereae virgineae fiat vnguentum.
Apply hereof unto the caruncle every day once for three or four days; and
after that, but every third day once unto the end. Although it happen to
bleed in the first days, yet go forward.

An unguent for wounds with burning.
Banester.
Rec. Ol. vel pingued. lardi.iiij. ol. butyri, vel pinguedinis cremoris per
ignem seperatae, ol. ouorum, ana.ij. ol. sambuci.j.ss. ol. amydalarum
dulc..ij.ss. ol. papaueris and hyosciami, ana.j. salis nitri.ij. cerae
albae.ij. Fiat.

An unguent for filthy ulcers, that mundifieth and heals exceeding well.
Banester.
Rec. Ol. rosarum,.iiij. ol. ouorum.ij. pinguedinis palmae.iij.
terebinthinae.j.ss. ol. myrrhae.j. masticis.j.ss. cerusae.ij.ss. picis graecae
sieve colophoniae.ij. cerae citrinae.j. or less of the wax if you see cause:
so make an unguent.

Vnguentum hyosciami for all pains and inflammations of great use.
Banester.
Rec. Axungiae suillae lib. viij. fol. and summitatum hyosciami lib. viij.
Stamp the herb very well, then mix them together, and set your vessel in
the heat of the sun, or in balneo mariae for ten days: after boil it to
the consumption of the watrish iuycines: strain it, and put too lib.vj. more of
fresh herb. Sun them, and boil them as before: then strain it to keep.

Vnguentum de Alabastro for wounds, defluxions and cataractes in the eyes of
great use and commendation: with some correction in the making.
Rec. Summitatum Rubi number. 50. rutae, Beneuenutus Hierosolymitanus.
m.j. alabastritae lib.ss. sem. foeniculi.ss. ol. rosac. lib.j. florum
chamaemeli.iiij. vini albi lib.ij. cerae.j. albuminum ouorum nu. vj. With a
new and clean sponge crush through the whites of eggs till they be as
water, so keep them a part: your alabaster grind on a marble stone with aqua
rosacea or foeniculi till it be as fine as a painters color. Now to compound
them, do thus: Take your herbs, flower and fenill seed, (being all well
stamped) power upon them your oil of roses and wine: boil them to the wasting
of the wine, after strain them cleerelie into another fair vessel, and set
it on the fire again: put in your alabaster so ground as I have said before,
and your wax. Let it sees again softly (but always stirring it) until the
watrishnesse be gone out. Then take it from the fire to cool, but cease not
stirring till it be utterly cold. When it is almost cold, put in your whites
of eggs. To some part of this would I also add a little camfer, and reserve
that by it self.

An unguent generally good for all evils of the eyes.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Butyri recentis 9. times washed cu^ vino albo odorifero.j. tutiae
praeparatae and pulu..j.ss. caphurae trituratae.j. antimonij.ss. Mix them al
in a leaden mortar according to Art. The use is, to put a little thereof into
the eyes when the patient goes to bed.

An unguent of Nicotian, of very great effect in healing wounds of gunshot,
and others also.
Goodrus.
Rec. Balsami Nicotiani nostri lib.j.ss. cerae citrinae, resinae pini, ceui
ceruini ana iij. gummi elemi.j.ss. succi Nicotianae.iiij. pinguedinis porc..ij.
Mix them according to Art, and boil them to the consumption of the iuyces.

Vnguentum Ophioglossi, a most excellent consolidatiue.
Rec. Ophioglossi as much as a peck will contain, Iarre^.
meliloti, valerianae, ana m.j. solidaginis saracenicae m.ss. saniculae,
prunellae, virgae aureae, Iacobaeae, ana m.ss. Stamp them in a stone mortar,
and put unto them three quartes of oil Olive, so let it stand all night: in
the morning boil it gently until it have an exce^^^nt green color. Strain
it, and add too cerae lib.j. ceui ceruini lib.ss. masticis.j. olibani.j.
finely powdered. In the cooling put in Terebinthinae purae.iiij.

An unguent to root out the caruncle.
Rec. Argenti viui, Frederick
plumbi tenuissime laminati, ana.j. aquae fortis.iiij. Let these stand in a
strong glass or pot close stopped 48. hours, until the arg. viuum become
like ice, and the plumbum white. Then at an easy fire euaporate the water:
beat the rest into fine powder, and wash it well in plantaine or rose water
until it be sweet. Hereto more over add virid aeris praep..ss. sabinae
pulue..j. antimonij.iiij. caphurae.v. stercoris canis.ij. Emplastri
Finichini,.ij. ceui caprini, terebinthinae Venetae, ana.j. siccati sanguinis
columbarum.j.ss. Let all these be mixed in a leaden mortar according to Art.

Note.
This Unguent must be applied upon a hollow tent made of lawne and paper.

An unguent to assuage the pain, and soreness that may happen by the
corosiue applications to the Caruncle.
Frederick.
Rec. Vng. diap^mpholigos.ij. infrigidantis gal. vng. albi Rhasis ana.iij. vng.
pomati, vng. populei, ana.j. opij.j. Mix all these in a leaden mortar and
pestell until it become of the color of lead it self.

An unguent for all contused wounds very excellent: it helps and quickens
^he natural heat in the part, appeaseth pain, staieth putrefaction, concocteth
and separateth that which is unsound.
Baker.
Rec. Lupinorum.ij. hyperici, centaurij minoris, ana m.j. aquae lib.j.ss. Decoct
these to the wasting of lib.ss. Rec. huius decoctionis.vj. mellis ros..viij.
myrrhae.ss. boracis.j.ss. viridis aeris, croci, ana.ss. Boil all these to the
consistence of honey to be applied with tent or seton. After the use thereof a
sufficient time, Rec. vng. praefati.ij. terebinthinae venetae.ss. ol.
lumbricorum.ij. mercurij praecipitati.j. Mix them, and this apply unto the
perfect digesting and mundifying.

A rare unguent for stiffenes of ioynts^ sinews, gowtes, and all aches.
Rec. Succi chamaepitheos, Baker.
suc. saluiae, suc. rutae, ana lib.ss. decocti vini cu^ limatura cornu ceruini
lib.j.ss. ol. chamaemeli and liliacei, ana lib.j. Boil these altogether to the
consumption of the wine, then add cerae, sagapeni, oppoponacis, bdellij,
galbani, ana.ij. The gummes that you cannot powder, dissolve in wine: and so
make your unguent according to Art.

An unguent to stay the stench of a Canker.
Rec. Citri in vitro inclusi and balneo mariae donec flaccescat cocti lib.ss.
Antonius Montagnana.
Stamp it fine, and add theretoo boli armeni orientalis,.j. extracti vel
succi vincetoxici ad mellis spissitudinem condensati.iij. Mix them.

A most fine and approved unguent to stay the gleeting humor of wounds in the
joints.
Balthrop.
Rec. Myrrhae, aquae vitae, of each proportionable parts: Grind them together
on a marble to a perfect appliable body, and if you will assuage pain also,
add succi nicotiani tantillum.

Waters.
A proved water for all manner heates and inflammations of the eyes.
REc. Aloes epaticae, zacchari puriss. lapidis tutiae subt. pulu. ana.j. aq.
rosarum rubrarum, vini albi, ana lib.ij. In a double glass set them in balneo
mariae five or six days, often shaking it about.

A water to cleanse and dry filthy ulcers.
Rec. Rosarum rubr. siccarum, fol. myrti, Nicolaus Massa.
corticum granatorum, balaustij, tartari, vini albi, aluminis, hordei, sem.
caulium, ana parts aequales, aq. plantag. q, s. Decoct them according to Art,
and strain them, and to every pound of the decoction put mellis rosarum.iij.

A water for ulcers marvelously commended, to cleanse, dry and heal them;
especially if they proceed from a pockie fountain.
Rec. Aq. seperationis auri ab argento.ij. Nicholaus Massa.
aq. rosaru^.vj. Mix them and herewith touch the ulcers: which will stay (says
the author) the malign gadding, and the descending of humors.

A water to cicatrize plain ulcers speedily.
Rec. Aq. fontanae lib.iiij. mercurij sublimati.ss. vitrioli albi, album. oui,
ana.vj. cinabrij.j. lapid. haematitis.ij. boli armeni.x. masticis, olibani,
sarcocollae, ana.iij. Powder those that are to be powdered, and mix and boil
them to the consumption of half.

A water for a scalde head, proved.
Rec. Aq. fontanae lib.viij. aluminis.ss. mellis albi li.j. Let these boil a
pretty space skimming it very clean: then put too viridis aeris pulu..ij. and
boil it again a little, then filtre it and use it.

Another.
Rec. Lixiuij minime fortis lib.ij. vini albi lib.j. mercurij sublimati.j.
salis nitri.ij. Boil them to the wasting of the half, then filtre it.

A water for vlcered mouths in Lue Venerea.
Augerius Ferrerius.
Rec. Foecis vini, and foecis aceti, aerug. aluminis, nitri, ana.j. Boil them
in aq. rosar. and plantag. a walme or 2. clear the^ through a strainer, but
without pressing, and with lynt dipped therein touch the vlcered places.

A water that excels in this case, is made,
Ex theriaca cum aquae vitae and aceti part. Augerius Ferrerius.
aequalibus stilled by a glass gourd, and then having dissolved therein terram
sigillatam or armeniam: then herewith gently touch the corroded parts.

In want thereof this water may be used.
Rec. Aquarum rosarum, Aug. Ferrerius.
plantaginis and prunellorum agrestium ana.j. aceti, aquae vitae, ana.vj.
diamori, mellis rosa. ana.iij. theriacae, boli armeni, aluminis ana.ij. Let
them stand for certain hours upon hot coals (but without boiling):
afterward strain them lightly.

A water for Pustules and spots in the face or whole body, especially of Lue
Venerea.
Rec. Masticis, olibani, dragaganthi, Aug. Ferr^rius.
laudani, ana.j. succi limonum.j. aquarum plantag. and rosarum ana.ij. sumach,
tartari rubri and coralli albi, boracis ana.ss. sublimati pulu. gr.iij. Boil
them in a glass vessel at a gentle fire to the consumption of the fourth
part, clarify it, and aromatize it with some grains of Musk.

Aqua Cinnabaris for pustules of the French pockes, for an old scall, and
filthy breakings out about the fundament.
D. Foster.
Rec. Vini albi antiqui lib.j. aeruginis, auripigmenti, aluminis, ana.ss.
cinnabaris.v. sublimati.ij. Powder the things that are to be powdered, and
heat them all together for a washing water.

A water of great force to cleanse a filthy cancrous ulcer.
Banester.
Rec. Aq. plantag. rosarum rub. ana lib.j. succi solatri, semperviui, and
plantaginis, ana.iiij. rosarum rub.m.ss. myrtillorum, nucu^ cupressi, ana.ss.
malecorij.iij. florum hyperici p.ij. floru^ verbasci p.j. masticis, myrrhae,
thuris, ana.j. mellis rosacei lib.j..iiij. Powder that which is to be powdered,
and distill them altogether. Rec. aquae huius destillatae lib.j. Therein
dissolve conseruae rosarum.vj. and sir. rosaru^ siccarum.j. cum ol. sulphuris
gut.xij. and use it.

A special good water for chops or cleftes about the nails, or other parts of
the hands and feet.
Goodrus.
Rec. limaturae aeris tenuissimae.j. aquae plantaginis lib.ss. Boil them
together until half be consumed, then strain it: therein dippe linen
clothes, and lay to the places. It cease the pain, and cures presently.

A water that cures the French pockes.
Rec. Cariophyllorum, pyrethri, H. de Otthen.
ana.ss. piperis nigri.ij. cardamomi.iij. cantaridum.v. aluminis, salis nitri,
sulphuris, cerusae, ana.j. croci orient..j. sublimati.iij. theriacae Androm..j.
aquae ardentis lib.iij. Powder those that are to be powdered: let them all
stand to macerate in a cold place for certain days. With this water by a
sponge wet the principal joints of the body until they blister, or other
accidents (as in the unctions fall out. For the blisters use no medicine, but
abstain from this a space. Return to it eftsoons, and repeat the order till
you be sure the disease is expelled.

A blistering water where there is pains in the bones or joints proceeding ex
lue gallica.
Rec. Carioph. sal. nitri, Rennerus.
sulphu. ana.j. zingiberis. piper. long. pirethri, aloes epat. erucae, ana.ss.
croci or. eupho. an..ij. alum..ij.ss. cantharidarum purgatarum.vj. aqu. vitae
lib.ij.ss. Powder that which is to be powdered, mix them all together, and put
them into a glass: let it stand till the aqua vitae have taken out the force.

A water against spots and marks, or scarres proceeding ex Lue Venerea.
Rennerus.
Rec. Tutiae praeparatae.j. sulphuris, aluminis vsti, ana.ij. acetirosacei.j.
aquae rosarum.ij. Mix them together.

A water for heat and pimples proceeding ex Lue Venerea.
Rennerus.
Rec. Cerusae.ij. mercurij sublimati gr. xij. olei tartari.j. aquae rosarum
alb..v. Grind your cerusa and mercury very fine and mix them together
according to Art.

A water very effectual for healing of ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Plumbi albi puriss..x. aluminis rochae.xij. vitrioli.vj. minij.v. Make
the^ in fine powder, and calcine them together exactlie. Take hereof.ij.ss. and
put it into aquae rosaceae lib.j. When it is made hot let them stand for a
day together, and so use it.

A water to cicatrize and heal any plain ulcer.
Rec. Aq. chalib. lib.iiij. fol. plantag. centinodij, Banester^
bursae pastoris, ana m.ss. aluminis rochae.j.ss. masticis.j. thuris.ij.
vitrioli albi.ij. Boil them to the consumption of the half, strain it, and
use it as Art does require.

A water that cicatrizeth notably, and of excellent use for wounds of the eyes.
Rec. Albumina ouorum iiij. crush them through a clean sponge, Goodrus.
until they become as a clear flowing water, vini albi, lactis recentis, ana
lib.ss. lapidis calaminaris in vino albo extincti.iij. masticis, myrrhae,
olibani, sarcocollae, ana.j. vitrioli albi crudi.ij. Powder these most finely,
and mix them with the liquors, and set them to sun, or in horse dung for
four days. After distill the liquor by a filtre and keep it.

With.iiij. of this water, and sublimati.iiij. is made an excellent water for
rednes of the face. Also with four ounces of this water and zacchari candi
albiss..ij. cu^ aloes praeparatae.ss. is made a notable collirie for affects of
the eyes.

A water for the eyes that wears away both web and spots, and sharpneth the
sight.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Rutae, sclareae, plantaginis, foeniculi, rosarum, papaueris rub. verbenae,
fol. celidoniae, ana.j. aquae ros. lib.j. vini albi lib.j. tutiae
praeparatae.j. aloes epat..j.ss. gariophyllorum.j. Powder, mix and distill
them according to Art, drop it into the eye morning and night.

A water for watring eyes.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Aquae rosac. and foeniculi, ana.vj. vitrioli albi.ij. Mix them, put a
drop in the eye every night when the party goes to bed, and in seven or
eight days it shall take away the tears.

A water for the Canker.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini albi, ana lib.iiij. radicum plantaginis, herbarum
saluiae, rutae, lauendulae, rosmarini, ana^m.j. caprifolij m.ij. Boil these
whole in the liquors to the quantity of three pintes, strain them, and add
mellis clari.iij. vel iiij. aluminis vsti.iij. So keep it to use.

A Lac virginis of great praise for skinning old ulcers, clensing the skin,
and killing creeping tettars.
Idem.
Rec. Aceti albi fortiss, lib.ij. lithargyrij auri and tenuissime triti lib.j.
Infuse them together four days, stirring them every day twice. After let it
settle a whole day; power off the cleerest and keep it in a glass. Rec.
aquae pluuialis lib.j. salis gemmae,.ij. salis communis coch.j. Boil these
till the stalks be dissolved, put of the cleerest into a glass by it self.
Now to make your milk. Rec. aquae prioris tres parts, aquae posterioris two
parts and a little more, put them together, and it will presently be as milk
or cream.

A proved water much commended for filthy putrified ulcers, namely in the
legs.
Rec. Rutae, Ex manuscripto.
saluiae, fol. nucis auellanae, pulegij, caprifolij (florum and foliorum) ana
m.j. mellis cochl. v. ceruisiae praestantis lib.iiij. (according to ale
measure) aluminis.ij. First clarify your ale, then put in your other stuff,
and boil all to the wasting of one part out of three: strain it strongly, and
keep it. The elder the better.

A red water to the same purpose.
Rec. Lixiuij cort. mediae fraxini lib.viij. Idem.
aluminis rup. lib.ss. aquae infusionis corticis quercus ( we call it Tanners
ouse) coria non expertae, lib.viij. rubiae tinct. lib.ss. Boil all these to
the wasting of one part of four, and use it.

Another water for ulcers, and namely of the mouth.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Florum and rad. bellidis minoris, m.j. caprifolij, aquilegiae, rosarum
rub. violarum, fol. nucis, sonchi, rubi, rosmarini, ana m.j. Boil them in two
gallons of fountain water, almost to the half, then strain it, and add
aluminis rupini,.ij.ss. boli armeniae.iiij. mellis depurati.vij. vel x. Boil
them to less than a gallon, and so keep it.

A water for watrie excoriations and itching ulcers.
Balthrop.
Rec. Vitrioli albi.iij. caphurae.ss. Burn them together, make them in fine
powder cum boli armeniae.iij. When you will use it, mingle three spoonefulles
hereof with a pottle of running water when it is ready to sees.

A water that dries and skinneth any ulcer exceedingly.
Frederick.
Rec. Vini albi, aquae fontanae, ana lib.j. ligni sancti.iiij. Steep these
together four and twenty hours, then add minij.ss. aluminis.ss. mellis albi
cochl.iiij. gariophyllorum number.xij. rosmarini, saluiae, siccatarum, ana parum.
Boil these together a pretty while.

A Triacle water for Lues Venerea.
Rec. Rasurae ligni sancti opt. lib.ss. vini albi dulcedinis expertis lib.ij.
aquae defecatissimae lib. viij. aquarum fumariae, Calmeteus.
cychorij, chamaemeli, ana lib.j. polipodij quercini lib.ss. macerentur simul
horas duodecem, add epithymi.ij. asplenij.vj. sem. iuniperi.ij. cort. citri.j.
conseruae rosarum, cychorij, buglossae, and borag. ana lib.ss. conseru. enulae
campanae and theriacae veteris, ana quart.j. Distill them, afterward add
zacchari and cinamomi, as much as will make it pleasant. Doss..iij.iiij. vel v.
according to the strength of the patient, and force of the disease.

A water for straitness of the apple of the eye.
Rec. Foeniculi dulc..j. sang. columbini, Vigo.
.j. tutiae, antimonij, ana.ij. aquae rosarum, aquae myrtillorum, ana.j.ss.
myrabol. citrin..ss. Misce and cum vase vitreo ad artem alembicetur.

Weckerus.
A water for Polypus.
Rec. Vuarum immaturarum lib.iij. mali granati, balaust. sumach, ana lib.ij.
infundantur in aceto, and distillentur, deinde add alum. lib.j. vitrioli.iij.
Distill them again, and use it according to Art.

A water for skabbes.
Victor. Fauentinus.
Rec. Aquae lapathi acuti lib.ij. succi plantaginis.iiij. aquae rosarum.iiij.
succi limonum.ij. litharg..vj. cerusae ss. sublimati.j.ss. salis communis.ss.
sulphuris viui.iij. terend. terantur, and infuse them four and twenty hours,
and distill them according to Art.

A water for a virulent and corosiue ulcer.
Weckerus.
Rec. Cerusae, lithargyrij, ana.j. plumbi vsti.ss. lapid. calaminar..ss. boli
armeni.j.ss. sanguinis draconis, terrae sigillatae, ana.j. aluminis
combusti.ss. callicum glandium, gallarum viridium, baccarum myrthi, psydiae,
balaustij, sumach^ ana m.j. coriandri, sem. plantaginis, ana.ss. rosarum
rubrarum, p.ij. bulliant in q.s. aquae chalybiatae, and use it. You may add
h^nie, because it is more abstersive.

A drying water for a Cancer vlcerated.
Rec. Succi solani, semperviui, acetosae, W^ckerus.
scabiosae, succi caprifolij, tapsibarbati, scrophulariae, succi phylopendulae,
lumariae, and succi agrimoniae, ana lib.ss. succi omphacij lib.j. carnis
limacum, carnis ranarum, carnis cancrorum, ana lib.ss. alb. ouorum number. vj.
aluminis.iij. caphurae.j.ss. Distill all in a leaden Limbecke, and bathe the
place therewith.

A water for an ulcer where the bone is corrupted.
Rec. Rad. aristol. vtriusque, iridis, Weckerus.
ana.j.ss centaurij minoris,.j.ss. agarici.iij. symphiti m.j. hyperici, ped.
columb. ana m.j. herbae roberti m.j. cort. pini.ij. rosarum rub.p.ss. anthos
p.ss. mellis rosarum.iij. Mix them with white wine q.s. and distill them
according to Art.

A water for the redness and watrishnesse of the eyes.
Rec. zacchari albi, Vesalius.
aloes epat. ana.v. tutiae praeparat..ss. camphorae gra.ij. vini albi clari,
aquae rosarum and foeniculi, ana.ss. Mix them in a glass vial, wherein let
them infuse six hours at the least, and then use it according to Art.

A water to cleanse filthy and hollow ulcers.
Banester.
Rec. Vini^ albi lib.j.ss. aquae plantag. and rosarum, ana lib.j. mercurij
sublimati.iij. boli armeni.ss. aluminis vsti.j.ss. vitrioli albi, boracis,
ana.ss. zacchari albi.ij. mastic. sarcocollae, ana.j.ss. Powder what are to be
powdered, and boil them together till half be wasted, then filtre it, and add
aquae vitae opt. lib.j. and reserve it to your use.

A water for Gutta Rosacea.
Rec. Aquae pluuialis lib.j. aquae ros. lib.j.ss. succi limonum,.vj.ss. succi
semperviui.viij. vini albi lib.j. boracis.ij. sublimati.iij. salis gemmae.j
zacchari candi.ij. litharg. auri.iij. salis armeni.iij. sulphuris viui.ij. rad.
lapathi acuti.iij. rad. brioniae.v. camphorae.ss. Powder all that are to be
powdered very fine, and set all in balneo mariae, in a vessel close stopped,
and so distill it at a gentle fire.

A water for the affects of the eyes.
Banester.
Rec. Vini albi lib.iij. foeniculi frondentis m.ij. aluminis.iiij. guaiaci
lib.ss. zacchari albi candidi ^ij.ss. vitrioli albi.ij. chelidonij, m.iij.
rutae m.ss. saluiae, verbenae, ana m.j.ss. hederae terrest.m.ij. lap.
calaminaris.ij. lapid. tutiae.j. camphorae.iij. mellis.iij. Powder what is to
be powdered, and distill it in a glass Limbecke.

A water to cicatrize ulcers in any part of the body.
Rec. Vini nigri lib.ij. aquae plantag. lib.ss. Banester.
aquae rosarum.iiij. succi plantaginis, succi verbasci, bursae pastoris,
centinodij, consolid. maio. and mino. succi centaurij minoris, ana.j. aluminis
crudi, lib.j. nucum cupressi.iij. balaust..ss. malicorij.iij. gallarum.ss.
sumach, cort. quercini, ana.ss. cort. thuris.iij. terebinthinae.iij. mellis
crudi lib.ss. masticis, olibani, ana.x. sarcocollae.ij. vitrioli combusti,
plumbi vsti, ana.j. boli armeni.iij. cassiae lignae.ss. aristolochiae
rotundae.iij. Powder what is to be powdered, and mix them altogether, and
infuse them, then distill the water, and the ulcers being dried reserve it to
your use.

Another.
Rec. Masticis, olibani, myrrhae, Banester.
sarcocollae, mummiae, ana.iij. thuris.j. nucis moscat. cinamomi,
gariophyllorum, cubebarum, ana.ij. nucis cupressi.ss. balaustij, malicorij,
ana.j. boli armeni.j. sanguinis draconis.ss. rosarum rubr.ij.ss. aluminis
rochae lib.j. vitrioli.vij. mellis d^spumati.j. aquae vitae lib. j.ss. vini
albi lib.j. succi plantag. solani, consolid. maio. and mino. ana.iij. aquae
ferratae lib.iiij. Powder what is to be powdered, and infuse them all night in
aqua vitae, in the morning draw forth the water by a Limbecke, and keep it to
your use.

An excellent water for the exulceration of the yard.
Banester.
Rec. Aquae ferratae lib.ij. rosarum rubr..iiij. balaust. malicorij, ana.ij.
plantaginis, semperviui ana.iij.ss. mellis rosarum, terebinthinae, ana lib.ss.
aluminis.vj. vitrioli albi.iij. Boil them in a clean vessel till half be
wasted, then strain it, and add viridis aeris.iij. Boil them again, or if
you will filtre it.

A water for the eyes.
Rec. Fol. euphras. pimpinellae, vilag. cichorij, oculi christi, foeniculi
fragariae, draconc. consolid. mino. caprifolij, ana parts aequales. Distill
them together, and add so much camfer as is sufficient.

A water for ulcers.
Rec. Vini albi lib.iiij. aquae plantaginis Banester.
lib.ij. aluminis lib.ss. vitrioli albi.v. mellis crudi lib.j. glycyrrhizae
rasae lib.j. boli armeni.j^ camphorae j.ss. mercurij sublimati.ij. Bruise them
that are to be bruised, and distill them through a Limbecke.

A water for hollow wounds.
Rec. Aquae fontanae, vini rubri, Banester.
ana lib. ij.ss. rosarum rubrarum.iiij. balaust. malecorij, ana.ij.ss.
sumach.ij. saluiae m.j. consolid. maio. and mino. ana m.ss. aluminis lib.ss.
sarcocollae.iij. masticis.ij. olibani.j. mellis lib.j. aquae terebinthinae
lib.j.ss. Bruise them that are to be bruised, and put all into a glass
Limbecke, and draw out all the liquor with a gentle fire, and reserve it to
your use.

A water of wonderful effect in bringing in of a cicatrize.
Rec. Aquae ferrar. lib.iiij. aquae balsami Banester.
very lib.iij. terebinthinae lib.j.ss. mellis crudi lib.j. aluminis.x. vitrioli
albi.v. boli armeni ^vij. mercurij sublimati.ss. fol. plantaginis, consolid.
maio. mino. and med^ae, saluiae, virgae pastoris, centinodij, hyperici, ana
m.j.ss. thuris.ij. olibani.ss. santali albi.ss. rosarum rubr.m.j.ss. cassiae
lignae, cinamomi, ana.iij. pro prima destillatione. Deinde rec. terebinthinae
lib.j. masticis.iij. thuris.iij. resinae purae.vj. cinamomi.ij.
gariophyllorum.ij. malecorij.ss. nucis cupressi.j.ss. vitrioli albi.ij.
aluminis.iij. olib..iiij. sanguinis draconis.j.ss. aquae balsami very lib.j.
pro secunda destillatione. Postea rec. terebinthinae lib.ss. florum hyperic.
saluiae, rosmarini, card. bened. centaurij, ana.j. mastic. santali rubr.
ana.iij. lig. aloes.ij. cubebarum.j. aquae vitae lib.ss. aluminis vsti.ij.ss.
tartari albi.j.ss. myrrhae.ss. lumbricorum in puluere.j. cort. thuris.iiij.
cort. medij querc..vj. cassiae lignae.iij. vitrioli albi.j. malecorij.ss.
cinamomi.ij. balaust..j. guaiaci.iiij. carpobalsami, xylobalsami ana.j.
myrtillorum.ij. mummiae.ij. borac..ss. gariophyllorum.ij. tormentillae,
gentianae, aristol. rot. ana.ij.ss. aluminis crudi.ij.ss. This is for the third
and last distillation, but yet after this distillation add aluminis vsti.ss.
vitrioli albi.ij. mastic..j. in fine powder and keep it.

A water for the scabbes and Itch.
Rec. Aquae plantag. aquae rosarum, ana lib.ss. mercurij sublimati.ij. aluminis
crudi.vj. Powder what is to be powdered, mix them and boil them in a double
vessel at a soft fire by the space of an hour, then filtre it and use it.

A water drying ulcers, and to cleanse any sharp ulcer, and to take away any
proud flesh.
Rec. Aluminis crudi.ij. alb. ouorum crud. number.xv. succi portulac. plantag.
solani, Julius Palmarius Constant.
semperviui, nicotianae, aquae vlmariae, lagopi and rosarum, ana.iiij. Labor
them well together, then put all into a glass bottell, and draw forth the
water through a double vessel.

A very good water to dry up moisture in an ulcer, extinguish heat, and heal
them.
Rec. Aceti lib.j. aquae fontanae lib.j. lithargyrij auri and argenti, Martin.
ana.ij. cerusae.j. aluminis.ss. Powder that which is to be powdered, boil
altogether a quarter of an hour, always stirring it, then reserve it to your
use. When you will use it, let thereof be strained from the rest: then make it
warm and apply it with steuphes.

A special good water for the preserving and restoring of the eyesight: ten
years decay will be recovered in forty days, if it be possible.
Ex manuscripto.
Rec. Rosarum. rub. apij, rutae, verbenae, capillorum veneris, euphrasiae,
endiuiae, semperviui, foeniculi, hilwort (says my copy, which name I have not
heard of, and perhaps it should be pilewort) chelidonij maioris, ana m.j.
Steep these in a pottle of white wine a whole day, then distill them. The first
water will be like gold, the second like silver, and the third like Balm.

An excellent distilled water for iniection to hollow wounds.
Banester.
Rec. Aquae fontanae, vinirub. ana lib.ij.ss. ros. rub.iiij. balaustiorum,
malecorij, ana.ij.ss. sumach,.ij. saluiae m.j. consolidae vtriusque, ana m.ss.
aluminis lib.ss. sarcocollae.iij. masticis.ij. olibani.j. mellis lib.j. aquae
terebinthinae lib.j.ss. Prepare the ingredients according to Art, and distill
altogether with a glass Limbecke at a gentle fire.

Another excellent distilled water for ulcers or wounds.
Rec. Calcis viu. extinctae in aqua fontana, Banester.
lib. viij. aquae plantag..iiij. aquae ros. lib.ij. vini albi lib.j. Heat
these together, afterward let them stand and clear. Power forth all the clear
into your Limbecke, and put too it mellis lib.ij. aluminis.ij. boracis.iij.
masticis.iij. olibani.iiij. mediae corticis quercus desiccatae.iij. Powder
those that ought to be and distill them.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
Aches. A Fomentation. 132 Aches cold. A Liniment. 174, 179. See Pain.
Alopecia Gallica. A Bath. 30. A Pil. 231, 232, 233. Alopecia Gallica. A Fume.
134. A Liniment 166. Alopecia Gallica. A Gargarisme 141. Ancles wounded. An
Oil, 197. Angina. Gargarismes 137, 138, 139, 140. An^honies fire. A Liniment
159. Anthrax. A Cataplasme, 45. Apostemes of the jaws. A Gargarisme 141.
Apostemes in the ears. A Plaster 248. Apostemes in wome^s breasts A plaster
255. Apostemes upon the stomach A Cerote 67 Apostemes cold in arms or
legs. A fomentatio^ 126 Apple of the eye enlarged. A Fomentation 123. Arm
hoales or arm pits sweatie. A Bath 34. Arms, to wit, wounds in them. A
Cerote 69. Astrictiue powder for stitching of wounds. 214. ^^ Asswaging of
pain in tumors. A Cataplasme 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 51. See Pain. Augmentation
of an inflammation. A fomentation 132.
B
Baldnes. A Liniment 166. Belly wounded. A Clister 81. A Drink 101. An
Iniection 150. Biting. A Plaster 256, 257 Biting of venomous creatures. Balmes
16, 17. An Unguent 291. Biting of a mad dog. A Cataplasme 50. A Clister 80. A
Drink 107. A Plaster 256. Black balm of Banesters. 5 Bladder wounded. An
Iniection 150. Blood stanching. A Powder 210, 211, 212, 215, 223. Blood bruised
under the skin A Plaster ^60. Bones foul to cleanse them, A cerote 71. a
water 351 Bones broken: a cerote 71. Bones broken by gunshot: a wound drink
90. Botium or Bronchoc^le: a powder inwardly to spend it away by stool, 221. A
Potion ^o purge^ 224. Brannie skales or skurfe in the head. A Bath 29. A
Liniment 170. Breasts of women swelled. 45. vlcerated. A Cataplasme 51. For
sephyros in them. A Cerote 60. See women's breasts. Breast wounded: a drink 101
Breast vlcerated. An Unguent 304. Bruses. A Liniment. 162 Bruised wounds. A
Cataplasme 50 Bronchocele. 46, 47. Bubo venereus. A Cataplasme 48. A Cerote 63.
A Lotion 180. A plaster to maturate 252. Bubo pestiferous. A Cataplasme 44, 54
Bubo, to digest the humor. An Elect 116. Bubo lurking. A Fomentation ^24. Also
when it appears. A Fomentation Ibid. Beginning of an inflammation. A
Fomentation 132 Burning^ A Liniment 170, 171. An vng. 301, 306, 317, 332.
Burning of the urine. An ^niection 156.
C
Cancers. A Cerote 61.76 Cancers. An inward cure 108.120. Cancers An oil
199.201 Cancer. A Powder to be given inward and outward 223 Cancer. A Linim.
168.165 Cancer. An Unguent 306. 337. A Water 346.351. Cancer not vlcerated. An
Elect 115. A Potion 224 Cancerous ulcers: a Balm 7 A Plaster 268. vng 298.
299 303. 304. 307. A Water 342. Carbuncle. A catapl. 44.45. Carbuncles to
mollify them. A Fomentation 133. Carbunculous pustule. A Powder 209. Caruncle.
An vng. 331.335 336. An Iniection 156. 157. Cataracts. Vng. de Alabastro 333
Cauterise, a bleeding vein potentially 57. Chinkes, or chappes in the hands.
An Vng 318. Cicatrizing: a Powder 214 218.219. A pl 275.280. Cicatrizing a
wound or ulcer A Cerot^ 78 Cicatrizing of ulcers. A water 353.355. Clensing a
wound or ulcer. A Cerote 78 Cliftes or chappes about the hands or f^et: ^ water
342 Clensing a foul bone. A Ce^^te 71 Coddes swe^led: a catapl. 48 Coddes with
tumors in them A Plaster 250.251. Cold Apostemes in arms or legs. A Foment
126. Cold and windy tumors. A Balm 1. A Catapl. 37. Cold tumors. An
Embrocation 121. A Catapl. 40.41. A Foment. 131 Choler flowing to a wound. A
Clister 80 Collicke. A Balm. 17 Comforting a painful wou^d A Cataplasme 49
Comforting a fractured member. A Cerote 72 Comforting the sinews. A Cerote 75
Comforting nature after sweats and purgations 118 Comforting weak members A
plaster. 285 Comforting contused wounds An vng. 336 Comfort wounds and ulcers
in healing: a Fomen. 127 Consolidating. A Plaster. 260 261 Contracted members
A ^ath. 33. A Fume 135.136 Contusions. A Linime^t 162 Contusion in the head. A
Cerote 70 Contusions in the flesh of fall or stripe: cataplasme 50 Contused
wounds. A Cataplasme 50. A Digestive 113. An unguent 336^ Contused blood making
a bunch in the flesh. A Fomentation. 127 Co^uulsions: a Lin. 165.176. Corrosiue
ulcers. A Fomentation 129. A water 350. Corrosiue Vn^ue^ts 305.330 Crampe. A
Balm 17.19 A Bath 32. An oil 202. A purging Decoction 228 Crampe in wounded
persons Electuaries 117
D
Deafness. A Plaster 286 Debilitie of the eyesight. A Bath 34. Dislocations
or luxations A Plaster 269.270 272. Dissoluing hard knots and ga^glious
tumors: a Cerot. 69 A Plaster 285. Dissoluing a contusion. A Fomentation 127.
Dissoluing wind. A Fomentation 130. Distemperatenes of wounds An Vng. 311.
Dogs biting that is mad. A Catapl. 56. A Clister 80. A plaster 256. Drawing
phlegm out of the head. A Gargar^sme 142 Drawing out splints, thorns or arrow
heads. Plasters 257, 258. Vng. 292, 298. Drying of an Ulcer. A Fomentation
129. Drying, or Desiccating Plasters 279, 280. Dura Matter to defend it from
putrefaction. An Unguent 290.
E
Ears wormie, or vlcerated. Iniections 154. A Liniment 171. Ears pained. A
Liniment 171. Ears impostumed. A Plaster 248. Eating down proud flesh or
putrified. Corosiue powder 216, 217, 219.220. Edges of wounds swelled and
diste^pered. An Unguent 311. Eye sight debilitate or weakened. A Bath 34. Eye
sight to preserve it. A Powder to be eaten 221. Eyes inflamed and painful. A
Cataplasme 53. A Water 339. Eyes, to comfort and help^ them against flux of
humors. A Collerie 83. An Vng. 333. Eyes containing mat^er between Cornea and
Vueae. A Collerie 83, 84. Eyes read and running. A Collerie 84. A Plaster
280. Eyes Opthalmia in them. A Collerie 84. Eyes having bloody suffusion in
them. A Collerie 85. Eyes being wounded. A Collerie 85. An vng. de Alabastro
333. A water 345 Eyes, to clear the sight. A Collerie 87. An unguent 334. Eyes
that are watring. A Defensatiue 112. Eyes that have suffusion in them. A
Fomentation 123. Eyes that have their apple overmuch enlarged. 123 Eyes
diversely affected. Water of all sorts 346, 349, 351, 352, 354, 358.
Erisypelas. A Cataplasme 53. A Liniment 161. Erisypilas Phlegmonodes. A Potion
to purge 224. Erosion, or fretting of the bowels, in cure of Alopecia Gallica.
A Clister 81 Escars, to remove them. A Digestive 114. Excoriations in the
mouth of Lues Venerea. A Garga^isme 145. Excoriations. An vng 323.
F
Face that has pustules or spots. A water 341. Face that has morphew or
spots. An oil 202. Falling of hair. 29. A Liniment 163, 164, 167, 168.
Fellon, a tumor so called. A Cataplasme 53, 54. A Plaster 249, 250. Feet,
tumors in them A ce^rote 67. Wounds in them A Cerote 69. An Oil 197. Feet
luxated. A Plaster 271. Filthy ulcers. A water 352. Fingers, tumors in them.
A cerote 67. Fistulaes, to mortify them. A ruptorie 56, 57. Fistulaes. A
collerie 86. An vng. 311, 320. An oil 186, 199, 201. A pl. 2^7. Fistulaes.
Drinks to cure them 104, 106, 107, Fistulous Dispositions of wounds in the
breast. A Drink 102. Flank swelled: See Bubo Venereus. Phlegm drawing out of
the head. A gargarisme 141 Flesh, to increase it in ulcers: a cerote 71. Flesh,
to rebate or take it away by corosiue powders 216, 217, 219, 220. Flesh that
is proud or superfluous: a water 357. Flowing of humors to any part: an vng.
330. Flux of choler to a wound: a ^lister 80. Flux of blood: a powder, 210,
211, 212, 21^, 223. Fractures. Cerotes 71, 72. Fracture in Coccyx. A Plaster
272. Fracture in the skull: a plaster 263, 271. To prove whether it be a
fracture, or no: a plaster 264. Fractured members to comfort them. A Cerote
72. A Lotion or Bath. 182. A plaster 269 270.271 French Pockes. Bathes 35 A
water. 343. Fretting or erosion of the bowels in the cure of Alopecia Gallica.
8 Fundament swelled. A Cataplasme 48 Fundament slipped down. A plaster. 254
Fundament sore of the pocks A water 342.
G
Ganglious tumors: Cerote. 60 a plaster. 242.243. Gangrae^a: a De^ensatiue 109
a Fomentation 132 a plaster 246. an vng 305 Glandulous tumors: a plaster
239.240. Gleeting humor of the tendons: an unguent. 290. Gleeting humor of
wounds in joints. Vng. 338. Gunshot wounds: a Balm. 9.10. Iniections 148.149.
150. an unguent 334 Gowt: a Balm 23. a Cerot. 74, 75, 76, 78. an vng. 337 an
oil. 202, 204. a Plaster 272, 277, 278. Gowte in the hands: a Fomentation 131
Gutta rosacea: a water 352
H
Hands, tumors in them: a Cerote 67 Hands, wounds in them: a Cerote 69. Hard
tumors: a plaster 237 244 Hard edged ulcers: a plaster 284 Hardness of
sinews: A Balm 25. A Bath 22.33. a plaster 283. an vng. 327 Hardness about
a wound. an Oil. 194 Hardness in wome^s breasts A plaster 248. Head, wounds
therein: A Balm. 19.22. a plaster. 258.259.261. an vng. 296. a powder 213
214. Head contused: a plaster. 261.262. Head, wounds therein: a Ce^ote. 69
Head contused: a Cerote 70 Head wounds: a drink 100 101.102. an vng. 294. Head
pained in Lue Venerea: an Embr^catio^ 122 Hair that falls. a Bath. 29 30. a
Liniment 163. 164, 167, 168. A Lotion. 180. Hair to cause it to grow: a
Liniment 166 Heat in an ulcer to extinguish it: a water 357 Hemrhoydes: a Bath
26^ a Cerote. 65. an vng. 288. a Fomentation 126 Hemrhoydes, to mitigate their
pain: a plaster 251 252. To stay them: an unguent 308 Hernia intestinalis: a
plaster 247.248. Hernia Humoralis: a plaster. 249 Hernia Aquosa: a plaster.
251.284 Hydrocele: Ibid. A Cataplasme. 52 Herpes creeping: An Embrocation. 121.
A plaster repercussiue and desiccatiue. 244 Hollow wounds: a powder. 209. a
water. 355.358 Hollow ulcers: an oil. 200 a water. 352. Huckle bone
vlcerated: A Collerie 87 Huckle bone pained: a Fomentation. 130. See S^^atica.
Humors flowing to the eyes: a plaster. 280.
I
Jaws apostumated: a Gar^garisme 141 Incarning or causing flesh in ulcers: a
Cerote^ 71. A Collerie. 87. a powd 210 Inflammations: Cataplasmes 36, 37, 38,
39, 52 To prevent it in a wound: A Balm 18. Inflammation: a Bath. 26 a
plaster. 246 an unguent 288, 323, 332. Inflammation of the eyes to assuage
their pain: a Cataplasme. 53 Inflammations, to repel them. A Cataplasme. 54 A
Cerote. 66 67 77 Inflammations in their beginning, or augmentation: a
Fomentation. 132. ^ a Liniment. 158. Inflammation of the throat and mouth: a
Ga^g 140. Inflammation of Uvula: A Gargarisme Ibid. Inflamatio^ in wome^s
breasts A Liniment. 178 Joints wounded: A Balm 19 20. A Cerote 70. An unguent.
338. Joints pained: A Liniment. 177. An oil. 203 Joints, ulcers in them: an
unguent 311, 331. Itch: a Bath 27.28. a Liniment 164, 168, 169. an unguent 290,
300, 323. Itching ulcers: a water 343, 349. Itch of Lues Venerea. Baths 35.
Itch in the purse of the testicles: a foment. 132. Itch, and mattrie scabs: an
oil 204.
K
Kernelly knots, to wast the^: a Drink 88. Knobbes in the flesh: a Cerote 60.
Knobs in the face: an vng. 307. Knottes: a plaster 239, 240 241, 242, 243.
L
Lamenesse of members: a Bath 33. Lamenesse after the gowte: a Liniment 176.
Lamenes by contraction and resolution of sinews: a Liniment 177, 179. Legs
that are stiff: a Lotion 189. Leprosy: a Bath 31. Lips wounded: a powder
214. Lousy disease: a Bath 31. a Liniment 176. Lues venerea: Bathes 35. a
water 343, 349. an vngue^t 325, 326, 327, 328. Lues Venerea: a lenitiue potion
for delicate bodies 225. Also purging potions and decoctions 226, 227, 228.
Lues Venerea to purge by Pills 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236. Luxations or
dislocations: 269, 270, 271, 272.
M
Mad dogs biting: a cataplasme 50. a Drink 107. a Plaster 256. an unguent
291. Maligni^ie of a canker, to correct it. 108.120. Malignant ulcers and
wounds a plaster 268, 281, 286. Malign scab: an vng. 326. Malum mortuum: a
Bath 31. Maturating of tumors: a Cataplasme 43, 44, 48. a Cerote 66. Maturate
Apostemes: an Embrocation 121. Maturatiue^ Liniment. 159 Maturating in a cold
cause a plaster 246. Maturating tumors in women's breasts: a plaster 246.
Members lamed: a Bath 33 Members weak and consuming: a Cerote 73. Members
contracted: a ^ume 135, 136. Members weak: a Liniment 172, 177. a Plaster
285. Members consumed: a Liniment 172, 177. Memory that is weak: a Balm 17.
Mollifying of tumors: a cerote 76 a Liniment 160 Mollifying: a Clister 79.
Mollifying a Carbuncle: a Foment^ 133. Mollifying hard tumours^ plasters 237,
244, 246. 273, 275, 282, 283. Morphew and spots in the face: an oil 202.
Mortefie a Fistula: a ruptorie 56, 57. Mouth vlcerated: a Balm 7. an vngu.
312. a water 340, 341, 348. Mouth inflamed: a Gagarisme 140. Mouth vlcerated:
Gargarismes 142, 143. Iniectiiections 155. Mundifying in the cure of a a node:
a cerote 59. Mundifie ulcers: a Collerie 87. an oil 201. an vng. 297, etc.
N
Navel going forth: a Clister 79. Neck swelled: a catapl. 46 Neck wounded: an
oil 196 Nodes: a Cerote 59, 60. Plasters 239, 240, 241, 242, 243. Nose
wounded: a powder 215. Nose vlcerated by the pocks, a fume 135. Numnesse: a
Balm 19. a Liniment 177, 179.
O
Oedema: Cataplasmes 37. a fomentation 123. Oedematous tumors: an Embrocation
121. a plaster. 245. a Lininiment 159, 178. Open^ng of Apostemes: a Ruptorie
56. Liniments 159.178. Opthalmia: Colleries 84, 85.
P
Palsy in wounded persons. Balmes 15, 17, 19, 24 an Electuarie. 117 Palsy in
members. A Liniment^ 177 Palsy. a purging Decoction 228 Pannicles of the
brain to restore them after wounding A Liniment^ 168 Pain, Catapl^smes. 39. A
Liniment. 173, 174. A plaster. 274, 275, 276. an vng. 310, 311, 332. Pain, to
prevent it in a wound. A Balm. 18 Pain in wounds, to assuage it. Cataplasmes.
49, 51, 52. A Liniment. 175. An oil. 204. vng. 294, 312. Pain in the joints.
A Cerote. 74, 75, 76. Pain in ulcers. A Cerot 77 78. Liniments. 175, 165. a
pl. 273. vng. 295.318. Pain of the head in lue venerea. An Embrocation. 122. a
Liniment 175 Pain in the huckle bone: a Fomentation. 130 Pain in Erysipelas:
a Liniment 161 Pain in the ears: a Liniment 171 Pain of luxations or bruses
a plaster. 271 Pain in the joints: a Liniment. 177. a plaster. 276 277, 278,
279. an vng. 313, 337. Pain in the joints of Lues Venerea: an oil. 203. a
plaster. 243, 272. an unguent. 328.329 Pain in a Carbuncle: a plaster. 244
Pain in the huckle bone: a plaster. 284 Pain in any place: a plaster 285
Pains of the pockes: a water. 343 Phlegmon, to repel it: a Cataplasme 54
Phlegmon in the beginning. a Liniment. 158. a plaister^ 245 Pimples in the
face: a Liniment. 160, 161 Polypus. a water. 350 Poisoned shot: a wound drink
90 Poisoned wounds: a plaster 257, 281 Pricks to heal them after the first
inte^tion a balm. 19 Pricking of Nerves: a Cerote. 70 Pricking of sinews: an
oil 198. a plaister^ 262 Proud flesh, or spongie flesh: a Liniment. 175. a
water. 350. Putrefaction of wounds, to cleanse it: an unguent 291 Pustules of
the pockes: Water^ 341, 34^, 343. Putrefying filthy and stinking ulcers: a
plaster 287. an unguent 336.
R
Regulus Antimonij. 206 Resolving in the cure of a Node. a Cerote. 59 Resolving
any swelling: a plaster. 247, 282, 286. Rewmes: a Balm. 17. a purging
decoction 228 Ringwormes, or Tettars: an unguent 301.328.329. Ripening of
tumors: cataplasmes^ 40, 42^ 43. Ruptures: a Bath. 27. a cerote 63.64 Rupture,
to cure them: a Dri^ke. 88. Ruptures: an Electuarie. 114. a powder. 208
Ruptures: a Fomentation. 125, 126 Ruptures: a plaster 254, 255, 285.
S
Schyrrous tumors: a plaster to mollify and resolve 237 a pill 233 Scorbutum
in the mouth. an unguent 312 Sciatica: a plaster 276, 278 284. a cerote 75
Scrofula: a plaster 342. an unguent 307. a catapl. 55 Scrofulous tumors to
spend them away by stool: a powder 220 Skull wounded or depressed: a
plaster. 261, 262, 263. Sephyros in the breasts: a cerote 61 Serpents
stinging or biting: a plaster 2^7 Shingles: a cataplasme 53 Shrinking of
sinews: an oil 203 Sinews stiff or hard: a Bath 33. an vng. 327 Sinews
wounded: a balm. 19, 21, an oil. 197, 198 199. Sinews harned: a balm 25 a
Bath 32 Sinews, to assuage pain in them: a cerote 75 Sinews pricked: a
plaster 202. To strengthen them unguent 327 Scabbes with matter: Oil 204. a
purging decoction 228. an vng. 300, 301, 326 Scabbes of Lues Venerea: Baths 27,
28, 35. vng. 328 Fume 134, 135. Skabbes: a Liniment 164, 169. a wa^er 350.356.
Ska^d head: a Water 340, 342. Liniment 165-171 See Tinea. Skalding: a liniment
170. Skales or skurfe in the head 29. a Liniment 170. Sleep, to provoke it: an
Electuarie 119. Spongie flesh, to consume it: a causticke 57^ Spongie flesh, to
abate it: a Liniment 175. Spots in the face: an Oil 202. Spots in the eyes: a
Water 346. Spots of lue venerea: a water 341, 343. Squinantia: Gargarismes 137,
138, 139, 140. Stanching of blood: a powder 210, 211, 212, 215. Stench of a
Canker to stay it: an oil 207. an vng. 337. Stitching of wounds: a powder
astrictiue 214, 223. Stifnes of legs: a lotion 183 Stiffness of sinews: an
unguent 337. Stomach whereon is an Aposteme: a cerote 67. Stomach, diseased
after green wounds, or long ulcers 118, 119. Strains: a Cataplasme 53 a
Liniment 179. Strengthening nature in the cure of a wound: a drink 97. Struma: a
cataplasme 55. Suffusion in the eyes: a Fo^mentation 123. Suppurating of
tumors: cataplasmes 40. Sweat of the arm holes: a Bath 34. Swelling in the
coddes of a cold cause: a plaster 251 Swelling in the throat: a powder 209.
Side wounded: a clister 81.
T
Te^dons wounded: a Balm 19. Tettars: an vng. 301, 307, 318, 328, 329. a Water
or Lac virginis 346. Thorn or prick: a plaster 257, 258^ Throat swelled: a
cata^plasme 46, 47. a powder 209. a potion 224. Throat inflamed: a Gargarisme
140, 141. Throat wounded: an Iniection 150. Tinea capitis: a plaster 269
Tongue vlcerated: a powder 222. Toothach: a Balm 17. Tumors of cold and
windy matter: a Balm 1. a plaster 256. Tumors cold: cataplasmes 37, 40.
Tumors, to mollify, dissolve, and assuage them: a cataplasme 41. Tumors in
women's breasts: a cataplasme 45. Plasters 248, 252, 255. Tumors in the flank.
See Bubo Venereus. Tumors in the fundament: a cataplasme 45. T^mors in the
cods: a plaster 250, 251, 253. Tumor in the throat: a plaster 153. Tumors
happening in wounds an unguent 312.
V
Veins that bleed: a caustic 57. Venomous biting: a Balm 16. Venomous
wounds: an Unguent 288, 289. Vertebres broken: a defensatiue 111. Virulent
ulcers: a fomentation 129. Virulent and corrosiue Ulcers: a potion 225. a water
350. Ulcers: Balmes 7, 14, 22. Ulcers in the legs: a Bath 32. a Secret 316.
Ulcers in the yard: a cataplasme 51. See Yard. Ulcers virulent: a cerote 77
Ulcers generally: a cerote 77, 78. Plasters 265, 266 267, etc. Ulcers in the
eyes: a colle^ie 87. Ulcers of the huckle bone: a collerie 87. Ulcers, to
mundifie and incarne them: a collerie 87 Ulcers, Decoctions or Diet drinks
103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108. Vlcerate foul bodies: a purging Decoction very
effectual 229. a Pill 233, 234. Ulcers: Defensatiues 110. Ulcers of Lues
Venerea: a Fume 134. an Unguent 296, 297. Vlce^ed mouths: Gargarismes 142,
143, 144, 145.146. Ulcers: Iniections 151. Lotions 181, etc. Oil 192, 193,
200, 201.205, 206. Powder 218. Ulcers in the tongue: a powder 222 Vndimia: a
cerote 65. a Fomentation 126 Vomiting blood by reason of a bruise: an Electuary
116 Vomiting in wounded or vlcerate persons, to stay it: a Fomentation 128
Uvula fallen down: a Gargarisme 141 Uvula inflamed: a clister 79
W
Warts: a Liniment 158 Warts on the yard: a powder 222 Watrie excoriations: a
water 348, 357 Watrie Rupture: a Fomentation 126 Watrie tumor: a catapl. 49
Weakness or debilitie of the eyesight: Bath 34 Weakness of memory: a
Balm 17^ Weak and consuming members: a cerote 73 Weakness of a member
wounded: a Liniment 172. a plaster 285 Web in the eye: a Water 346 Weeping
of the sinews, as some call it, or gleeting humor: an unguent 290 Wennes: a
plaster 238^239 Windy tumors: a Balm. 1 a plaster 245.256 Windy Rupture: a
fomentation 125 Windiness: an Embrocation 122. a Foment^ 130 Women's breasts,
swelling or ranckling: a cataplasme 405. vlcerated: a cataplasme 51. a cerot
60^ an vng. 304. Women's breasts not cancerated: a cerote 60, 62, 63. For
Sephyros in the^. 61 Women's breasts inflamed and hard by crudding of the
milk: a Linime^t 178 Women's breasts hardened: a plaster 248 Worms: a Balm
17 Worms in the ears: an iniection. 184.171 Wounds: Balmes of worthy choice.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Wounds in
any part: a cerote 68, 69 Wounds in the head: a cerote 69 Wounds in the joints:
a cerote 70. an vng. 338 Wounds in the belly and side: a clister 81. Wounds,
to cure them by drinks. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96^ To prove whether
they be curable, or no. Drink 95. Wounds: De^en^atiues 109 110.111.112
Wounds by gunshot, or otherwise^ Iniections 148, 149, 150. See gunshot.
Wounds: Lotions 181, etc. Oils 184, etc. Wounds in the neck or throat: an
Oil 196 Wounds in the anckles and feet: an Oil 197 Wounds in the sinews
and joints: an Oil 197, 198, 199. Wounds: a powder 209, 210, 212, 213. Wounds
in the head: a powder. 213, 214. a plaster. 258, 259. Wounds in the nose: a
powder 215 Wounds poisoned: a plaster 257. an vng. 288, 289. Wounds in pockie
persons: an unguent 289 Wounds with burning: an unguent 332 Wounds in the
eyes: an unguent de Alabastro 333 Wrenches: a cataplasme 53
Y
Yard vlcerated: a Balm 7. a cataplasme 51. a clister. 82 a collerie 86 an
almo^d milk 106. a Fomentation. 130. an Iniectio^ 155 a powder 219. Another
that does exiccate, incarnate, and agglutinate 219 a Potion 225. a plaster to
be applied to the reins. 269^ an unguent 298.308 a water 354. Yard that has
wartes: a powder 222 Yssues, to keep the^ open 284
FINIS.
Faults escaped in this Book.
In the 2. page of Master Clowes his Epistle 26. line, varitie read verity.
Page 59^ linea 6. cymini. p. 63. lin. 25. and a me particula etc. p 259. lin.
6. gummi. Page 353-lin. 21.22. put out these words, the ulcers being dried.
354-lin. 22. viol. 357. lin. 13. glass still. lin. 14. water by a etc.


