A MERRY DIALOGVE, Between BAND, CVFFE, and RVFFE: Done by an excellent WIT,
And Lately acted in a show in the famous University of CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Miles Partrich, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleetstreet, near unto Chancerielane. 1615.

A Merry Dialogue betvveene BAND, CVFFE, and RVFFE.
ACTORS. Band, Cuffe, and Ruff.
Enter BAND and CVFFE. Band. VFFE, where art thou?


Cuffe. Here at hand.


Band. Where is this Cuffe?


Cuffe Almost at your Elbow.


ENTER RVFFE. Ruff OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou had been worn
out of date by this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least.


Band. What? do you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know
that there be men of fashion in place, as well as your self.


Cuffe. Good Band, do not fret so.


Band. A scurvie shag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a
Freshman, come up hither to learn fashions and seek to expel me?


Cuffe. Nay: if you be so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.


Ruff. Sir, I Will pull down your Choler from you.

He iustles B. and C. stays him.
Cuffe. It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a
falling Band.


Ruff. Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, I Will make you limber enough
before I have done with you.


Band. No, Hodge Peake, its more then you can do.


Ruff. Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another
place, and I will make cut-worke of you.


Band. There Is never a Spanish Ruff of you all can do it.


Cuffe. Sfoot, if these two should go together by the cares and hurt one
another, Ruff would be in a fine plight: would he not?


Ruff. Well, Band, look to thy self, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee
roundly.


Band. Lace me? thou would be laced thy self, Ruff, for this is the very
truth, thou art a plain Knave.


Cuffe. If they talk of lacing, I were best look about my self.


Ruff. Dare thou meet me in the field?


Band. In the field? why? thou art but an effeminate fellow, Ruff; for all
thou art so well set: but at what weapon?


Ruff. Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou will, I scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle work.


Band. Sfoot, thou shall know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.


Ruff. A Soldier?


Cuffe. Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?


Ruff. Where did you serve? in the Low Countries?


Cuffe. It may be so; for I am sure he is a Holland Band.


Band. Where I have served, it is no matter, but I am sure I have been pressed
often.


Cuffe. Truly, his Landresse will bear him witness thereof.


Ruff. Press me no pressings, I Will make you know that Ruff is steeled to the
back, if I had my stick here, you should feel it.


Band. Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band
but a hemme, and he will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and
hour of our meeting.


Ruff. The place, the Paper mills, where I will tear thee into rags, before I
have done with thee: the time, to morrow in the afternoon about one: but do
you hear? we will fight single, you shall not be double, Band.


Cuffe. Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.


Ruff. But do you hear? once more do not say at our next meeting you forgot
the time.


Cuffe. No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then
he: for I am sure he has always at the least a dozen Clocks about him.


Ruff. Farewell then.


Band. Then farewell.


Cuffe. Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not
what fighting means: a couple of white liuered fellows, your Landresse will
make you both as white as a clout it she list; If you lack beating, she will
beat you I Will warrant you, she will so clap your sides together, that they shall
be beaten out in once or twice ha^dling; why? I have known her leave her mark
behind her a whole week after, sheell quickly beat you Black and Blew, for
I am sure she will scarce wash white before she starch.


Band. Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.


Cuffe. Well, remember your sclues and Misteris Stichwell, one to whom you have
been both beholding in your days.


Band. Who? Mistress Stichwell, by this light I know her not.


Cuffe. No, nor you neither.


Ruff. Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew-starch in Christendom.


Cuffe. I thought so, why its the Semster, one that both you had been undone
had it not been for her, but what talk you of undoing? I say Mister is
Stichwell the Semster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little do you
regard her, but it is the common custom of you all, when you come to be so
great as you are, you forget from what house you come.


Ruff. Sfoote Ruff cares not a pin for her.


Band. Nor Band a button.


Cuffe. Well Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her,
you know she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you
again, it is a hundredth to one, if she hang you not both up, for she has got
strings already.


Ruff. Meet me, if thou dare?


Band. The place the Paper-mils, the hour to morrow at one.


Cuffe. Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as
little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I
do not, say, Cuffe is no man of his hands.


Ruff. Alas poor shrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands.


Cuffe. If you go, you shall never say that Cuffe came of a sleeuelesse
errand, I Will bind your hands (I warrant you) for striking.


Band. Say and hold.


Ruff. Remember the Paper-mils.


Cuffe. And you be so chollericke, I Will even pin you both in, as soon as I
come home: can you not decide the quarrel between your selves without a
field? I had thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a
horrible Puritan the other day, a very precise Ruff.


Ruff. Hang him, base Rascal: would he not make any man mad, to see such a
-- I durst not scarce peep out before Collar came to Town, now to swagger thus.


Cuffe. Come, you shall be friends, Band.


Band. Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threed-bare fellow,
I scorn, but my man Collar should go as well as he every day in the week,
and be friends with him.


Ruff. Thy man Collar? thy Master, thou would have said, I am sure he is
thy vp-holder.


Cuffe. Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands, make rags;
Rags make Paper; Paper makes Past-board; and Past-board makes Collar; and I
think that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master.


Ruff. Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, I Will cut him in iags,
let me but claspe him, and I Will make him for stirring.


Cuffe. But you shall not fight: have you not Friends and Neighbors enough to
end this controversy, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the
thread of your lives? we will have none of that, come choose you an Vmpire, Band,
for it shall be so.


Band. Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.


Cuffe. Ruff, you shall be content.


Ruff. If I shall then, I must, let him name him.


Band. If I may choose, I Will have Master Handkerchiefe.


Cuffe. Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sniveling fellow, and he will wipe
your Nose of all, if you put the case to him, but what say you to Shirt?


Ruff. He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before has
been much beholding, they were joined a long time together in friendship.


Cuffe. Why, then go to Master Cap, the headman of the Town.


Band. No, I deny that, he is a very bad Justice, you may have him wrought on
any side for monic.


Ruff. I Will tell you what, then we will go to my Lord Corpus himself.


Band. He is not in Town.


Ruff. He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Footeman in Town.


Cuffe. Here Is a do with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed I would you were
both hanged about his neck for me, but I see, this strife will never be ended,
till I be Arbitrator my self, you know, I am equally allied to you both:
shall I be Moderator between you?


Band and Ruff. Content.


Cuffe. Well then, Ruff shall be most accounted of amongst the Clergy, for
he is the grave Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for
him, he has such a deal of setting, and they love standing very well.) As for
you, Band, you shall be most made of amongst the young Gal ants, although
sometimes they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not otherwise; how ever, you
need not regard the gid die headed multitude, let them do as they list,
sometimes respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the
Counsailor, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging Master
Worths to be equal, they shall prefer neither, but use the kindness of you
both, wearing both a Band and a Ruff; how say you, are you both content?


Band and Ruff. We are.


Cuffe. Then go before me to the next town, and I Will follow after with a Band
of your friendship drawn, which I hope, these Gentlemen will seal with their
hands.


Exeunt Band and Ruff. Cuffe. Claw me, and I Will claw thee, the proverb goes,
Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes, Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors
hands remain, Let hands clap me, and I Will Cuffe them again.


FINIS.

