TWO Most remarkable and true Histories, which happened this present year, 1619.

The one relating how God most miraculously restored to health Elizabeth
Goossens Taets, dwelling in the Long street near St. Georges Church in
Amers-ford by Vtrecht in the Low Countries, the 29. of August last, after five
and twenty years great inabilitie and weakness of body.

The other showing how a marvelous deformed Monster was found in the belly of
a Cow which was killed by John Vandel Malt-man of Amersford aforesaid, the
first day of October last. 1619.

Both which may serve to inuit us to serious repentance and unfeigned amendment
of life, in this wicked and decaying age.



Printed at London by G. E. for DANIEL SPEED. 1620.

A strange and wonderful Relation, of Elizabeth Goossens Taets, dwelling in
the long Street by Saint Georges Church in the Town of Amers-foord by Vtrecht
in the Low Countries, who after 25. years inhability and weakness of her
members, was miraculously restored to her former health, the 29. of August
last. 1619.
Our Savior Jesus Christ, by the mouth of his holy Servants, has now long
ago foretold that in these latter days many signs should appear in the
Sun, Moon, Stars and Creatures above; and also before his second coming,
many Miracles should here be seen on earth below. Have we not felt famine and
pestilence in those years bypast? And do we not hear rumors of Wars
every day, and the rising of Nation against Nation throughout all Europe? How
many Sects of Religion do daily break up, to the overthrow of the simplicity
and sincerity of the Gospel, and offense of weak ones to stumble at? The
Wicked in this respect may justly tremble and quake, who never intend to break
off their sins by repentance, but putting off the evil day from them, lie
wallowing in the puddle of their filthy pleasures, being past all feeling, are
frozen in the dregs of the unfruitful works of darkness: as contrarily
the Elect have matter to rejoice, and lift up their heads, for the day of their
Redemption draws near; For does not daily experience teach us the
accomplishment of all the tokens which should precede the great day of the
Lord? And now of late what a great blazing Star looked down upon the Earth,
out of the Firmament, portending no doubt some great alteration of state, and
punishment by the Lords usual weapons of fire, sword and plague, of the
stubborn and obstinate rebellion of the wicked in so great a light of the
Gospel? The Lord has called of late sundry Princes and great Personages to
their rest, from these troublesome times: The rising of it inclining in the
South-east over the House of Austria, and other parts under that Climate, has
brought such effusion of blood, murdering robbing, ransacking of Cities,
Towns and Countries with it, which are ominous presages of greater and more
fearful evils to come. For all these things we cease not to provoke the
holy One of Israel to wrath; yet God, who is rich in mercy, spreads forth the
large beams of his fatherly bountifulness and goodness on the penitent, that
either the ungodly may turn away from their evil ways, or then to make them
inexcusable. Christ in the days of his flesh wrought many Miracles, in healing
incurable diseases, whereof the Lords records in the new Testament makes
mention abundantly; for the which the godly and well disposed glorifieth the
Lord, but others wickedly affected do misconstrue the action, imputing it to
the work of Satan, or else mock and calumniate the same. The hand of the Lord
is not shortened now among us upon whom the ends of the world is come.

In this Amers-ford in the Low Countries, three miles distant from Vtrecht, an
extraordinary form of visitation miraculously befell a young Maiden, named
Elizabeth Goossens dwelling near by the principal Church Saint George, whose
father and mother are both yet alive, honest and well esteemed persons, of good
name and credit in the city, his name is Goossen Cornelison Taets.

The said Maiden in her infancy was stricken with lamenesse, that the Lord
questionless might manifest his power and goodness in her, and continued a
criple 25. years, so that she could neither go, sit, nor stand, but was
carried hither and thither by the help of others wheresoever her business
was, which all the inhabitants of the City can faithfully witness: wherefore
toward the end of the foresaid years, she could not for the space of 28.
weeks eat or taste any thing to any purpose, but continued in prayers and
supplications night and day, repeating these words: Thou Son of David,
Creator of heaven and earth, receive me into thy Kingdom, or else give me
patience and comfort in this my heavy and pitiful disease.

Wherefore, behold what an unexpected relief was sent unto her: For this
present year, 1619 the 28. of August last, at night between eleauen and
twelve a clock, according to her accustomed manner, she poured out earnest
prayers unto God, her hands stretched out unto heaven, (for she had no use of
her knees,) saying, (as her self afterward confessed before great multitudes)
Thou God all-sufficient, that both can and wilt deliver thine own, according
to thy pleasure, loose me from this earthly tabernacle. Lying thus lifting up
her heart unto God in effectual prayer, lo, suddenly the chamber shined as
bright within, as if it had been sunshine, and she thought she saw before
her bed, a yongman in a long white robe, who took her by the right hand,
lifted her up kindly up, and spoke unto her with a soft and sweet voice,
saying, Arise in the name of God, and placed her on a chair hard by, taking
her with his right hand, by the pulse of her right arm, looking always
smilingly upon her, whose long shining robe hung very low, and covered the
ground: and the more she looked upon him, the more beautiful, fair and
comely he seemed to be, yet within a quarter of an hour, the chamber lost all
the brightness, and the yongman vanished away from her. Wherefore the Maid
after a loud shrike fell in a sound, which noise when her mother heard, she
came out her bed greatly aghast, and finding her daughter lying upon the ground
was exceedingly amazed: and after her daughter had recovered her spirits, asked
how she came to that place, who with all reverence told her parents what had
happened unto her. Wherefore the next day after being the 29. of August last, she
who could neither stir, nor stand nor go for the space of 25. years, went
lustily up and down the house without any staff, and the third day after,
walked apace into her mothers garden, without any supply and help of staff at
all, for which, the Maid, with her Parents, and whole congregation, with as
many in the City as did know her (for great was the number of them who did
frequent her company, after the miraculous recovery of her health) did praise,
give thanks, and magnify Gods great power and goodness, who had looked of
his unspeakable favor upon the low estate and grievous sickness of this his
poor handmaid.

The true Relation of a strange deformed Monster, found in the belly of a Cow
which was killed in the aforesaid Town of Amers-ford, the first day of October
last. 1619.
IN this present year of our Lord, 1619. the first of October, in the province
of Vtrecht in the aforementioned Amersford, dwells a man very wealthy, and of
good reputation among his neighbors, named John Vandael, by trade a Malt-man,
who for his own provision, caused a Cow to be killed, in whose intrailes this
most deformed and fearful Monster was found, and the same was laid without
the gates of the City upon a dunghill, to which wonderful and fearful
spectacle the whole City, both young and old, rich and poor, came to behold:
for it was in shape as follows.

The head was like an Otters head, but rounder: it had the nose and mouth of a
man, but ears like unto a Dog, yet the shape of the eyes resembled much a
man's: the color of it was a fleshy color, and about the body a scarf of
flesh, the shoulders were like unto a man's to the elbow, and the privy members
not unlike.

The foreside was such as has been spoken, but behind it had a crooked
tail, out of the mouth also did hang a huge long tongue, like unto a Cow or
some other beast of that kind. The feet thereof very like unto a hogs, and
the mouth was all grown about with hair. Moreover, the knees were like two
Pompions, fine and round.

And now because I thought it very fit the world should take notice of this
unnatural and extraordinary work, I have set here before your eyes as perfect
a deliniation thereof, as possibly upon such a sudden I could. The Lord make
us fervent in weldoing, watching and praying, striving to go in at the narrow
gate, that we may set our affections on things that are above, and not on
things below: for these terrible spectacles if there were no other thing, may
be sufficient to drive us away from the love of this earthly and transitory
pilgrimage: and he give us grace to abhor monstrous sins, which procure
these monstrous spectacles, and will bring upon us more fearful judgments,
unless we repent betimes.

Englished according to the Copy printed at Vtrecht, by John Amelison, at the
sign of the golden ABC. 1619.

Confirmed by the testimony of
Cornelius Garrets of London. and Cornelius Johnson of London. Mr. Jacques
Hunscot, of Amers-ford, Mr. Joel de Towers, of Amers-ford, Martin Copeman, of
Amers-ford, John Smeires, of Amers-ford,
Vtramque historiam Belgice extare, mibique fuisse exhibitam testor, Simeon
Rutingius.

FINIS.

