LOVES COMPLAINT, FOR WANT of Entertainment:

A Sermon preached a^ PAVLES CROSS, the third of December, 1609.

By WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

printer's or publisher's device IW


LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Thomas Cambell, Knight, and the now Lord Mayor of
the famous City of LONDON, all true honor, grace and happiness be multiplied.
ALthough it be true (Right Honorable) which is commonly spoken, that great
men have many ears, and that the eyes of many are upon the rich, yet I know it
to be as true, that they have as few true friends as any, for who more
licentious and out of order, and who more incorrigibly and unreproved, walk
in wickedness then many of them? Let experience speak, and yet either the
timerousnes of their professed friends, or their own greatness, keep such as
should, far from entering into reproof of them, and such as would, withhold
themselves from it, because most commonly both they and their true friendship
find hard entertainment. I have therefore Right Honorable, (presuming upon
your kind acceptance of what I have done) made bold to dedicate this little
work unto you, that you may have that daily in your hands and before your
eyes, which once sounded in your ears. The reasons ensuing I hope will excuse
my boldness, and plead, yea, prevail for kind entertainment. For first, to
whom does it of right more belong to, then to your self, both in respect of
the place where it was preached, your attention and readiness in hearing,
(especially when you in particular were spoken to) and the matter therein
contained? which does as much, if not more, concern you then any that were
hearers there that day, both for the instigating of you to discountenance
sin, by stopping the stream and course of many gross corruptions in your
City, which GOD calls for at your hands, in respect of your place, as also
to the countenancing of good in all weldoers. Secondly, we are all through our
own in bred corruption, and the readiness of the devil to choke good things
begun, more ready not to hear, and forget having heard, then to hear:
remember, and practice what is taught, which moves me by writing to be a
Monitor to your Honor, of that I was by my mouth. Lastly your kind acceptance
of it being heard, as appeared by your speech to me, your professed resolution
to do what you might (though you could not do what you would) with your
honorable respect (as to all Ministers coming to that place so) to me,
challenges this labor only to your self. These reasons considered, I hope
(right Honorable) this Glass which I dedicate unto you without all sinister
respect, (only aiming at Gods glory therein, your good, and the good of your
renowned City,) will not only be entertained of you, but carefully looked on
by you from day to day, it will prove one of the faithfullest Monitors and
soundest friends about you, it will lie for no cause, it will not call white
black, nor black white, it will not be meal mouthed, it will not be bribed
by kindness to conceal your errors if you go awry, nor moved by unkind
dealing to exclaim of you, and say more then is true, or require more then is
your due to pay to God, and the place over which God has called you to rule,
therefore what more worthy entertainment then such a true and trusty Friend?
which not doubting of, I will cease from further troubling your Lordship with
unnecessary lines, though not cease to pray for you, that you may so walk and
prove your self a man in this your present Office, as the issue thereof may be
to the glory of God, the good of this City, and the true peace of your own
Conscience.

Your Lordships to be commanded, WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, what I was contrary to my expectation commanded to preach, I
have at the very earnest and importunate request of many, consented to be
published, therein keeping my self as near as I can to the very words I used
in the preaching of it, without addition or detraction, neither affecting
curiosity of words in the one nor the other, but truth and plainness, which
has ever proved best, and will I hope appear to every conscionable Reader to
be herein. The captious I regard not; the Pulpit is a place not for a man to
show his wit and reading in, to work upon the ear by, but the judgment;
plainness, and evidence of the spirit to wound and work upon the conscience
by, which I especially aimed at: what good it has wrought, I cease to speak
more then to God in thanksgiving: what good it may work, let thee and me
heartily desire. Show thy love to the truth by passing by (in the reading of
it) without rigid censure, what shall seem harsh unto thee, (I intended not
the pleasing, but the instructing of all therein) Give thanks to GOD for what
good is therein revealed, and help me and the Church with the benefit of thy
prayers. Farewell.

Thine in the best band William Holbrooke.

LOVES COMPLAINT for want of Entertainment.
1. Corinthians. 13.6. Love rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth.


AS the eyes of the people were fastened upon our Savior (right Honorable,
right Worshipful, men, fathers and brethren, beloved in our Lord and Savior
Christ) that they might with the more attention hear what he would say; so are
yours upon me, expecting the Subject I intend to stand upon, to answer your
expectation: wherein, understand, that to meddle directly with controversies
abroad, or amongst our selves, so often inculcated upon and travailed in, I
intend not, lest I should not say more then formerly has been said, or
trouble your ears with the same, though happily by a cunning Cook it might be
served in, in other dishes; counting it more then folly for a Physician, to
forsake his patients mortally sick at home, and to run abroad for others;
much more folly, yea and madness it self for me, a Physician of the Soul,
to leave you my auditors snorting and sleeping, yea ouerspread with sin, and
to busy my self in matters afar off, that naught or little concern you. My
intent then is at this present, to discover unto you your iniquities, whereof
you are mortally sick, and that which is worst of all, you will not be cured;
especially I intend to show unto you your want of Love, by your manifest
injustice, and want of Rejoicing in true and honest dealing and religion
toward God. Which my promise that I may make good, I will (both for your help
of memory and my better facility in speaking) observe this Method. 1. Show
the connection of this, with that which praecedeth. 2. Declare the sense of the
words in retaile and by gross. 3. Lay open the parts thereof, into which it
does divide it self: and lastly, handle the several instructions thence
arising.

For the connection of it: The Apostle in the Chapter next before going, having
laid down the several functions of men in the Church, in the last verse of
the same, Verse. 28.
in conclusion he exhorts the Corinthians, and us in them, to desire the
best gifts. Upon the hearing whereof, it seems some did or might conclude,
that so they would do, for they would strive to speak excellently, and to be
men of great knowledge, etc. and what better then these? for the better
instructing of whom, the Apostle in the three first verses of this Chapter,
g^ueth them to understand, that it is not sufficient to have these and the best
gifts, except they had love, and accordingly did use the same: which he
amplifieth by laying down particulars, as first, that it is to no end to
speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and to be without love, verse. 1.
secondly, that it is to as little purpose, to have the gift of prophesying, and
that in the largest manner and measure; yea to have faith, that is, the gift of
doing miracles, without love: thirdly, it is to no purpose for a man to be so
liberal and kind hearted, as to give all they have to the poor; and lastly
so to suffer as to be burned, without love all these profit nothing. Upon this
might some reply and say, Thou do not think us altogether inhumane and void
of love, do thou? Unto which Paul does secretly reply, You may deceive your
selves in your judgment, for every love is not the love I speak of and mean
here: and that you may not be deceived, whether your love be this yea or no,
observe whether it have the several marks and notable effects, I propound unto
your consideration, which charity (proceeding from justifying faith) has: and
to this end the Apostle from the 4. verse of this Chapter to the end of the 7.
verse, lays down a chain consisting of 14. linkes, every link whereof is a
several mark of this true love: amongst which this verse is one: so that this
verse contains a true mark of love, by which faith does work, being the
tenth link of this chain: And thus you have the conexion of it.

The sense of the words, being the second thing I promised, is to be considered
by examining the several words, comparing the translation with the original,
and the acceptance of them elsewhere in holy Writ: For the word Love, it is in
vain to stand long upon the acceptance of it, it being diversely taken in the
Scripture, the mind of the Apostle being easily perceived, that here he
means that love, which he speaks of elsewhere, saying, Faith, that is,
justifying faith, works by love: and elsewhere calls it the fruit of the
spirit, Gal. 5.22. The word translated Iniquity, is in the original (...),
which is most commonly translated Injustice, yet in the Scripture has both a
general and restrained sense, generally comprehending all sin: and so it is
taken in that 5. of the first of John, ver. 17. (...), all unrighteousness is
sin: and so does Ezra use it in his prayer, Chap. 9. ver. 6. and Dan. 9. v.
5. Restrainedly it is taken for injustice betwixt man and man, which I take to
be especially meant in this place: so you shall find it taken in the last of
the Revelation and 11. verse, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and
in the 16. of Luke, verse 8. (...), And the Lord commended the unjust steward:
or rather according to the original, the steward of injustice: so is the
simple word (...) taken for justice, that is, honest dealing betwixt man and
man. Titus 1.8. speaking of a minister, says he, he must be righteous, that is
just, which the word [holy] following shows. In the second at the 12. verse,
the grace of God teaches us that we should love, (...), righteously, that is,
justly which the word (...) following plainly shows. Now we see the
acceptance of this word in the Scripture, the Question is, how it is to be
taken in this place, unto which I Answer, though I take the second sense, to
be especially meant in this place, yet I see no reason why it may not carry
both the senses here, both which do set out the nature of Love the better, and
therefore I will take it in both senses (but specially in the latter) it being
the safest way to construe Scripture, and take it in the largest sense, when
both the drift of the holy Ghost, the sense of the original words, and the
Analogy of Faith, gainesay it not.

[But reioyceth] The word in the original is (...), rejoices together, which
some expound, does requite good dealing with good dealing, which although I do
not condemn, yet I rather cleave to this exposition by way of Antithesis to
(...), that as love does not rejoice in sinful and unjust courses, so it
rejoices to see others together with himself, to take delight in just dealing
with men, and religion toward God, fully expressing the nature of true love
both in hating and distasting of evil, as also in the loving of good, having
these effects wheresoever it is.

For the word Truth, it is diversely taken in Scripture, sometimes for the
Son of God, Ioh. 14.6. I am the way, the Truth, and the Life. Sometimes for
the word of God, Ioh. 17.17. Sanctify them with thy Word, thy Word is Truth.
Sometimes for honest dealing and true speaking, Ephesians. 4.25. Speak the truth
every man to his neighbor: where, by Truth is not only meant to speak as the
matter is, but also to deal honestly. And sometimes for religion professed,
according to the word of God, as in that of the Proverbs, Buy the Truth, but
sell it not. And 2. Ep. Ioh. ver. 4. I rejoiced when I found of thy children
walking in the Truth. Amongst the diverse acceptations whereof, I tie my self
to the two later by way of Antithesis, answering my acceptance of (...), in
the former part of the verse, and thus have you the sense of it in parcels.

Now to totalize the same, and cast it up altogether, it comes to thus much,
that that person in whom true Love is (by which faith does work, and is a
fruit of the Spirit, and by which our actions measured and performed do please
God), as he does not take delight in sin and unjust dealing, so he does on
the other side, yea it is his joy and great delight to deal justly with men,
and walk religiously toward God, in his own use, and to see others to do
the same; and thus have I performed the second branch of my promise.

3 The parts into which this verse does offer it Quid Charitas abstinet, in
these words, Love rejoices not in iniquity, that is far from Quid efficit,
in these words, but rejoices in the Truth, which love ever does. And that is
the third branch of my promise.

The fourth remains: Let us hasten thereunto, that we may see how these five
barley loaves and two little fishes, will feed so many hundreds as you be here
gathered together, or this little pitcher of oil will fill all the vessels you
have brought, pay you that it owes you and you expect, and be able
notwithstanding to stand of it self.

Out of the setting down of this mark, and setting in of this link into this
chain, by the Apostle; first showing what it does not; secondly, showing what
it does: we observe this instruction. Graces presence is sins absence, sins
absence is graces presence.
and where there is a conscionable abstinence from any evil, there is the
presence of the contrary good Which truth this with other Scriptures will make
plain unto us: for the orderly proceeding wherein, observe that this Doctrine
has two parts, and therefore requires that they be apart handled. The first,
namely that where there is any true fruit of the sanctifying Spirit of God,
there is an absence of the contrary evil, the Psalmist directly proves, in
Psalm. 34.4. saying, Eschew evil, and do good: as though he should say, evil
and good cannot stand together, thou must avoid the one before thou can do
the other; with whom the Prophet Esaias agrees, chap. 1. ver. 16. where God
teaching the delinquent Jews, what course to take to come into his favor,
which they could not do, continuing in their filthiness, and beset with the
dyrt of their sins as they were, aduertiseth them first to wash and make
themselves clean from that filthiness, sin had brought upon them, and then,
(for until that was put away, it was to no end) to seek judgment, and
relieve the oppressed, etc. Whereby he would teach them, that there could be
no true compassion and upright walking in them, except they were first
purified, and their sins abandoned, and the very self same does David
affirm in the first Psalm, the first and second verses, describing a godly
man, first, from what he does not, in the first verse; secondly, from what he
does, in the second verse; being well acquainted with the course of
sanctification, and every part of Adam, who is earth earthly, before he can be
a Son of Adam, who is heaven heavenly. Of this does the Apostle likewise
render a reason, saying, What fellowship has Christ with Belial, or light with
darkness? which speech for our present purpose, is worth the marking: for
before Christ take possession of us, and draw us to him, we are no better then
devils, ruled and swayed by the devil the Prince of the air, with whom, when
christ comes into thee, thou ceasest to have any further fellowship: the
presence of Christ is the absence of him. And again, by nature we are the
children of darkness, yea, darkness it it self. Now when light comes,
that is, the graces of Gods Spirit, the beams of the Sun of righteousness,
our darkness vanishes away as the darkness of the night, from covering the
world before the Sun; and darkness in particular places and private rooms
before a candle; which plainly concludes my doctrine, that where Christ is,
the devil is absent; in whom Christ has a foot, the devil has no pawe.

Gods Spirit, what our standing is, whether it be as we take it to be: If it
be, thou art metamorphosed, there is not that evil was in thee before,
neither art thou the man thou wast. Thou can say, I was a blasphemer, but now
by the grace of God I am that I am; I was a persecutor, but now that is far
from me; I labor more to build up the Church and increase it, then all the
rest of the Apostles. I was n^ked, but now Christ has cast his covering over
me, I went astray, but now am returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of my soul.
Which not ably meets with the mere civil honest man, that thinks to come
to heaven with his ciuility, blessing himself in his cursed estate, he is as
well as can be, he is not without the graces of Gods Spirit, no that he is
not. He has served God all his life long, he has believed ever since he was
borne, he has had a care to live honestly, and pay every man his own
(although it never came into his mind to pay God his due) he serves God after
the manner of his country, goes to the Church upon the Sabbath both to morning
and evening prayer, and when he can have leisure on the work day, if there be
any exercise, and when he can attend, he has prayers in his family (which he
takes as a work of supererogation) and what would you have him to do more?
Alas, alas poor soul, thou art led hoodwinkt in the way of perdition, what
alteration is in thee, what change, from whence do these proceed? from the
absence of the contrary evil, then all is well, if not, Know, that where there
was never any battle, there was never any conquest; and where there never was
a deprivation of evil, there never was the true entrance of the contrary good.
If thou have true knowledge, ignorance is dispelled as a cloud, and thrust out
as not worth the keeping: If thou have true faith, infidelity is driven away
and abandoned. Whereby we see what are the religious and charitable works of
the mere natural man, in truth nothing but Candida peccata, Beautiful
sins, because they arise not from the absence of the contrary evil.

O then, let every one of us that brag and boast of our sanctification, or any
fruit of the spirit, examine and try our selves, when the evil spirit went
from us. And thus much for the first part of the doctrine: the second
follows, namely: Conscionable abstinence from sin produces and brings
forth the contrary good.

The fruits of the spirit grow where sin once did, now conscionably abstained
from; which Paul's example evidently proves: For, whereas he was a persecutor
and blood sucker, of the blood of Gods Saints formerly, behold, now he is a
Paul, no such fruit grows on this tree, but the pleasant fruits of the
spirit: he is become of a persecuter, an earnest prosecuter of the Gospel; of
a blasphemer, a blesser of all such as go on in the truth of Christ, formerly
by him evil spoken of; of a foe, a fortitude to the Church; of a destroyer, an
infatigable builder up of the same. And truly there is no reason why this
should seem strange unto us: for, if corruption attracted unto us from the
first Adam, do bring forth the cursed fruits of unrighteousness in every
son of Adam, why should not grace, obtained unto by the second Adam, be
fruitful, once entered into the place of the former. Secondly, the Apostle
plainly affirms That where sin abounded, grace abounds much more.

nolens volens art restrained from. Look unto this you bloody minded old men
who have lived by quarelling and shedding of blood all your days, but now are
decrepite and impotent, not unwilling, but have as

This lets us see, that it is not enough if we do not evil, but we must
also do good, beating down to the ground that Maxim of nature, that I thank
God, I do no man harm, as I can do him no good; as also showing how grossly
the Papists do belie us, and our doctrine of justification by faith, only to
be a doctrine of liberty and licentiousness, whereas we teach and tell our
people, that without both practice of duties of piety, and works of
charity, there is no conscionable abstinence from sin, and so consequently
no way but to hell.

Love rejoices not in iniquity:] understanding the word iniquity for sin,
according to the general acceptance of the word, it offers this Doctrine.
Joseph who was far from taking delight to commit that sin of uncleanness;
but shows his dislike to his Mistrisse for importuning him thereunto, whereby
he did manifest the truth of his love to God, his own soul and body, and
both fidelity and love to his Master. For the latter, the vexation of righteous
Lot, and the streams of tears flowing from David's eyes, the one because of
the uncleanness of his people, the other for the transgression of his, stand
up to witness.

own sins, and if we come to examine our selves, how we make our selves
merry with the sins of others, we shall be constrained to say there is no love
upon the earth. First do not thou rejoice at the profaneness and
beastliness of thy own children and servant, their wantonness and
abominable drunkenness? with blasphemous swearing: what gentleman is there
that must not cry guilty upon this examination? But how much more these
ungracious wretches that will set their servants to swear, and cry as a
Beare-ward to his Bear, finely sworn, nay, will lay wagers of one
ouerswearing another, first they will begin the price themselves, and not being
able to get the victory, having damned their own souls, will set one of their
Serving men (whom they know to be most graceless) to maintain it, whilst he
stands by, making himself merry with the bloody oaths of the contenders? O
horrible! and whose heart is not astonished to hear this? and is not the like
both abroad and at home more then rife by drunkenness? Pitiful to behold, and
grievous to speak of. Look unto these things beloved, and the Lord give you
understanding, know if these things be so, there is no true love in you.

will flatter us, and say, All is well done, but those that most deny to yield
unto us in our sinful courses, that are sad and heavy when we sin, that can
mourn and weep when we rejoice in our iniquity. O consider this, ye that are
Gentlemen and have many servants, those love thee most and without
dissimulation, that will not foster thee in thy sin, but show dislike to the
same.

Here we may see the difference between nature

Motives to move us to be far from reioyccing in our own or others sins.
First consider the end of every sin whosesoeuer it is, without repentance,
damnation: so that a man is going to the place of execution when he commits
sin, let this consideration enter into thy heart, and it will make thee far
from being merry at sin, will thou grieve to see a man to go from Newgate to
Tiburne to execution, and will thou not much more grieve to see thy self and
others to go from hence to hell to execution and endless torments?

Secondly, consider the examples of holy men, first of our Savior, he wept to
see the gracelesnesse of Jerusalem, that she would not when she might be
visited, the Lord having so kindly as he had often times visited her, by
sending to her early and late, but alas ye weep not that ye have done this,
resisted the truth as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, you being men of
corrupt minds and reprobate concerning the truth. Lot he was vexed from day
to day, never had merry day nor night because of the filthiness of the
Sodomites. The people of God in Ezekiels time mourned for the iniquities of the
people. Jeremiah wept night and day for the slain of the daughter of his
people, but alas what do these prevail? O let them be always before thine
eyes, and in thy heart, yea, let them be as thy signet upon thy right hand, to
move thee to be far from making thy self merry with thine own and others
sins. Shall Christ weep for Jerusalem because she will not hear? and will thou laugh to see England and the men thereof stop their ears against the
voice of the Charmer? shall Lot be vexed from day to day with the filthiness
of the Sodomites, and will thou with the uncleanness of England from day to
day at bed and at board make thy self merry?

thy dislike of those filthy smells by thy speeches, and yet thou can come by,
yea, walk by and talk with these filthy dunghils of the world, belching out
more filthy smells then all the dunghils in the City, and yet thou can hold
up thy head, and laugh at the same, pitiful and lamentable to behold,
especially this being found there, and in those persons, where and by whom
sin should be most punished. As in your spiritual courts. You make but a
tush of sin, yea of whoredom it self: you can and do make your selves
merry both in your Courts and elsewhere, with the things there related. If
this will not prevail to root out this evil, let the consideration of the
work our sin had in our Savior move us. Oh will thou rejoice at that which
made him heavy, and sad? shall that make thee laugh, so that tears shall
pass from thine eyes with joy, which made our Savior to shed both water and
blood? O beloved, let it never be said, that thou art so graceless and little
respective of Christ thy Savior, whom thou labourest hereby to crucify
again, and do no less then laugh him to scorn.

Out of the word signifying injustice, especially meant in this place, we
learn. Joseph, who refused to consult with flesh and blood, and therefore
would depend upon God, rather then to labor to continue his favor, or better
his estate by dealing iniustly with his Master, importuned so to do by his
Mistress. Like unto which is that example of Jacob, who would no way injury his
Master to enrich himself, and therefore he clea^eth himself, by saying,
That whatsoever is found more with him then covenant, namely what sheep or
goats were found more then those that had little or great spots of black upon
them, with him, should be theft unto him. Genesis 10.33.
A pattern worth the observing for servants both bond and free in our days:
If all should be theft (as it is in truth before God) that they have taken and
filched from their Masters more then their wages, all the prisons in London
would not be able to hold all the thieves in London, for either flatly and
plainly do they play the thieves, or else more politiquely, and that they will
stand in defense of to be no theft, to sell their Masters wares, to allow him
so much as he priseth them at, and by which they know he may be an honest
gainer, and the rest keep to themselves. On riches of iniquity, and herein
do you commit two sins, theft with your Master, and oppression with others,
by haling them to a greater price then indeed you should. And as he did not by
theft labor to enrich himself, neither did he by his lasie, negligent, and
half serving of his Master; he bestowed all the time he should upon his
Masters business, he did not love his bed better then his Masters business,
for his sleep departed from his eyes, neither did he shrink for the heat of
the day, or the cold of the night, for says he, I was in the day consumed
with heat, and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
Genesis 31.40. And as this holy man was far from seeking to enrich himself by
unlawful and unjust courses: So Paul protests that he was far from the
same, which he avouches as a testimony of his love (though not requited with
love again) to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 12.15.16.17. This doctrine will
appear more dilucidly in the truth thereof: If we consider that where love
has been wanting, there men have not cared by iniust courses to enrich
themselves, as Ahab to get Naboths vineyard by murder, Absolon to aspire to the
Kingdom by flattery, and Judas to betray his Master upon envy and hasty
anger.

Ahab, by his false Prophets, false cyting of Scriptures to our Savior Christ,
Equiuocating, and sophistical cauilling; according to which, do the men of
our days labor to enrich themselves, by accusing of men better then
themselves, by lying and deceitful speeches, which they spread as a Net, to
entrapp those that deal and traffic with them by: But that I may come a
little nearer, and fasten this Nail a little faster, let me rank you into
your several ranks, and accordingly, your several tricks of injustice, that
we may see if true love dwells in this City, or almost in any place of the
world. First, for Churchmen, does love dwell amongst you? let your injustice
speak: Secondly, You Noblemen, has it any better entertainment amongst you?
your oppression, cruelty, and the incorrigible theeuery of some of you, shall
witness: You Lawyers, is it better accepted amongst you? your perverting of
justice and judgment, and more then intolerable bribery will say noe: You
Tradsemen, in what Company of you dwells love? your false and deceitful
tricks will sing, not in our Company we are sure: You Cheaters, your
cunny-catching, and roguish tricks, will say, not with us; and so it will
prove, love is no where entertained.

That injustice has built her nest in the Church, let the indirect courses
taken by Churchmen, at their entrance, and afterward to make themselves
great, witness: In entrance, not grace and gifts from God, but dross and
gifts from men prevail, Patrons selling their livings as commonly, as horses
are soulde in Smith-fielde, at the first motion, saying, quantum dabitis, unto
which, the party to be presented, willing to give ear, answers, We may not
deal so plainly and directly, let us carry matters more handsomely, least the
law (of man he means, he never thinks of God in those matters) take hold
of us; and therefore behold your several iniust, and unlawful courses, you
have to enter by: If you cannot come to parle with the Patron, then you will
undermine him by his wife, and you will not stick to give her twenty or forty
pounds to buy her a Gown or a Nagge, so that she will stand your good Mistress,
and speak for you: If that will not do, then betake you your selves to your
young Master; and that he may not be mealy-mouthed you will bestow upon him a
couple of Dogs, or a Gelding of ten pounds: If this will not serve, then
you will lay wait in every corner and place, and therefore will be sure to
bestow angels liberally upon his attendants, that they may help you forward,
and lift you up to come in by the Windows: And if all this will not do, then
you have an Vltimum refugium, And that is, to enter into bonds with the Patron
to pay him an hundred pounds, or some sum of money without mentioning of and
in consideration of such a Benefice, or living bestowed (that were too plain
dealing) by virtue whereof, the Patron may drive the party after institution
and induction, to agree with him, that he may share with him. Are not these
things so (beloved)? and are not these the stairs that lead up to the Window?
what evils they have brought upon our Church (even the placing of idle and
insufficient persons, because they can procure more friends, or have greater
purses, and the like) I will cease to speak.

And from this first, I will come to the second kind of injustice in
Churchmen, and that is after they are entered in: they are of two sorts, either
non-residents, or residents: non-residents are those which have many livings,
or but two: these men do seek to enrich themselves by usury, for of all,
these are the most intolerable usurers, worse then Aldermen, whose trade it
is, to whom I shall speak anon. For they will take but ten or twenty upon
the hundred, but these non-residents will make an hundred of ten: nay, they
will have one set over their one hundred or two hundred pound livings happily
to post from one to another, as a foote-boy to do his Masters arrand, whereby
they deal unjustly to reap the fleece, and not feeding the flock, putting in
hirelings and insufficients into their room, whilst they lie at the spring and
well head of promotion, as in this City, or some Cathedral place, that when
the ladder of promotion is empty, they may step up, which brings to my mind
that picture of a non-resident, which was thus pictured with two livings in
both hands, with two at his feet, and with two in his pockets, and yet he
gaped for another: have we not such Churchmen in our days? now to residents,
and those are of three sorts, which iniustly enrich themselves, as first those
which are able to preach, but are lasie and idle, feeding their people when
they can a while. Secondly, such as take upon them to preach and can but
babble, uttering froth in stead of sound doctrine, as the evil blood and
humors in their people show.

The third are dumb dogs, and such as cannot preach (the burden and bane of
our Church) these and every of these by injustice enrich themselves receiving
the fleece; but sparingly, corruptly, and not at all, teaching their people:
and thus you see Churchmen are the seats of injustice, by which they have
driven love out of the Church, then in Ecclesia nulla charitas. Now from the
Church I will descend to the Nobility, and Gentry of our Land, to see if love
dwell in these Noble hearts: alas, alas, a man may as soon find a knot in a
bull-rush, as any true love here, for here is nothing in many of them but
robbing and spoiling of the poor, and those that are too weak for them. Are
not most of you Church-robbers, holding the tenths from the Church, the Levites
portion? and do not you daily imbessell the right of the Church from her, by
pulling back that which is due to the Minister? yea, some of you are such
greedy earthwormes, that you will share and part stakes with the Minister you
present, else he shall have no benefice from you: alas what will you do at that
general Audite, when you shall stand before him, whom you have robbed and
spoiled improperly, having made the allowance of his servants yours, you will
be found not only thieves (though now incorrigible) but murderers of the
souls of the people, by keeping that in your hands, should maintain the
stewards of Gods house, that might give them their portion in due season: but
leaving this, let us come to take a view of your just dealing in your temporal
estates, alas behold nothing but oppression, and grinding the face of the
poor, always looking and casting how you may receive much to spend upon your
lusts, or to hoord up against the day of wrath, never thinking what they shall
have for their money, to whom you let your lands, so that I may now say, that
Landlords are become the racks of their tenants, for a worse rack they cannot
provide for them, then to distract them and pull them in pieces, as they do,
by causing them to carpe and care night and day, how to pay them that they
extort of them, house and household being unprovided for: and is here all? No.
Behold what iniust courses they use to get that they have, and to join house
to house, might not right, for by their might do they wrest the law out of the
hands of the poor and innocent, and by that, which should be their sword to
defend them, do they thrust them out of house and harbor, that many of them
dwell upon lands and in houses, they have come to by robbery and cruelty. Let
the many hundreds and thousands, many of them have coming yearly in,
arising from Church-liuings and lands gotten by might not right, the horses
they ride on, the meat they feed upon, the silks and satin suits they iet
up and down in, bought with the revenues of such land, witness the same. Do
they not stretch themselves upon beds, drink their wine in bowls, have they
not their great chambers and dining Parlours hung with hangings, bought with
money which is none of their own, but iniustly kept and held from the owner
after the day: do they not daily build houses with the wages of
unrighteousness, do they not keep back their servants wages, and use the
help of their neighbors, without giving them for their travail? Do they not
rob both Country and the poor, to maintain their pomp. Let the manifold
legacies they keep in their hands bequeathed to the poor, and to charitable
uses, as making of bridges and mending the high ways, witness the same. So
that here this Quaere of Love has as bad success as in the Church; Noblemen
and Gentlemen, are as Iniust as any.

Let us put this Quaere to Lawyers, is there any love amongst most of you?
Alas, methinkes most of you answer me Nodum in scirpo quaeris, if you seek
for Love here: Which, that common Prayer of the people of our age does verify,
for whereas they had wont to pray to be delivered from the devil and Hell, now
they pray to be delivered from Law and Lawyers, but how justly they do this,
let the several tricks you have to enrich your selves by, testify; Do not
you serve your own turns upon your Clients, bearing them in hand their cause
is good, when you know it to be starke-naught, like the false Prophets to Ahab?
Are not you such, many of you, that besides your Fee you will take a Bribe to
procure a day of hearing? Do not you make law a nose of wax, construing it as
you please, making that Law now which shortly shall be none? Do not you keep
matters, causes and Suites longer depending then needs, and for no other end
but that you may pull Clients bare, and feather your own nests with their
feathers? Do you hear and Plead and Judge matters and cases betwixt man and
man, without respecting persons? Does the cause of Widows and the Fatherless
come before you, as well as the cause of the rich and mighty? The complaints
of many to the contrary say, there is no such thing. And that you may fulfill
the measure of your Injustice, you will have about with God, to steal his time
from him: For, do not you (Right Reverend Judges) ride your Circuits upon the
Lords day usually, and refer matters to be heard privately in your Chambers?
I beseech you let these things be amended. And you that are of the Temples and
Innes, in and about this City, do you not steal the Lords time? Are not your
Stairs troad, and your Chambers frequented, as much upon the Sabbath as upon
other days? This cannot be denied, which plainly concludes that Injustice is
rise amongst you, and therefore no true love. Which of you can say with Job,
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me? Job 29.13.
Nay, may you not more truly say, the cursings of them that were ready to
perish, come and are upon us; for our Injustice? Let the bitter curses of more
then a few, Praeoc.
witness what I say. As I approve not their cursing, so know you that
offenses will come, but woe be to them by whom offenses do come.

Which of you can say, that you have put on Justice, Verse 14.
and that covers you, and that your Judgment is a Crown and Robe unto you?
Nay, rather can you not more truly say, you have used Injustice and that
covers you? You have perverted Justice and Judgment, and that is it that
has brought so many Crowns, Angels and Robes unto you? Can you say that when
you knew not the cause, you sought it out diligently? Few or none of you can so
say. If the matter and cause be ambiguous and troublesome, do not you refuse
to meddle in it? Or if you be importuned thereunto? Do you not so shuffle and
daube it over, that when it comes to be looked into again, it proves worse
then at the first, like an old Wound that was not healed to the bottom? These
things are more then plain amongst many of you, as woeful and daily experience
shows, whereby it appears that there is no Love amongst you to be found,
and that all this while in seeking Love amongst you, Nodum in scirpo quaesiui.
From you, let me come to Tradesmen, what say you, is there any more Love
amongst you? I doubt it sore, your indirect courses to enrich your selves by,
say you have no Love amongst you.

First to begin with you Aldermen, do not you as you come into place of
Magistracy sell the Offices of Sergeants, Yeomen, and the like under you? Some
for twenty Pound, some for forty Pound, some for an hundred Pound? If this be
so (as the complaint is) you hereby testify that Love is far from amongst you.
Do not you oppress others by the diverse Taskes, Fifteenes, and Impositions,
and your unequal Ceffing of men therein, so that they which worst may do bear
the burden? I accuse not any of you, let every soul examine himself, the
general voice is, you do this; if you do it, can you say there is any Love
amongst you to lay heavy burdens upon others, that you may go light laden?
Do not you put your money to Usury? Yes, let that epethite (though commonly
spoken, yet peculiar appropriated to you) Usury the Aldermans Trade, witness
this: And is this nothing (Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful) that I may
say no more then Ezekiel, did of Jerusalem: Ezekiel. 22.2.
Let me say so much! O bloody London, because with many other sins, thy
Inhabitants, Verse 12.
especially most of thy Aldermen, have taken Usury, and the increase and
defrauded their neighbors by Extortion: by all which it appears, that
amongst the chief of you, that have to do in Trading in this City, there is
no Love. And if we descend to the inferior sort, we shall find as little: For,
do not those which are rich amongst you like Pickrels, labor to eat up all
the rest? And that either by ouer-selling the poorer and meaner ones, or else
by engrossing all into their hands, that the meaner shall be driven to come and
buy at their hands: And to pay such a price for every commodity, that he can
not live by selling the same again, and therefore must be constrained either
to be come slave to the greater, or else to do worse? Do not you usually
falsify your weights by deceit, have you not one weight and measure to sell
by, and another to buy by? Have you not a false Balance, and a bag of false
Weights which the Lord hates? Do you not prey upon the ignorance and
necessities of men in buying, selling, and lending? Do you not prey upon the
necessity of the time, as against this time (which you call the good-time and
holy days, though in regard of the abuse and profaneness of them; they may now
justly be callen the bad time and worst of days) do you not set to sale your
worst Wares and Commodities, and set good glosses upon the same, saying, lying,
and swearing, it is the best, when there is no such matter: And you only do
this, that you may prey upon the necessities of the time, and the wants of men
which must needs be supplied, all which, with your cozening, and calling of
good, bad, in buying; and bad, good in selling, testify that amongst you
tradesmen there is no love to be found, seeing iniust and indirect means are
in every sort of you used to enrich your selves by: therefore let us in the last
place come to cheaters, and see whether direct dealing dwell there, let us take
a view of their courses, they take for their victuals, clothes, horses, and
spending money, and we shall be constrained to conclude, that loves house is
nullibi in these days. For the providing of their victuals, behold how with
impudent tricks they can draw young Gentlemen to tauernes, for dinners or
suppers, and when all is done, by one sly subtle trick or other finely put
it from themselves, and upon the Gallants to pay for all, it will not
otherways stand with their honors, worships, or reputations. Now you see the
impudent tricks they have to victual the camp, let us see if they have any
better to cloth it withal: to the Tailor or Mercer they go, and there take
up their suites, never stand upon terms and prises, but let them have their
own asking, (but you must understand when they can get it) they will promise
payment (for few such pay down) and give fair words, and as many bonds as
they will have, but to pay what they owe, is the farthest from their thoughts.
Thus they deal for their apparel, for their horses and spending money, they
have ways more then many, their father the devil whom they serve has taught
them well. So that they by their long being with, and much observation of the
gallants and young Gentlemen of our days, see how they are disposed, and
accordingly fit their humors, if to hawks, then that way; if to hounds then,
that: if to horses, then that; if to harlots, then that; if to quarrelling,
then that way: so that at length by their humoring of them, they cosen them
with a cracked groat, and serve their turns upon them, and by this means have
as good horses, and as large a purse as the best of them all. Thus do you see
(beloved) that love is no where, because injustice is every where: but what is
the cause that injustice thus ouer-spreadeth our land, and all degrees in the
same: The Apostle tells you, the want of love, unto which I may add the
sin of our first parents aspiring minds, that we cannot content our selves
to be as God would have us, we will be housed, meated, apparrelled, and
attended according to the fashion, and the best, not according to our estate
and place. Secondly, want of trusting God, trusting him no further then we see
him, the sin of the murmering Israelites: and thirdly, presuming that by our
own power we can help our selves. Let us then (beloved) to remove this
general injustice, labor to love one another more and more, and that not in
word but in deed, let us be content with the Lords fashion and allowance; if
he will have thee to wear cloth, do not thou wear velvet, if he would
have thee to put but one yard into thy garment, put not in two: If he would
have thee to have but one length in thy band or ruff, put not in more. Trust
God although thou see him not, and know that the help of man is naught worth,
no man is able by his own care to add one cubite unto his stature. So shall
injustice fade and decay, but love and honest dealing flourish more and more:
that I may persuade you heereto, I will endeavor my self to lay down several
motives and practices, as helps and furtherances herein: showing the vanity
and unprofitableness of that we so by injustice search after; the first
consideration, is this.

That which we so labor and toil our selves to Prou. 23.5
Why will thou cast thy eyes upon it, which is nothing? for riches takes her
to her wings, as an Eagle and flies into the heaven, of which opinion is the
Apostle Paul in that his Epistle to Timothy. 1.6.7. Charge them which are rich
in this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in
uncertain riches. Which the example of that great rich man mentioned Luke
12.21.22. plainly confirms: Over night he had so much that he lacked room to
lay what he had in, but in the morning all was nothing: so is every one that is
rich in this world, and not rich in God: lay this to thy soul, and often
consider it to stay thee from iniust courses to enrich thy self by, for when
thou have that thou seek for, thou have, that thou have no certainty of,
and in truth a matter of nothing, and is it not madness for nothing thus to
toil thy self and iniure others?

To such a man as thou desire to be, is pronounced a woe, Luke. 6.24. vae
vobis diuitibus, which never is will make thee fear to be rich, and to walk
thankfully in poverty.

It is an estate that makes men slack to Gods service, hardly to be drawn to
God, and when they are drawn to him, a great means to pull them back, as
both experience and Scriptures witness. Who sees it not, but that they which
are rich, are the tardiest comers to the Church, and holy exercises of all
others? Upon the Sabbath they cannot attend at the posts of the door of the
Church, but must be attended upon, the whole Church and congregation must stay
upon them, if they come to the Sermon it is well, they have no part nor portion
in prayer, what is the cause of this, they are so curiously to be dressed,
that the whole morning is too little for that, or else they have accounts to
take, or one thing or other to confer of, that they can come no sooner. And as
they are tardy comers, so, who so infrequent there as these persons? they have
farms, or yokes of Oxen, or the like, that they cannot come, if once of the
day, they think that sufficient, if twice, they think that more then needs,
and that then God is so beholding to them, that he must of desert, and in liew
of that service vouchsafed that day, allow them the rest of the Sabbath before
and after, either for their worldly commodities or cursed delights. Besides all
this, who so hardly drawn to Christ as they? they are like to Pickrels not
easily nor often taken, a man may take twenty Pinkes and lesser fishes before
one Pickrell, for he preieth so sore at his pleasure upon the lesser fishes,
that he seldom or never has any stomach to bite at the bait, and so fares
it with the rich men of the world, their stomachs are so cloyed with the crusts
and hard fare of the things of this life, that when the doctrine of salvation
is preached, they have no appetite thereto; the young man found it to be true,
nothing hindered his coming to Christ but the loss of his riches: until our
Savior told him, that must be the thing he must part withal, who forwarder
then he? This hardness that experience lets us see, our Savior taught us,
saying, It is as hard for a rich man to come to the Kingdom of heaven, as for
a cable to go through the eye of a needle; and not only this, but they are
means to draw men from God, as Lots wives example testifies, and daily
experience witnesses. O let these considerations enter into thy heart, and
cease thou by injustice to seek that which is such an enemy to thee in
coming to holy exercises, and hinderers of thee from coming to Christ, and
pullers of thee from him, when thou have laid hold on him.

They are dangerous in getting and not safe in keeping, who sees it not, that
it is a hard thing for a man with life. So dangerous (beloved) is it to climb
up the tree of riches, for most commonly men lay hold so upon one hundred
after another, and one thousand after another, that they endanger themselves
sore, if they escape with salvation of soul and body. And truly as they are
thus dangerous in coming by, so they are not less dangerous in using and
keeping them, for how can a man lie in a bed of thorns, and not be pricked? or
how can a man feed upon little fishes full of bones and not be in danger of
choking, without good take heed? Let this move us to ease from climbing by
injustice to riches so dangerous in getting, and no less in keeping.

Consider what thou shall leave to thy children, if

Consider the little avail and profit that is in these things: What evils did
they free thee from? not from Dives must to hell from all his riches, because
he would not part with them to the poor, much more the rich men of our days,
that not only will not give to the poor, but by all means they can take from
them. Oh let this enter into thy heart, and if none of the former
considerations will prevail with thee, let this, to stay thee from further
seeking, there is no more avail in riches then in poverty. Now let us come to
the practices, which are three: the first is prayer, and that which David has
taught: Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness; this
prayer, howsoever it is entertained, I am sure it is not practiced: which must
be, if ever you will come to the practice of justice. You would have liked me
better if I had put covetousness in the place of thy testimonies, and thy
testimonies in the place of covetousness. Use this prayer, and continually
strive with the Lord, and thou shall see the effect sure, for he is faithful
that has promised.

Read rationem villicationis tuae, which will be a means, and that an
excellent one, to cause thee to look to thy ways, least by injustice thou
reap to thy self damnation.

Take more then ordinary pains, as thou castest thy Quid charitas abstinet:
now to the latter, Quid efficit, in the last words of the verse, which
affords this point.

It is the property of true Love to rejoice in Justice and honest dealing
betwixt man and man: Which truth, the Lamentation of Jeremiah in his ninth
does plainly show, weeping for the deceit and false dealing of his age:
brother deceitfully dealing with brother. As that also of Nehem. 5.4.13. where
he shows his dislike to see the people so oppressed, as that they were
constrained to cry out, and to lay their Lands, Houses, and Vineyards to gage
for the Kings tribute, and to sell them because of the famine, this grieved
these Holy men not a little, the contrary whereof would have ioyed them much.

of the same, but I fear this sore (Right Honorable) the many exclamations
and complaints here, argue the contrary, O look to this, if you will have any
comfort in thinking your self to be free from perjury, which will not only
stain thee, but brand thy posterity after thee, that both thou and they,
shall be trusted the worse again whilst you live. And from this we will
proceed to the second part of this Doctrine, which I only will insist upon,
being thus much.

[That Love rejoices.] To see men walk in the truth, that is to be Religious
toward God; Which the example of David in the 122. Psalm. ver. 1. plainly
proves, who faith he rejoiced when they said, Come let us go to the house of
the Lord. Together with that 2. Chro. 15.14.15. Where it is said, the people
rejoiced to see all so ready to take the Oath for the service of the true God:
as Hezekiah and the people did, to see the Priests so ready to purge the
Temple, Ibid. 29.36. and the rejoicing in fetching up the Arc shows the same.

Because such are servants to the most mighty Lord, and it does them good to
see their Master well attended.

True Love makes us to wish, every one to be as we are, and therefore a
Christian never desires to go alone, but would have company.

show, which all tend to the disgracing of them and their Holy profession. If a
man will but pray with his family, Evening and Morning, Catechize them, and call
them to an account what they have heard, refrain himself from Tauernes,
Plays, and other company of good fellows, falsely so called, he is made
like an Owl in the wilderness amongst you, he is hated of his neighbors,
evil spoken of undeservedly, and his causes and Suites shall fare the worse
for them. Is this to rejoice to see men forward in Religion? Nay, is it not to
grieve because they be so, which is to envy at Gods good estate to be so well
attended: This sin, the sin peculiar to England above all Nations, is every
where to be found. Is there any people that will hate them that are forward in
their own Religion? And yet we do, that a man will serve God but in good
earnest, and make care of keeping his word and vow with GOD, in forsaking the
devil and all his works, is he not presently named a Prescitian and gross
hypocrite, and yet does nothing but that which thou must do, except thou will
prove a promise breaker and perjured person before God. The Papists and Turks
in renowming those that have been forwardest in their Religion, shall rise up
at the day of Judgment to condemn the English people, who are most hateful
to them that serve God most entirely, which shows little rejoicing in the
truth amongst us, and so consequently, little or no true Love at all. Now that
I may leave you without doubt in this point, I will lay down some several
marks whereby you may know, whether you rejoice in Religion, and in the happy
success thereof, yea or no. The first whereof: A rejoicing in the truth,
because it is the truth, and for no other respects, saying and performing as
Job, Though thou kill me, I will not forsake thee: And with our Saviors
Disciples, Whither shall we go Lord, thou have the word of eternal life,
which is the undoubted mark of a true Lover of Religion. Hereby let you
Churchmen examine your selves? Do you profess Religion, and hold your places
in pretense of maintaining the same, because it is truth, or rather because of
the sweetness of the living you enjoy thereby? You Professors, do you
profess out of mere love to the truth, or for sinister respects? You
Children, and such as are under Government, do you it not rather because you
may thereby purchase more liberty to your selves. You Tradesmen Professors,
do not you profess and only seem to rejoice in the truth, because you may
gain customers thereby, and make it a cover for your couzning? You poorer
sort, do not you likewise profess for your bellies sakes. I fear this much
beloved, look to it, if thou reioycest in the truth, thou do it simply
because it is the truth.

David would vow that he would keep Gods righteous Judgments: So that we must
see what endeavoring there is to forward Religion in our selves, what care we
have to grow and wax in grace.

What care have thou to forward Religion in thy family: 1. Tim. 3.4.
that he must be one that can rule his own house honestly, having children
under obedience with all honesty, and are you such? are your houses ruled
honestly, and have you children obedient, and wise, sober, honest, and not
evil speakers, but faithful in all things.

Now you Noblemen and Gentlemen, are your houses any better governed? and do
you plant Religion any more in your families then Churchmen do in theirs?
Ioshuahs resolution is in few Noblemen and Governors of the people seen; I
and my household will serve the Lord. Do you catechize and instruct your
family, and pray with them in your own persons? Do you give thanks at the
table for your self, and those that dine with thee? Oh no, it is too base. Now
(beloved) I know you are of two sorts, some that think you are freed from this
in your own person, those be such of you that have Chaplains, who are in your
stead, and so you will serve God by your Attorney, which does dismember the
congregation, as it is now used, that when the greatest part of the
congregation is at public place peaceable, and hearing or calling upon God,
the greatest person with his train is in private serving God, which is an
vnseemable doing of a good action, doing good in private when we should be
public. And these private exercises in families when we should be in
public, cannot be warranted in the quiet and peaceable time of the Church, as
now it is with us. In the time of persecution I know the Christians met
together in private families: secondly, it does confound two distinct duties
and callings in one person, namely in the Minister, when he takes upon him to
be a public person, and a private person too, unto which he is not
necessarily called, as he is in his own family to be Master of a family, and
so to discharge the duty of a Master in his house, and of a Minister

It freeth the Master of the family from that duty God has required of him,
in his own person to perform to his family, as to teach them in the Law of
God, when he is at home and going abroad. Deuteronomy. 6.7. which Abraham and Joshua,
and all the holy men of God practiced, and no Master of a family is to be
exempted from.

to make thy self merry withal, then to instruct thee or thy people, what
will thou then do? shall thy family not be instructed? do thou think this
pretense will serve thy turn? but grant thy Chaplain be sufficient, what if
he be lasie, idle, and careless, as most be, being readier to play a game at
the dice and cards with thee, thy servants and children, then to teach and
catechize you, shall this bear thee out before God? no: if thy people perish
for want of instruction privately, you shall answer for the blood of their
souls, as thou should for the blood of their bodies, if they perished by
thy detaining of that from them, as meat, drink, and wages, which thou art
bound to allow them. Were this a plea sufficient to say, thou did thy duty
to thy child, for thou committedst him or her to a nurse, whom thou knew to
be dry, and every way insufficient? No beloved, no more will it bear thee out
to say thou have a Chaplain, except thou see them instructed by thy own
person.

Now then you Noblemen and Gentlemen, do you forward Religion, by teaching
your family, and praying with them? No, these do not fit with your Greatness,
in truth these heavenly things do not fit with your baseness, and therefore
thou will not meddle with the same. God shall never be called upon by thy
family together, rather then thou will be their mouth. God shall never be
praised at the table, rather then thou will do it, and therefore most commonly
it is, that at such men's tables, if the Chaplain be away and the children,
grace and all is away, which argues all their service is but customarie, not
of conscience: well, if this be thy custom, thou reioycest not in the truth,
for thou do not forward it in thy family by Doctrine and example, which
every one does that rejoices in it. Do thou see, say, and perform with
David, That no wicked person shall abide and dwell in thy house? No. For, alas
where is the route and crew of such, if not in your houses? whither do
unclean persons, wantons, and bloud-shedders betake themselves for shelter but
to you? thinking if they once get your houses over their heads, and your cloak
or coat upon their backs, then they are safe enough, as the Woodcock when he
has hid his head, and Adoniah when he fled to the horns of the Altar. What
shall I compare your houses unto? but to the fattest and fertilest ground
untilled and unhusbanded? which most commonly brings forth most weeds, and
in which the most dangerous vermines do abide. Look unto this, and either
reform it, or else confess that you rejoice not in the truth, and so
consequently have no true love. This concerns both sorts of you, both that
under pretense of Chaplains will be careless, and you also that without
pretense thereof walk thus carelessly.

Paul says of a Minister, how shall he care for the Church of God, if he
cannot rule his own family? so how can it be that you care to settle Religion
in the places where you abide, if you be careless of it in your own families?
what care you have to further it in the places of your abode will the better
appear, if we examine how ye use the means to further it there, which are
of two sorts: 1, either with men, 2, or God. With men, and those are either, 1.
the Church livings thou have to bestow: 2. thy words and countenance: 3. thy
purse: 4. thy iourneying: 5. thy magistracy and authority.

If thou use all these to furthering Religion in the place where thou dwell,
thou reioycest in the truth, if not, thou do not, and so by consequence no
love in thee. That we may the better perceive this, let us consider these
things in order. 1. Art thou careful to bestow these benefices and
Church-liuings upon able and sufficient teachers? do you commit holy things,
as the souls of the people, the word of God and the Sacraments, to holy men,
who have vrim and thummim, purity of life and soundness of Doctrine: nay,
rather are you not Ieroboams, that prefer to the place of the Ministry, the
baggage and refuse of men? the more by far of such now in the Church, then of
sufficient Preachers, does testify it to your shame: O let us pray that these
things were amended. Here had I thought to have spoken to the reverend Father
of this Church, but let me speak to his ears and eyes, that I would have
done to him, namely, that forasmuch as Patrones be careless whom they
present, but most commonly him that will give most, or has greatest friends,
caring not a jot to falsify the trust committed to them, O that it would
please our Church governors to be careful of these things, and to admit,
institute, and induct, none but men sufficient, and therefore not to be over
entreated by great Persons, nor importuned by flatterers about you, who for
their Bribes, not for any goodwill to the Church, importune you. Thus by your
care of bestowing your Livings, you may see whether you have any joy in
Religion: yea, or no. But alas, by this it appears, that the Patrons of our
days have little Love that way. For who seeks for an able Minister, but one
that is able to give well for it, before he have it. Now let us come to see
what rejoicing you have in the truth, by using your word and countenance to
profit the same?

Ahashuerosh in their behalf? Does the benefit of thy words extend to the
Saints that are upon the earth? Do thou further their causes, and defend
them? Little of this beloved amongst you, I would I might not say the quite
contrary, that your tongues are sharp arrows and spears against them, and
that you are speakers for and favorers of Roman Catholics, many of you,
more then of Protestants.

continue the sincere and sound Ministry of the word amongst you? Nay, rather
is it not to thrust them out? For many spend that way, but few the other, is it
to defend innocent and righteous persons and causes? Nay, rather is it not to
fee a Procter to speak against them, whom thou unjustly slanderest? Is it to
buy good Books? No, rather to buy Play books, Ballads and wanton Sonnets, if
not Popish books. Is it spent to relieve the Saints upon the earth? No, but
upon the scumme of the world, Stage players, the bellows of lust, Fiddlers, and
Roguish Musicians, by all which you show plainly, you rejoice not in the
truth, for by laying out of your money, you show the same.

And as in this, so I doubt you show your selves little better in the next,
which is your iournying: For, do you journey with Ezra to seek the Law of the
Lord, and to teach it in Israel? Is it to good exercises? No, rather it is to
thy whorish sports and pastimes, for the satisfying of thy self wherein, no
journey is too long, too tedious or chargeable, whereby you show your want of
Love, by your little rejoicing in the truth, travailing against it, not for it.

Now let us come to the last means to be used amongst not; But to leave you,
let me come to this City, and to you (Right Honorable) the L. Mayor, with the
rest of your Brethren the Aldermen, and the Officers of this Corporation: Do
you exercise your Authority to further Religion? Let the profanation of the
Sabbath, by trauailers into, and out of your City, the carrying of burdens in
your City: The public and secret Markets kept in your City, both in Streets
in Cheapeside, and other places, by Apple-women, etc. Gracious-streete (I had
almost said Graceless street) with her Morning and Evening Market: In Shops
in the Morning, in Tipling-houses, warehouses, whore-houses and Tauernes all
the day, witness this, and more then this: The selling of corrupt Wares, yea,
of the badges of Idolatry, say what you do; O beloved, what shall I say? But
mourn for these things. O draw out your Sword of Justice (Right Honorable)
and stand out like a man of War, for the redress of these things: Know that
your Authority is not only for man, but for God, to maintain his Laws,
know that you stand charged with the whole City, and the Gates of the same
for the year, and therefore look to it, you are guilty of the sins of
those that break the Sabbath within your jurisdiction, by any of the ways
aforesaid, if you strive and labor not the amendment of the same. You will
say, what shall I do? I will tell thee what, Set a man at every Gate of the
City, and let the Gates be shut before the Sabbath, and not opened until the
Sabbath be ended, as Nehemiah did, whom thou art herein to follow, Nehem.
13.19. and if this will not serve, use thy Authority to drive them from about
the Gates, suffer not burdens to be carried, both upon Carts, Horses, and the
backs of men, as they usually are, the Lord cannot endure it, Iere. 17.20 Ad
finem. Let not the Sabbath be a Market day for the things of the body, which
God has set to be the Market day of the soul. Look that Play books and
wanton Sonnets, the means of corrupting young minds, be not countenanced
neither in Printing nor selling, by you, much less Popish books: but with the
rest, forget not to abandon the Relics of Idolatry, from Cheapeside, I
mean, Rings with Crucifixes upon the same, usually sold there: Is it not a
thing incredible, that our King who lamenteth the whore of Rome, should have in
his Kingdom: yea, in the chiefest City of his Kingdom, and the stateliest
street of the same, the Badges of that Whore to be sold: yea, which is more
from thence to be transported to Popish Countries, to furnish them with the
same: O look to these, and other gross matters, and set your self to a happy
and speedy reformation of the same; set upon it, you shall not loose your
labor, you shall get you praise, both in heaven and earth: God will love you,
the Angels love you, and men will praise you: I for my part will, and my
Brethren succeeding me in this place, will give you your due praise: we will
say, many Mayors have done worthily, but you have excelled them all, as may
witness the good commendations of the late Mayor, and his officers your Honors
and your predecessors, given unto him for the good he did in reforming, in some
measure some of the abominations aforesaid, who began to build the Temple, I
mean this happy reformation for you, but I know not how it is unhappily all
cast in the dust again. Consider this (right Honorable) and set to Mordecay
to Hester, Who knows whether God has brought you to this place for this end,
yea or no? Therefore do it, if you will not, God will have reformation by some
let this last consideration: the walking in thy office, as I have directed,
will make thee with boldness to appear before God in prayer with Nehemiah, 5,
19. Remember me O my God in goodness, according to all that I have done for
this people: Which he could never have so boldly uttered as he did, except he
had walked conscionably in his calling.

O let these enter into your honorable breast, and consider of them at home and
every day, that we may see, to the praise of God and your salvation, some good
effect of this days work. But why should I stand so long upon these things,
me thinks I perceive that you are and will be as ready to reform these things,
as I to discover them, Deceive not my persuasion (right honorable) least you
frustrate your own salvation. Thus having done with the five several means,
which every man that rejoices in the truth, for the furthering of the same in
the place where he dwells, uses amongst men, as they concern him: let us
come to the means every man that rejoices in the truth, uses to further it
by, with God, and that is prayer. Which few use, and therefore do so little
good as they do, they think if they bestow their livings well, speak for,
and countenance good men, spend their money for furthering such causes and
persons, and journey to the same end, and use their Magistracy and Authority
for the like, then they have done enough: but alas, there is one thing, which
procures a blessing to all these, wanting: and that is hearty prayer, which
David used in the 51. Psalm. ver. 18. Be favorable unto Sion, for thy good
pleasure build up the walls of Jerusalem, without this, thinking his not
ceasing to give the temples of his head any rest, till he had found a place for
the worship of God, and his great a-doe to procure the wealth of Jerusalem, was
to no end or little worth: See and examine thy self, whether with the former
thou join the latter, if not, it argues thou have no great heart-burning to,
or liking of Religion. Now follows the third mark, whereby we may know if
we rejoice in Jeroboam and go to Rehoboam, we will not stay in Pharaohs
Court, but will go to live with Gods children, though in affliction: But alas
where is this to be found, that the company of such are acceptable to us? and
so consequently, where is there any rejoicing in the truth? this proves, that
few or none be lovers of the same. I doubt the Elies daughter in law, the
Arc is taken away and the glory is departed from Israel. Where is any to be
found sorrowing, to see the people scattered as sheep upon a mountain without
a shepherd? who cou^teth this amongst, nay, the greatest of their griefs and
sorrows? that the ways to Gods house are untrodden, and that her enemies are
the chief therein? but who of all men does make the absence from Gods house
and service, and the exercises of Religion, the matter of their complaint, not
being any where, whilst they are absent therefrom, able to sing merrily? Few
such (beloved) if any, therefore few, if any, rejoicing to see Religion
flourish. As there be few that mourn for the absence of it, so who will
defend the same? which is the fifth mark of a man rejoicing in the truth, and
that both by speaking for it, as Mary her days: and lastly, practicing the
same. Many will do the former, and happily the latter, but few endure to do
the second: Ergo, few rejoice in the truth. And as few will defend it in this
manner, who is there that prefer it to their chief joy? which is the sixth and
Paul Acts, 20. My life is not dear unto me, so I may finish my course with
joy? or with Nehe. 6.11. Should such a man as I flee, who is he being as I am,
that would go into the temple to live, I will not go in. Or with Hester, if I
perish, I perish: Alas few such, life is sweet will all say, but I say to a
Christian man and woman. Religion the life of the soul is far sweeter. Thus
have we examined from top to toe, both by Quid charitas abstinet, and quid
efficit, and few do we find to have love dwelling in them, because few love
righteousness or honest dealing with men, or Religion toward God. I will
only lay down two motives to move the latter to be in love with Religion, and
to rejoice in the same, and so I will cease. Which are these. 1. The necessity
of it, without it there is no coming to the Kingdom of heaven, for we must
rejoice to see Christ reign here by grace in the hearts of men, else we shall
never come to rejoice with him in glory.

Ely, plainly shows: he that honors me, shall be honored, but he that
despises me shall be despised. Which experience shows, for who is so truly
feared and reverenced both at home and abroad, of his own and others, as he
that truly fears the Lord? Much is the complaining of men in these days,
that they never had such sturdy servants, and no man such disobedient children?
alas they enter not into the true consideration of these things, if they did,
they should find it as a just judgment of God upon them, for their want of
fear and love to his, therefore he makes them that should most reverence
thee, to be thy greatest grief and heartbreaking: for what was the cause that
strangers shrunk away, and did fear in their privy chambers at the presence
of David? because he kept the ways of the Lord, and did not wickedly against
his God. And what was the cause, that the young men hid themselves when they saw
Job, and the aged arose and stood up? because he was a righteous man, feet to
the lame, and eyes to the blind, so that it is ever true, and ever shall be,
that the way truly to be reverenced, is to be truly religious, which we shall
find further to be true, both in their life and death, for proof whereof,
that example of Iehoiada is worth always remembrance, who setting himself
wholly to restore religion and the true service of God, and to abandon Idolatry,
was therefore honored both in life and death: in life God honored him in his
marriage, for he was son in law to one King, and brother in law to another, 2.
Chro. 22. penult, and more then that King Ioash would do nothing without his
counsel and advise: and in his death was he no less honored then in his life,
companion he was to Kings in his life, and so in his death, 2. Chro. 24. they
buried him in the City of David with the Kings, because he had done good in
Israel, and toward God and his house. Which truth will the better appear, if
we consider how God has dishonored the enemies of his Church, by bringing upon
them shameful deaths, as witness Haman, Achitophell and Judas, who for ease
went and hanged themselves. Herod with his lousy death, Zenacherib slain with
the fruit of his own bowels, whilst he was worshipping Nisroch his God, 2.
Chron. 32.21. and Ioash, 2. Chron. 24 25. who was overcome with a few, left in
great diseases, killed by his own servants, and not graced with burial in the
Sepulchers of the Kings, and all for his falling from the truth, and misusing
of Zechariah the son of Iehoiada. No better, but far worse was the end of
Zedekiah for murdering Vriah, and showing his dislike to the truth of God, as
it plainly appears by comparing Ier. 22.18.19. with Ier. 26.22.23. He was
buried without mourners, as a man whose death all wished, and were glad of:
they lamented him not, saying, Ah my brother, or Ah my sister, neither did they
mourn for him, saying, Ah Lord, and Ah his glory: he was buried as an Ass is
buried, even drawn and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem: thus has
God showed dishonor upon them that have dishonored him. Let this go to your
hearts, and prevail with you, to increase your love by rejoicing in the truth
of God, and to see Religion flourish.

To this I know some of you will object, that you have known men, who have
been far from this I speak of, and yet have died as quietly, been buried
as honorably, and respected, reverenced, and honored as much in their lives,
as any that have been, or are so too too much religious. Unto which I answer,
how know thou, they have died so quietly, thou know not what hearts they
have, a fair outside thou see, but the horror and disquietnes of his soul
is hid from thee, he is loath and ashamed to let it be seen, and the Devil
not willing thou should behold the same, least it should fright thee, and
thou avoid his manner of living, least thou should come to the same end: his
burial is no other but that which is common to the wicked: yea the wicked have
most of that pomp, not one heart mourning for him, but many black mockers
rather then mourners: His honor, reverence and respect he has, is not true
and worthy, from the heart, but servile, because they dare do no otherwise,
those whom thou speak of being like the great Mastiues, whom the little Curs
dare not but crouch to, least the Mastiues should all to rend them. Thus thou
see all they have, is but so in show, not in deed, labor thou then to follow
Christ, to love religion from thy heart, that honor and true dignity may be
heaped upon thee here, and everlasting honor in the life to come. Which God
for his Christ's sake grant unto us all. Amen.

FINIS.

