THE KING'S REQVEST: OR, DAVID'S DESIRE.

A Sermon preached at the last general Fast holden at York, the 21. of April
last.

By PHINEES HODSON Doctor of Divinity, and Chancellor of the Metropoliticall
Church of St. Peter-Yorke.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER, for Edward Blount, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard. 1628.

PSALM. 27.4. One thing have J desired of the Lord, which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.


IN this Psalm you have the Prophet keeping an Audit, and taking a reckoning
of the treasures of his heart: the receipts were many and great, Mat. 12.35.
which like so many Rivers from that great Ocean of Gods mercy, made glad his
heart, that was a man after Gods heart, 1. Sam. 13.14.

For the receipts you shall find them acknowledged in all his accounts. To
seek no further; an infinite treasure, greater then Solomon's, is mentioned in
the first verse of this Psalm, the Lord is his light, his strength, his
salvation. My text disburseth that treasure in thankful devotion. One thing
etc. And we have reason to take our rise hence, to begin at thanks: for we
have received much. And to receive much, and restore nothing, is a shame. It Is
a shame not to give, where there is cause; a double shame not to restore; and
shame seldom goes alone, but is accompanied either with sorrow, or pain, or
both, at least attended, There being no burden that loades more then a
benefit; and burdens if they be heavy, are both sorrowful and painful.

Indeed ask a natural man, what is the greatest burden, and he will tell you
sorrow. Ask a spiritual man, and he will say Sin. Sorrow loades man; But
Sin loades man and God himself, yea and tyers him too. Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, (a mean office to put God to) and wearied me with thy
transgressions, Is. 43.24.

But ask the moral man, what is the greatest burden, and he will tell you a
benefit. The Prophet David had experience of all these. He complains of his
son, and great was his sorrow, that he that came out of his own bowels
sought his life. But he roares for his sin.

And when these tempests were ouerblowne, he was not quiet in the calm, but
was after a serious meditation put to his, Quid retribuam, What shall I give
unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto me. And this in
effect is his labor now, there he consulted, Quid retribuam; here he
resolved: One thing have I desired, etc. For in the three first verses before
my Text, he made a discovery of Gods mercy and bounty. In my Text he vows
his service, as the tribute of his duty. For though it be Vnum petij, he went
not only to pray, but to offer sacrifices of joy, and to sing and praise the
Lord, verse 6.

For thankfulness is Debitum morale; and the Ciuilians say Naturaliter
obligamur a dante. So that, as it is a heavy thing to bear, either in body or
conscience, so are not they released that are released. The very act of
delivery drawing on a third burden how to be thankful, which unless we take
up, a worse than either of the other will happen unto us. Therefore in the nine
leapers that returned not to give thanks, to take up this burden, Luc. 17.
Vlcus ingratitudinis, was (said one) more loathsome then they leprosy the had?
for they were Mundi cute, but not Cord. Christ had given them fair skins, but
they had made themselves foul hearts.

But a good man is ever thankful. If Elisha have house-roome with the
Shunamite, before he take his leave, What shall we do for thee 2 K. 4.13. And
if Jonathan be dead, David will enquire for some of Saul's kindred to gratify
them for his friend Ionathans sake, 2 Samuel 9.3. yea unthankful Absalom will
condemn ingrate Hushai, though himself gain by it, is this thy kindness to
thy friend? 2 Samuel 16.17. yea the Devil himself damnes it, Job. 1.9. and cons
him not thank that leanes to one that supports him. Does Job serve God for
nothing? And as the thing is odious, for, In hac contumelia omnis contumelia;
so is the name: he is a Nabal, a fool, 1 Samuel 25.25. a title in these times
more contemptible than a knave, when the world is more ashamed of infirmities,
then crimes, and it is greater reproach to be esteemed shallow then wicked. And
as both the thing, and the name is odious, so it is unprofitable. For as it is
true; He that smoothers one injury, draws on a second; So he that unthankfully
smoothers a benefit, loses a second. And again, as he that quits one wrong,
preuents many; So he that quits a benefit, inuites many. For, Nunquam cessabit
decursus gratiarum a Deo, nisi prius cesset recursus gratiarum ab homine, The
showers of Gods graces will never leave falling upon us, so long as we send
back but the fruit of thankfulness to him.

Then before we ask new blessings, let us be thankful for the old; Eighty
eight and powder treason.
we have within many of our memories, been delivered both from destruction by
water, and fire. Some of us, even of late, from famine, and many of us from the
pestilence. We of this City so preserved from it, as it has not been
suffered in that common calamity, to come near our dwellings. And now Lord
make us thankful, and in mercy, not in wrath, preserve us from the sword. It
were a secret, worth our discovery, what is the motive to Gods patience toward
us, that all our neighbor countries should be in blood, and worse, and the
sword of the deuourer should not be able to touch us. I say in blood, and
worse. For God has a plague, both on this side, and beyond death, worse than
death. On this side captivity, and idolatry. Beyond it; That fearful and
eternal separation of our bodies and soul from God. From both which good Lord
deliver us.

And that he may deliver us, let us pray that he would send such a gracious
rain upon his inheritance as may refresh it, and open it so in thankfulness
toward him as it may expect the later rain, and not be deceived. These
showers they were that made the Prophet David's heart so fruitful. In the three
first verses of this Psalm they fall upon him. In my Text the fruit of those
showers return to God.

In the first God is gracious unto David. In my Text David is thankful unto
God.

The parts are three and those three are in a manner one. For God, David, and
the Temple, make up every part. And these three make up the three parts.

For first you have David praying for one thing.

There Is God, David and the Temple. For that one thing in the second place is
the Temple of the Lord, where he desires of God he may ever dwell. There
again is God, David, and the Temple. And thirdly, the end of his desire to
dweell there: to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. There
again is God, David, and the Temple.

So the parts are three, and these are one, and one has all. But in every of
these, one is most eminent; in the first David, in the second the Temple, in
the third God.

Frist David in his humble majesty; A petitioner, and therein humble. But
importunate, and therein he wears a badge of majesty.

In the second the Temple (indeed the Tabernacle) in her glory, the Lords
house; for a house can have no greater honor then to be domus Dei.

In the third you have God discovered in his sweetest form. The beauty of the
Lord, which made David's heart and his tongue run upon that place where he
beheld such beauty.

Of these the first is for the second, and both are for the last. He prays in
the first part, and the end of his prayer in the second place, is, that he may
dwell in Gods house. And he prays to dwell there in the third place, that he
may behold his beauty.

In the first he is a suitor to God. His suit makes way that he may be
soiourner with God. He sues to soiourne and that not for a time, but all the
days of his life, that he may see his beauty. For that was the
Architectonicon to all his desires and endeavors.

He prays to God, and will have no nay; for that he desires, he will require.
Secondly if he may be heard, he would dwell in a place, from whence he would
never remove, all the days of his life. And no marvel if importunate in his
suit, no marvel if pleased with his seat, that had such a prospect, such a
spectacle, as the beauty of the Lord.

This appears. He that sets up his rest on Gods service, shall find and see
that shall ever delight him. But he must be desirous and diligent too, whom
God admits to behold his beauty. He that so loves God, as he makes him his
Vnum, his darling, will be diligent: for nothing works diligence so much as
love: hence is Ditectio one of loves names. And he that is diligent shall
suerly speed. Let but Mary be so diligent as to rise early, and come first to
the Sepulcher and she shall first see Jesus, Mark. 16.

And this Vt Videam is the Center of my Text, wherein all the lines of the
circumstances meet, his Petij, his Requiram. For this he prayed, for this he
importuned. This was his Vnum that so seriously sent him to God, for this he
would be in Gods house, not only repair thither, but dwell there, and that
not for a time, but all the days of his life, all was to this end Vt Videam.

Now to the parts wherein David the King appears with his Petij. To desire and
pray is ordinary with Gods Saints, but to tell of it is not so. Here he tells
what he had done, and what he will do. He had prayed; this is worth the
enquiry, why he tells us what he had done. He had no doubt found extraordinary
comfort by it, and could not conceal it.

For when persecuted by Saul, he had many enemies and few friends; suffered
much, and in reason could see no end of his sorrow; by his prayers he seeks to
support and sustain himself, in that his desolate condition. Nor was he
frustrated of his hope, God speaks peace unto him; and thence he cheeres
himself in his God, from whom he received assurance, that in his own time, he
would make good that honor which he begun in him.

Hence in the midst of all dangers, he not only escapes, not only fears not,
but with confidence triumphs over his enemies. The Lord is my light, and my
salvation, whom then shall I fear: their rage and fury was so far from
overthrowing him that they were not able to shake him. A house may shake and
yet stand many a day. But all their forces cannot make him afraid. And to
manifest his courage, he doubles his challenge, Quem timebo, a quo trepidabo?

And yet it seems there was cause why he should fear. For his enemies came
with that confidence against him, that they came rather to the slaughter than
to battle, to devour than to fight; for they came to eat up his flesh, the
second verse of this Psalm: so great was the ods. But the ods was not so great
for them at first, as it was against them at last: for they stumbled and fell
verse 2. But he was set upon a rock verse 5. and his head was lifted up above
his enemies round about him, verse 6. They lower for all their power, and
advantage: he higher that seemed a prey unto their teeth.

But though he have escaped hitherto, it will not be so still. The pitcher goes
often to the Well, but at last comes broken home; what if Saul's troops were
disapointed, or defeated; it cannot serve his turn. An army is prepared, nay
ready in the field; all ways are laid to intercept him, and if they miss, and
he stand out for a time, the war shall be continued, which shall never end,
but with his destruction.

For all this David is still where he was. Nor army can daunt him, nor further
preparation drive him from his trust, the verse before my Text.

But how came he to this courage? whence got he this assurance? surely even in
the Sanctuary where malefactors themselves are freed. And shall not God secure
his children that serve him there, that is content wicked men be safe that fly
thither?

He had learned and found in the Sanctuary, that the Lord was his light, and
his salvation; and because of such comfort he could never have enough, whilst
his enemies are in the field, he betakes himself to the Church; this was his
care, this his endeavor, this his suit, Vnum petij.

Others assailed, fly to worldly succors, they provide armies, and money, the
sinews of armies, and all great actions. They enter treaties, conclude
leagues, strengthen themselves by factions and friends, build Magizins for
munition, raise Forts, fortify Citadels and Castles, take all courses to
strengthen themselves, and weaken their adversaries.

What David in this case did this way, I examine not; perhaps he had sometimes
more, sometimes less of these advantages. But whatsoever else he did, he
slipped not this, to get himself either in his person or his desire to Gods
house. Other things to him were but the By, this was the Maine of his strength:
you would thinkt it were all, By and Maine, for it was his Vnum. And if it were
not all he did, it was all he desired to do. If he wanted any thing, there he
sped. If he got any thing there by his thankfulness, he had it doubled.
Therefore would he dwell there to pray too, and praise God all the days of his
life.

Surely our condition in many respects is not unlike David's, for if we look
upon the number and strength of our adversaries, they are many more then his
were, and reason we have to believe, that whenever they attempt an invasion,
they will in confidence of their forces come to eat us up rather than to fight.
The Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain, France now. And vast Germany, that
had wont to be a Bulwark against the Turk, and an out-worke for us against
the approach of the Spaniard. Now in a manner rac't or raised against us. And
all these are but the heads of many confederacies able to furnish out great and
terrible forces: yea I would to God we had not cause to fear (besides that of
our sins) a worm and a moath at home, as dangerous as all these.

Against all which, had we but David's affection and resolution; then should we
be confident, that in the time of trouble he would hide us, in his Tabernacle;
for if we dwell there, he will surely keep us safe.

Indeed Statesmen and Governors, should not so far tempt God, as to neglect
ordinary succors. And his gracious majesty has by his Proclamation signified
his care that way. But how few does that charge import. Then whilst they
provide arms, let us go to our prayers, whilst they consult, what is fit, let
us cast our selves down before his footstool, and crave a blessing on their
labors, that he would give them the spirit of wisdom to direct, and the
spirit of courage to execute that which shall tend to the glory of God, and the
good of this Church and commonwealth.

So shall you, even all you, though decrepit old men, though weak women, be as
the horsemen and Chariots of fire round about Elisha, 2 K. 6. and thereby shall
more be with us then against us.

For compute I pray you, the City so ancient, York.
so numerous in Parishes and people, at these times of Parliament, sends but
two to consult (and I wish you had so consulted of those two as might have
prevented that charge and combustion, and fraction, which since has followed)
these two represent the desires of the whole City, and by their act you are
all bound. So are there for this great and famous shire but two Knights, and
for the several Borough towns two Burgesses.

Take them together, and often, perhaps twenty thousand appears for the rest.

If it should come to blows, and God knows how soon that may be, the ods
will be less, though great still. Of all the men in this Kingdom, not one of
a thousand traind. Of those that are traind, all are not brought into the
field. Of those that are brought to the field in actions of greatest
importance, a number, it may be half never come to strike stroke. Of so many
millions in the Kings Dominions, not many thousands may come to bear the
shocke and burden of the day.

But by our vows and prayers, all the whole Kingdom may fight at once. So
many persons, so many traind, armed men, so many souls, so many soldiers.

Then if we cannot equal our adversaries in number and strength of soldiers,
if we can but get the ods by our prayers, what an advantage shall we have? when
for twenty aduising, we shall have many times twenty thousands praying to
prosper their counsels, when for one thousand fighting, we shall have many
thousands of devout souls like so many several armies, or troops, at least
in several congregations, beseeching, beseeching said I? I said little.
Besieging God, Manu facta, with their prayers, and offering violence, for why
not to God, as to the Kingdom of God, till he yield to go forth with our
armies, and to give us strength, and victory in the day of battle.

This was it that made King David when he seemed most weak to be most strong.
This was it that made him confident against their greatest assaults. And if we,
all we, that are neither for the head part, nor for the hand part, that are
neither called to consult, nor fit to fight, would but seriously consider, how
by warring against our own corruptions, and rebellions against God, how by
approaching his Temple with our Petij, we might make him our friend, we should
to our comfort find, that there is no wisdom, nor yet understanding, nor
counsel against the Lord, Pr. 21.30.

Nor can I direct you a better course, then King David was in, who when his
enemies were most furious, with most feruency importuned God, that being freed
from his troubles, he might have liberty to dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of his life: for thereby he was sure to make his peace (you will
confess) with God, and then I say with men. For when a man's ways please the
Lord, he will make his enemies to be at peace with him, Pr. 16.7. and so has
he by this means peace, both with God and men.

David the King then appears with his Petij, he had reason for it, he found
comfort in it, and hence is it that he is not ashamed to confess it. Many
under the rod pray, and forget. David did it, and to encourage and draw on
others tells of it. Indeed it becomes Kings well to be Suitors to God. And then
do they advance their crowns highest, when they cast them lowest at Gods
feet. In old Rome the way to Honors Temple, was through the Temple of Virtue,
and the moral was good, but it is too general for christians, the way to
honor now is by humility, a virtue not known amongst the Heathens, the first
that admitted her was Religion, and she alone keeps her; this David knew, and
thereby resolved, that how high soever seated, he must not be high minded, but
must by the gate of humility pass to heaven.

The King then you see is a beggar, nor wants he his tongue, for he does
petere, Vnum petij. And though a zealous affection, be a continual prayer, Qua
semper petitur, quod semper optatur, whereby we always ask that we always
wish and desire to have. Yet the better to stir up his devotion, and to
impound his straying fancies from gadding abroad, and that the reflection of
his words might beat upon his soul, he does not only Optare with his heart,
but he does Petere also with his tongue, a point Aquinas observed, Omnis oration
debet esse vocalis, every complete prayer ought to be vocal. For God the
Creator of both, requires the service of the body as well as the soul. He is
not so far out of love with Ceremonies as some men take him to be, for all
their quarrel at putting religion in a ceremony. The tongue and the hand, and
the knee, and the eye, and the habit, and the hat, and the outward appearance,
will sometimes remove a curse, and bring a blessing when they want the heart,
as is plain in the story of Ahab, 1 King. 21.

In a word, never man neglected the duty of prayer, that did not first neglect
the ceremonies of that duty. From this root they grow up to the highest pitch
of impiety. Therefore this man, this King of ceremonies, David, that went not
to bed to pray there, but when he was in bed rose up to perform that duty;
gives this reason of Atheism, and all impiety, and profaneness even the want
of this Petij, Non inuocauerunt deum, Psalm. 53.4. and therefore it follows in
this Psalm, the seventh verse, Hearken unto my voice, (he still continues the
use of his tongue) when I cry: he desires not to be heard upon other condition.

Now as the greatest must be suitors, and the iustest petitioners to God. So
in our petitions, as he likes not a proud peremptory faith, (I am not like
other men, you know the Dialect) for Abraham must be but dust and ashes, Genesis
18. so he dislikes as much distrustful humility, Qui timide rogat docet
negare. And this the Prophet knowing, though he be a suitor; yet he comes with
confidence, he will have no nay. One thing have I desired, which I will
require; with Jacob, though he be less then all Gods mercies, Genesis 32. yet he
resolves not to let him go before he bless him: Have he would that he
desired, though with Sampson he took it out of the Lions mouth. That he
desires, he will require.

And surely this his importunity was a good argument of his familiary with God,
for men use to be importunate with their friends, and such as they may make
most bold with.

And therefore Abraham, who only by name is called Gods friend, 2 Chronicles. 20.
and Moses with whom God talked as with a friend, Exodus 33. are observed to have
been most importunate with him of all other, the one for the Sodomites,
pleading, and by degrees drawing him from fifty to ten, Genesis 18. the other for
the Israelites, so pressing God, that he was feign to entreat Moses to let him
alone, as Moses was to entreat God to forgive them, Exodus 32.

And doubtless this was it that made David so bold, to require and importune
that he had desired, he was a friend of Gods too, for what can be required
more of a friend, then to be a man after his own heart, and such a friend was
David: hence it is, that he is not only a friend, but a friend to Gods friends,
and an enemy to Gods enemies, for so it is in the verse before my Text. When
the wicked, even my enemies: See you a wicked man: he is David's enemy, because
Gods enemy. See you an enemy to David, why then, sure he is a wicked man,
implying that for which he contesteth with God himself. Psalm 13.9. Do I not
hate them that hate thee. And then he protests, that for which he contested;
yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred, as though they were my enemies. So that
there being such a reciprocal assurance, upon intercourse, betwixt God and the
Prophet, that they are not only friends, but they maintain a league offensive
and defensive; so as they are friends to friends, and enemies to enemies; we
need not marvel he should be so bold, as to require that he had desired. From
David's affection we may learn to know our selves, If Gods friends be our
friends, we may take comfort to think, that God is our friend too. If Gods
friends be our enemies, or Gods enemies be our friends, it is to be doubted
our league is likewise broken which we had with God: That Is for his affection.

From David's confidence and importunity, and Gods liking and allowance of it,
great men may learn not to scorn to be importuned by their inferiors. The
distance is greater betwixt God and man then can be betwixt one man and
another, and yet David thought it no inciuility to importune God him self. One
thing have I desired, which I will require.

It Is a rule at Court, not to move a man again in a suit, whom we have lately
troubled, I think because there is little true friendship there, but he is the
welcomest that comes oftnest to God. And he that has been at him with his
Petij, may be the most bold with his Requiram. Such is the condition of
favorites, both with God and men. His first blessings are causes of second,
and his bypast favors inducements to him, and so many encouragements to us,
to call for more. Thus the Prophet pleades, Thou have been my succor, leave
me not, the ninth verse of this Psalm. A strange motive it were among men, Sir
I have lately troubled you, but I have another suit, No, would he answer, I
have already done well, trouble me no more. But he is the best entertained that
comes oftnest to God. He is not new fangled. Ego Iehova and non mutor, he
grows not weary of his friends. Once his and his ever, to teach us, when once
we put our hands to the Plough, to serve him ever, and to be sure to make our
Petij good with our Requiram.

Again though importunity be often waited on with impatience, it is not so in
David, impatient he was not, though importunate; so should it be with us. For
Quae nondu^ data sunt stulte negata putas? Blessings are not denied when not
presently given, sometimes God is not fit, his time to show his greater glory,
is not yet come. Sometimes we are not fit to receive. Our Prophet knew that
with God there was plenteous redemption. And therefore he that said with
himself Requiram, said to himself Expectans expectaui, the beginning of the
last verse of this Psalm, and though he tarry long, yet Sustine Dominum, the
end of the same verse.

So, impatient he was not, yet importunate, That I will require. And no wonder
if he were importunate, seeing it was but vnum, one thing that he ask't, and
vnum quiddam, such a one. And this vnum, as it is set before, so it passes
through my Text, and every part of it. He desires one thing, to be in one
place, to behold one beauty, and therefore having fixed his desires, well he
would not change, but to this vnum would allot all the days of his life.

He that makes a suit but once to a friend, though it be somewhat distasteful,
will look to speed. Sampson suspected himself, when he prayed to be heard at
this time only. It employed thus much. It Is a great matter Lord, I now desire to
be revenged for these scorns, and the loss of mine eyes, with the loss of my
own life, and so many thousands of mine enemies. But strengthen me at this
time only, and I shall never on earth make other request, and then God heard
him, Judge. 16.

David comes oftener then once, but it is but for one thing, and that vnum
quiddam, such a thing as of all other was most pleasing to God, he could have
devised nothing for which he should have been more welcome, and yet he is
glad to importune God before he speed. When the Breast is full, the Mother
would be drawn, but she will endure a little pain to hear her child
entreat, or make moan for it. Doubtless it is pain and grief to God to
withold his mercies, which he never does but in mercy. If he delay to
satisfy his children, even that delay is another mercy. For if David had sped
at first, it had been vnum, but not primum, or if primum, not vnicum; it had
been one amongst the rest, not above the rest, whereas the want made it his
vnicum, most dear unto him, Finiuit omnes cupiditates, remanfit vna illa quam
petijt; he had quenched all other desires, so as to delight in them, this only
remained as the joy of his heart, and the longing of his soul.

Then Vis impetrare, aliud noli petere, vni suffice, quia vnus tibi sufficient:
Set thy heart only upon him that is only able to fill thy heart. Use other
things thou may: but lay thy rest upon this, to serve God.

To those that depend for comfort upon any thing but this vnum, we may say with
the Prophet, Isa. 50.21. You have kindled a fire, and are compassed about with
sparks, and may not tarry lest you burn. But this vnum will upon the point
cure all exorbitancies, and cool all distempers. For either it is that, or
leads to that, wherein all generations have been, and shall be blessed.
Abels, and Moses, and John's Lamb, were all one Lamb. The woman's seed, and
Abraham's, and David's, and the Virgins were all one seed. David's stone that the
builders refused, Psalm. 118. Daniels stone cut without hands, Dan. 2. Peter's
stone elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2.6. are all one stone. Jacobs Shilo, Isaies
child, the Evangelists Jesus, are all one Jesus, without whom we see not Gods
beauty. And as Joseph said, Genesis 41. both Pharaohs dreams are one. So may we
say of David's vnum here, and Christ's vnum in Luke 10.42. all is one, and the same
vnum. Mary sat hearing, and that was Christ's vnum. David would be hearing, for
the soul sees by the ear, and so would he behold the beauty of the Lord, and
that is David's vnum.

This I gather, a man is esteemed happy that has that he loves, Vere autem
foelix est, non si habet, quod amat, sed si amat quod amandum est: For many are
more miserable by enjoying their desires, then if they wanted them. It being
most true, that it is ill to love, worse to love and enjoy that which is ill.
And therefore God in mercy denies us that we love, when we love that which is
not good for us; and in justice Dat amanti quod male amat. So God heard the
Israelites for flesh: but not Paul for remoouing stimulum carnis, but illis
dedit ad damnationem, huic negauit ad sanitatem, as S. Augustine says, in a
temporal blessing he heard the Israelites to their damnation; in a spiritual
blessing he denied S. Paul to his salvation.

Then let every man be careful what he sets up to himself for his vnum. If it
be such a thing as may be spared, let him not ouer-carefully or greedily desire
it. If it be such as is approved, as grace or some means of grace, let him not
for the want of it be dejected. Let it still be his vnum, let him not spare to
ask it, I say not three times, but thirty times three times, and either he
shall speed of that he asks, or he shall speed of that shall be aequiualent to
it, either the temptation shall be removed, or sufficient grace to overcome it.

Then let Courtiers flatter, to get favor; popular men dissemble to gain
opinion; the ambitious labor to soar aloft, and when they are up, to keep
themselves on wing; the lascivious drink of stolen waters, as being the
sweetest, whatsoever they cost them, though body, and soul, and all; yea, let
all men set themselves to their several delights. David you see desires but
one thing, and that one thing without exception, that he may behold the beauty
of the Lord.

But because Gods beauty is not every where to be found or seen. David takes a
sure course, and desires to dwell where God dwells. God dwells in Zion, Psalm. 9.
And if he may dwell there, he shall surely see him and his beauty too; for out
of Zion God shines, Psalm. 50.2. And this was it that made his love so great to
the Temple, even because his honor dwelt there, that appears not only
himself in beauty, but makes every place beautiful where he is, for in the
Verse before named, Out of Zion, which is the perfection of beauty, God has
shined. So that whether you look upon the Lord, or the house of the Lord,
there is nothing but beauty in his eye.

Hence is it that what he thought, he cannot conceal. But tells us sometimes
how amiable it is in it self. Sometimes how pleasing to him. Even so pleasing,
as he had rather be a doore-keeper in Gods house, then enjoy any other honor.
Here indeed was his heart. Gods house was his vnum, wherein he found all other
comforts.

Yea, if any affection be more violent in a man then other, here he finds
matter for it. How have men been transported with that which they call beauty.
And this, David as you heard found in the Temple; yea, many times the fancies
of men make those appear beautiful that are not: and as the Philosopher
observed, that Honor non est in honorato, sed in honorante. So may we truly,
that beauty many times is not in amata, but in amante, for it is his affection
makes her seem so. But David iustifies his affection to be well placed, for
the Mistres of his thoughts the Temple is the perfection of beauty.

No more marvel then if the Prophet were in love, for indeed so he was; and as
at another time he professed, My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed. So might he
now say, My heart is stricken, my heart is stricken, and I am sick of love;
whereof if any shall doubt, look upon him as he discouers himself in Psalm.
84. where you shall find him in the exaltation of loves jealousy. And of
whom surely he seems to me to envy the liberty and estate of Birds, in
respect of that he was in when he could not come at the Temple. The Sparrow and
the Swallow had built their nests, even by thine Altars, says David, but his
soul longed and fainted for the Courts of the Lord. He that before had been
the subject of men's songs. Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten
thousand, and had all the honor and content which a kingdom, and the grace
and special favor of God could cast upon him, is now brought so low in his
own estimation, that the poor birds cannot build their nests, but he must
emulate their felicity, as if upon that condition he could have been a bird,
so he might have bred about the Temple. So that when he can he frequents it,
when he cannot he desires it, and as a boon, the granting whereof had bin the
sum of all bliss, he requires but this one thing, and while he obtains it,
he looks and holds up his hands toward it, Psalm. 28. And as the woman by
touching Christ got virtue out of him; so does he, as after the Prophet Daniel,
Dan. 6. by setting his face to that quarter where the Temple stood, fetch force
of affection and zeal in his prayers to God, and in a holy dotage (I speak it
with reverence) over the Temple, as over some chaste Virgin, whom he had chosen
for his Spowse, he longs, and faints for her, and that so impotently, as if
all that were near her, though unreasonable creatures, exceeded him in the
truth of all real perfect contentment.

Might he then have the liberty that Sparrowes and Swallows have, how would he
use it; surely even as the Birds do. The Sparrowes-house should be his, and
he would build him a neast with the Swallow. For he would not call in, but
dwell there.

God says, my habitation is in Zion, and David prays that his habitation may
be there too. So that unless God depart from his Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 8. David
will dwell in it. It was said of the Centurion, Christus non intravit tectum
sed cor. So may we say of David, Christus intrauit cor Davidis, and that made
him so desirous, Habitare in tecto Dei.

Foxes to their holes, Lions to their dens, Birds to their nests, Fishes to
the Sea, Beasts to the fields, Children to their mothers, Scholars to their
studies, Tradsmen to their shops, Merchants to their ships, Wantons to their
chambers, Rich men to their chests, where their treasures, and their hearts
are, all men to their delights. David would be at the Temple. This is the
object of his thoughts, the Theater of his delight, the joy of his heart, the
Center about which all his desires were turned, for he would not dwell there,
but as if it were the body and the soul, he would never part, for there he
would be all the days of his life.

He had sought it with importunity, and if he may speed, he and the Temple
will never be seuer'd. He that so importunately desired it, had experience, how
pleasing a thing it would be to enjoy it, how grievous to want it.

Carnal men cannot relish spiritual contentments, they are foolishness unto
them, till they be thoroughly acquainted with them. For this is the difference
betwixt heavenly and earthly pleasures: In earthly pleasures, you shall ever
find it true, that Vilescit adeptum, quod accendit desideratum, Those things we
hotly pursue before we get them, sped once, we contemn, and Qui satietati
occurrit, satietatem incurrit, we are satiated with that which we took as a
medicine against satietie. But it is not so with spiritual pleasures. Before we
have them we neglect them. Get them once and we love them a-life: so that
temporal pleasures are slightly regarded after, spiritual before we enjoy
them. Before we enjoy temporal pleasures we are madded, not after; after we
have tasted spiritual pleasures, we more pursue them, not before. This of the
Prophet was a spiritual contentment: and a contentment it must needs be to
behold beauty, and a spiritual contentment to behold the beauty of the Lord;
therefore would he keep it all the days of his life.

And well was this added to behold the beauty of the Lord, for there are many
that dwell there, and yet never behold his beauty whilst they are there. As
forward they seem as David to come to the Temple; but that is the end of their
Petij, they desire to be seen there, they care not to see God when they are
seen there: for many come for many respects, and for the most part they find
that they come for. He that comes not to see the beauty of the Lord, shall
never be cheered with the sight of it.

Some come to gaze, some to walk, some to meet their acquaintance, some for
fashions sake, some for fear of law, the gospel cannot draw them, some to spy
a fault, some to pick a quarrel, and some perhaps for worse: I have heard
travelers say, that in Italy many loose matches are made there. But David
far otherwise comes to behold the beauty of of the Lord. And this is the last
part, but the first sphere, by virtue whereof all the rest move, and as the
Jews spoiled themselves of their garments, to entertain Christ, Matthew. 21. so
does King David here spoil himself of all the desires of his heart, of all
the contentments of his life, for this one boon, that he may behold the beauty
of the Lord.

Some translate it Voluntatem so the old translation, and it may bear it well
enough, but then it must be (...) the good will of God, the beams of which
beauty we may behold by that light in the first to the Ephesians at the fifth
verse, Who has predestined us to be the adopted through Jesus Christ, unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, and well might this be
his meaning, for it follows in the ninth verse of this Psalm, O God of my
salvation, for therein is the good pleasure of his will manifested unto us, to
this are we adopted, to this predestined, that we may be saved: in which
form whosoever beholds God, will not long for another beauty.

Others translate it, Voluptatem, delectationem, amoenitatem, pulchritudinem,
all things much set by, and yet to be set by as of no estimation, not once to
be looked upon in respect of that which David beheld, for he that made the eye
shall not he see, and he that made beauty, shall not he be beautiful?

I, but smoke goes out at his nostrils, and a consuming fire out of his mouth,
Ps. 18.8. The Mountains tremble for him, and the Hills melt, and the earth is
burnt up at his sight, Nah. 1. how then saw David beauty in his face? True, But
as we read in the ninty Psalm, as a man fears, says David, so is Gods
displeasure: so may I say as a man believes and loves, so is Gods good
pleasure, Voluntas Domini; hence our Savior, according to your faith be it
unto you, Matthew. 9.29. and according to your love so is Gods beauty, for just
as we stand affected to God, do we behold God reflecting upon us, Ille placet
Deo cui Deus placet, he pleases God that is pleased with God. This beauty and
this pleasure and delight which the Apostle Saint Paul took in God, was it
that made him esteem all things dung in respect of him, so was he taken with
this beauty. This was it that made our Prophet break out in the 42. Psalm As
the Heart brayeth after the rivers of water (when he is pursued by the hunters,
and is ready to fall down, as a prey before the dogs, by reason of his thirst)
so my soul pants for thee O Lord, to appear in thy presence; yea this
beauty was it that moved him to make that challenge and protestation. Whom
have I in heaven but thee, and I desire nothing in the earth with thee, Ps. 73.
Not only nothing above him, but nothing with him. His flesh may fail, and so
may his heart, yet so long as he may look upon this beauty, Thou art says he
to God, the strengh of my heart, and my portion for ever, the 26. verse.

Yea from the sight of this beauty was it, that the Apostles flesh did in a
sort fail, that it did not fail, for he desired to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ: and the Church in the Cant. was so far rapt in this
contemplation of this admirable heavenly beauty, which she saw in our blessed
Savior, that impatient of delay, and as she after professes sick of love
Cant. 2. she requests in the first of Cant. Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth. And now says Saint Augustine, Aliud desidera, si maius, si melius,
si suavius inveneris, if having felt such pleasure such delight, if having
seen such comeliness, such beauty, as the good pleasure of the Lord,
manifested unto thee in the form of a Savior, and bringing salvation unto thy
soul, does represent unto thee, go to and love something else, if any thing
be greater, be better, be sweeter.

Yet all this while we do not see him face to face, but once we shall, and
know him as we are known. In the mean time this is our comfort, that as S.
Augustine says, though we cannot so see him, though there be not here Potestas
videndi, yet here there is Gratia promerendi ut videre possimus, and though we
see him not here in glory, yet here we see him in grace, and no man beholds
him face to face in the next world, that by grace beholds not his beauty in
this: therefore our Prophet desires of God in the ninth verse of this Psalm,
that since he would so gladly behold his beauty, it would please God not to
hide his face from him.

Only let me exhort you, that while you seek this beauty, and make it your
Primum, you neglect not, deceiving your selves (as a way to it) to promooue the
beauty of the Church and Common wealth, which principally consists in order,
and unity. For these two make decency, which is beauty; for that which is
beautiful is decent, and that which is decent is beautiful, and neither of
these can be without order and unity. Hence the Apostle as if all beauty were
in order, Let all things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. and last.

And indeed order and unity, which is nothing but explicit order, are the
outward beauty, the beauty of the body of the Church, the inward beauty, or the
souls is holiness, that is it makes her all glorious within. But that beauty
we cannot so well discern, as believe,: it is only seen of God because the
residence of it is in the heart, and unless we in some measure partake of that
beauty, and be gracious by it in the eyes of God, by being holy as he is holy,
he will never show us his own beauty, for they must be beautiful themselves
in some measure, that enjoy such a beauty as his is: therefore the spouse in
the Cant. 8.6. would be set as a seal on Christ's heart, that if it were
possible, the print might not more resemble the seal, then she her Savior.

And indeed this is the prime feature, that takes him, this is that beauty that
wounds his heart. Cant. 4.9. when we thus look upon our Savior, we overcome
him, Cant. 6.4. for this above all things makes his desire toward us, Cant.
7.10. and there is no surer possession we can have, no greater conquest we can
make, then by possessing and speeding by the desire of those we conquer and
possess.

Fear keeps good quarter, but it is only by the rod; remove that, and we
recoile, but desire yields all, and always. If his desire be to us, we do
overcome him, and all his by that conquest, all his blessings, all his
pleasures, all his graces, all his joys are enfeofed and estated upon us.

Then get holiness, the beauty of holiness, 1 Chr. 16.29. for that is it is
so attractiue, so strong, so preualent.

But whilst you labor for this inward beauty, you must take care likewise
for the outward: For though holiness make her glorious within; yet if we
neglect unity and order, her clothing will not not be as is fit for the Kings
daughter, and for his Spouse that is the chiefest of ten thousand, of wrought
gold and Needle-worke. She may be beautiful, and yet want her ornaments
wherewith she should be dressed. And I doubt not, but when our Savior in the
fourth of the Canticles, brake out into that admiration of her, Behold thou art
fair my love, behold thou art fair, thine eyes are like the Doves; and so
passes to her hairs, and her teeth, and her lips, and her neck, and her
breasts; he took pleasure even in these outward ornaments, of Order and
Unity, which are nothing else but unanimity and uniformity. And in express
terms we have order, which is uniformity, when he compares her teeth to a
flock of sheep in good order, the second verse of that Chapter, there is
uniformity. And when a multitude of men like hairs on a Virgins head, are well
set, the first verse, and are all like one entire body, there is unanimity. When
the Churches lips are like a thread of Scarlet, there is uniformity. And when
her talk is comely, both in the third verse, there is unanimity; for where it is
crossing, there is no unity.

This is her neck built for defense. Let the holy Church of God be beautified,
and guarded with unanimity, and uniformity; and they will be to her as a
thousand Shields, and as all the Targets of the strong men, Cantic. 4.4.

I must confess, that of late whatsoever our inward beauty has been, we have
wanted the outward, both in Church and state. And surely I see no great cause
to hope for amends in the Church, at least in these parts; where, with many,
nothing but singularity is accounted sanctity; whilst men hold of this man,
and of that man, of this Church, and of that Church, and yet by no reason, by
no authority can be brought to see that they are carnal; though the Apostle
concludes against them strongly as convinced, when one says I am Paul's, and
another, I am Apolloes, 1 Corinthians. 3. are ye not carnal?

And for the State, we cannot but acknowledge the divisions in it, whilst by
the practices of some lovers of themselves; the Prince has been rent from the
people, and the people from the Prince, as has appeared by those distractions
in the highest Court, the only means to ingratiate Prince and people, one to
another. When the bed entertaines iarres between man and wife, what shall
reconcile them? when the mercies of men are cruel, what can soften them? and
when the house of Unity and Order, the Fountain from whence it should flow,
and stream out to the whole Land, is in jealousy and combustion, what can the
fruit or effect be but confusion? And thus it has been, but blessed be God,
that of late has given us cause to hope for better things, and that God that
put it into his Majesty's heart to call a Parliament, so bless it, and
continue peace and unity in it, as with one heart, and one hand they may join
against the enemies of Religion, and the State, to the glory of God, the honor
of his sacred Majesty, and the safety of his Kingdoms.

What if hitherto the clouds, and storms of contention have intercepted those
rays of comfort, which otherwise might have cheared us, and made us strong
against all foreign assaults and fears, and have enabled us to have supported
the weak hands of our confederates and allies, that have fainted under the
burden of the common enemy. Yet let us not be discouraged.

It Is Gods method many times in matters of moment to proceed by contraries.
Thus he began. So was Eve cursed before she had the promise of blessing. Thus
he went on. So was Sarahs womb dried up, before he made it fruitful, Genesis 18.
Yea, thus he continued. So he made Joseph a bondslaue, before he brought him
to honor. And he must himself in a Basket (a leaking Boat God knows) be
cast into a River, Ex. 2. that must carry Gods people through the red Sea. Could
any thing be more cross, then to think that that child, that in a basket was
ready to sink, should carry so great a people through a Sea, and yet
dry-shood. You see in my Text, David longs, and faints, and prays, and
importunes, and sets his rest upon it, as his only bliss, before he can be
admitted to dwell in Gods house, to behold his beauty. And this is our hope,
and I am persuaded my trust is not in vain, that God in this course has been
pleased to make strife and distraction, the ground and foundation of that
beauty of uniformity and unanimity, which shall henceforth commend and grace
this Church and State. Thus did our blessed Savior, out of the infidelity of
Thomas work faith: thus did God cause John Baptist to spring out of the barren
womb of Elizabeth.

And surely then shall we begin to have assurance, that God has not forgotten
to be gracious; when out of the former seeds of faction and division, he shall
cause the beautiful fruits of love and unity o grow. O how good and comely a
thing is it for brethren to dwell together, in unity; this is it makes us
beautiful, and comely, and commends us to Gods affection.

Therefore if Saint Paul will vouchsafe to entreat those he may command, this
shall be it, That they speak all one thing, that there be no dissension, that
they be knit together in one mind, and in one judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. And if
Saint Peter will have one thing remembered above all the rest, he will bring it
in, as a parting blow, whereof they must take special knowledge, Friends be
ye all of one mind 1 Pet. 3.8. and in the second to the Philippians after he
had contested with them, and coniured them, by whatsoever was dear unto them,
If any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any compassion and mercy, what of all this? fulfill my joy. This was
the utmost of his ambition, the period of his desires; wherein would he have
his joy fulfilled? what would do it? That ye be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, and of one judgment. And what was the end of this
his serious importunity? that nothing be done through contention, or vain
glory, which are like the breaking in of waters, that cannot be stayed.

If God have been long angry with his people, and once begin to be reconciled,
why then, They shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will give
them one heart, and one way, Ier. 32. yea this was our Saviors prayer last
before his passion, as Saint John records it, that they may be all one, Ioh.
17.

Even so Lord Jesus, let us be all one, in our affections and devotions, that
with one mouth we may praise God, Romans 15. all one in judgment, that we may
proceed by one rule, both in things pertaining to Religion, and government
Ecclesiastical, and by one rule, in civil matters, and things pertaining to
the common good and the majesty and honor of the King and State. That this
whole Kingdom being as a City that is at unity in it self, nay, as one
family, nay if it were possible, as one heart, wherein reason seasoned with
religion, gouernes, and commands, like a just and a potent King, and the
affections yield obedience, like so many humble faithful, dutiful subjects,
the whole Nation, may be a Nation after Gods own heart, and with confidence
say with the Spouse in the Cant. My well-beloued is mine and I am his. So shall
we enjoy Gods beauty, and he take pleasure in ours. So may the temporal fruit,
by the marriage of King and people, in a happy bond of love and unity, be anew
brood of Kingdoms, for men and women being married begat men and women like
themselves. But Prince and people happily joined, if they beget, it must be
kingdoms like themselves by a new propagation and enlargement.

So shall the spiritual fruit be such, by this beauteous conjunction, that so
many of us as are thus joined, shall be his children, and adopted for heirs, and
every heir a King to reign with our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, in the
Kingdom of his Father; which the Lord grant, for the same his dear Sons
sake, to whom with the holy Ghost be all glory and praise for ever and ever.

FJNJS.

