THE Hollanders Declaration of the affairs of the East INDIES.

OR A TRVE RELATION OF THAT WHICH PASSED IN THE Islands of Banda, in the East
Indies: In the year of our Lord God, 1621. and before.

Faithfully Translated according to the Dutch Copy.

Printed at Amsterdam.

1622.

A TRVE RELATION OF THAT WHICH PASSED IN THE ISLANDS OF BANDA, IN the East
Indies: In the year of our Lord God 1621. and before.
ALL the Islands of Banda, from the tenth of August 1609. were by a special
treaty and agreement made with the Orang-cayas, or Magistrates of the foresaid
Islands, were put under the protection of the high and mighty, the States
general of the united Provinces, on condition to defend them from the
Portugal, and other their Enemies, provided that they of the said Islands are
bound to deliver unto the Fort called Nassau, or unto the Committes of the said
Company, all their fruits or spices at a certain price, and so forth, as by
the said treaty of agreement more at large appears. These articles of
agreement, being for a time by them performed, were afterward broken and
violated as well in keeping back, and withholding the said frui^s and spices,
which they were tied to to the Netherlands Company; as also enforcing and
robbing their Warehouses, and contrary to solemn treaty and promise,
murdering at sundry times and places, diverse of the principal Officers,
Committees, and Servants of the said Netherlands Company, in taking away diverse
small Ship provision, their open inuading of the places and Countries,
withstood also lately under the subjection of the high and mighty, the States
general and in conquering the inhabitants thereof, whom with a strong hand
they forced from being Christians to become Mores again, or those which
withstood or gaine-said them, they sold as Slaves, and in committing all kind
of perverse wickedness and treachery: during which passages and doings, there
was again certain contracts on the aforesaid conditions agreed upon, with the
said Bandaneseis, as in May in the year 1616. by one of the Netherlands
Commanders called Lam, and by their Governor General Lawrance Reaell, in the
year 1617. which indeed were shortly after broken and violated by the
Bandaneseis, and that through the animating by the English, who did openly aid
and assist the foresaid Islands, and maintained them in warrage, the
Netherlands Company with victuals, and Munition, great Ordnance, Men, and
Ships, thereby to withhold from us the fruits and spices, which the Bandaneseis
were tied to deliver. In this wilfulness the Bandaneseis continued, till in
June 1620. Till that at laccatra was published both amongst the English and the
Netherlands Fleet, then riding there in the Road: the treaty concluded and
agreed upon, between his most excellent Majesty, the King of great Britain,
and the high and mighty Lords the States general, for to reconcile upon
certain conditions, the English and Netherlands East India Companies.

The which Treaty, and by conference of handling concerning the Molluccoes,
Amboyna, and Banda, all disputes and differences between the English and the
Netherlands Company concerning the same, were to that time abollished, and a
general force of Ships of War was ordained between them, for the defense of
both Companies in their rights, and the commerce which they had obtained in the
Indies.

The Reduction of the wilful Bandaneseis unto the Netherlands Camp, was
hindered a year or two, through the actual proceedings which the English in
Banda it self, since the year 1616. and afterward in the year 1618. About
the coast of Iaua, and whole India through, by open hostility did attempt:
whereby the aforesaid Bandaneseis being encouraged, and made bolder, did
withdraw themselves wholly from under the subjection of the Castle of Nassaw,
doing unto us and ours all wrong and hostility, and withholding from us their
fruits (to say) Nutmegs and Maces, which they did not only sell unto the
English, and to the Indians, but also to the Portugalls, who are both their and
our Enemies, with whom they seek to make nearer aliance of friendship, as
already in the great Island named Banda, were come fifty or three score
Portugalls, who by some more affistance, considering the natural force of the
said Island, would have been sufficient to have deprived both the English and
the Netherlands Company of the rights therein, and the fruits thereof, without
hope hereafter to have any redress.

In regard of those inconveniences, after the publication of the contract that
was made, the General of the Netherland company, in the common Counsel for
defense, (consisting of Englishmen and Netherlanders) propounded the necessity
of the taking of Banda, as also of the redressing and assuring of those
Quarters, and of the trade in Amboyna and Moluccoes, to the which end, both the
Companies according to the contract were bound together, to use all the force
and power that he could, for the preferuation of the places, as much as
concerned the trade, for both the Companies. And it appears by the Act made
by those of the said Counsel for defense, bearing date the first of January
1621. stilo ^oua, that the English Committies there declared, that the
necessities of the business was well known unto them; as also that they were
very willing together with us, to do some common exploit: but for that as
then, they wanted both power and means of men and ships, that they could not
for that time furnish any thing toward the same: Whereupon, the Netherlands
Governor General declared, that with the particular power of the Netherland
Company, he would take the same in hand, and effect it in such manner, as God
should be pleased to prosper his proceedings.

And to that end, upon the 13. of January, the Governor General went from
Iacotra to Amboyna, where he arrived upon the 14. of February, and from thence
went to Banda, to the Castle of Nassaw, lying in the Island Nera, upon the 27.
of February 1621. In the mean time, one of the English Counsel for defense,
that had been at Iacotra upon the first of January 1621. and was privy to the
contract made, lying then in Amboyna, when the Governor General went from
thence to Banda; sent Letters in our own Ships to the Englishmen, lying in
the small Island Puleron, and made known and discovered unto those of Banda, in
what manner the General of the Netherland Company, intended to assail the
great Island of Banda: and when the said Governor General was come to the Fort
of Nassaw in Banda, he understood that the Englishmen in Puleron, had aided
them of the Town of Lontor, in the great Island of Banda, with 4. Pieces of
great Ordnance; and that if they had had longer time, that the entrance of the
General of the Netherlands Army into Lantor Haven, should have been let and
withstood by a great battery. As also that some Englishmen in Lantor, assisted
these of Banda, ours and (according to the contract) their enemies, both with
counsel and force, encouraging them with their presence, and notwithstanding
that the said General required the said Englishmen of Lontor to leave the
Town, for the causes and reasons aforesaid as also for that they themselves,
according to the contract and Order made by the Counsel of Defense, before
that time might not buy any Fruit in Molucques, Amboina, and Banda, as after
the publication of the Contract they might do, and that only together, and in
common places with the Netherlanders, yet some few of them stayed still with
them of Banda our common enemies. Notwithstanding also that the Governor
General protested, that he was not therein to be blamed, if by that means
any hurt were done unto them, being among and with our common enemies, from
whom they should and ought to have separated themselves.

First, tho Governors General, determined to assail the great Island of Banda
on the South side, (by some called Lontor, because the principal Town is so
called) by land in a place called Luchny, and to that end caused the Ship
called the Heart to Anckor thereabouts, which lay not long there, but it was
shot at by an English piece of Ordinance, whereby our men were forced to tow
the said Ship with a Galley from the shore, and to leave two Anckors and two
Cables behind them, or else it had been in great danger of sincking or
burning, out men assuring us, that an English Gunner had shot at them, and that
they perfectly descryed and saw him, although the Englishmen seem to deny it.

Whereby altering of their first purpose, the General of the Netherlanders
resolved to land upon the inward part of the Island of Banda, there to encampe
themselves, and then to go up upon the Hills, and there to plant there
Ordinance, and to that end upon the 8. of March, 1621. landing with 17.
Companies between Comber and Ortatten, they marched along the shoreside,
within the reach of three Pieces of great Ordinance lent then by the
Englishmen, and not long before planted there, whereby if they had marched
forward many of our men had been slain, and so we should have found no place
there to encampe our selves, but the Enemy from the Hills would have
domineered over us, no man knowing what counsel to give, whereby we might get
up upon the hills. The way where on above Three years before we had been,
being all entrenched, whereupon the General determined to enter again into
his Ship with the whole Army, to take another course. They of Banda not once
pursuing after us, but with flowting and mocking let us go, and so thinking
thereby that they had gotten the upper hand of us, most part of them brought
their Wives and Children again into Lontor. After these two enterprises,
partly hindered by the English Ordinance, were in that manner crossed The General
for a third resolution, determined to assail the great Island of Banda, on
both sides, that is on the inner side of the Land with 6. Companies, and on the
South side with 10. Companies. That they on the Inner side should land an hour
before the others should land, by that means to draw the enemy forth, and so
to make place on the other side, while a Company of chosen men should land on
the North side, to climb up upon the Hills, and others in other places of the
land should also be in a readiness, being 330. persons, whereof 150. were
Musketeers, appointed for the manning and ashuring of 30. Boats which the said
Company would bring on the South side of the Island.

This was effected upon the 11. of March, and accordingly 6. Companies by
break of day, went on Land between Comber and Ortatten. Captain Vogheel with
certain chosen Soldiers marching forward, who climbing up upon the hills,
found such resistance, that all their powder being spent, they were in great
danger to be spoiled, but being well followed and seconded by the rest, the
enemy was forced to retire, and while this skirmish continued, the other 10.
Companies landing out of the said 30. Boats, went on shore upon the South side
of Banda, in a small Bay, some with Laders and others without climbing up upon
the Cliffes, and being gotten up, they marched to the backside of Lontor
without any resistance, but only those that set upon the first troops, being
some 10. or 20. Musketeers, by whom one of our men was slain, and 4. or 5.
hurt, whereby Lontor was taken on the South side by the said 10. Companies,
while the other 5. Companies skirmished with those of Banda upon the Hills, and
as soon as Lontor was taken, those of Madiangi, Luchny, Or^atten, and Sammer,
presently forsook their Towns in the said Island. When they of Banda saw the
aforesaid 30. Boats, they thought we would have sailed round about the Land,
as we had done three times before, whereupon making no reckning of our
landing, they were suddenly surprised by break of day.

As Soon as Lontor with the rest of the places aforesaid were won, the rest of
them of Banda, namely Slamma, Comber, Owendender, Wayer, and those of the
Islands of Rossing^, and Puloron, made composition with us, which we granted
upon condition, that they should break down their Forts and walls, and give
unto us their Shot, Pieces and Muskets, etc. Which by them being done, all of
them together, according to their Contract and promises, yielded to hold their
Countries and Lands, of the Lords the general States of the united Netherland
Provinces, promising to do whatsoever they should be commanded, and
acknowledge the said Lords the general States for their Sovereigns, not
withstanding their former Oaths taken unto any others.

Those of Lontor and others being first overcome and vanquished, and that saved
themselves among others of Banda, also asked pardon and sought for Peace, which
was granted unto them upon the condition aforesaid, though they hardly held the
same, and secretly sought to begin a new rebellion, and were commanded by the
General to show them selves all together upon the Strand, that they might be
appointed in some other convenient place to live as fellow Citizens freely
together, without the loss of their goods which they then had. Whereunto some
of them obayed, but the greatest part fled upon the high Mountains in the
great Island of Banda, to whom also many other Towns resorted, and slew a
Netherland Merchant, one other, and a Boy, where they were enclosed and hindered
from victuals by our men. By this means all the Towns and Places in Banda
were woone, and made sure, only Puleron, which was not meddled withal, because
they of Banda therein behaved themselves peaceably, for the aid, or rather the
service of those of Puleron. The Englishmen planted nine Pieces of Ordnance
upon a small Island in Puleron, having entrenched the same: and when those of
Puleron, according to the composition, were to yield up their Arms, and
disarme themselves, as they willingly did; yet our General did not once speak
of those nine pieces of Ordnance standing in the said small Island, because the
Englishmen should have no cause to make any question, that our men had done
any thing against their Fort or men.

The English Commander, Humphrey Fitz Herbert, with his Ship called the
Exchange, lying before ^he Castle of Amboina, and having intelligence of the
General of the Netherlands victory in Banda, shot off Fourteen pieces of
Ordinance for Joy thereof.

This that is formerly declared, is the true state and proceedings of that,
which has been done now lately, and before in the Island of Banda, wherein
nothing has been done, but that which (according to the Law of Nations, and
the aforesaid Contract, made, and promised to be holden, and without any wrong
done to the Liberties of the English Company, agreed upon with the Company of
the Netherland) might and ought to have been done.

FINIS.

