A treatise entitled the Path way to the tower of perfection Compiled by Miles
Huggarde, servant to the Queen's most excellent majesty.

Imprinted at London by Robert Caly within the precinct of the late dissolved,
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital. 1554.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the Reader.
PResumed I have good gentle Reader,
To make this treatise thus unlearnedly,
Not that I would seem to be a leder,
Of other men, for truly none know I,
That wourse does live, displeasing god hye,
Than my self does, and therefore I pray,
All men to judge well in that I will say.
I study not for any eloquence,
For if I did my labor were in vain,
First because I lack the intelligence,
The which thereunto does truly apertaine:
Secondely if I could, little would it gain,
The simple folk to who^ I have this book wild,
Which in eloquente speech, is little skilde,
And as for such as truly learned be,
The which will wast time, this treatise to read
Where they any fault in the same shall see,
I hertely pray the^, where their wisdoms seith need
The same to cortecte, for why this my deed,
I fancye not so, but I know I may err,
Since in such matter I do wade so far.
Well I may err I say, by ignorance,
But not to my knowledge that I know well,
For in matters of faieth I have assurance,
From which I thank God, I yet never fell,
Nor I trust never shall, though the devil in hell,
Would from this same faith me da^ly perswaid.
But God in whom I trust, is always mine aid.
This little work I have intiteled,
The Pathe way to the toure of perfection,
Wherein to walk God has all men willed,
Both by him self and the description,
Of his blessed word with this condition,
That except we believe and his law obey.
We are none of his, he does plainly say.
Finis.
IT has been said in time gone and past,
That what so ever does in custom grow,
Uery hard it is that away to cast,
Be it good or ill this all men does know,
Experience partly does the proof show,
And some custom there is which is indefferent,
And that in my self, I see evident,
For to walk abroad my custom often has been
Because in song of birds I had a delight,
Musinge often times what I had heard and seen,
Among all degrees of worldly apetite,
Some of which groslie in book I did write,
But ever with one bird happily I met,
Which caused me my pen, to the book to set.
Calling to my mind, in my bed as I lay,
This my former custom taken of old,
Knowing it was the merry month of May,
The lust of sleep could me no longer hold,
But that abroad for my pastyme I would,
Immediately into the feldes I went,
Where I thought most birds to be resident.
And as I there walked by a wood side,
Where pleasauntly al kinds of birds did singe,
For whose pleasant noise I did their abide,
To here their notes not from nature altringe,
But kept tune and time, to kind according,
Which hering many thiges to my mide brought,
Cheiflye what nature, God in the^ had wrought.
In their kind our lord they praise night and day.
Keeping perfection in their degree,
In which study for a time I did stay,
And laying me down a while to rest me,
Under the shadow of a Cypress tree,
What with this study and the birds singinge^,
Into a sound sleep these two did me bring.
Now than as I in to this sleep ded fall,
Anon by vision appeared to me,
The bird which of old I had talkte withal:
Arise man arise for very shame quod she,
And remember where of thou diddist bethike the,
When thou diddist lie down, and avoid the blame,
Which may turn thy thought, to thine own shame.
Thou did did while air quod she reuolue in thy mind,
The perfection of us in our estate,
Now if thou thy self according to kind,
Wilt not labor that way to emytate,
Which might bring the unto a perfect rate,
What great shame shall we birds bring y^ unto,
If thou praise in us that thy self will not do.
With that word tha^ me thought I did awake,
And asked her what I should do in this:
Mary sir quod she if thou pain wilt take,
I will soon bring the where thou shall not miss,
To walk in the pathe that most perfect is,
Shall I go quod I and know not whither,
Thou shall know quod she or thou come thither.
I will know first quod I or ^s ye sall,
Go alone for me where ever it be,
A well quod she, now I know thy mind all,
Because of the pain, thou art loathe to agree,
To go with me, but hardly choose the,
Whether thou wylt in sloth, have short joy here,
Or else by short pain, have long joy else where.
Long joy after this, I rather require,
Then after short joy, quod I, to have a long pain
Then quod she if thou wylt have thy desire,
Rise and go with me it is for thy gain,
Nay tarry a while, quod I, for I think plain,
Their is no joy to this to here these birds sing,
And to lie where so many swet flowers does sprig
O foolish man quod she this pleasure is vain,
And shall have an end thou know not how soon
Will thou y^ everlasting joy disdain,
For this shadow of joy, than I have done,
All worldly pleasures thou ought to shonne,
And rather to my counsel to apply,
Then in vain vanites thus for to lie.
Call for grace quod she that thou may arise, ^race is ever at hand to all
those that call for it. I stand at the Door and knock A ^oc. (...).

From all worldly pleasures transitory,
She is ready and at thine elbowe lyese,
Profringe her help to bring the to glory,
Plaint these my words man in thy memory.
Refuse not Gods grace while she may be taken,
For she bydeth not where she is for saken.
O lord quod I ho^de this moves my heart,
Feign would I go but I have great hindrau^ce,
The sprite is ready ^way to depart, The flesh ^usteth against the sprite.
(...). (...).

But to the flesh it is a great greuaunce,
But o lord by grace be thou my governance,
Then grace me thought to ^e me by the hand fast:
saying I am thine, till thou me of cast.
Than up I rose straight, by the help of grace,
To take this iornay to me far unknown,
Now quod I to ye bird, I am in such case,
That I am mete to walk while grace is mine own,
Yet take heed quod she thou be not over thrown,
Remember the saying of holy saint Paul:
Let him that thinks he sta^des take heed lest he fall. (...). C^ y.

Now come on quod she, and I will fly before,
Not to fast quod I, and if thou love me,
So froward quod she, thou art ever more,
To do that which to thy great comfort shall be,
Thy corrupt nature by this thou maiste se:
With that toward the East she took her flight,
And I went after as fast as I might.
And ever as she had flowne a good way,
But yet neither out of heringe nor sight,
She would sit down and for my coming stay:
Telling me that I my nature showde right,
In vain iornaies quod she, thou can go light,
But now thou go as thou were shod with leede,
Me think thou can scarsly hold up thy head.
With much a do quod I, I may tell the,
Than forth she flewe farther over hill and dale,
Alas quod I, for pain now woe is me,
Mine own foolishness I may here bewale,
With out any comfort that may me auale,
To take this hard iornay what mad man was I.
Then for very faintness down I ded lie.
Now as I there lay, which was but a while, (...) (...) (...) of the (...)

A woman anon upon me laid hold:
Will thou all joy, quod she, from thee excyle:
Which hearing, for fear it made my heart cold,
Her heir lay out brayded shininge like gold,
Gorgiously decked, with neck and breast baire,
Me thought I never saw woman so fair.
She enbrased me saying their with all:
I am thy darlyng and ever has been,
It greueth me to se the thus far to fall,
In the fondest folly that ever was seen,
All pleasures bodyly thou have lost clean,
But those shall enjoy it, which does it seek,
Take this way and you shall have it next week.
What man would leave me onles he were mad,
Which am so sweet, far and amiable,
My rest and ease I take, most mete to be had,
This pain I abhore as most excecrable,
Of sweet meats I feed, which are delectable,
And in such pleasures as nature requiere,
I live, and s^liue at my hearts desire.
Therefore leave this thy mad foolishenes,
And come back to y^ place which thou do know
The pleasures whereof thy proffe does express,
Likewise this pain, these pains partly show,
Therefore since such pains i this path does grow,
Go now no farther but come back with me,
For of this iornay, the best thou do se.
And that is quod I, badde inoughe in deed:
Bad inoughe quod she, nay thou know not al,
The pain and trouble, that this way does breed,
Will surely cause the in myserie to fall:
The bird this hearing to me ded call,
Saying remember man and call for grace,
Her wicked counsel to fly in this case.
All her inticementes be detestable,
As by her punishments does well appear,
To show all her mischeifes I am not able,
How be it some examples thou shall here,
The which may engender in the a fear,
To follow her ways, as they did before,
For which some were damned for evermore.
First of Sodom and Gomore mark the end, (...) (...)

Se what vengaunce God on them did take,
Fire and brimstone from heaven ded discende,
Consuming them all as in a fyrie lake,
Because her beastlines they would not for sake,
And after that, they sounke all down in to hell,
With the five cities which about the^ ded dwell.
She caused just Loath to commit inceste,
With his own daughters by drinkinge excess, (...) (...) (...)

The Israelites whom God chose for the best, (...) (...)

By her mocion fell unto wyckednes,
And Sa^pso^ whose strength no tongue ca^ express, (...) (...).

By her was conquered and clean overcome,
And used by his enmies, as a beast domme.
David whom God so entierly did love, (...) (...) (...).

By her intisement did commit adultrie,
And was plaged therefore y^ proffe did well prove:
Solomon his son of wisdom so hye, (...) (...)

By her was overcome and fell to great folly,
Frequenting such fondnes, that I dare not say,
Whether that he was, saved, ye or nay.
All these thou may se, by her intisement,
Did fall into gods great indignaciou,
Of the which though some were therefore penitent
Yet some did incur utter dampnacion,
And even so shall thou, if by instigacion,
Of this fylthy flesh do follow her delight,
Thou art in danger of loss of heaven quite.
Alas wretched man that I am quod I,
In what woeful case do I now stand,
For grace quod she to God do thou cry,
Which I did, and then she was at my hand, who (...) (...) meth unto me says
Christ I cast not out of the door. (...) ^it.

saying, man do thou not think on the band,
And promise, the which I made unto the,
That til thou cast me of thou should enjoy me.
Then by help of grace, and godly instruction,
The which the good bird did give unto me,
I rose up avoiding the false seduction,
Of the flesh, the which before me I did se,
Lying on the ground, seming dead to be,
Glad was I then of that great victory,
Then the bird calling me, forth again did fly.
After that we went through a wood long and thick,
Among raginge beasts which were very wyld,
Where thorns to the very bones did me prick,
So that my strength was almost clean excyld,
Alas quod I how thou have me begyld,
Is this the true way unto perfection,
Ye for sothe quod she, by Christ's derection.
The^ no marvel quod I, though so few does it go,
Considring the pains that it does contain,
It behooved Christ quod she, to suffer great woe, (...). (...)

And so to enter heaven, scripture is plain,
Now then if the head, did enter by pain,
Ought not the members to suffer likewise,
Onles their souls health they clearly dispyse.
Alas quod I that ever God did ordain,
This way, for I think I shall it never pass,
The^ past I this wood, at last with great pain,
Being as weary as ever I was:
O mad man quod she why do thou trespass,
Against God so sore, come forward for shame,
I must needs rest me, quod I, I am lame,
Then even at the entering in to a medowe,
Which with swet flowers was goodly garnished
Upon the grene grass I laid me full low,
Lyinge like one with paynefulnes punished,
But this pleasant rest my heart refresshed,
And as I there lay I saw suddenly,
A man of hye stature standinge me by.
Aparaled he was in rich array,
As though he had been a great prince or king, The ^tion of the wor^de.

Alas man quod he what do thou this way,
Behold what plesures in that pathe does spring
Wherein I do walk, and with that saying,
He took me up straight and held me on hye,
Tell me now quod he what do thou there spy.
O lord quod I what great riches I se,
What castles and towers with bildiges su^ptuous,
What parks what pastors of great fertilite,
What corn what fruit with woods plentious,
What oxen, what sheep with catell commodious,
What gold and silver with iewelles most pure,
O that all were mine for ever to endure.
They be all mine, quod he, and I the^ possess,
How be it if thou will come back with me,
The pleasure of them are thine nevertheless,
And thou shall enjoy them after such degree,
That thou even alone a lord of them shall be,
I were mad quod I, if I would this forsake,
Then come on quod he, and my way let us take,
Then he turned back, and I with him also,
The which the bird seeing, fast on me did call,
Alas man quod ^he whither do thou go,
Mary quod I, his pleasures passes all,
When I them possess as he says I shall,
For he has showed me, that is my hearts delight
Therefore farewell now, I for sake the quite.
O man quod she, yet call unto thy mind,
What God in his word unto the does say,
Who that loves this world from gods love is bl^
And justly shall perish, this read thou may, Io^. (...).

Will thou with the world cast thy self away,
If thou wylfully my counsel wilt refuse,
And if thou perish thou can make none excuse,
The world is all set upon wickedness, Io^. v. (...). xvit.

The world has not know God, nor never will,
The world hates all that loves godliness, (...). Joan. (...).

The world all the lusts of the flesh does fulfill,
The world is cursed, for occasions of ill, (...). v. ^ath. xvi^. (...). vi^.

The world therefore if thou follow now,
God his blessed ear to the will not bow,
The world by his wicked temptation,
Does draw the from the pathe of ryghtwisnes,
Wherein thou should find great consolacion,
But contrary the world full of wyckednes,
Will bring the to sorrow and pains endless.
By his fained joys, and crafty decite,
Which colourably he does counterfeite.
If thou call not for grace thereby to resist,
This temptacion to which he does move thee,
Of heavenly joy thou shall be dismissed,
Warned thou art, now say I love the,
O lord quod I how these words does move me
Grant me grace lord the world to withstand,
And deliver me, out of his wicked band.
Then drew grace near and unto me did say,
Because quod she thou did to the world icline
I could not abide, he drove me away,
But now thou see what came of it in fine,
I confess quod I, the folly was mine,
So should the pain have been at last quod she,
Come back fro y^ world to the right path with me,
Then unto the world I had no respect,
But turninge with grace she said again,
Now forward quod she and thine eyes erecte,
To the place the which thou hopest to attain,
Then the bird saying me begane to complain,
Of my frailnes and vnstabelite,
Chyde no more quod I, my folly I do se.
Then she flewe before and bade me come after,
Which I did through a marise very soft,
Where as I thought I should sure have left her,
For in that ground I stu^bled wondrous often,
Alas quod I that I were paste this crofte,
And if it be long I shall it not endure,
Well enough quod she, keep thy footing sure.
Alas quod I, who can keep footing here,
Yt is so slyppery and so soft with all,
I think this ground will me not through bear, he^ ^ye (...) this (...).

At every step I am like to fall:
Be content quod she, pass it anon thou shall,
The which I did at last with much a do,
The wourst place it was that ever I came to.
Such a iornay quod I, I never went before,
Nor will not do again if this were ones paste,
Alas for pain quod I, al my bones be sore,
I think my good days be now at the last,
Then came I within a little stones cast,
Of a fair grene, which when I did spy,
Yonder is a good place to rest me thought I.
And when I there came I lay down in deed,
There for to rest me among the sweet flowers:
Iwys quod the bird this is more then need,
To go farther quod I, passes al my powers,
He that had suffered so many sharp showers,
As I have done, would scant go on his feet,
The hope of joy quod she, should make the pains sweet. (...). (...).

Then thinking of that joy my heart did revive,
And with that one be hind me did apeire,
Which in proporcion had such prerogative,
That to tell it plain I can go nothing near,
But his voice and words right well I did here,
O happy man quod he how blessed art thou, The (...) of the (...).

that such pains does take which god does allow
Thou ought quod he in this act to rejoice,
Because thou do in this, thy time so well sped,
Glory therein, for blessed is thy choice,
Thine act, in to al coostes shall extend,
And hyely the world will it commend,
To thy great fame and praise perpetual,
In hope whereof, proceed thou forth with all.
Thy words quod I does set my heart on fire.
Nothing shall let me forward to proceed,
That fame is it which nature does require,
Then do thou quod he, follow it in deed,
For unto perfection, it will the led,
And if any do above the take place,
Think that he does it thy fame to deface.
With that I neither hard nor saw him more,
Then rose I well eased and forward made have,
The bird tha^ beheld me being before,
Stay thou fool quod she, thy time thou do wast
Forsooth thou have had a goodly repaste,
Whereby as great a profit thou shall find,
As of the duste borne about with the wind,
The property of which is to blind the eyes,
And so has his counsel done unto the,
So redye thou art thy self to exercise,
In that which thy hole destruction shall be,
I promise the quod I, I do not that se,
For me thought that all his counsel was good,
As thy foolish fancy quod she understood.
For if of grace thou were not destitute,
Thou might at the first him perceive well,
For he used the means which does confute,
Each kind of virtue as scripture does tell, ^ash. v^. and x^. (...) say.
xiii^.

The devil by pride, thought him self to excel,
Above the most highest which is God eterne,
And (...) follow him he did the now learn.
But what came of him that so hye did look,
When he had thought to be highest of all,
God for his pride such vengaunce on him took,
That by and by in to hell he did fall,
There to remain in pains perpetual,
Now as he in him self gave him self praise,
So does he move the to bring the that ways.
Then mark at the last with what he did end,
Not only did he provoke the to pride,
But to envy those, that to virtue ascend,
In which his own nature he does not hyde,
For when in heaven he could no longer abide,
He saying man after wa^de in paradise, ^eue. (...).

For envy to sin he did than intise.
Now thou or such like, that enuiouslie,
Has envy at those which pass the in grace,
Whereby in some gifts their knowledge is hye,
Thou do, I say, reseble in that case,
The devil which laboreth all virtue to deface,
And as he in everlasting pain shall rest,
So shall thou with him have afree intreste,
Envy moved Cayne, to sle just Abell, ^ene (...) (...). ^ene (...) ^ene.
(...). ^ath. (...).

Envy moved Saull, David to pursue,
Envy moved Jacobs sons, there brother to sell,
Envy moved Rachell against Lya true,
Envy moved the Jews against Christ Jesus,
Envy of virtue well never judge right,
Envy blinds men, from all heavenly sight,
By pride thus thou see how Lucyfer did fall,
And what envy works where he does rain,
Eschew them therefore or perish thou shall,
With the devil and his in eternal pain:
Wylt thou now lose thy labor all in vain,
And change the praise of me^ for heuens reward,
Which as a blast of wide thou oughtist to regard
Now chose the thou art at thy lib^te,
Which of these rewards for thy pains thou will take,
The one is all an endless felicitee,
The other is burninge in thinfarnall lake,
In such flaminge fire as never shall slake,
Alas quod I, how all my bones shake for fere,
These horable thretninges of thee thus to here.
With hell pains in deed I threten y^ quod she,
Because I perceive no love will the draw,
To leave thy wyckednes which in the I se,
Rebelling against both God and his law,
Oh quod I how this my consience does gnawe:
Pray for grace quod she, so I do quod I,
I am ready quod grace, repent thy folly,
Thus our lord God preserved me by grace,
And the^ I thought my self in case wonders well,
Now quod I to the bird go forward a pace,
For mine enemies which caused me to rebel,
Be now over thrown, I think down in to hell
Nay nay, man quod she, they are as ready all,
As ever they were, to cause the to fall.
Therefore quod she thou must thy self prepare,
Their suttell assautes, to with stand always,
Or else they will sure take the again in snare,
Again quod I, alas what shall I say,
Forsooth quod she, to God still thou must pray,
That will I do quod I, the^ come forth quod she,
And the tower of perfection anon thou shall se,
But first quod she I will tell the one thing,
Thou must prepare thy self some pains to take
For unto the tower or I can the bring,
Thou shall mete with those who^ thou may not forsake
For they must save the from a perilous lake,
Which stands in the way very broad and wide,
In which thou shall fall, onles they the gyde.
Alas quod I, have I yet more a do,
That thou have quod she, there is no remedy,
Then that tower quod I, shall I never come to,
I warant the quod she, stand manfully,
Then with in a while, the pyt I did espy,
And at the brinke thereof stood the same three, ^he world the ^the and the
^uyll.

The which before that, had assauted me.
What call thou yonder pyt tell me quod I:
The pyt quod she of disperacion,
And they three stand there to the end only,
To draw the in, to thy condemnacion,
I bade the therefore to make preperacion,
To resist them, for they will the assail,
But stand fast and it shall turn to thine avail,
With that the world, y^ flesh and the devil also,
Sprede all my sinful deeds before my face, The Devil would bring man to
disperacion.

And accused me, saiinge thou wretched man loo,
What wretch art thou, offe^ding god in such case
To think that God will give to the his grace,
Remember how he has since the world began,
Condemned all such, as from his law ran,
That is false quod the bird, god co^de^neth none, The truepreacher of the
wo^e of God.

But such as in to that wicked pyt does fall,
Or such as by error from true faith are gone,
Or such as repent not their lives beastiall,
Therefore man quod she for help of God call,
That thou may have grace, which most perfect is
To resist the devil so full of malice.
Then unto heaven I did lift up mine eyes,
Saying, o lord thy grace unto me send,
Behold a wretched man, which for mercy cries,
Even ready to perish onles thou extend,
Thy mercy on me, so greatly I offend,
And therefore unworthy, thy mercy to have,
Saving for thy promise, in which mercy I crave
Then came grace to me the which with her brought,
Two devout ladies of virtue excellent,
Here is faith and hope quod grace, take no thought,
For God by me now, has them to the sent,
To bring the out of thy danger present,
I gave the light quod faith, the right way to se The office of Faith.

For one foot thou could not go with out me.
Although presently I did not a pere,
Yet was it I that first to this did the move,
And I quod hoope did thy heart always chere, The office of ^oope.

For by me thou did trust to ascend above,
To the place which thy soul naturally does love
Yet the world the flesh and the devil most wicked,
If I were not had the here confounded,
Oh good lord quod I, how happy am I now, M^ naturally abhorre^h al bodi^y
pain and therefore would come to heaven with out pain

That faith and hoope I have thus optained,
I trust that by the only help of you,
I shall not be now any more pained,
As before I was, but now retained,
With you twain I trust, I shall be,
And so with out pain to yonne tower to bring me.
O vain man quod faith how thou art deceived, what avails it a man to say he
has fayeth when he has no works, can faith save him Iac. it.

Think thou I am sent for thy bodily ease,
To color or clooke thy foul sins committed,
By which thy lord god thou do daily displease,
Though with out me thou can not his wrath apease
Yet having me if thou do me abuse,
To bring the thither I do here refuse.
And all though quod hoope, that I am only she,
Which am thy comfort in this thy progress,
And if thou to do gods will wilt not agree,
Thou shall not by me have any good success,
Because thou turnest me by thy wylfulnesse,
From true hoope unto vain presumtion,
I shall the rather be thy confucion,
Ye have brought me now quod I unto my wits end
I am in case now, worse the^ ever I was,
Thou shall know by us quod they, how to asce^d,
Unto perfection, and if thou do pass,
On our counsel, but me think alas,
Thou regardest not thy souls health at all,
For which I fear the danger of thy fall,
Then show me quod I what shall I do here in,
The bird quod faith which does led the the way,
Will teach the where thou shall after this begine,
Whose counsel refuse in no wise thou may,
And now thou art preserved this day,
From disperacion, we will leave the here.
And yet bide with the, though we not thus apere
With that they vanished fro my sight corporal,
And I stood and much on their sainges did muse,
Than came the bird and unto me did call,
What will thou do quod she, take or refuse,
There counsel given, or else wylt thou use,
Thy froward custom, and go back again.
Nay rather quod I, I will take a great pain.
For by faith and hoope me think I dose,
The great joy and pleasure which does remain.
In the towore of perfection: a well quod she,
I am glad I have you in so good a train,
I have no cause now on the to complain,
Come on, for anon thou shall come so nere,
That the sight of the tower to the shall appear.
Shall I yet quod I, but come to the sight,
No forsoeth quod she, and that is well I trow,
Do thou set thy most sinful deeds so light,
The which the devil before the did show,
But what thou shall do first ano^ thou shall know
I am content quod I then come forth quod she,
With that we came where I a great stone wall did se.
This wall was made of very ragged stone,
In the which stood a do^e wonderful strait,
What wall is this quod I, I never saw none,
So full of sharp stone and so natowe a gate:
By this door quod she all people of each estate,
Does enter, or else come they never shall,
Unto the tower, for it stands with in this wall.
For this is the strait and narow way quod she, (...). (...). The ^raite gace.

To the which Christ has all people exhorted,
And this wall in closes, as thou anon shall see,
The field of penance, in three parts divided,
Through which to pass by grace thou shall be gided
Lord grant me grace quod I, yt e^ter I may,
I am at hand quod grace I will led thee, the way.
Then by the hand to the gate she brought me,
In at the which I entered with great pain,
Then even by and by, a woman I did se, (...).

Which of my sinful deeds did sore complain,
The which to morn and weep did me co^straine,
Considring my sins of which then I thought:
O lord what sorrow the^ in my heart she wrought.
This is quod grace perfect contricion,
Which does move the thy sin to lament,
This is quod she the first perticion,
By which all true christians ever went.
With that the next gate I saw evident,
With in which a woeful lady did stand,
The which held her heart openly in her hand. (...).

Who^ when I beheld, she made my heart quake:
Alas quod I, let not me come near her,
Thou may in no wise quod grace her forsake
Painful though she be thou may not forbere her
For by her from sin, thou shall be made clerer,
Then what is her name tell me true quod I,
Her self quod grace shall tell the by and by.
With that this woman of me had a sight,
Come nere man quod she and be not afraied,
Thou seist how I show my heart in the light,
So must thou also thy sins being waied,
Show forth thy heart man, why have thou stayed,
For of all vices I am a confounder,
And in thy soul, of virtue a grounder.
Who art thou quod I of so great virtue,
I am quod she pertite confession,
Which does man's soul truly renew,
Being penitent for his transgression,
And to follow Christ hatn an affection,
My heart here therefore I show openly,
No sin I do hyde^ I sygnyfye thereby.
Our lord which is auctor of all goodness, ^ene. (...).

Ordained me when the first man did sin,
Causinge him his fault plainly to confess,
Seek the scripture thou shall find it therein:
Shall I quod I, nay my wit is to thin,
Then will I quod she make a relacion,
Of certain places for my probacion.
David the prophet did his fault confess, (...). Reg. (...). and ^salm. xixi.

And did therefore very greatly lament,
And Cayn which committed so great wickedness, ^ne. ^tit.

Confessed his sin though not penitent,
And in the law written by Gods commandment, (...). iii^. and. vi.

Men came before God their sins confessinge,
Whose sins the people knew by their kind of offering.
Also in the Gospel, for to come more nere,
Diverse which herd John the Baptest preach, (...). iii.

Asked what they should do which when he did here
Every man in his degree he did teach,
To reform their fautes like a good souls leach
And this did he not in a generalite,
But one by one each after their qualite.
By which it does apere that they confessed, (...). (...).

Their sines to him first, his answers declares,
And by saint James it is plainly expressed, (...). v.

Where he of the calling of the preistes speaks,
To anoint the sick, even anon therewith,
Confess your sins one to an other says he,
Which is the sick man to the priest, that must needs be,
Thus I am needful and also aunciente,
And therefore I trow thou wylt me not refuce,
To allow the quod I, I am content,
But yet at thin age somewhat I do muse,
For some wryt that men of old did the not use,
Thou wast made they say in Latrense counsel,
They are deceived quod she, which that tale does tell.
For ancient writters diverse there be,
Which wrote before that council many days,
The which for very godly does allow me,
Being ryghtly used as the doctors says,
But that counsel stablisht me, no man denaies,
And used I am now as I ever have been,
But when I first began few has seen.
The cause in deed of the cou^selles stablishme^t,
Was because the people slack and loath were.
To confess their sins so maliuolent,
They thought a great shame in a man's ear,
To show their sins, by which did apeare,
Many stood in fear any sin to commit,
Reme^brynge that to a man they should show it.
That it bridled me^ from sin y^ church foresaw
And what comfort to, come to men's souls thereby
The council bound men thereto by a law,
Because it should be observed truly,
As it had been before auryculerly,
Thus how I was used in the law old,
And how in the new I have the plain told.
Then forward I went grace co^ducting me,
Passinge that walk with much shamfastnes, the sacrament ^f penance.

A preiste then coming to me I did se,
Which seemed to be of great holiness,
Because quod he thou come thy sines to confess
Losed from them thou shall be forth with all,
And rec^iue absolucion sacramental.
Then I kneled down and after confession.
I did receive of him this holy sacrament,
To my great comfort and consolacion,
Gyuing me salues for my sores corespondent,
Commanding me my sins still to lament,
Now come on quod grace, and forward proceed,
For to the next gate I will the straight led.
Then or ever that, I came to this gate,
One lady I met which brought with her three, Charitee.

Other women which were of a strange estate,
With whom I had, had small familiarite,
For truly they were strangers unto me:
These be quod grace three Ladies good and just,
Which in at yonder gate needs bear thou must.
Bear them quod I, it is not posseble,
The gate is to narowe and strait a great way,
And I being ready both weak and feeble,
I can not se how, bear them in I may,
To bear them quod grace do thou not denay,
Yet first quod I let me know who they be:
Prayer, fasting, and alms deeds quod she.
At that word I began both to shrug and shrink,
Alas thought I what a burden is this,
Then came faith and hoope saiing, man the bethink
Of the joy, which prepared for the is,
By Christ thy lord, and thou shall find iwys, My yocke (...) swee^ (...) my
(...) then is light. Math. (...).

That this hurthen shall be to thy pain but small
Nay rather thou shall think it no pain at all,
Then began my sprytes here with to revive,
Saying, Faith, Hoope, and also Charity,
Standinge me by, no pain could me drive,
To go back therfro, but rather they so moved me
That long I thought till I the tower should se,
What call ye yonder gate quod I, fain I would here,
Where through these three on my back I must bear
This is quod grace the gate of Satisfaction: Satisfaction.

Is it quod I, mary the world does say,
That of Christ's death it is a detraction,
Therefore enter there, by no means I may,
Those y^ so says, quoth faith, takes it y^ wrong way,
f^ is not understand, that man shall satysfye,
As though Christ had not done it sufficiently.
But because his laws man has not duly kept
And the^ by these virtues will please him again, The ^ue vn^anding of
satisfaction on ^ans pa^te to (...) ward.

Of his great goodness he does it accept,
As a satisfaction on man's part plain:
Does this prove christ's death isufficie^t and vain,
Nay it settes forth his glory, sith he will thus,
Crown his own works wrought by him in us.
Come therefore quod faieth for enter needs thou must
And labor there in truly with all thy hole power
Yea quod hoope or else by me thou can not trust
To atcheue thy purpose in the perfect tower,
Thou must not quoth charity, think thy pain sour
For if thou do I will for sake the quite,
And then in all thy works God will not delight.
Therefore come forth quod she and to e^ter make have
With all my heart quod I, I thereto consent,
They would not suffer me any time to wast,
Then on me I took, these virtues continent.
And till I came to the gate I did not stent:
The^ met me corrupt nature which trouble me so (...) (...). (...)

That he stopte me at the gate in I could not go.
O Blessed God quod I, now I se right well. Such m^make not there works there
savior.

Without thou help never enter I shall.
Then hard I a sweet text of the Gospel,
Which was, come to me you that labor al, Math. xi.

And I will refreshe you: at the which call,
My heart did rejoice, then faith pointed me,
To look in at the gate what I could there se.
There me thought I saw christ with his wounds bl^di^g (...) the mercy of (...)
and the (...) fi^e of (...) death.

Which said eo^e to me, the lack I will supply,
In my bitter death, because thou according,
Unto my holy word, do thy will apply,
Though nature hinder the, I grant the mercy,
And because thou have done thy deligence,
Come in I pardon the for natures offense.
Oh with what joy the^ this did my heart perce,
To here of my savior these words comfortable,
With a thowsande tongues I could it not reherce
If with so many to speak I were able,
I being a wretch in case miserable,
Worthy dampnation, oh wonderful kindenes,
That my loving lord to me did express.
Then at his feet prostrate I fell humbly,
And for very joy, braste out on weeping:
Saiynge, oh my soul, thy lord magnifye,
And thou my sprite also, rejoice according,
In God my savior, to me most louinge,
Which of his great mercy, has had a respect,
To me a poute wretch, with sinfulnes infecte.
Come forward quod Christ and now follow me,
For I am the light, the life, the truth and the way,
Then perfitly the tower before me I did se,
The glory whereof express I ne may,
I repented much that so long a delay,
I made by my folly, more regardinge,
The vanites worldly then this heavenly thing.
Then with dilygence, after Christ I went,
Even as nigh as nature would suffer me,
Which was far behind, but faith then present.
Did comfort me saying, thine imbiselite,
Shall from yonder tower, not much hinder the,
Since to go forward thou applyest thy good will,
And do keep me, and my systers with the still.
By help of grace quod I, I trust I so shall,
The^ walking thetherward, the tower I did view
Which had but only one gate or portall,
To enter in by, on which was Jesus,
Decked with precious stones from which did insew.
So glorious a light, that the day might well,
Be called derkenes, this light did so excel.
Then saw I before me diverse bye ways,
In the which diverse men diversely did go,
Making in the way many stoppes and stays,
Like people ouerseene, wandryng to and fro,
What mean youn folk quod I, to walk those paths so,
They are me^ quod faith of inco^sta^t mide,
Which are ouerthrown, with each blast of wide.
Some again which saw their way co^berous
Full of sharp thorns which did vex them sore,
They thought it should not be, to the^ so troblous
Like wytty men they spread carpetes the^ before,
Upon the which of folk went many a score,
So deintely and nicely as though they wo^de,
Not offend the flesh, for a great deal of gold.
Tell me quod I, I pray you who be those,
Which makes their way so pleasant to go upon, (...)* (...). (...). (...).

They be such quod she, as be their own foose,
These la^ al on christ's back, pains the^ will tak^ none,
They frame the^ selves a faith, lettig christ alone,
And assure them selves in to heaven to be take,
By a promise which Christ did never make.
An other way I saw which very painful was
And yet all those people which in it went, (...)*

Let for no pain but through it did pas:
Yonder folk quod I, has much labor spent,
And still in one place they be permanent,
Thold proverb quod she, true in the^ thou may find,
The faster they go the farther behind.
Why so quod I, mary because quod she,
These are those which for worldly praise does look,
They seem forward to go, as far as men se,
Unto perfection, but God did never brook,
Any such walkers, but them always forsook,
Therefore stand they still, and do no farther go,
But take their reward here, their request is so.
An other sort I saw which kept no path at al,
But ra^ among bushes where they their clothes ret These are spoken of by (...).
(...). in his Epistle. an^. (...). ^e. (...). Contem^ of all good orders and
also of men in authority.

And so^e time among flowers where they often did fall
And some time stuck fast i y^ mier where the^ went
Yonder folk quod I, to take pains do not stent,
Like mad men me think: these be those quod she
Which to honest order will never agree.
Then saw I an other great tablement,
Which busseled together out of quietness, Sundry ^tes of (...).

Not one of them was with another content,
Many paths they had which I can not express
Going out of that, where they went there progress
Of the which each of them contrariely,
Affirmed to be the right way to the tower hye.
Yonder folk quod I, me think can not agree,
No marvel quod she for as it does appear,
Many ways out of one going thou do see,
That one wai is error, which al me^ ought to fere
And those paths are opinions, going nothig nere
Toward perfection, and yet they do all,
Each to defend his own wa^, strive chide and braul.
Then in an other pathe, I saw men discrete, The heathen (...).

Walkinge soberly, the way being hard,
And each of them, looked wisely to his feet,
For fear of falling, they had so good regard,
In keeping their walk, to this hye tower ward,
Then beholding them, I saw they were blind,
And therefore the right pathe, could they never find.
Of all sorts quod I, that I did yet see,
These men were most like in this tower to dwell
They were so quod she, for these men only be,
Those which in moral virtues did hye excel,
As their lives in writing does us painly tell,
But yet because of faith they never had the light
Ascend to this tower truly they never might.
Then in this thornye way wherein I did go,
I saw some people walk, but in number small, (...) a^e but (...) (...) the
wic^ed.

Alack quod I for pain, that I see no mo,
Walk the right pathe to the life eternal,
A great sort I see walk the way infarnall, Many (...), but o^e (...) ^th the
(...)

Remember quod she, what Christ's sayings be
Many their be calde, but few chosen says he.
And again, strait and narow is the gate,
The which does led unto salvation,
And very few thereby which goes in the rate,
Like wise the way leding to dampnation,
Is a very large ambulacion,
And many there be which does go that way,
Therefore wonder not though many do decay.
Then praised I God for his great mercy,
Because he forgiueth sinners theri sinfulnes,
Namely all those that do penitently,
Do true penance, for their sinful wickedness,
And again I praised him for his right wisenes,
Whereby he does justly condemn al those,
The which wilfully, their own souls will lose.
With that to the tower I came very nigh, The discriptio^ of the tower of
perfection.

The lowest part where of was humilite,
Upon the which was set two pillars great and hie
Justice was the one stayed up by equite, Justice.

Law, correction, judgment and verite,
This pyller one corner of this tower did uphold,
The goodness whereof by me can not be told.
The other pyller was force or fortitude, Fortitude.

Which was strongly staide by magnifisence,
With constaunce also which does exclude,
Al wavering thoughts which troubles conscience
Toleraunce, which bears and forgiueth each offense
And perseueraunce kept all these from seperacio^
This of virtue is worthy commendacion,
The other corners had two pillars like case,
Of the which the one was called Prudence, Prudence.

Which does all rude rashenes clearlye deface,
Strongly it was bildid by honest providence,
The fear of God, and counselles intelligence,
With memory which does bear all this in mind,
This pillar will not move with any blast of wide.
The fourth and last pyller, was temperaunce, Temperaunce.

The chief stay of whom was called discretion,
Moralite also which makes no vttraunce,
Against the virtue of nature at no season,
Fasting and sobernes joined with reason,
Taciturnitee, to rule the tongue ryghtly,
And dispising worldly thiges not used discretly.
On these four pillars stood this godly toure,
And all the virtues which on them did depend,
Made the walls betwyxt unto the highest floor
Above which to look I did mine eyes extend,
Four turretes I saw which I cold not co^prehe^d
Which was perfect charity, faith, hope and grace,
Fro who^ spread y^ virtues which couerd al y^ place
From grace did proceed all the other three,
And betwyxt al four stood the batilmetes hye:
The rooffe of this tower, then well did I se,
Came from faith, hoope and charity truly:
From faith I saw proceed evidently,
Religion, clennes, and obedience,
Chastity, virginitee and holy continence.
From charity came petie, peace and swetnes.
Mercy compassion and benignitee,
Concord unite and fre forgyuenes,
Amitee unfeigned with liberalitee,
Prayer, Almyse and Hospitalitee,
These were of such virtue that they had power,
To cover three parts of the roffe of this tower.
From hoope did proceed holy contemplacion,
True confession, joy and honest,
Compunction of heart the souls consolacion,
Patience also and longanimitee,
These couerde this tower of hye felicitee,
And to garnishe it godly, I saw on the wall,
The four Evangelists and the Apostels all.
Prepare thy self quod faith, now to enter in
Since thou have come the pathe perfect and good,
And therefore by Christ art unlade of sin,
Thou must receive Christ's very flesh and blood,
Which is of thy soul the most precious food,
With joyful heart quod I, I do thereto consent,
Thou shall receive him quod hoope continent.
O man quod charity remember the great love, Exortation.

Which thy savior Christ has showed unto the,
He being Gods eternal son above,
would for thy sake discende to the degree,
Of thy mortal state, vexed with myserie,
Only sin except, and yet beside this,
Would dye a shameful death, for thy fault and not his.
And yet wc this vile death his love did not cease,
But ordained him self at his last supper,
To be eaten of the, thy faith to increase,
What greater love could ever, any man utter,
To his derest friend, but his love much further,
He extended to the, (being his ennimie),
By gyuinge to the, his own blessed body.
For the he died, for the he rose again,
For the he did ascend, for the to make the way,
And as he did ascend, to make the certain,
To ascend with him, he gave him self I say,
To be eaten of the, because he would stay,
Thy faith, that thou should, not thike his death frustrat
He would have y^ truly, in hi^, i^corporate.
Then of heaven quod hoope, needs thou must be sure
If thou dwell still in him, and he like case in the,
He being the head, and thou a member pure,
Must follow the head, this can non other be,
Thou must be sure quod faith, that thy heart agree,
That christ's own flesh is there, as hi self does say
Orels thou art begyld, and shall be cast away.
Now for as much quod faith, as thou have done thy best
To enter this tower of perfection,
By eatinge his flesh thou shall have intrest,
For he is of him self, thy only derection,
Unto this tower, therefore thine affection,
Set thou in him, for with out him be thou sure,
Enter here, thou coldist not, with corrupt nature
Then out of this tower came a priest devout,
Which brought with him the holy sacrament,
With many Angels compassinge him about,
Which so^ge swet himmes with voices excellent.
Henoring their king whom they knew present.
Then faith bade me on my knees to knele down,
Which I did, then for joy, I was like to sown.
Then after my confession general,
And other prayers mete, gynen me by grace,
I did receive this sacrament principal,
Whereby I changed to a perfect case,
Then the Angels drue about me apace,
Usinge me much hyer then fellow like.
The which a great joy to my heart did strike.
Then begane the Angels with great joy to sing,
Praising God hyely for my conversion,
Fro my sinful life, and so did me bring,
With more joy then ever I can think upon,
Into this godly tower, oh what joy alone,
It was to be there, my tongue can not tell,
The blessedness thereof did all my wits excel.
If with a thowsa^de pe^nes at ones I could writ
And with as many to^ges, y^ same time could speak
Yea, if al living men, would the joys indite.
Which I had in this tower, they were al to weak
What should I herein my wits farther break,
It pleased me so that I wished sure,
Evermore in the same tower to endure.
Thus in ioying this joy even suddenly,
Out of this trance, then I did awake,
And found my self there where I first down did lie
For sorrow and shame all my bones did shake,
Because this iournay on me I do not take,
And as I homewarde went, to God I did pray,
That he would grant us all to walk this true way
The which if we do, then no doubt we shall.
First have joy here by peace of conscience,
And after this joy, the joys perpetual,
The which to express does pass all science,
God grant us all to do our diligence,
To serve him here in perfect unite,
And then to enjoy endless felicitee.
Amen.

