EXCHANGE WARE AT THE SECOND HAND, VIZ.

Band, Ruff, and Cuffe, lately out, and now newly dearned up.

OR A DIALOGVE, ACTED IN A SHOW IN THE famous University of CAMBRIDGE.

The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Miles Partrich, and are to be sold at his
shop near Saint Dunstones Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1615.

RVFFE, CVFFE, AND BANDS COMPLAINT AGAINST THE PRINTER.
When the Printer read the copy of our Iarrs,
He attacht us straight as authors of some wars:
And like a Judge th'arraignment did begin,
With guilty (yea or no) of such like sin.
We that had words, yet knew not how to cry,
Not guilty, Sir, condemned were to die:
And since in silence thus our plea did rest,
According to the law he would have us pressed.
THE OWNERS APPEAL FROM M. PRINTER HIS FALSE IVDGEMENT.
PRinter, you are mistaken in their fault,
And though he swears, that Band, Cuffe, Ruff are naught,
Yet thus the cause he would have you understand,
He was bewitch't by this same Cuffe, Ruff, Band.
To do him Justice, then he does desire,
Condemn this Ruff, Cuffe, Band, unto the fire.
So shall you see your Judgment will prove right,
And so their faults shall sooner come to light.
A Jurie of Seamsters, and their verdit upon Band, Ruff, and Cuffe.
1.
I Viewed my wares, and found Bands case was good,
And Ruff and Cuffe, if rightly understood.
The fault the Printers was; for he mistook,
And made a writ of Error in the book.
M. Pus.

2.
LEt Judgment try to whom the faults belong,
'T will say, the Printer did Ruff, Cuffe, Band wrong.
M. T.

3.
I See no fault for which I judge it meet,
That Ruff, Cuffe, Band should here stand in a sheet.
M. A.

4.
THe work's well viewd, each man in it does pry,
It cannot escape the very Needles eye:
Yet this be sure, if ought had been o'reslipt,
The fault by me should not have escaped vnript.
M. H.

5.
NOt for to clear you, Ruff, Cuffe, Band, come I
Hither to the Term: but rather here to buy
A prohibition for to make no more,
Lest by this art, we Seampsters grow but poor.
M. L.

6.
MY verdit's this, The accuser is in fault:
To pick a hole in Ruff, Cuffe, Band, it is naught.
M. O.

7.
THey press Ruff, Cuffe, and Band: (what reason's in it)
And yet desire, they still should stand in print.
M. B.

8.
Think not your face so good, as need no band:
Dare not to spoil great Ruff; set not your hand,
Cuffe to disgrace. All Linen else will take
Up arms for Ruff, and Cuffe, and Band, and make
Their enemies like Friars, wool-ward to lie,
Or wear a Dishclout, yet before they die.
M. H.

9.
THe faults in Ruff, Cuffe, Band, are whose, do you think?
The Printers? I. He spoild them with his Ink.
M. I.

10.
WHat though the Printer Ruff, Cuffe, Band has stayn'd?
I Will get it forth, or else let me be blamed.
For all his black foul fingers never fear,
But that the Landresse she can make them clear.
M. D.

11.
IF this Ruff, Cuffe, and Band condemned are,
We Will look unto the Linen, that we wear.
Did you desire good Ware, you would rather plead,
The owner sure has spunne a goodly thread.
M. D.

12.
When Cuffe at the Bar is forced to hold his hand,
And there condemned is with Ruff and Band,
You that can see in them there is such defects,
High time it is to look unto your necks.
M. E.

The Owners desire.
THe faults that may in Ruff, Cuffe, Band be named,
Will surely make the Owner more then blamed;
You will condemn him for what he mistook:
Yet still he craves, you would let him have his book.
M. Stitchwels sentence.
THe Printer seeks some way to bring about,
That he the second time might set Ruff out,
With Cuffe and Band. The Owner does begin
To seek some way, that he may call them in.
Thus to please both, and grant them their request,
My sentence is, The Book shall be represt.
Upon the second Edition.
BAnd, Ruff and Cuffe, at first so well did go
Through Stitch, as naught might added be thereto.
Yet in my mind they now seem well enrich't,
Since by the Printer, they have been double stitcht.
M. Burse.

WAre never the worse for wearing? 'twas much before.
But now new washed and starcht, it is thus much more.
You Will not lose tweluepence by it (mark what you give)
Wear it and vse't, as long as ere you live.
M. Exchange.

To the Cheapner.
Do you hear, Sir? one word more:
Pray let me know,
What is the utmost farthing you will bestow?
To sell at such a rate, there is none can live.
But since no more you are minded for to give,
Hark in your ear (I hope you will not reveal it)
It cost me so, or I in troth did steal it.
A Merry Dialogue betvveene BAND, CVFFE, and RVFFE.
ACTORS.
Band, Cuffe and Ruff.
Enter BAND and CVFFE. Band. CVFFE, where art thou?


Cuffe. Here at hand.


ENTER RVFFE. Ruff. WHere is this Cuffe?


Cuffe. Almost at your Elbow.


Ruff. OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou had been worn out of date
by this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least.


Band. What? do you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know
that there be men of fashion in place, as well as your self.


Cuffe. Good Band, do not fret so.


Band. A scurvie shag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a
Freshman, come up hither to learn fashions and seek to expel me?


Cuffe. Nay: if you be so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.


Ruff. He iustles B. and C. stays him.
Sir, I Will pull down you Collar from you.


Cuffe. It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a
falling Band.


Ruff. Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, I Will make you limber enough
before I have done with you.


Band. No, Hodge Poker, its more then you can do.


Ruff. Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another
place, and I will make cut-worke of you.


Band. There Is never a Spanish Ruff of you all can do it.


Cuffe. Sfoot, if these two should go together by the ears and hurt one
another, Cuffe would be in a fine plight: would he not?


Ruff. Well, Band, look to thy self, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee
roundly.


Band. Lace me? thou would be laced thy self, Ruff: for this is the very
truth, thou art a plain Knave.


Cuffe. If they talk of lacing, I were best look about my self.


Ruff. Dare thou meet me in the field?


Band. In the field? why? thou art but an efminate fellow, Ruff; for all thou
art so well set: but at what weapon?


Ruff. Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou will, I scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle-worke.


Band. Sfoot, thou shall know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.


Ruff. A Soldier?


Cuffe. Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?


Ruff. Where did you serve? in the Low Countries?


Cuffe. It may be so, for I am sure he is a Holland Band.


Band. Where I have served, it is no matter: but I am sure I have been pressed
often.


Cuffe. Truly, his Landresse will bear him witness thereof.


Ruff. Press me no pressings: I Will make you know that Ruff is steeled to the
back, if I had my stick here, you should feel it.


Band. Nay, bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band
but a hemme, and he will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and
hour of our meeting.


Ruff. The place, the Paper-mills, where I will tear thee into Rags, before I
have done with thee: the time, to morrow in the afternoon about one: but do
you hear? we will fight single, you shall not be double, Band.


Cuffe. Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.


Ruff. But do you hear? once more do not say at our next meeting you forgot
the time.


Cuffe. No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then
he: for I am sure he has always at the least a dozen Clockes about him.


Ruff. Farewell then.


Band. Then farewell.


Cuffe. Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not
what fighting means: a couple of white liuered fellows, your Landresse will
make you both as white as a clout if she list; If you lack beating, she will
beat you, I Will warrant you, she will so clap your sides together, that they shall
be beaten out in once or twice ha^dling; why? I have known her leave her
marks behind her a whole week after, sheell quickly beat you Black and
Blew, for I am sure she will scarce wash white before she starch.


Band. Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.


Cuffe. Well, remember your selves and Mistress Stitchwel, one to whom you have
been both beholding in your days.


Band. Who? Mistress Stitchwell, by this light I know her not.


Cuffe. No, nor you neither?


Ruff. Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew-starch in Christendom.


Cuffe. I thought so, why its the Sempster, one that both you had been undone,
had it not been for her: but what talk I of your undoing? I say Mistress
Stitchwel the Sempster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little do you
regard her: but it is the common custom of you all, when you come to be so
great as you are, you forget from what house you come.


Ruff. Sfoote, Ruff cares not a pin for her.


Band. Nor Band a button.


Cuffe. Well, Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her,
you know she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you
again, it is a hundredth to one, if she hang you not both up, for she has got
strings already.


Ruff. Meet me, if thou dare.


Band. The place the Paper-mils, the hour to morrow at one.


Cuffe. Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as
little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I
do not, say, Cuffe is no man of his hands.


Ruff. Alas poor shrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands.


Cuffe. If you go, you shall never say that Cuffe came of a sleeuelesse
errand: I Will bind your hands (I warrant you) for striking.


Band. Say and hold.


Ruff. Remember the Paper-mils.


Cuffe. And you be so chollericke, I Will even pin you both in, as soon as I
come home: can you not decide the quarrel between your selves without a
field? I had thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a
horrible Puritan the other day, and very precise, Ruff.


Ruff. Hang him, base Rascal: would he not make any man mad, to see such a --
that durst not (scarce) peep out, before Collar came to Town, now to swagger
thus?


Cuffe. Come, you shall be friends, Band.


Band. Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threed-bare fellow:
I scorn, but my man Collar should go as well as he every day in the week,
and be friends with him.


Ruff. Thy man, Collar? thy Master, thou would have said, I am sure he is
thy vpholder.


Cuffe. Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands make rags;
Rags make Paper, Paper makes Past-board, and Past-board makes Collar; and I
think that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master.


Ruff. Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, I Will cut him in iags,
let me but claspe him, and I Will make him for stirring.


Cuffe. But you shall not. Have you not Friends and Neighbors ynow to end this
controversy, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the thread of
your lives? we will have none of that: come choose you an Vmpire, Band, for it
shall be so.


Band. Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.


Cuffe. Ruff, you shall be content.


Ruff. If I shall, then I must, let him name him.


Band. If I may choose, I Will have Master Handkerchiefe.


Cuffe. Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sniveling fellow, and a notable
lawyer; he will wipe your Nose of all, if you put the case to him: but what say
you to Shirt?


Ruff. He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before has
been much beholding. Why, they were joined a long time together in friendship.


Cuffe. Why, then go to Master Cap, the headman of the Town.


Band. No, I deny that, he is a very bad Justice, you may have him wrought on
any side for money.


Ruff. I Will tell you what, then we will go to my Lord Corpus himself.


Band. He is not in Town.


Ruff. He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Footeman here yesterday.


Cuffe. Here Is ado with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed, I would you were both
hanged about his neck for me. But I see, this strife will never be ended, til
I be Arbitrator my self, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I be
Moderator between you?


Band and Ruff. Content.


Cuffe. Well then, thus I pronounce. Ruff shall be most accounted of amongst
the Clergy, for he is the grauer Fellow. (Although I know, the Puritans will
not greatly care for him, he has such a deal of setting, and they love
standing better.) As for you, Band, you shall be most made of amongst the
young Gallants (although sometimes they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not
otherwise;) how ever, you need not regard the giddie headed multitude, let
them do as they list, sometimes respecting one, sometimes the other: but when
you come to the Counsailors, and men of Law, which know right from wrong,
acknowledging both your Worths to be equal, they shall prefer neither, but
use the kindness of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruff; how say you,
are you both content?


Band and Ruff. We are.


Ruff. Then go before me to the next Tavern, and I Will follow after with a
Band of your friendship drawn, which I hope these Gentlemen will seal with
their hands.


Exeunt Band and Ruff. Cuffe. Claw me, and I Will claw thee, the proverb goes,
Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes,
Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remain,
Let hands clap me, and I Will Cuffe them again.

Exit Cuffe. FINIS.

