A Cypres Garland, For the Sacred Forehead of our late Sovereign KING JAMES.

By Hugh Holland.

P. Ovid: Nase* Infaelix habitum temporis huius habe.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Waterson. MDCXXV.

TO MY LORD: THE DVKE OF BVCKINGHAMS Grace: Whom God Preserve.
PRIVATE acknowledgment may not satisfy for Public courtesies. And what more
public then a Kings presence? Very glad therefore I should have bin of the
least opportunity to express my thankfulness: and much more grieud at the
heart I am, that now I have so just occasion. But all the Noble Favors which I
have received at your Gracious Hands, I have laid up in a grateful Heart. It
was you that led me by the hand nor once, nor twice, to kiss that awful Hand
of his, to which I durst not have else aspired* With what sweetness and
bravery the Great Majesty of Britain, embraced then his meanest Vassal, and
those my humble Compositions, Our young Sovereign (then Prince of my Country)
your Grace and the Honorable Lords then praesent, perhaps remember (sure I am,
I can never forget) And if I do, let my right hand forget her cunning. But I
will repress my self, least I may seem to have picked occasion, rather to
boast my self, then to bewail him. And yet in spite of mine own modesty, in
spite of others malignity, in the approbation of James the great, I do, I
must, I will ever triumph His Majesty to me did much grace: and feign to his
memory would I do some Glory. Often to my comfort I spoke or wrote to Him, now to
my grief I only write of him. This Elegy vents more sorrow then wit, For in wit
the less I was to labor, in whose room matter had succeeded, If it be too
long, think that my tears have drouned my ink: if it be too short, think
that my sighs both ink at once* and tears have drayned* With his H^^^hments,
at Westminster I also offer up my Pen, consecrating the life thereof to Him,
and him to aeternity. I will conclude with public vows. With vows X and with
vows XX. So with X. so with XX. The God of Jacob project all his Elixar of
blessings upon the Son and Seed of JACOB. That King CHARLES may ever live
in the favor of God, your Grace in his, and I in yours.

Your Graces servant in much affection HVGH HOLLAND.

A CYPRES GARLAND, FOR the Sacred Forehead of our Late Sovereign King JAMES.
WHo now will read my Rimes, and with exceeding
Sweet grace, and accent, mend them in the reading
So would be praise the manner, and the matter,
Nor did they him, he rather them did flatter.
For with his sugared lips my ears he charmed:
And with his snowy Hand my lips he warmed.
But now the frost of Death my heart has chilled:
My blood is through my eyes to tears distilled.
His Ague has me whole, that for enditing,
I neither ha^^ a head, nor hand for writing.
Great Britany; that knows no other bounders,
But Heaven and Sea, lost lately Both her Founders
My Master King of Arms, by man's apointment:
My Soueraign King of Peace, by Gods anointment.
Oh that my Sovereign had bin longer lived,
Or had my Camden yet a while suruiued:
With Angels quill (what else can reach his glory?)
To write this mortal God's immortal story.
But in that other world, which never ends,
Him with his Lords his Herald he attends.
How many Great ones here not meanly graced,
In thirteen months the dance of Death have traced
Three Earls, two Dukes, a Marquis and a Baron:
(Who then may escape thy boat discourteous Caron)
Besides young Wriothsly, who^ the Earl his Father,
Then to survive, chose to associate rather.
Two of the House were Stewards, just and loyal:
But of the Realm James was the Steward royal,
In cares, no less then Name: but ever heedefull
To furnish it with noble things, or needful.
If Heaven and Earth did all their Forces muster,
You should not find a gentler nor a Juster.
The flower of Kings, the King of flowers is wasted
The Rose of England in the Spring is blasted:
When in the Ram his beams young Phoebus scatred,
The Ram of death the Fort of Phoebus batred.
Yet has Breda thrice three months siege endured,
Is life no more in peace then war secured?
Great Britain and Breda have lost their Masters:
(Alas! that here they were no longer lasters)
Of Peace and War the ornaments are spoiled:
Their faces Death and not their fame has soyled.
The one with peace, which Mars the other sided:
Yet neither were in life, nor death, divided.
Both in a year, too late they were engendered:
Both in a year, too soon to death surrendered.
But with my plaints why should I others mingle?
The sorrow which I suffer is not single.
His Holland has no need my tears to borow,
Enough is me to share in Englands sorrow.
Nor have they so much ink on us bestowed,
For all the blood which from our breasts has flowed.
Why was the fatal Spinster so unthrifty?
To draw my third four years to tell and fifty?
Why did not Atropos in pieces rauil
My string of life and cut it with my Nauil?
Cursed be the day that I was borne, and cursed
The nights that have so long my sorows nurced.
Yet grief is by the surer side my brother:
The child of pain, and Pain was eke my mother.
Who children had, the Arc had men as many,
Of which, my self except, now breathes not any.
Nor Vrsula my dear, nor Phil my daughter:
Amongst us death has made so dire a slaughter.
Them and my Martyn have I wretch suruiued:
But all their deaths, my Soueraigne's has retriued.
Each year, month, week, day, hour, I loose some fleeces,
So from my self, and all, I part by pieces:
The whilst I stand in controversy, whether,
More Sigh and weep, I, or the wind and weather.
This is the year that all good hearts has galled,
Let it no year of IVBILE be called:
This is the month of Mars to him so bloody,
Because he still the arts of peace did study:
This is the dismal day, the sea'un and twenteth,
That of no kind of Spring or sweetness senteth:
When as the Sun (no Sunday that, nor holy)
Did set at noone, and was ecclipsed wholly.
Was never March so moist; had heaven refrained
From tears, our eyes more then enough had rained.
And yet, oh furious, oh infernal Fever!
So great, so precious dust, no March had ever.
Yet in this month (how have the Fates revolued?)
The great Eliza went to dust dissolved:
Yea in this month his glorious Anne expired,
And droun'd his eyes, through which his heart she fired.
Her lively cheeks were like two lovely spouses
And bare the mingled badge of both the Houses.
For, howsoever now we see it coined,
K. James the Realms, and she the Roses joined.
This Sun and Moon betwixt them did engender
A Star, that both their lights alone does render:
Young Charlemaine the joy of either nation:
Great by his birth, and good in expectation
His Fathers throne o may he long inherit:
His Heir in blood, his Successor in merit.
With cares, with fears, at home, vntost, untroubled?
His Fathers longest reign in his be doubled.
But if vn-friends abroad our peace affritghten,
In arms so will he thunder, and so lighten:
That all the troops before his face shall tremble,
And more their malice, then their fears dissemble.
My Liege, my Lord, my transitory treasure,
Amid these worldly woes a world of pleasure;
You now a triple Crown have in possesion:
Yet must the same demisse to your succession.
But may that day, then all our days be later,
Yea turn the world to fire, now turned to water.
But had you twenty more, imagine rather
Your gain the less by loosing such a Father.
You are a lively Statua of that Quarry,
Whereof was also hewed your brother Harry,
Your Sister Marie, and your Sister Sophey,
Death over them erected has a trophey.
And now (my grief I can no longer smother)
Remarried are your Father and your Mother.
Prophaner heels on sacred foreheads trample:
At Westminster we daily see the sample.
Where now do lie their bones, but void of (...)
For whom this Isle, and Ireland were too narr^^^
Man is but only Proclamation building:
All but on clay, though some have gayer (...)
And Kings are made, what else so e're we clatter,
To nobler ends, but of no nobler matter.
Of limbs or lineaments so strong or hansome,
Who breaths that from the grave his head may ransom
Remember this my Liege, and them remember,
Of whom (now head of all) you are a member,
Con you the lessons which he gave your Brother,
(Perhaps at parting too he gave some other)
For rule you must a people of that bravery:
That can nor brook all freedom, nor all slavery.
God prosper you (for God must be the grounsell)
And send you still an understanding Counsel,
That they may give, and keep, with hearts vnhollow
And that you counsel may discern, and follow.
The Giver deep, the Follower yet is deeper.
But Cabinet of counsel is the Keeper.
And those of you shall ever most be loved,
Who loved your Father, and whose Faith he proved.
His heart profound, his tongue was prompt and ready
His head for counsels fit, not counsels heady.
His ears to suitors open were, and heedy,
So were his hands, but some were over greedy.
He neither husband of his wife deceived,
Nor of their husbands many wives bereaved.
Nor any Fathers made, nor Mothers harmed,
His breast no Mars unjust nor Venus warmed.
To black revenge his edge was also blunted,
For after human blood, he never hunted.
And when for exercise the fields he rainged,
Minerua seemed into Diana chainged.
His kingdom was of wits, in every knolledge
An Academy, and his Court a College.
Where Cynthea sometimes shone, Apollo's sister,
Apollo self did with the Muses glister.
Be proof his prose, and well accented Sonets,
To which the brauest wits may veil their bonets.
Not every day, nor every year I tro it,
Is either borne a King, or yet a Poet:
The best of either, him but hardly matched:
In every nest the Phoenix is not hatched.
No King with matter fit his Muse could furnish,
No Poet could his Kingly actions burnish.
His Holy Soul to see the parts and factions,
That in the Christian Corpse, made such distractions,
Was inly vexed: for as his Pen he wreathed
With endless bays, his sword he would have sheathed
Within those bowels, that in part have eaten
Thine Heritage o Christ, and all do threaten.
Of Christendom though he abhord the cumbers,
A battle yet he sung in haughty numbers:
That all may gather how that Heavenly poem,
Was of his great intentions but the proem.
Lepanto, which he did so loudly warble,
That it surmounts Messina brass, and marble
When heaven the child of Austria so inflamed
That half the Turkey pride, he quickly tamed.
While he and his, of Heaven and Earth were parters,
For Earth the victors had, and Heaven the martyrs.
A happy man to do such acts renouned:
But happy more to leave his acts so crowned.
Eliza fair with hers in foreign regions:
Who marched in the front of many legions.
Perhaps but hardly knows of her disaster,
But ill Report then good^ay flies faster:
Then you my Lords of Holland look unto it,
Let non^ it tell, and punish them that do it:
Least when Report this in her ear has rouned
Your Country with her tears, and theirs be drouned:
The Rhine with all his waters sad and sable,
To wail her huge misfortune is not able.
Then you great Lord, that were to me so gracious,
In twenty weeks (a time not very spacious)
To cause me thrice to kiss (me thrice your depter)
That hand which bore the Lilly-bearing Scepter
Yet needed none, who thinks it is too silly,
His Arm the Scepter was, his Hand the Lilly,
Command the seas (the seas you have in keeping,
As Admiral) to help us in our weeping.
You of the greatest Isle, no petty pillar,
Who bear the name of George the Dragon-killer;
Ah! could not you, and could not all the Order?
That Dragon-Feuer hunt out of that border?
Was ever King, or Maritine, or Mercian,
Before this heard to dye, but of a Tertian?
Can vulgars escape the dropsy, escape the Phthisik?
And is there for the Crowned head no physic?
Oh subject state of Kings to hard conditions,
Betwixt our flatteries, and their own suspicions!
Whose minds to practice on the flatterer spares not,
But on their bodies the Physician dares not:
Our breasts the Surgeon opens with their bowels,
And mutes before, will then be sounding vowells*
Malignant Fever hence, and get thee further,
To beastly men, who take delight in murder:
Among the Turks abide, among the Tarters;
And folk that would infest the Christian quarters
On Infidels, or Pagans, go and glut thee,
But if thy fellow-Canniballs rebut thee,
Then with thee take the Plague thy cosin-fury:
Hence and in hell your selves for ever bury.
But (Lord) why should we live a minute longer?
For (save the Truth) what then a King is stronger
The King is dead, yet this the Law denies,
And says the King of England never dies:
But James is dead, and he the kingdom guided,
The Person and the Office are divided:
This and his virtues from his Seed to sever,
May Fates be able never, never, never.
O would his Spirit now my senses ravish,
(But this desire of mine is too too lavish)
I would inchant the world with these my Muses,
That have no Life but what his Death infuses.
In every Land* to make no long rehersall,
Of Peace he was a Justice universal.
Peace as a present to the Realm he breathed,
And as a legacy the same bequeathed.
Which his Executor will see performed,
What though the Nations have a little stormed?
King Charles will follow still his Fathers humor,
And stop the Rage of war, if not the Rumor.
That Man of God, that God of man applied,
His heart to peace: so lived, and so dyed.
FINIS.

