

PANCHARIS: The first Book. Containing The Preparation of the Love between
OWN TVDYR, and the QVEENE, Long since intended to her Maiden MAJESTY: And
now dedicated TO THE INVINCIBLE JAMES, Second and greater Monarch of great
Britain, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, with the Islands
adjacent.

Mar. Valerius Martialis. Victurus Genium debet habere liber. Printed at London
by V. S. for Clement Knight, M D CIII.

TO MY LORD THE KING. Sonet Acrosticke.
IMage of God; first as a Man, and then
As King, by most Desert, and only Right:
Man is the King of Creatures, and thy might
Exceedes this too, for thou art King of men.
Sun of our Sphaeie, may never Cloud up pen
So radiant Beams from thy poor Subjects sight:
That still our Eyes may see their happy Light,
Even as their Heat did warm our Bosoms, when
Unseen they shone beneath the fixed Star.
Up Noble Mind to thy fifth Empirie,
And some yet higher then thy fortunes ar:
Resemble Heaven in all but Leuitie,
Take after Earth in nothing more or less
Except an irremooued Stayednesse.
TO THE BRIGHT QVEENE ANNE his dear Wife, and our dread Lady.
1
WHat is she that like silver Cynthia shoeth
Amidst the host of heaven,
But fairer three times seven?
It is the Queen of Love, see where she goes.
The Queen of Love and Beauty, (lo) together
With her fair son the Prince of Love comes hither
2
The Southpole that in our Horizon shined,
And made the Earth to wonder,
Gone is that Earth all under,
And to the Northpole has her room resigned:
On whom to wait our Eyes and Hearts persevere,
And may they cease, o never, never, never
3
Thou in whose Zodiak of white arms enchained
Our Sun so often has shined,
In whose womb was confined
What in this Isle scorns to be long contained;
Live thou and he, and may thou see him rather
Copartner then Successor to his Father.
TO MY LORD THE PRINCE. Sonet Acrosticke.
Heir of thy Sires four Realms, and (which I more
Esteem) four virtues, that unto a fifth,
No doubt will thee (o slowly slowly) lift;
^e^^iue this Ryme of thine old Auncestore
^ong Prince of Wales, and pardon me therefore.
So may glad VICTORY be one day swift
To crown thy sacred head (that art a grift
Extracted hence) with holy Bays, before
(Vnuanquish'd or unhurt by sea or land)
Upon thy brow the Wreath of England sit:
And I with crowned head, but armed hand,
Ride by thy Lordly side, and after it
Turn from thy Grandsires loves to sing thy wars,
Exchanging Venus Mole for Marses skars.
Illustrissimae Dominae. ARBELLAE STVARTAE. Sonulus Elegeiacus Acrostichus.
A Vricomum alterius Mundi iubar altera Virgo,
Regia cui stirps est, Men's neque stirpe minor;
Bu imperfectum facili cape front Poema:
Est quia perfectus qui tibi mittit amor.
Lactea nec Venus est illic, nec Vena, nec unquam
Latus Amor Musa nouit adesse meae.
Attamen Eugenij sacros cantillat amores,
Senfit amans socium queis Catherina iugum.
Tandem orata Venus sic ambos iuvit amantes,
Vnde genus tantis Regibus, atque tibi.
Atque mihi scribenti utinam sic aequa fuisset:
Rite ego si colui, dum sub Amore fui.
Tutamen (horriduiae faueas licet ipsa Dianae)
Alma veni, Musis and Venus esto meis.
Clarissimo and Candidissimo jngenio Praeceptori olim, semper Amico GVLIELMO
CAMDENO Armorum Regi nulli secundo Poemation hoc censendum and emendandum mitto.
NAnus Musaei cupit in quacunque locari
Part liber, magnum nec capit ille locum.
Sed neque se magnis studet immiscere Poetis
Quales Meonides maximus, atque Maro.
Cern^us hic veterum lambat vestigia vatum,
Atque pio sanctos basiet ore pedes.
Cum Nasone tamen ponas (hic namque libellus
Sanctior, vt multis doctior ille modis)
Vel cum Chaucero (nec enim mihi fidus Amator
Est minus, and multo Nympha pudic a magis.)
Plus quoque quam tetigisse pedes fortasse meretur,
Quando tuas meritus sit tetigisse manus.
Andreas Downs Graecus professor Regius Cantabrigiae.
ANtiquos memorat vatum chorus omn is amores,
Sed plerumque quibus non Venus aequa fuit:
Foelices HOLLANDE canis foeliciter igneis
Tu veterum, quibus hand abnuit alma Venus.
Et REGINA fuit memorabilis, and THEODORUS:
Illam qui meruit, carmine dignus erat.
Nec tant^m furor ambobus fuit ille secundus,
Nec blandum hoc modo tum iuvit vtrumque iugum:
Sed populos domuit saeuos gentesque feroceis
Hic tandem placide conciliauit amor.
Cuius nunc voluend a dies fructum attulit vitro,
Et maiore beat munere longa dies.
Namque tribus populis discordibus insula dives
Ante colebatur, bellaque crebra mouet.
Verum exhinc mox laeta duos Concordia iunxit,
Firmus and hic stabili foedere vinxit amor.
Tertia magnanimis restabant regna Britannis,
Haec quoque magnifico sub duce nunc coeunt.
Hac etenim de stirpe venit Rex inclytus, atque
Clara recens soboles, and noua progenies.
Quae penitus toto seclusos orb Britannos
Aeterna reget in pace, fauente Deo.
Et maioribus auspicijs dominabitur orae,
Circumquaque ingens qua fluit Oceanus:
Sceptra tenens, diadema gerens, IACOBI age honores,
Aggredere o magnos, maxim, laetus ouans.
Horridula genitum in regione Eremanthidos Arcti,
Sol regem vidit te simul atque hominem.
Creuerunt animi pariter crescentibus annis,
Sors tandem aequa animis cedere regna iubet.
Finibus exiguis arctari magna recusant,
Virtuti campum fata dedere parem.
Mollior horrifero Boreae superadditus Auster,
Vna est virtutis facta palaestra tibi.
Quam sapiens fuit Empedocies, qui foedere amoris,
Et caelo and terra cuncta coire facit!
I nunc o vates and Theseas atque Ariadnas
Medeasque truces dic and Amazonidas:
Materiam noster nouit sibi sumere dignam,
Dignos and versus pangere materia.
Nicolai Hilli Carmen Testamentale and viaticum.
NVnc migro, nec patrios forsan rediturus ad agros
Vrget, and officij debita cura premit.
Quid prohibebit enim quin very testis honestem,
Quem studij paritas iustraque multa probant?
Raptim and discedens verbo quod sentio dicam,
Totius gregis est gloria, nemo gregis.
Ornat and egregijs Catherinam millibus effert:
Vt canit ille suam, sic canit illa suum.
E: B: Anacreontickes.
Scarce 'till now has ENGLAND seen
A Poem, but of verses store;
Here an vnenforced green
Has native flowers, which heretofore
Had, at most, well painted been,
As was the season which them bore:
Arts each Venus that does shine
In ancient Poesy, here more.
HOLLAND, this first birth of thine
Put forth imperfect, stands before
The finished, and shall in fine
Somewhat be new for worlds to adore:
CYNTHIVS (as we divine)
And the MUSES, and the GRACES,
And their QVEENE, by thee refine
Bastard Songs, whose common bases
Were but words, that KATHARINE
Beauty quall to her faces
Might enjoy Here then unhard
A Princely Love, and learned Bard.
Ben: Johnson. Ode. (...).
WHo says our Times nor have, nor can
Produce us a black Swan?
Behold, where one does swim;
Whose Note, and Hue,
Besides the other Swannes admiring him,
Betray it true:
A gentler Bird, then this,
Did never dint the breast of Tamisis.
Mark, mark, but when his wing he takes,
How fair a flight he makes!
How upward, and direct!
Whilst pleased Apollo
Smiles in his Sphaere, to see the rest affect,
In vain to follow:
This Swanne is only his,
And Phoebus love cause of his blackenesse is.
He showed him first the hoofe-cleft Spring,
Near which, the Thespiad's sing;
The clear Dircaean Fount
Where Pindar swamme;
The pale Pyrene, and the forked Mount:
And, when they came
To brooks, and broader streams,
From Zephyr's rape would close him with his beams.
This changed his Down; till this, as white
As the whole heard in fight,
And still is in the Breast:
That part nor Wind,
Nor Sun could make to vary from the rest,
Or alter kind.
"So much does Virtue hate,
"For style of rareness, to degenerate.
Be then both Rare, and Good; and long
Continue thy sweet Song.
Nor let one River boast
Thy tunes alone;
But prove the Air, and sail from Coast to Coast:
Salute old Moan,
But first to Cluid stoop low,
The Vale, that bred thee pure, as her Hills Snow.
From thence, display thy vving again
Over Ie^rna maine,
To the Eugenian dale;
There charm the rout
With thy soft notes, and hold them within Pale
That late were out.
"Music has power to draw,
"Where neither Force can bend, nor Fear can awe.
Be proof, the glory of his hand,
(Charles Montioy) whose command
Has all been Harmony:
And more has won
Upon the Kerne, and wildest Irishry,
Then Time has done,
Whose strength is above strength;
And conquers all things, yea it self, at length.
Who ever sipt at Baphyre river,
That heard but Spite deliver
His farre-admited Acts,
And is not raped
With entheate rage, to publish their bright tracts?
(But this more apt
When him alone we sing)
Now must we plie our aim; our Swan's on wing.
Who (see) already has ore-flowne
The Hebrid Isles, and known
The scattered Orcades;
From thence is gone
To utmost Thule: whence, he backs the Seas
To Caledon,
And over Grampius mountain,
To Loumond lake, and Twedes blacke-springing fountain.
Haste, Haste, sweet Singer: Nor to Tine,
Humber, or Owse, decline;
But over Land to Trent:
There cool thy Plumes,
And up again, in skies, and air to vent
Their reeking fumes;
Till thou at Tames alight,
From whose proud bosom, thou began'st thy flight.
Tames, proud of thee, and of his Fate
In entertaining late
The choice of Europes pride;
The nimble French;
The Dutch whom Wealth (not Hatred) does divide,
The Danes that drench
Their cares in wine; with sure
Though slower Spain; and Italy mature.
All which, when they but hear a strain
Of thine, shall think the Maine
Has sent her Mermaides in,
To hold them here:
Yet, looking in thy face, they shall begin
To loose that fear;
And (in the place) envy
So black a Bird, so bright a Quality.
But should they know (as I) that this,
Who warbleth PANCHARIS,
Were CYCNVS, once high flying
With Cupids wing;
Though, now by Love transformed, and daily dying:
(Which makes him sing
With more delight, and grace)
Or thought they, Leda's white Adult'rers place
Among the stars should be resigned
To him, and he there shrin'd;
Or Tames be raped from us
To dim and drown
In heaven the Sign of old Eridamos:
How they would frown!
But these are Mysteries
Concealed from all but clear Propheticke eyes.
It is enough, their grief shall know
At their return, nor Po,
Iberus, Tagus, Rheine,
Scheldt, nor the Maas,
Slow Arar, nor swift Rhone; the Loyre, nor Seine,
With all the race
Of Europes waters can
Set out a like, or second to our Swan.
To my Maiden Muse.
Go Virgin Muse to her Divinity,
That is the Vesta of Virginity:
For unto whom should thou go rather
So bound to her, and to her father?
Be gonne, and when thou come before her,
Upon thy knee, see thou adore her.
For thou may gather by her feature,
She is more then an earthly creature.
In whom no Elements are combined,
But a fifth Essence well refined
Above the vulgar gross confections
Of any of the four complexions,
Phlegm, Sanguine, Melancholy, Coler.
Tell her that once I was her Scholar,
And how in Grammar I was grounded
In the best school she ever founded,
By two great Clerks (two greater wasters
Of oil then hours) that were my Masters:
Where I lived partly of her larges,
And partly of my parents charges.
Thence was I had to learn more knolledge
To Cambridge, and her fathers College,
Of him whose fame is flowne ALL-OVER
As well beyond as this side Dover.
On Aristotle often I pored,
And here and there him ouer-skored.
Where Poetry too I found defined,
To which by birth I was inclined.
Yet heard I worthy DOVVNES in Homer,
And every day I gleaned my gomer.
Thus having there for Lea served
Though some said Rachel I deserved)
Some thought the house could stand without me.
I then began to look about me:
And forthwith desperately did ventre
The wide world, in whose little Center
My friends (of whom death has bereft me)
My loving friends some living left me,
Enough (if God the grace but lend me)
From Cold and Hunger to defend me:
That I may study still by leisure,
Without all pain, and at my pleasure.
Now the black Down began to cover
My pale Cheeks (for I was a Lover)
And sung Acrosticke Sonets sweetly;
For (if that some can judge discreetely)
I need not fear that dainty DAVIES,
Though he sing sweeter then the Mauis.
And of my Love they were. But stay thee,
No more of that my Muse I pray thee.
For either it must show my folly,
Or else renew my Melancholy:
Yet was she fair, and Honorable,
And Virtuous (had she been more stable.)
Though she perhaps did but forget her,
And now likes May denhead the better:
Whereof she is the richest border
Next CYNTHIA Sovereign of that Order.
When Love my bosom thus had fired,
Me for his Prophet he inspired:
That every line, and every letter
Of my devise might pass the better.
Yet of this Legend but the writer
Was I, and he the sole inditer.
For how alas can it be other?
I am not I the Muses brother.
My lips I never yet have sowsed
In Hippocrene, nor carowsed
The lusty Liquor thence distilling
The brain with holly fury filling.
The Climat where I was begotten
Of father Phoebus is forgotten,
No Parnasse there (though Mountains many)
Nor Muse (though Nymphs as fair as any)
God wot it is too far removed
From her, to be of them beloved.
Apollo, they and all the Graces,
Attend her only in all places.
This in effect when thou have told her,
Thou must be yet a little bolder:
And beg that thou may wait upon her,
Among her many May des of Honor;
A modest Maid with chaste variety,
To lull asleep that sweet Society.
Who may as well as any other,
Read every line before the Mother.
So shamefa'cd are they, and so holly,
Void of all looseness, and light folly:
Else had it been too much impiety,
To vow them to so great a Deity.
This done, again on knee low bended,
And hands as high to heaven extended,
Ascribe me of this golden story
Only the pain, and her the glory:
Praying she would but read the proem,
And so breath life into my Poem
PANCHARIS: THE FIRST BOOK.
I Sing Queen Katharine and my countryman.
O Love (if I before thy Altar spread,
Black though I be, have often looked pale and wan;
And as white Turtles there have offered,
As are those that thy whiter mother dravve)
Draw near, and with her Myrtle deck the head
Of me thy priest, that am too rudely raw,
Nor once have bin baptized in the spring
Of Helicon, which yet I never saw.
A pinion pluck me out of thine own wing:
And let thy godhead more propitious be
Unto my thoughts whiles others loves I sing,
Then in mine own it has been unto me.
AND thou O second Sea-borne Queen of Love,
In whose fair forehead Love and Majesty
Still kiss each other (as the Turtle-doue
Does her beloved) thou whose frown, whose smile
Presents both, who do inspire and move
This lesser Continent, this greatest I Will:
Let smiling Love, when Majesty would frown,
Infuse like life and motion to my Style.
I treat not I here of the awful Crown,
(Though somewhat of the court) my Legend is
Composde of Love and Beauty up and down.
Where if I aught have said that sounds amiss,
Immortal Maid, thou pardon me that crime,
Since thy white hand which (lord) I long to kiss
May cross out all, and rectify my rhyme.
So shall the amorous Readers seem as those,
That have seen thee full often and many a time.
Yet seeing thee again, anon suppose
They somewhat see they never saw before,
Such spangling objects thou do still disclose,
As all desire to see thee more and more.
From London Westward does a Castle stand
Along the Thames, which of the winding shore
Is called Windsore, known by sea and land,
For the rich Guarter and the holy George
There founded first by the victorious hand
Of warlike Edward, he that was the scorge
And second hammer of the haughty Scot.
As the lame God in his Trinacrian Forge
Strived first to blow the stubborn iron hot,
And after laid about him like a Lord,
Till he thereof the upper hand had got:
So English Edward did with fire and sword,
Lighten and Thunder in that Northern Clime,
And never respite did his foe afford,
(No nor himself almost) until the time
As hardy David graced fair Windsores Court.
Where also John of France, who longed to clime
The wheel of Fortune in the self same sort,
A captive King was after shortly seen.
Yet neither this, nor that, so much report
The fame of Windsore, as fair Katherine;
She that has yet (save her great Niece) no other,
Daughter of France, of England Mother-Queene,
The sixth Charles daughter, the sixth Henry's mother,
And (which is chiefest) the fifth Henry's Wife.
Here the sad Queen full many a sigh did smother,
Resolved still to lead a Widows life.
So chaste was she, though fair, and rich, and young,
That young and old to praise her were at strife:
Of her high honor all Musicians sung,
And thereto each sweet Poet tuned his pen,
That therewith England and all Europe rung.
She was the wonder of all mortal men,
Few Queens came near her, and none went above,
In grace and goodness, since, before, or then.
Might once no minion dare to kiss her glove
(Much less her hand) or Mistress her mis-call;
As men are wont, when they for fashion love.
So modest was she, and so mecke withal,
That all good folks might to her Presence come
No less then to some Counselors common Hall.
More does the suter than the gaudy room,
Set out a Monarchs Majesty, by ods,
When life or death he looks for at his doom.
Not they that grau'd the gold did make the gods,
But such as did before them bow to beg,
All were they made of clay but only clods:
Nor they the Prince that still provoke and egg,
(That only they may golden I dolls be
To which the subject bends his servile leg)
The sacred and anointed Majesty
To rob the realm, to gain the subjects wealth,
And loose their hearts; But such as on the knee
Importune grace with happiness and health,
Not posted off to those extreme delays
Of bribing favorites, which is worse then stealth,
And scarce was heard of in those happy days.
Her self a widow, would for widows plead
With much compassion, and at al assayes,
But as for Orphans bills, them would she read,
And then shut in her princely Orphans hand,
Whereby along with her she would him lead
Unto his Uncle that did rule the land:
Hard were the heart, that in so just a cause,
With two such suitors upon terms could stand,
And not dispense a little with the laws.
Thus with her great delight in doing good,
She wanne such fame and popular applause,
That on a time the goddess of the wood
Diana sorely longed once to see
This ^^ street model of all womanhoode,
And next her self the flower of chastity.
Wherefore the (Sun now scorching in the skull
Of L^o) forth a hunting needs would she
To Windesore forest, which she found as full
Of dear, as trees: yet trees so many ar,
As there the darts of Phoebus are too dull;
And pierce no more then does the meanest star.
There was the Laurel that was glad to hide
Her green head from the face of Phoebus far,
The I ordly Oak that scorned not by his side
The bragging Brier, and with wild yuie was
Like great God Bacchus crowned, there was, beside
The smoothskinn'd Beech all kerued as did pass,
In curious knotts that did the names entwine
Of many a Lover, and of many a Less.
There was the Elm that underprops the Vine,
And Box, whereof poor shephards frame their pipes,
The gentle Wood bind, and sweet Eglantine,
Each other clipping with their amorous gripes.
The budded Hawthorn, and our London dames
Holy-reformers: the Birch lacing stripes
On lasie truands, with such like, whose names
I know not, save the Willow that did guirde
The banks forsaken of the slippry Thames.
On every tree did sit a several bird,
And every bird did sing his several note:
This to the base a fifth, that sung a third,
Each one according to his aerie throat.
A Summers day me thinks were nothing long
With the rare Music which they made by rote:
Phoebe her self with all her Nymphs did throng
To hear it, as she had not heavenly been:
And this was all the burden of their Song,
Long live Diana and fair Katherene.
Wearied with toil, but never with the noise,
High time she thought to go and see the Queen,
For her declining brother, that enioyes
One part in one of her three-formed realms,
Bade her break up those sports and earthly joys,
Since he must never quench his thirsty beams,
Till she to heaven return and take his place
To govern there the stars, and here the streams.
She therefore to the Castle began to pace
That bounteously was built of fair freestone,
Whose gilded inside, for the greater grace,
Was all set out with many a precious one,
And they with one that yet more precious was:
The cristall windows round about it shone,
That as she stood therein the very glass
Seemed rather to let out the lusty light.
On did the goddess with her meany pass,
Till they came to a room all richly dight,
Of heavenly bliss and happiness the bower,
Where each of other had this happy sight.
The place was after called the Maidens tower,
But of Diana and her Maids no doubt
So called was, and is unto this hour.
Much the amazed goddess looked about,
But most astoned at the Queen she stood,
That ready word she could bring hardly out,
Before the lovely Queen, (who could more good
Then half a world) did silence softly break,
Each Lilly blending with a Rose of blood.
Madame (she said) my tongue can hardly speak
That world of worth which I in you admire:
Then all that I can do is far too weak
To answer your desert and my desire:
For since my Lord, my life, (God his soul save)
Was laid (as well may witness my attire)
My better half since he was laid in grave,
I never yet came forth in company;
But in my chamber my self buried have.
Wherefore, if person here, or aught there be,
That unto you may breed the least offense,
God knows it is without my priuitie:
But did I know, I soon should rid him hence,
That of this action is not humbly glad,
And therewithal, they both low reverence
Did one another. Up the while was had
A Banquet to a by rome as did pass,
Bisket-bread, Sucket, Marchpane, Marmalad,
Candids, Conserues, and all that dainty was:
It haild down comfects, and through every spoutt
The Sugar-Castles powrd out hypocras
Walked up and down the boles, so as I doubt
If I may call them standing cups or no.
And as the wine, so went the day about.
Diana rose, and ready was to go,
When in an other cup of massy gold
They crowned her wine that sparkled to and fro.
It was the king Confessors Cup of old,
Who lived a married man, and died a maid.
She kissed the cup, where grau'n, she might behold
Actaeons death, and down it quickly laid,
Then turned a little to her maids aside,
Rebuk't their want of secrecy, and said.
Could ye no better your own counsels hide,
But over England too it must be blazed?
Lo here, Actaeon in his horned hide
While on our shame and nakedness he gazed,
Therewith she pawz'd, but they no word could say,
So were they at that lively map amazed.
And sure the cup did all so well display,
As if it white wine were that therein stood.
Then would ye swear Dianaes self there by,
Nakedly clothed with the cristall flood.
And were it read, there lay then would ye swears,
Actaeon bathing him in his own blood.
At last, as one that half abashed were,
Unto the Queen she turned and vttred this.
Alack, alack, if his own hownds did tear
This fond Actaeon, yet the fault was his,
And mine the grief: we gods are no less sorry
For mortals punishments, then for their amiss,
Though we, by this, and that, declare our glory,
And our own justice in them both exalte:
Yet some will say (and they too peremptory)
That this his fortune was, and not his fault:
Was It not his fault so to profane a place,
That hallowed was with franckincense and salt?
Were It not his fault that should surprise your grace
Here in your chamber, skare you or your train,
And from your side your surest servants race?
Abortiue fancies swim about his brain,
And fail him when himself he most assures:
Run all his plots and purposes in vain,
That shall the like attempts on you or yours.
Thus ended she, and with this speech the day.
On stole the night, that parting still procures,
As though it came to bid her come away,
Then took she leave, and in her coach did clime,
The Eastern hill with horses iron gray,
Where in slow minutes she must tell the time,
And serve the use of man. God bade her so.
When neither Cock does crow, nor Clock does chime,
Whether we see her silver face or no,
Yet there she walks, as well by day as night,
And still about her cristall or be does go.
But (lord) with what a longing and delight
To Windsor ward she down would cast her look,
And guild the wide Thames with her trembling light.
An other heaven ye would have thought the brook
With Moon and Stars, and here and there a cloud:
But in high heaven what way so e're she took,
Queen Katharines praises there she rung aloude,
Set to the tune of her well tempred sphere,
Much more harmonious then is harp and crowd.
Hermes, that all the ghosts below can rear,
And gently usher with his snaky rod,
To this new Caroll gaue' attentive ear:
And (as he is a very prating god)
To the bright Venus has it told anon
From the first point to the last period.
When she in all the haste would needs be gone
To see below, what all had heard above,
Of Englands Queen and peerless paragon:
Her Coach was drawn by many a Turtle-doue,
And driven by a coachman of great worth,
Her little son, the mighty god of Love.
So long he guided on his course by North,
When having past the seventh and utmost clime,
Out of the sea he might see peeping forth
A spot of Earth as white as any lime:
To which he thought it best his course to hold.
Now was the Earth, for it was past the prime,
That had unmasked her of her tawny old,
Reuested with a flowery diadem,
And new green velvet, spangled all with gold.
Thus were the fields enameld all of them,
Along the silver Thames that did embrace
The golden meades in wanton arms, and hem
Their looser skitts like an indented lace.
Acrosle, and up and down the river swame
Her sacred swannes, who when they saw her Grace,
Unto her Coach to do their homage came:
And from the land came Turtles many a pair,
Unto her Deity who did the same.
Then Citherea seeing them so repair
Bespake, Sir boy, we sure be gone amiss:
(But yet, the best is this, the way was fair)
Nay doubtless, that no way to Windsore is,
But to our palace in mount C^theron.
And Cupid he was sore afraid by this
Lest it were so indeed, when (having gone
A little further) he might plainly see
Where with his eye a castle met anon
High on a hill (as though it scorned to be
Built on the baser earth) and towr'd above
The lofty clouds, with such a Majesty,
As said it could not be the Court of Love.
How often have you seen together dwell
The lordly Eagle and the lowely Dove,
Or Love and Majesty concording well?
By this, they to the castle-gate be come,
That was shut in by warning of a bell,
In every room yet stirring heard they some,
Which made them loudly call, and loudly knock,
Yet none, no more then if they had bin dombe,
Would answer them; a long hour by the clock,
They waited there; now he, now she, now both:
Cupid at last did peep in at the lock,
Yet no man came; Then Venus waxed wroth,
And since of force she must her purpose miss
To be revenged she took a solemn oath
And said. Much worship have we won iwis,
If thus one silly woman may abuse
Two such great Godheads; if we suffer this,
What wretch I pray you may not well refuse
To burn on our high altars his perfumes,
And by this president the fact excuse?
Whether she on our gentleness presumes,
Or her own greatness, all is one for that,
I shall ere long so pull her peacockes plumes,
That though she now be young and fair and fat)
She shall no sooner look upon a glass
But she shall grieve and sore repine thereat,
And say, That now is hay was sometimes grass.
Thinks she to escape our hands so frank and free,
That she forsooth of France the daughter was,
Englands fresh bride, and thereby chaunc'd to be
Mother to him that now is King of both?
Alas, what is all this to a Deity?
No more but titles and mere toies in troth,
As then she has deserved, so shall she have,
"Divine revenge comes sure, though late and loath.
Belike these giddie French think they may brave
My son and me at pleasure, leave undone
What at their hands most lawfully we crave,
Or do all lawless outrage under Sun.
They make but cu'n a Woman and a child
Of me and thee, and thereby think to shun
Our vengeance, this it is to be so mild
To malefactors, that for very spite
Our Temples and our Altars have defilde,
Left vnprophaned no religious rite,
But havoc made of holy maidenhead,
As if the Charge we had renounced quite
That appertains to the Bridal bed:
Wherein the lawful heir begotten is,
Whom after nine months fully finished,
The shame-fac't father shall not fear to kiss
At midnight to him by the Midwife borne,
Yea he himself will swear it to be his,
When Lucifer lets forth the blushy Morn.
But if they still my patience thus shall wrong
By S. Adonis here lo have I sworn,
And will not fail, I shall, ere it ^e long,
A plague send on them that will quickly tame
Their pride, and teach them sing another song.
It shall feed in their marow like a flame,
And rage through every corner of the land,
That of the nation it shall take the name.
But to the point that now we have in hand.
Which to effect with more successful speed,
Son Cupid, you awhile my friend must stand.
Mother (quoth he) to fear you shall not need,
For I have still been your obsequious son,
And still will be, in thought, and word, and deed.
Yet hold I not this dame so much, a Nun
By nature, as by virtue of the clime
Is far removed Northward from the Sun.
For she has loved, and so may do in time.
The bird that having once escaped the net,
Defies the fowler, may be caught by lime
Or other engines that for him be set,
And so may she by some more quaint devise,
But what that is, my self knows skarcely yet)
Maugre her heart all were it made of ice.
Gramercie son, quoth he, why then no doubt
(Though she were ten times more then she is nice)
This act we shall bring well enough about.
But that I fear me which you lately told
About the Climat all this Isle throughout,
Is all the let that ever happen could,
For though the Sun now in the Lion reign,
And his Meridian, yet an uncouth cold
Me thinks does hit me now through every vain.
In Affricke if the Lion list to rage,
Who shall him from his Ladies side restrain?
Yet here he sleeps out his idle age,
And dreams not once of Natures kindly sport.
Were it not this, what grate or iron cage
Could coope him from his pleasure? To be short,
The Vine that with the scorching sun by noone,
Grows quickly ripe in France, if you transport
Into this Country, ripeneth not so soon:
Yet is the soil as thankful here as there.
Yea The Elements, all underneath the Moon,
Removed from their own place, some otherwhere,
Take new impressions to them, for the fire
That only shines in his celestial sphere
Here burns most violent. And with desire
Said Cupid, shall this Saint, this Katherine
In Windshore burn whom he did so admire,
The man of Monmouth when she did but shine
In France at Melaws, like a blazing star:
Whose fair aspect and influence divine,
Did stop the hoarse and open throat of war.
As there great Henry fell in love with her,
Here of another shall she dote as far,
Except my cunning, or this hand do err:
And that rich dowre, yea were it ten times more,
Upon a subject shall I soon confer.
What, on a Saxon Cupid, will ye so?
Now by this Mole (quoth she) upon my cheek,
I rather had this high revenge forgo
Which I on her so thirstingly do seek,
Then any flinty Saxon should succeed
A Prince so mighty, and a Prince so meek.
These Saxons clean have washed away my seed,
Swallowing the fat soil like another flood.
Those sturdy Saxons whom the stones did breed,
Which Pyrrha (when yet all the earth was mudde)
By diueli^h divination backward threw
To take the form of flesh, and bones, and blood.
These men, these stones, at an advantage slew
Of thy poor kindred thousands with the sword,
And all the woeful remnant did pursue
To the bare Mountains, that could scarce afford
Food for themselves, or safety from the foe,
Fowly entreating them indeed and word.
Long were they torn and tosst thus to and fro,
Now foiling, and then foild, till at the last
Edward the first (their fates ordaining so)
To make them subject to his Crown did cast.
His tender babe to be their Prince they took,
To whose succeeding heirs they stuck so fast,
As none of them their faith as yet forsook,
Save only one Owen sirnam'd Glyndoore,
Who became Rebel against Bullinbrooke,
And by his pride made all his Country poor.
Ah Harry why should thou a Civil Prince
For one man's fault and fury play the Moore
Or Tartar thus, and tax a whole Province
With such discourteous and Barbarian laws
As never heard were of before, or since?
If Jove alas, as often as men give cause
Did every time but hurl a fiery ball,
A little time then should he have to pause,
And in a while himself leave none at all.
For all yet that betide them could, or can,
Here lives one still, and still I hope he shall,
A gallant and resolved gentleman,
Fair Owen Tudyr, fire thou her in love
With him, my boy. Mother (said he) your Swanne
Shall not exceed this Eagle, nor your Dove:
Hereafter shall she stoop so to the lure,
Though now a while the clouds she tower above,
For her pure bosom with a brand as pure
I will so kindle yet before the sun
Get out of Libra, that none may recure
Her heart, but only Owen. Well said son,
(Him answered she) why should I then despair?
But (as one Owen has us all undone)
Another Owen may those harms repair.
For who does know, but that in time to come,
There may spring from this well consorted pair may
(I will so bless and fructify her womb)
H. 7. That seven times happy man, who one day
Sit on this throne, and thence with mercy doom
His and my people? O when will that day
Shine from the East upon this Northern Clime?
Then, then may well both Welsh and English say,
That they were borne in a most blessed time.
Mother, quoth he, thereof mine be the care,
And if I fail therein, mine be the crime:
But since the court of heaven can hardly spare
Us both at once, this cause to me refer,
Perhaps the Gods in no such business are,
Yet mortalles are. How shall the Mariner
That long in the wide Ocean tossed is,
And nothing sees save sea and heaven, but ere
When your propitious star he there does miss?
How shall the shepherd do, that to the hill
Leads forth his flock, and home again by this?
How shall the struggling Bride against her will,
With her impatient love this night conceive,
Unless your gracious influence do fill
Her fruitful lap? Gods must not therefore leave
To help and comfort mortal men, because
Of their due honor they the Gods bereave.
This said, he stayed, and with this only clause
She condescended, that all should be done,
As that her self thereto her best applause
Should give, and that as soon too as the sun
A judge between the night and day became.
O silly Queen! these snares how can thou shun?
And how, O Venus (had thou any shame?)
Can thou but blush what have ye reap't by this,
Thou and thy son, what great and glorious name,
When by two Gods beguyld one Woman is?
A month and more to make the Queen his slave
He sought by all such trains and tricks of his
As know ye lovers (God from them me save)
By dreams and fancies whilst abed she lay:
So wisely though herself she did behave,
That once he thought it best to run away.
By this the golden Eye of heaven the Sun,
From that disastrous and midnight of day
Wherein his clewe of life was clean out spunne,
Henry the first in fame, in name the fifth,
About the silver skarfe of heaven had run.
Whose fiery Coursers (howsoever swift
To some glad hearts) seem to the sorry slow
And dull as lead, then first the Queen did lift
Her drooping Ey-liddes from the Earth below.
As one that having horded up his chief
His only treasure, still his eye does throw
Back to the place as to his best relief;
So was the Queen and all the Court to gloss
The more with her did flatter this her grief:
For like the Prince the people them compose.
Moved for their sakes, God wot, more then her own,
The Dowager Queen (like to the Virgin Rose
That all night is bedewed, and newly blown
Unto the morning Sun for comfort seeks)
Those purer Roses wiping that were sown
Among the Lillies in her lovely cheeks;
And with her tears bedewed day and night
By the full space of two and fifty weeks,
Resolved at last to come by candlelight
Into the Presence chamber, and to glad
Her heart a little with the peoples sight,
Who to see her again were nothing sad.
For all the lusty Courtiers did devise
(So soon as notice of her mind was had)
To entertain her with some strange disguise,
Done by Dan Lidgate a great learned Munke,
Who then in Poesy bare away the prise;
For after Chaucer had he deeply drunk
Of Helicon, as few besides have yet.
Now when the Sun into the Sea was suncke,
They all together in the Wardrobe met,
And them among (though far above them all)
The gentle Owen was, a man well set:
Broad were his shoulders, though his waste but small;
Straight was his back, and even was his breast,
Which no less seemly made him show, then tall.
Such as Achilles seemed among the rest
Of all his army clad in mighty brass:
Among them such (though all they of the best)
The man of Moan magnifique Owen was.
He seemed an other Oak among the Breers:
And as in stature, so did he surpas
In wit, and active feats, his other peers.
He nimbly could discourse, and nimbly dance,
And aged he was about some thirty years:
But armed had ye seen him go to France,
Ye would have said, that few on foot or horse
Could have so tossed a Pike, or cowch'd a Lance,
Wherewith to ground he brought full many a corse.
That often alone when I recount the same,
My tender heart cannot but have remorse.
To write it then, alas, I were too blame:
Of only Love, and of his arms I sing,
Thy wars (O Mars) I meant not once to name,
Yet hardly could I spare that haughty string,
Did not the Boy mine ear pull now and then
Beyond my bounds for fear I chance to fling.
The fame and splendour of my Countrymen
Inuit me so. What is he that can hold
In his rude fingers such a flaggy pen,
If aught by chance of Agincourt be told,
But into tears his eyes would quickly thawe,
In stead of ink, to write the manifold
And goodly slaughters which our men did draw
That day in blood' But O thou mighty ghost
Of Henry Monmouth, who yet holds in awe
My bolder Ditty that so longs to boast
Those old Heroes crowned with holy bays,
That under him did use to lead his host;
Beauforts, Veres, Neuills, Talbots, Cliffords, Grayes:
O pardon thou, and they that I leave out
The immortal mortal fights and blody frayes
By force of arms there fairly brought about.
And thou John Huntington, whose acts I more
Admire than all, before whose face the rout
Of fearful Normans, when thou came ashore
From the triumphed Ocean fled away
As heartlesse Hares the Greyhounds do before*
Redoubted Earl, of pardon I thee pray.
God wot I would, yet half so great a task
I dare not undertake: and sooth to say,
That argument a louder Trump does ask.
To sound a March too slender is my Reed,
Enough is it to tune a Courtly mask,
Then to high purpose and the point proceed.
While they made ready there, ye might have seen,
One or an other in a masking weed,
Go friske about upon the rushes green,
And wish if aught he chanced well to do,
That all were done no worse before the Queen.
Some one the God of Love did pray unto,
With his mild mother, so to stand his friend,
As he thereby his Ladies love might woe,
To whose sweet praise his pains he did commend.
Another, that he might good honors make
As every Measure did begin or end
Whereof his Mistress might due notice take.
One that the dropping linkes defilde him not
For his white suite of costly satin sake:
An other that his Imprease or his Mot,
Or aught of his the Princess mind might please.
Full many a suite in broken sighs, God wot,
Was offered there, yet all could not appease
His kindled ire, who by this easy bait
Thought now or never on the Queen to sease
That had so often made him sound retraite.
It fell that four and twenty Pages were
Appointed on the Reuelers to wait,
Who two by two, before each pair should bear,
The linkes aloft, and for the greater show,
Like suites to them and vizards also wear.
The wily god that all this did foreknow,
By putting on the person of a page,
Made up the count, his quiver and his bow
To buy a visard which he laid to gage;
But turned into a blazing torch his brand.
A pretty strippling, much about the age
Of fourteen years he seemed when he did stand
Among the rest. Now was it time to sup:
So costly nothing was by sea or land
But it was had, while still the frothy Cup
Did haste to deal about the lusty wine.
When all was ended, and the board was up,
In heaven above the stars began to shine:
Where also burned Cithere the bright,
To Cupid nodding, who knew well the sign.
And like an other heaven with starry light,
Adorned was all the Presence round about,
That into day again did turn the night,
Although the cheifest light was yet without.
With this the trumpets lo began to sound,
And eke the multitude aloude to shout,
(That all the room did even again rebound,
Reecchoing no particle amiss)
God save your Grace, and God your foes confound.
To some her hand of snow she gave to kis,
She talked with other, and gave thanks to all,
Along the chamber as the manner is.
Behold how many fiery sparkles small,
The Moon about her silver or be does spend,
When Hesperus the Evening forth does call:
So many glorious ladies glad to tend
Upon the Queen unto her princely State,
Down to the ground before her Grace did bend.
As there in Majesty awhile she Sat
With shame faced looks low fixed upon the ground
Lo three fair damsels fal'ne at foul debate,
And them before a Trumpet hard to sound.
The Damsells dreast in white and blew and black
Were asked, whence they were, and whither bound?
Whom they did look for, or what they did lack?
A while they paused, and often they changed hew,
The one still to the other looking back,
Till she, that all appareld was in blew
Stepped forth at last, and making Curt'sy low
Began aloud. Most Mighty Queen, to you
In humble manner we present this show
A silly Maid, a Widow, and a Wife,
As by our habits you may partly know.
A late between us happened heavy strife,
Whether the Wife, the Widow, or the Maid
Lives the most happy and contented life?
All what we could, we three therein have said,
And women (as men clatter) want no words.
Yet here (alas) the matter has not staide,
For acted it must needs be by the swords
Of Martialists, but your Maiestike hand,
That unto misers mercy still affoords,
The same by your authority with stand;
Which is so sovereign, and does carry weight
With all the mighty Sprites of the land,
That ended all this stir will here be straight.
Eight hardy Squiers do hold of Maidenhead,
(Whereof is Owen Tudyr chief) and eight
Maintain that it much better is to wed,
The last eight by like arguments approve
The life sequestered from the nuptial bed.
Renouned Empress, then let pity move
Your royal breast to save them from the spoil,
What heart of iron has she that does love
To see one man in fight an other soil?
Or once abide to see the blood to stream
That in the manly bosom wonts to boil?
Here at, as one awaked out of a dream,
The softly sighing Queen up started soon,
Guilding the world with such a glorious Beam
As does the Sun this Hemispheare by noone,
With morning showrs though somewhat ouerspred:
Or, as when in some misty night the Moon
Breaks through the clouds, and shows her silver head.
And thus she spoke. Ye virtuous Maid and Wife,
(For such ye seem) and thou whose half is dead,
Whose other half resolves to lead the life
That also does thy Queen; not all this I Will
A fitter one could yield to stint your strife,
Extended out though it lie many a mile,
And, but the Sea, abides not any bound.
For all three courses have I known awhile.
A very Maid of me King Henry found,
(Whose soul God pardon, and to mercy take)
To whom my love my faith kept ever sound,
That all the world my honor might not shake,
Ne wrack my fame against so foul a shelfe.
As unto him, so for his only sake
I will remain no less true to my self:
For Henry's Wife and Widow will I die.
Honors, vain pleasures, transitory pelf,
I force not of such gawdes a whit, not I:
Yet does this trash the minds of many tempt
To Loves delights, from whose vile tyranny
Princes, no more then other, are exempt.
But only him I loved, so do I now,
And ever shall, of whom both thought and dreamt
I have so often, that no man else may bow
My settled heart: only (were he alive)
He might perhaps prevail against my vow.
And God I beg it now, so let me thrive,
If aught I speak the worlds good word to woo
Beyond my worth, but with his thunder drive
Me quick those ugly shades of hell into,
Before, O shamefastnes, that I forsake
Thee, or yet any law of thine undo.
Might I with me my little Henry take
To some remote and solitary den;
Your noble Prince, his servant God him make,
(Whereto the people cried Amen, Amen)
I could be well content no more to come
Among the prease and multitudes of men.
Not that I doubt but virtuous there be some,
I know there be, and many in this place.
This of my speech then is the very sum;
That often alone when I recount my case,
No life me thinks is like to widdowhoode,
So God but guide it with his holy grace.
Heereat the Maid and Wife astoned stood.
Mistake me not, quoth then the lovely Queen,
For often has it been no less a good
To marry well, then to live singly seen.
Perhaps the more, if heart as well as hands
Be rightly tied the married pair between:
Not altogether wedded unto lands,
Ne wealthy dowres: ah, never may she thrive,
That on the purse above the party stands.
She that so weds (as I know none that did)
Beguiles her husband, he has but the hiue,
Another eats the honey. God forbid
That ever any courtly Dame should carry
A heart so base within her bosom hid.
As for my self, had I not loved my Harry,
Perdy I make a vow, that for my part
No kingdom could have tempted me to marry
Against the love and liking of my heart.
But ah, not long had I enjoyed my Joy
When ugly Death comes stealing with his dart,
(For hand of man could never him annoy)
And him of life, and me of love depriues.
Yet has he left behind a princely boy,
That in my breast his heavenly shape reuiues.
So like the father does he daily grow,
As any you have seen in all your lives,
Yea like him he already learnes to go*
So would he bend the browe, so would he look,
His eyes his hands, he cast he carried so.
But whither have I like a wandering brook
Thus erred by love? Few liquid pearls then gusht
From out her eyes, and there her breath she took.
But (Lord) then how the lovely Virgin blushed,
When all the people did the Queen pursue
With fresh applauses; till, when all was hushed,
The Queen did her continued speech renew.
Ladies it seems (and therewithal she sat)
It seems I say to us, that each of you
So pleased is with her peculiar state,
That all the world may not your wills reclaim.
Me lever also wear your love then hate,
Whereat no virtuous Prince did ever aim.
Tyranny fear, and fear this hate begot.
What duty then can want a privy maime
That of the subjects love proceeds not?
I then conclude, no kind of life amiss
That is so fixed, and alters not a jot:
Unhappy most, the least resolved is,
When as the great Commander in the wars
Affects the Merchants life, the Merchant his,
Who knows each crooked motion of the stars,
The Clerk again enuies the Courtier,
And he the Clown. To leave particulars
In us, and you, (for often thus one may err)
I must (I hope to none of your disgrace)
Together when all courses I confer,
Of force define, that both resign the place
To maidenhead, as Copper does, or Brass,
When Indy Gold their glory does deface.
A worthy wife no doubt Susanna was,
Redeemed from death, as she was thereto led:
Yet did the widow Judith her surpass;
Who smote off, as he breathed his last abed,
That horrid head, yet breathing war and lust.
But unto MARY well of Maidenhead,
This, and that other yield of duty must.
The Maid where three times three months did repose
The Sun, in whom reposde is all my trust.
A virgin is but even a very Rose,
For once if hand of man thereon be laid,
Both sent and color it will quickly lose,
So tender in the bloome is every Maid.
That innocent and ever happy state
(Had our forefathers not so fondly straide)
Wherein God humane nature did create
In holy maidenhead resembled is,
Whence having fallen too soon, we grieve too late:
When all the world does point at our amiss,
Then see we naked shame with open eyes.
Yea maidenhead goes far beyond all this.
For in that earthly place of paradise,
As here we do, they did by Gods behest:
But in that heaven where his own owner lies,
As are his Angels, such are all the rest;
Maids and unmarried: here then I conclude
That Maidenhead of all is only best.
And as she said, so said the multitude.
Then all three Ladies (who did now relent
And pardon ask that they had been so rude)
Besought the night in sportes might now be spent,
Whom so to do with many thanks she praide.
So they unto the four and twenty sent
To certify them what the Queen had said,
And therewithal to bid them haste away.
The messenger so did, and they obaide.
Alack for pity now what shall I say?
A wily traitor and a very thief,
That all the while in ambush closely lay,
Among the Maskers is become the chief:
And to the Castle is already come,
Good Queen, I fear me to thy further grief.
Herewith was heard the Trumpet and the Drum,
As if they had been marching for the field:
By two and two they entered all and some
Each after other offering up his shield,
While she, that in all curtsie did abound,
To every man particular thanks did yield.
The softer music then began to sound,
And eke the Ladies were had out to dance:
It also pleased the Queen to walk a round,
The Courtly sportes the more to countenance,
With whom (because he did the Measures lead)
To couple it was Owens happy chance.
Then all in order began it softly tread
Up and down, in and out: the planets seven,
Rapt with harmonious spheres (as we may read)
So dance about the lofty pole of heaven.
The Measures ended, it grew very late,
(For it was half an hour nigh past eleauen.)
Then bade the Queen, that one below the State,
A stool for her should set upon the ground:
This done, anon down therevppon she sat,
Some in their cinqueapase did nimbly bound,
Some did the Cros-point, some high Capers cut,
And on the toe some other turned round,
While still the Minstrell on the trembling gut,
Strove with division to outrunne the time
That hasted on the Reuells up to shut,
(For midnight now the clock began to chime.)
Then issued Owen out among the rest,
Reserved until then as only prime
Of all the Maskers, and the very best.
LOVE that did all the while no wile forsloe,
That holp to set afire her snowy breast,
Resolved at last, that it must needs be so.
Wherefore, as Owen did his galliard dance,
And graced it with a turn upon the toe;
(Whether his eyes aside he chaunc'd to glaunce,
And like the lovely God became so blind,
Or else perhaps it were his happy chance,
I know not, and record none can I find)
This is the short; The Queen being very nigh,
He fell, and (as he forward down declinde)
His knee did hit against her softer thigh.
I hope he felt no great hurt by the fall,
That happy fall which mounted him so high.
For up he quickly sprang, and therewithal
He fetched me such a frisk above the ground,
That, O well done, cried out both great and small.
The Queen arose then, and dealt thanks around
To all of them, but unto Owen most:
The Trumpets also they began to sound,
For on she passt, and after her an host
Of lovely ladies, while the people prayed,
That God would guide her with his holy ghost.
Thus all the Court was very well apaide,
And every dauncer in delight did swim,
But Owen only, who was so dismaide,
That all the Company came to comfort him.
Amongst all, one wished it had been his hap:
I can not blame him, though he lost a lim,
That longed to pitch in such a princely lap.
But out alas, what shall there more be said?
This was but even an engine and a trappe,
That for the seely foul was lately laid:
The fairest foul I ween that ever was,
This only trick so fowly has betraide.
As into some one center of the glass
The Sunny beams we do contract to light
Divine Tobacco, that all balm does pass,
Because all union has the greater might:
So fierce Cupido causde his fiery brand
Upon that Eagle-eye of his to light;
That in the very turning of a hand,
Reflected it might set afire her heart,
That obstacles none might it once withstand.
The wound did at the first not greatly smart,
For it was inward, and there softly bled
Feeding the fire, till (having got apart)
Her yuory body laid in yuory bed,
She there afresh of all began to think
(For idle fancies there be soonest fed)
And unawares let Love in softly sink
Between the lillies of her lovely breast.
What should she do? she could not sleep a wink,
Nor any respite take, nor any rest,
Nor once but dream (for how can one awake?)
That in was got such an unruly guest.
Which on the gods behalf did greatly make.
It was the very dead of drowsy night,
When every creature else his ease did take
But only young Queen Katharine the bright,
Whose eyes (like two fair Diamonds set in rings,)
Awaked her outward little world to light.
For ugly night with her broad Rauen-wings
Had ouerhild the golden goodly face,
As well of heavenly as of earthly things,
And the dull humor powered down apace
On weary miserable mortal men:
Lo, then began her eyes first to embrace
An easy slumber: her devotions then
She softly sighed, and Requiem also said,
For her dear Lord; thus (having breathed Amen,
And softer check upon soft pillow laid)
Fell fast asleep: who then but Cupid sung?
Who laughed, who danced, or half such herod's played?
For here and there the fire about he flung,
As did in Aetna his supposed Sire:
That where before she was but only stung
A little in the fancy with desire,
And quickly might have cured the same again
(Had she but used the means:) his raging fire
Diffusde the venim now through every vain.
As Elementar fire does closely creep
Between some plankes the greater height to gain,
Not daring out of his blind Cell to peep,
Before alas (as often it does befall)
The goodman of the house be fast asleep:
Then opposition finding none at all,
About the Noone of night inuades the sparres,
And many hundred thousand sparkles small,
About the welkin hurls to mock the stars:
At last in smoaky flames it chokes the skies,
And of the building all the beauty marres,
Or once the Owner half can open his eyes.
O mercy God, O Love, O Charity,
What is this heat, or how does it arise?
Is it begot but of a wanton eye,
And so conceived in a gentle heart?
If it be so, then ask I reason why?
Thy self, O Love, of eyes deprived art*
But if by fatal revolution
Of any star, O god thou guide thy dart
(Since that we know the certain motion
Of every Star in heaven, both her degree,
Her opposition, and conjunction,
With every other hidden quality,
Portending what is likeliest to befall)
Reveal, O God, reveal thou unto me
That am thy Priest (though worthy least of all)
So long have I rebel'd against thy law,
Blaspheming it as ceremonial,
Enacted only fools to keep in awe:
Yet since I do recant my folly now
That into danger youth might happily draw,
Reveal the reason, and the cause, why thou
In all thy deeds so diverse ever art;
And do, I pray, instruct thy Prophet, how
In every pageant thou do play thy part,
Provoking here to love and there to lust.
^ Why should a Lady like with all her heart
(Her self borne under Jove and Venus just)
A tawny face befurd with sable hair,
Borne under old Saturnus star combust?
What appetite the foul has to the fair
Is evident, for every seelv soul
Knows with perfection how things long to pair:
But that the fair should stoop unto the foul,
A wonder it does seem to me no less
Then if an Eagle should unto an Owl.
Yet more may be then I can happily guess,
I might be numbered eighth among the Wise,
If all to know my self I should profess.
Is it because that in fair women's eyes
Black men seem pearls (and women all iwis
Would be: or else, which does as well suffice,
Reputed fair?) or is it happily this,
That any beauty laid against the black,
Of much more beauty and more brightness is?
Is it because we like (though naught we lack)
What other have? or else because this hue
Lends liuelier heat and moisture to the back?
Why should a Queen to whom so many sue,
So many Princes would be proud to serve,
Bid all the glittering pomp of Court adue,
And to a private love her sweets reserve?
Why should she spend with him her happy days,
That hardly does to serve her but deserve?
This is thy power, O Love, this is thy praise,
For unto Gods it only does belong
The mighty down to pull, the meek to raise;
Thou find likes, or else ere it be long,
Thou framest such of sundry qualities:
It is then open and no petty wrong,
To charge thee so with incongruities:
For only thou alone in all thy deeds,
As at the first yet work'st by contraries.
Whenas together all the sundry seeds
Of undigested Chaos did conspire
To mould the body that so many breeds:
The Earth, the Air, the Water and the Fire,
(For each was unto either deadly foe)
To sundry ranks did all at once retire:
The leight got up, the heavy stayed below,
The Sea did start aside to show the land,
The winds did on the billows stiffly blove
All which be now tied in so friendly band,
As they may not beyond their limits range,
And this was done by thy Almighty hand.
Nor art thou Lord (for all thou seem so strange)
Yet half so mutable as any man:
But as resolved and unapt to change,
As at the day when first the world began.
Perhaps by some to scorn I shall be laughed
For bolding so, say all they what they can,
This is the truth, thus other shall be taught:
Yea (though therefore I should be tortured)
I would not alter any word for aught,
For all is right, if it be rightly read.
FINIS.
Richardo Martino Hugo Hollandius Optimo Oratori Pessimus Poeta, veteris and
perfecti amoris ergo nouum sed imperfectum poema mittit. Sonulus
Hendecasyllabi^us.
HOc Martine tibi vetus sodalis
Nuper mitto nouum poema coeptum,
Nec doctum satis id, nimisue ineptum:
Vester Pegasus est, nec opse talis
Qui t antis vehar incitatus alis.
Verum me videor sat esse adeptum,
Si carmen tibi tale sit receptum:
Nec lectum tibi non fuisse malis.
Quod (si quid saperem) domo quiet a
Annus debuerat videre nonus:
O sed fama ego gloriaque spreta
In pessum cecidi poeta pronus;
"Tanto pessimus omnium poeta,
"Quanto tu optimus omnium patronus.
To Sir Robert Cotton Knight, Lord of Cunnington.
MY Reasons can no longer hold out, nor yet my Modesty: Nature indeed has
armed me against Blushing, not against Bashfulnes. Have here the^ this double
imperfect Poem. First, though ill, not all done: Secondly, through all il done.
The faults I confess in making (as they be many) are mine: the fault in setting
forth (if it be any) is yours, and so much the more yours, by how much the more
you would have mine published. It was (if you remember) the work, or rather
the Pastime of one Vacation. Howbeit that can no way justly excuse me. For (if
the Destiny of these leaves should out-spin Nature in our lives) how should
posterity be informed in how short time the same were written? All the writings
of old time were as the Testaments of the writers: But most of the writers of
our days, are as Executors to their writings, not unlike Hecuba in the
Tragedy, who in her own life time saw the death of all her children. And to
say but truth (had not I been the more indulgent father) these Rimes of mine
(which nigh upon two years have now layen by me) had long since made
windeing-sheetes for perfumed gloves in the EXCHANGE. The last Summer I began
to put this Infant (then about some twelue-moneths old) out of his foul and
swatheling clowts; and (like our London Nurses, who when they bring their
foster-children to be showed the friends, dress them up in their best
habilimen^) wrote it out curiously with mine own hand, think to have gone into
Scotland and to have given it the King. Toward whom my loyalty, I was in
those days as daring to power into your bosom, as I found it ready to endeere
the same. Your love to me, and our duty to him gave us both confidence
thereunto: to speak nothing of particular Interest, his Majesty and you
descended of two brothers, he from Rob. le Bruise, and you from Bernard. But
ill news carried me into Wales, and upon my return Master Secretary Herbert
(with whom was in commission the Noble and gentle Lord Eure, and the right
worthy and virtuous Master Doctor Dun) being ready to go into Germany (which
was his thirteenth public Employment) I signified to his Honor the desire I
had but once in my life to see the world (for until then I had been always
one of the Queens Decre) and he lovingly consented thereunto. Believe me Sir
Rob. he is the man I took him for, and told you of. I will not speak of
honors and titles, things (like representations in glasses) actuated by other:
but rather of his learning, his wisdom, (...) honesty, the first and last
whereof are goodly Virtues in a man of his Fortune, all three lying within the
sphere of our own actiuitie. At Amste^red^^ in my way homeward (for I
returned before their Lordships) I met those good ill-newes of the Queen^
death, to whose honor and memory (neque me m^^inisse pigebit ELISAE) as by the
Preface may appear I had once intended this first book of the Praeparation or
Praeludium of the love between Owen Tudyr and the Queen. Which Praeface
notwithstanding I will have printed with the rest, that I do so much right to
that dead Lady, sometimes our Sovereign Queen and Mistress. The very Gospel
itself (next which no gladder tidings could have pierced our ears, then that
King JAMES his head should be invested with the Royal Diadem) did allow the
Law an honorable burial. Neither should we fashion ourselves to such whose
affection to her waxed cold before her body, who thought they had done her a
stout piece of service that they forsook not her body before her soul did. I
judge modestly of them all, and hope it was but a longing they had to see his
Majesty, whom God of his mercy long preserve, lest he, who has freed us from
one curse of a Kingdom, that is, a Woman, leave us unto another, that is, a
Child. I have written an Acrosticke Sonet to his Majesty, a Canzonet to the
Queen, and another Acrosticke unto the Prince; whose Servant I am by vow, and
subordinate Subject by birth, For I doubt not but his Noble Father will shortly
kiss him, and deliver him the Verge of gold with his Patent, whereby he is
entitled Prince of Wales. Which (though now high in nothing but Mountains) I
hope one day shall be raised by his Graces presence. In whom we claim a double
interest, as well by Walter Stewarte, as Owen Tudyr: both of them lineally
descended from the most haught and magnanimous Princes of Wales. My second
book (if God spare life) of the entertainment of their love (which I
principally vow to the honor of the better part of his Graces Principallity
my beloved Country gentle Northwales, where by the way I am to speak somewhat
of the wars of Owen Glindoure, with the worthy deeds of the two thunderbolts
of war, the Noble Percies) I purpose to consecrate unto his Highness: As
also the third book of the perfection of their love unto the Queens Right
excellent Majesty. For unto whom should I dedicate the perfection of Love but
to the perfection of Beauty? I speak this but by hearsay, you have seen
her and know I flatter not: from which fault (if from any) I am most free. For
in flattery (says Tacitus) is the foul fault of Slavery, and freedom of
speech will be thought Malice. Howbeit after the fair Example of our good
friend M. Martin (who with like liberty, as eloquence was not afraid to tell
the King the truth) I will so comporte my self and wade warily between both,
that I ever carry the heart of a Monarchy, and the tongue of a Commonwealth:
the one loyal, the other liberal. In which resolution I end, Commending this
Poem to the conceit of the Reader, my self to you, and you to God.

Your very loving Hugh Holland.




