An Answer to the Hollanders Declaration, concerning the Occurrents of the
East India.

The first Part.

Written by certain Mariners, lately returned from thence into England.

Printed 1622.

AN ANSWER TO THE HOLLANders Declaration concerning the Occurrents of the
East India.
THere was of late two Currants published, bearing date, the one, the 8. of
February, the other, the 28. In these two Currants sundry, both incredible and
intolerable wrongs and grieuances were made known, which the Hollanders of
the East Indies had inflicted and enforced upon the English company of the
East Indies. Sithence the printing of these two Currants, the Hollanders have
published a Pamphlet entitled, A declaration of the affairs of the
East Indies. This declaration was published (as by the discourse may appear)
in answer of the two Currants above mentioned, for the whole scope of the
declaration tends to no other end, but to justify their own right in the
East Indies, and thereupon to charge the English with wrongs done to them, that
thereby the world might be made believe that whatsoever extremities or hard
measures they offered to the English, they were urged and provoked thereunto by
the unjust dealing of the English, and the wrongs first offered by them: How
soever the English provoked the Hollanders in India, the Hollanders by this
declaration do urge and provoke the English to defend themselves against so
false and fabulous slanders imposed upon them. Is it not too much that the
Hollanders most unjustly oppressed us in India, but that they must proceed
further to slander us in England. They spoiled us of our goods in foreign
parts, and now they practice to deprive us from all hope of relief in our own
Country? What relief and remedy can we expect, if by our own desert and
provocation we drew and urged the Hollanders to practice what they did upon
us. Where punishment is deserved the offenders are condemned and their
complaints contemned: It is an old Proverb, Give losers leave to speak; Our
losses are without compare, to lose our lives and liberty, to lose our goods,
to lose our trade and traffic, and now lastly in our own Country to lose
the honest reputation of men, of Englishmen, of English Merchants, of the
English company of East India. This is a loss irrecouerable, as an Heathen
Historian writes; Maiora sunt fame and fidei damna, quam que sarciri possunt:
The loss of a good name, the loss of trust and credit are losses
irrecouerable. But thanks be to Almighty God who does always protect the
innocent: This Declaration of the Hollanders intended and published for our
utter un doing and disgrace, offers unto us in two respects both hope and
help, so that we may say to the Hollanders as the primative Christians said
of Julian the Apostata; Voluntatem nocendi habes, potestatem auiem non habes
Iuliani: We understand your intents O Hollanders, to overthrow us, but you want
power, we do not mean your Sea power (which is too potent) but we mean of
your malice, which is by the judgment of God utterly confounded: if in this
Declaration of yours, your will and malice had joined in equal power, we the
oppressed English might have for borne to have complained of our wrongs, with
shame and confusion; of whom or what should we complain, if our selves urged,
provoked and deserved our own misfortunes. But as we have said, thanks be to
Almighty God, who has converted Hamon his Gallows intended against
Mordocheus, to his own confusion, like as he has suffered you to publish a
Declaration to cut your own throats: what could you devise to write and
publish more opposite to what you intended, more to disgrace your selves in
conuincing you of falsehood, more to honor, acquit and clear the English then
this Declaration? All which shall manifestly appear in the examination of your
declaration, which follows.

To begin with the very first lines and page, you affirm, that all the Islands
of Banda from the tenth of August 1609. were by a special Treaty and agreement
made with the Orange Cayus the Magistrates of the Islands, put under the
protection of the States of Netherlands: how untrue this is, let all men judge,
when as you confess in the latter end of the first page, and in the beginning
of the second, were afterward broken and violated; And that the Ilanders
withheld their fruits and spices, that they enforced and robbed their
Warehouses, murdered at sundry times and places diverse of the principal
Officers, committies, and servants of the Netherlands company, taking away
their ships and provision, what could the Hollanders say less then to pretend
an agreement? and what or how could allege and prove more directly to convince
them selves of untruth then so plainly and largely confess the recited
hostilities, practiced by the Bandineses against them: what an agreement could
this be where there was so great an auersion of the Ilanders minds, declared
by the hostile deeds which they practiced against the Hollanders, they might
perhaps say, there was a Treaty; but such hostile practices manifestly prove
there could be no agreement.

The Hollanders proceed further, from the year 1609. to the year 1616. where
they speak of another agreement concluded in May, by one of the Netherlanders
Commanders called Lam. And another agreement made by their Governor General
called Real, in the year 1617. which they confess were both shortly after
broken by the Bandineses, but how? Here comes in the maine matter, the
Bandineses rebelled through the animating of the English, who did openly aid
and assist them with victuals, munition, great Ordinance, men, and ships.

In this second Page here are strange wrongs offered to the Hollanders by the
Bandineses and the English, nay, to God himself, of which we must first
speak.

The Bandineses enforced Christians to turn Moors again. First, let us ask
you who converted these turne-coate Christians, did you? Admit you did. Next
let us ask you to what kind of Christianity did you convert them, if to that
kind of Christianity to which one Chircke, the Master of a Ship called the
Sampson, which you wrongfully took from the English, the offense of the
Bandineses was the less, if they compelled the inhabitants to forsake such
Christianity, for your own Country men in the East Indies do and did openly
and iestingly confess that Chircke was a Cuckold before he was a Christian,
for being married in Holland, he left his wife with his familiar friends, who
did out of their familiar love increase the family in the Husbands absence; It
was two or three years after that Chircke was christened. Such Christians may
quickly turn Moors who delay Baptizing till thirty five. But to return to
the heavy burden with which the English are charged; namely, to animate, to
aid and assist the Bandineses, it were necessary that the Hollanders should
set down the causes which moved the English to join so sarre with the
Bandineses, for the causes do either lesson or agrauate the charge imposed
upon the English: they must either say the English aided the Bandineses
directly against the Hollanders without further respect, which they cannot
prove, or they must allege, which themselves in their Declaration, do prove
that the English did endeavor to defend them with whom they had free trade and
traffic, who lovingly and with free consent sold to the English their spices,
etc. who put themselves under the protection of the English, who yielded the
Islands of Polawaye, Polerone and Lantore, under the obeisance of the King of
England, which if they would they cannot deny, for they confess that the
English had mounted ordinance upon all these Islands: why should the English
plant their ordinance upon these Islands but to defend their right. How could
the English plant their Ordinance upon the Islands but with free consent of the
Bandinesses, at what time did the English plant their Ordinance in these Islands
of Banda? The Hollanders confess before they came to the Islands; for they
found them in the Islands: now where is the wrong that the English have done the
Hollanders? and in what because the English did hinder the agreements so often
made betwixt the Hollanders and the Bandinesses, why for eleven years the
Hollanders confess there was never any, as in the third page they say: In this
wilfulness did the Bandinesses continue till in June 1620. Thus hitherto it is
plainly acknowledged the Hollanders never had any landing, any Castle or Fort,
any trading in the Islands of Banda, but what was gotten by force and absolute
constraint: If the Hollanders could prove so much for themselves as they do
for the English; the English then might have blushed for shame. In all this
time that the Hollanders maintained hostility with the Bandinesses there is no
mention made that the Bandinesses ever offered any opposition against the
English, or once denied them their Spices, but that they had trade and
traffic with them freely and friendly, now if consent and prescription of
time be the best claim the Hollanders would have for the Islands of Banda, why
the Englishmen go far beyond them, the Bandinesses did never violate any
agreement made with the English, they never kept any pretended agreement made
with the Hollanders, the Englishmen in eleven years were never expelled, the
Hollanders in all that time were never entertained, but in all hostile manner:
The English men had offer at all times of Nutmegs and Mace, so had the
Hollanders never at any time, but what they got by violence and compulsion; all
which is acknowledged in the third Page, and the beginning of the fourth. We
pass over many acknowledgements and confessions of the Hollanders, because
they all tend but to two ends, to justify themselves, and condemn the
English; and because there is sufficient observation given, that in justifying
themselves, they disgrace themselves, and in practicing to disgrace the
English, they do them great honor. But to deal plainly and truly, not to
abuse the world with untruths, nor to wrong the Hollanders without cause, we
do confess; The Bandineses made one famous agreement with the Hollanders,
which we well remember, even in that year in which they report they had made
agreement with the Bandineses. In June 1609. after they had by force taken from
them a Town called Noara, and making them fly to the backeside of the coast,
to a place which they called Nassaw. Van Hofe the general made show of love
and friendship with the Bandineses, which they perceiving and desirous to
revenge the wrongs and cruelties offered unto them by the Hollanders, did
dissemble their intents, entertaining Van Hoof with vain hopes, promising him
to come to some agreement, by which means they drew Van Hoof with three score
or more of his Commanders and Soldiers unto a place in which the Bandineses
had advantage. Now instead of agreement, in warlike manner they set upon Van
Hoof and slew him and almost his company. This is the best agreement that we
ever knew or heard the Bandineses ever made with the Hollanders during a leaven
or twelve years. Presently after this, in July after, Captain Bitter who
among all the Commanders escaped, when Van Hoof was slain, attempted to
supprize another Town caled Slamma; he was sought withal by the Bandineses,
and wounded in the thigh, of which wound he shortly dyed.

Now it appears manifestly without denial upon this former examination of
the Hollanders declaration that the right to the Hands of Banda was principally
yielded by free consent of the Ilanders, confirmed by many years trade and
traffic without any opposition in any hostile manner, but with mutual enter
course of all love and amity.

This the Hollanders do confess, and what proof can be more pregnant then
the testimony of an adversary: Where is now any wrong which the English has
done the Hollanders, except it be a wrong to maintain them, who with free and
general consent put themselves under the protection of the King of England? or
a wrong to defend them who willingly traffic and trade with the English, or a
wrong to maintain that right which the Hollanders acknowledge the English had
in the Island of Banda: These be all the wrongs which the Hollanders do or can
charge the English withal.

But now on the other side, what extreme wrongs do the English charge upon
the Hollanders? In two Currants printed the eight of February, and the twenty
eight 1629. the Hollanders are charged with most barbarous and inhumane wrongs
done to the English, all which they pass over in their Declaration without any
answer at all, whereby in silence they cannot but plead guilty: to confess
them they are a shamed, and to deny them they cannot, but in their accustomed
policy they seek to avoid them by way of infinuation, that the English
deserved them in ayding and assisting the Bandineses against them.

There were two Orators of Athens very great and inward friends, before the
Judges the one did accuse, the other defend a Magistrate of Athens, whereupon
the one Orator did challenge the other that he had dealt very unkindly with him
to defend his mortal enemy, and thou as unkindly with me, quoth the other, to
accuse my dearest friend.

This is just the like challenge betwixt the Hollanders and the English: Why
do you say the Hollanders defend our greatest enemies? And why do you say the
English oppose against our dearest friends? Yet in this challenge there is a
difference, for the English have more cause to defend their friends, then the
Hollanders have cause to oppose against their enemies, English men have a right
by consent, Hollanders have nothing but by constraint.

Just defense is more honest and honorable then unjust opposition is, either
by Laws of God or man warrantable.

To proceed on with the cruel, and inhumane wrongs done by the Hollanders, to
the English, by so much more barbarous and inhumane, by how much the English of
all Nations in the world, did least deserve it. What? deserve any hard measures
from the Hollanders? To what Nation under the Coape of Heaven, are they so much
bound as to the English, who has fostered and nursed them up to this
greatness, but the English? what Nation has shed so much blood, lost the the
lives of so many gallant Captains, Commanders, and Soldiers, to aid and
defend them as the English?

What Nation has lent them, and spent upon them so much money and treasure, as
the English have done, when they were in their extreemest weakness, and
poverty? when and where did the English ever fail them. If for these causes,
the English have deserved at the Hollanders, hands, to have their ships
taken, and made prize, their goods confiscate, and converted to their own
uses, their Captains, Soldiers, Factors, and Mariners, taken prisoners, held
in miserable servitude, clogged with yorns, kept in stocks, bound hand and
foot, tied to stakes, haling, and pulling them with ropes about their necks,
spurning them like dogs, throwing them headlong down rocks and clifts,
killing, murdering, staruing, and pining them to death, enforcing them to
carry lime, and stone for their buildings. Landing them amongst the Pagan
people, without all provision whatsoever, exposing them to the mercy of
miscreants of whom notwithstanding they sound better usage then of the
Hollanders. When as the Hollanders robbed, and spoiled other Nations under the
English colors, pretending to disgrace the English, that they were English
men, counterfeiting the coin of other nations, charging the English with the
same. Laying the English, whom they held as prisoners above hatches, where the
Sun scorched them in the day, and where their ordutes and pisle fell upon
them in the night, till they grew more loathsome and filthy then Leapers,
barring the English, as much as in them lay, from all commerse and trade in the
Indies. As all these perticulars are directly to be proved by men yet living,
who either endured, or their eyes saw, what is hear reported, and will be
ready upon all occasions either with their lives or oaths to justify for
truth, what they have endured, and what they have seen with their eyes.

Let all the world judge whether English men have deserved these vsages, at the
Hollanders hands: Where as some people either affected to the Hollanders, or
thinking it to strange, and monsterous, that Christians should domineare over
Christians, with such inhumane and barbarous cruelty, rather tyranoy, except
the English had provoked them heavily thereunto.

Let all such who harbor any such conceits, read and consider what is before
answered to such objections: the Hollanders in their declaration being charged
in the two first Currants, with may of these extreme wrongs inflicted upon the
English, they make no denial of them: make a challenge that the English did
aid and assist the Bandineses against them; it has formerly been alleged,
and sufficiently proved, by their own confession, that the English did not
maintain the Ileanders, by way of opposing against the Hollanders, but they
did as much as in them lay, to defend the right of the King of England, they
did defend that right which they had by consent, they did defend that people,
who did so freely, and friendly trade and traffic with them, other causes
then their so honest, so just agreeing with the Laws of God, of nature, and
Nations, they neither do or can allege any: some other inconsiderat people,
who envy the prosperity of the East-Indian Merchants will further say, to
cloase with the Hollanders, that these extremities were offered in India, only
and no where else to the English, for proffe of the contrary, we of the
East-Indian Company do challenge all the Merchants which travail or traffic
East, West, North, or South, to deliver their knowledge what indignities they
have endured from the Hollanders in Turkey, in the Straights, in Moscony, in
Groynland, at Neusoundland; and where not so that not only the East-Indian
Company has only cause to complain: yea, they wrong Englishmen in their own
seas, at home, as is generally known: Now because Hollanders may say, that
they are charged with generalities, without particular instances. General
speeches being a common cause to aggrauate causes, and be avoided except the
General be proved by perticulars, because they shall find that we cannot
want of particulers our of infinite, there shall be hear following delivered
some by men yet living, who have both seen them, and endured them.

In the Road of Patanye in the East Indies the 17. of July 1619. the two ships
called the Sampson and the Hound, riding there at Anchour, three ships of the
Netherlands set upon them with might and maine, after five hours fight, eleven
of the men in the Sampson were slain outright, and five and thirty men of the
same ship were wounded, maimed and dismembered, at this time Captain Jorden was
Captain of the Sampson, and did hang up a flagge of Truce, and withal sent
Thomas Hackwell, Master of the Sampson, to the Netherlanders to parlee about a
peacc.

The Examination of Thomas Hackwell the 25. of January. 1621.
Thomas Hackwell being sworn and examined upon certain Articles ministered on
the behalef of the right worshipful, the English company of Merchants trading
to the East India aforesaid, says and deposes thereto as follows.
TO the first of the said Articles he says, and deposes by charge of his
oath, that in the Road of Pattany in the East India, upon the 17. day of July.
1619. last past, the Sampson whereof this examinant was Master, and the Hound
belonging to the English Company, were forceably assaulted by three ships of
the Hollanders, (viz.) The Angel, the Morning Star, and the Burgarboate,
whereof Hendricke Johnson was commander, and after five glasses fight two
hours and a half, eleven of the said ship the Sampson, her men being slain
outright, five dismembered, and about thirty otherwise wounded, Captain
Iourdaine being then in the said ship the Sampson and Commander of her, caused
a flagge of truce to be hung out, and sent this examinant in the Sampsons
boat, aboard the Flemmings, to treat with them for a peace, and at the
hanging out of the said flagge of truce, and when this examinant left the said
Captain Iourdaine to go aboard the Flemmings, he was well; But above half an
hour after the said flag of truce was so hung out, and this examinant was in
parlee with the Flemmings about the said peace, Captain Iourdaine not
exspecting any violence from the Flemmings during the said Parlee, showed
himself aboard the Sampson before the main Mast upon the gratings, where the
Flemmings espying him, most treacherously and cruelly shot at him with a
Musket, and shot him into the body near the heart; of which wound he died
within half an hour after. And this he says by charge of his oath.

To the second he says, That after the said Ships, the Sampson and the Hound
were surprised by the Hollanders in the said fight at Patany, as aforesaid, the
greatest part of their men, by the command of the Dutch, were brought aboard
the Angel, their Admiral: And there notwithstanding, diverse of them in the
said fight were much burnt with Gunpounder, and wounded with splinters, and
thereby suffered miserable torment, yet they the said Dutch most unchristianly
and inhumanly caused and forced them to put their legs down through the
gratings, and so seized them, and tied them to the Capsten Bars, insomuch
that still as any man had occasion to go and ease himself, his legs were so
swelled by reason of the extraordinary hard tying of them, that the Carpenter
was always fetched to make bigger the holes, at which they were put down to
get out their legs again. And this he says by charge of his oath is most true.

To the third he says, That he knows that the Dutch at Iackatra, do cause
all China men, residing and bartering there, to pay monthly 6. shillings upon
a head, or else you shall not sell any commodity there to the English, and this
he has seen diverse of China men pay at Iackatra.

To the fourth he says, That upon the third day of March last was twelve
month, aboard the new Zealand then riding in Bantam road, this examinant, with
three or four oaths, did hear one Clause Derickson, then upper stearsman of
the Dutch ship called the Southern-Indraught, said that the States in Holland
had bin plotting that war between the English and the Dutch in the Indie
seven years before.

To this last Article is witness, Thomas Hackwell. William Shaples. Henry
Backtasel. Bartholomew Churchman. Antony Piccot.


The deposition of Bartholomew Churchman.
I do affirm, that they have many times termed us slaves to the king of
Holland, and that we should all be sent to the Moluccaes to row in their
Galleys, and so be kept bond-slaues under them during our lives.

More I affirm, that they have kept 12. of us in a dungeon at Poloway, and 24.
at Aomboyna, by the command of Lawrence Riall then General, but now returned
into Holland, where they pist and () upon our heads, and in this manner we
lay, until such time as we were broken out from top to toe, like lepers,
having nothing to eat but durty Rice, and stinking raine-water, insomuch as if
it had not been for a Dutch woman, named mistress Cane, and some poor
Blackes that brought us a little fruit, we had all starued in that place, as
many of our company did, besides the extremity which they used to manyothers,
which they had in prison at other Islands where they perished, leaving their
wives and children here in England ready to starve for want of maintenance.

The names of the 10. other men which lay in Poloway are these: Bartholomew
Churchman. Jacob Lane. Kellam Throgmorton. Matthew Willis. William Burris.
Cassarion David. George Iaokson. George Pettice. Walter Stacy. Rhichard
Phillips.


At Amboyna, Richard Swanley, William Brooks, and 12. more, whose names I well
know not, nor cannot remember, put into a dungeon, with forty Indians all in a
hole, having no place to ease themselves.

Bartholomew Churchman.

The last of October, 1617. John Tucker affirms.
That the Dutch men took the Dragon, the Expedition, the Bear, and the Rose,
and delivered only the Rose, and that there being in the Dragon a present from
the King of Achai for the King of England, called by them a Creese (that is to
say) a Dagger, which they do detain to this hour.

This is true, I under written do affirm, and testify that it was not done by
base Rognes (as they term it) but some of the principal Commanders.

John Tucker.

After the taking of these ships, there were above three hundred and fifty men
set out of the four ships which were on shore, exposed unto the mercy of
the Indians, where they found more courtesy then of the Hollanders, otherwise
they had all perished.

That all these abuses, and many more which we have formerly received by them,
are true, we will maintain upon our oaths, and with our lives against any of
their Nation, or others that shall gainsay this truth. Yet notwithstanding
all this being (by the goodness of almighty God) returned into our own
Country, we have no satisfaction for these intolerable injuries, nor any
consideration for two thirds of our wages most barbarously kept from us.

Articles of abuses done by the Hollanders at the Island of Moloccas, and other
places of the East Indies, as well against our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty; as also against us, and other Englishmen, since the year of our
Lord, one thousand fix hundred and sixteen; not only before the Peace, but
also since, until the month of March, one thousand six hundred and twenty,
that we came out of the Indies, in the good Ship called the James.
The second day of the month of February, in the year of our Lord 1616. the
Swanne was surprised and taken by the Hollanders, at the Islands of Banda, and
her men kept prisoners till the eight and twenty of April following. At which
time the Hollanders carried five and twenty of the English to the Moloccaes,
where they were very hardly and inhumanely used, being fettered and shackelled
in the day time, and close locked up a nights. And from the month of May,
until the end of September, they were compelled to carry stone and lime for
the building of Forts there; which if any refused to do, they were kept in
Stocks and Irons till they would work; and were notwithstanding also very
hardly used, for their victuals, insomuch that the one half of them died
through their hard usage.

When we were first taken, we were possessed of diverse goods, provisions
and means wherewith to relieve our selves, which they presently took from us,
and left us not so much as wherewith to cover our bodies.

Whereof when we complained to John Ellias who was Lieutenant to one Garret
Derickson in the Trow. hoping that he would have had some commiseration of our
miseries, and long lying in Irons, bad usage for want of meat, drink,
lodging, and other things: The said Ellias and the rest of his company did
thereupon, and many other times say unto us, That he cared not for us, nor for
any of our Countrymen; and that if they should take us and hang us up, we had
our deserts: Yea, they used other gross and base speeches, not fit to be
spoken of.

We affirm, that the said John Ellias and his company said, that they had
little need of Englishmen; for they in Holland were able of a sudden to make
and furnish 24000. of flat-bottomd boats, such as Parma would have landed upon
the English shore in 88. And also said, that they had of their own Nation and
Countrymen at the least 40000. strong in England, that presently, upon the
least occasion, would rise in Arms, and bend their forces speedily against us
in our own Country.

We affirm, that Laurence Ryall, who was their General, caused Grates and
Cages to be made in their Ship, and did put us therein, and carried us in
them bound in Irons from Port to Port amongst the Indians, and thus in
scornful and deriding manner and sort spoke unto the Indians as follows:
Behold and see, here is the people of that Nation, whose King you care so much
for. But now you may hereby plainly behold how kindly we use his Subjects;
making them believe, that Englishmen were their Vassals and Slaves.

Besides all this, they kept many of us fast bound and fettered in Irons, in
most loathsome and dark stinking dungeons, and gave us no sustenance, but a
little durtie Rice to eat, and a little stinking rainewater to drink. So that
many of our English fainting in their sights, for want of competent sustenance
or other lodging at their hands: for want whereof many dyed, who were fetched
out of the Dungeons, and so basely buried, more like Dogs then Christians.

About the fifth of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and
nineteen, we having ouer-passed many hungry days, and cold nights Lodging,
in cold Irons and dark Dungeons, and thinking it not possibly able for us to
endure those miseries any longer, made means that some of us came to John
Peter Socoma, their General that now is, and desired his Lordship (which Title
he duly looks for in the East Indies) that he would consider of our extreme
wants, and miseries, and help us to some better sustenance. And further we
desired him, that he would be so much our friend, as to ease us of our Irons
but for the day time: Whereupon the said General most wickedly replied with
base speeches, and bade us be gone, and trouble him no more; for if we did,
he would cause us all to be hanged speedily. So that we were forced to
return from whence we came with heavy hearts, having no hope but in the
Almighty, to whom we prayed to turn their hearts, and to release us of our
miseries.

Upon the thirteenth of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
and nineteen, 1619.
the Dutch went ashore at Iaparre; Iaparre, the cruelty there.
and there they wickedly and maliciously burnt down the Town, and the English
House there, and from thence forcibly took away the English Flagge, and in
great disdain of our Country trayled our Flagge after them in the dirt
through the Town, and towed it aboard their ship at their boats stearne; but
what they did with it afterward, we know not.

Upon the eighteenth day of the month of November, and in the year of our
Lord God one thousand six hundred and nineteen, 1619.
they took one Bartholomew Churchman, and clapped him up in Irons, and set him
where he sat in the rain and coldc storms of the night, and in the day
time, where the hot Sun shone upon him, and scorched him, without any shelter
at all: and this they did to him, only because he struck a base fellow that
spoke such words against our late Queen Annes Majesty, as are not fit to be
repeated: which words, as also diverse other which they spoke against our dread
Sovereign, we dare not relate, as being too odious to be used in a subjects
mouth touching his Prince: Howbeit, might license and freedom of speech be
granted us, to make known the base flaunderous and detracting speeches of that
Nation against our King and Country, that we might not incur any danger of
his Majesty's displeasure by the repeating them, it would sufficiently make
known the pride and crueltic of that people, who did not then let to say that
they made no account of our King, nor any of his subjects.

The seventeenth day of the month of March, and in the year of our Lord God
everlasting, one thousand six hundred and nineteenth, their Governor of the
Moloccas gave order for the release of the English there, and appointed thirty
of them to be carried to Aombonias, Aombonias cruelty.
from thence to be sent into England or Holland. But the governor of Aombonias,
perceiving them to be arrived, he utterly refused to discharge them, and
forced them to serve in their 3. ships, that went to the Manelees as men of
waire, which if any refused to do, they were to row in their Galleys chained
like unto slaves; in which voyage to the Manelees, fourteen of our men went
in the Saint Michael, which were lost, and never since heard on, whose names
do follow: George Trigges, John Edwards, James Welsh, John Crocket, William
Nichols, Robert Gilbert, Matthew Gilbert, Giles Lipscombe, Arthur ^ap, Edward
Parker, William Vese, John King, John Over, and William Smith Surgeon.

We affirm, that they having Arrian Ellis, Edward Read, and William Ponell,
3. Englishmen prisosoners, in their ship called the Bantam, they chained them
in Irons, and laid them in the Beake-head, straightly prohibiting all others to
come near them, to give them any other food then their allowance, which was
so small that mere hunger compelled those three prisoners to throw the dice
who should cut each others throat; and so they did throw the dice to that end,
but were disclosed before any of them were slain, so that they were thereupon
sundred, and sent into other ships.

They have taken our men, and without any cause have stripped and whipped them
openly in the market place; they have also beaten up their Drum, and called
the Blackes together to see it done.

They will not suffer us to wear, or spread in our English houses in those
parts where they have any command, any colors that are our Kings colors.

The Coppie of a Letter sent unto the Dutch in the East Indies, from their
English Captives at the Island of Monoboca, the nineteenth day of March one
thousand six hundred and eighteen, and delivered unto Captain William
Johnson,Commander of the Angel.
COnsideration in things of difficulty is requisite: and therefore much
requisite in these our vnchristian-like miseries. But because this has been
but slightly respected, we are now resolved to tell you of all your
perfidiousnesse. First, Grippe got advantage to surprise our ships, and made
a vow, not to touch life, nor goods in any sort. But since the contrary has
been so much proved, that Grippe and his confederates are now seen to be
forsworn, as shortly after their actions did show, in taking away even those
things, which with their consent we did save, and bring aboard your ship
called the Trow.

At that time we being indungeoned at Pollaway, (besides all the Pagan-like
usage of that cruel man, Laurence Ryall) we were by Vanhoose kept in such
extreme misery, with stinking water, and Rice half full of stones and dirt
(scarce able to keep life and soul together) that had not Derrickson Van lame
granted the English at Pollo-Roone, free access to Pollaway to bring us
relief, we had been all ere this time starued for want. But we passed away
that time in expectation of better fortunes, which you have all from time to
time promised; yet now again our miseries are thrice redoubled: for since we
came to this place, you have not only used us most basely in other things, but
also have taken away from us even that poor sustenance, which we bought with
our own moneys; and this has been done by that envious man the Master, whom
your Commanders do suffer to be their Commander, rather then their inferior.
If you consider all his actions, the refreshing which we have bought, has
been but small, that is to say, four small hens and cocks, and even them
has the Master taken away, and eaten them in the great Cabin, which dealing
of his, if it be Christian-like, we refer it to your own discretion: and now
at last, for a small cause, or nothing at all, to be thus handled, is a ten
times worse affliction, then ever was inflicted upon us, for to chain us up
like so many dogs, and to let us lie in the rain and storms of the night,
without any shelter, which is also brought to pass by the Master: For
(Commander) A sop for Cerberus.
we considering your gentleness, so that you can dispense with rigor: Therefore
that misery that we endure is not by your means, but by the masters and
theirs that be of his mind; and this is of a truth, that even your hogs after
their kind lie a nights drier, then we after our kind being Christians: and our
grief is the more, because your men of the black Lion, being taken by our
English, were used like men, and we like abiects of the world, to be thus used
like dogs, being subjects to the Kings Majesty of England, and in good
respect with our imployers. But God that is above all, knows all, and in his
good time will remedy all. Thus much we have thought good to certify unto you,
not in the way of entreaty, for that we see is vain, but only that you may
know, we now never look to come alive out of your hands: for by all manifest
appearance, you seek to take even our lives from us: and this shall be a true
argument of our grieved hearts, witnessing to all men, how unchristianlike we
have bin, and are used by you, for in all this we have not expressed the tenth
part of your cruelty, yet we hope, that for this time it shall be a sufficient
light unto you for that which has bin from time to time, practiced by you
against the English. Given at the Island of Monaboca. the 19. of March. 1618.

Subscribed by Cassarian David. Bartholomew Churchman. George Pettys.


Upon the receipt of this letter, we three aforenamed were laid in Irons for
eighteen months following, with such barbarous usage as is not to be imagined
to be used amongst Christians.

Upon the news of the taking of our two ships called the Sampson and the Hound
in Patania Road, Hendericke Johnson the Commander of three ships. viz. the
Angel, the Morning Star, and the Burger-Boate, sent a letter by the upper
Steresman of the Star, (who had but one arm) to their General John Peeter
Sacone then at Iacotra of the taking of our two ships, He, the said Sacone then
said, you have now, Henricke Johnson, given me good satisfaction, in that
Captain Jordan is dead, and at his return thither gratified him with 1400.
Gilders, in a chain of gold, putting it himself about his neck, not leaving
any one unrewarded, that had been at the taking of our two ships, and a 100.
pieces of eight to him that shot him, notwithstanding our flag of truce was
hung out. We affirm also that the said General John Peeter Sacone upon the
news brought him by a ship called the Heart from the coast of Carmandele of the
death of Sir Thomas Dale, then said; Dale is dead, and Iordans blood I have, if
I had George Cockins life too I were then satisfied.

An answer to objections made by the Hollanders that the English were the cause
of the first breach in the East Indies.
Whereas the Hollanders affirm that Sir Thomas Dale and Captain Iordane were
the prime cause of all the differences betwixt the two Companies. 1616. Feb. 2.
This we affirm and can prove, that both Sir Thomas Dale and Captain Iordane
were both in England when the Defense and the Swan were taken, and also that
very inhumanely they took the Defense when for relief being put from their
Anchor at Polorone in a storm, they came into one of their harbors for succor.
They took the ship, 1617.
and detemed her men prisoners, likewise in rescue, we following they took a
Pinnice of ours called the Speed-Well, going to Iacatra, one of our men they
slew, and the rest they laid in Irons as prisoners, amongst which one Richard
Tailor Carpenter of the said Pinnice, who at that time had the bloody flux,
who dying in their hands in Irons, they took the dead carcass of the said
deceased, and put him into a bush, with his head downward, and his heels
upward, and said in most barbarous manner, that there was a stert man, that is
a man with a tail with his heels upward, and there his carcass rotted in the
bush.

^ (...)
(...) it is to be proved (...) then coming out of England, hardly clear of
the Coast, when they took both these ships, upon fair terms of Composition:
namely with promise to give us our lives, goods, and liberty. They robbed us
of all our goods, and kept us in lamentable manner in Irons; some of us three
years, some more, some less: in which woeful misery many of our Company
(...) their days lamentably; for in truth they never kept any faith, oath, or
promise with us at all, but most proudly, disdainfully, and cruelly demeaned
themselves toward us.

Bartholomew Churchman.


