A Pollitique Platt for the honor of the Prince, the great profit of the
public state, relief of the poor, preservation of the rich, reformation of
Roges and Idle persons, and the wealth of thousands that knows not how to
live. Written for an Newyeres gift to England, and the inhabitants thereof:
by Robert Hitchcok late of Cauerffeelde in the County of Buckyngham Gentleman.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston.

1. January.

1580.



THE EPISTLE TO ENGLAND.
FOR me O noble and renowned England to write to thee, that has bredde and
brought for the so many famous, honorable, wise, and learned men, who be
not only most expert, in all politic government, but also most happily
furnished each way, with all manner of knowledge, cunnyng and wisdom,
thoroughly seen in all the noble sciences and arts liberal. Both thou and
they may think (and think it truly) over much boldness, and mere
arrogancy in me, that neither am furnished of good letters, knowledge,
histories, or other mean, to make a plausable way of that, or for that I
wish should have good success at thy hands, or good opinion at theirs. Much
more I am afraid lest thou hold it outrage and presumption, for me to dedicate
unto thee, and trouble thee, with the patronage and defense of this my device:
a frutlesse thing as some may deem it, before it be thoroughly considered of
the^. But sithence I am void of presumption, all manner of ways (God be my
record) and am one of thine own brood fostered up with the fatt of thy
loins, and take not upon me to discourse of vanities, but of the setting out
of part of thy flouyng goodness, that has so enbalmed this thy Region with
secret richesse, though a world of eyes be poryng in my face, I trust in thine
own cause, and for thyn own sake, and goodness of the matter it self, and
for such reasons and arguments, as I have set down, to find a great
number of willing hearts, and well disposed minds (that with open mouth will
confess the invention sound and good, and the mean to bring it to pass both
easy and profitable) to further their native soil, and the benefit thereof,
with this my simple action I take in hand, in displeiyng part of thy
richesse. And therefore the grave and wise men of this land, of their good
grace and favor, I trust undoubtedly will accept and take in good part, this
my good will and long travel, and shroude and defend me and my Book, under
the wings of their wisdom, as under a sure Anchor hold, against the rash
opinions of those, that rather wilfully then wisely, will imagine no politic
provision can come, from the Skonse of a Soldioure, that has trailed the Pike.
But as God raises instruments to set out his glory diverse ways, and by
diverse degrees. So let it not be grievous to thee O England, nor to the
better sort of men, that one of thine own (though not so finely as others)
do set abroad part of thy richesse, wealth, and glory to enriche thy
own peculiar people with all, and has opened the golden stream, of thy
secret store house, to the Inhabitauntes of the same. But likewise open thou,
by thy Divine providence the hearts of the wise, grave, and rich of this land
that they will affecte it, embrace it, put their helpyng hands to it, and
willyngly further it, by all possible means they can, for the common profit
of the inhabitauntes. In as mutche as by Gods means, so great a benefit, is
offered with small care, little toil, and no cost, to make all this land
blessed, the people thereof happy, strong, and invincible. If I should
perticularly discourse the several commodities that flow from it, in
perticularitie, and the number of all sorts of people, within this land, that
shall be maintained thereby, I should but weary you with a long tale, and
keep you from the matter, I desire you should know. Therefore commendyng the
goodness thereof to your wisdom, and me to your favorable exposition I
end. Yours humbly in all that I may at commandment during life, for the
honor of prince and country.

Robert Hichcocke.

Fraunces Hitchcocke to the Readers of this his brothers book.
AS they of all most praise descrue,
That first with pen did show:
To us the sacred word of God,
Whereby his will we know.
So many thanks are dew to those,
That beats their restless brain:
To profit all both old and young,
That in this land remain.
Amongst the rest that well deserve,
Account the Author one:
Who by his toil has here offered,
To all excepting none.
A banquet great that sauereth sweet,
To such as hungry be:
Withouten cost, for aye to last,
To people of each degree.
Shake now the Tree and taste the fruit,
Of this his Newyeres gift:
Till purse be full and stringes do brake,
With gold and grotes of thrift.
Prepare thee then a grateful heart,
And sound the trumpe of fame:
In recompense of his good will,
That Hitchcocke has to name.
Thus loath to keep thee fro thy meat,
Wherewith I wish thee fed:
I stay my pen and so fare well,
The Table now is spredde.
Vale.
To the freendly Reader.
FOR asmutche as the Almighty God has blessed and enriched this noble
kingdom, with the sweet dew of his heauely goodness, and stored therein
many rich hidden and pleasant treasures for our benefits, to reveal unto us
when his good pleasure is. I think therefore, every man is rather borne to
profit his native soil and common weal, in reuealyng the same secrets, and
hidden treasure to his country, (if they be showed him) then to seek after his
own private gain, and glory thereby. So I have taken upon me good gentle
Reader, to unfold some of the same hidden treasures to my Country, which I
suppose is manifested unto me: Albeeit there be a great number, that can more
sweetly and with pleasanter words and sugared style (then I) set out the matter
to thee (if they knew it) in far better Method and order. Yet the zeal and
duty I bear to my country, being partly fed with hope of thy good paciece
(gentill reader) and partly enboldened with the fore warnyng that Eccle. ca.
II. gives, which is, That no man shall be condemned before his tale be told,
and inquitision thereof made: whereby righteous Judgment may thereof
follow, Least he (as Solomon says) Procure to him self folly and shame, in
giuyng sentence of a matter before he hear it. These thin ges I say haus
moved me, to put forth my simple mind in writing to my Country, and
praiyng thee of thy good courtesy to peruse it, and thoroughly way the depthes
thereof, in the balance of thy grave Judgment. And if thou find the pithe
and carnell of my labor, fruitful to thee and thy Country (as I doubt
nothing thereof but thou shalt) then may it be, that it has pleased God to
power out his knowledge as well upon a Soldiour, as upon a great Clarke, for
now and then wisdom may be shrouded under an unclean Cloak. And I doubt
not also, but the same reasons and duty that bound me this many years, to
travel in this action, to my great cost and charge, to find out the way
and perfection thereof, shall also bind thee, and move thee effectually, to
favor it, to further it in the Parliament house, and to defend my
imperfection, against a sort of Momus fecte, and Zoilus band, that can rather
find fault with the man, then with the matter, be it never so well, or any
way put to their helpyng hands to amend the same (if it be not orderly.)
My care has been to please my Country* and the honest and grave sort
thereof: which if this my travel shall do and content, I have cause to
thank almighty God for it, and think my time well spent For in this little
book (gentill Reader) thou shall find (if the same be executed according to
law) it imports mutche matter, brings great plenty and mutche wealth,
and benefit, to all the inhabitauntes of this Realm. It provides for the
poor, in honest and decent manner, brynging them to a good and a Godly vocation
of life: with many other special benefits, to this Kingdom and common
wealth, which for tediousness sake, least I weary thee, I refer thee to
the book it self, where thou may at large see them, with thy eye, Judge
them by thy good discretion, wisdom, and favor, and further them by thy good
help and assistaunce at convenient time. So fare thee hartly well.

Robert Hitchcocke.

Hitchcockes Newyeres gift to England.
THE GREAT CARE that the Queens Maestie, and her noble progenitors have taken,
to banishe and root out of their Dominions, that lothesome monster Idelnesse
(the mother and breeder of Uacaboundes) is most apparaunt by their wholesome
laws and provisions, made from time to time: Beginning at the worthy reign
of King Edward the third, King Richard the second, and so descendyng to her
Majesty's most prudente and virtuous government, wherein as well public
provisions has been to help the commonweal, as some sharp and severe
punishment provided, if common policy would not serve. Yet nevertheless all
these Laws so circumspectly made, could not, nor cannot banishe that pestilent
Canker out of this commonweal, by any degree, but that the same increases
daiely more and more, to the great hurt and impouerishyng of this Realm.

For remedy whereof, almighty GOD by the most comodious situation of this
Islande (and his blessings both of the Land thereof, and of the Sea,
wherewith it is environed) has provided a most convenient mean, both for
labor for the Idle: and for food, benefit, and riches for the Inhabitants.
Whereby: the lusty Uacabounds and Idell persons, (the roots, buddes, and
seeds of idelnesse) shall at all hands and in all places be set on work, and
labor willyngly, and thereby prove good subjects, and profitable members of
this Commonweal. This realm and the inhabitants Read the preamble of the
statute Henry 8. Anno 33. cap 2.
bordryng as well upon the sea, as upon the land throughout the same, in short
time to be meruailously enriched. Nine thousand Mariners more then now
presently there is, to serve her Majesty's ships at all times if need be.
The Coins of gold and silver, that issues plentefully out of this Realm, to
stay and abide within this land. For restraint whereof both her highness,
and her noble progenitors, have made diverse laws and statutes, but yet never
could do the same. A ready mean to cause foreign wares to be brought hither.
Her Majesty's Customs and Subsidies greatly augmented: Her Navigations greatly
increased. The Tounes borderyng upon the Sea coasts now in ruin, and void of
English inhabitauntes, to be peopled and inhabited by her majesty's own
peculer Subjects: to the great strength of this Realm, and terror of the
enemy. Besides the help that shall be ministered to two hundredth twenty and
five decayed tounes in England and Wales: with a stock of two hundeth pound
to every decayed town, to set the poor on work. And to eight principal Port
tounes with in this land, appointed for sondrie causes apperteinyng to this
Platte eighte thousand pound, which is to every principal Port Town one
thousand pound, to be a stock for ever. Besides four hundredth Fishing
Ships to continue for ever. And two good Ships of war, furnished
warlike, to defend the Fishyng Ships. All which things (God willing) may
be performed within three years, without cost or charges to any man, as by
this plat shall appear. And also an infinite number of people, as well rich as
poor set to work, by diverse means and degrees, which things will relieve
many a poor man: and save many a tall fellow from the Gallows.

For performaunce whereof, first there must be made four hundredth fishyng
Ships: after the manner of Flemishe Busses, of the burden of three score and
ten Tun the Ship, or more: but none under, which will cost two hundredth
pound the Ship, with the furniture: if it be ready furnished to the Sea, in
all things necessary. Every Ship requires one skillful Master to govern
it, twelve Mariners or fishermen, and xii. of the strong lusty Beggars, or
poor men: taken up through this Land. Which in the whole amounts to the
number of ten thousand persons, at the first mannyng of the Ships. So
that with a little experience, this Realm has clearly increased nine
thousand Mariners, more then was in this Land before.

These Ships so made, furnished and manned, must be appointed to such
Roades and Haven tounes, as border upon the Sea coasts: compassyng this
Realm round about: Beginning an London, and so orderly proceedyng, according
to the Table hereunto annexed. And being thus placed (having with them to the
Seas, for their victualles, sufficient Bread, Bear, Butter, and Cheese, with
Barrelles empty, Caske, and Salt, with order also not to return until they
be fully laden) shall go yearly a fishyng: and kill Herynges upon the
coasts of England and Irelande, presently and always as they kille them, to
gill them, salt, pickle, and barrill them after the Flemishe manner, with
salt upon salt, which is the best kind of Salt. And shall fish for
Herynges yearly, during the time of Heryng Fishyng: which is fowertene or
fiftene weeks. In which time (by Gods grace) every Ship will kill (at the
least) fifty Last of the best sort of Herynges, amountyng in the whole to
twenty thousand Last. Every Last being sold, but for ten pound, (which is
xvi. s. viii. d. the Barrel:) draws to two hundredth thousand pounds
yearly for the best Herynges only. Perhaps they may load their Ships
yearly twice with Herynges: and then the sum is doubled, in that time of
Herryng Fishyng.

And to the end the Herynges shall be wholesome for the subject, Stranger,
or for whom so ever shall buy them, and that the good usage thereof may get
credit, where they shall happen to be uttered. They shall account in making
of their Herynges upon the Sea, so as sixtene Barrelles made there, make but
twelve Barrelles (at their home coming, to their several Ports) when they
shall be new sorted, severed, couched, and truly and justly packed, by such
honest and substanciall men, as shall be sworn, and purposely chosen for that
intent, and they to have two pence of every Barrel, according to the Statute
for that purpose provided. Dividing the full Heringes in to two several
sorts, markyng the beggest and best Heringes with this several mark B. The
second, with the second mark, M. Also the shotten Herynges with this proper
mark S. to the end no man may be abused. Every Barrel conteinyng two and
thirty Gallons, according to the statute made Anno 22. Edward 4. Chapter 2.
which twelve Barrelles makes a Last.

Out of which said number of twenty thousand Last of Herynges: nine or
ten thousand Last, will be a sufficient rate or portion to satisfy this
whole Realm. The residue being ten or eleven thousand Last, drawing to
one hundred thousand pound: being ordered as a foresaied, will be of as great
estimation in France, as the Flemishe Herynges be. And will be sold and
uttered in diverse parts of that Regio^: As in Normandy, in Nantes, in
Burdeux, and in Rochell. And the further South, that the Countries do lie: the
better vtteraunce for Fish. For these Herynges: return will be made, of all
such necessaries, as we want in this Realm, viz: Wine and Woades (for which
is always paid ready gold) Salt, Canuas, Uitere, Doulas, and diverse other
things. The Custom also for the Queens Majesty, being paid upon every
Last of that shall be transported, and sold beyond the Sea: comes to five
thousand pound, after the rate of Pondage, for this number of Herynges only.

The other part of this great blessing of God, may aptly be taken and
applied, viz: These four hundredth Busses or fishyng Ships, may take Codd
and Lyng, and Newlande Fish. The advantage and profit whereof, this Realm
and Subjects of late years, for the most part have lost: and suffered
strangers, the Fleminges and other Nations to take, who seeing our careless
dealyng, have not only taken this beneficial Fishyng from us: but very
warely does sell the same commodity unto us. And thereby carries out of this
land both Gold and Silver, and a merueilous quantity of double double Beer,
and other things: satisfiyng us, with these Fishes: which through our own
slothe we lose, which being taken by our selves (as a special blessyng of
God appointed unto us) and so sold to the^ and others it must needs follow,
that we should save a great mass of gold, within this land. And for that fish
they now utter unto us: we should receive of them the commodities of the Low
Countries. viz: Hollande clothe, Rape oil, Hoppes, Madder, all sorts of Wier,
and diverse other Merchandise: Or else their ready Gold and Money, whereby:
this realm and subjects should be mightly enriched. This great benefit, is
no less to be valued, for the profit of this Realm and subjects: then the
benefit of the Herynges. For every Ship, being but of the burden of lxx.
tun, if God bless it with safe return, from Newfounde land, will bring
home to his Port (in August,) twenty thousand of the best and middle sort of
wette fish (at the least) called blanckfishe, and ten thousand dry fish,
which being sold upon the Ships return, as it may be at Newhauen in
France but for forty shillynges the hundredth of wette fish, which is not
four pence the fish. And xxshillynges the hundredth of dry fish, which is
not two pence the fish, amounts to five hundredth pound at the least.
Likewise any other of the ships, but of the like burden, going a fishyng to
the ward house, to Islande, to the North seas of England and Scotland, or to
Irelande, comes home (at the same time) laden with fifteen thousand Codde,
and ten thousand Lyng, which being sold but for forty shillinges the
hundredth one with an other, amounts to five C. pound. And besides that every
ship will bring home to his Port four or five tun of oil, made of fish
livers, worth to be sold for xii. pound the tun.

The way how this Platte shall be brought to pass and performed, without cost
or charges to any manne: is by borowyng of four score thousand pound for
three years, which forty men in a Shire will, and may easily accomplish,
if every man lend but fifty pound, upon good assurance, after the rate of
ten pound yearly upon every hundredth pound lent, which sommes shall be
repaied again within three years at two paimentes. In what sort this money
shall be levied is set down in the first table followyng. The second table does
declare, to whom and to what principal Port tounes the money shall be
delivered, how it shall be used, who shall give assurance for the same, and
therewith provide the forsaied ships. The third table does show, to what
haven tounes these fishyng Ships shall be placed, and how the money shall be
levied, to make payment of the money borrowed, and to answer all charges. And
in the fowerth table is set down, how many decayed tounes in every Shire,
shall have a continual stock of two hundredth pound a piece, to set the
poor on work for ever. Also how every man shall be pleased, and liberally
considered, that shall be appointed to the execution of this Platte. And how
the paimentes of the money borrowed, with the interest money for the time of for
bearaunce, shall be made and paid at two paimentes.

ORDERS.
IN primis, every one of these eight principal Port tounes: London, Yarmouth,
Hull, New castle, Chester, Bristow, Exeter, and Southampton, must have two
honest and substanciall men of credit, to be chief and principal officers of
every these said Ports: who shall as Treasurers and Puruiours, jointly deal
togethers, in all causes to this Platte apperteinyng. First in receiuyng all
sommes of money, that be appointed to every the said Ports: laiyng it up
safely with their tounes treasure. And there with to provide fifty Fishyng
ships, with all things needful for them, ready to the Seas: with such
careful consideration, as the money were their own. And that every ship be
both strong and good, and not under the burden of three score and ten tun.
And then for to appoint them to the Roades and Haven tounes, in the third Table
of this Platte specified: that is to say, five ships to every Fishyng town.
Taking order also that every of these ships, may have one skillful master
to govern it, twelve Mariners, coaste men or Fishermen, and twelve poor men
taken up, to serve in every of them. And to take bonds of every town,
whereunto the said five ships shall be delivered, for the paiemente of one
hundredth and fifty pound, out of every Ship yearly, during three years.
This being done, the said five ships shall be given to the Fishyng town
for ever: with Preuiso, that if any Ship or ships of the whole number
miscary, or be lost by any kind of chance or degree: then all the rest,
viz: Every ship of the number remainyng shall pay ten shillynges,
(toward the new making of every ship so wanting) to the cheef officers,
where the ship is lackyng: with which money they shall provide again one
other new ship, furnished with all things, as aforesaid. Which law shall
be kept vnuiolately amongst them for ever: upon pain every shipp: (that
shall be found in fault at any time) to forfet for every offense five pound: And
the same to be levied, and received by the order of statute Law, but the whole
benefit to the same town or tounes, where the ship or ships be wantyng.
And the same sixteen cheef Officers shall have allowed them for their fees
yearly, during the said three years xvi. hundredth pounds that is to every
officer one hundredth pound yearly. Also in the end of the third year, there
shall be given in recompense to every of the said eight principal Port tounes
one thousand pound, to be a stock, to remain to the same tounes for ever, as
hereafter shall be declared.

These Busses or fishyng Ships, thus placed in four score fishyng tounes (as
five ships to every fishyng town) shall be set forth to the Seas, by the
Governors of every several Fishyng Town, to take fish: as the times and
seasons of the year does serve. First in March having victuals for five
months, with hokes, lines, and salt (provided by the said Governors and
their assistances) they shall be set out to fish for Lodd and Lyng, where the
said Governors by the consent of the Town likes best: or else to Newfounde
land, for Newlande fish. And by the grace of God, in Auguste at the furthest,
they shall come home, to their several Ports: Laden with fish, and Trane
oil, made of fish Livers. Which fish, shall forthwith be divided into three
equal parts. The first part to the master, and fishermen for their pains.
The second part, to them that were at the charges of victuals, Salt lines,
and hooks. The third part, to be laid up under safe keepyng: until time
serve best to sell the same: or to be vented, where most profit may be
made. Then again with all speed, presently after the fish is divided, every
Ship being victaled for six weeks, with Nets, Laske, and Salt, they must
be set out to fish for Herringes: tariyng upon the Seas, until they be fully
laden. Then they return again to their several Ports (if God bless them
with good luck, and safe return) laden with fifty Last of the best
Herrynges. Every Ship (if wind and weather serve) may return twice laden
with Herrynges: in that time of Herryng fishing. And always (as the ships
with Herrynges do come to their several Ports) the said Governors shall
cause the said Herrynges to be divided into four equal parts. The first
part, to the Master and the Mariners for their pains. The second part, to
them that prouides the Salt and Uictualles. The third part, to them that
finds the Caske and Nets. And the fowerth part, to be laid up under safe
keepyng: until it may be vented. Out of the which portion of Herrynges, and
of the other fish aforefaid, shall be paid the first day of April yearly
(next after the first year, that the Ships of this Platte begins to
fish) one hundredth and fifty pound, for every Ship yearly, during three
years, by the Governors of every fishyng town, that so shall have regard of
their retournes, and use of the goods, where the Ships be placed. Which
paimente shall be paid to the cheef officers of that principal Port, that
did place the said five Ships to the same Town. And then after the three
years be expired: the third part of great fish, and the fowerth part of
Herrynges shall be, and remain for ever, to every Fishyng town, where the
fishyng ships be at the day of the last paimente. Out of which, the five
ships shall yearly be repaired and maintained, by every fishyng town: for
the profit of the same Town, and the benefit of the Common weal. When
Herryng fishyng is past, then with all conueniente speed, the Governors
aforesaid,) shall appoint some of their Ships) to take fish upon the coasts
of England, Scotland or Ireland. And send other some into France, or else
where with Codd, Lyng, Herrynges, and New land fish there to utter them,
making return with such commodities as will be best uttered here, or else
with Salt and money. By which return it will be time to make ready for the
Fishyng in March as before. Thus the whole year is spent in Fishyng.

There must be an Auditour for receiuyng all accomptes, that shall appertain,
and depend upon the execution of this Plat: Such as it shall please the
Parliament house to nominate and appointe. Who shall receive of the sixtene
cheef officers aforesaied, eight hundredth pound yearly, during three years,
viz: of the cheef officers of every principal Port (upon his quittaunce) one
hundredth pound for his Fee. Which said Auditour must ride from every
principal Port to other, to see, and to provide that all and every of the
five decayed counes, within every Shire in England: and also twenty decayed
tounes in Wales, have the stock of two hundredth pounds truly paid to every
one of them, according to this Plat, and that it be used accordyngly, viz:
that the Governor of every the decayed tounes, with the said stock of two
hundredth pound, shall diligentely and carefully provide yearly, such
commodities to set the poor on work, as the nature of the country does
yield for most profit. And that the poor people that laboreth, be paid
weekly their wages: conuertyng the benefit of their travel in to the
increase of the same stock. And that the said Auditour take knowledge how many
there be at work in every place, by that means: and with what commodities,
the said poor people are set to work in every Shire. And for that there
shall be no percialitie in naming of the decayed tounes. The two Parliamente
Knights, with two Justices of Peace in every their Shire, to name and appoint
the ancient decayed tounes in every Shire, for to have the said stock of two
hundredth pound, according to the fourth table of this Plat. And being
subscribed under their hands, to deliver it to the said Auditour in the first
year, that the Fishyng ships aforesaid, be set to the Sea to Fish.

There must also be a Comptroler, joined in Commission with the cheef officers
of every principal Port town: for the prouidyng of all things needful at
the best hand. Who must ride to every Port and Fishing town, and to all
other places, where these Ships be either made, bought, or placed, to see
that all things may be justly performed: according to the true meaning of
this Platt, and to be done with all expedition. Who may by this order, and
without greef to this Platte, receive for his Fee eight hundredth pound yearly
during three years. viz: of the cheef officers of every principal Port town,
one hundredth pound upon his quittaunce: for his pains and charges, and for
the charges of his servants and ministers that must be, and remain in many
several Ports and places, to see the dew execution of this Platte in all
points. Which said Comptroler, the aucthor wishes should be such a man,
as would bend his wits for the Commonweal, and that he were as ripe in this
matter, and could so well execute the same as him self. For then he should be
able to declare in all places what is to be done, and what should be done at
every extremity to avoid any danger.

The officers of every the said eight principal Port towns, shall appoint
one honest virtuous discrete and learned man, to preach Gods word, which
Preachers shall travail continually (as the Apostles did) from place to place,
prea chyng in all these fishyng towns, and dekayed towns, appointed to every
several Port. And every Preacher shall receive for his maintenance one
hundredth pound yearly during three years: of the chief officers of that same
principal port town, where unto he is appointed. And also that order may
be had from the Queens Majesty, that two of her graces Ships of war,
such as yearly be appointed to wafte the Merchants may contineue upon her
Majesty's Seas, from the first of March, until the last of November yearly
for two years: for the defense of these fishing Ships. And toward the
charges of the same two Ships of war. The chief Officers appointed for
Yarmouth and Bristowe, shall pay yearly during two years, four thousand
pound. Which Ships if they can not be had, Then the said Audytour and
Comptroler, shall with that monic provide two other Ships of war for the
same cause. Also the said Audytor and Comptroler who rides all the whole
circuit of this land, for the performaunce of this platte: shall make
declaration once a year, to the Right Honorable Lords, the Lord
Chauncellor, the Lord Treasarour, the Lord Admyrall of England, and Lord
privy Seal of the whole state, cause and procedinges of this Plat. To the
end their Lordeshippes may use their honorable considerations for and in
redress of things needful,

Provided always that if the chief Officers, of any of the said eight
principal Port tounes, do find just cause that there is some
insufficiency, either in any of the fishyng Tounes, where the five Ships are
placed: or else in the Governors of the same Town, such negligence that this
fishyng can not prove profitable, or that it is not used according to the
effect and true meaning of this Platte. Then upon just proof, or informacion
made to the Lords aforesaied, the same officers of that principal Port, by
consent of the Comptroler and Audytoure, with order from the said Lords, may
remove the same ships, from any such fishing Town, and appoynte them
elsewhere within their several charge, where they may be both better placed,
and for the common weal more profitable.

The same sixtene chief Officers, of the said eight principal Port Tounes,
for the time being after their first years recept (which amounts to three
score thousand pound) shall at May day next following, deduct out of the
same recept, four thousand pound for fees and wages dew and to be paid to
them selves, to the Audytour, to the Comptroler, and to the eight Preachers, as
before is appointed for that first year. Likewise out of the same recept, they
shall pay forty and five thousand pound to the Governors of two hundredth
and five and twenty dekaied tounes, viz: to every dekaied Town two hundredth
pound, to be a stock for ever, to set the poor people on work, as it is
appointed in the fourth table of this Platte. Also the Officers of Yarmouth
(out of the said recept) shall pay to two Ships of war four thousand
pound, for their wages the first year. All paiments paid for the first year.
There remains of the said recept seven thousand pound, whereof, the
officers of Bristowe, has in their hands four thousand pound (as by their
paymentes appears) which is for to pay the second years wages, to the two
Ships of war, for defendyng the Fishermen the second year. The other
three thousand pound is in the hands of the officers of Yarmouth aforesaied
(as by their payments likewise appears) which shall be by them bestowed, upon
making of two Ships of war, of the burden of eight score tun the Ship:
after the best and strongest manner in warlike sort, and to furnishe them
with store of all needful things to the Sea, as appertains to ships of
war. And also with ordnaunce, powder, shot, armor, Weapons, and all other
prouicion necessary. These several sommes of monnie, amounts to three score
thousand pound, which is the first years recept.

The second years recept of threescore thousand pound, being received by
the said sixtene chief Officers, of the foresaied eight principal Ports.
They shall deduct out of the same four thousand pound for fees and wages, to
content and pay them selves, the Audytor, the Comptroler, and the eight
Preachers for the second year in like manner as aforesaied. Also they shall
pay to the lenders of the money, the one half of the money borrowed, which is
forty thousand pound and the interest money of the whole sum borrowed for
two years. Which is sixtene thousand pound, which paymentes amountes to
three score thousand pound. And that is the just recept and payment of and for
the second year.

The third years recept of three score thousand pound being received in
like manner, by the foresaied chief Officers, of the said eight principal
Ports. They shall deduct out of the same four thousand pound for fees and
wages, to be paid as aforesaied unto them selves, the Auditour, the
Comptroler, and the eight Preachers for the same third year. And likewise
four thousand pound for wages to two ships of war for the same third
year, as by the Officers of every principal Port town five hundredth pound.
Then they shall pay to the lenders of the monye, the other half of the money
borrowed, which is forty thousand pound, and the interest money for that
third and last year, which is four thousand pound. All which paiments
amountes to fifty two thousand pound. This fishing platte thus being
parformed, all paiments paid, and every man that has taken pains in the
execution of the same, very well pleased and contented. There does remain
eight thousand pound in the hands of the chief Officers, of the said
principal Ports, viz: one thousand pound with the chief Officers of every
principal Port, as appears by their recepts and payments, which shall be
allowed unto the same eight principal Port tounes amongst them, viz: to
every principal Port Town one thousand pound, to be a stock to remain
for ever, for the profitte and benefitte of the same Town. And yearly to be
used for profit, to such Fisher tounes, and fishermen, as upon good
assurance will use any part thereof in the trade or craft of fishyng.

And when this is done and brought to pass, I will declare a device
appertainyng to this plat, that shall (if it please God) be worth ten
thousand pound yearly for ever, without cost or charges to any man: neither
offendyng or incrochyng upon any parson with the same device. Which is to
maintain the foresaied Ships of war warlike yearly for ever, with wages,
victuals, Soldiers, and Marrynours, and all other kind of charges. And also
to maintain all the aforesaied officers and Preachers their yearly fees for
ever. Unto either of the same two ships of war, there must be appointed one
skillful and valiant master, the masters mate, four quarter masters, a
Purser, a master Gu^ner, and one hundredth and twenty Soldiers and
Marrynours. The Master to have for wages, four shillynges the day, every
other Officer two shillinges the day, and every Soldiour or Marrynour twelve
pence the day for wages. The order for their diet of victuals all the whole
year, and what monye is to be allowed for the yearly repracions of the said
two Ships of war, and how all this shall be mayntained for ever: I have
set down in writing. And after this Plat with the great benefits growyng
universal to this Realm shall be thoroughly considered, drawn into perfect
form and put in execution, by authority of Parliament (which is the power of
the whole comonaltie of England) I will deliver the same where it shall be
thought meet.

The times and places of the yearly fishyng for Codde and Lyng.
FIrst for Codde upon the Coaste of Lancashire: beginning at Ester, and
continues until midsommer.

For Hakes in the deepes, betwixt Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontyde until
saint James tide.

For Codde and Lyng about Padsiowe, within the lands end of Seuerne, is good
fishyng from Christmas until midlent.

There is an excellent good fishyng for Codde about Irelande, where does come
yearly to fish three or four hundredth sail of Ships and Barks out of
Biskey, Galiza, and Portugale, about the Southwest parts: near to
Mackertymors country, and does continewe April, May, June, and Iulie.

Also for Codde and Lyng, on the West and Northwest of Irelande, beginning at
Christmas and continues until March.

And there is one other excelent good fishyng upon the North of Irelande.

Also for Newelande fish upon the banks of Newfoundlande. The ships goes
forth from England and Irelande in March, and comes home laden in August.

There is an excelent good fishyng (for them that will go further) for Codd
and Lyng, in the Rivers of Backlasse, continuyng April, May, June, and Iulie.

Also for Codde and Lyng, upon the North coasts of England, and upon the
coasts of Scotland, and the North Isles of Scotland, continuyng from Ester
until midsomer.

The like for Codde, upon the East coasts of Freselande, Norwaie and
Shotlande, from Easter until midsomer.

To fish for Codde and Lyng in Islande, the Ships commonly must go forth
in March, and returns laden in August.

The like manner and time is used for Cod and Lyng from England to the ward
house, where is excelent good fishyng, April, May, and June.

The times and places of the yearly fishyng for Herynges.
THe Herrynges shootes out of the deepes, on both sides of Scotland and
England, and begins upon the Scots coaste at midsomer, and be not
Marchaundable (but yet vendable) because they be so fat: by reason whereof they
will grow reastie if they be kept. And therefore they be presently sold.

The second and best fishyng begins at Bartholmewtyde at Skarbrough, and
so proceeds alo^g the coaste, until they come to Thames mouth, continuyng
very good until Hollentyde. All which time they be very good and
Marchaundable, and will abide the saltyng very well.

The third fishyng is from Thames mouth through the narrow Seas: yet not
certain, for after that time, they shoot suddenly through the same Seas (upon
any extreme weather) on both sides of Irelande. Which fishyng does continue
until the feast of saint Androwe.

Also upon the coaste of Irelande, is very good fishyng from Michaelmasse
until Christmasse. For there is great plenty of Herringes.

Also upon the Northwest Seas of England, over against Carlell in Cumberlande,
about Wirkington is good fishyng for Herynges, from Bartholmewtide until
foretene days after Michaelmasse.

Also from Holentyde till Christmasse upon the coaste of Norwaie (that serves
all the East countries) called the Mall sand, where all strangers do fish:
paiyng their custom (a Youghendale upon every Last) to the King of Denmark.
But some times the Frostes be so great there, that the Heringes will not take
salt.

There is an other exercise to breed profitte, called the huntyng of the
Whaile, which continues all the Summer. The Whaile is upon the coasts of
Rushe toward Muskouy, and saint Nicholasse. The killyng of the Whaile is
both pleasant and profitable, and without great charges: yelding great
plenty of Oil, the tun whereof is worth ten pound. One of the Ships may
bring home to his Port fifty Tun, the which is worth five hundredth pound.

Objections and aunsweres of the Author.
First what moves you to think that there will be found forty men in every
Shire of England, that will lend fifty pound a man, for three years in
this covetous time, when every man is for him self.

THis Realm of England and Wales is very populos, and the most part be the
poorer sort of people, who daiely does harken when the world should amend
with them. They are indifferent in what sort, so that their state were
relieved. And so parhappes apt to assiste Rebellion, or to join with whom
soever dare invade this noble Island, if any such attempt should be made.
Then are they meet Guides to bring the Soldiers or men of war, to the rich
men's wealth For they can point with their finger, there it is, yonder it is,
here it is, and he has it, and she has it that will do us much good. And
so procure Martyrdom with murder, to many wealthy parsons for their wealth.
Therefore the wise and wealthy men of this land, had need by great
discretion to devise some speedy help herein, that his poorerer sort of
people, may be set to some good Arts, Science, Occupacions, Crafts and
labors, by which means they might be able to reliue them selves of their
great need and want. And being brought to such vocation of life, having some
good trade to live upon, there is no doubt, but they will prove good and
profitable subjects, and be careful to see this common wealth florishe, and
will spend their lives and blood to defend the same, and their little wealth,
their liberties, their wifes and children. For having nothing they are
desperate, but having some little goods, they will dye before they leese it.
Wherefore if this matter be looked into with eyes of judgment, there is no
doubt of borowing the money upon the assurance and interest. For I do know in
some Shires four men that will gladly lend so much money as the whole Shire
is appointed to lend. In Hollande and Sealande, the rich men makes so sure
accounte of their fishyng, that they appointe their children Portions to be
increased by that use.

I pray you show me by what occacion or means, this huge number of Beggars
and Vacaboundes do breed here in England. And why you appointe twelve of
them to every Shipp, I think they may carry the Ship away, and become
Pirates.

IF you consider the poverty that is, and does remain in the Shire tounes, and
Market tounes, within this Realm of England and Wales, which tounes being
inhabited with great store of poor householders, who by their poverty are
driven to bring up their youth idly, and if they live until they come to
man's state, then are they past all remedy to be brought to work. Therefore at
such time as their Parents fayles them: they begin to shifte, and acquainte
them selves with some one like brought up, that has made his shifte, with
dicyng, cosenyng, picking or cutting of purses, or else if he be of courage*
plain robbing by the way side, which they count an honest shift for the time,
and so come they daiely to the Gallows. Hereby grows the great and huge
number of Beggars and Uacaboundes, which by no reasonable means or laws could
yet be brought to work, being thus idely brought up. Which perilous state
and imminent danger, that they now stand in: I thought it good to avoid, by
placeyng twelve of these poor people into every fishyng Ship, according to
this Platte. Who when they shall find and perceive that their diet for all the
whole year is provided, and that two vyoges every year will yield to every
man for his pains, xx. pound clear, and for ever to continue: By which honest
trade they shall be able to live in estimacion amongst men, whereas before they
were hated, whipped, almost sterued, poor and naked, imprisoned and in
danger daiely to be marked with a burning Iron for a Roge, and to be hanged
for a Uacabounde. When they shall find these dangers to be avoided by their
travail, and thereby an increase of wealth to ensewe: they will be glad to
continue this good and profitable vocacion of life, and shun the other.
Besides that it is well known, that six Marryners or Seafaring me^, is able
to rule and govern twelve land men, that be not acquainted with the Sea,
And therefore not to be doubted that this kind of people will prove Pirates,
they be so base minded. For the heart mind and value of a man is such, and
his spirit so great, that he will travail all the kingdoms of Princes to
seek interteinmente, rather then he will show his face, to beg or crave
relief of thousands of people, that be unworthy to unbuckle his shoes. And
in his great want, will take with force and courage from them that has to
serve his necessity, thinkyng it more happy to dye speedely, then to live
defamed and miserablely. Of which sort of people at* the breaking up of
wars, there is a great number of worthy and valiant Soldiers, that has
served in the Wars with inuinceable minds, who through want of living
either depart as aforesaied, or else if they tarry in England, hangyng is the
end of the most part of them.

How may so many Ships be provided for want of Timber, Mastes, Cables,
Pytche and Iron? And where shall Masters and Marryners be had, with other
needful things, as Salt, Nets and Caske?

TO that I must put you in mind of Hollande, Sellande, and Freeselande, that
of late years, has flourished with Ships Marryners and Fisher men, and
thereby proved of merueilous wealth, no Country more. And all the Timber they
used for their Ships came from the Domynions of other Princes. Their Cables,
Mastes, Pytch, and Terre came from the cou^tryes under the King of Denmark.
The Sails for their Ships, the threede for their Nets, came from Normandy
and Britain: Their Salt came from France, Portugale and Spain. And their
Iron came from the countries of other Princes: We need not doubt of these
things, for there are Ships presently to be bought (for the sommes of money
appointed for every Ship) both here in this Realm, and in Hollande,
France, and in other places. And if there were not, I could name the places
within this Realm, where is plenty of Timber: If you do remember the great
and wonderful woods of Timber Trees that is in Irelande, you will shake of
that doubt. And for Iron there is great plenty made within this land: I may
call to witness the inhabytaunts of the forest of Deane, the county of Sussex
with other places. And for all other needful things, the Havens, Ports, and
Realm of England, lies nearer to those countries where plenty is, then the
Flemminges does. And for Masters, there is plenty of coaste me^, which will
gladly serve that place that be sufficient men. And for Mariners, there is
great store of poor Fisher men all along the coaste of England and Wales,
that will willyngly serve in these fishyng ships and use the craft of
fishyng, their gain will be so great. And for Salt there is great plenty
made at the Witches in Chesshire, and in diverse other places: Besides many
Salt houses standing upon the coaste of England that makes Salt, by sething
of salt Sea water. And besides the great store of salt, that will be brought
yearly into England, by the Merchants and others to make salt upon salt.
Also for Caske, there is great store of Oak, Ash, and Beeche, growyng in many
places of England, so that there can be no want of Caske, if there be use to
use it, nor yet of any other thing aforesaied, if good consideracion be had.
This Platte (being put in execution) will breed such store of Marryners,
that when so ever the noble Navy of England shall be set to the Seas, for
the safegarde of this land, there shall be no want of Mariners to serve in the
same, where as now they be both scant and hard to be found. Look back into
Hollande, where practice is used, and see what store is there.

You appoynte ten thousand Last of Herrynges to be sold in France. How can
that be? so long as the Flemmynges, the French men and other Nations do fish,
who has all ready won the credit of their Fish. They shall sell when we
can not. Then where shall the fish taken by us be uttered?

THere is no doubt but there wilbee ten thousand Last of Heringes to spare,
this Realm being served, if these four hundredth fishing ships with these
fishermen be appointed to the Seas, for they will take their place to fish
within the Queens Majesty's Seas: And so shall serve both England and France,
plentifully and also better cheap then the Flemminges are able to do. And the
Herrynges Codde and Newlandefishe being used in such sort, as the Flemminges
does, will be of as great estimacion as there is be, and may yearly be sold
and uttered in France as at Deep, that serves and victualles all Pickardie,
at Newhauen that serves all base Normandy, and at the Town of Rone, that
serves all the hie con^tries of France, for thither comes yearly three
hundredth Lighters (called Gabers) with Wines: of ten hundredth tun or twelve a
Gaber, and there best return is Fish and Salt. And for the other parts of
Fran^ce, at Rochell and Burdeux: Also the Marchaunts that travails into
Spain, Portugale, Italy, Barbary and Africa, cariyng Fish, the further
South and Southweste, that the fish well used is carried, the dearer it is, and
greatly desired. Wherefore let all men fish that will, of what couutrey so
ever, for there is fish plenty in these Northren Seas for them all, if there
were a thousand sail of fishyng Ships more then there is. And the English
nation shall and may weary them out, for their travail and labor (where
they shall fish) is not far, their Ports Harbors and Roades be at hand,
their ships cost the Fisher men nothing: Therefore the English men shall
better be able to sell good cheap then any other Nation, by means whereof
they shall sell when others can not. And so the Flemminges being put from
uttering their Herringes in France, shall be driven to leave their great
Ships, and to fish in smaller Uesselles near the shore, to serve their own
turns, as hitherto they have caused us to do, for fear of them: and every
tempest triumphyng at our folly, for not taking this great benefit and
blessyng of God powered into our laps.

How do you know that nine or ten thousand Last of Herrynges will serve
all England? And when wars shall happen between France and England, where
shall we sell the rest of our Herrynges and other fish: The Flemmynges being
provided for by their own people.

BY estemacion five thousand Last of Herrynges does serve London, out of
which portion, all the Shires about London are served. And by the like
estemacion, five thousand last more will serve all England. And if wars
should happen between France and England, then the Italianes, Spaniardes,
Flemmynges, and other Nations, does bring into England all sorts of French
commodities, as Wines, Woades, Lockromes and Canuas of all sorts. These
Marchaunts will daiely look for profit and in time of wars, nothing does
pass with less danger, sooner is vented and made ready money, then these
Herrynges, Codde, Lyng, and Newlandfish. So there is no doubt of utterance for
fish, either in wars or in peace: Let experience of other Countries serve
for this wholly. And I think it good to let you understand how Herrynges
were sold in France Anno. 1577. The best Flemmishe Herrynges were sold for
four and twenty pound ten shillynges the Last, Yarmouth Herringes (who of
late does use and order their Herynges as the Flemmings does) were sold for
twenty pound twelve shillinges the Last. Irishe Herringes for eightene
pound the Last: Coaste Herringes and Scottishe Herrynges for a leven pound
the Last. These defferences be in Heringes* which being used as is set down
in this Platte, will be in all places (with in a little time) equal in
goodness with the Flemmishe Herringes.

In what order does the Flemminges, the Frenchmen, and others fish for
Herrynges, Codde, and Newlandefishe.

FIrst behold this Sea Plat or proportiture here set down, showing how the
same Strangers do fish in their great Ships upon the English coaste: And
how our English men (for fear of them and every tempest as aforesaied) do
fish in small Uesselles near the shore.

THe Flemminges sets out of Flanders Hollande and Sealande yearly (at
Bartholmewtide) four or five hundredth Busses, to fish for Heringes upon the
East coaste of England, where before they fish, they ask leave at Scarbrough
(as ever more they have done) with which honor (and no profit) this Realm and
Subjects has hitherto been vainly fed. And amongst them this is the
order, one man prouides the Ship, an other victuals and Salt, the third
Caske, the fowerth Nets. And when the ships comes home deuides the Fish.
There goes out of France commonly five hundredth sail of ships yearly in
March to Newefoundlande, to fish for Newlande fish, and comes home again in
August, Amongst many of them, this is the order, ten or twelve Marryners
does confer with a Money man, who furnishes them with money to buy Ships,
Uictualls, Salt, Lines and Hooks, to be paid his money at the ships
return, either in fish or in money, with five and thirty pound upon the
hundredth pound in money lent. Likewise here in England, in the West country
the like order is used, the fishermen conferres with the money man, who
furnishes them with money to provide victuals, salt, and all other needful
things to be paid twenty five pound at the ships return, upon the
hundredth pound in money lent. And some of the same money men does borowe money
upon ten pound in the hundredth pound, and puts it forth in this order to the
Fishermen. And for to be assured of the money ventered, they will have it
assured, geuyng six pound for the assuring of every hundredth pound to him
that abides the venture of the Ships return, as thus. A ship of Excester
is gone to the Ward house, to fish for Codd and Lyng; the venture of the
Ship, Salt, and Uictualls is three hundredth pound, for eightene pound all
is assured. So that if the ship never return, yet the money man gains
declaro, forty and eight pon^d and his principal again. So by these reasons,
there seameth great good to be done by fishyng, when other men being at such
charges do prove rich by using this trade. Shall not the English nation that
thus shall fish (the greatest charges cut of) be more able to sell good
cheap, then any others may? and so weary the^ out as aforesaied.

You say that much gold goes forth of this land for Wynes and other
French commodities: I pray you to what value in the year, does the Wynes of
France brought into England amounte unto? And what several sorts of English
wares be sold in France to buy the same.

I do esteem to come into England every year, ten thousand Tun of
Gascoine and Rochell Wines, which at twenty Crounes the Tun, amounts in
English paymente to threescore thousand pound. The flete that goes from
London to Burdeux, carries commonly victuals, Ballace, and some Cloth, for the
money is always made over by exchange, out of London out of Flanders and out
of Spain. And the ships that goes from other places of this Realm, as from
Bristowe, Wales, Westchester, Newcastle, Hull, and elsewhere to the Uintage,
caryeth (contrary to the law) Lether, Calueskins, Butter, and Tallowe, with
ready gold, as they may provide it all the whole year before. At Rone in
France which is the chefest vent, be sold our English wares, as Welche and
Manchester Cottons, Northern Carseis, Whites, Lead, and Tin: Which money
is commonly employed in Normandy and Britain, in all sorts of Canuasses
with other small wares, and in Lockromes, Uiterie, and Dowlasse, Pouldauis,
Olyraunce and Myndernex: part for ready money, part for commodity. And
Woades is commonly lode^ at Burdeux, and uttered there to our Nation, and
others, for money and Clothe, or else not. These sorts of wares bought in
France, besides the Wines, amounts (by estimacion) to six times so much as
all the English wares be sold for in France every year. And for a truth,
this trade of fishyng is the best (and of lightest cost that can be found)
to counteruaile the valewes of the French commodities. Experience does show
the same, by the Flemminges: Who with their green fish, barreled Cod and
Heringes, caryeth out of England for the same yearly, both gold and silver
and other commodities: and at the least ten thousand tun of dubble dubble
Bear, and has also all kind of French commodities, continually both in time
of wars and peace, by their trade only of fishyng. Thus the great sums of
gold, that is carried yearly out of this land to the vintage (as appears by
this Plat following) will stay: And the Wines nevertheless, and other french
waires of all sorts, will be had and obtained for Herrynges and fish.



When you put your fishyng Platte into the Parliament house, what did you
conseaue by the speech of such Burgesses, as you conferred with of the same?

IN the eightene year of the Queens Majesty's reign, five or six days
before the Parliament house brake up, I had the Burgesses (almost) of all
the stately Port tounes of England and Wales, at a Dynner with me at
Westminster, amongst whom the substance of my Platte was red, and of every
man well lyked, so that some were desirous to have a Lopie of the same, and
said, that they would of their own cost and charges set so many Ships to
the Sea: as was to their tounes appointed, without the assistaunce of any
other. Of the like mind were the Burgesses of Rye, and some said it were good
to leuye a subsidy of two shillynges land, and sixteen pence goods, for the
making of these fishyng Ships. Of which mind the speaker master Bell was,
saying a Parliament has been called for a less cause, other some said, it
were good to give a subsidy for this purpose, to ship these kind of people
in this sort, for if they should never return, and so avoided: the land were
happy, for it is but riddaunce of a number of idle and evil disposed people.
But these men that so does think, wilbee of an other mind with in two years
next after this Platte take effect, as when they shall see by this occacion
only: such a number of Larpenters and Shipwrightes set on work, such a
number of Cowpers employed, such nombers of people making Lines, Ropes and
Cables, dressors of Hemp, spinners of threede, and makers of Nets, so many
Salt houses set up to make salt, and salt upon salt: And what a number of
Marryners is made of poor men, and what a number of poor people is set on
work in those Shires all along upon the Sea coaste in England and Wales: in
splettyng of fish, washyng of fish, packyng of fish, salting of fish,
caryng and recaring of fish, and serving all the countries in England with
fish. And to serve all those occupacions aforesaied, there must depend an
infinite number of servant, boys, and day laborers for the use of things
needful: And with all to remember how that about England and Wales, there
is established in four score Haven tounes five fishyng Ships to every town,
to continue for ever: which will breed plenty of fish in every (Market, and
that will make flesh good cheap) And that by the only help of God and these
fishermen, there shall be established within England and Wales, to two hundredth
five and twenty decayed tounes, a stock of two hundredth pound to every
decayed town, which shall continue for ever to set the poor people on work:
And to conclude I do carry that mind, that with in few years, there will
be of these fishyng tounes of such wealth, that they will cast Ditches about
their Tounes, and wall the same defensive against the Enemy, to guard them
and their wealth in more saiftie. What English man is he think you, that
will not rejoice to see these things come to pass: And for my part I perceive
nothing but good success is like to come of this Platte. To further the same I
gave a Copy hereof to my Lord of Leicester, six years paste, one other
copy to the Queens Majesty, four years paste. Also to sundry of her
Majesty's privy Council certain copies. And in the end of the last
Parliament, holden in the said eightene year of her Majesty's Reign: I gave
twelve Copies to Counselors of the law, and other men of great credit,
hopyng that God would stir up some good man to set out this work, which
the Author (being a Soldiour, trained up in the wars and not in scholles,
with great charges, and travail of mind for his country sake) has devised
and laid as a foundation, for them that has judgment to build upon.
Amongst whom, Master Leonerd Digges, (a proper Gentilman and a wise) had one
Copy, who (being a Burgess of the house) took occasion there upon, to
desire license to speak his mind, concerning this Plat, saieyng he spoke for
the common wealth of all England, and for no private cause: He (by report) did
so worthily frame his speech, for the common weal of his country: that he
has gained thereby, both fame and great good likyng of all the hearers, and
so concluded, desiryng that this device might be red, which for want of time,
was deferred until their next assembly in Parliament.

FINIS.




THE FIRST TABLE THE SECOND TABLE. THE THIRD TABLE. THE FOVRTH TABLE. The order
of borowyng lxxx. thousand pound for three years, not chargyng above xl.
persons in any one Shire, to lend fifty li. a man, of the lords Bushops,
Knights, Gentlemen, Merchauntes, and other rich men, Spiritual and
temporal, in these Shires following: accomptyng London for a shire, all
Southwales for a shire, and all North wales for a shire. And for that it is,
for the common weal, the two Parliament Knights, and two Justices of the
peace of every Shire, to name the parties in every their Shires, that shall
lend the maney: and appoint one sufficient man of good credit, in every
shire, to collect the same money, and then to deliver it, to the cheef officers
of every the eight principal Port tounes in the next Table. The cheef officers
of every of these eight principal Port tounes herevnder written, shall give the
seal of every Port town, for the assurance of every several sonnne borrowed,
to be repaied again within iif, years at two paintentes. And with the saeid
money to them delivered: shall provide I. fishyng ships ready furnished to the
sea: according to the true meaning hereof. And deliver them to the haven tounes
in the next table, as they be there appointed, taking bonds of every the same
haven tounes, or fishyng tounes within their charge, for the payment of Cl. l.
for every ship yearly during three years: with which payment this Platte shall
be performed, and every man well pleased, that shall take pains in the
execution of the same Platte. These ships must be placed within the roades and
fishyng tounes* all a log the sea coasts, beginning at London, and co^passyng
this land by sea, according to this table. The governors of every fishing
town, must provide one skillful master, xii. fisher men, or Mariners, and
xii. poor men to serve in every shipp, with all needful things: and then
set them to the sea to take fish, for the profit of their town, and the
common weal. At whose returns the governors before said shall see that the
fish of every ship be used, as is declared in the orders of this Platt. Out
of which they shall pay for every ship yearly, during three years, Cl. li. to
the cheef officers of that principal Port town, that placed the said
ships, to these their Roades followyng. The cheef officers of the said eight
principal Port tounes, at May day next after their first years receipte,
shall yearly pay and discharge all fees and wages, with other paimentes in the
orders more ar large mentioned, both of the money borrowed, with the interest
money, and for making of two Ships of war with their wages, as also to the
said eight Port tounes viij. M. l. to be a stock for ever. And to the end
the poor people in all places may spedely be relieved, they shall (out of the
first years receipt) pay to the governors of v. decayed tounes in every
shire followyng one M. li. to be a stock of CC. li, to every town for ever,
to set the poor on work, Sum xlv. M. li. for CCxxv. decayed tounes,
according to this Table, The money to be levied. The principal Ports. Roades.
Ships. Paimentes. Paimentes by the cheef officers. in London. Middlesex.
Hartforshire. Cambridgeshire. Huntyngtonshire.
x.iii. which said sum under assurance must be delivered unto the cheef
officers. of London, whose seal, as above written, must be given up the said
cheef officers for the repaiement of the said sum to them delivered, which
sum is, li..iii. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishyng
Ships of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at London. 5 Stepney parish. 5
Grenewiche. 5 Wolwiche. 5 Anthe 5 Grauesende. 5 Quinborough 5 Rochester 5 Lee.
5 Malden. 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, during three years, Cl. li. to the
cheef officers of London, Sum. M. C. vii. v. l. of London, for fees five C.
li. and to the decayed tounes in Middlesex one M, li. in Essex, one M. li. in
Suffolk, a M. li. in Hartforshire, one M. li. in Cambridgeshire a M. l. in
Huntingtonshire a M. l. in Norffeolk a M. l. M. C. vij. v. l. in Essex.
Suffolk. Norfolk Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire.
li x.iii. which said su^me under assurance, must be delivered unto the
cheef officers. of Yarmouthe, whose seal as above written, must be given by
the cheef officers, for the repaimente of the money to them delivered, which
sum is li. x.iii. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishyng
Ships of lxx. tun the shipp and place them at Colchester 5 Harwiche 5
Ipswiche. 5 Dunidge 5 Yarmoth. 5 Orforde. 5 Alborough. 5 Blackney 5 Dasyngham.
5 Burnam. 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, C l. li. to
the cheef officers of Yarmouth, Sum. M. C. vij.v. l. Yarmouthe, for fees v.
C. pound, and for wages to two ships of war, for the first year iiij. M.
l. and for the making and furnishyng of ij. ships of war to the sea warlike
iii. M. li. M. C. Vij. v. l. in Yorkshire. Ritchmondshire. Lincolneshire.
Rutlandshire. Lecestershire.
li. x.iii. which said su^me under assurance, must be delivered unto the
cheef officers. of Hull, whose Seal as above written, must be given by the
cheef officers, for the repaiment of the money them delivered, which su^me is
li. x.iii. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishing ships,
of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Wells 5 Lynne 5 Saltflete. 5
Wansflete 5 Boston. 5 Grimsbie. 5 Barton 5 Hull. 5 Beuerley. 5 York. 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, Cl. li. to the
Chief Officers of Hull, Sum. M. C. vij.v. l. of Hull, for fees v. C. li. and
to the decayed tounes in Yorkshire a M. l. in Ritchmondshire a M. l. in
Lincolneshire a M, li, in Rutland shire a M. li, in Lecestershire a M, li, in
Northampton shire a M, li, and in Warwickeshire one thousand pound. M. C.
Vij. v. l. in Northumberlande. Cumberlande. Westmerlande. Bishopric.
Darbishire. Nottynghamshire. Warwickeshire. Northamptonshire.
li. x. m. which said su^me under assurance, must be delivered unto the cheef
officers. of Newcastle, whose Seal, as above written, must be given by the
che officers, for the repaimente of the money to them delivered, which form
is, li. x. m. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishyng
ships, of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Bridlyngton 5 Whitbye 5
Scarborough Flamborough 5 Hartlepoole 5 Durham cu^ Sheelds. 5 Newcastell. 5
Tynmouth 5 Holy Island 5 Sarwicke 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, Cl. li. to the
Chief Officers of Newcastle. M. C. vii.v. l. of Newcastle, for fees v, C, L,
to the decayed tounes in Northumberlande v. M. l. in Cu^berlande a M.l. in
Westmerla^d a M.l. in Bishopric a M.l. Nottingamshire a M.l. Darbishire a
M.li. and in Lankashire a M,li. M.C.vij.v.l. in Lankashire. Cheshire.
Staffordshire. Shropshire. Worcestershire. The six Shires in North Wales.
li. x m. which said su^me under assurance, must be deliueered unto the cheef
officers. of Westchester, whose Seal as above written, must be given by the
cheef officers for the repaimente of the money to them delivered, which sum
is li.x.m. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishing ships,
of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Carlell 5 Warkyngton. 5 I Will of Man. 5
Lyrpoole. 5 Westchester 5 Bewmarres 5 Bangor 5 Holly Hedde 5 Carnaruan 5
Punthelle 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, Cl. li. to the
Chief Officers of Westchester. M. C. vij.v.l. of Westchester,, for fees v.C.l.
to the decayed tounes in Chesshire, a M.li. in Northwales ij.M.li. and in
Southwales ij.M.l. in Monmouthe shire a M.li. and in Herefordshire a M,li.
M.C.vij.v.l. in Somersetshire. Herefordshire. Glocestershire. Monmouthshire.
The six Shires in South Wales.
li. x.iii. which said su^me under assurance, must be delivered unto the che
officers. Bristowe, whose Seal as above written, must be given by the cheef
officers, for the repaimente of the money to them delivered, which sum is li.
x.m. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishing ships, of
lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Gloucester. 5 Bristowe. 5 Newporte. 4
Bridgewater. 5 Chipstowe. 5 Cardiff. 5 Penbroke. 5 Hartforde 5 Carmarden 5
Padstowe 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, Cl. li. to the
Chief officers of Bristowe. M. C. viij.v.l. of Bristowe, for Fees v.C.l. and
to the decayed Tounes in Somersetshire a M.l. in Shropshire, a M. li. in
Staffordshire M. li. And for the wages of two ships of war for the second
years service iiii. thousand pound. M.C. vij.v.l. in Cornwall. Devonshire.
Dorcetershire. Wiltshire. Oxfordshire.
xi.x.m. which said sum^e under assurance, must be delivered unto the chee
officers. of Excester, whose Seal, as above written, must be given by the
cheef officers, for the repaiemente of the money to them delivered, which
sum is li. x.m. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishyng
ships, of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Foye. 5 Truro 5 Melbroke 5
Saltashe. 5 Perin. 5 Sawkom. 5 Excester. 5 Plimmouthe. 5 Dartemouth. 5 Poole. 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years, Cl. li. to the
Chief Officers of Excester. M: C. vij.v.l. of Excester, for fees v. C. li. and
to the decayed tounes in Cornwall a M.li. in Devonshire a M.l. in Wiltshire a
M.l. in Oxfordshire a M.l. in Glocestershire a M.l. in Worcestershire a M.li.
and in Docestershire a M.li. M. C. vij.v.l. in Hampshire. Barckeshire. Surrie.
Sussex. Kent.
li. x.m. shiche said su^me under assurance, must be delivered unto the cheef
officers. of Southampton, whose Seal, as above written, must be given by the
cheef officers, for the repaimente of the money to them delivered, which sum
is li. x.m. wherewith the said cheef officers must provide l. Fishyng ships,
of lxx. tun the ship, and place them at Line. 5 Waimouthe. 5 Newport. 5
Southampton 5 Portesmouthe 5 Checester 5 Rye. 5 Dover 5 Feuersam 5 Sandwiche 5
Every Town to pay for every ship yearly, dueryng three years Cl. li. to the
cheef Officers of Southhampton. M.C. vij.v.l. of Southampton, for fees v. C.li.
to the decayed tounes in Hampshire a M.li. in Sussex a M.l. in Kent a M.l. in
Surrie a M.li. in Barkeshire a M.li. in Buckinghamshire, a M.l. and in
Bedfordshire a M.li. Sum. M.C.vij.v.l. Sum paid by the cheef officers the
first year lx.M.li. With the second years recipt, the cheef officers of the
said eight principll Port tounes whall discharge and pay all fees and wages,
as be forsaid-for the second year, which is iiij.M.li. And also shall make
paiemente of the one half of the money borrowed, which is xl.M.l. And for the
interest money of the whole so^me borrowed for two years xvi.M.li. Sum of the
paiments the second year lx.M.l. And the said cheef officers with the third
years receipt, in like manner aforsaid, shall discharge and pay all fees and
wages of the third year, which is iiij M.l. and the wages of the ij. ships of
war for the same year, which is also iiij. M.l. And like wise they shall pay
the other half of the money borrowed, which is xl.M.l. and iiij.M.li. for the
interest money for that third year. And also one M.ll. to every one of the
eight principal Port Tounes, to be a stock for ever. All which in the
orders more at large does appear. Shires xliiiij. Sum collected lsss.M.li.
Ports viij. Ships to be made iiij.c. Roades lxxx. Sum yearly lx.M.li.
Sum of the third years paimentes lx. M. l.


