(...) OR THE MARRIAGES OF THE ARTS.

A Comedy, Written by BARTEN HOLYDAY, Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ-Church in Oxford, and acted by the Students of the same House before the
University, at Shroue-tide.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for John Parker, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Ball. 1618.

The Actors.
POLITES, A Magistrate. PHYSICA, ASTRONOMIA, Daughter to Physica. ETHICVS, An
old man. OECONOMA, Wife to Ethicus. GEOGRAPHVS, A trauailer, and courtier: in
love with Astronomia. GEOMETRES, In love with Astronomia. ARITHMETICA, In love
with Geometres. LOGICVS, GRAMMATICVS, A schoolmaster. POETA, HISTORIA, In love
with Poeta. RHETORICA, In love with Logicus. MVSICA, Attendant on Astronom^^
MEDICVS, CAVSIDICVS, MAGVS, ASTROLOGIA, Wife to Magus PHANTASTES, Servant to
Geographus. MELANCHOLICO, Poeta's man. CHOLER, Grammaticus his Usher. SANGVIS,
Medicus his man. PHLEGMATICO, Logicus his man. Gypsies, and Fortune Tellers.
PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES. Gypsies, and Fortune Tellers.
Persons only mentioned METAPHYSICVS, an Apothecary.
THE SCENE. INSVLA FORTVNATA.

PROLOGVE.
GRacious Spectators, not to vex your ears
With some old Negative Prologue, saying, Here Is
No Soldier, no Parasite, no Whore,
No Baud (for many understand no more
Then such cheap stage-ware) to unfold our Scene,
And without veil to Open what we mean
Behold. Here the upper part of the Scene opened; when straight appeared a
Heaven, and all the Pure Arts sitting on two semicircular benches, one above
another: who sat thus till the rest of the Prologue was spoken, which being
ended, they descended in order within the Scene, whiles the Music played Our
Poet knowing our free hearts
Has here invited Heaven and All the Arts
To entertayne His Theater, and does bring
What he prepared for our Platonique King:
Deeming Your judgments able to supply
The absence of So Great a Majesty.
But his free conscience does protest, the mirth
Of this his night was but a Fiue-weekes birth;
Yet no Abortiue; if your courteous hands
Shall wrap the Infant in his swathing bands.
It Speaks Already and each Art, to raise
Delight, does use it is Own Distinguished phrase.
Lend your Purged ears. If any do look grim,
Our Author says they wrong the Arts not Him:
He strives to Please. But yet he scorns to be
So vile, to Bargain for a Plaudite;
And from your seats, at a Compacted clap,
Hug an Abusing joy. If it is his hap
To have your Free applause, to This he stands,
The Arts shall not more crown him, then Your Hands.
TENOGAIA: OR The Marriages of the Arts.
ACTVS I.
SCENA I.
GEOGRAPHVS, in a white Beauer, with a white and green Feather, a little Band,
a light-colour'd Satin suite, imbrodered Gloves, red-silke Stockings, blue
Garters and Roses, white Pumps, a Cloak whereon was described the terrestrial
Globe in two Hemispheares, and on the Cape the two Poles. ASTRONOMIA, in an
azure Gown, and a Mantle seeded with stars; on her head a Tiara, bearing on
the front the seven stars, and behind, stars promiscuously; on the right
side the Sun, on the left the Moon, in Gloves, and white Pumps. PHANTASTES,
In a branched velvet Ierkin with hanging sleeves buttoned and loop'd, a short
pair of Breeches, a green Cloak with silver lace, lined through with velvet,
red-silke Stockings, party-colored Garters, a low-crown'd Hat with broad
brims, with a Peacocks feather in it, in a yellow Band, Gloves, and red Pumps.


GEOGRAPHVS, ASTRONOMIA, PHANTASTES.
PHANTASTES, leave us.


Phant. I might very well be here, Sir, at a wooing match; but, I go: yet I
will not be far off. Exit.


Geog. Come, now you shall, Astronomia.


Astron. What shall I, Geographus?


Geog. Kiss.


Astron. What? a' spite of my teeth?


Geog. No not so, I hope you do not use to kiss with your teeth.


Astron. Marry and I hope I do not use to kiss without them.


Geog. I, but (my fine Wit-catcher) I mean you do not Show your teeth when
you kiss: -- 't is thy Ambrosiake lip (sweet Nymph) which thus I salute
after the fine French -- thus, He kisses Astron. the gracious Spanish, -- (hold
still) thus the slauering Dutch -- (nay, I will) and thus the devouring Italian
fashion -- I Am a Courtier sweet Nymph, I Am a Courtier; pardon my (you know
the Court-humor) boldness.


Astron. What? is it the Court humor then to kiss a Maid out of breath?


Geog. No, sweet chucke, but to kiss them In breath; to make them
long-breathed in kissing, and able to endure a Smothering and Revive again.


Astron. Faith for my part Sir Courtier, then I am not acquainted with a long
breath; though, I think, they that use kissing much, are acquainted with long
breaths, for, I warrant them, they may be smelt far enough off.


Geog. Come, my Heaven, I must take off your Zone; shall Astronomia be in girt
with a Zone, and not Geographus? especially since all we Lovers live under Zona
torrida.


Astron. If it be So Sir, then I pray you keep you there still; for My Zone,
I Will assure you, as yet is a Temperate one; pardon me Sir, Ungirt Unblessed: if I
am not Fast, I Am Loose, untie the Heavens and take away their Zones, we should
have brave Skie-falling.

Geog. I, and brave Larke-catching, (pretty Bird) ah! were they all such as
Thee, it should be my First wish.


Astron. I perceive Sir, then you Courtiers are ready to take a Maid at the
Fall; Well Sir, but let go your hand from my girdle, he that has that, shall
have me and all.


Geog. With all my heart (my double soul) I have Already trauel'd over the
whole Earth, and am now again in Travel to be Delivered of a second Attempt,
the Peregrination of the Heavens; which to effect, I know no more expedite
Course, then to have Recourse to Astronomia.


Astron. Pray le be; be Modest yet; I think you will force me to say be Honest,
leave, or I Will Cry.


Geog. I, but I Will make you Laugh.


Astron. Nay, pray you, be not Elephantine; I suppose you have been in India,
and pierce the Phrase.


Geog. Nay, but Nymph, Will Not you then?


Astron. Will Not I? what?


Geog. Be kind.


Astron. Be kind? how?


Geog. (The plague of Lovers! crossing in the point; He espies Physica entering.
Yonder comes thy mother Physica) why be kind as she has been.


Astron. Marry --


Geog. It may be she will not consent.


Astron. O Sir, your apprehension it too nimble; I was saying, marry gracious
are the Fates, to deliver a Maid from the violence of a Rauisher.


Geog. Nay, good love, He speaks this drawing back to depart. think this but
an exiliencie of my affection, or rather think not out at all, but only (O my
Venus lipp'd) of this Wooers modest kiss, that is but lent till the next
meeting: but farewell, I see thy Mothers aged brow wrinkled already; and I had
rather again undertake my performed journey about the World, then thou
should be shent for me; once more farewell, Geographus his Astronomia. Exit
Geographus.


Astron. I must behave my self now as demurely, as a Gentlewoman when she is
eating an Egg, well I Will prevent her, and go meet Her, or else she will be
Meet with Me.


ACTVS I. SCENA II.
PHYSICA with a Cornet on her head, bearing on the front a Woman with two
Children sucking at her breasts, and a CERES Horn passing up between her
arms; round about on the border of her Coronet were Beasts and Trees; in a
loose-bodied Gown of green branched Taffata, in Gloves and White Pumps.


ASTRONOMIA, PHYSICA.
FOrsooth, and 't please you --


Physica. Who was that?


Astron. And please you forsooth it was --


Physica. I, who was it? that is the question I ask.


Astron. It was forsooth and please you --


Physica. Yes, it pleases me to know, though I fear when I do know it will
scarce please me.


Astron. Why then forsooth since it pleases you --


Physica. Oh, is the excuse made now?


Astron. Alas forsooth, I was coming of mine accord, to tell you forsooth.


Physica. Well, now I hope forsooth, so many forsooths have made up one excuse
by this time.


Astron. It was forsooth --.


Physica. Yet again?


Astron. My Uncle Ethicus.


Physica. That came to teach you manners belike, and that is the reason you use
so many mannerly forsooths.


Astron. No forsooth, he came to inuit me to his House to a Banquet.


Physica. To a Banquet? Indeed you are better fed then taught.


Astron. And maruail'd that you and I were so great strangers at his house.


Physica. Nay, that is not strange, now-adayes, for the nearer kin, the
farther off in friendship, and therefore the greater strangers.


Astron. But I promised, for my self, my oftener presence hereafter, and bid
Ethicus persuade himself, that though you did not come to him in person, yet
that your love and best Affections dwelt always with him; and I did my best to
make part of an excuse for you.


Physica. As you do now for your Self: but Minion do you expect a thank of
me, for your excuse? I believe rather, you will stand more in need of an excuse
your self; it seems your are well skilled in the framing of them. What? who
bid you put on this apparel to day? you must be in your skie-colour'd Gown
every day, in your best apparel holy days and working-dayes: and had you
never a worse head-tyre to put on to day but this with colored Ribbands tied
like Stars? but, Minion, the mystery of the truth; come, I must know it: Does
your Uncle Ethicus look of that fashion? is he a Courtier? a Trauellour? a
Puppet? does he make himself a verier Fool then the Taylour makes him? has
he a Jury of Nations come in to give their verdict, for the making up of one
suit of apparel for him? is he for your long Hat, short Cloak, little Band?
are his old hammes grown supple again? is he for your knee-congey? the
throwing of a wavering head off his shoulders in a salutation? or the breaking
of his high-heeld Shoes, or (which is better) sometimes of his crazie legs,
when in a wanton pride they cannot stand upon his giddie feet? you would make a
fine creature of your Uncle; but, my fine Minion, my Periphrasis has incircled
your companion, as his arms did your middle even now: you apprehend? ah
Astronomia, thy face was never made for the coloring of a lie; oh how this one
untruth has Eclipsed thy beauty? thou never receiu'dst such a vile Nature
from thy Mother Physica: no; no; I know from whom this corruption proceeds;
it is that false, that vile Astrologia, that infects thee thus, and whom I
observe, still to follow at thy heels: but I fret mine old age too much,
which is enough anguish to it self: in, in you light Huswife --. Exeunt.


ACTVS I. SCENA III.
GEOMETRES in a colored Hat ascending in a Pyramidall form, with a Square in
it in stead of a Feather, in a light-colour'd suit of Satin, a Ruffe-band, a
Cloak whereon were described diverse Geometrical Instruments, and a man taking
the height of a Tower with a Jacobs Staff; in blue-silke Stockings, Garters,
Roses, Gloves, and white Pumps. MAGVS in a black suit with a triple Crown on
his head, beset with Crosses, and other Magical Characters; in black Shoes,
with a white wand in his hand.


GEOMETRES, MAGVS.
LEt Geometres never use Measure more, if he loves not his dearest Magus
beyond measure: Oh, the Gods! that you and I could never know one another
before! but First it should be my luck to be acquainted with Astronomia, Then
with your Self! Sir, if your occasions can make use of my best endeavors, the
employment shall be a favor: if at any time you want any Characters, and
strange Figures for your Circles, or Circles themselves, for the confining of
your Spirits, know Sir, They shall not be more obedient unto You, then My
officious gratitude, employ Me Sir, I protest I Am grown Infinite in love
with the fairest Astronomia, with your self.


Magus. Sir, let me never use my Great Art more, if my love to You be not
greater then my Art: the Spirits that I Command, shall not be so quick in my
Ambassages, as the Spirit of my Love, in the effecting your desires, it is as my
Circle, most capacious and without End.


Geom. Well, Sir: I need not then you think to fear Geographus; for indeed
though he be proud, yet I am sure Astronomia is much more Highminded: and yet
were her Altitude as high as Heaven, could not I Measure it? besides what can
she count of him, but as of a giddie fellow, whose Head is Guided by his
Heels? but for Me, it is well known, I have the Rule of my self: indeed
there is Poeta, him I fear, for he plays at his Mistres with his Hexameter,
and Pentameter, as a Fencer lies at his Rapier and Dagger-foile; but from Him
you say Youl' Ward me.


Magus. I warrant you Sir, as securely as with an Enchanted shield: (and now
Sir to Descend to Realities) I will briefly acquaint you with some of the
Mysteries of our Sacred Science; and first with this. There are three ways, by
one of which your desire may be effected, the first i^ Fascination; the second
Coniuration, and the third Medicine. The first can be wrought only by
opportunity, by being in company with Astronomia.


Geom. Alas! that is the Unmeasurable Depth of my grief, for I can never almost
get into her company, but yet Sir acquaint me with the device that I may not
lose occasion it offered.


Magus. I will Sir; This Fascination is, when one does work love in a woman by
looking on her.


Geom. But is that possible?


Magus. O, Sir, in a moderate sort very familiar; I have known a man and a
woman by an earnest looking one upon another, when they fell in love, both
become stark blind.


Geom. Strange! Wonderful! but if that should happen me, how should I enjoy
the sight of her beauty?


Magus. Sir, my care shall exempt you from that fear; but to unfold unto you
the manner of this admirable operation --


Geom. I Sir, I desire to know what Proportion it can bear with truth.


Magus. It is thus: The instrument of fascination is a vapor pure, and
subtle, arising from the heat of the heart, out of the purer bl^ud, which
through the eyes does project beams like it self; those beams do carry
with them a pure vapor, which sometimes carries with it blood, (as we see in
bleare-ey'd folks, who hurt by looking on) which being eiaculated upon the
eyes of a woman (being sent forth with a laboring violence) enter into her
eye, pierce her heart, infect the blood and Spirits, then by a continuance of
the eiaculation, produce an assimilation in the object.


Geom. Sir, this is Deep; but is this Rule infallible?


Magus. There are a sort of your Philosophers that deny this; but (alas!)
vnexperienc'd fellows, that never went beyond the Circle of their Science; but
we men of practice correct and surpass the narrow bounds of their empty
Speculations: and now Sir for the guarding of your self, and the more
powerful operation, I will furnish you with an Unction of Doves, or Sparrowes
blood.


Geom. Dove, nor Sparrow is so hot, as my love to you, dearest Magus: but you
made mention of a second, Coniuration.


Magus. Sir, by that I can present unto you, your love.


Geom. Presently?


Magus. Presently.


Geom. Will you?


Magus. What will I not for you?


Geom. I am yours Soul and Body.


Magus. Well, stay you here then, I Will but step forth. Exit.


Geom. That ever thou wast borne! that ever thou wast borne, Divine Magus!
well, the Devil take me if I do not turn Magician, He puts on a cypress
Suite, then puts Geometres into a Circle which he brings forth and spreads;
then goes into it himself, with a white rod in his hand, which he waves 4.
ways. what ever it cost me. O Astronomia! --


Magus. Come, Sir, stand you here, and move not beyond this Circle, and speak
not a word; and now prepare your self to be satisfied with the beauty of your
Love.

Bael, Agares, Marbas, Pruflas.
Loray, Valefar, Morax, N^berus. At the end of each of these four names is
made a great noise within, like thunder.

Geom. Good Magus leave off, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, I shall never be able to
endure.


Magus. Classialabolas --


Geom. Oh, I Will cry out if ye will not leave. Magus stops Geometres's mouth, and
speaks on.


Magus. Amduscias, Zagan, Elauros, Orobas.


Geom. Oh, I shall --


Magus. Hagaenti, Vual, Zaleos.


Geom. I cannot endure it, oh I cannot endure it. Geometres falls down,
thrusting his head between Magus his feet, and covering his face with his
hands.


Magus. What a faint-hearted Lover is this? I must send them away again,
before they are come.

Va, Va, Va, Acim, Acim, Acim,
Ei, Ei, Ei: Hau, Hau, Hau.
Procul hinc, procul ite profani; redite, redite. Come, Sir, will you rise to
see your Love?


Geom. Is she gone yet?


Magus. Why? Do you love her so well, that you would have her gone?


Geom. Oh! I cannot endure it.


Magus. Not endure her? Marry you love her well then it is likely. Geometres
rises.


Geom. Well, I besecch you, Sir, fall to your last remedy, Medicine: for this
is intolerable.


Magus. Well, Sir, that does not belong to you.


Geom. No? why? Must not I take Physic to make her fall in love with me?


Magus. No, Geometres: what device do thou think should be in that?


Geom. Nay alas I cannot tell, I do but ask; come I pray, let us be gone hence,
I cannot endure to stay here, we will talk further of this in some other place.
Good Magus, let me hold by you till we are gone a pretty way hence.


Magus. Come, you're a brave Mars for a Venus! Exeunt.


ACTVS I. SCENA IIII.
ASTROLOGIA, in a Loose-bodied Gown of Red-branched Velvet; a dark starry
Mantle, in a Tiera beset with dim stars, in the front of which was
described the Scheme of a Nativity; on the two sides the Sun and Moon
Eclipsed, in Gloves and black Pumps. ARITHMETICA, in a green Gown of Silk;
on her head a Coronet, bearing in the front a Table of Multiplication, and
round about the border, the nine radical Figures, and a Cipher; in Gloves and
white Pumps. MVSICA, in a Wast-coat and Petty-coat of Red-branch'd Velvet; in a
Coronet bearing in the front the Table of the Gammvt, with the first six
Musical notes, ascending, and descending; and above that a Bag-pipe and a
Harp; bearing on the border diverse other Instruments; and on the top of two
Arches, rising from the circle of the Coronet, was expressed Fame sounding a
Trumpet; in Gloves and white Pumps.


ASTRONOMIA, ASTROLOGIA, ARITHMETICA, MVSICA.
COme, Lasses: in faith I have been arraigned, condemned and executed, without
holding up my hand at a Bar.


Astrol. Why? Did thou ever offend the Heavens in thy life, Astronomia?


Astron. No. But it seems I have offended Nature; for I Am sure my mother
Physica has powered out her affection toward me.


Astrol. As how, I prithee?


Astron. Nay, I have been held upon her Items: Item, for being in company with
Geographus: Item, for being in company with Astrologia --


Astrol. With me?


Astron. Item, for wearing my best clothes every day: Alas, alas, does my
Mother think All Natures desire the same things? It pleases Her in Summer to
wear one kind of garment; in Winter another; in Autumn and Spring as
different: another perhaps would count this pride in her: I wear always the
same, which me thinks her age (but that, Age is froward) might interpret, as a
three-sold virtue, Humility, Thrift, and Constancy: but --


Astrol. Oh! I can easily guess why she speaks against me: I perceive all
eminency of gifts is attended on by envy: but ^ush, Old -- I say no worse: let
her chide the gods that gave me my Foreknowledge of things above her
apprehension: believe me, I saw this great contention before, in the present
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars: But for Geographus, I would wish your Height
of worth, Astronomia, would not Descend unto his Baseness.


Astron. You abuse me, Astrologia: baseness?


Astrol. Nay, then I perceive there is somewhat of fate in love; and that the
Stars do not rule men, but men the Stars; why there is no Proportion of
worth between him and Geometres, a man cut out by the very Square of all
virtue.


Arithm. I, and let Arithmetica be cast out of the Number of the Sciences; if
in his very face (I speak it freely behind his back) appear not to my eye the
very Figure of sincerity.


Astron. Alas! would you Parallel Geometres with Geographus? you may as well
liken the Middle of the Earth to the whole Circumference: or, but some Angle to
a whole Map.


Arithm. Nay, you are the whole Heauen-wide, Astronomia, on the contrary part;
for though Geometres think there be too great Disparity between him and me,
and that Arithmetica stands now but for a Cipher in his account; yet, that
conceit of his shall never make a Fraction or Division in my love, but as he
was once mine Entire, so shall I ever hold it the golden Rule of friendship,
rather to Add unto, then Substract from my first affection: but let us not
multiply words: Musica, prithee what do thou think of this?


Musica. Truly, I think Geographus to be a liberal Gentleman, and therefore
may not consent unto Astrologia, when she calls him base, yet I think he has
some Crotchets now and then of a Traveler: and for Geometres, I take him for a
plain Solid fellow: but in my conceit, in his discourse he is somewhat obtuse,
blunt, blunt.


Arithm. I, that is but thy conceit.


Musica. Indeed I must confess I have more conceit then judgment: But in my
fancy, there is Poeta, Poeta and Melancholico begin to Enter. h'as more love
in's little finger, then both they in their whole bodies.


Astron. Marry thou say true, for I think there he is indeed. Come, let us
begone; for I think every one now a Spy: for my mother told me she would set more
Eyes beside Musicaes to attend me hereafter: but Musica, do thou turn that
way and meet him, that if he be one, I may know whom to thank for my mothers
next kind salutation.

Exeunt Astron. Astrol. Arith.
ACTVS I. SCENA V.
POETA, in a black Satin Suite, a lerkin with hanging sleeves buttoned
together behind, a black Beauer, with a garland of Bays about it, a
Ruffe-band, in yellow silk Stockings, black silk Garters tied acrosse,
black Roses, Gloves, and white Pumps. MELANCHOLICO, in a black Suite, a
black Hat, a black Cl^ke wrapped about his shoulders, a blacke-worke Band,
black Gloves, and black Shoes.


MVSICA, POETA, MELANCHOLICO.
FA, la, la, la, la, Sol, la, mi, fa.


Poeta. How now my Treble, my Minikin, art thou so pleasant?


Musica. Oh sir, I see you keep your old Tenor still: you are always
Descanting.


Poeta. But my little Fidde, where have thou been?


Musica. Sounding your Harmonious virtues, to a Consort of Ladies.


Poeta. Mine? If I had not called thee my Fiddle before, I might now call thee
my Trumpet, but I will yet call thee my Pipe, my Syrinx, a piece of Pan's Reed:
but prithee, sirrah, who were they? O Melancholico! here is a Wench, if her
Mistress would part with her, would make thee live one seven years longer, but
to be in her company.


Mel. It Is a merry Wench indeed.


Musica. Why, there was my Lady, with Astrologia, and Arithmetica.


Poeta. Thy Lady? Indeed I have heard thy Lady loves Music well, and for
that respect I have had a conceit to Her my self.


Musica. A conceit? Well, I cannot stay or else I could say more.


Poeta. Hold her, Melancholico, she shall not begone yet.


Musica. Why how now Sir? Faith, Poeta, your man looks as if he would fall in
love with me. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa.


Poeta. Nay, prithee Musica, tell me how thou came to attend on Astronomia
first.


Musica. Alas, it is beyond my remembrance to tell that: only I have heard a
certain Philosopher that was in love with Astronomia, bestowed me upon her
when I was but a child: but I Am sure she entertaines me so well, that I care
for no other service now under Heaven, she is a Divine Lady, A Divine Lady, and
since my coming thither, she has made rare devices, rare devices to cause
Harmony: but I must be gone, I cannot stay. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi,
fa. Exit.


Mel. It Is a merry Wench.


Poeta. But a Divine Lady! but a Divine Lady! I cannot tell what ails me, but
I am not very well. Follow me in, Melancholico.


Mel. I follow, Sir. Exeunt.


ACTVS I. SCENA. VI.
GEOGRAPHVS, PHANTASTES.
WHat should I cry out now against the iniquity of the (...), for wrapping up
all in blind Fortune, and for the unequal distribution of their gifts? I have
indeed been about all the world, and brought home nothing but a World of care.
I could cry, I confess, but that I cannot find in my heart to be such a fool,
unless my tears would turn to gold, as those of Phaetons sisters did to
Amber; and then in faith I Would turn a most devout penitent: but, Phantastes, put
up the Siquis, put up the Siquis.


Phant. I will, I will.


Geogr. Faith I Am almost extracted, I Am come to the Mercury already; there is
nothing left but my wits: but what if I can get no customers now?


Phant. Faith you had best turn Paper-man, and sell Maps; and yet that trade
is almost down the wind now: or you may get a pretty young -- one -- and set
up a Tabacco-shop.


Geogr. Foh! that is a stinking trade.


Phant. Oh your fattest soiles are most full of dirt; and I have known a
fellow, that was not worth a hair of his head, nay, that had not an hair of
an honest man, gather more gold out of this dunghill, then ever Maro did out
of his Ennius; that now he cares not for any man in the Parish: Oh! this is the
trade that yields e fumo fulgorem; Gold out of smoke.


Geogr. Oh, Astronomia! there is my chiefest grief, I confess; for as it is
held policy in rich men to love; so I fear it will prove ridiculous in me, if
once I grow poor.


Phant. Sir, not many years since, before I undertook with you our journey
about the wide world, I was my self driven to the like streights; I mean,
Sir, in that Cod-piece-ago, when the innocence of men did not blush to show all
that Nature gave them, indeed, because they did no more, then, that taught
them: then, when they wore doublets with crawes, and sleeves with pockets, then
(I say) the fashion was so long at a stand, that I had like to have been at a
fall: then your Philosopher in the University, scorned nothing but (the unjust
cause of scorn) fine apparel, showing the severity of his profession, by the
ruggedness of his gown: but since, I think, I have fashioned them all;
though, of late, some of your gor-belli'd country-chuffes, have cast themselves
into their frieze jerkins, with great tinned buttons siluer'd over, rather out
of a proud niggardliness then an honest thrift.


Geogr. Well, but what course shall I take, if I get money?


Phant. Mary, Sir, this: wear apparel of the best, be merry, wanton, toying,
bold; affront any man: get a faire-false-diamond -- on your finger, and by all
means have a gilt watch, which sometimes, to know how the day passes, you must
draw out in the Marketplace, though peradventure there be a Clock hard by
within the view of your eye; 'twill imply, you reckon not your day by the
peoples Dyall: or sometimes you may draw it forth before a rich man's door,
(you know in our travails we observed the like in a Gentleman at Venice) and
assure your self, at the next meeting, he will give you the salutation.


Geogr. Oh! thou have a rare wit, my fine Phantastes! well, let us commit it to
the heavens, and if my stars bless me but to obtain Astronomia; I Will count it
as an enjoying of the whole world, which I have yet but seen. Exeunt
Geographus and Phantastes.


ACTVS I. SCENA VII.
POETA, MELANCHOLICO.
ANd did she not say, Melancholico, she was a divine Lady?


Mel. Yes, she did.


Poet. And did she not say she had made rare devices, rare devices (for she
repeated it) to cause Harmony?


Mel. Yes, she did.


Poet. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, hum -- and did she not say she
would not change her service for any under Heaven?


Mel. Yes, she did.


Poet. Hum. And did she not say she could say more?


Mel. Yes, she did.


Poet. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, pretty little Musica! Fa, la, la,
la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, for she sung it three times I remember, pretty
Musica; divine Astronomia! -- the juice of the Gods Nepenthe were vinegar to
one of her kisses: divine Astronomia!

Unjust, blind god of love, or not enfire

My breast; or, if thou do, crown my desire. Poeta sees the Siquis, and Mel.
takes it down. What Siquis is that?


Mel. I Will read it, Sir.

If there be any Gentleman, that, for the accomplishing of his natural
indowments, intertaynes a desire of learning the languages, especially, the
nimble French, maiestike Spanish, courtly Italian, masculine Dutch,
happily-compounding Greek, mystical Hebrew, and physical Arabicke; or that
is otherwise transported with the admirable knowledge of foreign policies,
complementall behavior, natural dispositions, or whatsoever else belongs to
any people or country under heaven; he shall, to his abundant satisfaction, be
made happy in his expectation and success, if he please to repair to the
sign of the Globe.



Poet. Good, good; I Will monopolize this commodity; Logicus and Grammaticus
enter. Poeta tears the Siquis. when I shall have so many tongues to woo, I
will not doubt to obtain Astronomia.


ACTVS I. SCENA VIII.
LOGICVS, In a wide-sleeu'd gown, and a square cap, etc. GRAMMATICVS, In a
pair of breeches close to his thigh, his stockings garter'd above knee: a
sharpe-crown'd hat with the sides pinned up; a ruffe-band; and a Ferula at his
back, etc.


POETA, MELANCHOLICO, LOGICVS, GRAMMATICVS.
Gram. SIr, you did that by a Poetica licentia.


Poet. SO, Grammaticus, you would feign Rule me still: -- Et nos ergo manum ferulae
subduximus.


Logic. Nay, Poeta, you must not abuse him that has been your Master, he has
been your Master, Ergo, you must not abuse him.


Poet. Why, how now, Logicus? will you be the Neptune, to calm these Seas with
your three-fork'd Mace? I thought you could spet nothing but Aristotle.


Gram. Aristotle? saucy boy? Aristotelis libri sunt omne genus elegantia
referti; pro Omnis generis.


Logic. Nay, Poeta, we must grant you the eloquence: Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis disertos.


Poet. Why how, no, Logicus? have thou caught the itch of Grammaticus? I should
rather have thought, thou would have infected him.


Gram. How now? boys talk? by the soul of Priscian, A praeceptore vapulabis.


Poet. Nay, then in faith: Atrepido vix abstinetira Magistro.


Gram. Poeta and Gram. fight. What? insolent? Faciam vt meique ac huius diei,
ac loci, semper memineris.


Poet. Melancholico, do thou crack an argument with clog-head, there.


Mel. Logicus and Melancholico fight. I Will do my best to crack his pate, if I
can.


Logic. He bites, he bites: O, do you scratch, you coward?


Mel. Yes, Sir, because you have the itch.


Poet. To him, Melancholico.


Mel. They part. Nay, let me alone, I warrant you: we are at it, tooth and
nail.


Gram. Well, Poeta, Refero ad Senatum.


Poet. Will you come again, Sir!


Gram. N^n si me obsecres. Exit.


Poet. I believe thee, in faith; Logicus, will you return?


Logic. I see no reason for it: Ergo, I will not. Exit.


Poet. O, have we broke off one of the forks of your Mace? he most valiantly
now runs away upon two feet: Stay, here comes Choler, Grammaticus his man.


Enter CHOLER in a yellow cloak, a yellow suite, on the breast whereof were
expressed two fellows wrestling; in a yellow hat; bearing a fist with a club
in it: yellow stockings, yellow pumps, etc. Choler. Who was that ran away last
there? Logicus?


Mel. Yes.


Choler. Did you beat him?


Mel. Yes.


Choler. And who was the other? my Master?


P^et. Yes


Choler. Did you beat him?


Poet. Yes, Sir: what say you to that?


Choler. What say I to that? mary, I say, I would have fought as long as I
could have stood, if you had not left beating of my Master.


Poet. Oh! is that all! Domini similis es; farewell, valiant Champion.


Mel. Oh! is that all? Domini similis es; farewell, valiant Champion. Exeunt
Poeta and Melancholico.


Choler. How? bafled? by my masters Ferula, I Will quarrel with the next man I
meet, who er'e he be: and yonder comes Sanguis, Medicus his man; but he looks
as if he would say somewhat; I Will therefore stand aside first, and hear what
he will say.


ACTVS I. SCENA IX.
SANGVIS, in a red suite; on the breast whereof was a man with his nose
bleeding; on the back, one let blood in the arm; in a red hat, red band,
stockings, red pumps, etc.


SANGVIS, CHOLER.
MY Master is now in a consumption; he is come to putting up a Si-quis already
for want of custom; and if he had not lately been more beholding to Venus
then to Mars, he had been quite spent, long er'e this: She indeed now and
then sends him in, those customers that are sick in her quarters; for most men
now prevent physic, either by death or wariness; either by running upon
violent and quick deaths, and so dying er'e physic comes; or if they fall
out, never coming to bloodshed, but only to a few foolish words in their
idle choler.


Chol. What? does he speak of me? nay, that is enough.


Sang. But I Will put up my Siquis and pray most devoutly to Aesculapius, or else
my Master will be the first that will have so much need of his own physic,
as Salus her self will be scarce able to save him.


Chol. Soft, Sir, did not you misuse me, behind my back?


Sang. Misuse thee? alas! I thought not on thee.


Chol. No! did not you say, Idle Choler? Choler strikes Sanguis. you shall know
I am not idle.


Sang. Why, how now Choler, are you so hot?


Chol. Yes, Sanguis, as hot as you for your blood.


Sang. I shall be about your ears, straight.


Chol. They fight, and Choler breaks Sanguis his head. I shall vex all the
veins in your heart then.


Sang. O, my head! my head's broke.


Chol. It Is no matter, Sanguis; there is custom for thy Master, beyond his
expectation.


Sang. And beyond mine too; I Will pray no more this good while for this trick;
the gods are quick of hearing, I perceive; Aesculapius has sent my Master a
patient too soon, but the gods know it is a sorry one; but I shall remember
you, Choler. Exit.


Chol. Do, do; I gave you a remembrance on purpose; but, what had the Rogue
in this Si-quis? I Will put it together again.

If there be any man woman, or child, that is affected with any disease, whether
it be luxation or dislocation of the bones, rupture, inflammation, obstruction,
impostumation, consumption, or any ulcer, whether it be pox, plague, or
pestilence, or any destruction of nature, as dumbness, deafness, blindness,
whether temporary and by accident, or continued from the birth; or whatsoever
disease incident to the body of man, that has been ever yet counted
incurable; may it please him, or her, or that child, to repair to the sign of
the Vrinall, and they shall find a speedy salvation.

Why? do not I know Medicus? and did I ever know that he knew this before?
well, he that performs all this, must be a god or a devil: but now I think
on it better, I Am half sorry I broke Sanguis his head; for if my Master be
hurt, he must repair to this Medicus; and then will Sanguis either pay my
Master for my sake; or make my Master pay me for his sake: I see, he that
strikes in his choler, does but repent afterward; well, I Will correct his
hastiness of nature. Exit.


ACTVS II.
SCENA I.
POLITES, In a black gown, a black Satin suit, a black beauer with a gold
hat-band; with a white staff in his hand, etc. ETHICVS, In a black hat with
broad brims, a long gray beard, a coat with velvet lace, hanging-sleeues, and
broad skirts, a pair of trunke-hose with panes, with a velvet pouch by his
side, in a ruff band, his garters tied above knee: with a walking staff in
his hand. OECONOMA, In a black close-bodied gown, a ruff, a broad brimd hat,
a white apron, etc. HISTORIA, In a green gown of branched velvet, a laced
ruff, on her head a coronet, about the border whereof stood the nine Worthies,
and on the top of two cross arches arising from the circle of the coronet
stood Time, an old man with a long beard, at his feet lay a sith, holding in
one hand a crown, in the other a whip: in gloves and white pumps. RHETORICA,
In a green silk gown a laced ruff, wearing on her head a coronet, the
border whereof was beset with red and white roses, in the front was expressed a
garland of bays with a palm of a band in the midst, and round about the
border, above the roses, were described palms of hands, in gloves, and white
pumps.


POLITES, ETHICVS, OECONOMA, HISTORIA, RHETORICA.
WEll, Historia, I see love's unruly even in the wisest; you may do what you
will; but if you would be ruled by your friends, my counsel should be that you
would never fancy this Poeta, a fellow of that kind of profession, which all
Wise men have ever banished out of the commonwealth, as being the Mother of
lies, the Nurse of abuse, and at the Best, but the worst of knowledge; perhaps
you may think Polites uses this disswasion because Poeta's poor; (which also
I confess in the Policy of an ordinary Discretion is to be considered) but I
profess I Am chiefly moved at the uncertainty of his courses; which I think
would not very aptly consort with your sober consistency and stayednesse of
life: but I Will say no more; good Ethicus, supply my room.


Histor. Reverend Polites --


Ethic. Nay, nay --


Rhetor. Nay? nay? nay truly Ethicus, it is good manners, to let her answer in
her own defense.


Ethic. Nay, Rhetorica, we know you have words at will; every woman has two
tongues, and you have Four, 'twill come to a fine pass in a while, if we
suffer every young pert thing to be prachant, especially toward their elders,
I may be thy father, wench, and I will speak. Thou art a greene-head,
Historia; I say that Poeta's a licentious fellow, a Drinker, a Dicer, a
Wencher, a Ballad-maker, a Seducer of young minds, a Scoffer, a Libeller, a
Sharker, an Humorist, an Epicure; proud, fantastical, sullen, slothful,
lewd, irreligious, and in a word an enemy to all the Gods and Virtues.


Histor. Have you done? you have stuck cloves enough in your Orange to make it
smell.


Ethic. He speaks to Rhetorica. Nay, thou wench, I like thee better, though
thou have a shrewd Tongue: for thou have set thine affection upon Logicus, a
fellow of some understanding, and though he has some of thy fault (as a piece
of thy tongue) yet it is likely he will make a good Housekeeper; he is thrifty,
thrifty, and I like that.


Oecon. Historia walks aside, and Oecon, takes her by the arm. Nay, pray
Historia, take Oeconoma's counsel, or (at least) hear it, I Will speak
moderately.


Histor. I shall the rather hear you then.


Oecon. Indeed I think that Poeta will never prove a good housekeeper; for he
must have nothing (unless it be himself) out of Order in his house; but every
thing forsooth so neat, so trim, as if folks had nothing to do but wait upon
his humorous sloth: but we that keep houses (by cock a'py) must have room for
baking, brewing, spinning, carding, washing, wringing, starching, setting,
sleeking, pinning, folding, smoothing; here a chair, there a tub; here a pan,
there a kettle; here a wheel, there a reele; and a hundred such clutterments.


Histor. It seems you keep a cleanely house; but I pray, how long have you
been married?


Oecon. Married? why, thirty five years last Valentines day; next Valentines
day 'twill be -- just as can be -- thirty six years full, blessed be the day
when it comes.


Histor. You may then indeed have forgot loue-sports by this time; well, you
are not angry with me for hearing you? are you?


Oecon. No.


Historia. Why then, I must pray you likewise that you will not be offended, if
I do not follow what I hear.


Oecon. Well, you may (if you will) let your own young head guide you; fare you
well, fare you well Shrewes; I Will pray, that you may have good Housekeepers to
your Husbands.


Polites. And I, that you may have good Citizens.


Ethicus. And I, that you may have Honest men: farewell Shrewes. Exeunt
Polites, Ethicus, Oeconoma.


Historia. Fare you well; you have had a time to love and woo, and so must we
have. These old folks think their Old Age must carry it away, as if they
had won as clear a Victory from us, as can be; alas! I Will give them leave to
use their Dead Precepts, but if they once come to lively Examples, I Will
undertake my Self to convince their best Experience. Poeta's love indeed of
late is much alienated from me, but as long I love him, I Will speak in his
defense; did you see how Polites did only speak an Accusation against him?
and Ethicus Abuse his froward Age; and Oeconoma Chafe out her weak conjecture?
and then, (when they had rather showed the Weakness of their Age; then the
Strength of their Reason,) flung away, as if their Objections could not be
Answered, because they would not Hear an Answer. I would enquire of Polites
(if my Ancestors have not mis-inform'd me in Antiquity) whether in the Time
of Herodotus, and after that, of Zenophon (and since of many others) there has
not bin a like conjunction to Poeta's and Historia's; and whether your chiefest
Common-wealths-men, either of Former times as Plato; or of Later, as the great
Solon of the Vtopian Commonwealth, have not made a Poetical invention their
chiefest glory? but there is no discoursing with Age; especially, when it is
poss^ssed with a perverse prejudice.


Rhetorica. And did you mark with what a Strength of Heat, his Cold
Feebleness set upon me? and I was Mistress Tongue; and I was Nimble-tongu'd,
and I had Four tongues. But if the Eye of Age be not so Dim, but that it
may Reflect upon it self: if the Ear of Age be not so Perverse, but that it
may Admit a free Attention; if the Reason of Age, will but yield to Reason;
then shall his Eye, his Ear, his Reason, bring in their several informations
against his Age. If we should inquire with whom does reside the most refined
Expolition of Language; would it be answered with Olde-folkes? if we should
inquire with whom does abide the most nimble vigor of purest Apprehension;
would it be answered with Old-folkes? if we should inquire who are most tried
for Quick Dispatch of weighty Affairs, would it be answered your Old-folkes?
whose Age brings Care, Care Weakness, Weakness Frowardnes, Frowardness
Distraction, Distraction Childishness: and thus running Round in the Circle of
Time, growing Giddie, they fall down upon all Four again, like Children:
Children I may call them for their Impotencie, not Innocence: for their
Perverseness, not Hopefulnesse; for their Impatience, not Tenderness; for
then would they afford a more Tender censure, of our more Tender loves: but
let us be gone, and though they Chide, yet will we Love; and I will sooner
confess my Tongue to want Eloquence, then my Love of Logicus to want Reason.


Historia. And I will truly acknowledge Historia Unhappy in her love, but
never Poeta, unworthy of her love. Exeunt.


ACTVS II. SCENA II.
CHOLER solus.
I Perceive yet I am not so Hastie-natur'd, but there be some as Hasty; why,
I would have sworn Logicus had bin a fellow of Reason and very stayed, but
(Heaven defend me) I almost quake to think what a thundering he kept, when he
came to my Masters House, one while he would Fight with Poeta, that he would;
then he would have him in the Law, then again he would Fight with him, then
again he would go to Law with him; at the last he resolves to do both,
though I know not whether he will Perform either: if he go to Law; my
Master (in Policy) will let his Own cause fall, to come in as a Witness for
Logicus; but in the mean time I must serve for a Messenger to Carry this
Challenge from Logicus to Poeta; which I must see, that if I have occasion to
send one to Sanguis, I may know how to draw Blood of him, before we e're come
into the Field; let us see.

O Poeta, thou Poeta, base Nayle-byter, Deske-thumper, Head-scratcher: O Poeta,
thou Poeta; the very Bottle-Ale of frothy Humor, and, the floting Cork of
Spungie Vanity; since thou have (though not per te, but, per alium) by thy man
Melancholico, (but woe to thy man Melancholico!) with most audacious and
injurious indignity flowne up into my face (but, oh dreadful flying up into
my face!) know, if thou do not make thy peace with me, by a reconciling
submission (which you may do, and I had rather you should do, then fight. I
never provoked you) I do to thy perdition (O speedy perdition! think upon
that, and let me not fight, I do not provoke you) challenge thee O Poeta,
thee Poeta, thy very self (mark that) to single Combat at any of these
several Weapons, (for I only grant thee the choice of thy death) Battle-Axe,
Single Rapier, Case of Ponyards, Case of Pistols, Bodkins, or Pinnes: but know
that by my art beforehand, I do Define thee a man of death; and, for the
executing of that dire-full judgment, which yet thou may prevent (and o
prevent by not provoking me to fight) I will cleave thee from the crown of thy
head down to thy girdle, with the fury of a Division. Briefly if thou art not
reconciled, I shall gore thee with the Horns of this Dilemma. If thou Come,
Mine Innocence will overcome thee, if thou do Not Come, thine Own
Cowardlinesse: farewell till our next meeting with horror, and then eternally
thy ordained Destroyer;

But I will not name my self, lest the sound thereof should kill thee with an
astonishing fear, and so snatch thee from the terror of my prodigious fury.

Well, I Will go carry Poeta this Letter of Commission for his Execution, and if
he have the heart to read it through, without fallng into half a dozen
sounds, I Will say he has a good heart; but I must haste, or else I think
Logicus himself will overtake me. Exit.


ACTVS II.
SCENA. III.
LOGICVS. O The soul of Aristotle! I was never in such a Praedicament before
in all my life: well, I Will to Causidicus, they say his house is here about, and
I think this be it: ho, who is within?


Causidicus. From within. Who Is there?


Logicus. There Is an answer indeed; when I ask who is within? he asks, who is
without?

Enter CAVSIDICVS in a Lawyers Gown, a laced Ruff, a black Hat, black Suite,
Gloves, Silk-stockins, Garters, Roses, etc. O, save you Sir, does not one
Master Causidicus dwell here?


Cause. Yes, what would you have Sir?


Logicus. Have Sir! nay, I have more already then I would have.


Cause. If you have any business, you may impart it to me.


Logicus. Business? then I perceive you are all for Business, you have but
little entertainment for a friend; well Sir, are not you a Lawyer?


Cause. I may not deny my profession, Sir.


Logicus. If then you are a Lawyer Sir, you are either a Civil Lawyer, or an
uncivil, you must admit a Division, Sir, for your Lawyers are Aequiuocall, and
therefore carefully to be distinguished before you be defined.


Cause. Sir, I must confess, I am not a Civil Lawyer, yet I trust not an
Uncivil.


Logicus. Nay, Sir, my Division holds; I prove it; Either you are a Civil
Lawyer, or you are not a Civil Lawyer: But you confess you are not a Civil
Lawyer: Ergo, you are an Uncivil Lawyer.


Cause. Well then, Sir, if you would have it so, I am an Uncivil Lawyer.


Logicus. Marry Sir, I then fear you will scarce plead my cause well: for my
complaint is against an Uncivil fellow, and therefore I much suspect your
uprightness: but yet since I cannot make choice, I must use you; but Sir, you
must give me leave to hold you a little longer upon some Interrogatories: if
you are an Uncivil Lawyer, then you are either an Extraordinary Lawyer or a
Common Lawyer.


Cause. Faith, I am no extraordinary Lawyer, and therefore (if you will) a
Common Lawyer.


Logius. Hum. Indeed had you bin an Extraordinary Lawyer, you had bin a
Disorderly Lawyer: for, though they are called Canon Lawyers, yet are they most
Extrauagant. But again Sir, if you are a Common Lawyer, you are to be
suspected; for commonly your Common Lawyers are to be suspected.

Enter PHLEGMATICO in a pale russet Suite; on the back whereof was expressed
one filling a Pipe of Tobacco; on the breast one taking Tobacco; his Hat beset
round about with Tobacco-pipes: with a Can of drink hanging at his girdle. But
who comes yonder? Phlegmatico, my valiant Armor-bearer.


Phlegmatico. Before love most Meteorologicall Tobacco! He takes Tobacco,
drinks, and then spawles. (again) Pure Indian! (again) Not a lot
Sophisticated (again) A Tobacco-pipe is the Chimney of perpetual Hospitality
(again) Before love most Metropolitan Tobacco! He drinks again and Sings,
while Logicus, and Causidicus privately withdraw to the side of the Stage.

TObacco's a Musician
And in a Pipe delights;
It descends in a Close,
Through the Organ of the nose,
With a Relish that inuiteth.
This makes me sing So ho, ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound J loudly;
Earth never did breed
Such a iouiall weed
Whereof to boast so proudly.
Tobacco is a Lawyer,
His pipes do love Long Cases:
When our brains it enters,
Our feet do make Indentures,
Which we Seal with stamping paces.
This makes me sing, So ho, etc.
Tobacco's a Physician
Good both for Sound and Sickly:
It Is a Hot Perfume
That expells Cold Rhewme,
And makes it flow down quickly.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Trauellour
Come from the Indies Hither;
It passed Sea and Land
Ere it came to my hand,
And escaped the Wind, and Wether.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Critticke,
That still Old Paper Turns;
Whose Labor, and Care
Is as Smoke in the Air,
That ascends from a rag when it burns.
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco's an Ignis fatuus,
A Fat and Fyrie vapor;
That leads men about
Till the Fire be Out,
Consuming like a Taper,
This makes me sing, etc.
Tobacco is a Whiffler,
And cries Huff Snuff with fury;
His Pipe's his Club and Link;
He Is the visor that does drink;
Thus armed I fear not a Jury.
This makes me sing So ho ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound I loudly:
Earth never did breed
Such a Iouiall weed,
Whereof to boast so proudly.

Logicus. 'Faith it is my man Phlegmatico, he is at his rheumatike antidote; but
I Will --


Phleg. My Master, and I saw him not!


Logicus. He takes away his Pipe, breaks it, and beats him. Nay, never put up
your pipe, you shall not be gone so. A fire burn this Tobacco.


Phleg. It would, if you would have let it alone, Sir.


Logicus. You're my Target-bearer, sirrah, are you not? a present defense at a
desperate combat: bear this also home with you, till I bring you more my
self, you slauering rogue. Exit. Phleg. Look Master Causidicus, I have by
Action expressed, what my Passion before would scarce have afforded words to
deliver; I my self was in like sort beaten by a Varlet, but upon an unlike
cause, most injuriously; and now I come to you to be my advocate, and if you
will stand my friend, I shall not be wanting to content you in any reasonable
sort; and, because you Lawyers are somewhat Tongue-tide, suffer me to be the
Midwife to cut the string thereof, with this Silver Penny. Nay, 'pray Sir be
not womanish, you shall take it.


Causid. Sir, I count my Profession Crowned, when I plead most causes: and
since I have at this present Sir, some importunate auocation of businesses; I
will promise you a meditated defense, and when you please but to intimate the
instant of your necessity, I shall fly to you as swiftly, as with the wings of
Angels. Sir, I partly know you, is not your name Master Logicus?


Logicus. I am called so, Sir.


Cau. Then fare you well, good Master Logicus. Exit Cau.


Logicus. Fare you well good Master Causidicus. Now look to thy self Poeta,
for I shall make thee fly to thy railing Iambicks: but look to thy self, I
say, for I have put a sword into a mad-mans hand against thee. Exit.


ACTVS II.
SCENA. IIII.
ARITHMETICA, GEOMETRES.
I Perceive to what Center all the lines of your Circle tend.


Geom. You would rather say to what Circumference all the lines run from my
Center.


Arith. Lo, now you have confes'd: and is it Astronomia that must so Outshine
Arithmetica? well, were her beauties as the Stars, I Will make them want the
beauty of all beauties, Number; that they shall only be uncertainly gazed
upon, under an Indefinite multitude.


Geom. You're out, you're out in your Account Arithmetica, believe me you are:
I only intimated your suspicion, not expres'd mine own desires.


Arith. Well, Geometres, I have known the time when your love to Arithmetica
was more Solid, and not thus Superficial; the time was when Geometres would
not do any thing without Arithmetica; not measure a Foot of ground, but ask
of Arithmetica how many Inches it was; not an Inch but inquire of Arithmetica
how many Grains were in it: but now forsooth the pride of his desires is raised
to an Higher pitch; and now Astronomia is the Star upon which his eye is
fixed, and now Astronomia is the Magnetique Pole, after which the Lodestone of
his heart does turn. And Astronomia --


Geom. Peace.


Arith. What? cannot you endure to hear the name of your dearest Astronomia?


Geom. Not from that mouth.


Arith. Because I cannot praise her Infinitely? why then me thinks not from
your own, because you cannot praise her without Measure; well, Geometres,
forgive me, but I must love thee. Come, dearest; I Will be a Globe, be thou the
Axle-tree: I Will be a Circle, be thou the Diameter: I Will be --


Geom. A chaste virgin! I think she will get her self with child by an
imagination, without marrying; for she does already, me thinks, Multiply
exceedingly, and Bring forth: well, I Will leave you, or else there is no way,
Arithmetica, to stay your Progression. Exit Geometres.


Arith. Well, Geometres, know, when thou once forsakest Number, thou then
run'st headlong into confusion; but this is the misery of inthral'd affections;
yet since I cannot dissettle them, I will mitigate them; and so long count them
at least supportable, as they shall not exceed Number and Measure.


ACTVS II. SCENA V.
POETA. Melancholico enters, takes money and departs. HIst, Melancholico,
passion of me! I had almost forgot the maine point of the business: here --
give that to Causidicus. A man may as well open an Oister without a knife, as a
Lawyers mouth without a fee; but if he were half dead, that would (like
strong-water to a dying man) make him Gape, though he could not speak. O the
Serpentine ingratitude of man! that these snakes, whom I have nourished in my
bosom, should now sting me! This Logicus, a base, dry-brain'd kecks-witted
clinch-fist, not long ago, perceiving his fortunes to be brought to a
desperate praecipitation; through the incomprehensible difficulty of his
Artlesse curiosities, most fawningly embosomes himself into my acquaintance,
upon a former consideration of my alluring faculty; and in the dustie terms of
some cob-web eloquence, blunderingly stammerd out his extreme, his extreme
wants: for he had only so much enforced rhetoric, as to bring out those
words twice, and so by chance light upon a sorry Figure; then brutishly he
expres'd the rest, rather by crying then speaking; (and indeed he had no more
moisture else in him, then only to bewail his own misery) when asking what
was his request, he answered, that I would turn his unpleasant rules into
pleasant Verse: I straight out of the open freenes of my nature and an effuse
goodness, prevented the repetition of his suit, by a quick consent; thereupon
set my self a work, and after some travail performed it: Some Travail I
say; for by the Nine Muses, I think I was above Nine Months in travail with
that monstrous birth: If one but consider what splay-footed verses they were, a
man would swear, that some infernal hagge, not a Muse (though unwilling) had
been the mother of them; which unhappy labor when I had showed unto him, the
reviving wretch falls on's knees, admires the work, calls me the Aesculapius
of his salvation, and with hands lifted up, vows to pay his vows at the Muses
altar; that I now more admired at his admiration, then at the deformities of
mine own Work: for, by Jove, they are such unblessed, such unlucky verses,
that, besides the loss of custom, which they may justly procure the Author,
they are able to make a man be suspected for a Coniurer; there wants nothing
but a Circle to make a complete coniuration. Fecana, Caieti, Dafenes, Hebare,
Gedaco,
Gebali stant, non stant, Febas, Hebas, Hecas.
Sure I think it should have been Hecate. Well, he enioyes them; and upon
the happiness of this success came Grammaticus to me with the like suit:
'faith I did it, and cast most of his Rules likewise into Verse: but by Jove,
since the proud Schoolmasters has showed himself thus ungracious and
stiff-necked toward me, I Will be even with him; and now I think on it, there is
all his Syntaxis yet to do; but by this hand, if ever I turn line of it into
Verse, let me hereafter be a mere Heteroclite, and the very Aptoton of a
fool per omnes casus.


ACTVS II. SCENA VI.
PHYSIOGNOMVS. CHEIROMANTES. The one of a greater stature, the other little:
attired like Rogues, in tottered apparel, with black faces like Gypsies; in
flat round caps close to their heads, without bands and girdles, with
truncheons in their hands.

PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES, POETA.
Let Us set upon him. The gods preserve you Sir, from the black dragon of the
night.


Cheir. The broad eye of the Heavens still attend you Sir.


Phys. And grant that the sweet Fairies may nightly put money in your shoes
Sir.


Cheir. And sweep your house clean Sir.


Phys. And make you the rich husband of many wives.


Cheir. And the blessed father of many children.


Phys. The gods of the night send you happy dreams.


Cheir. And that you may never pare your nails upon a Friday.


Phys. And that the horse-shoo may never be pulled from your threshold.


Cheir. And that your Stables may be always free from the queen of the
Goblins.


Phys. That your nose may never bleed only three drops at a time.


Cheir. That a yellow Death-mould may never appear upon your hand, or any part
of your body.


Phys. That you may never stumble at your going out in the morning.


Cheir. That you may --


Poeta. Be rid of you Varlets. What Egyptian darkness has seaz'd upon your
faces?


Phys. We are indeed from Aegypt-land, and't please your good vrship: Brother,
by the Ruffian, I think this is a quier coue, he cuts such quier whidds: Good
Sir, if you be a Gentry coue, vouchsafe some small Win or but a Make, for we
have neither Lowre, nor Libbeg, nor Libkin.


Cheir. No by Solomon, unless it be Strommell sometimes in a Skipper; we had
rather Mawnd then Mill to keep us from Trining.


Phys. Good Gentry coue vouchsafe us a little Lowre, or some old Duddes, as a
Castir or a Commission.


Poeta. Marry if I had a Commission* I knew what to do with you.


Cheir. Ah, your good vrship, to cover our Quarommes, that our wants may not
drive us to the Chates -- let me see your Famble good Master.


Poeta. My Famble Villain? This is almost as bad as the language of Logicus.


Phys. Ah your good vrship! it is the Gypsy language: the vrship of the gods
bless your fair Glasiers, and look out with your merciful eyne.


Cheiro. Gentle Ruler of this place, if so you be, vouchsafe to favor us in
the way of truth for the gods cause.


Phys. Somewhat toward a meals meat, Well and Wisely bestow upon us, and the
Go-ads reward you for it.


Cheir. Ah good Master well and wisely, give me but an old sheet against the
cold, or an old Petticoat or smock of my Mistres's (Heaven save her life) for
my poor Doxy.


Phys. Good Sir give but a cup of your best drink well and wisely. The gods
save the King and his Counsel, and the governors of this place; you shall
have a fair wife Master, and many children.


Poeta. Ha! a fair wife and many children? how know thou that? what is thy
name?


Phys. Physiognomus, good Master.


Poeta. And thine?


Cheir. Cheiromantes, and't like your good vrship.


Poeta. Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes? Why what can you do?


Phys. We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your
fortune, Master.


Cheir. We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your
fortune, Master.


Poeta. My fortune? why what is my fortune?


Cheir. You shall have a very fair wife.


Poeta. Shall have? thou mean, Would have.


Cheir. No History ever made mention of so fair a one; she shall be as
beautiful as the Stars.


Poeta. Ha! as beautiful as the Stars? and no History ever made mention of
so fair a one? why that is, it shall not be Historia but Astronomia. I Am
crowned! Sirrah, you flatter me.


Cheir. It is the decree of the gods Sir.


Poeta. Why now my dreame's out.


Cheir. You shall have many children, and one of them shall be borne with Teeth
in his head, and his name shall be Satyrico.


Poeta. Nay, I Will bear with any misfortune in my children, so I may be happy
in my wife. O divine Astronomia, why? was not this my very dream?

Whilst Poeta looks up earnestly, Cheiromantes picks his pocket, takes out a
book and a purse, and so he with Physiognomus departs. ME thought as on a
shadie bank I lay,
The whilst a murmuring Brook did gently play
With his soft sliding waves, and did complain
How Astronomia did my love disdain;
A Lady, like my Love, in Heaven did stand,
The Sun and Moon waiting on either hand:
And when I spoke, she Frowned: and, when I cried,
She, with a wanton smile, seemed to deride.
At last the Sun and Moon did both descend,
And unto me, me thought, their course did bend.
But when they were drawn nigh, they both appeared
Cole-blacke; that with the wonder I was feared.
They came and kissed me, and then suddenly
They both did vanish from my trembling eye.
The Lady then, seeming to smile, did make
A sign unto me, and did bid me take
The Teian Poet, sweet Anacreon,
My individual companion,
And in my native language to translate
His Niobe, and as it was her fate
To turn into a stone; so I by this
Should find a stranger Metamorphosis:
And she, that I did love, should change her heart
Of stone, and by her love release my smart.
I took my book and straight translated it;
(Lines soon are penned when Love does dictate wit)
With that me thought she pulled me up unto her,
And said; I Will now refresh thee my grieved wooer.
She pulled me up, and when I was even crowned
With Heaven, she let me fall back to the ground.
When with the fall me thought I lost my dear
Anacreon, and that increased my fear.
Then with this double fear I straight awake,
And my faint joints with a chill horror shakt.
I Will comment thus: that face that from above
Appeared, was the fair image of my love,
Bright Astronomia: and the darkened Sun
And Moon that graciously vouchsaft to run
From their own Sphere to kiss me, were these two
Black, but glad messengers (if this be true
They do pronounce) and therefore they were sent
From heaven, because they knew the gods intent.
The turning of Anacreon does imply
I shall obtain her love by Poesy.
And, ere I rose, this morn I made my quill
Express Anacreons Ionian skill.
Verses can draw the Moon from Heaven; then may
My lines, if blessed, win Astronomia.
Her letting me fall down, was not true story,
But feigned by envious sleep to make me sorry.
So was the losing my Anacreon:
But dearest friend, as yet thou art not gone:
No, no, my hopes and joys are too too great;
And these do flatter me too much --
But stay -- O my Anacreon, my Anacreon, He feels in his pockets, and finds
himself coozen'd. I have lost my Anacreon: Varlets, Villains, I Am deluded,
my pockets are picked; I have lost my Anacreon: did I dream? or did I make
Verses? or was I mad? now my dreame's out, it is out indeed, all; for now I
remember me, I left out the worst part vnexpounded, and that was their
vanishing from me: well, this it is to be a Starre-gazer, and fall into a pit; I
was thinking of Astronomia, when I was by promise to have met with Geographus:
well, I Will pursue my first intendment, and to Geographus for the learning of the
languages; and fear never a corriuall under Heaven, now Mithridates, and
Scaliger are dead. Exit Poeta.


ACTVS II. SCENA VII.
MEDICVS, in a Physicians gown, a laced ruffe-band, a black Satin suit,
silk stockings, garters, roses, etc.


MAGVS, ASTROLOGIA, MEDICVS, PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES.
I, But Medicus, who brought you word that Poeta was sick?


Medic. Why, Historia has sent one unto me, now to entreat me to minister unto
him my best physic; and the messenger told me (as he heard, it seems) the
occasion thereof, which was, that Historia who was in love with him, hearing
that he was hurt in a fray with Logicus and Grammaticus, out of the jealous
fear of her abundant love, sent to me thus carefully, upon the suspicion of
his hurt.


Magus. Why, Physiognomus, did Poeta seem to you, to be well?


Physiog. Yes, in faith; or if he were sick 'twas more in mind then in body.


Magus. Well, Medicus, where is the messenger?


Medic. Why, at my house expecting my return.


Magus. Back then, in all haste, and by her servant send him poison, that if
he be sick he may die: and so one may be removed out of Geometres his way. And
if the poison chance to be discovered, thou may pretend 'twas her treachery,
because he does not love her, and that thy physic was good.


Medic. Let me alone, I warrant you; but if I can but once come to the
handling of him my self, I Will give him but a clyster, and blow him up with a
Powder, I warrant him. Exit Med.


Magus. But, Physiognomus, are you sure 'twas he? did not you mistake him?


Physiog. Faith, neither of us knew him very well; but Cheiromantes has brought
some testimonies from him.


Magus. What, I prithee? what?


Cheiro. Mary, Sir, a book, and that I think is a sign of a Scholar; but I
have a purse too, and that, I think, is not a sign of a Scholar.


Magus. What Is in it? what is in it?


Cheiro. Nay, I Will swear, we both ran since I Nimb'd it, that we durst not be
so bold yet, as to take leisure to look in it, but now I Will see.


Magus. What Is this? Anacreon? an old bawdy Poet? a fit companion for such a
Gallant.


Cheiro. A fire burn it; here is nothing but a scuruy paper.


Magus. But a murren, how could thou possibly get these things from him?


Physiog. Faith, Cheiromantes, by the slight of the Hand did it very neatly.


Cheiro. I, 'faith, I have the trick on it: for (a rapture of love seizing on
him, and casting him into an ecstasy) he fell a talking to himself of a
dream he had: I seeing he was fallen into a Dream, persuaded my self he was
fast asleep; and so presumptuously diu'd into his pockets, whence I brought
these spoils.


Magus. Good, good, prithee let us see the paper.

Anacreons Niobe, or his Lyricks to his love, beginning with the daughter of
Tantalus or Niobe, thus, (...)
(...).
Translated by me this morning upon occasion of my celestial vision.


Astrol. Pretty, pretty, why these Poets, they are all of them borne, I
think, upon Friday at the sixth hour, for then Venus has the dominion of the
Day, and Mars of the Hour; now the Planet of the Day does chiefly govern
their Actions, and the Planet of the Hour does admixe a Subordinate Influence,
and that is the reason that your Poets have more of Venus in them then Mars; yet
sometimes they are in combats, as lately Poeta: so on the other side your
Warriors for the most part are borne upon Tuesdaies at the third hour, for
then Mars has the dominion of the Day, and Venus of the Hour, and therefore
your Warriors have more of Mars then Venus.


Magus. Well, let us read them.

To his Love.
NIOBE, as they say, once stood
Turned to a stone by Phrygian flood,
PANDIONS daughter (so fame sings)
Changed to a Swallow had swift wings,
But I a Looking-glass would be,
Still to be looked upon by Thee:
Or I (my Love) would be thy Gown,
By Thee to be worn up and down.
Or a pure Well full to the brimmes,
That I might wash Thy purer limbs.
Or I Would be precious Balm to 'Noynt
With choicest care each Choicest joint.
Or, if I might, I would be (feign)
About Thy neck thy happy Chain.
Or would it were my blessed hap
To be the Lawne over Thy fair Pap.
Or would I were thy Shoo to be
Daily but Trod upon by Thee.
Pretty, pretty, by the dimpled chin of my Astrologia, pretty; I Will give the
rascal his Anacreon again (because I cannot tell what to do with it) for
this trick, and tell him I found it, and so make him fall in love with me
most poetically; well, my little rascals, expect a better booty of some richer
body the next time; be gone: but be in readiness, there is to be a banquet at
Ethicus his house, for the reconciling of Logicus, Grammaticus, and this Poeta,
if he can be there, and I with Astrologia are invited thither, wherefore if
there should be any occasion of employment for you, be at hand.


Physiog. Cheiro. We warrant you.

Exeunt Physiognomus and Cheiromantes.
Magus. Now, Astrologia, take that powder, and according to my instructions at
the banquet, see that Astronomia drink it off, and I warrant her then, 'twill
make her love our more loved Geometres.


Astrol. Fear not, I know already by the Stars 'twill take effect. Exit
Astrologia.


Magus. Farewell; I must to Geometres, or else in faith he will Conjure me for
staying. Exit Magus.


ACTVS II. SCENA VIII.
POETA, GEOGRAPHVS, PHANTASTES.
FOr the learning of your languages, Sir, I must confess, I do highly approve
of it, but I see no such necessity of travailing, beside the danger and
expense that must be undergone.


Geogr. O, Sir, I could tell you such wonders, as would inflame you with a
desire.


Poet. As what, I pray you, Sir?


Geogr. Sir, I can impart such rarities of relation unto you, as would amaze
you; and yet they are familiar to a Trauailour. In a City of Greece, I remember
I saw the admired net, which Vulcan made to entangle Mars and Venus; and it is
hanged up in a Temple dedicated to the same god, and by himself was given
thereunto, to the terror of all Cuckold-makers for ever.


Poet. O strange! but, Sir, as I remember that net was invisible.


Geogr. Hum -- oh -- true Sir, it was invisible, but, Now Sir -- it is to be
seen.


Phant. Sir, I will take leave to help a little my Masters memory, not his
invention; for by Jove, Sir, and by the Artemisian Mausoleum, which these eyes,
not without amazement, have beheld, it is true; thus 'twas, Sir: it can be seen
by any honest man; but if any Adulterer casts his eyes toward it, he presently
loses his sight, and therefore it is their manner of Trial for those that are
accused of adultery.


Poet. O wonderful!


Geogr. Nay, Sir, in another place of Greece there is a round, close Valley,
encompassed with exceeding high Hills; only on one side there is a narrow
entrance into it and through the midst of it runs a delicate stream, by
the bank of which if a man stand, he shall as perfectly hear the Music of
the Spheres, as if he were amongst them: and the cause of this, by the
inhabitants is thought to be the height of the Hills: which keeping-in the
sound, and bringing it down to the water, does by an aeriall resultancy produce
a most reciprocal representation of the divine harmony.


Poet. Oh, that I was not made a trauailour!


Geogr. Nay, Sir, moreover it is so sweet, that the hearer can never leave
hearing of his own accord, but stands still.


Poet. O wonderful! but then I pray, Sir, how does he come away?


Geogr. Hum -- faith I was told the device of that, but I have forgot.


Phant. O, Sir, I perfectly remember it, 'twas thus: The inhabitants have, at
the foot of the outside of the Hill, dig'd forth an entrance, and underneath
have made a Vault which reaches just to the bank of the River, all along the
side of which, they have made a many trap-doores, and so when a man has heard
enough, they vnbolt the trap-doores within, and let him slide down gently.


Poet. Oh admirable! but me thinks when the door is open, they should hear
it below likewise in the Vault, and stand still there too.


Phant. Well, Sir, by my Mothers soul (that oath I learned in Spain) it is a
truth; and the reason it cannot be heard lower, is, because the sound does not
descend below the water.


Poet. Indeed, that is an excellent reason.


Phant. Nay, by Jove, Sir, I scorn to lie; I scorn to speak any thing
without reason, by Jove; by Jove, I Will give as good a reason of those things I
know, as any man under the cope of Heaven; I will, by Jove.


Geogr. Why, I have seen white bears with faces would make you fall in love
with them.


Poet. O strange! white bears! and yet indeed I have heard that a late in
America there are white bears, but they are most terrible.


Geogr. Nay, Sir, and these have long tails.


Poet. That Is somewhat worth the admiration; and yet I think all Bears at
first had long tails, or else why should the Bear in the heavens have one!


Geogr. It Is true; yet (if you mark it) it is broken.


Poet. O, that came thus; when Jupiter pulled him up to heaven by the tail,
the weight of his body broke it, whereupon Jupiter caught him by the rumpe, and
so tied his tail together again, and that is the reason of the knot in the
middle of it, and so it has ever since hung slopeling downe-ward, if you mark
it.


Geogr. Again, Sir, in my travails in Tuscany, I beheld a most curious piece
of Architecture; it was an hall built in the form of a cross, that, which way
soever the wind sat, or the sun shined, a man might always go to one of
the ends, and so decline the present violence of the season: and as in an
arbor unto which the Sun has access, you shall see boughs at the top
correspondently represented on the ground in the shadow: so whatsoever curious
work was seen in the roof of this building, the same underneath was expressed
in the Floor.


Poet. I fancy the conceit prettily.


Phant. Nay, Sir; I Will tell you a wonder, we met with a Trauailour that could
speak some six languages at the same instant.


Poet. How? at the same instant! that is impossible.


Phant. Nay, Sir, the actualitie of the performance puts it beyond all
contradiction. With his tongue he would vowell you out as smooth Italian, as any
man breathing: with his Eye he would sparkle forth the proud Spanish: with his
Nose blow out most Robustious Dutch: the Creaking of his High-heel'd Shoo would
articulate exact Polonian: The knocking of his shin-bones Foeminine French: and
his Belly would grumble most pure and Scholer-like Hungary.


Poet. How? his Belly speak?


Phant. Alas, that is the least wonder, for at what time Pythagoras flourished,
that was a familiar thing with his Scholars: and I may confirm it by a
perswasiue induction drawn from your Pythonisses, and your new-fashion'd Lutes
that sound from within, Sir, from within: nay, besides all this, Sir, at the
same time his Ears could sing, and his Brains crow; and he could Laugh till
the tears stood in's Eyes.


Poet. O wonderful! wonderful!


Geogr. If you please, Sir, now to employ me, not only my Wants, but also my
Love shall make me diligently respectfull.


Poet. Sir, I courteously accept your offered endeavors.


Geogr. Ah, dearest Astronomia, it is for thy sake I do thus. He speaks this
aside to himself, and Poeta ouer-heares him.


Poet. How? for Astronomia's? [hee spoke that to himselfe] Sir, I am on a
sudden less well affected, wherefore pardon, I pray you, an abrupt
entreating of your present departure, and some speedy occasion shall shortly
offer a second meeting.


Geog. Well Sir, we thank you; Apollo be always the Patron of your Muse and
Health.


Poeta. For Astronomia's sake? why? is he in love with her? (For Astronomia's
sake!) or is he in love with me! I woun't torture my self, I Will expound
gently; He Is in love with me, and because (it may be) he hears I love her,
he accounts (it may be) that he does this, that I may obtain her: and thus
(it may be) he means he does this for Her: This is Scuruie; Master
Geographus you have marred your own Market; my stomacke's turned; I have
Tongues enough for a wiseman; thousands before me have got Wife and Children,
more then thy could keep, without learning the Languages; and therefore from
henceforth, for fear of the worst, you may, Master Geographus, (if you
please) undertake a second Travel.


ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
POETA in his Nightcap and Slippers, vnbutton'd and untrust.


POETA. Melancholico comes in, and lays down (...) and departs. BE not far
off.
That nothing is entire!
Nothing all-blest! but still some new desire
Brings a new torture! and this Fate does lie,
An heavy weight on all mortality!
It does; thus was not lately my affection
Chained to Historia by a strong subjection?
Did I not pule, and pine, entreat, and cry?
Pretend a sickness? threaten I would die,
If she not loved me? did I not act all
The frantike parts wherewith Love does inthrall
His Rebell-Subiects? Did I not look Sad
If she but Frowned; and, if she Smiled, look Glad?
I did; and took delight to be inchain'd
To her, Hope said at last she might be gained.
Yet see the wheel of change! I now do scorn
Her tears, and now she thinks her self forlorn.

Mel. Pardon my intrusion Sir, Historia Melancholico enters.
Hearing you were hurt lately in a Fray,
Has in her jealousy of love sent here
Some Physic, to prevent a greater fear.

Poeta. She should have sent me Poison, far from her
I count it so; yet let the Messenger
Return our courteous gratitude. Begone. Exit Melancholico.
Lo, thus vexations never come alone;
Well, I woun^t love her; nay, I Will ha^^ her more
Henceforth; she plagues me worse then before.

Enter MELANCHALICO, and SANGVIS. Mel. Pardon once more, Sir, here comes sent
by her,
Medicus, Servant to administer
The Physic.

Poeta. -- Why, I prithee know I lack
No Physic, there it is, thou may carry't back.

Sanguis. The Gods forbid, Sir, this is Poison. Sanguis looks on the poison.


Poeta. -- How!


Sanguis. It Is Poison, Sir.


Poeta. -- Why? it was sent but now
From my Loue-sicke Historia.

Sanguis. -- So 't may be:
They'ue changed my Masters Physic.

Poeta. -- Oh to see
The Treachery of women! well, conceal
The fact as yet; just time shall all reveal.
Exeunt MELANCHOLICO, and SANGVIS. O Women, Witches, Monsters, Furies Devils,
The impure extract of a World of evils;
Natures great Error; the obliquitie
Of the Gods Wisdom; and the Anomalie
From all that is good; I Will curse you all below
The Center, and, if I could, then further throw
Your cursed heads; and if any should gain
A place in Heaven, I Will time 'em down again
To a worse ruin; yet me thinks I hear
How Astronomia whispers in mine ear,
And begs a Pardon for them; well; to thee
I Will yield, thou stand'st above mortality.
Aspire, my gentle Muse, inflame my breast;
Then thus my graceful love shall be expressed.
Her Brow is like a brave Heroicke line,
That does a sacred Majesty inshrine.
Her Nose Phaleuciake-like in comely sort
Ends in a Trochie, or a long and short.
Her Mouth is like a pretty Dimeter;
Her Eie-browes like a little-longer Trimeter.
Her Chinne is an Adonicke; and her Tongue --
Is an Hyp^rmeter, somewhat too-long.
Her Eyes, I may compare them unto two
Quick-turning Dactyles, for their nimble View.
Her Neck A^clepiad-like turns round about
Behind, before a little bone stands out.
Her Ribs like Staves of Sapphickes do descend
Thither, which but to name were to offend.
Her Arms like two Iambickes raised on hie,
Do with her Brow bear equal Majesty.
Her Legs like two strait Spondies, keep a pace
Slow as two Scazons, but with stately grace.
Thanks to my Muse; yet why do I admire
Her thus, whom I enjoy but by desire?
For more I never shall; this is my weight
Of grief, and this my preordained Fate.
He takes up his Lute. Come, come, thou part of Heaven, companion
Of all my woes and loves, thou that alone
Do in the midst of sorrows yield relief,
And though not take away, make less my grief.
He plays on his Lute, then leaves off, and speaks again. My dearest Lute,
Apoollo's best invention
Wherewith he does compose the wild dissension
Of our untuned desires, which would confound
Us quite, but that they break forth with a sound!
Sighs from our breasts are like sounds from thy womb,
Borne dead, and buried in an aerie Tomb.
Sigh then to Cupid, tell him he is too blame
Not raising in my love a mutual flame.

He plays on his Lute, and leaving off, calls to his man MELANCHOLICO. Ho,
Melancholico.


Mel. -- Here Sir.


Poeta. -- Begone.


Mel. Did you not call me Sir?


Poeta. -- Sirrah, begone.

He plays a little on his Lute, and then calls MELANCHOLICO again. Ho,
Melancholico.


Mel. -- Sir.


Poeta. Dance, I say, Dance.


Mel. -- I cannot.


Poeta. -- Sirrah, dance that which I play.
He plays the Antique on his Lute, and MELANCHOLICO dances, then abruptly
leaving off, he speaks to him. Begone: MELANCHOLICO continues dancing. Sirrah,
begone.
He plays again on his Lute, and suddenly leaving off, throws it away. --
Away, away,
Charmer, Inchanter, it is a truth to say,
Our bodies cast their shapes into the Air,
And can appear when they are gone; so rare
Philosophers have held, and so I hold:
Pardon, great Astronomia, I was bold,
Too-bold, I do confess, but my dim sight
Could not before behold thee though so bright.
But now mine eyes are cleared; on my bowed knee,
I ask a Pardon of thy Majesty.
Pardon thy Poet, and vouchsafe this grace, He faines Astronomia to be present,
falls on his knees, embraces and kisses the air: then rises.
That thy rich beauties he may thus embrace.
And now, dear Love, add hereunto one kiss,
And then thou shall in heaven my soul with bliss.
Maro, thy Riddle's solu'd: I thus untie
The knot, which thou did knit, men's wits to try.
Dic quibus in terris (and eris mihi magnus APOLLO)
Tres pateat Coeli spatium (non amplius) vlnas?
Maro, it is here; here is Astronomia;
Here Is Heaven closed in those narrow limits; nay,
Here Is Deity, the object of all loves,
Enough to make a thousand Heavens of Jove's.
See, He thinks he sees her ascending into Heaven. see, how she ascends!
mount, mount, great Queen
Of Heaven, and in full luster be thou seen
Mortalities amazement; see, she is gone
To mount yet higher to a stately Throne,
Placed on the Azure pauement of the Stars,
Guarded by Days, Months, Hours, then sees the wars
Of Pygmie-mortals --. Enter MELANCHOLICO.

Mel. -- Sir, here is Ethicus
Is come, and says he would speak with you.

Poeta. -- With us?
Admit him in. Exit Melancholico. Enter ETHICVS.

Ethicus. -- Hay! scarce dressed yet! how so?

Poeta. What? comes your froward age to chide us?

Ethicus. -- No.
But to inuit you to a Feast, my self your friend,
Desirous of your peace, to set an end
To your contentions with Grammaticus
And Logicus, to night do purpose thus
To make you friends.

Poeta. But --

Ethicus. -- Nay, no buts: Be there.

Poeta. I will.

Ethicus. -- Why thanks. Welcome shall be your cheer.
Exit Ethicus.
Poeta. Well then, I Will in and dress me, and so come,
Yet better (...) purchance you had my room. Exit Poeta.

ACT^ II. SCENA III.
(...) ^ES, MAGVS.
(...). (...) ^o deal with spirits?

(...) ^ly a Grometrician, it is lawful for you to deal only with bodies: but
if you will undertake Our Superior faculty, it is not only lawful, but most
honorable; why Sir, it is one of the greatest gifts of the Gods to have command
over Spirits; but for the approbation of it, you may only look back unto the
antiquity thereof, which is drawn from more then eight hundred years before
the Siege of Troy, in the time of Agonaces, and of the renowned Zoroaster a
King of the Bactrians, who described the high Mystery of this Divine Science
in an hundred thousand verses; after these there flourished Iobeth, Toluscol,
Zamolxis, whose admired fame was afterward emulated by Almadal, Alchindus, and
Hipocus Arabians: Apuscorus, Zaratus, and Cobares, Medians: Marmaridius, a
Babylonian: Zarmocenidas, an Assyrian, Abbaris, an Hyperborean, Thesphetion, an
Ethiopian, Arnuphis, an Egyptian, Theurgus, a Chaldean: with these I may
recite Cambyses, Zamares, Charondas, Dam^gorgon, Gobrias, Arbatel, Apollonius,
Gog, Hostanes, Atyr, Choastes --


Geom. Good Sir, do not conjure.


Magus. No Sir, these are nothing but the names of the Sacred Professors of
this Divine Science.


Geom. I but it may be Sir, they had coniuring names.


Magus. Alas, Sir! it is not so easy a matter to work effectually in our
Sacred Science, as most men think it is, and as I will most manifestly declare
unto you; for this is a rule, you must be first an Absolute Astrologian; upon
which fundamental Supposition I thus proceed: before you can obtain the
knowledge of Astrology, you must be a most Grounded Philosopher, a sound
Physician, and an exquisite Mathematician; by the helps of which Sciences you
shall know the courses of the Stars; the number of the Orbs; your Poles; the
Circles; the Vertical and Pedall points; the Azimuth, or Vertical Circle; the
Almucantarath or Circles of Altitude; the Concentricitie and Excentricitie of
the Orbs; the Ascendent, and Descendent Knots, or Syndesmes, that Cut the
Ecliptike; your Orbs Aequant, Epicyclicall, and Deferent of the Apogeum, and
Perigeum, or of the Highest and Lowest Absis; the Planetarie Aspects, or
Configurations, either Right as Conjunction and Opposition, or Collateral as
Sextile, Quadrate, and Trine; the Direct motion of the Planets, their
Retrogradation and Station; then Sir, your Astrology is either Canonical for
the Influence of the Stars, or Thematicall for the Erection of a Scheme of
the Heavens, wherein is to be known the Order of the Domicils, and the
Inscription. Then there is your Iudiciarie, which is either Genethliacall, or
Catholic instructing in predictions, either Idiomaticall or Symptomaticall;
the eight and twenty Mansions of the Moon; the Symbolization of Occult
qualities in Herbs, with the Planets; Signacles, Pentacles, Planetarie
Suffumigations, Unctions, Pailters, Rings, Alligations, Suspensions; the twelve
Scales of the Numbers; the Duodenarie Scale, either Cabalisticall or Orphicall;
the Characters, Seals, and Bands of Spirits --


Geom. You Will give me all this in writing Sir; woun't you?


Magus. Yes Sir, yes. Then are there diverse kinds of your Magic, as
Necromancie, Anthropomancie, Gastromancie, Cheiromancie, Coscinomancy, --


Geom. I pray, do you your self know how many there are in all?


Magus. Sir, One and twenty. I Will begin them over again, if you will.
Necromancie, Anthropomancie --


Geom. Nay, good Sir hold, we have enough already: But I perceive you
Magicians have admirable memories to get hard words by heart; I marvel you
do not turn Dictionarie-makers: Why? I warrant there is no hard word but you
can tell the meaning on it: you would put all their noses out of joint quite.


Magus. I, and put them out of their wits, if we list: But then, Sir, to know
the Spirit of Every Day, and Hour; his Name, Power, and Legions under him,
his Form of appearing, whether like a Dragon, or an Horse, or a Wolf, or a
flame of fire; the Region whence he comes; the Gift he bestows, whether
Learning, Riches, Beauty; his Name, his Characters: these, these, are the
wonders, the amazements of our Spiritual Science; Spiritual I may justly call
in, since every Art receives an Excellency from its Object; and yet (alas!) I
confess, I am but young in it yet, and have scarce served a 'prentice-ship in
it, if it may be called a servitude, wherein there is such Freeness, and
Euagation of spirit in such exquisite knowledge; nay, Dominion over Spirits.


Geom. Young say you? marry, I think, you are absolutely grounded in it, that
can know all these Mysteries; ah, were it the will of the gods, I had but half
of this skill, I Would give all that I have, and get more as I could; but can you
do all these Wonders?


Magus. Far stranger, far stranger; most amazing transformations; why,
there was Apuleius so skillful in this Art, that he turned himself into an
Ass, and Lucian was turned into an Ass, before he studi'd it.


Geom. O strange! but can a Spirit give Learning?


Magus. Oh, there was Hermolaus Barbarus, when he studied Philosophy, and
less understood any place, he would call up a Spirit to instruct him; so the
famous Cardans father carried one always in a Ring on his finger; and Agrippa
had his Dog with a Uncharacterized Collar.


Geom. But can you by your Art, tell me whether or no I shall have Astronomia?


Magus. Any thing.


Geom. How!


Magus. Why, I can do it by Coscinomancie.


Geom. What Is that?


Magus. By the turning of a Sieve.


Geom. But I have heard, that is only for things stolen.


Magus. Ah, it is more general, and that you shall see; stay here, I Will but step
forth. Exit Magus.


Geom. Well, this is the man whom the Heavens have ordained to make me happy;
O Venus, be favorable unto me, and I Will build thee a fayrer Temple then ever
the Ephesians directed to Diana. MAGVS enters.


Magus. Come Sir, here are Sheeres and a Sieve; I must fasten the Sheeres? now
do as I bid you; Hold up the side of the Sheeres with your finger. (he puts
the wrong finger) Nay, come, your middle-finger: So; now must I say a mystical
form of powerful words, and then name those that we suspect shall have her;
and amongst them name you also; and at whose name the Sieve turns, he shall
have her.


Geom. If it does not turn at mine, I shall die: 'pray make it turn at mine.


Magus. Nay, then it must go for nothing, for it must turn of its own
accord. Be silent now. Dies mies, Ieschet, been doefet, Dowim^, Enitemaus. Who
shall have Astronomia? Shall Poeta? (It stands still.) Who shall have
Astronomia? Shall Logicus?


Geom. He Is not in love with her, Sir; 'pray do not you put in him too.


Magus. O vile! peace; now must I begin again. Diet mies, Ieschet, Been
doefet, Dowima, Enitemaus. Who shall have Astronomia? Shall Poeta? (It stands
still.) Who shall have Astronomia? Shall Logicus? (It stands still.) Who shall
have Astronomia? Shall Geographus? (It moves a little.) Who shall have
Astronomia? Shall Geometres? (It turns round.) Shall he obtain her by
Coniuration? (It stands still.) Shall he obtain her by Medicine? (It moves a
little.) Shall he obtain her by Fascination? (It turns round.)


Geom. Georaetres falls down on his knees, and embraces Magus his knees.
Magus, what is mine is yours, goods, life, soul, and all: Venus, thy temple
shall be a mile in length; thy Image in it shall be greater then the Colossus at
Rhodes, it shall be all white Marble: The temple at Millaine shall look like
pale-faced ^^llow to it; it shall have as many pillars, as there are hours in
the year, and as many windows as there are minutes; and the Spire shall be
higher then Tenariffa, or the Tower of Babylon by eight score Measured surlongs
at the least. Magus, I have enough, I have enough.


Magus. Nay but, Sir, you must Measure your joy; diverse have died with
overmuch rejoicing, and so may you; and then you would both break your vow to the
Goddess, and lose your Love besides.


Geom. You say true.


Magus. Besides, you must use a means you see, Fascination; which you shall
use at the Banquet, which (you know) we are invited unto.


Geom. Nay, let me alone for looking on her; I Will look through her, and through
her; and make her as Perspectiue, as I am Solid.


Magus. Besides, there was a little moving, you saw, at the name of
Geographus: to signify he will be fair for her too. And again, there was a
little moving at the word Medicine, and therefore that must be used too: but
for that take you no care.


Geom. Well, you learned men put so many doubts -- but I care not, I shall have
her in the end: come, I Have enough, now let us go.


Magus. Measure your joy, I say.


Geom. You Are mine, you are mine, Astronomia, I Am in Heaven already;
Geographus may go travail again, and Poeta, in stead of Baies, may go wear
a Willow-garland.


Magus. Come, let us in. Exeunt Geometres and Magus.


ACTVS III. SCENA III.
LOGICVS, RHETORICA.
MArry, and I be thus troubled with you when you woo me, and seek to please;
what should I expect and we were married once?


Rhet. Nay, dearest Logicus, let not the excellency of your reason be so
severe, but that it may admit a gracious apprehension of a smiling love; let
not the exactnes of your wisdom be so regulated, but that it may express a
courteous acceptance of a Lovers admiration; let not --


Log. Nay, and you once fall to Set speeches, I am gone; I perceive you are not
for common talk; I wonder, now I think on it, in what Praedicament a woman's
tongue is; let us see: yet, what if I make it a Transcendent? and yet it cannot
be so, for it is neither vnum, nor verum, nor honum: 'faith, and't be in any
Praedicament, it shall be in Quantitate Continua, and that is opposite to
Discreta; or rather, since it is so irregular, and therefore can hardly be
admitted into any Order, I will count it that Monster in Nature, and
Contradiction of Philosophy, Infinitum in acta.


Rhet. Why lo, now your self has made a set speech; and thus whilst you
Reprehend, you Offend: whilst you Direct, you Neglect: whilst you Reform, you
Deforme: whilst you --


Log. Hey day! this is tick-tack: Here Is another shorter trick: well, I
perceive there is no other course -- which is your way?


Rhet. Which is your way?


Log. Do you speak first.


Rhet. Nay, do you speak first, you are the better Man.


Log. Why, mine lies this way.


Rhet. Why so does mine; we will go together.


Log. I, But I must go this way to do a little business first.


Rhet. Why so must I.


Log. But I must walk here alone a little to think on it first.


Rhet. Why, and I must walk here alone a little first.


Log. Why, then fare you well; I can think on my business by the way.


Rhet. Why, and I can very well think on my business by the way.


Log. Why, you woun't follow me? I am going to a Feast.


Rhet. Why, and I am going to a Feast.


Log. I am going to Ethicus.


Rhet. Why, and I am going to Ethicus.


Log. O you gods! which of you will come to deliver me? Well, if we must
together, and if you will stick so close unto me; yet, good Mistres Tongue, do
not cleave to the roof of my Mouth.


Rhet. No, no; your lip is all that I desire.

Exeunt Logicus and Rhetorica.
ACTVS III. SCENA IIII.
MVSICA at one door: GEOGRAPHVS and PHANTASTES at another. TAra, ding de ding,
ding de ding, lan, tan, dan, dido.


Geog. How now my nimble Crotchet? who was the first Fiddle-maker?


Mus. Thats's a question, Sir.


Geog. Why, for that reason I proposed it.


Mus. Why, for that reason you might have proposed many more.


Geog. I, but Answer.


Mus. I, but I must know first; it is a great controversy.


Geog. What then was the first kind of Instrument?


Mus. Why, that is as hard.


Geog. Why, I can tell.


Mus. What?


Geog. An Harp.


Mus. I but you're deceived, I rather think 'twas a Bagge-pipe.


Geog. A Bag-pipe? why prithee?


Mus. Why? marry, first understand this reason, and then I Will show you: You know
every Art both draws it is imitation from Nature, and labors to perfect it,
which it does by finding comforts to preserve it: Music then at the first was
found out as an antidote against grief: and by this means, when men were
grieved, they cried Oh, and there was one Note: then Hey-ho, there were two
Notes more. So, when they laughed, they observed three more by Ha, ha, ho. These
being first joined together, and afterward variously intermixed, were the first
harmony in voice; which being repeated unto grieved minds, were as it were a
pretty deluding of their sorrows; and these by observation were afterward
reduced to instrument --


Geog. I conceit it, Musica.


Mus. Thus, men perceiving that these notes were conceived in the belly, and
afterward, (as it were) formed in the passage of the throat, sowed Leather in
the form of a Belly, or bag; and with a Reed made a long Neck unto it, and
a Winde-pipe; which when they blew full of wind, and perceived it gave no
sound, they cut many holes in the reed to let it out, and then alternately
stopping the holes, they found an admirable variety of harmony; and as the
holes serve for distinction of notes in a Winde-instrument, so do your frets
on a String'd-instrument.


Geog. Indeed I think this a truth; for as the voice was before the
Instrument, so the Winde-instrument before the string'd. But then how came your
Trumpet up?


Mus. Why, on this manner: When Triton came to help the gods in the Wars of
the Giants, he wanted a weapon, and finding the shell of a Fish, he did blow
in it, which yielded a most hideous noise: the Giants thinking it had been some
terrible beast, fled away affrighted, and since by a perfecting imitation, men
have altered both the matter, and the form of that Instrument.


Geog. Nay, I do believe there is a great virtue in Music.


Mus. O Sir, it is your only medicine of the mind.


Geog. Indeed I think so, and that is the reason, it is likely, why Apollo is
the god both of Music and Physic: and now I remember it, in one place where
we came, in our travails, there were no Physicions, but all their sick folks
were cured by Music; where was it, Phantastes? I have quite forgot.


Phant. Why 'twas in Creet Sir, where Jupiter was nursed, and the Music was
made with those Kettle-drums, which they sounded to drown the crying of
Jupiter, when he was in his swathe-bands: in reward of which love, he procured
of Apollo, in the favor of the Cretians, that at the sound of those
Kettle-drummes all sick folks, whose time of death was not come, should
without any languishing sickness immediately recover; and therefore the order
is, when any one is sick, they carry him presently in a Litter to the Temple
where these Drums are kept; and if he does not straight-wayes recover, they
carry him home again, as a man that must dye, and so provide for his funeral.


Mus. Where is this Sir? in Creet?


Phant. Yes, in Creet.


Mus. I, but I have heard, the Cretians are mighty liars.


Phant. Upon the Faith of a Trauellour, the Honesty of a Courtier, and the
Word of a Gentleman, it is a most confirmed truth.


Mus. Indeed these three are much about one value.


Geog. Well, Musica, I could talk with thee all day --


Phant. I, and all night too.


Geog. But I cannot stay now; I Am afraid they stay for me at the banquet. Is
thy Mistress there?


Music. Yes, I think, by this time.


Geog. Well, farewell till anon: you will meet us at supper? woun't you?


Music. Yes, yes; I Am going for Music. Exit Geogra.


Phant. Come, my pretty Pigeon, let us bill a little; is it possible, Phantastes
and Musica should meet, and part without a kiss? -- now farewell. Exit
Phantastes.


Music. Ah: these Courtiers are lycourish-lip'd: but I must go fetch the
Music, To ra ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan dan dido. Exit Musica.


ACTVS III. SCENA V.
ETHICVS, GEOMETRES, LOGICVS, POETA, GRAMMATICVS, MAGVS, ASTRONOMIA,
ARITHMETICA, RHETORICA, ASTROLOGIA, CHOLER.
WElcome, welcome, all of you; i'good faith, I Am even young again, to see such
a jolly company of my friends together: but, passion of me! why, Oeconoma?


Oecon. I, I, presently, presently, She speaks from within. wee'r making all
haste we can.


Ethic. Ah, there is a good huswife, neither meat oth' table, nor cloth laid,
nor any thing in a readiness. Good friends pardon us, we are somewhat
unmannerly to make you stay thus; we will talk till supper is served in; but
where is Geographus? Enter GEOGRAPHVS and PHANTASTES. Oh here is; welcome,
welcome.


Geogr. Thanks, They all salute him, and he them mutually, especially the
Ladies. courteous Ethicus -- save you gallants -- fair Ladies --


Ethic. Phantastes, and Choler, [ Enter MVSICA] and thou Musica, now thou art
come, be a little forward to make a supply for our backwardness, and step in
to my wife to help out supper quickly: (Exeunt Phantast. Choler, and Musica)
why it is well, it is well, now it is as it should be, all friends, all friends:
but where is Historia?


Rhet. Historia? why, ask Poeta.


Poet. Me?


Rhet. I, you; they say she is sick of love.


Ethic. Poeta, where is your man Melancholico?


Poet. Faith, when I was coming hither, he was in a dump, and therefore I
thinking him not fit to come to a banquet, left him behind me; and indeed
that is his fault, he will not commonly be merry in company.


Ethic. Logicus, where is your man Phlegmatico?


Logic. Faith, as I was coming, my Slauerer was at his Tobacco, but, I think,
I made him smoke for his labor, and so would not let him come, for he would
nothing but have spawl'd in your room, Phantastes, Choler, Musica, bring in
Supper. and have turned your stomakes.


Choler. Well, remember this Phantastes.


Phant. What?


Choler. That you carry in the march-pane and not I, but I Will --


Phant. What? amn't I the better man?


Choler. Would supper were done: I Would bumme you.


Geogr. What Is the matter?


Phant. Why, Sir, he is angry that I brought in the marchpane.


Geogr. Phantastes, Choler, Musica, go out again Come, be mannerly.


Gram. Why, sirrah, Choler, will you still be quarrelling?


Ethic. You should let him be my man a little; faith I should be as froward as
he; we two should have a bickering once a day. (Choler to Phantast. as they
come in with more service.


Choler. I would supper were done once for your sake.


Gram. Why, sirrah, are you still grumbling?


Oecon. Come, friends, you are all welcome, we have made you stay here too-long
for a little sorry cheer; come husband will you place the guests?


Ethic. Sit down, you know your places; sit down (they all sit down) wife,
bid them welcome.


Oecon. You are all heartily welcome, heartily welcome.


Ethic. Why, Musica, where are the Musicians?


Music. Here, Sir, here.


Ethic. Come on, play, feed you our ears, whilst we seed our bellyes. The
music plays; Geographus drinks to Astronomia; she to Geome^^^^; he to
Arithmetica she to Astrologia; she drinks to Astronomia, then ^^ally casts in
a powder: which being done, Phantastes sings.


Phant. O Happy state
Above power of fate
Which you, blessed Arts, enjoy!
You were little Gods,
If you fell not at ods,
And did not your selves annoy.
But when pride does once tickle,
It makes us too fickle
And vain:
Till some good Old-men
Do temper us then,
And bring us in tune again.
Then learn of me
Thus wise to be
To have a yielding mind;
With weather-cocke art
To play well your part
And turn with each strong wind.
So you shall by prevention
Escape all contention
And iars:
So you shall be secure,
And never endure
The affliction of Learned wars.
O harmless feast
With Mirth increast,
Where Music and Love do meet!
Where the Piper does find
A more delicate wind
To make his pipe sound more sweet:
Whiles his stick does belabour
The head of his Tabour
Amain.
Where the Wine in the boules,
And every tongue roules,
Yet never disturbs the brain.
Jove's Trojan boy
Was no such joy,
Nor all his Heavenly whores:
There Is no such delight
By day or by night
E're felt by feigning wooers;
As is the soft pleasure
At such honest leisure
To sport:
When all are so merry,
They sing till they are weary,
And trippe it in comely sort.

Ethic. Here, Logicus, you shall drink to Poeta,


Logic. I accept your Proposition, Sir; Poeta, to set a Conclusion to our
former dissentions, and to make a plain Demonstration of reconcilement, I
drink to you. He drinks.


Poet. With the most ingenuous freedom of a Poet, I accept it: Grammaticus,
that our contention ending in love, may make a Tragike-Comedie, I drink to
you. He drinks.


Gram. I protest to you, Sir, I do put all former wrongs in the
praeter-plu-perfect Tence, and am glad of this happy Conjunction, and that we
are all of us in such a merry Mood: but by the way, my Masters, these
Noune-Adiectiues of the Foeminine gender, sit all this while vn-drunke to:
Astronomia. He offers to drink to Astronomia. --


Astron. Intruth, Grammaticus, I am not in Case to pledge you: I pledged
Astrologia even now, and I am not since half well.


Gram. Arithmetica --


Arith. If you Count again, you shall find that I drunk last.

Rhetorica -- here is to moysten your eloquent tongue.


Rhet. An eloquent tongue is never dry, Astrologia will pledge you for me.


Gram. Astrologia --


Astrol. In troth I have been drinking my Belly full of Nectar; but just now,
my thoughts were upon the present Conjunction of Mars and Venus.


Poet. Why how now, Grammaticus! who do you drink to? faith thou art now a
Noune Substantive indeed, for thou standst alone by thy self, without being
joined to any of these Adjectives.


Gram. Nay, do not you jest.


Poet. What? do thou make a Iester of me?


Mag. Nay, I Conjure you both; by our present meeting, that you go not out of
the Circle of harmless mirth.


Poet. Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometres to
Astronomia's.


Mag. Nay, will you, Poeta? you make Astronomia blush.


Poet. Some Aqua vitae, I say, for Geometres.


Mag. Why, Poeta?


Poet. Why, he is a dying I think, his eyes are fixed in's head already.


Mag. It may be, Poeta, you measure Geometres his looks by your own.


Poet. Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometres to
Astronomia's.


Astron. I Am even stifled, I do not use to be in such a close Room, I love
the Open Air.


Oecon. Alas! Astronomia's extreme ill. Exeunt Astronomia and Oeconoma.


Ethic. Friends, you are all heartily welcome, rest you here I pray, and we will
in with her. Exit Ethicus.


Mag. Astrologia, follow her, and see you be never from her all the while
she is sick.


Astrol. I saw this disastrous chance in the stars, for as Mars and Venus
were sporting, they were beheld by the rest of the envious gods. Exit.


Rhet. I Will in too, to sit and Talk with her, whiles she is sick. Exit
Rhetorica.


Arith. I Will in too, that I may --


Geogr. Be made sit down again.


Music. Alas, my Mistress!


Geogr. She did not look well.


Music. Astronomia sick? then all the Heauen's awry, and my Musike's quite out
of tune. Exit Musica.


Geogr. 'Twas, I fear me, a fit of an Ague.


Mag. Astronomia in a fit of an Ague? I never understood the Motus
trepidationis of the Heaven before.


Geogr. Musicians, depart the room. The Musicians go out.


Poet. By Jove I came to be merry, and I will be merry. Here Is an health to
Astronomia. He drinks.


Geog. Here Is a health to Astronomia. He drinks.


Geom. Here Is a health to Astronomia. He drinks.


Poet. Sir, you wrong us all, not to take off your full measure.


Geom. Oh, Sir, they that drink with Measure, drink without Measure.


Arith. I, indeed, for they that Number their cups, commonly Multiply their
cups.


Poet. He loves not Astronomia, that does not pledge her a whole one.


Geom. Well, because it is to her, I Will do it, He drinks.


Logic. I cannot drink.


Gram. Nor I.


Mag. Nor I.


Arith. You woun't, I know, require it of me.


Poet. Well, and you woun't, here is to you that will: A second health to
Astronomia. He drinks.


Geogr. A second health to Astronomia. He drinks.


Geom. A second health to Astronomia. He drinks.


Phant. By Jove I must be merry, and I will be merry; can you sing?


Geogr. Begin, we will follow.


Geom. Begin, we will follow.


Poet. Have at you then.

FIll up my boule to the brim-a,
That my lips in wine may swim-a;
That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my boule to the brimme-a

Poeta. Geog. Geom. simul. That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my bowl to the brimme-a.

Geog. He Is a puny cannot swagger,
Carouse and yet never stagger,
But be soberly drunk
And closely have his punke:
He Is a puny cannot swagger.

Geog. Poeta. Geom. simul. But he soberly drunk
And closely have his punke:
He Is a puny cannot swagger.

Geom. O my Jacobs staff is broken,
And that's a disast'rous token,
My Compasses did slide,
My Ruler slipped aside:
O my Jacobs staff is broken.

Geom. Geog. Poeta. simul. My Compasses did slide
My Ruler slipped aside
O my Iacobs-staffe is broken.

Poeta. Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna,
And still that sport we will beginn-a,
That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.

Poeta. Geog. Geom. simul. That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.

Poeta. Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Geog. Here Is a health to Astronomia.


Geom. Here Is a health to Astronomia. Prithee Poeta do thou sing a Catch
alone, and we will sing the Close with thee.


Poeta. A match, hay boys.

THe black Jacke
The merry black Jack
As it is tossed on by-a
Grows,
Flows,
Till at last they fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.

Poeta. Geog. Geom. simul. -- Grows,
Flows,
Till at last the fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.
The brown bowl,
The merry brown bowl,
As it goes round about-a.
Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.

Poeta. Geog. Geom. simul. -- Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.

Poeta. The deep Can
The merry deep Can
As thou do freely quaffe a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And Sound a lusty laugh a.

Poeta. Geog. Geom. simul. Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And sound a lusty laugh a.

Poet. Here Is a health to Astronomia. He drinks.


Geogr. Faith, I can drink no more, Poeta.


Geom. Nor I.


Poet. How? not pledge me? Choler, fill the bowl again; by Jove, not pledge
me? pledge me, pledge me, Geographus: for by Jove --


Geogr. What?


Poet. I will drink with thee, and I will sing with thee, and I will fight
with thee.


Mag. Nay, 'pray let us have no fighting.


Poet. By Jove. I will drink with thee, I will sing with thee, and I will
fight with thee.


Geogr. By Jove you're almost foxt.


Poet. By Jove (He drinks) you lowsie-shirted rogue, you sit above me? did not
you beg entertaynment of me the other day?


Geogr. Sleep, sleep, Poeta. Exit Geographus.


Phant. A rope of a drunken fool; I Have lost my supper by this: I must follow
my Master. Exit Phant.


Poet. Ten-toes, I know you're a good footman; Come, Geometres, I hope you will
sit squarely to it still.


Geom. Nay, if I cannot Rule others, I will Rule my self. Exit Geometres.


Arith. And if Geometres depart, Arithmetica will be none of the Number. Exit
Arith.


Poet. Farewell, Hostess; we shall be sure to have no reckoning now
Arithmetica's gone: and yet I Will pay you somewhat, Clinch-fist. (He beats
Logicus, and ouer-turnes the Table; then falls on Grammaticus, and Choler.) Hay
tables! Hay!


Logic. Well, you drunken rogue, I Will have an Opposition for you before Polites,
that you shall not be able to Answer to. Exit Logicus.


Poet. Farewell block-head: now pae-da-gog, pa-da-gog: I must say my Part to
you too.


Gram. I, but, I cannot stay to Hear you, now.


Poet. Choler, will not you fight for your Master, valiantly?


Choler. No, I thank you, Sir, your moisture does allay my heat. Exit Choler.


Poet. Are you all gone? then, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. I am
King, I am King: by Tantalus I am as dry as an Horse. He falls down and
sleeps. Magus charms him. O, some drink, some drink.


Mag. Alte dormi, Irioni, Chiriori, Essera, Chuder, Fere; Pax, Caspor, Prax,
Melchior, Max, Balthazar, Ymax, Adimax, Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galdat, Hax,
pax, max, alte dormi. Poeta snores: Magus waves his rod over him, and runs
round about him. Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho; O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. Dragons fly
swiftly, Dragons fly swiftly.


ACTVS III. SCENA VI.
MAGVS, PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES, POETA.
Omnes. Dancing about Poeta. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O,
ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.


Magus. They go leisurely about him, saying this charm. Ye gods that dwell
In darkest cell
Of lowest Hell,

Physiog. Vouchsafe this grace
A little space
To guard this place.

Cheito. Let now a deep
And moystning sleep
His watch here keep.

Magus. We would obtain
This, for this swain,
Whom wine does chain.

Physiog. That so since day
Is fled, we may
Make him our pray.

Omnes. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, Dancing about him.
ho, ho, ho, hoy --


Poeta. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. In his sleep.


Cheiro. What a Rogue's this? he laughes at us in his Dream.


Poeta. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho: In his sleep. Some drink,
Tantalus, some drink, some drink; or I will --


Phys. What will he do?


Poeta. By the -- by the --


Mag. He Is about to swear sure by somewhat.


Poeta. By the great -- By the great --


Cheiro. He will swear by the Great.


Poeta. By the great -- By the great --


Phys. It Is so great 'twoun't come out.


Poeta. By the great Hogs-head at Heidelburge, Logicus is a Blockhead.


Phys. Well said in faith, I perceive there is some remembrance of ones friends
in Wine.


Poeta. Corinna, will you kiss? will you kiss cockle-kisse? close, close, you
Whore.


Mag. Oh, here is a brave Dreamer!


Poeta. I will make this Verse like a Nut-hooke-like a Nut-hooke-and then pull
down -- pull down the Moon with it. He begins to rise.


Phys. Sure, Magus, you have not charmed him well.


Mag. Let me alone; I warrant you.


Poeta. Come kiss, my Pigeon, come kiss, my pretty Corinna, Nibble a little,
my Love; nibble again, and again.


Mag. Hay day! he is at's Hexameter and Pentameter Verses in our tongue: 'saith
I think in some such humor this kind of Verses was first made amongst us.


Poeta. My purse is richer the^ the Mines rich India brings forth.


Cheiro. You shall not need to make a short Verse to that Sir: we will be very
short with you. He is about to pick his pocket.


Poeta. Take off your whole one, or take a sowse of the chops. Poeta strikes
Cheiromantes


Cheiro. Beshrow his drunken fingers; Magus you have not charmed him well.


Mag. Alte dormi, pax, prax, max; alie dormi, Galbos, Galbat: Galdes, Galdat:
pax, prax, max, alte dormi. Poeta falls down again.


Phys. See what is in his pocket. Cheiromantes takes out a purse and looks in
it.


Cheiro. A murren on it, here is nothing but a Purse with a paper in it.


Mag. Let Us see it, why, what is here? Verses! He takes the paper and reads it.

ANACREONS (...), etc. Translated by me upon occasion of Ethicus his inuiting
me to Supper.

The fruitful Earth does drink the rain;
Trees drinks the fruitful Earth again.
The Sea does drink the liquid Air;
By the Suns beams the Sea-waues are
Drunk up; which is no sooner done,
But straight the Moon drinks up the Sun.
Why then, companions, do you think
I may not with like freedom drink?
This had been lost, if I had not given the Rogue his Anacreon again. Is this
the rich Purse? Come, 'ifaith we will even serve for a Voyder, and carry him
away, whiles he is drunk, rid the room of him.


Omnes. Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet. Exeunt Omnes,
carrying away Poeta on their shoulders.


ACTVS IIII.
SCENA. I.
POLITES, GEOGRAPHVS.
ANd have you been in Italy too?


Geog. In the most parts of the World, Sir.


Polites. You have disposed your observations by heads! have you not?


Geog. They are yet Sir but a miscellany, but I am now in reducing of them.


Polites. And what may the sum of them be?


Geog. Sir, they are principally drawn from the People, and Country:
discoursing upon the policy, and natural disposition of the first; as on the
situation, and fertility of the second.


Polites. Hum, the method is sufficiently approoueable: but I like that very
well that you place Policy first; and would wish you to prosecute that fully,
with the most subtle examinations of your purest judgment: 'twill be worth
your travail: and it is a maine fault of your common Geographers, that
now-a-dayes do rather garnish the margin of a Map, then materially describe
it; and only draw a company of lines through it; as if they had rid over the
Country to take notice only of the highways; which yet a Carriers Horse
knows better then they; neglecting in the mean time more solid observations;
whilst their fancies (I will not say judgments) are weakly satisfied with
these fruitless superficialities; not unlike your sedentary Students, who for
the attaining of a little glory with some few less judicious of their own
Sect, stirred up with a contemplative ambition, earnestly prosecute those
studies, which themselves shall never reduce unto practice, in the actions of
their life.


Geog. Sir, the observation of government was my first and principal
intendment, especially in some secrets of state, as yet (to my knowledge) not
observed, at least not revealed by any.


Polites. As what?


Geog. I will show unto you.


Polites. But how could you come unto the knowledge of them?


Geog. You shall understand that too. The secret is concerning the happy
detection of such, as from enemy-states, are usually sent to the subversion of
a Land; my means of attayning to the knowledge of this Mystery, was my
acquaintance with a Gentleman in Italy, who having been one of the most
practiced Intelligencers in Europe, upon the death of his Lord, who employed
him, fell into great wants; when, out of the fullness of a grieved mind, and
the rather to excite in me a compassion of his griefs, unfolded unto me the
whole secret.


Polites. Proceed.


Geog. The Italian Lord, that employed this Gentleman, furnished him always
with money, that he might cast himself into what shape he would, then sent
him to the enemies Land, where living, (either concealing his own Country, or
professing a dislike of it) and insinuating himself into the acquaintance of
men next to the best, would, commonly by entertaining their humors, and giving
occasion of such discourse at any meeting, with much Art and ease, allure every
man, to discover (even for glory, to show who could show most) all intended and
secret employments into foreign Lands; by this means he would learn the
whole design, agent, time, and whatsoever other necessary circumstance; then
the person to be employed, being commonly of estate not beyond himself, he
would upon some sought (though but slight) occasion, grow so far acquainted
with him, as to entreat the courtesy of Nations of him, to carry a Letter from
him to that Country; which being with all courtesy granted, he would, against
the time of his departure, provide a Letter fairly written, containing nothing
but some complement, or lighter business to his friend --


Polites. Who? to his Lord?


Geog. No, Sir, but to another agent, whom his Lord employed at home, as this
Gentleman abroad.


Polites. Proceed then.


Geog. VVithall giving his friend in charge, upon their love, to give all
courteous entertainment to the bearer thereof; as, to provide him a fit
lodging, with all other complements of friendship: then reading this Letter to
the Gentleman, to free him from all suspicion of false dealing, would seal it
in his presence, and deliver it to him --


Polites. What device was there-in this?


Geog. This Letter, Sir, being written by the Art of Steganography, contained
the whole intendement of this imployd Messenger. That Art (as Trithemius has at
large discovered, or rather taught it) proceeds upon many devices, as the
putting together every first letter of a word, or every last, or every second,
according to the compact before laid between these two friends. Upon the
receipt of which, proceeded first a most courteous entertayning, and then upon
the maturitie of his intendements, an artificial detection of al his designs.


Polites. All this bears a just probability of truth. Well, Geographus, we
shall take a further notice of your wants and worth; and since you have
ingeniously discovered both your free education, present state, and unavoidable
affection to Astronomia, and, as you say, hers mutually to you, I shall, I
trust, effectually, in your behalf, remove the unwillingness of her Mother
Physica. But withal, I hold it a course, not altogether without Policy, to
inquire of Astronomia, the dislikes, for which she does except against you, and
therein by a praeuenient discretion, exactly to manifest a reformation; for
this time the expectation of some business admits not a further continuance of
our discourse.


Geog. I shall rest, Sir, at the bounty of your virtue.


Exit Geographus. Polites. A Gentleman of parts worth the taking notice of;
well, such wits must be nourisht: it is the saying of my Tacitus: Ingenia,
studique oppresseris facilius quam reuocaueris; and I remember he there shows
an analogy between men's wits and their bodies: They are (says he) both of
them long a making, but soon marred. And indeed, young wits that are worth
the nourishing, when they see themselves neglected, are too-too prone to fall
to desperate resolutions, arguing thus with themselves, That if Virtue and
Learning cannot advance them; by a reason from the contrary, neither Vice nor
Ignorance can debase them; thus from bad premises drawing a worse conclusion,
they overthrow in a moment the workmanship of many years. But my Kins-woman
Historia said she would be here by this. Oh, here she comes.


ACTVS IIII. SCENA II.
POLITES, HISTORIA.
NOw Cousin, what? always sad? always sad?


Histo. Do you admire at my sadness, when you know, nay when you are the
cause of it?


Polites. I? Cousin? how? how?


Histo. Your continual declamations, Sir, against my most loved Poeta, a man
whose praises admit no Hyperbole; no, they transcend all; and whose worth we
may admire rather then express.


Polites. Why Cousin? my declamations have been only against his faults, not
his person, and so far --


Histo. Nay, for your State-distinctions you may reserve them to your self,
you can love and hate the same man at the same time by a distinction; I do but
plainly relate the truth unto you, and I think there is hardly any man could
more violently have inueigh'd against him then your self; excepting old
froward Ethicus; his age indeed must always be correcting some body.


Polites. Why, but why should you regard him, when it seems he little regards
you?


Histo. Marry, and little reason he has, when he sees the best of my friends,
your self, and Ethicus to neglect him. But otherwise I Am sure he did love me
once: there have bin of the Historias that have been well beloved by Poets,
and those the most renowned in all ages: as by admired Homer, the greatest
glory and Shame of Greece, the one for his worth, the other for his wants: then
by divine Maro, that beautiful wonder of Nature; and especially by one Lucan,
a worthy Gentleman of Rome, besides many more; that if you would vouchsafe but
to grace him, his Laurel would be the crown of your glory.


Polites. I but he bears love to Astronomia.


Hist. I understand so much: but I think that rather the exiliency of some
passion, then any consistency of a settled desire. I have indeed heard also of
some of the Astronomias that have been beloved by Poets; as by Manilius,
Pontanus, and some other, who have written whole Books in the praise of their
beauties; but it seems their beauties had such small divinity in them, that
they could not raise, to any height of poeticke rapture, the wits of their
admirers. And there was also one Lucretius, a Roman Gentleman, in former times
that fell in love with Physica, she from whom Physica the mother of Astronomia
deriues now both her name and lineage, which Gentleman, in the passion of his
love, writ books in the praise of her beauty; but what wrinkle-fac'd Verses
they are, let the present age judge; and if her beauty was like his lines,
sure she was past her Threescore, when he fell in love with her; but alas,
there was never any of that family that ever came near the Historias for
beauty.


Polites. Well, Cousin, then what is the employment wherewith you will task
me?


Hist. Why, if you mean to have me alive long, change your dislike of Poeta
into love, and reform him if you will, but not hate him; admonish him, entreat
him, woo him, and in a word, win him unto me; and those hymns of your
praises, and relations of your glory shall be put in the mouth of posterity;
that sooner shall the Commonwealth dye, then your fame.


Polites. Well, Cousin, you have now enough admonisht me, entreated me, wooed
me, and in a word won me: refer the finding out of means, and the
accomplishing of your desire to the priuacie of my meditations.


Histor. Reverend Polites, pardon the unmannerliness of my disordered
passions; love resisted grows rude and furious: but I will not instruct your
wisdom; only remember my life lies in your hands.

Exit Historia.
Polites. And that shall not perish if I can save it. There are many
accusations in against this Poeta, and some of them I perceive will be
prosecuted; he has bad, and good parts; he has a wild head, yet may be
reformed, and then there is a man saved: a good purchase; nay, Historia is
saved, that is a double. Well, then since I must love him, I will save him: if
he prove good, I win two; if bad, 'twill be but the loss of one, of
Historia; who already professes, that, without him, she shall be lost.

Exit Polites.
ACTVS IIII. SCENA III.
ASTRONOMIA, ASTROLOGIA, ARITHMETICA, POETA, MEDICVS, MVSICA.
OH, I Am so hot, I could drink a whole River of water.


Poeta. Nay, if you talk of drinking, I could drink my self half a doozen
Helicons off at a draught: Musica, fetch a flaggon of Wine.


Astron. Nay, let it be pure Water.


Med. Have a care what you do: it is as much as your life's worth.


Poeta. By Jove we will have our liquor about us. Go Wench, why, Sir, should
not she drink?


Med. Why, to drink in the heat of an Ague is present death; and I remember
Galen in his Book de consuetudine, relates a Story of Arius a Peripateticke,
who dyed suddenly, being forced to drink a full draught of cold water in the
hea^ of his Fever; though according to the prescriptions of his Physicians:
yet, I confess, in him there was another adioyn'd cause, which Galen in the
same place makes mention of, to wit, his stomach being always very cold, he
resolved on a perpetual abstinence from all cold nourishments, so that this
aduentitious cold of the water he drank, wrought not only against his
disease, but also against his constitution.


Poeta. Oh that was it, that was it; then fill out the liquor.


Med. You Poets would make mad Physicians; or at the best but desperate
Paracelsians; But Astronomia, you stir too much; and so the heat of your
disease increases to an inflammation: you must rest more, you must rest more.


Astron. Nay, I shall never live, if I leave moving.


Med. I, but not so fast; you walk as fast as you do when you are in health.


Astrol. Indeed, me thinks, she keeps always the same pace.


Arith. I, but if you mark it, it is not a direct Progression, but a kind of
giddie turning Round, which proceeds from a lightness of the head, caused by
her disease.


Med. I dislike your diet; for in the very hottest of Summer, when the Sun
is in Cancer, you eat the hottest meat, feeding altogether upon Crab; which
two concurrent heates of the Meat and of the Weather, are able to cast any man
into the inflammation of a Fever.


Astron. Indeed, I confess that; and it is at that season, my only diet.


Med. I, but it is bad; and again it is very good to feed upon variety of meat.


Poeta. Say you so! marry, I think, you will prove a paradoxicall Paracelsian
your self; if you hold such Tenants: for you know, Sir, it is the most received
opinion of Physicians, that variety of meats disturbes concoction.


Med. Sir, I hold that opinion rather to argue the Authors superstition, then
judgment: for our nature delights in variety, and those meats which the
stomach does with pleasure desire, it does most embracingly attract, and
concoct most faithfully, besides the substance of our bodies consisting of a
various nature, as moisture, air, and the like, one of these parts may be more
spent then another, by labor, or other means; so that a man had need, for the
undoubted supply of all these parts, receive a great variety of nourishments,
that there may be a reparation for whatsoever the body does euacuate.


Poeta. I understand Sir.


Med. Besides, Astronomia, going abroad you never take care in what Air you
walk.


Astron. Indeed, I confess, I am too neglectiue of that.


Med. Oh, that is a chief matter to be provided for; for the very same air
sometimes is hurtful for one part of the body, and good for another.


Poeta. How? is that possible?


Med. Sir, it is a truth observed by Guido Cauliacensis; and in particular of
the air of Paris; where, if the same man have a wound in his head, and another
in his thigh; it hurts the one and heales the other.


Poeta. That Is pretty in faith: the reason, the reason, Master Physician.


Med. It Is thus, Sir, the air there is cold and moist, and therefore most
hurtful for the head; and again, the same air by an obscuration of the
spirits, a degrauation of the blood, and a condensation of the humors, whereby
they are made less quick to flow down, does therefore make the wounds of the
thighs more curable, whiles the course of the humors is intercepted, whose
defluence or flowing down would hinder the cure of the wound.


Poeta. You Physicians, I perceive, sometimes have some of Apollo in you.


Mus. Pray, Medicus, tell me one thing; you are a Physician; I have heard
Geographus relate of a place in his Travels, where the people are healed by
Music: is that possible?


Med. O yes: I Will confirm it by mine own experience: I knew a young Gentle man
that married a young Gentlewoman; who being extraordinarily fair, and he as
melancholy, grew into a great jealousy, that she had made him a Cuckold, upon
which conceit, at the first but light, the strength of his melancholy and
jealousy working together; he fell into a strong persuasion that he had
Horns: the best Physicians were sent for, used all medicines and inventions to
cure him, nothing prevailed, whereupon they left him, entreating his wife to be
patient, and expect his recovery in time. Away they went, and none but a
little boy was left in the room to tend the Gentleman, when upon a sudden
there comes me by, a Bag-pipe-player, at the sound of whose Pipe the Gentleman
suddenly arose, leapes about the Chamber, beats his head against the wall,
so long, till at last he had broke his face in diverse places that the blood
gushed out; upon the effusion of which melancholy blood, that had corrupted his
brain and fantasy, the Gentleman's Horns were beaten off against the wall,
and the Gentlewoman became as honest a woman after that time, as any in Europe.


Poeta. In good faith, you Physicians are the only fellows in the world to
tell Tales by Gentlewomens Bed-sides, whiles they are sick.


Mus. I, this Cure was by the effusion of blood, but they whom Geographus told
of, were healed without any such means.


Med. I Will satisfy you in that by another particularitie of experience: I knew
another Gentleman, who being very sick of a contagious disease, and finding no
remedy by Medicine, the Physicians caused Musicians to be brought into the
room, and play; at the hearing of which Music, he suddenly leapes and
continued dancing so long, till the laborious exagitation of his whole body,
had by sweat and breathing dissipated the contagion.


Poeta. I wonder you Physicians do not turn Trauailors, you would have an
advantage beyond them all, by making good your Relations, by giving a reason
for them.


Med. O by no means, Sir; for if we should travail into foreign Lands, our
skill would there fail us; by reason of the difference of the Country, and
our ignorance of their constitutions and diet.


Astron. Musica, some drink; me thinks, I have not one jot of moisture in me.


Med. Musica, fetch none, she shall drink no more.


Astron. I must drink, the World was not in such a combustion at Phaeton's
driving the Chariot of the Sun, as I am in now.


Astrol. Come, come, Medicus, the strictness of your prescriptions must be
dispensed with, a little.


Med. Will you spoil her, Astrologia?


Astrol. I Will warrant you, she will never dye of this disease, I have calculated
her Nativity, to know so much beyond your Art: the sixth House of her
Horoscope, wherein all her diseases are Prefiguratiuely registered, promises a
better issue of her sickness then so: besides, she shall have an happy
Womb, for I find in her Horoscope, Venus in her Exaltation, to wit, in Pisces,
and Jupiter in the fifth House, the Radiation of Venus falling on the First
House, and of Jupiter on the Eleventh, Luna being in the Seventh, illustrating
the Fifth House with a Sextile Radiation; she shall have a beautiful Daughter,
her name shall be Optica: there shall appear at her Birth four Suns, and as
many Rain-bowes, and the Air ouer-against these Rain-bowes, shall seem to be
full of Looking-glasses, and in the middle of each Rainbow shall appear a
Peacockes tail, which being reflected from the Looking-glasses, shall project
an infinity of colors in the Air.


Med. Astronomia, you go too much, you will never leave your Walking, and if
Copernicus were alive again, 'ifaith he would make you stand still.


Astron. Some drink. She drinks and falls.


Music. Help, Astronomia falls.


Poeta. Marie, Heavens forbid.


Medic. I, here is your drink.


Arith. Ah, Astrologia, you made no Reckoning of this sickness, I shall scarce
e're trust you again, as long as I know you: Come, let us have her in, let us
have her in. Exeunt omnes.


ACTVS IIII. SCENA IIII.
MAGVS, PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES.
NOw my sweet Devils, I am even sick with expecting when Medicus will come and
visit me: I fear, his physic cannot work upon Poeta: that rogues Verses, I
think, are a counter-charme against all our coniurations: a rope on his
sixe-footed lousy Hexameters: sure, the slaves skin is enchanted; the quilting
of Ajax shield was but a thin Cheu'rill to it.


Physiog. Why, but do you think it is impenetrable?


Magus. Oh, far tougher then a Tanners: I have heard of a Poet, that having
been buried a matter of two or three hundred years, has been taken up again
whole, without the least perishing of his skin, as fair as any Vellome.


Cheiro. Nay, by this Hand, I hold them to be everlasting villains.


Physiog. And I know by his looks, if he once settle his affection upon a
wench, he will pursue her more swiftly then ever Apollo did Daphne; for he will
overtake her before her Metamorphosis.


Cheiro. I, and I know the rascal to have a soft and moist Hand, by which I
also infallibly know he loves: for take a Poet without his wine and his wench;
and if he make not dry, pitiful dry Verses, I Will forswear Fortune-telling as
long as I live.


Magus. But, I hope, that wench shall not be Astronomia.


Physiog. Never fear that: I have seriously observed (taking an opportunity the
other day to look on her) the whole composure of her Face; and first for her
beauty, I must confess it absolute; for there are the two causes of all
beauty; a most exquisite Symmetrie, or correspondent commensuration of the
parts; and an exact mixture of colors, which adds unto the proportion an
incomprehensible pulchritude: since which time, I have taken a like view of
Geographus and Geometres; now for their heights, Geographus is somewhat lower
then she; but Geometres is of her pitch just; for the lines of proportion in
their faces, I must confess, I can hardly judge which is most like her, well,
I hope yet 'twill be Geometres, or if Geographus do win her, 'twill be by his
comely deportment: 'faith I wish him well, but we must work for them that
feel us in the fist.


Magus. Well, Ravens, croke here, and whosoe'r comes by, make a prey of him; in
the mean time I Will to Astrologia, for I know not what is the reason on it, but my
Spirits cannot inform me of any thing she does, so that I must of necessity
to Astrologia, to know how things proceed: but there is one Galilaus an
exquisite Mathematicean, an Italian: whom I came very lately acquainted with,
by admirable luck; and he has promised to help me to a glass, by which I
shall see all things as perfectly represented in Astronomia's house, as if I
were there: till which time I must take the pains to have it by relation; but
to your charge, to your charge; croke Ravens, croke.


ACTVS IIII. SCENA V.
PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES, SANGVIS.
Cheiro. HEre comes some body, Physiognomus; set a good Face on it and Affront
him; and I Will set my Fingers a work, presently.


Physiog. Hold thy Hands there, it is Sanguis, he is of our side, stay a little.


Sang. Well, I shrowdly suspect my Master for this physic: but mum, I am
o're-heard, I fear.


Physiog. How now, Sanguis? why do thou blush so?


Sang. Do I blush?


Cheiro. I Am sure thou look as red as fire; I think all the Blood in thy
body is in thy face.


Sang. Well, well, all your words will not make me a jot redder then I am: but,
if you talk of blushing, I think you have more need to blush, if you knew the
report that goes of you.


Physiog. Of us?


Sang. I, of you; but especially of Cheiromantes.


Cheiro. Of me? what?


Sang. Nothing, but that you are a Cutpurse.


Cheiro. I defy mine accusers, and I call honesty it self to witness, that
I get my living by my fingers ends.


Sang. Come, come, leave these protestations: a bad cause is better defended by
silence, then argument.


Physiog. Faith it is true; let us be friends: and since thy Master Medicus has
taught thee to Kill, we will teach thee to Steal: but honestly, Sanguis,
honestly.


Cheiro. We three will set upon the next man we meet.


Sang. I would 'twere Choler that broke my head the other day: of that condition,
I Would stay; but my Master has sent me to Magus. I must begone.

Enter CHOLER.
Physiog. Nay, stay a little longer now, Sanguis: who comes yonder? do you
know his Face?


Sang. Well, you woe will help me?


Cheiro. My Hand shall be always ready to help my friend.


Sang. Choler gives Sanguis a box on the ear, and they fall to cuffes.
Choler, I Am Sanguis, and here is my head.


Choler. Sanguis, I Am Choler and here is my hand.

Enter MELANCHOLICO.
Melan. How? three against one? Hercules himself could not fight with such
disadvantage: there is no ingenuitie in this; I Will take his part for pittie-sake
at adventure, be it right or wrong. He helps Choler


Physiog. O my nose, my nose --


Choler. I Will make you too Sanguis cry your Bloody nose before I have done.


Cheiro. O my hand! my hand! O you rogue, you bow it quite double almost.

Enter MVSICA with a pack and a bottle of drink.
Music. Why men, beasts, furies, what do you mean?


Melan. Choler, Choler, draw thy knife, and flit Physiognomus his nose.


Physiog. Ah you dull rogue, do you kick?

Enter PHLEGMATICO with a pipe of Tobacco.
Music. Oh, Phlegmatico! you are welcome; but prithee throw away thy pipe;
unless 'twere one could make them dance after it, and so cool their fury.


Phleg. Why, ho!


Music. Orpheus, they say, by music held beasts by the ears; let Musica then
hold the beastly furies of you, that are now by the ears.


Phleg. Why, ho! They leave fighting.


Melan. He has picked my pocket. Sirrah, Cheiromantes, you rogue, where is my
hand-kercher?


Phleg. Nay, give him his hand-kercher, I saw you take it: there, there is thy
hand-kercher, Melancholico: why I thought thou had been no fighter.


Melan. 'Faith, ingenuitie made me fight, when I saw three upon one.


Music. Come, come, for shame, be friends; you shall all be friends before you
part.


Melan. Nay, I Am angry with no body: I did but fight, to make them leave
fighting.


Physiog. Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.


Cheir. Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.


Phleg. I thought 'twas Choler, and Sanguis, they still are provoking one
another: What have thou in thy bottle, Musica? Nepenthe to reconcile the Gods?


Music. 'Faith here is drink to reconcile these furies, if they will?


Phleg. Come, Musica, do you begin, and we will all dance after thy pipe.


Music. You have spoke truer then you think, for there is a Piper coming
after me, and somebody else; they will be here anon: well, here is to you all
then. She drinks. He drinks.


Melan. Phlegmatico, here is to thee.


Phleg. Sanguis, here is to thee.


Sang. Choler, here is to thee.


Choler. Cheiromantes, have at you.


Cheiro. Work. (Choler drinks) Physiognomus, will you taste this liquor?


Physiog. Play off: (Cheiromantes drinks) Well then, I am last, I Will drink to
you all; I Will leave never a jot: (He drinks) there, Musica, there is thy bottle.


Music. Sanguis and Choler shake hands; are you friends?


Sang. With all my heart.


Choler. With all my heart.


Music. Cheiromantes, they say, you can tell fortunes; is it true?


Cheiro. Try me.


Music. Let Us know all our fortunes then.


Cheiro. Come on, let me see your hand, sweet Musica: you shall be beloved of
two, a Courtier and a Scholar; you shall love the Courtier more; but the
Scholar shall have you; and it shall so come to pass, that the Courtier shall
afterward be your servant: your husband shall be exceeding melancholy: you
shall have three sons; the first shall be called by his fathers name (but I
know not what that shall be) and he shall be extreme discontent and solitary;
and if he prevent a consumption, he may live till forty; for longer he cannot,
being of a cold and dry constitution: the second shall be called Timido, and
he will be endanger of being bit with a mad dog; which if he escape, he may
live till fifty: the third shall be called Iucundo; the other two took after
their father; but he will take after his mother; he will be exceedingly given
to good cheer, music, and women: he will be in danger of a Surfeit; and of
Fire; and if he escape these two, especially burning, he may live to be an old
man.


Phleg. Tell me mine next.


Cheiro. You, Phlegmatico; 'twill be long ere you can get you a wife; yet
you will have one, and one daughter; the child will die very young, of the black
Iaundice, and your wife of the dropsy.


Phleg. Sirrah, I saw you steal before, and now I hear you lie, you rogue.


Melan. Tell me mine next.


Cheiro. I Will tell you yours in your ear. He whispers in Melancholico's ear.


Melan. Thanks, dear Cheiromantes.


Sang. Nay, and fortunes be so good that are told in ones ear; I Will have mine
told in my care too.


Cheiro. Thus it is then. He whispers in his ear.


Sang. Pish, this is no such fine fortune.


Choler. Tell me mine openly.


Cheiro. Why, this it is: You, Choler, shall be somewhat happy in your wife: her
name shall be Poenitentia; you shall have two children; and one shall take only
after you, his name shall be Furioso. He shall die in his young age, in an
Alehouse, of a stab in at the mouth, which shall pass through his tongue, and
brains. The other child shall be a daughter; she shall take after her mother;
her name shall be Lacryma, a modest sober girl, and one that shall be well
beloved by wise men.


Choler. Well, this is a pretty mixed fortune; now, what is thine own fortune
and thy fellows?


Cheiro. Oh, stark naught, stark naught; I Will conceal them.


Music. Then fare you well; I can stay no longer.


Sang. 'Faith you shall not go yet; what have you in your pack?


Music. What Is that to you?


Melan. Prethec, Musica, tell me, what thou have in thy pack?


Music. Why, because you speak kindly now, and entreat me, I Will show you.


Melan. Hay, brave! what is here?


Sang. Morrice-bels?


Phleg. And waste-coates, and napkins?


Choler. Why, how came thou by them?


Music. Why, thus: my Mistress had been ill a good while, and because I tended
her very carefully; she gave me leave to recreate my self to day; and
in faith I light on merry company, where they used these jinglers: and when
they had done, they prayed me to carry them home with this bottle of drink.


Sang. Faith, and there were enough, we would dance.


Music. Enough? now I think on it, there is just enough, there is six pair.


Sang. Faith we will to it then, but what would thou do, Musica?


Music. Why, I Will play the maid Marian.


Sang. A match, a match: dress, dress, we will have brave jingling. (...).


Melan. I cannot dance.


Music. Nay, prithee be not sullen, good Melancholico.


Melan. If I do, I Will wear no bells.


Music. Why then lay one pair aside.


Melan. But I woun't dance now.


Music. Why, Melancholico?


Melan. I woun't dance, unless I have one of the wrought waste-coates.


Music. Why, now they have put them on.


Melan. I care not, I woun't dance else.


Music. Come prithee, Cheiromantes, slip off thine again and change with him;
Melancholico must have his sullen humors. So, now we want nothing but the
Tabor we talked of: but it is no matter, since he does not come, we will sing,
and so make music to our selves. Who can tune the Morris best?

Enter an hobby horse dancing the Morris and a Tabourer. Oh, The hobby horse
rushes on them, and throws them all down. here they are both, here they are
both.


Cheiro. O my arm, my arm!


Sang. O my shinne!


Choler. Ah, murren on him; who the deuill's this?


Phleg. I have hurt my breast.


Physiog. O the side of my face!


Melan. A rope on you, must you throw me quite down?


Music. Prithee dance the morris quietly with us: up, up, ho, and we will
dance. They (...), the (...) over (...) them all a^^^e, (...) Music^, and
runs away with the Tabourer.


Sang. A murren go with you -- Musica, who played in the hobbyhorse?


Music. No, I must not tell.


Sang. Come then, we will go now to Barly-breake.


Phleg. I but there is one odd: what shall he do? sit out every time?


Mus. Yes faith, and give a reason of the other three couples meeting.


Mel. Agreed: run.

They run and meet thus: Sanguis. Musica. Physiognomus. Cheiromantes.
Melancholico. Phlegmatico.

Choler. A murren on it, must I be the first man must sit out? nothing angers me
but that.


Mus. Nay Choler, thou't fret and chafe now --


Sang. Come Choler, your reasons.


Choler. Why, thou and Musica are met together -- because -- Sanguine folks
are most fit for Music and sports. Physiognomus and Chieromantes met, because
they feared we would have suspected they would have picked our pockets, if they
had joined with any of us --


Phys. We thank you Choler, we shall be even with you, and't come to our
turn.


Choler. Melancholico, and Phlegmatico joined; because one's too dry; and the
other's too moist: and so they will serve for Medicines one for another: come
run again: I Will be sure to catch some body this time.

They run again and meet thus. Sanguis. Melancholico. Choler. Phlegmatico
Musica. Cheiromantes.

Phys. I can tell you Choler, you had almost mis't this same time too. Well, to
my task, since it is my luck. Sanguis and Melancholico met, because one's cold
and dry, and the other's hot, and sufficiently moist: Choler and Phlegmatico
(have at you Choler) are like a flap-dragon, or a piece of bread sopt in
Aqua-vitae, and then set a-fire --


Choler. Thank you Physiognomus.


Phys. And Musica met with Cheiromantes, because the hand in this sense, in
respect of Music, may most justly be called the Instrument of instruments:
and therefore most fitly to be coupled with it.


Choler. In Faith Cheiromantes you are beholding to him, he has graced you.


Phys. Come, run again.

They meet thus: Choler. Cheiromantes. Sanguis. Physiognomus. Musica.
Phlegmatico.

Mel. What? is it my course?


Choler. Hay! Melancholico will give gallant reasons.


Sanguis. I, he will be exceeding witty, I warrant you.


Mus. Nay, I believe he will give incomparable reasons.


Cheiro. Come on Melancholico.


Phleg. Let Us hear the first.


Phys. He looks as if he would give profound ones.


Mel. What? do you mean to abuse me? I Will give none. I Will play no more.


Choler. That Is a poor put-off in faith; either play on, or else I Will call thee
Block-head as long as I know thee.


Mel. Do, do.


Choler. Block-head, block-head.


Mel. Come, you saucy Ass, because you are so hot, I Will take you down: I Will
propose a riddle.


Mus. Let it be a good one, and it shall be for all the reasons thou should
have given.


Choler. Yes faith, and't be a good one.


Mel. Well, take it as it is: Riddle me, riddle me, what is this? It is not, and
yet we see it: it is like a picture, and yet it is no picture: and it was drawn
by a blind Painter.


Choler. This is impossible.


Sang. Nay Choler, you are too rash in your judgment -- It is not, and yet we
see it, -- why, it may be you mean honesty, which peradventure you think is
nowhere truly: but seems to be some-where.


Mel. No, no, your conjecture halts.


Mus. It is not, and yet we see it? -- If it had been, It is not, and yet we
hear it, I could have given a reasonable conjecture.


Mel. As how? I prithee.


Mus. Why, I could have thought it to be Fame.


Mel. Indeed that had been reasonable: but you see it is not so proposed;
neither could that hold with the parts that follow: well, to the next.


Sanguis. It Is like a picture, and yet no picture? I Will give a very strong
conjecture at that.


Mel. Let Us hear it.


Sanguis. Why, it may be a Gentlewomans face painted.


Mel. That conjecture is plausible, but 'twill not hold with the rest. To the
last.


Sanguis. And it was drawn by a blind Painter.


Choler. That Is altogether impossible.


Sanguis. You're too quick again, Choler. I can conceive how that may be.


Mel. How?


Sanguis. How? Why the Painter might lose his sight after he had drawn the
picture, And so be a blind Painter.


Mus. Pretty, pretty, pretty.


Mel. But you are out, Sir.


Choler. Well, what was it now?


Mel. Nay, since you are so hot, you shall not know.


Sang. Nay, prithee what is it.


Mel. No, I woun't tell it.


Mus. Nay what sullenness is this? Prithee tell. What is it?


Mel. I woun't.


Phleg. A pox on it, I long to know. Prithee what is it Melancholico?


Choler. Come, what is it, Melancholico?


Mel. Nay, I Am a block-head, I Am a block-head, Choler, 'pray what is it? your
delicate wit, I doubt not can easily tell.


Choler. A rope of all sullen noddies: he sees every one greedy to know, and
therefore out of a doggednesse conceales it.


Phleg. A rope, if he had never proposed it, it would never have angered me.
Will you tell, Melancholico?


Mel. Alas, I Am a block-head.


Chairo. Well, we will wait his leisure.


Sanguis. I shall not sleep for thinking on it, if he does not tell me.


Phleg. I shall dream on it all night.


Mus. Good Melancholico, what is it?


Mel. Alas, I Am a block-head.


Mus. Pish, why then Good block-head, what is it?


Mel. Nay, you wonn't tell who danced in the Hobbyhorse, you.


Mus. IN says I will, if you will tell this first, and swear you will not be
angry with him, for throwing you down.


Mel. Nay, I Will know that first, and without all conditions.


Omnes. Do (...) (...) pr^thee do.


Mus. I Will tell you (...) in your ear, Melancholico.


Mel. Nay, he have it told openly, it concerns every one as much as me.


Mus. Why then if you would know, 'twas Phantastes; that had bin at the same
merry-making with me.


Mel. Phantastes! Indeed I have heard he is the only fellow in the Country to
dance in an Hobbyhorse: but he might have used his friends the humors better.


Mus. But you will forgive him I hope now.


Omnes. For thy sake we will.


Mus. Well. Now Melancholico, what is it?


Mel. I but Musica, you shall kiss me first. They kiss.


Mus. Come on then.


Mel. Kiss me again.


Mus. Why and again.


Mel. And again.


Mus. And again.


Mel. Now you shall all recant the word Block-head, and say Melancholico is no
block-head: say so.


Omnes. Melancholico is No block-head.


Mel. So Musica, kiss me once more, and then I Will tell.


Mus. Why thus I do, sweet Melancholico, that art no block-head.


Mel. Well said, you little rogue. Why now I Will tell you, It is the Rainbow
described by Homer; but you shall have it by parts: It is not, and yet we see
it, -- the colors in the Rain bow are not true and very colors, but only
seem so to be; as I have heard Physica often say. It is like a picture, and
yet is no picture, -- that is manifest. And it was drawn by a blind Painter,
-- Homer was blind and a Poet, now a Poet as I have heard my Master say, may
fitly be called a Painter; as painting may be called Poe^sie in picture.


Choler. The illation is superfluous to apprehensiue ears.


Musica. I Will remember this in faith; where are my Bells, and Wast-coates, and
Napkins? Well, now fare you well all. Exit Musica.


Omnes. Farewell, Musica.


Choler. Farewell, Gallants; my business lies this way too.

Exit Choler.
Mel. Who goes this way?


Phleg. That do I.


Mel. Come on then; farewell, Lads.


Exeunt Melancholico, and Phlegmatico. Cheiro. Fare you well: I Am glad they are
all gone, I have got some what.


Phys. What is it?


Cheiro. The pair of Bells which Melancholico would not wear.


Phys. I protest, I never perceived, when thou did nimbe them.


Sang. Nor I.


Cheiro. Nay, I Have the slight of the hand exactly; if I steal not some what
where ere we come, let me be hanged: come, Boys, we will have some liquor for
these Iinglers: in faith, Sanguis, we must take a Cup or two before you go to
Magus.


Sang. I care not now for drinking.


Cheiro. Fie, fie, forsake thy liquor? 'twil breed good blood: Sanguis, 'twill
breed good blood: Come along Boys.

Exeunt Omnes.
ACTVS IIII. SCENA VI.
POLITES in a Scarlet Gown, Hood, and Cap with Ermins, a white Staff, etc.


POLITES, LOGICVS, GRAMMATICVS, POETA, CAVSIDIOVS.
I Do find my self at this present affected with that which should not touch
a good Magistrate, an unwillingness to do Justice: yet I profess it proceeds
not from a desire to be injurious, but merciful; not for an ill will to
either, but a love to both. Whilst heretofore, I understood of this
dissension, as I was somewhat cast down with sorrow, so I was raised with an
hope of happy reconcilement, but now that hope also which before was the cause
of an uncertain joy, is become the ground of my most certain grief; and the
rather to see the state of our most blessed Commonwealth (which the gods have
decreed shall be eternal, if our selves hinder not) to be thus torn with our
civil Discords. You are not ignorant of the miraculous means which the gods
have used in raising us to this greatness: not by riches, but poverty; not by
plenty, but want; that what to others has been the occasion of disgrace, has
to us been the means of our present honor: It is the observation of the
Grecians, Tacitus, and truest Oracle of Greece, Thucidides, that the Athenians
Commonwealth was not raised to that glory (like the rest of Greece) by the
fruitfulness but barrenness of the soil: for which cause whilst the
Inhabitants lived secure from the invasion of Borderers, others growing rich,
were at last consumed by their own dissentions: so that for the avoiding of
public disturbance, when any were afflicted, they retired to the Athenians,
with what they had left, before all were lost; who as they did partake of the
Athenians security, so mutually offered to the Athenians the participation of
their wealth: the like I may say of our present estate; we have not sought unto
others; yet who have not sought to us? we had nothing, yet what want we,
unless it be a moderation of our felicity? All other Mechanicke faculties, of
whatsoever Corporations, have they not forsook themselves to retire to us? and
yielded up their estates, which they thought unhappy, to receive them as an
happiness from our bounty? I speak not these things unto you as an
instructor, but a remembrancer: Not to impose on you a new belief beyond your
experience, but to imprint in your minds a just consideration of your
dangerous contention. I have yet but begun to speak; but sorrow is a bad
Orator, and I must continue my speech with a silent Rhetorike. He speaks this
aside to Causid.


Poeta. Press the abuse thoroughly, as I instructed you.


Cause. I warrant you Sir.


Log. How now, Sir! What do you whispering with my Lawyer?


Poeta. With yours? I Would laugh at that, in faith.


Log. With mine? I, mine, I Am sure I gave him a fee.


Poeta. But I Am sure I gave him a couple.


Polites. How now! what new contention's this?


Log. And't please you, he abuses me before your face; he bribes my Lawyer.


Poeta. Yours! he is mine.


Log. Thine? he is none of thine. He Is mine.


Pol. He can be Advocate but for one: ask him whose he is.


Log. Causidicus, are not you my Lawyer?


Cause. Yes.


Poeta. How! thou Varlet! why? art thou not mine?


Cause. -- Yes.


Polites. What new face of impudent villainy is this, which does appear unto
us? O thou Monster of a double tongue and heart.


Cause. Pardon, honored Polites.


Polites. Varlet, thou prophaner of Justice! pardon?


Cause. Honored Polites --


Polites. Varlet, abuse not mine honest name with that mouth: with what face
can thou ask for mercy, unless thou had another face too? with what
tongue will thou beg for mercy, unless thou have a third! with what heart
will thou manifest a truth of sorrow, unless thou have a third also? do not
speak, kneel, mutter; one Lawyer come to plead two causes? O new confidence!
stand aside, thy absence peradventure might sooner cause us to forget thy
crime: then thy presence, though with most fawning dissimulation, to pardon it:
Logicus, you are the accuser; propose your own cause; then shall Poeta answer
for himself; and lastly, Grammaticus your witness, shall allege what he
knows. Begin, Logicus.


Log. And't please you, Grammaticus was soundly beaten by this fellow Poeta,
and, I forsooth, by his man a clogge-headed Rogue; but that riming Rascal set
him on.


Polites. Fie, Logicus, fie, fie; how shamefully you wrong your self, by these
unseemly terms? besides, the Gentleman's worth is well known.


Log. He Is a Rascal to Me I Am sure.


Poeta. Fie, Logicus, fie; you see I give you never a foul word, and that the
goodness of my Cause, moves even the Judge in my defense.


Log. And't please you Polites, every one counts him but a dissolute Rascal,
and so he has in all times been held but for my faculty, what age ever
flourisht in which that flourisht not?


Poeta. Nay, Logicus, you have little reason to say so, I can tell you: for if
we take a view of the most illustrious Age, that ever the world inioy'd, which
I think to be the time of the twelve Roman Caesar's; wherein Arms and
Learning were at their height, you may observe Poetry to have been most
famous, embraced by Emperors, admired by all who labored to have their names
amongst the Learned. But for Logicians, alas, (I must speak the truth) as
their names were unknown, so were their endeavors buried in obscurity:
Indeed those times were thriftie, and active: but these, out of a wanton
softness of a dainty sloth, do only spinne out these Spider-webs of
curiosity; and it has been often my meditation, to have an amputation of
such Excrescencies, and to cause that our youth which is to be instructed for
future use, should not consume the strength of their wits, in an injurious
labor of fruitless vanities. I do not deny a just knowledge of your
faculty, to be most necessary, and our selves thereinto have an advantage of
former times: but yet, alas! how many thousand famous Orators have there been
without Logic? how many eternal Poets without Logic? whose divine
eloquence could speak beyond all Logic; without all Logic. Enter MVSICA.


Mus. Reverend Polites, necessity has imposed a bad message upon me, though
unfit: Astronomia is in a trance, and only the Heavens know whether or no she
will again recover. (I knew it boded no good luck, that all my Lutestrings
cracked last night of their own accord.)


Polites. All the gods forbid; ah dear Astronomia, grief upon grief still:
Indeed Musica, thou wast an unfit Messenger for such sad news: for this
contention, it must rest undecided till another occasion. Causidicus, I warn
you to be in a readiness to appear, when you are sent for.

Exit Polites. Exit Musica.
Cause. Pardon, good Polites, honored Polites, good Polites, pardon. Exit
Causidicus.


Log. Grammaticus what think thou of this departure? is it not pretty?


Gram. By my faith, I could make a bad Construction of it: this may be but a
trick; well, Poeta, I perceive you have some Invention.


Poeta. You abuse the integrity of our Honorable Judge.


Log. Thou talk of integrity? go, go, thou art a cracked Pitcher, a broken
Pisse-pot, Polites talks against Logicians; when as your Logicians are the
only Scholars in the world: but the best is he does but talk against them.


Poeta. The only Scholars? the only Dunces.


Log. Sirrah, Dunces?


Poeta. Yes Logger-head, Dunces: do thou murmr? thou know not the
Letters of thy Alphabet yet.


Log. How you Slave?


Poeta. Nay, never make a Vizard of thy scuruie face: I say thou know not
the Letters of thy Alphabet: have not I heard thee say? Omne A. est B. Omne
B^st C. Ergo Omne A. est C. and indeed I think there is a like reason, for A.
may as well be C. as B. but fare you well Blockhead, fare you well. Exit.


Gram. And my Choler were here, he would have him by the ears: come let us
begone, here is nothing to be done: are these your Law-cases? a murren on them,
they are Dative cases to the Lawyers; but Ablative to the Clients.


Log. Come, come; I Am sure our case is in a fine Predicament: I think we have
been put off long enough: i'saith all Law-cases shall hereafter be no more put
in the Predicament of Action; but of Quando, of Quando; a plague of these
Lawyers. Exeunt Log, and Grammat.


ACTVS IIII.
SCENA. VII.
MEDICVS solus, with an Vrinall in his hand. WHy so; this is good: I have
brought my self into a fine case: I must be a Poysoner, I: and to get my
Living must lose my Life; blessing on my wise pate in the mean while. And to
observe the witty revenge of the gods; that this intended Murder should come
forth by mine own man Sanguis, from whom in Policy I concealed it: well, I
perceive Blood is Open-mouthed and will tell all: but since it is not much
known, and that I am not as yet accused to Polites, and now requested to help
Astronomia, I Will take the happy occasion, and use my best art to cure her, and
so if she escape, I may peradventure escape too; obtaining pardon for my
recompense -- let me see -- by this water I do find the state of her body
much altered, and her disease changed. There was an Astronomia that I once had
in cure before now, and she was of the very same constitution, had the like
disease, and the like turning in her head; now she dyed, and afterward we made
a dissection in her head, to see what was the disaffection of her brain, which
when we had done, we found all her brains turned to a matter much like clear
Ielly, or a Crystalline Orb: but I hope all such suspicions of this Astronomia
are Fables -- but stay -- what is the relish of her urine? (he tastes it) --
Pah, naught, naught: oh, who would be a Physician to taste these things? it is
worse then to be a Salt-peeterman, and dig in a Priuie-house -- but what
smell has it? (he smells to it.) Foh, worse, worse, I cannot endure it, [he
throws away the Vrinall, and breaks it.] Astronomia's of a fair complexion
her self, I wonder that her Urine should be so dark; it is of the color of a
Cloud. Well, I see she is very corrupt within, and I fear it is this
Astrologia has powdered her; to give her a Potion at the mouth will not do
much good; for 'twill be so long in descending, that the power of it will be
much debilitated; I conclude then, it must be a Clyster, a Clyster; and so I Will
in, to administer it: well, if I escape this Scowring cleanly; I Will never come in
the like Pickle again, whilst I breathe. Exit Medicus.


ACTVS V.
SCENA I.
POLITES, in a black gown, a black satin suit, a black beuer with a gold
hat-band, with a white staff, etc.


POLITES, PHYSICA.
YOu see, I have in part described the worthy parts of Geographus; and
doubtless it is pity any cowardly youngman should spend the strength of his
best age in the murmurings of discontent. I can say no more, and you may --


Physic. Nay, I must needs approve of such commendable parts in him; but I have
ever thought your Trauailers like unto Meteors which wander in the Air, and
their love in particular like the shooting star, which only lasts till the
fire is spent, and then falls down again with a swift precipitation: but I Am
sure my Astronomia is of a more Fixed desire.


Polites. I, but I Am persuaded he will be so regular, he will never go beyond
the prescribed bounds of her will; come, you shall see, she will so encompasse
him, that he shall never get out.


Physic. He must, and shall then turn away his man Phantastes, that has
incited him to entertayne all his uncertain courses.


Polites. Will you be willing, on that condition, to yield your consent, that
he shall have her?


Physic. I will.


Polites. Well then, I Will hasten a speedy celebration of this marriage: for I Will
make him discard his Phantastes immediately; 'twas somewhat tolerable to
entertayne such a giddie Counselor, whilst be was unmarried; but hereafter
assure your self he will be more stayed: and consider, Physica, that though he
have been a Trauailer, yet he is now come home, and I hope not only to his
Country, but to himself.


Physic. Well, your wishes and my counsels will work upon him, I trust; and
I Will be sure, he shall never stir abroad, but Astronomia still shall have an
eye to him.


Polites. Come then, let us in.


ACTVS V. SCENA II.
GRAMMATICVS, RHETORICA.
FAirest Rhetorica, will the pride of your beauty still tyrannize? will it be
still in the Imperative Mood? and shall my languishing desire be always in the
unhappy Optatiue? let me go a little further, and come at last to the
Potentiall.


Rhet. Yes, faith, you shall go further if you will, to the Infinitive: I am
not in the Mood to be wooed now.


Gram. Ah, dearest Rhetorica, I cannot choose.

Omnia vincit Amor, and nos cedamus Amori.


Rhet. I wonder at this, Grammaticus: that you having brought Love under a
Rule, cannot notwithstanding rule it.


Gram. Hei mihi quod nullie Amor est medicabilis herbis.


Rhet. But why should you torture yourselfe so with love?


Gram. Torture? O but it is a sweet, a sweet torture.

-- In Genitiuo
Id tibi dulcedo faciens dulcedinis, illud
Demonstratque propago, propaginis: adijce virgo
-we learn this in the very School.


Rhet. I think they are happy that never marry.


Gram. Oh, it is the right of nature: Funus iusta petit, petit and sponsalia
virgo.


Rhet. If then women desire so much to marry, why is Amor of the Masculine
gender?


Gram. Because women are not so much love it self, as the cause of love in men.


Rhet. I, but me thinks, they should be afraid of Actaeons fortune.


Gram. Indeed -- Est cornus cura sinistra: but that is not always: it is but a
Redundans, and therefore we put it among the Heteroclites.


Rhet. Well, Sir, my necessary departure must cut off the End of your
discourse by an Apocope. Exit. Rhet.


Gram. I, but it is a Prothesis to my discontent: O, see the scorn of love:
she flies away. -- Nec vult Panthera demari -- well if I were rich enough, I
durst lay the loss of her, I Would gain her: but it is money must go first; and
therefore, now I think on it, it runs so in the rule. -- Diuitiaeque Nuptiae
item -- for riches must be the Usher, -- Oh! but who would fall in love?
before, I had a little Understanding; then I fell mad in Love, and now I do
nothing but waste my self with a fruitless Sloth; why this it is -- Intelligo,
diligo, Negligo tantum -- and yet I can scarce hope, and yet I must love.
Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurret. Exit Gram.


ACTVS V. SCENA III.
MAGVS, ASTROLOGIA, PHYSIOGNOMVS, CHEIROMANTES.
MY great gods protect me; but the last night was a-dreadfull night unto me.


Astrol. Why? had you any terrible dreams?


Magus. Worse, worse: my spirit Glassialabolas appeared unto me, and being
skilful in the knowledge of future things, most lovingly has foretold me of
great danger coming toward me; and he said it would happen when I did least
suspect it, and amongst my acquaintance too; he appeared in his wonted shape
like a Dog with the wings of a Griffin, but he looked most horridly, most
horridly: and me thought when he went out, there followed him four, just
like to us four for all the world.


Astrol. Physiog. Cheiro. simul. Like to us four? alas!


Magus. Just like to us four; and they cried exceedingly as they went: and I
ventured to call him back again, but he would not come.


Astrol. I vvonder I vvakt not; why did you not tell me of it before?


Magus. I protest I was in a doubt whether I should tell thee at all or no, it
was so terrible.


Astrol. Why you're of my mind just: for I had an untoward dream, and was
verily resolved not to tell you, but now I will: me thought I and Astronomia
fell out exceedingly about Geographus, because she kissed him, and me thought
shee-forbade forbade me her house, and that her mother Physica did soreioyce at
it, which angered me most of all. Indeed I do not like the effect which I see
the heavens likely to produce ere long, against somebody, but I hope 'twill
not be to us.


Cheiro. In good faith, I had the prettiest dream that e're you heard, me
thought as I was about to pick a fellows pocket, he struck me quite through
the hand with a knife, and leaving the knife in my hand, thrust his hand into
my pocket and picked it, and so punished me, as I have punished others many a time.


Physiog. Troth, and as I was going to bed last night, there stood in the
chamber window a looking-glass; and as I came by, chance to lay my hand down
there, the candle not standing far off, I saw my face in the glass, but in
good faith me thought I looked so wanly and so scuruily -- and indeed I have
heard them often say, it is ill luck to see ones face in a glass by
candlelight.


Magus. Well, let then all our ill luck come together, if it will: indeed
Astronomia's perfectly recouer'd, and I saw but now Geographus and her with
Polites; which can bode no good: and afterward I met with Geometres, and he
passed by, without saluting me, but looked sullenly toward me: I know not
what is the matter; but I fear me, he has scarce learned the Rule of
friendship, to keep secrets. Well; come what will, we will not accuse our
selves by a foolish retiredness or fear; and if we should chance to be
conuented, we must be very obedient, and that will argue an innocence: and let
them prove what they can, it may be they can prove nothing, and then we are
free; if they prove the worst they can, and condemn us to death, we'll
patiently hear our sentence of condemnation; but when they are about to carry
us to prison, then you shall see my art: [he takes four rings out of his
pocket.] See, here are four rings, there is each of you one, and here is a
fourth for my self: put them in your pockets, and when your condemnation is
pronounced, and they think to carry us away, privily slip those rings on your
little-fingers, and then cry aloud Glassialabolas three times, and we shall
all four immediately become invisible.


Astrol. Physiog. Cheiro. simul. Hay brave! we stand above fate, and the
heavens.


Magus. Come, now let us go securely.


Physiog. Cheiro. Long may great Magus live: long may great Magus live. Exeunt
omnes.


ACTVS V. SCENA IIII.
POETA, PHANTASTES.
I Protest, Phantastes, I Am sorry for thee; but thou know I have a man
already, and one that loves me very well, Melancholico.


Phant. Yet, dearest Poeta, if you will vouchsafe another also intertaynment,
Phantastes shall be ready at your command.


Poet. How far have thou trauail'd with Geographus?


Phant. Too far, Sir, to be cast off now: why, about the world, Sir; or to
speak the truth, I have gone further then he.


Poet. Say thou so?


Phant. Yes, I Will assure you, Sir: and I can acquaint you, Sir, if you please,
with one particular attempt of mine, whereby I out-ventur'd him.


Poet. What Is that?


Phant. Why, Sir, in our North-voyage being come to the utmost part in all
Finmarchia, to the North-cape (the Longitude thereof is well-nigh fifty
degrees, and the Latitude almost 73.) being then past the Articke-circle about
six degrees, and so by consequent being in a parallel Sphere, Geographus
durst not venture any further; and there was, Sir, at that time in our company,
a great Magician (I have forgot of what University) which Magician and I,
leaving Geographus upon the Land, undertook (being so near) to discover the
parts directly under the Pole.


Poet. But what was your device against the cold?


Phant. Why, Sir, besides excellent furs we had, we had also hot waters to
preserve our heat within: but at last we were come so far, that we were
feign to come out of our ship upon the ice, and then the Magician being also an
exquisite Geometrician, got the ship upon the Ice, and then made wheels for
it, and an artificial Engine to make it go of it self; you may see
proportionally the like device in your Puppets that will go and turn of
themselves. The ice then being smooth, the ship went forward of its own
accord, till we found our selves to have past the Articke circle twenty three
degrees full. Then were we half a degree just from the Pole: there we met with
a most furious sea, that scorns to yield to the usurping cold; when the
Geometrician takes me off the wheels, and forth we lanched, and so sailed till
we came to have the Pole it self for our Zenith; and then we beheld a
dreadful rock.


Poeta. How did ye then?


Phant. Why thus, Sir: when the Magician saw this, he immediately draws a
book out of his Pocket, and falls to reading; when straightway all the sea
about us was as calm as a fresh water river amongst us: and the ship went no
faster then we would have it our selves; and so without any danger we came to
the rock; unto which making a shift to fasten our ship, we ascended: it
seemed as black as any Pitch: upon the top of which (for we went to the top)
there ascended an huge Pillar: which on the lower parts seemed as black as the
rock; but still in the Ascent it grew whiter, and whiter; and indeed the whole
pillar seemed to us very Ice, but that it was at the lower part blacker, and it
was as big as ordinarily any tower among us; and at the bottom of it there
was a passage to go in. We went in, and being entered, there were two pair of
stairs, the one descending, the other ascending: for we found the pillar to be
hollow, and our sight could not discover without-side how high it was: we went
down wards some dozen or twenty stairs, where we heard a most hideous noise,
that our hearts failing us we came up again.


Poeta. And what did you come away then?


Phant. No, Sir, we then went upwards, and in our ascent we still found open
places to give us light and Air; as big commonly as a door; and we ascended
so far, that at last the Sun shined upon us, as it does here, and then it
grieved us to think we were to go back such an uncouth way again; well, we
went still higher, and at last looking out at these doors, and seeing that
part of the world that lay toward us, (being a fine Sunshine day,) we saw a
very terrible battle, fought between the Turk and the Persian, wherein the
Turk was put to the worst: but now the Magician growing weary, and desirous to
know how far this Pillar ascended, he held by the side of the door, and
looked vpwardes, but with the fear suddenly fell down: and there was the
unhappy end of my companion. This pillar doubtless we coniectur'd to be the
Pole, and the way to heaven; and the stairs that descended, the way to hell,
and to the other Pole. With this accident I being half affrighted, with a
trembling at the wonders of the gods, humbly descended.


Poeta. Alas! what did you do in that case being alone?


Phant. Why, Sir, when I was come down, the sea was still calm; and so I
vnfastening the ship, saild the Ice, and according to the instruction I had
learned of the Magician, I got it over the Ice; and without any danger returned
to Geographus.


Poeta. Me thinks you should have had but Cold Comfort to be in that place
alone.


Phant. I protest unto you, Sir, simple as I stand here now, I did it then.
Now, Sir, wheresoever Geographus comes, he equally bragges of this attempt as
his also; but I vow by my former dangers and present griefs, the discovery
was made only by Magus, and Phantastes; and the relation by Phantastes only.


Poeta. And is this the reward which Geographus having now gotten enough gives
unto you? especially you having saved his credit hitherto in not discovering
also his lying arrogancy? it is inhumane ingratitude.

Enter ETHICVS. Ethicus (to Phantastes) How now weather-cocke? what wind blew
you this way? (to Poeta) Why, wise man, have you never a fitter Companion then
this travailing gallant? [to Phantastes] Pray be so mannerly as to travail a
little aside; I must speak with Poeta.


Phant. Alas sir, I Will not disturb you; when a man's once down, I perceive he
shall be trod upon. Exit Phantastes.


Ethicus. How now? what would this fellovv have with you?


Poeta. A service.


Ethicus. Yes faith, you should entertain every man's castoff. Come, are you
ready with your Mask you promised Polites at the Celebration of Astronomia's
marriage? all the chief of the Commonwealth will be there.


Poeta. Yes I will attend upon their joy and mine own grief: I have made a
mask aforehand; for I foresavv long ago Geographus should have her; I have
kept my promise; but it is but short, as my discontent would give me leave: and
the boys that are to act it, have learned it at once reading over, and
Melancholico has dressed them by this time I think.


Ethicus. Come, let us in: I hope ere long to come to your wedding and
Historia's.


Poeta. Mine? alas! I Will resolve now to live and die a maid: Historia shall
register me up among her examples of virginity.


Ethicus. I, and thy verse make her immortal: come, let us go, but thou make
me laugh, a Poet die a maid? I never knew any of the brood yet, so chaste.
Exeunt.


ACTVS V. SCENA V.
MEDICVS CAVSIDICVS.
Med. NAy Causidicus, your state cannot be worse then mine; for I Am in a
terrible quandarie, more shaking then an Ague: 't had bin better I had taken
the poison my self, for so I might have took a Vomit, and peradventure got it
up again; but I shall never be able to Purge my self of this infamy.


Causid. 'Faith Medicus, and I think no man's case can be likely worse then
mine own: for it had been better for me if I had pleaded never a cause, rather
then two. Well, I fear by this double fee, I shall purchase the fee-simple of
a knave, as long as I live.


Medicus. Indeed I do not well see how you will be ever able to plead again
now your tongue's cloven; and yet I remember there was a famous Lawyer, that
riding to plead two or three causes (just as you would have done now) unhappily
fell off his horse, and falling on his chinne, his tongue by chance doubling in
his mouth, he bit it quite through, and yet by good luck I cured him.


Causid. Nay, for my tongue, that will do well enough: but it is my ears that
I fear: I would I had but a Lease of mine own life for them.


Medic. 'Faith, witty great crimes are like a consumption, they are easily to
be cured when they begin, but hardly discovered; and easily discovered when
they are ripe, but hardly cured: and therefore I fear we shall be both cut off
as desperate Members.


Causid. Well, yet let us keep possession of our states as long as we can; and
that must be by this means. If we be called to our accounts, not presently to
confess, for the veriest thief will at the first plead, Not Guilty: and yet
we will not too-stiffely stand in our innocence, that so there may be a way
left for our pardon.


Medic. Well, let us hasten in to the celebration of the marriage; for wee're
expected before this time; my heart's almost at my mouth with fear, and
Dances, me thinks, as if it were at the wedding already.


Causid. This Polites is a subtle fellow, and he will take us when we little
think on it; but we will go voluntarily, and so he shall not need to send out
a Capias ad respondendum, for us.


Medic. Well, I think when all comes to all, our best means to wash away
these faults, will be our Distillation of tears. Exeunt Medicus and Causidious.


ACTVS V. SCENA VI.
[The Music playing, these enter.] POLITES, in a scarlet gown, hood, and cap
with Ermines. POLITES GEOGRAPH. ASTRONOM.
PHYSICA ETHICVS OECONOM.
POETA, GEOMETRES, GRAMMATICVS, LOGICVS, MAGVS, MEDICVS, HISTORIA, ARITHMETICA,
RHETORICA, ASTROLOGIA, MVSICA, MELANCHOLICO, SANGVIS, CHOLER, PHLEGMATICO.


ALl happiness attend the Nuptials.


Omnes. All happiness attend the Nuptials.


Polites. Physica, you now behold the blessed union of your dearest child.


Physic. And with joy, thanks to the gods and most honored Polites. Enter PHANT.


Choler. How now, sirrah? what do you here? you serve no body here, get you
our again.


Phant. I woun't, Sir: they say here is a mask to be seen.


Choler. Woun't you, Sir? I Will try that.


Polites. What Is the matter there?


Choler. Why, and't please you, Sir, Phantastes is shifted in here to see a
mask, which he says, he heard should be here, but he is deceived, and I Would
have him out again.


Polites. Come, let him alone, let him alone, this once; he will sooner shift to
see such a toy then a better thing: but wisemens marriages now-adayes can be
thriftily celebrated without Fiddlers.


Phant. Sirrah, now I will stand here in spite of your teeth.


Choler. You may thank Polites, or else in faith I Would have trounc'd you.


Polites. Silence: Since the gods have afforded us the happiness of so
frequent an Assembly, I think it the next happiness to use a preuenient
discretion, upon this offered occasion, for the reformation of some dangerous
abuses, which most stealingly have crept into the commonwealth: and therefore
are the more dangerous, by how much they are the more secret. Magus and
Astrologia, depart the Bench.


Magus. We?


Astrol. We?


Polites. Obey, or justice shall be violent to enforce you. Choler, are the two
rogues, Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes apprehended, as I gave command?


Choler. Yes, Sir, and at hand.


Polites. Let them be brought in then; and with them Causidicus. Exit Choler.
Medicus, leave the bench.


Medic. I? who is my accuser?


Polites. Thine own actions, and thy man Sanguis shall cry loud against thee.


Enter CHOLER with CAVSIDICVS and PHYSIOGNOMVS, but drawing CHEIROMANTES.
Choler. O the gods! and't please you, Polites, this little rogue Cheiromantes
being unwilling to come, as I was drawing him, picked my pocket. 'Sbones, these
Varlets are worse then witches, for they say when they are in hold, they must
leave their devil, but a man had as leife have the devil in hold as these,
for they will have his money in hold, or it shall escape 'hem hardly.


Polites. Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes, do you know this Gentleman? He
points to Poeta.


Physiog. Yes, Sir.


Cheiro. Yes, Sir.


Polites. And did you never know a purse of his?


Cheiro. I protest unto your Honor, there was nothing but a few idle papers
in it, but not a penny of money.


Poet. Oh the impudence of villainy! by the reputation of a Gentleman, I put
five pounds of gold into it the morning before I came forth; or else Poeta's a
Feigner.


Cheiro. Sure then, Sir, you put it forth again before you came forth.


Polites. Well, your own confession proclaims your guilt; Justice, therefore
awards you this sentence. Thou Physioguemus, that thou may never look any
man in the Face more, shall be burnt in the forehead for a Rogue, that so
every one may know thee by thy Physiognomie -- Cheiromantes, since thou have
had a Hand in this matter too, thou shall be burnt in the hand, and then both
of you shall be banished the Commonwealth of the Sciences. -- Choler, take
them away.


Phys. Tush, I Will but paint my Face afterward.


Cheiro. And I Will quickly bite it out of my hand again.


Physiog. We scorn to escape this punishment. Exeunt Choler, Physiog. Cheiro.


Cheiro. We scorn to escape this punishment. Exeunt Choler, Physiog. Cheiro.


Polites. Geometres, did not Magus offer by Magike and loue-cups to procure you
the love of Astronomia?


Geom. Yes, Sir, he did.


Polites. And Geometres, did not you see Astrologia at the Banquet at Ethicus
his house, cast a powder into Astronomia's drink?


Geom. I did Sir.


Polites. Why then, justice must proceed upon you.


Magus. We yield our selves to your Honors mercy.


Astrol. We yield our selves to your Honors mercy.


[Geometres comes to Polites, and whispers him in the ear, then returns to
his pl^] Polites. Melancholico and Sanguis lay ^ands upon them presently,
search their pockets, and take out certain Rings if they have any.


Magus. Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence! Oh
violence!


Astrol. Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence! Melanch.
and Sanguis search their pockets by force, and take out Kings. Oh violence!


Mel. Here Is one Sir.


Sang. And here is another.


Geom. I, these are they. Magus himself acquainted me with this device: for,
these Rings put on their little-fingers, and those words repeated thrice, would
have made them invisible immediately.


Omnes. O strange!


Geom. Now honored Polites, you may proceed.


Polites. Magus, because thy profoundest villainy was wrought by a Circle; in
stead of an endless punishment like thy Circle, here thou shall be broken
upon a wheel, and afterward the gods no doubt will adiudge thee for ever to
supply Ixions room, by turning his wheel. Thou Astrologia, shall not as yet
be determined on, but cast into a close Prison, that thou may never more
behold the Heavens, but be tortured continually with a perpetual anxietie,
and expectation of thy fate.


Geog. Nay, honored Polites, let me beg Magus his life.


Astron. I; and I, that Astrologia may enjoy the benefit of the Heavens,
liberty.


Polites. I may not without a danger to the Commonwealth.


Geog. Then let Geographus obtain the request on this condition, that they
undertake a voluntary travail, in stead of an enforced banishment.


Polites. Depart then the Commonwealth for ever.


Magus. We go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and yet
they will not ruin us.


Astrol. We go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and
yet they will not ruin us.


Exeunt Magus, and Astrologia. Polites. Medicus, did not you send Poison in
stead of Physic to Poeta being sick?


Med. And't please you, I know not whether it were Poison or not: I sent
Historia's own servant with a Recipe, to Galli-pot mine Apothecarie: and if it
were bad, 'twas his villainy.


Polites. Well, as if he had any reason to have done so, without underhand
notice from you? do not deprive your self of an hope of pardon by an unjust
pretense of innocence.


Med. Good Polites. [On his knees].


Polites. What can thou say for thy self, that judgment should not proceed
against thee?


Med. Honored Polites, vouchsafe to hear me speak: with grief I
acknowledge mine offense, but it was need first made me bad: I was at the
first an Apothecaries man, and keeping a note of Recipe's that came to my
Master, and inquiring of the bearers the disease of the Patient, I afterward
turned Physician, but I never administered any Physic but such as I found in
my Papers: and then, for fashion, I fell to reading some Physick-bookes: and
though I could not judge of them, and make use of them, yet I by them did
learn to talk with my Patients in their sickness.


Polites. Oh, the confident ignorance of beggarly Emperickes! Well, stand aside
a little: Causidicus, can thy two tongues, make one honest defense for the
justifying of thy self? what can thou allege that judgment should not
proceed against thee?


Cause. My Book, honored Polites.


Polites. Thou can not have it.


Cause. H^nour'd Polites --


Polites. Thou can not have it.


Cause. Then vouchsafe, I beseech you, to hear me speak. I likewise must
accuse Poverty of my first guilt; 'twas need also that first made me bad: I
was at the first a Sumner, then got to be a Scriuener, then a Lawyers Clarke;
and these were the first steps of my fortune: and since I have been a Lawyer,
(alas!) such have been my wants, that having no Clyents to save my credit, I
have pretended business, and gone up and down with a Pen and Inke-horne by my
side, as earnestly as if I had a dozen Causes to plead: when (alas!) I had
scarce bread to live on, that, I protest unto your honor, Fortune had quite
out-lawed my estate.


Polites. Well then, I award thee this merciful judgment: because,
Causidicus, after seven years practice of the Law (for so long thou have, I
know not how justly, gone under that title) thou have deserved to hold up thy
hand at the Bar, when thou should have been the defender of Justice, thou
shall henceforth be called a Barrister; till by thy honest pleading you
redeem your self from that name; and hereafter when any of thy Profession
plead Causes, they shall, in the admonishing remembrance of thy crime, plead at
a Bar --; and that thy pleading of two Causes may be remembered, thou shall
wear, etc. -- For you, Medicus, because you did happily recover Astronomia --


Astron. Indeed he gave me a very good Clyster, Heaven knows.


Polites. We pardon your offense: and thus upon your Good-behauiour we will
suffer you both in the Commonwealth; but with this caution, that if ever you
come by your Learning to any degrees in the University of our Commonwealth,
(that you may for ever be distinguished from other men) because you have not
been found Viri quadrati, Square and upright men; you shall be enioyn'd to
wear Round Caps.


Med. A like mercy still attend Polites.


Causid. A like mercy still attend Polites.


Polites. But, Medicus, see you love your man Sanguis, though this your crime
was detected by him: I say, Sanguis is an honest servant, and more faithful to
the whole Body of the Commonwealth, then any one Corrupt Member. Depart, and
henceforth abuse not our mercy.


Med. Long may Polites live most honored; long may Polites live most honored.
Exeunt Med. and Causi.


Causid. Long may Polites live most honored; long may Polites live most
honored. Exeunt Med. and Causi.


Enter CHOLER. Polites. Thus, as in a natural body, the first way to health,
is by remoouing all more dangerous corruptions; and the second, by reducing the
humors to a composed temperature: the first is already performed, and now it
remains that we temper our selves. Most honored Citizens, I am not ignorant
either of your contentions or loves: the first of which, as I would labor to
dissolve: so to unite the last; if your selves will be pleased but to refer
the composing of your differences to my impartial censure.


Omnes. We are pleased, Reverend Polites.


Polites. The gods add the happiness of success to my determinations. First,
then Poeta, Logicus, and Grammaticus, you shall bury all former contentions in
a perpetual (...), or oblivion, and then I thus proceed: For you Geometres, I
am sorry that that Villain Magus did so far seduce you; but we all rejoice
at your recovery: and since Geographus has obtained Astronomia, embrace you
courteously the love of Arithmitica. I Am sure ever since you have both been of
years of discretion, you have been acquainted: and besides, Geometres, there
is not any man in the World, whom she makes more account of then your self:
and therefore I will not say, vt ameris ama, love her, that she may love you;
but Quia amaris ama. Love because you are first loved; nay, it is a just
gratitude, which also is a love, and so you shall double it. Briefly, if there
be any point, Geometres, which you stand upon, know you remain still at Ods;
but if you embrace the love of Arithmetica, you will be at a perfect unity.


Geom. Well, Polites, Geometres shall be Ruled by you this once; come, Wench,
sure I must love thee, I even long to take thine Altitude.


Arith. And I trust we two shall be always Even.


Polites. Poeta, you have partly yielded to me in private a consent to the
embracing of Historia's love, which if you shall publicly confess, and so
confirm, you shall not only get a Wife, but a friend; and what honor Polites
may do, to Poeta, love and opportunity shall vnitedly perform.


Oeconoma. I; consent, wild-head, consent: she will make thee more stayed.


Poeta. I yield: Historia, my love shall more inseparably follow thee, then the
Hexameter the Pentameter; or the Adonicke, the Sapphicke.


Historia. Why, thus did Xenophon and his Love join together.


Polites. As for you, Grammaticus, I understand of your great affection to
Rhetorica; who though she loves Logicus, yet because he loves not her
mutually (which must be required between such paires) and that Rhetorica had
showed some kind of affection toward Grammaticus, with my best desires I will
join you two; and the rather to induce a willingness in you, Rhetorica, I
would have you not forget, how Grammaticus and you have been brought up from
Children together, and Schoole-fellowes, and take this for a rule: Change not
an old friend. Yield Rhetorica, yield, let Physica entreat thee.


Rheto. Why then, Grammaticus, at this double request, without any
Circumlocutions or Figures, I plainly offer unto thee my love.


Gram. Why then, dearest Rhetorica, Qua nostros vidisti flentis ocallos. Thou
do not only gratify Polites, but also Physica, and Nature her self: for,
Commune omnium animantium est coniunctionis appetitus procreandi causa.


Polites. You Logicus, if you will leave your contentions, having no desire, as I
perceive, to marry --


Log. I care not for marrying; I see no good Foundation, for any such Relation.


Polites. We will assume you for your approved understanding --


Logic. I, I should be sorry if I had not a good understanding --


Polites. As an assistant to our self. For your man Phlegmatico, if he will
win Polites his love, let him leave his Tobacco.


Ethicus. I, and learn more, manners, for I am sure he wants them.


Polites. And Grammaticus, for your man, let him bridle his Choler. Now my
counsel shall be, that you, Ethicus, and Oeconoma, would vouchsafe to give
good advice to Poeta and Historia: and you, honored Physica, to your happy
children Geographus and Astronomia: for Grammaticus and Rhetorica their Tongues
will always agree, and then I think they can hardly fall out: and for
Geometres and Arithmetica, I likewise know they will be very Regular, and now
all is composed; and yet, now I think on it, it is not, for yonder Melancholico
stands sad, and alone, amongst all these matches: and yet it is better thought
on; yonder is Musica too: now surely a sit match; but they shall be henceforth
for their ingenuitie, both exempt from servitude, and made joint fellows with
our selves.


Melan. Thanks to Polites: come, my little Minikin, thou and I will be
play-fellowes.


Music. 'Faith I Will have Dancing at my wedding, what ere comes on it.


Phant. I beseech you, Polites, suffer not a servant through want to be lost,
and come to an ignominious death.


Poet. I (alas!) Polites, let Poeta obtain so much for Phantastes: that he
may be servant to Melancholico and Musica.


Polites. I yield unto it.


Phant. And I trust I shall please my Master, and Mistress, beyond imagination.


Polites. And now most honored Citizens, when our aged and retired Prince
Metaphysicus (whose Deputy only I am, and from whom, as from our Sovereign,
we hold all we have) when, I say, he shall hear of these happy combinations,
what a content may we conceive he will conceit at the report? and for your
selves, you may more easily enjoy your felicity, then I express it; and my
endeavors also shall not receive a small encouragement, when the Royal bounty
of his Majesty shall take notice, that these things were done by me. Poeta,
you shall give me leave, for conclusion of my speech, to usurp two Verses,
which I have heard you often speak.


All Subjects labors fail, if Princes frown:
The Princes favor is the Subjects Crown.
THE END.
Epilogue.
IVdicious Hearers, you When the Epilogue was about to be spoken, the pure Arts
were ascended to Heaven, and appeared (as in the Prologue) till the Epilogue
was ended, and then the Heaven closed. that apprehend
What task it is to make the Arts descend
To Popular cares; you whose pure judgment knows,
How to distinguish between Art and Shows;
Our Author now salutes. And does compare
His Comedy unto his Theater;
Where some play Arts, some Humors; and thus fits
Himself, to all variety of wits.
If any yet shall ask why he does bring
A Hobbyhorse, or such a nimble thing
To raise an Ignorant laugh: It was his Art
That said, This will express Phantastes part;
And thus he Scorned and Used it. He did fear
Indeed, there was a People too, even Here.
Therefore his Courteous Comedy did speak
And act Some things to satisfy the Weak
She Academickes; and to make Them smile,
Brought in Impostors, Gypsies, and such vile
Pedlars of Arts: yet does he not from These
Hope for a Tin-foil'd glory: or so please
Himself, by a Reflection. Here to stay,
And in a Looking glass behold his play;
Nor does he promise to himself, in high
Conceit, a Saucy Immortality.
Yet This he says: Let no man judge his Aarts,
But he that first can judge of All the Arts.
But I forget one message; Fate of life*
Poor Melancholico has lost his wife.
For whilst, within, he on the Humors tended,
Pure Music with the Arts to Heaven ascended.
Which makes the poor man sad, that now he is grown
Into a Dump, thus to be left Alone.
Yet since he cannot call Her back again,
He does entreat this grace he may obtain;
That You would, to repair his Marriage bands,
Create Another Musica with Your Hands.
FINIS.

