Histoire Des Larrons, OR THE HISTORY OF THIEVES.

Written in French, and Translated out of the Original, By PAUL GODWIN.

LONDON, Printed by John Raworth, and are to be sold by Thomas Slater, at the
sign of the Swan in Duck-lane, 1638.

The Preface to the Reader.
ALthough that Licurgus the Lawmaker of the Lacedemonia^s was a great
Statesman, and obtained an immortal glory by the Laws and Statutes which he
left unto the Spartans. Yet I find that he was very faulty in pemitting his
Citizens to live in continual robbery; for what was this, but to nourish the
fire of dissension, by which he might have set on fire his new erected
Commonwealth; and indeed there needed the courage of Theseus, and the strength
of Hercules to purge a kingdom infected with the swarm of such people, for it
is a poison which (as says the Poet) Latius and latius vires acquirit eundo.
It is like unto rivers, which (the farther they run from their fountain) the
more they swell and enlarge themselves.

But before I represent unto you the diverse stratagems which these Rake hells
usually put in practice to gain their living; I will first show you their
original, it being no new thing since men began to be wicked: and surely this
vice must be very old, since the heathen gods sometimes exercised the same
trade: For Lucian (in his Dialogue of Apollo) and Vulcan) relates that Mercury
was one of the subtillest thieves that ever lived, for he was scarce out of
his shell, when he stole away the tools of Vulcan, he made what ever he found
in his way his own: and one day having overcome Cupid at the Lute, as Venus
came to embrace him, and congratulate his victory, he slilie stole from her
that admirable girdle whereof Homer makes such esteem: another time, he by
the sweetness of his music so charmed Apollo, whiles he kept the Kine of
Admetus, that he fell asleep, and in the mean time stole away his herd,
(wherein you may note how blind the ancients were in their belief, to worship
a cow-herd and a thief for gods) nay ever Jupiter could not keep himself from
the flights of this thief, for he stole from him his Scepter, and would no
doubt, have carried away his Thunderbolt had it not been too hot: Wherefore
Homer in the Hymn which he made in his praise, calls him (Arcon Philyteon)
the Prince of Thieves; and indeed it is a thing very remarkable, that there is
no vice which has not been authorized by gods, to the end that the Ancients
might not be scrupelous in imitating their actions, which was the devils
policy to draw men to be his followers, by introducing (by the means of false
Gods) vice in stead of virtue, and most commonly making use of things accounted
sacred, to make his poison to be swallowed the more easily; for who would not
have stole his neighbors goods, since god Mercury himself was of the trade,
or who was there among them, who esteemed it not an honor to follow the steps
of so brave a Champion? -- cui fas per limen utrumque
Solus habet geminoque facit commercia mundo?
as says Claudian, like Master, like servant; such a Prince, such a subject;
If the Gods in times past were Thieves, it must needs be that their
worshippers must follow their example: and we have seen the effects thereof;
for during the space of four or five thousand years, since that Nimrod by an
insupportable arrogancy placed the first stone in the tower of Babel, the
world has been full of nothing but confusion, murder, and theft. The Assyrians
spoiled and ransacked all their neighbor countries, to lay the foundation of
their Monarchy; but it proved no other then the preparation of a Trophee for
the Medes, who invading them, spoiled them of all that which they had ransaked
from others: The Medes enjoyed for a time their spoils, but they were soon
stripped by the Persians, thus one nation robbed another, until that the Romans
became Masters of the whole. And what happened at length, even after
revolutions of ages, this great Collossus (whose shadow struck a fear into the
inhabitants of the remotest Regions) was dismembered by peecemeale and at length
remained as naked as Esops bird, and it was according to reason, that the end
should be correspondent to the beginning; for seeing this famous Republique
had not its original and increase, but by theeveries, rapes* and massacres
under Romulus and others; there was no other likelihood but that it would
return to its first original.

But yet I find some mention of thieves before all these, for the Egyptians
were the first after the deluge that began to rob, a custom which has been so
long continued by this Nation, that they are yet seen to run by troops from
kingdom to kingdom* to tell fools their fortunes, and were it not that men
look more unto their hands then their feet, they would make a horrible havoc
in villages and solitary houses.

The barbarous Scythes, by the report of Herodottus, were also very subject to
this wicked vice. for they thought all goods to be common, both to men, and
other living creatures, but especially food, for they made it no scruple to
intrude themselves into any man's house, where they might find meat wherewith to
satisfy their hungry appetites.

But the Lydians were yet much more rude, for they held it for an infallible
Maxim, that it was not fit that a man should depart from any place without
furnishing, himself with something; and it may well be said, that there there
are two many Collonies of this race planted among us, for it is too apparent,
that the one half of the world robs the other; the greater thieves robbing the
less: For this is so miserable an age, that the great ones rejoice at the
tottering of the less; and many are seen standing under the Gallows to be as
spectatours of the execution of others, who have more often deserved death then
they have committed thefts: and though I might here take occasion to speak
much of the great thieves in the Commonwealth, yet considering, that Quae supra
nos nihil ad nos, I will forbear, and come unto the less, with sorrow that I
must leave one of the Principal parts of this History untouched: or, know
therefore, courteous Reader, that for thy good I have set forth this various,
and pleasant History, which will show thee, how thou may avoid many
dangers, and how others more wickedly inclined, may (by the punishments which
these reap as just rewards for their evil courses) be led from the precipice
of perdition, into the safe way of virtue and honesty.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. AN Innkeeper cheated. page 1. Chap. 2. A notable trick put upon a
Physician. p. 12. Chap. 3. A Tragi-Comedy acted by two Thieves. p. 18. Chap. 4.
A Cheaters self invitation. p. 28. Chap. 5. The notable Impudence of Amertis.
p. 36. Chap. 6. A Merchant cheated by a pretended Churchwarden. p. 45. Chap. 7.
Polidamors entertainment among Thieves. p. 53. Chap. 8. A prodigious History
of the Treacheries of Valesio. p. 67. Chap. 9. A young Cutpurse made free. p.
91. Chap. 10. The life and death of little- James. p. 99. Chap. 11. The story
of Pallioly, and his Choak-peare. p. 123. Chap. 12. The wicked servant. p. 1^5.
Chap. 13. The dangerous adventures and miraculous escapes of Colyrias. p. 161.
Chap. 14. One often cheated. p. 173. Chap. 15. A strange Robbery of a Merchants
shop. p. 183. Chap. 16. The cunning escape of a Cheater oot of Prison. p. 188.
Chap. 17. A Thief caught in a Trap. p. 193. Chap. 18. The story of Amboise la
Forge, a notable Cutpurse. p. 201. Chap. 19. A Relation of the notable cheats
performed by one Mutio. p. 221. Chap. 20. A facetious Relation, how one
Maillard cheated a Goldsmith of a rich piece of Plate. p. 238. Chapt. 21. The
multiplicity of Thieves. p. 263. Chap. 22. A facetious Relation of a Parisian
Thief, condemned to the Galleys at Marseilles. 269. Chap. 23. The grateful
Thief. p. 294
THE HISTORY OF THIEVES.
CHAP. I.
Of an Inne-keeper Cheated.
Despair often constrains us to embrace Actions which we would reject, as
pernicious to our souls health, if Passion blinded not our Senses; but we are
for the most part so wedded to our own perverse wills, that we will not
vouchsafe to deliberate with reason, but rashly do whatsoever is presented
unto us by our vain imaginations. This is the cause that man cannot so easily
see what he is, nor whence he draws his Original.

At that time when as Peace began to flowrish in this Kingdom, and that the
fury of a long war was appeased. It happened that five or six cashiered
Soldiers, not knowing what shifts to make, departed out of Paris, resolving
among themselves, that sithence unconstant Fortune seemed to deny them
sufficient Commodities for their sustenance, they would use their greatest
cunning and utmost endeavor to procure it. These people that before had plenty
of all things, could not now brook a scarcity, and therefore resolved to make a
correspondency to their former fortunes, though by any indirect means, neither
were they long to seek: For as it often comes to pass, that when men perceive
themselves sinking into the deepest misery, even then they find out a means of
relief.: So now Necessity dictates unto these cheating fellows, an invention
by which they for a time shift off these hungry wants which were now ready to
oppress them. They in their way chanced to meet with a youth about the age of
ten or twelve years, who had been sent from about twelve Leagves distant
from thence with a Letter to one in Paris, whom they staying, one among the
rest (intending to practice his wit and to recreate both himself and
companions by an invention (advises them to cloathe him after the best manner
they could possibly, and tells them, that as for the rest, he doubted not but
that he should so well act his part, that they should all fare the better for
his enterprise. They all follow his direction, and at length by their joint
endeavors, they so well apparel him that one would have taken him for some
young Lord, although there was a kind of constraint in his behavior, and that
by his actions he sometimes showed of what stock he was. The tree is known by
the fruit, and the leaf partly manifests the kind and the quality of the
stalk. For Generosity appears as well by the outward behavior, as it does
by Virtue which is the inward ornament, and whosoever will cloathe a Rustic in
the habit of a Gentleman, shall notwithstanding find in him the effects of
his rude breeding and incivility. This youth being thus revested, hatched
conceits which lifted him up even unto the clouds, he already thought himself
one of the great Lords of France; yet for all his high conceits, they become
his Lawgiver; and after mountains of golden promises, they command him upon
pain of death, not to speak to any one upon any occasion whatsoever more then
these two words Etiam and Maxim. Having thus grounded their intended deceit,
they went to take up their lodgings in one of the best Inns about Paris, where
being arrived, they fained themselves to be of the house of the extraordinary
Ambassador of Holland, and told the Host, that without fail, within four or
five days the said Ambassador would pass that way; and for an assured
testimony of what they spoke, they showed unto him the young Gentlemen, saying,
that he was Nephew unto the Ambassador: The Master of the house (who deeply
considered not what they spoke) believing them, entertained them very
sumptuously with whatsover they demanded: and the notice he took during their
abode in his house, that all of them in general were (submissively) respective
unto their young Master. (whom they blazed to be the Ambassadors Minion) made
him and the rest of the Inn verily believe, that the reverence which they
showed unto this youth was unfeigned, and what they spoke was undoubtedly true.

Five days were now past wherein there was no news of the Ambassador, but
what they themselves made in the house in the midst of their Jollities and
Banquets. The Host knew not what to think of it, but not being able to sound
the depth of their mysteries, he causes his doubt to reflect upon the
reverence which he saw was yielded unto this new made Gentleman; this
withholdeth him from any outward show of suspicion, and feeds him with the
hope of the future coming of the Ambassador. At length eight days being
pleasantly slipped away, and no Ambassador appearing, our Vagabond Soldiers
begin to dream that it was now time for them to take the air. And to finish
their well projected Enterprise, one of them sends forth his Masters Lackey
in fight of the Host, to give notice when the Ambassador approached, (but he
kept not his promise in coming, for he was not yet parted from his house (and
had before privately commanded him to return by three of the clock the next
morning, to give them notice that their Master was drawing near unto the City.
This Gullery was well practiced, the Lackey failed not to come at the appointed
hour, and knocking at the Gate, delivered unto them the welcome news of their
masters approach: Whereupon they all start up with speed, and having commanded
that their horses should be prepared, the Master of the Inn arises, calls
up his servants, and all of them confidently settle themselves in expectation of
the Ambassador: when their horses were ready, one of them came boldly unto the
Host, and told him, that they must of necessity go meet their Master, that he
must prepare a breakfast against their return, which would be within two or
three hours at furthest, and in the mean time they would leave their young
Master with him: so they all parted and forraged the Country, having merrily
recreated themselves at the expense of their Host.

In the mean time they prepare all the Lodgings for the Ambassador; but noone
being already past, and he not appearing, the Host begins to perceive the
deceit; He therefore ascends up into the Chamber, but was much amazed when he
saw there no other then a Country Clown in an old Hurden suite; the Host
straightly examineth him, and demands who he is, who those were that came to
lodge in his Inn? to which he answers not a word, and hardly could he draw
from him, more then these two words, Etiam and Maxim: the Host notwithstanding
who had been at extraordinary cost in entertaining them, could not be satisfied
with Latin, he takes therefore my young Clown, and with the smarting blows
of good rods teaches him French; thus passed their deceit, their well acted
Comedy, thus ending in a Tragedy.

CHAP. II.
A notable trick put upon a Physician.
THere lived in the famous City of Paris, a wise and renowned Physician named
Alcander, who had showed himself fortunately expert in diverse Cures, where it
seemed that humane Art had not sufficient force to give a remedy; the fame
whereof made him then much sought after. Now, to enter into the course of our
History, you must understand, that as this Physician went to visit the sick
in diverse parts of the City, one of the most notable and boldest Thieves which
were then in Paris, conceived that he should make a very good booty if he could
entrap him, for he was reputed a very rich and wealthy man, by reason of his
continual practice: this Conceit breed a Resolution and this Resolution
brought forth its effect; for on a Saturday about nine a clock at night, as the
said Alcander went to receive several sums of money from diverse houses where
he had finished particular Cures; this fellow who could not have chosen out a
fitter opportunity, nor a more favorable hour for his design, nor yet a more
subtle device to overreach Alcander, being confident that he had then good
store of Moneys about him, and that he could not escape him; Having long
attended his return in a little bye street, and at length perceiving him
afar off, comes unto him in great haste, and with a fained voice says unto
him, Sir* it is long since I have been so happy as to see you, yet I live not
far hence, and now your experience which I have still admired, has caused me
to importune you to visit my wife, who for this ten or twelve days has had
such a Flux of her belly, that she cannot find any means to stop it, the
longer it continues the more it increases; I have therefore made bold to come
unto you; I came even now from your house, where I stayed expecting you for at
least an hour; I humbly entreat you Sir, to do me so much favor as to come
with me: The seeming sincerity of his words, would have drawn on the most
distrustful of the world to have believed them: Alcand^^ Who was accustomed to
be induced more by gain then fair words, affoorded him this friendly and
comfortable answer; Sir, God forbid that I should refuse to do my endeavor
in that little skill which I have in the knowledge and practice of Physic; If
I can effect any thing for the good of the Gentlewoman your wife, I will attend
you thither with as good a will as my charge requires. Upon these complements
this notable Wag brings him from street to street into his lodging, where
having shut the door, he takes in the one hand a Pistol, and in the other
hand a great purse, and turning himself furiously toward the Physician,
Behold here (says he) my wife which has for a long time been tormented with
the Flux in her belly, it is you that must find out a means to cure the
disease, otherwise I my self am resolved to seek a remedy with this Pistol.
The Physician trembling, and much dismayed, to see himself so suddenly
surprised in this sort, would have cried out, but the other holding the Pistol
to his breast, so terrified him, that he was constrained to forsake his own
Purse, therewith to cure that which had the Flux. This part of the Tragedy
being thus acted, the Thief would show to Alcander, that he was not yet
altogether void of courtesy, in restoring (...) him some part of his moneys,
and promised him to conduct him to his lodging, holding still his Pistol in
his hand, lest he should have made an outcry: being come unto the house of
Alcander, the Thief knocks at the door, and taking his farewell of his
Benefactor, told him, that he now only feared rain, and that he must needs
lend him his Cloak, and fled: Alcander could never be otherwise paid for his
Cure; for on the morrow this Rascal had changed both his Host and lodging.

CHAP. III.
A Tragi-Comedy acted by two (...).
We having already seen how fertile man is in wicked inventions, especially
when an idle leisure in such sort sophisticateth the understanding, that he
remains as it were buried in an accustomed sluggishnesse. We may yet more
amply see it described in this ensuing discourse, where we shall behold, and as
in a Table, see described the different Plots and Stratagems by which these men
have sought to maintain themselves by an irreligious course of life, to the
hurt of others, and their own final destruction.

About the end of IVLY 1611. when as the Court was not much troubled with
rumors of Wars; Thieves were much spoken of at Paris, among others, there
were two who conceived they might show a trick of activity to a young Mercer
newly married, which they put in practice after this manner.

They both long since knew, that most commonly there was but one boy in the
shop; so that watching a time when the Master was out of the way, one of them
went unto a Chyrurgion dwelling in the street, called (...), whom he calling
aside, desired that when he brought unto him a youth of such and such a
complexion (describing unto him, the age, visage, and stature of the Mercers
boy) he would be pleased to conduct him into his Chamber, for that he had a
secret infirmity to acquaint him with, and that although he perhaps would at
first be bashful and unwilling to declare unto him his grief, yet his
parents would have him constrained to undergo the Cure.

The Chyrurgion (who doubted not but that what he spoke was true, his words
being delivered with such a natural liveliness (promised him not to neglect
what he propounded, but that he would so deal in the business that he should
have cause to rest satisfied; and would not only draw the boy to confess his
infirmity, but would undertake perfectly to cure him: whereupon this crafty
Knave (joyful of this invention, which promised unto him good success) came
unto his Comrade, and told him of that which he had so well performed:
consulting together how they should draw the boy who kept the hope to the said
Chyrurgion, which they having contrived, he who had begun the Plot, came into
the shop, and asked to see some wares; but by ill fortune, as the boy opened
them, the Mistress of the house came also, which made him doubt that he should
not finish his well projected enterprise; he could then willingly have wished
himself further off, and that he had not entered, since, as the case stood,
nothing promised him a good issue in his affairs: Nevertheless, to forsake a
thing so well forwarded, argued Cowardice, he therefore at length resolved to
try his fortune.

He causes to be brought unto him all sorts of the best Stuffes, and bargained
for a whole piece of that he best liked, saying, that his Master a very rich
Chyrurgion (whose name he tells, and the street wherein he resided) sent him
to make choice of a piece; He therefore desired the Mistress to permit the boy
to bring the Stuff away with him unto his Master, and that then he should
receive the moneys according to agreement: This young woman little doubting
that her new Chapman would have deceived her) commands the boy to follow the
Gentleman with the Stuff, and remember, said she, to bring money for it, upon
these words they departed, and had no sooner turned their backs but this
fellows Companion meets them as it were by chance; and the better to act
their parts, he demandes of his Comrade whence he came? he answered, from his
Master, and that he was sent to let one blood, but have you, said he, done that
which my Master commanded you? have you bought the Stuffes? The boy who heard
all these words, verily believed what they spoke to be true. Our two Vagabonds
being parted one from the other, he who conducted the Mercers boy, took
occasion to tell him that the other was his companion, and so wrought, that he
made him more and more confidently believe what he said; now as for the
business in hand, when you come to my Master, said he, you may leave your
Stuff below in the shop, and may ascend with him into the chamber, where he
will pay you your money, perhaps he will seek to abate of the price, but for
all that, when he knows that I have agreed with you for it, he will not fail
to content you: The young youth being thus instructed, they at length came unto
the house, and entered into the shop, where the Chyrurgion seemed joyful to see
his new Patient, Is this (said he) the youth of whom you told me? Yes Sir,
answered the other, you may if it please you take him into your Chamber to give
him content, I pray you walk up said the Chyrurgion, at which words the boy
leaves the Stuff he had under his Cloak in the shop, and follows the
Chyrurgion directly to the Chamber; the other seeing the shop void of people,
takes the Stuff and runs away with it: The Chyrurgion in the mean time
examineth the youth concerning his disease; and told him that there was no
danger for him to discover it unto him, and that if humane remedies could give
him ease, he hoped quickly to cure him of his malady.

The boy, quite amazed, not knowing what the Chyrurgion meaned, answered, That
(he thanked God) he was free from any disease.

The Chyrurgion, who was entreated to press him by threatenings if he would not
make known his grief by fair means, persisteth in his remonstrances, My
friend, said he unto him, diseases the more inveterate they are, the more
difficult they are to be cured, the grief that waxes old, takes root, and
men are often constrained to make incision, where (if applied in time) there
needed not more then an ordinary Plaster.

The youth, who expected nothing from him but money (that being the best salve
in these days) told him, That he came for no other cause but to receive money
for his Stuffes.

The Chyrurgion perceiving that he used all his fair persuasions to little or
no purpose, thought he might draw him to tell him his infirmities by
threatening; he therefore began to wax very rough with him, but when he heard
him speak of Stuffes and Ware, he began to smell out the cheat, and asked him
of what Ware he spoke; the boy exclaimed wonderfully against him, calling him
Cheater, and told him that he should pay for the stuff: but in the end he was
turned home without either Money or Stuff. This may serve as a warning to
young Apprentises, not to suffer themselves to be led by the fair words of any
man, but to be careful of their affairs, and to be watchful of those things
committed to their custody, by which means they shall deserve praise of all
men, and avoid many the like dangers which they shall run into.

CHAP. IIII.
A Cheaters selfe-invitation.
IMpudence is the ordinary portion of Thieves, and few are found among them,
that are not infected with that vice.

Garandine, as impudent as crafty (and who for his thefts was executed at
Roven) as he was one day at Paris, walking from place to place, as he was still
accustomed, the better to entrap Novices; took notice of two Citizens, who
having not for a long time seen one the other, embraced, welcomed, and
mutually rejoiced one in each others company: He who still kept one ear for
the Town, and another for the Country, perceiving them discourse of their
particular affairs, drew by little and little near unto them, yet without
seeming any way desirous to participate of their discourse; At length, after
much talk, the one of these earnestly entreated the other to come the next day
by eleven of the clock to his house, there to take part of a poor dinner with
him, and to bring with him some friend to bear him company; the other
faithfully promised him not to fail to endeavor the increase of his happiness,
by visiting him at the appointed hour, and withal, signified, that he much
honored him by his invitation.

Garandine, who had with an attentive ear hearkened to this loving invitation,
was persuaded that he might then perform some exploit: He resolves therefore
to follow his intended Host afarr off, and to learn the street and place
where he resided, to the end that he might not fail the next day to be there
as well as he who was invited; which having taken notice of, he failed not the
next day at the prefixed hour, to take his walk about the place, expecting
when he who was invited to dinner would come, that he might serve him for an
Vmbra; as the ancients were accustomed, who when any were invited to a feast,
always took one to accompany them.

He having at length perceived the invited guest coming afar off, so ordered
his steps that they both met at the same instant, just over against the very
door; whereupon, the Merchant thinking that Gerandine had been invited by the
master of the house, contested in humility who should enter last; the other
would not do as the shadow which lead Socrates one day to a banquet and entered
before its Master, which was contrary to custom, this was the cause that he
entered last: Where being both welcomed by the master of the house, they sat
down, and while dinner was preparing they entertained themselves in discourses
of News, and relations of such things as passed in Court. Garandine in the
mean time had not his eyes settled but in their unsettled motions, he gazed
every way to spy out an opportunity to provide for himself before his
departure: The table being furnished, while they wash their hands, Garandine
cast his eye on the Basin (which was of silver, and well worth 200 crowns) and
took notice that they had left it in the room adjoining, which was the
Kitchen.

The Master of the house thought that his friend had brought Gerandine with
him, and that he was of his acquaintance; And the other on the contrary,
thought that the Master of the house had invited him to dinner. It must needs
be that Gerandine had a good wit, and that he carried himself very cunningly
knavish in this place; for he was examined by both, and answered very
pertinently to all that was demanded. Dinner being ended, and the cloth taken
away, they for a time recreated themselves with discourse, until that
Garandine having perceived that the servant was gone forth, and that the
Mistress of the house was gone into an upper Chamber, Sirs (said he) I pray you
excuse me if I am somewhat unmannerly, there are some urgent occasions which
call me hence, but I will not fail to return unto you within this quarter of
an hour at most; and so having taken his leave of them, he descended into the
Kitchen, and took the silver Basin under his arm, and fled.

He was no sooner departed, but that the two Citizens (but especially he who
was invited) began to inquire who that honest Gentleman was? The other answered
that he knew him not, and that he thought him to have been some friendly
companion of his; whereupon, behold them mightily astonished, they call the
Mistress, to whom they relate the whole Story, but in the mean time they
thought not of their Basin which was stolen, until an hour after, when the
servant was returned from the City it was found missing, and the Thief known.
Thus got Garandine his dinner freely, but he dearly paid for the Basin
afterward at Roven.

CHAP. V.
The notable impudence of AMERTIS.
WE may well term it an Iron or Leaden age, since we find in it but
hard-hearted and heavy actions, and not to be imagined by common senses of
reasonable men; I may truly say, That the spring and fountain from whence so
many mischiefs proceed, is a certain kind of ungracious Impudence, whereto we
are all for the most part inclined, and which by our custom becoming
habitual, changes it self into a nature in the end: We may see a notable
example thereof in the person of Amertis, a man who had traveled through most
parts of Christendom, a man who had great correspondencies* both in his native
Country and among foreign Nations, and one who was much practiced in the
affairs of the World.

As this man one day walked in the Hall of the Palace, with an intent to spy
out men's actions, he saw a Merchant of Lions, who was with one of his
associates, talking about some Wares which he had formerly delivered unto him:
Amertis seriously viewing the Merchant, and in a deep contemplation,
considering with himself whether he could invent some trick to surprise him;
but as he ruminated on the execution of his not yet resolved enterprise, he
heard three or four Gentlemen talking of him; the one said that he was of
Lions, and that he knew him very well; the other said that he had made a
Voyage into Italy with him, and that he yet owed him some Moneys which he had
lent the Merchant at Millan: To all which Amertis very attentively listened, so
that at length, he by this and other discourse learned who he was, where he had
been, and about what time; to be brief, with the memory he had, which was
very quick, he retained all that which he heard spoken of him.

Not long after, he came unto him (finding him among three or four men of
quality with whom he sometimes dealt) and saluteth him with a profound
reverence; the other having never seen him, before, turns toward him, and
resalutes him with these words; Sir, excuse me, I pray you, I cannot call to
mind the remembrance of you, and yet methinks I have seen you some where: Sir
(replied he unto him) I have had the honor to make a Voyage into Italy with
you; The Merchant who could not remember all those who fifteen years since
had been in his company, being twelve or thirteen in number, believed that he
said true, and took upon him to acknowledge it.

Amertis conjecturing well of this new fained old acquaintance, after much
discourse of several things which he affirmed to have happened since they
last saw one another, began to tell him, That he should do him a very great
pleasure if he could now help him to the hundred Crowns he had formerly lent
him; whereat the Merchant being much amazed, and not knowing what Amertis
intended by those words, answered that he ought him nothing; I cannot believe,
replied the other, that a man of your rank and quality (who seemed always to
have esteemed honor, and ever made profession of an honest life) should now
have so bad a Conscience as to deny me that which is my due, that were not
only to violate the Rites of friendship and of all civil conversation, but
also to subvert that good opinion men have hitherto conceived of you both at
Lions and in Paris; do not you remember that I lent you this sum in Millan?
you can by no just means deny it, you will incur a general blame if you
should seek to enrich your self with the goods of another.

The Merchant being perplexed, not knowing what answer to make to his so
impudent demand, told him, That perhaps he had lent him some Money in his
Voyage, but that surely he had long since repayed; The other denying it,
persisteth eagerly in his first demand.

Those that were with the Merchant, perceiving some appearance of truth in
Amertis words (not discovering the falsehood that lay hid under them) were of
opinion that the Merchant wronged him, in refusing to pay him a due debt: And
truly, a man who had never seen the proceedings and countenance of Amertis,
would never have judged that he had intended deceit.

Upon this contestation they all retire to their several houses, but Amertis
pursued his old friend, even unto his lodging, to the end he might constrain
him to restitution; at length, being not able at that time to prevail, he
remits his cause until the next morning, and then finding him in an honorable
assembly, he moved him concerning his former demand.

The Merchant being much discontented to see himself so hardly pressed by this
impudent affronter, before such worthy company, fearing to hazard the loss of
reputation, and undergo an unjust censure for it, entreats one of his company
to take this debt upon him in his name, that they might try how this business
would that way succeed; whereupon, he that had received the watchword, seeing
that Amertis was resolutely bent to pursue the merchant, came in full assembly
and said unto him, Sir, you wrong your self, to take this man for him that
ought you the debt whereof you speak, you are mistaken Sir, it is not he, but I
that owe it, (and yet everyman knew that he had never been in Italy.)

Amertis, as crafty as a man could possibly be, took occasion by the lock, and
answered him, Sir, it is very true as you your self confess before these
worthy Gentlemen, that you owe me one hundred Crowns, for your part you cannot
deny it, but this is not the debt, for I lent him this sum in Italy, and he
must of necessity pay it. Thus he so strongly convinced them both, the one by
probable circumstances, and the other by his own confession; that for fear of
loosing their reputation in so honorable a presence, and to be rid of his
importunity, and future trouble, they were constrained to pay him the one half
in hand, promising him the rest shortly after, which he with much entreaty
accepted of.

CHAP. VI.
A Merchant cheated by a pretended Churchwarden.
THere lived in Paris a certain Cope-marchant named Clarinde, who was extreme
rich, and so given to the vice of Avarice, that he could seldom be at rest, or
enjoy any other content then by numbering his almost numberless Crowns; some
whereof he was accustomed to carry in a great Purse, which so heavily weighed
down his pocket, as if the burden thereof intended to crush him even unto
Hell before his time.

This Purse was noated by cheating Rascals (who are never idle, but always
going from street to street to seek advantages) who having: oftentimes passed
and repassed by the shop of this Clarinde, and considering with himself what
plot he might put in practice to deprive him of it; after a revolution of
thoughts, resolved to make trial of one of the strangest inventions that ever
was heard of. He takes one of his Companions upon the New-bridge (for that is
the place of their ordinary retreat) and clothing both himself and his
Companion like Husbandmen, they for a time consult whether it were best for him
to enter or retire, for he saw many Chapmen in the shop, which made him
despair of arriving at the period of his designs; for if he should have
entered in among so many people, he could not have practiced his invention with
a clear conveyance; again, the habit which he had taken purposely for that
intent, urged him not to desist from his intended enterprise, but to try the
favor of fortune; and moreover, his Companion so far pressed him, that he was
suspended as it were between two contrary opinions; In this case stood the
Cutpurse, he durst neither go forward nor backward; the nearer boldness made
him approach, the more the fear of being perceived willed him retire; at
length he resolved to attend, until that the Chapmen, who were then in the
shop, were departed, and to this he was the rather induced, by the hope he had
to increase the gain by his delay, for he conceived (as it prooved true
indeed) that the Merchant having sold that which they in the shop were
bargaining for, there would arise the more profit unto him, if he should have
the good fortune to obtain his Purse: In the mean time his companion seemed
much discontented, that he saw not as yet, the expected issue of that which his
Comrade had so confidently undertaken; the other encouraged him the best he
could, to attend a little while, until that the shop were void, which he did,
but with much impatience.

At length, he that was Captain in this exploit, having noated that the
Chapmen were departed, came to advertise his Companion, that he should stand
Sentinel on the end of the Merchants Bridge, there to receive from him what he
brought; he in the mean time goes into the shop, where finding the Merchant
alone, he causes him to open diverse Copes, telling him that he was a
Parishioner of Gentilly, and that being not long since chosen Churchwarden, he
was appointed to buy a fair Cope for the Parson of the Parish, he desired him
therefore to show him those that were good, and to use him well in the price.
Clarinde, who thirsted inwardly with the greedy desire of gain, shows him
diverse sorts of Copes, among these the Cutpurse made choice of one to which he
seemed to have a better liking then the rest, he therefore cheapens it, but
before he would fully agree on the price, he tells him that he would desire to
see whether the Cope were well made, and whether for size or length it would
fit the Curate of the Parish, who he said was much about his stature; he
therefore entreats him to do him so much favor as to assay it; Clarinde
(nothing at all doubting of that which his pretended Churchwarden would do)
puts on the Cope on his back, which the Churchwarden having exactly viewed,
seemed to dislike, for shortness, in that part where the Pouch hung; the
Merchant supposing the cause of this seeming shortness to be no other then the
bearing out of his Pouch underneath, unhang'd it and laid it by on the Counter;
his Chapman reviewing him, said he now liked it well, but his Purse better;
with that he nimbly snatched it, and ran away; the Merchant in his Cope (for he
had no leisure to put it off) ran after, the one for his money, the other for
his life; the Cutpurse, who had outrun him about forty paces, told the people
by the way as he ran, that they must not by any means stay him, for that he
that ran after him was distracted, to others he said, that he ran for a wager;
Clarind notwithstanding cease not his pursuit, but his legs being too stiff,
and his joints not well suppled, and the world gazing more on the fluttring of
his gay Cope then on him or his Cutpurse, he at length lost sight of his
Churchwarden, and was constrained, with shame, to return to his house, with
the loss of all the money which he had received in eight days before.

CHAP. VII.
Polidamors entertainment among Thieves.
THe City of Paris has always been accounted the ordinary refuge and retreat
of Thieves and Vagabonds, and (which one would admire) many of them maintain
themselves so well, and go so complete in their apparel, conforming their
discourse and outward demeanor thereunto, that men would often take them for
the chief gentlemen in court.

Let us now see what happened to Polidamor by the enterprises of some of these
night-walking Vagabonds. Polidamor was an Advocate, as famous for his wisdom,
as renowned for his eloquence, he only was spoken of in the Palace and Courts
of Pleadings; his name was the ordinary discourse of men of honor, and he was
admired of all that knew him.

These plotters of Mischief, who lie always in Ambush, expecting their prey,
hearing some talk of this worthy man, resolved among themselves to try their
cunning to entrap him: The complot being resolved on, and they (knowing his
lodging, which was not far from the Cordeliers) often sought the opportunity to
surprise him, but yet for three or four times they failed; but at length, he
coming only attended on by a little Lackey, near Saint Andrews of Arts,
three of them having perceived him, presently beset him, and there rifle him;
but finding no store of money about him, they took from him a new Cloak of
very fine Spanish-cloth lined through with Plush: Polidamor, who wonderfully
vexed that he had been after such a sort un-Cloak'd, said unto them; Sirs, I
humbly entreat you to afford me so much favor as to permit me (since you
have taken away my Cloak) to redeem it upon reasonable terms, I shall
willingly give unto you for it more then it will elsewhere afford you; if
therefore my proposition be acceptable unto you, to morrow, at what hour you
shall please to appoint, I will bring you money for it: the Thieves hearing him
speak after* that sort, answered him, That he should not fail the next day,
by six a clock at night, to be in that place, and that then they would restore
unto him his Cloak, but withal, told him, That they were already informed of
his lodging and quality, and therefore charged him not to bring any one with
him to serve him for a safe Convoy, for if he did, they vowed his ruin, and
gave him just cause to despair (if he came accompanied) of ever returning to
his house.

Polidamor, terrified with such threatenings, promised them not to fail to be
there alone at the appointed hour, in the mean time he was constrained to
return to his house without his Cloak, which he thought very unseemely in a
man of his quality, and could hardly digest it, he being a man not accustomed
to such rude entertainements; but in this case he must make a virtue of
necessity by enduring it with patience, not knowing well how to remedy it.

On the morrow he takes his purse well furnished with money, and departs from
his house about half an hour after five, and came to the place where the
former night he had lost his Cloak, there he for a time attended; at length,
immediately after six, he perceived a Coach with three or four Gentlemen in
it, Polidamor little thought those whom he expected were such kind of people;
these men seeing him stand at the appointed place, caused likewise their Coach
to stop, whereupon, one of them privately enquires of him, whether he were the
man from whom they had, the night before, taken away a Cloak lined with Plush?
he answered, That he was the man, and that he came thither upon no other
business, but to redeem it according to his promise; Upon this answer, one of
them came unto him, and whispering him in his ear, demanded whether he were
accompanied, or not, and told him that if he were, his life was in hazard: he
having vowed unto them that he was alone, was taken up by them, and placed in
the midst of the Coach, where they hoodwinke him, one of them holding a Pistol
at his breast lest he should make an outcry; behold Polidamor greatly amazed
and terrified, but he was much encouraged when they promised not any way to
hurt him, or do him mischief; they presently cause the boot of the Coach to
be shut close, and command the Coachman to drive away with speed: Polidamor in
the mean time remained as it were in a trance, not knowing whither he was
conveyed.

Having swiftly hurried from street to street, they came at length to a most
stately house, where the gate being presently opened, they enter; then began
Polidamor to redouble his fear, and to expect the hour of his death, for he
never thought to escape; at length, his eyes being uncovered, they led him
straight to a great Hall, where he found the Tables covered with all kinds of
most exquisite meats, he was mightily astonished to see himself in the midst
of so many people, all in good order, and so well clothed, that a man would
have judged them to have been of some high quality: They told him that he
needed not to fear, for that he was in good company, and that they had not
brought him thither, but that he might do them the honor to take part of a
poor Supper with them, but Polidamor could have wished himself at Supper
elsewhere in a place of more security; for he could not devise, either in what
part of the city he then was, nor conceive what they were with whom he was to
Suppe.

In the mean time, having washed their hands, every one took his place, and
had they been Princes they could not have been better attended, yet they caused
Polidamor to sit at the upper end of the Table, who had he been further from
both ends would have had a better appetite; He notwithstanding made show of
eating with the rest, judging, that seeing he was in the midst of Wolves, he
could not do otherwise then imitate their actions; When they had all Supped,
and that the Tables were uncovered and Cloth taken away, some of them came to
discourse with Polidamor, and after a complementall manner, told him, That they
were sorry that he had eaten so little with them; to which he knew not what to
answer, for he feared lest by the rash utterance of some word which might be
wrong taken, he should provoke them to anger, and to draw on his own ruin,
yet he took courage, and deliberately gave them respective answers* While some
of them were in discourse, one took a Lute, another a Violl, and so recreated
themselves; At length, after much talk, he, who the day before had taken the
Cloak from Polidamor, came unto him, and asked him whether he had brought the
Money which he promised? Polidamor answered that it was ready, and thereupon
told out thirty pistols upon the end of the Table (the Cloak being well worth
forty:) This being done, they showed unto him a little private Chamber, which
seemed unto him a very rich Wardrobe, hanged round about with Coats and Cloakes
of great value, there they bade him cull out his; Polidamor was amazed to see
such costly Cloakes, and began to take courage; and having found his Cloak
among the rest, he returned again into the Hall, behaving himself toward
them with all submissive respects, for he feared that he should not part upon
so good terms, neither did he; for when he was ready to depart, one came and
told him, That the Coachman who had brought him thither, and was to conduct him
back, must be rewarded for his pains with a pistolet, and that he must
likewise pay for his Supper with them: Polidamor, unwillingly liberal, gives
them two pistolets more, and so took his leave of them: The Coach was suddenly
provided, whereinto he entering, and having his eyes bound up, he was brought
unto the same place where they had formerly taken him up, there did they
uncover his eyes and set him on foot, delivering him a Billet, sealed with
green Wax, wherein was written these words in great Letters, THE GREAT BAND
HAS LET HIM PASS. and withal, advised him if he met with any one that would
offer him any kind of violence, to show unto him this Passeport; telling him,
That by that means he should be permitted quietly to pass, So Polidamor parted
from them, happy to have escaped out of their hands with life: But scarce had
he gone into the second street, but he found three other Thieves ready to rifle
him; and now he who at first made no account of the Billet which they had given
him, bethought himself that perhaps it might stand him in stead; he therefore
presents it unto them, which was read by one of them that carried a dark
Lantern, so they suffered him to pass and return unto his house, where his
wife remained in great perplexity, not knowing what was become of her husband;
but her anxious fear was soon turned into joy by his presence, and into
delight by the Relation which he made unto her of his adventures. She, like a
loving wife, not regarding the loss which he had sustained, seeing
smile-frowning Fortune had showed her constant inconstancy, by converting his
former loss and danger, into a safe return.

CHAP. VIII.
A prodigious History of the treacheries of Valesio.
THose men who are persuaded that they can bring the greatest things to
perfection, find themselves most often entangled by their natural imbecility
and weakness, and most commonly, the mischiefs which they contrive against
their neighbors, and the evils which they project against them, take not
success but to their own loss and disgrace; yea, those very darts which they
most despightfully cast at others, do often, by Gods justice, reverberate
against themselves: Antiquity furnishes me with many examples; but our
latter Age has noated out one above the rest, as prodigious and fearful, as
beyond the sense and common opinion of men.

There has not past an Age wherein the great Creator has not made some signs
of his just indignation appear, to punish the treacheries of those that
embrace actions so wicked and abominable, as if hatched in hell, rather then
sprung from man's invention. The History which I now describe unto you is true,
and happened not long since; the sequel whereof is as much to be admired, as
his end, who was the cause of it, was prodigious and horrible.

Valesio was borne in Berne a Canton of Switzerland, and was sent by his father
to the City of Lucerne, to be there instructed; he had a spirit full of
subtilty, and fit to undergo great matters, had he been honestly inclined: In
Lucerne he for a time studied the Law, where during his abode he often
resorted to the house of an Innkeeper, named Lucio of Zurich, a man rich and
wealthy, with whom he grew so familiarly acquainted, that he could neither eat
nor drink but in his company; he lodged over against his house, and it seemed
that heaven was not favorable unto him when he enjoyed not the company of this
man; but his affection increased when it had taken footing within his house,
and when he became enamored with the beauty of his only daughter: This young
Valesio being inflamed with an earnest desire of enjoying the feature of this
maid, the oftener frequented the house, under pretense of visiting the Father,
when as indeed his greatest happiness consisted in beholding the beauty of the
daughter; their eyes had already given to each other friendly enterchanges, and
had privately practiced an alliance in their thoughts, by the encounter of
their rays; and their hearts quickly approved of that within, which their eyes
had practiced without; so that Valesio perceiving his affection seconded by a
favorable Zephir, resolved to acquaint his Love with that which his heart as
yet concealed; The father being advertised thereof, and perceiving that the
inclinations and affections of these Lovers were mutual, knit them together in
marriage, under the sweet bonds of Hymen; happy, and thrice happy had they
been, had they not abused it, but finished the number of their years, without
straying from the path of Virtue. They lived two years and an half together,
in all sorts of Temporal delight; at the end whereof, the father died of a
lingering fever, happy in that he survived not to be a spectator of the
ensuing Tragedy. By the death of Lucio, all the inheritance fell into the
possession of Valesio, (for his wives mother deceased long before.) He
therefore resolved to take the same course of life, as his father in law had
done before him, being that he found the house so well furnished: The good
entertainment which he at the beginning gave unto his guests, purchased him a
good report of every one; so that if any man desired to entertain a friend
sumptuously, whither must they go but to the house of Valesio; there were they
joyfully received, and used with all kind of contentment; but at length, the
swinge which Valesio had taken, made him so swell with pride, that he began to
forget his family, that he might the better forget himself; the courtesy
which he formerly showed unto his guests, was now changed into most cruel
tyranny, which he often exercised upon travelers, killing and massacring them
like unto another Licaon: his house heretofore the receptacle and seat of
courtesy, was now become the cutthroat and deadly place where poor Passengers
were entrapped; he hacked them most cruelly in pieces, and made Pies therewith
(an unnatural and monstrous barbarism,) he durst not have practiced these
cruelties toward the Citizens of Lucerne, for so his wickedness had been
discovered: the delicate relish of his meat which he provided, drew unto him a
multitude of guests, which they with joyful greediness devour, whiles that he
(Villain) laughs at their simplicity; little thinking, that he himself should
shortly feel the just judgment of God, heavily lighting upon him for his
monstrous and barbarous cruelties. A strange blindness in humane conceits,
which persuade themselves, that there is no Divinity to revenge or punish their
heinous crimes and misdeeds; we so flatter our selves in our wicked
prosperities that we cannot believe we shall ever fall into those miserable
punishments which we deserve. Valeio could never believe, that the Heavens would
reveal or revenge the death of those innocent Souls, which he had most
barbarously slain: but the Great mover of the Heavens could no longer suffer
so cruel crimes: the blood of so many poor wretches unjustly shed, cried for
vengeance before the glorious majesty of his face; and yet this great and
merciful God stayed for a time the fury of his justice, to hearken to the
sweet requests of mercy, but he (wretched Caitiffe) deferred so long
repentance for his heinous misdeeds, until the weight of so many deadly
crimes, drew the arm of the just vengeance of God to punish him, as severely
and exemplarily, as the faults deserved.

It happened after the secret murders of so many people, that a certain
Merchant of France returning from Bohemia, was in passing that way desirous to
see the Cantons of the Switzers, and particularly the City of Lucerne; he
therefore came unto this City, where being arrived he inquires for an Inn, and
was directed to the house of Valesio, as the best and most renowned Inn of the
City; he goes thither, and was favorably received and welcomed by those cruel
Sirens, who allured passengers unto them by the harmonious consorts of their
voices, that they might afterward devour them, and make them their prey: he
having visited the City, and viewed part of the rarities thereof, (as the
stately Monastery, and the River Russi, which passes through the Town, and
runs forth of a great Lake as does the River Rhine, out of the Lake of
Constance) was desirous to take his rest: Here the confidence which the guest
ordinarily reposeth (according to the custom of France) in the Master of the
Inn, made the Merchant disburthen himself of two thousand Crowns which he
had in gold, and to demand of Valesio, a place where he might put them in safe
keeping: this Inne-keeper, who was always double in his works, had a strong
and massy Cupbord and two Keys which might easily open it; whereof he gave
one unto the Merchant to put his money in safeguard, but kept the other close
unto himself, to serve his own opportunities: night approaching, he was tempted
to bereave his guest, both of life and money: but whether it were that God
would otherwise dispose of him, or that his own life was already come to its
period; his wife who noated a comeliness and courtesy more then ordinary in
this Merchant, dissuaded him from so bloody a design, and urged him to embrace
another less cruel, but such as must cost him his life.

The Merchant rose early in the morning to view the rest of the City, which he
had not seen the day before. Valesio in the mean time opens the Cupbord,
rippeth the bottom of the bag, and takes a note in writing of the quantity of
all the moneys in general, and likewise of every sort of coin in particular
which he there found; then having neatly stitched up the bottom of the bag, he
locked the Cupbord, and acted his part with such subtle dexterity, that it was
impossible for a man to discern that it had been touched: but he who
penetrates into the depth of our most secret thoughts, easily discovered this
craft, as may be noted by that which ensues.

The Merchant having satisfied his curiosity, and seen (in passing) that which
was most worthy of noate in the Town, returned to his Inn; and having paid
what they demanded, he took forth his bag and went to horseback. Valesio
presently thinking that he had in vain opened the Theater (and begun the Play)
if he finished not the Tragedy, breaks open the bottom of his Cupboord, and
presently begins to raise Hue and Cry after the Thief, pretending that the
Merchant had robbed him; His neighbors were instantly in an uproare, (for he
had so long worn the cloak of Dissimulation, and outwardly behaved himself,
that every man esteemed his word as an Oracle) insomuch that many of his best
friends prepared themselves for pursuit; the Host shows them which way his
guest went, they hasten after and overtake him two Leagues from Lucerne; they
seize on his person, as on a malefactor; accuse him of theft, and bring him
back bound hand and foot into the Town; whereat he being amazed, seems, by
his silence, as it were to confess the deed: They lead him before a Justice,
who sends him to prison. That part of the Tragedy being acted, they prepare
his Indictment; and the Host showing his memorial, entreats them not to
examine him until they had perused his noate; He makes it apparent that his
Cupboord was broken; and upon the opening of the bags, the Judges found therein
the same sum and sorts of Coin specified in the Hosts noate. The most wary
and wisest Judge might have been encumbered, and overshot themselves in so
intricate a business. The Evidence of the deed being thus almost sifted out
(in man's judgment) caused the poor Merchant to be shut up in a strait
dungeon, and there to be laden with Irons.

Thus this poor innocent groaned in darkesome caves, not knowing any means of
his delivery: Wretch that I am (would he say) must I needs perish in this
obscure place, not having so much as intended that whereof they accuse me? What
Celestial powers have I so offended, that I should be reduced to such misery?
was I borne under so cruel Constellations that my own innocence should betray
me, and bereave me of my life? O great God! who in thy just judgments can
penetrate into the depth of this secret and unjust accusation, Will thou suffer
my fault to be made criminal in this sort? And must I be the shuttle-cocke and
sport of treason? Revenge and reveal this their injustice, (I beseech thee)
and suffer me not to perish in this depth of misery. As he pronounced these
words with an extreme grief and unexpressable passion, a Devil appeared unto
him in an humane shape, wearing on his head a red Cap, and approaching him,
inquires, what his grief was, and tells him, that if he would give him his
soul, he would deliver him out of those Fetters wherein he was wrongfully
shackled? Many in these days, and always have bin, who would have redeemed
themselves out of these temporary pains, to have cast themselves into the
eternal, thereby to have regained their over-valued liberty; but this Merchant
having firm hope in the Divine Providence, answered, that he was resolved
never to commit so heinous a crime, and that he had rather dye innocent of the
offense, whereof they accused him, then to live guilty of renouncing his
Creator. This Devil, destinated by the Almighty for to be a punisher of
Valesio's wickedness, notwithstanding offers him his service, and promises
him certainly to procure his liberty, provided, he would follow his advice; he
then told him, that the very day whereon they would bring him to execution, he
would be present to defend his cause that he should therefore boldly make choice
of him for his advocate, against the Impostures of his Host, that he should
know him by his red Cap, and that he by so doing should be by him clearly
freed from his innocent danger. Now it is to be noted, that when any among the
Cantons of the Switzers, will condemn a man to death, the Senate pronounces his
sentence in the midst of the Assembly upon a Scaffold, and gives permission to
the condemned to make choice of any of the company to defend his cause: this
custom has been anciently practiced, and yet is continued unto this day.

The day being come, whereon this Criminell should be punished, he was brought
unto the place of execution, where an infinite number of people attended him,
all of them being verily persuaded that this crime (whereof he was falsely
accused) should be rigourously punished, for an example to others for ensuing
times: They bring him on the Scaffold, his Host being there present, and
pronounce the sentence of his death, demanding of him (according unto custom)
whether he had any one in the Company that would plead for him; he, in this
miserable plight looks about him, and espying the red Bonnet among the rest.
Although (says he) my innocence speaks sufficiently of it self to justify
my actions, having always lived honestly, and in good credit, yet since I may
claim the liberty of your custom, I make choice of him in the red Cap, whom
you may there see, to justify me: upon these words every one looking upon the
Man, of who^ he spoke, could not tell what to imagine, for he looked not like a
Switzer, either in habit or countenance, he ascends upon the Scaffold, causes
the Host to approach, begins to declare the naked truth of the matter,
confronts, and confutes the witnesses, strikes a fear and terror into the
hearts and consciences of his accusers, and plainly lays open the wickedness of
Valesio. The people in the mean time wonder at his boldness, and admire his
eloquence, he at length declares the fraud, making it appear the bags were
ripped: then he brings the Judges to the Inn, where he discovers unto the^ the
place where they were accustomed to hide humane flesh; Valesio notwithstanding
insisteth on the contrary, and by superficial reasons, endeavors to palliate
his wickedness, still affirming that the Merchant had stolen the said money
from him; the Devil willing to catch him in his trap, said unto him, sithence
thou assurest with such probabilities that this innocent is guilty of death,
and that he has robbed thee, will thou on thy faith swear that he has done
it? The Host presently, the better to confirm the justness of his accusation,
said, it was he alone which stole away my money, and if it were not so as I
have affirmed, I wish to God that the Devil may carry me away both body and
soul; the Devil without prolonging the matter, takes upon him a most horrible
shape, snatcheth him up, and carries him away through the midst of the wide
air: thus paid he for treacherosly accusing the poor innocent, and so
inhumanely massacring those, who he should have kindly entertained.

The Merchant was presently set at liberty, with his Moneys restored unto him,
the Judges desiring pardon for committing so great an error, in so rashly
condemning him; For which, he desired no other satisfaction at his departure,
but an Act to be recorded, and a Certificate made of the present History, to
leave to posterity, the never dying remembrance of the infamous treachery of
the ever dying Valesio.

CHAP. IX.
A young Cutpurse made free.
THat I may recreate your mind after the former sad relation, I shall here
relate unto you, a bold deed and pleasant History, performed in the
Churchyard of Saint Innocents in Paris; the truth whereof many of the
neighboring Merchants can yet witness, and it was in this manner:

There was a young Boy newly arrived at Paris, who had associated himself with
diverse Vagabonds and Cutpurses, there did this Boy remain for the space of
fifteen days, without doing any thing that might be termed notorious: at
length, (as every thing has a beginning) the assembly of Rogues resolved,
sithence that he would be of their society, to make him free: for in this
trade, it is not as in others, wherein men must be first Scholars, before they
be Masters; or Aprentices, before they become Freemen: here is but a word and a
blow, one nip takes a Purse, and in the subtilty thereof consists the
perfection of the Trade.

Now there was one among the rest of the company, who was enjoined to take this
Boy abroad, and to appoint him some kind of trial, whereby they might be
assured of his courage and aptness to the performance of exploits. He
therefore takes forth his new Comerade, and brings him from one part of the
Town to the other, still expecting an opportunity of doing mischief; at length
being come into the Cloister of Saint Innocent, they perceived an old Woman
kneeling on a Tomb, there praying for the souls departed; whereupon this old
Hangman told the Boy, that if he would become Master of his Trade and be of
their fraternity, he must with a resolute subtilty go and cut the old Woman's
purse; to whom the Boy answered, that it was impossible for him so to do
without being perceived, and therefore desired to go try in some other place
where there were a throng of people, that he might the better perform what he
intended without evident dange, for that to attempt cutting off her purse, she
kneeling by her self, there being store of people in other places of the
Church, which might easily apprehend him, was as he said, mere madness: but
the old Fox so urged him by persuasions and threatenings, that he was at length
constrained to undertake it; so the Boy approached the Tomb, and kneeled down
close by the old woman; she (nothing doubting of the intended roguery, but
contrariwise thinking that Devotion had brought him thither) held on in her
prayers, and was not a jot interrupted in them: Now the young Rogue was in
great perplexity of mind, not knowing whether it were best for him to
adventure, or not; which his guide misdoubting (by reason of his long stay)
came and made a sign unto him to dispatch; whereupon, the boy encouraged with
the hope of his being free by that exploit, sliely cut her Purse; and so with a
slow pace withdrew himself, and being very joyful of what he had done, came
unto his guide, who expected him in the Cloister: but when as the old Villane
had looked into the Purse, and found but little in it, he told his young
Companion, that he had not yet passed Master of his art, for that he would show
him one trick of his Trade, which he had not yet learned; whereupon he took him
by the hand, and griping him fast, cried out unto the Woman, that that young
fellow had cut her Purse; the Woman presently looking about her, found her
strings there, but her Purse gone: as soon as the people heard it, they
hastened toward the Boy; but the news was no sooner spread, but the Boy was
gone, yet not so far, but that whole troops followed him, who being overtaken,
was soundly beaten with Cudgels, every one thronging to see the young Cutpurse;
among others, there were diverse Merchants of the street, who came out of their
Shops with little Pouches by their sides, which the old Villane taking notice
of, thrust himself into the thickest of the throng, and there cut off four or
five of their Pouches: the Merchants at length perceiving, that while they were
expostulating with the Boy, some other cut their Pouches, which they wondered
at, and well noating the behavior of the old Thief, they upon the sudden
found him cutting off another: this made all the people to forsake the Boy, and
to follow him, by which means the Boy escaped; but the old Cutpurse was by one
of the nimblest footmen overtaken, who trusting too much to the hold which he
had of one of his ears, suffered him likewise to escape from him; for this
crafty old Hangman, having formerly lost his ears, for some such mischievous
exploit, procured others to be so artificially made, that they seemed as
natural as others: by one of these was he taken, which easily coming off,
gave occasion of wonder to those that pursued him; and the mean while that
they stood wondering at that, he escaped to the Grove, into a throng of people,
who were there assembled to see an Execution of one who was broken on the
Wheel; from which place, he carried two Purses more to his fellows, where he
found his young Cutpurse much discontented, that he had so treacherously dealt
with him: Thus passed this young Boy Master in his Trade, after he had been
well beaten, though not so well as he justly deserved.

CHAP. X.
The Life and Death of little James.
IT is hard for one in these days, to find out a young man endued with a staid
wisdom; for they suffer themselves to be so violently hurried by the heat of
their own passions, that virtue is most commonly over-mastered by vice, and
reason, by a self-will inclination: the chief cause of this is, that vice
escapes too often unpunished, and that Parents do commonly slacken the reins of
their authority, permitting their children to do whatsoever they vainly
desire: so that this age being too apt and subject to ruin of it self; if it
be moreover encouraged to evil, by the over-fond permission of Parents, it is
no wonder, if at length vice predominate.

O wonderful and perverse Age! How many Monsters do thou produce? How many
children are in these times borne Viper-like, to gnaw out the bowels of their
Parents, causing them to custom themselves in sorrows and mournful
lamentations?

When we have once lost that dutiful respect wherein we are obliged toward
our Parents, how quickly do we lose that which we strictly owe unto God? As may
appear exemplified in the ensuing History, of one James, who being about the
age of fifteen Years, forsook his Parents (who were too careless of his
education,) with a full resolution, to betake himself to a debaucht kind of
life: and finding a fit opportunity, stole from his Father a great some of
money* and so fled. Not long after he enrolled himself as a Soldier, under
the command of a Lord, who at that time conducted a great Regiment: (this was
in those first troubles, wherein France, for a time, lost the sweet repose of
peace, by the dissension of some great Pears in the State, who were retired
from the Kings service to Cantonize it in diverse Provinces of the Kingdom.)
While he was in the Army, he committed a thousand insolences: and though but
little in age and stature, yet he grew to that height of wickedness, that he was
therein inferior to none. He seldom stayed long in a place, and where he
remained least, he sometimes left the greatest marks of his cruelty: those who
suffered most by him, were poor Country people: some whereof, he would cause to
be stretched out before a fire, and so by scorching and burning the soles of
their feet, would force them to confess where their money lay: he would slash
and cut the flesh of others, who would not suddenly bring unto him his
appointed ransom; and would also sometimes ravish those Maids he by chance
met: he grew so courageous that no man durst do him an affront: for in four
years wherein he lived in the Arrmy, he had slain five in single combat; who
not being patient enough to endure his bravadoes) had challenged him; of which
murders he soon obtained remission, (being much favored of some Great ones)
and so escaped unpunished.

The Army being at length cashiered, he was constrained (being never bred to
labor) either to steal, or beg: he therefore betook himself to the Forest
of Senlis, where he robbed diverse Passengers; thence he went as far as
Cleremont, with five or six of his Companions, who being armed with Pistols,
there robbed the Wagon of Amiens: thence he betook himself to Paris, where he
committed so many thefts, that he was at length, by the Society of Cutpurses,
chosen Ringleader of their Company: he carried himself so subtly in his
affairs, that his most trusty companions could never know where his lodging
was; only when they met together, he would appoint them a rendivous whereto meet
the next day; and would often punish, and sometimes stab, those who the day
before had executed no enterprise of noate. He would sometimes be clothed in
the habit of a Physician, in which he would often go to the houses of sick
persons, and having noated the entries, they should not fail the next day to
find themselves robbed: he would hide himself sometimes a whole day together,
in a House, and at night would open the doors to his Companions; at other
times he would cause himself to be followed by four or five Tagrags, and
would hastily come to the house of some Counselor, when he thought most of the
household servants were elsewhere employed, and having earnestly demanded to
speak with him, the Counselor should no sooner approach, but little James (for
so they called him) would have a Pistol at his breast, and then force him to
furnish him with what money he desired.

He, with two or three of his Companions, being one day in the fair St.
Germain, perceived a certain Attorney cheapning a silver Basin of a Goldsmith,
who not agreeing on the price, put the money (which he had offered down for
payment) into his pocket; whereupon, little James showing this Attorney to one
of his Comrades commanded him to dive into the bottom of his pocket for that
Gudgeon, and that otherwise they two should not be good friends; which the
other refused to do, as impossible without eminent danger; he thereupon called
unto him another, from whom he received the like denial: He seeing that
neither of them would obey his commands, conceived a mortal hatred against
them; and intending shortly to be revenged, he said unto them, You will not
undertake this enterprise, to ease me of imaginary difficulties, but assure
your selves (if I loose it) you shall soundly pay for it: he having thus spoken
left them, and came unto the Attorney, who was then bargaining with another
Goldsmith, because he could not agree on the price with the first: and finding
an opportunity, by reason of the throng then about him, thrust him with such
violence, that his Hat fell to the ground, which while the Attorney took up,
he gently put his hand into his Pocket and took his Purse, so that the
Attorney having afterward agreed with the Goldsmith for the Basin, found no
money to pay him, which was like to have caused dissension, in regard that the
Goldsmith would have forced the Basin on him. Little James having thus acted
his part, returned unto his Companions, and showed them the Purse, whereat they
rejoiced, but this their joy was short: for Little James hating them deadly for
their disobedience, led them to a by-place, called Mount Pernassus, where he
commanded the one to stay for him; and having drawn the other about a
Flight-shot from thence, told him in great fury, that he could hardly forbear
to kill him, whereupon his Comrade desired to know the cause of his anger, and
the reason why he spoke such words; but Little James perceiving that he
saucily reasoned with him, suddenly drew forth his Sword and ran him through:
thence he came back to the other, whom he had commanded to stay for him on the
Mount; but lest his companion should suspect any harm or ill intent from him,
he drew near unto him with a smiling countenance; when the other asking him
where his Comrade was, he snatched forth a Poniard, and stabbing him therewith,
he said, behold, there he is, go thou to him.

He once killed a begging Friar; and having taken on him his habit and Letters
of Order, came unto the Friars at S. Vincents, where he was by them for the
space of fifteen days kindly entertained: and being resolved to furnish
himself before his departure, he brought with him from Paris diverse sorts of
Pick-lock instruments, with which he (while the rest of the Convent, were
about midnight (as their custom is) at Mattens,) excusing himself for his
absence (as being constrained thereto) by in-disposition of body, picked open a
door where their money lay, which he having taken away, cunningly shut the
door and went to bed: the next day he arose early, and taking his leave of the
Superior, returned to Paris; where by his begging from door to door, he
greatly distressed those that were of that Order: for when any of them went
forth to beg provision, they were answered, that they were served already, and
that they had given it to one of their fellows, whereat the Friars were
mightily amazed, and could not conceive by any means who it was that so grossly
abused them: by this means did Little James commit sundry great thefts within
the Citizens houses, he having free entrance, by reason of his habit: but it
came to pass at length, that the Friars of Saint Vincents having found out his
arch knavery, desired some Officers within the City to search for him; but
their labor was in vain; until it happened that one of those Friars (not long
after,) entering into a certain house for an alms, met this James coming
forth of the same House; whereupon he entreated the Servants to lay hands on
him, which they did; and having lustily beaten him, were about to have led him
to a Justice: but by the coming of some of his Associates, who guarded him,
he was rescued; Little James taking an especial notice of them, came the the
next morning, (having changed his habit,) near unto the place where those
Servants dwelt, and craftily enquires their names, and the names of their
Parents; which having fully understood, he appointed 2. or 3. of his companions
to meet him at a house not far from thence, at which time he wrote this Letter
unto one of the Lackeys which had beaten him, whose name was Francis Maire, the
Contents of the Letter was as follows;

Son,
I Am come purposely into this City, to acquaint you with some affairs which
have lately happened in our parts: you have lived long here with little profit,
I have found a Match fit for you in our Country, which you must not neglect;
It is not always time to sow, we must sometimes reap: I would willingly have
come unto your lodging, but that perhaps (in so doing) your Master would have
suspected that I came purposely to entise you away; wherefore I should be glad
to see you at my lodging, whither this bearer will conduct you; I will in the
mean time cause a Breakfast to be provided for you against you come; and if
you bring a friend with you, he shall be welcome, and his entertainment shall
be the best we can provide.

Farewell.


Having sealed this Letter, he directs one of his young Cut-purses unto the
house where this Maire dwelt; who having received it, failed not to come with
his Companion; where being arrived, he was informed that his father was gone
into the City, and had left command for them to go to Breakfast, and not to
stay for him: They therefore, being earnestly entreated to sit down, did; but
they had not sat long, before little James entered and saluted them, but they
at first knew him not, until he withdrawing himself into an innerroome,
presently came forth in his Friars habit; then were the Lackyes in extreme
perplexity, and would have forsaken the Table; but Little James and his company
suddenly seized on them, and stripping them naked, he first lashed them with
Stirrop-leathers; then with a more then barbarous cruelty, caused their skins
to be gashed, and after, (they being all bloody) he put them into a great Tub
of feathers, where they had little ease; nothing could their cries avail them,
by reason that the House stood in a by-place, far from any common resort; and
after having done them many other injuries, he at midnight sent them away
feathered like so many Foul; and immediately he and his company forsook the
house.

Having discoursed of the manner of his Life, let us come now unto his Death;
and see, whether it be as tragic, as the actions of his life did
prognosticate. The fame of this notorious Thief augmented daily in Paris, and
twenty Leagues round there about; so that the Provost thought it a part of his
duty to make diligent search after him, he gives strict order therefore to his
Troops deligently to give attendance, with whom he made a Rode toward the
Forest of Fountaine-bleau, it being the common place where he lurked: but the
subtilty of little James deceived him; for he having intelligence of it,
disguising himself like a country Ploughman, passed through the midst of
them, and came to Paris, without being known: but in vain escapes he who
draws his punishment after him. For he being one day in a Tennis Court, was
earnestly noated by some of the Provosts men, who were going to play, which
exceedingly daunted him: yet without seeming to fear or suspect any thing, he
passed by them; but the Officers presently following him, saw him enter into a
house where a young Wench dwelt, whom he had debaucht, and and at that time
maintained: whereupon, they besetting the house, and one of them knocking at
the door, he himself came to the Window, and demanded their business,
(although he too well knew their intent:) the Officers, without using many
words, began to break open the door; when little James on the other side,
arming himself with a fierce resolution, foreseeing that he could not escape
death, resolved to sell his life at a dear rate, and to that end he
barricadoed himself within the house, turning the Table and Stools topsie
turvie against the door.

The news being spread that little James was within the house, made diverse
people flock together to see the issue; among others, many of the Guard hastened
thither, and endeavored by Ladders to enter through the Window; but Little
James having charged two Pistols and two Muskets with them, watching his
opportunity, when their thoughts were at the highest, humbled eleven of them to
the ground: his Wench at the same time charging as fast as he discharged: and
by that last office, testified the greatness of her courage and affection. As
for him he was so animated with rage and despair, that he often thrust out his
head at the Window, endeavoring to hasten his assured death, by the honorable
blow of some Musket, to eescape the dis-honour of the Gallows.

The people assembled more and more, and about an hundred persons had now
encompassed the House, armed with Muskets, Pikes, and Halberds: little James,
after he had discharged diverse shot, at last fell into a scarcity of Bullets,
which being perceived, some mounted upon the Ladders, whilst others broke open
the doors: every one admired the desperate stoutnesse of this Thief, in
resisting so many people: but he resisted in vain, for his hour was then
come; yet would he not for a long time yield himself, but would have killed
himself, had not his Wench hindered him: at length, the multitude entering he
was forced to yield to the fury of the people, who dragged him to prison, where
he lay not long before he was condemned to be broken on the Wheel.

The day of his death being spread abroad, caused a multitude of people to be
assembled in the place of execution; every one wondering to see one so young to
have perpetrated half so many villainies. Some pitied his youth; others
rejoiced to see him cut off so timely: as for me, I must confess I was not a
jot moved with pity, but was glad to see him punished according to his
deserts. Behold here, the Life and death of this notorious Rogue; whereby it
may be considered, how much it behooves Parents to chastise their children in
their youth, and not to suffer them to live in too great a liberty.

CHAP. XI.
The Story of Pallioly and his Choake-peare.
WE may compare youth to a young twigge, whose tenderness yields to the least
motion, and is easily bended either to the right or left hand; being made
fruitful or barren, according to the industry or negligence of the Owner. So is
it with youth, if he once finds the path of virtue by the care of his Parents,
he may be made continue and increase in the same: but contrary acts produce
contrary effects: and we cannot expect a greater comfort and joy from those
that are virtuous, then sorrow and grief from those that continue in a vicious
course of life. I would therefore advise all Parents and Guardians, to be
exceeding careful and wary in the education of their Children; especially to
beware of the poison of ill example; not suffering them to frequent the company
of such as are debaucht: for we naturally follow, with eagernes, those actions
which we see authorized by former presidents.

Pallioly was a pretty well favored youth, a fit lodging to entertain virtue,
as no doubt he would have done, had not the over fond affection of his Father,
permitted him to make choice of those courses which are most opposite to
virtue, and best pleasing our sensual appetites and inclination. His ingenuity
was such that had he been trained up virtuously, his wisdom might have made
him as famous as his wit, wrongly employed, has now made him infamous: he was
borne near unto Toulouse, where he remained not long, but out of a vain
curiosity, and curious vanity, he first (forsaking his earthly father, that he
might the better forget his heavenly,) betook himself toward Paris, where he
abode not long, before his riot and excess had wholly emptied his Purse of
coin; and his wits being quickened by necessity, he studied to supply his want
by this following device. He first makes a pair of hands of Wax, and fastens
them to his shoulders so artificially, that he could when he pleased put them
through his Cloak: with these he goes to the Church of S. Mederic, where he
understood that a great concourse of people would that day be, by reason of a
learned Man that then intended to preach: being come into the Church, he
espies a Gentlewoman with a silver Watch by her side, who was praying in the
body of the Church among many others, who every minute expected the Preachers
coming out of the Chancell: by her he kneeles, placing a Book on these his
artificial hands, and seems to fix his eyes on both: The Gentlewoman wonders
at his rudeness, in coming so near her, and conceives it to be only want of
breeding in him: she casts her eyes on him, and sees him with a Book in his
hand and praying: modesty permitted her to look, but not too earnestly to gaze
on him; she therefore without mistrust holds on her devotion, and he his; she
hers to God, and he his to the Devil, as appeared by the sequel; for while
she at the elevation of the Host bows down to the ground, and in humility
kisseth it, he nips off the Watch; and having likewise hypocritically kissed
the ground, departed.

Not long after, he goes to a Smith of his acquaintance, a very skillful man in
his Trade, and one wholly at his beck, and gives him instruction how to make a
kind of Instrument, in the likeness of a little Bowl; which by the help of
small springs within it, might open and enlarge it self; so that being clapped
into a man's mouth it could not be removed without the Key purposely made to
that end: this being finished according to his mind, and brought unto him, he
termed a Choke-peare; he might have termed it a Devils Pear, for never was
there a worse tasted fruit. Eridas a rich Citizen, dwelling about the Royal
Exchange, was the first who made trial how hard this Pear was of digestion;
for Pallioly knowing, by common report, that he was rich, chose out his
opportunity when all his household servants were busied in country affairs, and
none at home with him but one Lackey; and then being accompanied with three or
four such spend-thrifs, as himself, he came to the house, and boldly desired
to speak with Eridas; the Lackey supposing them to have been Gentlemen of
worth, by reason of their decent apparel, went unto his Master, and told him
that there were some Gentlemen below that desired to speak with him: but
Eridas coming unto them, and desiring to know their pleasure, was taken aside
by Pallioly, who in no less brief then rough terms, told him, that they were
poor Soldiers pinched by poverty, whose wants must be releeved by his
excess, that it was needless for him to endeavor resistance, for nothing
should satisfy him but money, and of that, no small quantity: Eridas (who
loved his money as his life, and nothing so well as his life but money, being
loath to lose either, and fearing the loss of both,) began to cry for help;
but at the instant one of them griping him by the throat, made him so gape for
breath, that it was no hard matter for the other to give him the Pear; which
being entered, his mouth opened so wide, that he was forced by reason of sharp
points of iron which were on each side of the Pear, to gape as wide (in
expectation of ease) as possibly he could. Thus remained poor Eridas like a
Statue, not being able to speak a word, or express his grief, but by signs,
whiles they having taken the Keys out of his pocket, furnished themselves with
money, and so departed. Eridas being rid of his guests, would willingly be rid
of his torment to: he to that end goes unto his neighbors with a wide mouth,
and endeavors to express by his signs, what he was not able to utter in
words: they are ready to laugh at his action, before they know the cause of his
sorrow* but finding by his signs and other circumstances, in what intolerable
torment he then was, they seek to excuse their former ignorance of his pain,
by diligent endeavoring his ease: but when neither their Will, or Art, could
invent a means to ease him, there comes a Porter with a Letter (and therein a
small Key enclosed) written to this effect:

Sir,
THat you may perceive how tender I am of your welfare and how far from
desiring your death, I have here enclosed, sent you a key, wherewith you may
open the instrument in your mouth; I know it has put you to some torment, yet
I pray you judge charitably of the cause, and conceive that I remain

your well-wishing servant.


Not long after, he took abroad with him a youth (that was not as then become
free, nor thoroughly experienced in his profession) and walked with him to the
Markethouse, where he perceived a plain Countrey-fellow sitting in a corner of
the street, compassed about with diverse pots, whereof some were full of rare
Fruits, and others emptied by sale: Pallioly taking notice of it, and espying
the fellows purse, indifferently well stufft, hanging about his neck and put
into his bosom, he commands the Boy to fetch him that purse if he would be
admitted as free of his Society: the Boy thinks the purse is in too safe
keeping for him to compass it, he therefore flatly refuses to fetch it, as a
thing impossible to be done, without being perceived; whereupon Pallioly bids
him learn of him, and without farther delay goes to the fellow, and tells him
some thorn had fallen in between his shirt and his back, and desired his help
to pull it out, for that it much troubled him, and so bowed himself
downwards; the country man in the mean time puts his hand in at his choler,
and while he seeks to find the straw that so troubled him, Pallioly cuts his
Purse, and takes his leave with thanks.

The Boy being encouraged by his good success, shortly after endeavored the
like exploit; but being caught in the action, was so soundly beaten, that he
was scarce able to return home: at length, Pallioly having committed diverse
the like thefts, was constrained, for safety of his life, to fly his country;
and after a long exile, was killed with a Musket Shot, being too good a
punishment for his many mischiefs.

CHAP. XII.
The wicked Servant.
IN the City of Paris there dwelt a Citizen named Melander, a man both honest
and rich; two qualities seldom meeting in one and the same person: amongst
other good qualities wherein he excelled, he was a great Architect, and much
sought after for his skill therein: This man had a servant which was married
named Alexis, a rude and surely fellow, whom his master Melander, for the space
of six years, retained in his service, in regard of his skill in the same Art:
The great love and favor which his master bare toward him, puffed him with
the wind of pride and Ambition, which did so powerfully reign in him, that
despising the due respect wherein he was obliged toward his master, he
contrived his ruin in this manner.

Melander had a house near Paris, wherein he sometimes recreated himself for
the space of six weeks together; Alexis who was married and had many
children, moved with a covetous desire, resolved to rob his Master of what was
most precious in it: but as often as this thought presented it self, so often
did he reject it, because he knew not how, safely to contrive the execution of
so bold and bloody an enterprise, until that having, by the Devils
entisement, associated himself with some of the most notorious Rogues in Paris,
he entreated them to meet at a place by him appointed, where he would open
unto them a matter that might conduce both to their own profit and his: These
Rogues hearing him thus speak, promised not to fail meeting him at the time
and place appointed; where meeting to the number of 5, (one whereof was a
Tapster, another a Mason, and the other three nearly allied) They being set at
dinner, and having drunk till their brains were well heated, Alexis thus began
to discover unto them his intended plot, saying; Sirs, I have a Master both
rich and wealthy, and methinks, seeing that we are poor, we may find a means
by him to raise our fortunes, by secretly murdering him and seazing on his
goods and money: these words being heard by his Companions, some approved his
council, others disliked it; but at last it was concluded between them, that
Alexis should be chief conductor in the enterprise, as being best acquainted
in the house, and that the other five should obey what he commanded: whereupon
one of the five, upon the set day, brought a Boat down the River to carry away
the booty (for the House of Melander was seated near the River) and fastened it
to the bankside; he came by night with his companions led by Alexis to the
said house of Melander, who was at that time there, it being the time of
Vintage.

When they were all come to the door, Alexis knocked and the servant (in
regard it was late) demanded who was there, but hearing Alexis answer, and
knowing his voice, she misdoubting no cause of fear, presently opened it; yet
was she much perplexed when she saw five others enter with him at so
unseasonable a time. No sooner were they entered but they killed this servant,
not giving her so much time as to crave help either of God or man.

They having thus begun, Alexis in a furious haste leads them up into a
Chamber, where Melander meets them, and demands of Alexis what fury had so
far transported him as to make such a ransacking of his house; To which Alexis
(having his eyes and ears shut from the respect which he owed unto his Master)
answered, that he was resolved to kill him, and that therefore he should
recommend himself to God: Melander in this extremity knew not what to do, but
being resolved, in his old age, to sell his life to them at a dear rate, he
suddenly endeavored to seize upon an Halbert which was at his beds head; but
Alexis with his Companions, to prevent it, rushed upon him, and gave him 20. or
30. blows with Clubs, wherewith they dashed out his brains: behold these
barbarous cruelties committed by a servant; yet that which follows seems
inhumane.

Melander brought with him into the same house one of his daughters, exceeding
fair, to look unto his houshold-affaires: this maid was mariageable, and might
have been well matched, had not the cruelty of these Rogues cut the thread of
her life: She lay in the next Chamber to that of Melander, when hearing the
outcry of her Father, she hid her self between the bed and the wall,
thinking so to avoid her ensuing death: Alexis notwithstanding (who was well
acquainted with every corner of the House,) having slain Melander, came into
the maids chamber, and having espied her, commanded his Companions to draw her
forth, who held her whilst he like a bruit beast, ravished her; and not content
with this, he caused his Companions to do the like. To express this action
fully, and the lamentable means she made, seeing her self brought into this
so miserable estate, requires the Pen of one more eloquent. These her
lamentations might have broken an heart of Adamant, but it was so far from
molifying of theirs, that they proceeded yet further; for without compassion of
her tender age, beauty, or Sex, they there bereaved her of her life.

Then Alexis being thus master of the House, caused the doors to be
barricadoed, and so fell to ransaking and rifling the whole house, preparing
themselves to be gone the next night: they spent the next day in jollity and
mirth; but night being come, they having loaded the Boat with the best
housholdstuffe, and themselves with money, in all, to the value of two thousand
pounds, they about midnight departed, not being perceived of any; which made
Alexis confident of his safety: but God, who sees both things past, things
present, and things to come, would not permit so impious an act to escape
undiscovered; it being in vain for humane wisdom to think to avoid the
irrevocable Decree of the Almighty.

Two days passed wherein was no news of Melander, the Vine-dressers wondered to
find no body at his house, which made one of them go to Paris to see whether
he were not there; where meeting with Alexis (who now lay rioting and
swaggering in Taverns) he asked him for his Master, at which demand he seemed
to wonder, saying, That he supposed to have found him at his Countrey-house,
and as if he had been much troubled at the news; he suddenly forsook his
company and hastened toward the house of Melander, where he with four or five
others (having for a long time knocked at the door, and no body answering)
broke into the house, where, upon their first entrance, they found the maid
(stretched forth) dead upon the floor, whereat they were amazed, but Alexis
chiefly seemed to take on, crying out that there had been thieves in the house:
thence they ascended up into the chamber, where they found Melander likewise
murdered: Then did Alexis fall down and kiss the corpse of his dead master;
saying, Alas, alas, What do mine eyes behold! Is it you my dear master that
are so miserably murdered, whilst I by my too long absence could not yield
thee succor? Ah miserable and unfortunate Alexis, How great is this days
loss? Thou have lost all thy support and fortune, on which thou have grounded
the anchor of thy hopes; thou have lost that which thou have most affected; and
to be short, thou have lost thy most kind and dearly beloved master. O God,
thou revenger of murder, punish this crime, and suffer not the authors to lie
concealed. He spoke this with so cunning a dissimulation, that those who were
present, seeing his Crocodiles-teares, believed that those bewailing
lamentations proceeded from his sincere love, and extreme affection. Then
searching the rest of the chambers, they found the poor daughter of Melander
likewise massacred, whereat he again powered forth a torrent of tears,
persuading the standers by that his griefs were much increased by this woeful
spectacle.

The bruit and rumor of this massacre was quickly spread abroad, which caused
a great concourse of people to come see so bloody and seldom heard of
tragedy: Alexis in the mean time remains in the house as master of the same;
receives all those that come to see it, and by his unusual sadness,
endeavors to cloak his treachery, and to make it an argument of his fidelity;
but some wiser then others, prying further into this business, began not only
to doubt of his fidelity, but secretly seemed to accuse him to be author of
the murder; some said that those tears were but fained, and that so many sobs
and sighs in a mere servant, no way allied unto him, could not proceed but
from a deep dissimulation: others excused him, and said, that Alexis having for
a long time been in the service of Melander, with hope by him to better his
fortune, had just cause exceedingly to grieve at this loss so disadvantagious
to his good; but among all, some pleaded so strongly against him, that he was
by their advice seized upon and imprisoned; at which he being much astonished,
called the heavens to be witnesses, and revengers of their tyranny; vowing
that he had never the least thought of so barbarous a cruelty; but they
notwithstanding having imprisoned him, prepared his enditement, and made
diligent enquiry where and how he had spent the last two days; but the
murderers had so secretly managed their affairs, that no man could depose any
thing against them, God only and their own consciences accusing them, so that
the prisoner was for that time set at liberty.

He was no sooner dismissed, but he began to blaze abroad his innocence, and
accuse them who had imprisoned him of injustice: six months were already past
wherein this crime was as it were smothered in silence, and buried in oblivion,
and the murderers were confident that it would be no more questioned; but they
were much deceived in their opinion, for not long after, four of the said
murderers (which were the Father, son, son in law, and a Mason, as we have
said) met in a certain village near Paris, and being willing to renew their
ancient leagues, they went to the next Tavern, where they began to carouse and
be merry; but as they were in the midst of their mirth, there came ten or
twelve of the Marshalls men, who being wearied (with some pursuit which they
had made) came by chance to refresh themselves to the same place; and being
entered, they put off their coats, meaning to sit down at the end of the same
table; then the marks of their office appearing, put these cruel confederates
in such a fear, as if a thunderbolt had fallen among them; and all their bold
mirth is now turned into whispering, and their joy into sorrow, they are hungry
but cannot eat, and a cold trembling so possesses them thorowout, that they
seem rather dead then alive, imagining these men pursued no other but
themselves.

These officers called for wine, and intended only their own recreation,
meaning nothing against them; but they much wondered that upon the sudden those
that sat near them had taken their flight, and left their wine and meat on
the table, departing without paying the shot. All which the officers well
noting, demanded of the Host, what was the cause of their sudden flight; to
which the Host said, that he could not choose but much wonder thereat, and told
them what kind of people they were, and how well furnished with money, being
formerly very poor and needy people.

Then the officers consulted together, and concluded that there was something
more then ordinary in the matter, and that these men (their consciences
accusing them of some offense by them committed) and fearing them as officers,
had taken their flight, and that it was requisite they should be pursued; which
being resolved on, they presently put in execution: and parting themselves,
some one way, and some another, by their diligence and speed overtook them,
they then stayed them in the Kings Name, and persuading them to confess the
cause of their flight, they told them that if they would not by fair means,
they would constrain them by force, and thereupon took the eldest of them and
gave him the Strapado, which made the old fellow quickly confess that they had
all four deserved death, namely, by the murdering of Melander: at the which
his companions grew enraged, he with the rest having before resolved to endure
all the tortures that could be inflicted upon them, rather then they would
confess: moreover, the said old man confessed that he had been the cause of
the deaths of threescore persons, whom he at several times taking into his
barge, under pretense of passing them over the River, had tied stones about
their necks, and having so drowned them, at night took them up, and so stripped
them: he moreover related unto them, that he had one day most wickedly killed a
boy about the age of seventeen years, who had no more then twelve pence about
him, and that of all the thefts and murders he had committed, he had never
grieved but for that, as being the cause of the death of one of the most comely
and hopeful young men that ever he saw.

Alexis having notice of their taking, (for it is to be noted, that of four
which were pursued, one escaped, and advised Alexis and his companion, who was
a Mason, to take their flight) Alexis fled into England, and the Mason into
Touraine, where we will anon overtake them. The officers having thus done their
devoire, led the offenders unto Paris, where they were condemned first to have
their hands cut off, and their bodies to be broken on the wheel before the
house of Melander, which was performed in the sight of a multitude of people.

One of those (which were thus broken) confessed, that he was accustomed in the
woods near Paris, to strangle the passengers with a cord, which he for that
purpose carried about him; and that when any demanded of him whither he went,
he would answer, he went to buy a calf, showing unto them the cord.

We will now return to our Renegadoes; he which was at Tours, having escaped
the danger which threatened him, had changed his name, and lived by his trade,
being welcome among others of the same profession in those parts, by reason of
his great skill therein: he being at length become amorous of a young maid in
the country, by the consent of her parents married her: Behold him at the
height of his desires; but yet so troubled in his conscience, that he could not
rest, for the blood of those innocent souls, which he had shed, ceased not to
cry for vengeance: but the mischiefs which troubled him, happened chiefly, in
that he (either in malice or jollity) so charmed the Cod-peece-point of one of
his neighbors, that he could not make use of his own wife, which being done,
he came about three or four days after unto the married man, and told him
that he partly knew that his point had been knit with a charming knot, and that
if he would give him a reasonable reward, he would untie it: The man who
desired nothing more then to be freed of this infirmity, yet without thinking
that the Mason had charmed it, promised to give him twenty shillings in
present, and twenty shillings more when he was eased thereof; of he received
the twenty shillings, and his neighbor being cured, he demanded of him the
other twenty shillings according to promise; who then called him Sorcerer, and
told him that he was a Witch, and had bewitched him, and deserved to be burnt;
the Mason not being able to bear such language, called him in question for
scandalizing his reputation.

The Judges having seriously considered the matter, by a common consent agreed
that he was the sole cause whence proceeded this evil; which being after a
sort prooved (for that about ten days after the marriage, the said Mason had
publicly bragged unto some that he had done it, which was prooved against
him) he was condemned to be whipped through the Marketplace and then banished;
which to avoid, he presently appeals to the Parliament of Paris, whither he
was sent, and where he found his death: The time being come wherein he must be
recompensed according to his merit; for being come to Paris, he is heard of by
some of the inhabitants of the said Village, who presently gave notice and
advertised the heirs of Melander, who so eagerly pursued him, that by the
deposition of the former witnesses, he was forced to confess the deed, and so
was judged to the same punishment as his companions, which last Execution was
done, in the year 1616. five years after the murder of Melander.

There remains now only Alexis who passing by Calis, it happened (as thieves
cannot forbear misdoing) that he entered the house of a rich Merchant, and
stole from him a great sum of money, while he was at Mass: he is thereupon
taken, and condemned to be hanged. Thus were they (by the Divine justice)
deservedly put to death, who so cruelly had murdered Melander.

CHAP. XIII.
The dangerous adventures, and miraculous escapes of Colyrias.
COlyrias was descended of a good family in Guien, and of a father whose virtue
might have been a pattern unto him in his actions, had he not been withdrawn
by the over-commanding power of the destinies. This young man (his father being
dead) was committed to the tuition of his Uncle; who slacking the severity
which at first he showed, soon after permitted him to follow his licentious
desires, as do most Tutors and Guardians of children in these days; they are
forward to receive the benefit of their place, but backward to perform the
duty. This is the bane of youth, when Parents are too indulgent to their
children, and Tutors or Guardians to their charge, suffering them freely to
exercise whatsoever is dictated unto them by the pravity of their own
dispositions.

Colyrias was of such a gadding humor, that he resolved (without his Uncles
consent) to make a Voyage toward Bourdeaux; and for that purpose pilfred from
his Uncle a round sum of money, and therewith privily departed: He had not
sojourned there long, but he was taken with a desire of seeing Paris, but
before he arived there, he took up his lodging in a Town, seated upon the
Loire, at an Inn, the Host whereof prooved a mere Cutthroat: here Colyrias
with two others, by him accidentally met, having supped together, were
conducted all to one Chamber where were three Beds; every one makes choice of
his own, and having locked the Chamber door, they all betook them to their
rest: But the Host having a secret door which entered into the same chamber,
about midnight, when he thought that a deep sleep had seized upon their
senses, softly entered, and coming into their chamber approached their beds;
Colyrias being by chance awake, saw them passing along the midst of the
chamber, and at length staying at the next bed, which made him jealous that
they had some attempt against their lives: he therefore began by snorting, to
make show that he was in a deep sleep, although he were indeed much
perplexed with the apprehension of an ensuing mischief.

The Host having visited the bed of his companions, came and handled his flesh
also; and having so done, he heard them say, that his flesh was but tough, and
that the other two would prove dainty meat, they then went to the others
beds, and (like bloody miscreants) miserably killed the companions of
Colyrias; whereat he was so amazed, that he knew not what course to take, for
he expected the same entertainment, as had his poor companions; yet beyond
his thought was the Host more merciful to him, then unto the others, for
having disposed of the bodies of his companions, he came unto him, and having
taken away from him his moneys, which amounted to twenty pounds and upwards,
causing him to arise, he conducted him through a gallery, wherein he had made a
trap, in the form of a drawbridge, which by the means of a bar of iron
fastened under, it would rise and fall with the least weight that came upon it;
Colyrias being come upon it, immediately fell down into an unfrequented street,
where while he with tears lamented his hard misfortunes, two thieves
perceiving him, demanded of him the cause of his complaints, whereupon he
declared unto them all his former accidents, whereunto they answered, that ill
fortune indeed had given him just cause of sorrow; but that patience ought to
serve him as a buckler against so many miseries; and that they so much pitied
him, that if he would he should participate of their better fortunes: upon this
promise he followed them, little thinking that he had fallen out of the frying
pan into the fire; but being come into the next street, they there for a time
stayed, expecting an opportunity to take some booty, they then going up another
street, came unto a well, where one of them, desirous to quench his thirst,
found that the buckets were wanting, which made him entreat Colyrias to descend
into the well for water; but he fearing that they would play some scurvy trick
with him, at first refused; yet at length, constrained by their earnest
entreaties, he adventured it: he was no sooner down, but the watch appeared in
sight of his companions, whereupon they forsaking the rope by which Colyrias
held, fled; so that had it not been that Colyrias had taken footing upon a
stone, which jutted forth of the side of the well, he had there perished: as
soon as the watch came unto the well, one of the company being desirous
likewise to quench his thirst (it being in the heat of Summer) thinking that
the bucket had been in the bottom of the water, began to draw at the rope;
Colyrias (thinking that his companions had drawn) according to their promise,
seazing upon the rope, was by little and little lifted up; but he finding the
weight heavier then was usual, called unto his companions for help; saying,
That surely there was something more then water in the bucket; at length, by
their united forces, they drew up Colyrias; when they saw him appear at the top
of the Well, they being terrified, ran away as if the Devil had been at
their heels, so suddenly loosing their hold of the rope, that if he had not
cast his hand quickly upon the mouth of the Well, he could not have escaped the
danger of tumbling in again.

It happened that about four or five days before the arrival of Colyrias,
that the Bishop of the Diocese being dead, was buried with a Ring and rich
Crosier staff in the presence of these his companions, which made them
earnestly desire by some plot or other to steal them: and to that end desired
the assistance of Colyrias, whereunto, though unwilling, he was constrained to
give his consent: they then came unto the Church door, which being opened by
Picklocks, they entered, showing him the Tomb, and threatening him with death
if he refused to go in, or failed to bring unto them the Ring and Crosier:
whereupon, they having with iron-crows, and other instruments, lifted up the
stone of the vault, he entered; and putting his hands upon the Coffin, pulled up
the planck that covered him, and taking the Crosier and Ring away, he came unto
his companions, and told them, that as for the Crosier, he had brought it; but
as for the Ring, it was not to be found in the Coffin; thinking by this means
to keep the Ring for himself: but they, who had been at the Bishops Funeral,
and knew assuredly that the Ring was enclosed in the Coffin, so threatened
Colyrias, that he was constrained to go into the Vault the second time; where,
making as if he searched farther, and having told them, that certainly it was
not there, they forthwith let fall the stone, and buried him in the sepulcher
with the Corpse of the dead Bishop; Colyrias had already escaped two imminent
dangers, but now thought assuredly, he should never escape the third, but that
he should perish in the vault.

Whilst he was in this great perplexity, there came two Priests, who being
possessed with the sacrilegious desire of robbing the Bishops sepulcher, lifted
up the stone, and one of them being about to enter, Colyrias caught hold of his
legs, who imagining that the dead Bishop was revived, and had caught him by the
legs, being filled with fear and amazement, he strived to withdraw his legs,
and so drew our Colyrias, who imagining his conceit, ran after him to the
place where he entered, and got forth, and having escaped out of the Church, he
hasted out of the town with the Ring, that was worth two hundred crowns, so
that he returned home with some recompense for the many dangers and miseries
that he had already suffered.

CHAP. XIV.
One often cheated.
IN the year 1615. there was in the town of Amiens, a young man whose name was
DORILIS, who forsook his Parents by reason of some private quarrels which he
had with his Brethren, but before his departure, he stole out of his fathers
Cabinet, the sum of twenty pounds and upwards; and having so done, went
toward Paris, but as he traveled, he overtook a Merchant that went to the
fair of St Germain, with whom he kept company until they came unto their
journeys end; but they there leaving one the other, took up their several
lodgings. This Dorilis being of a sottish and stupid nature, and little
acquainted with the crafts and subtilties of the world, being newly arrived at
the City, went from street to street to view the excellency of the buildings
and other rarities: his gazing about made him soon taken notice of by some
Cheaters, who as soon as they saw him, judged it an easy matter to entrap him;
one of them to that end comes toward him with a great Packet, with this
superscription;

Let this be delivered with trust to the Lady Robecour, dwelling at Aberis,
etc.

And having delivered unto him this Packet, he earnestly entreated him to tell
him to whom it was directed, signifying that is was his chance to find it, and
that there was somewhat enclosed in the same.

Dorilis, who could not dive into the depth of this mystery, read the
superscription, and at the request of him, who delivered him the Packet,
opens it; and therein finds a small chain of gold, with these words;

Madam,
HAving by your Letters, understood of the happy success of your marriage, and
that you have so soon perfected so good a work; it would have seemed that I had
not participated of your joy, if I should not have testified it with this
chain, it is but of small value in respect of your merits, it cost only fifty
crowns, this is a small gift in comparison of that which my affection would
have offered. Nevertheless oblige me with your acceptance, and I shall truly
rest Your Kinsman

A. de Robecour.


Dorilis having read this Letter, wished to have been so fortunate, as to have
found it; whereunto the other answered, that if he had a liking unto the chain,
he should have it upon reasonable terms, what it cost appears by the Letter,
and therefore in regard it was not fit for his wearing, he would part with it
for the one half that it cost: at length Dorilis after some arguing gave him
ten crowns for it.

This first encounter was but a forewarning of his future mishap; He
nevertheless, not suspecting any deceit, blessed the hour wherein he lighted
upon this good fortune: not long after, as he was passing through the Fair, he
espied some gamesters playing at Dice, whereupon he drew toward them, and
desired to be half with one of them that played, whereby he quickly gained a
Noble; this provoked Dorilis to play for himself, thinking thereby to better
his fortune: but these two Cheaters (who had at the beginning fained themselves
to be strangers one to the other) having perceived that he settled himself to
play, handled their false Dice so cunningly, that they suddenly gained from him
three pounds, and had without doubt got more, if the earnest desire of seeing
the Fair had not withdrawn him. Thence Dorilis proceeded farther into the
Fair, when he (according to his rude custom) gazing about him, espied a
Lottery; whereunto he drew near, and beheld the Adventurers; where being noted
by some Cheaters, who had complotted with the Master to be permitted to gain
when they would, he was by one of them entreated to participate with him in
this Adventure, which after Dorilis (fearing again to be cheated) refused, upon
this answer, the Cheater having drawn, opens the Billet, and finds therein
a silver Basin; which he having received of the Master of the Lottery, showed
to Dorilis, reproaching him for refusing to be halfes with him in the Lot, and
so to have gained the one half of the Ewer, whereupon* Dorilis induced by this
man's imaginary gain, begins to draw Lots, and ceased not until he had emptied
his purse of twenty crowns, and yet received not the worth of twenty pence,
notwithstanding all this, he was not any whit dejected, being confident that
his Gold chain would make him a saver.

After he had been in diverse parts of Paris, and had seen all that which was
most worthy of note in the city, he returned unto his Inn, where he no sooner
entered, but he perceived that he had lost his purse: then did the long way
which he had to go, the hazards of sickness which he might fall into, and a
thousand other misfortunes came into his mind, yet did the finding of his
chain in the other pocket, in part qualify the extremity of his grief, but
Fortune had destinated him more crosses: For as he was in the Inn bemoaning
his misfortunes, a Cheater, that was in the next chamber, hearing him, came,
and seeming to pity him, persuaded him by any means not to suffer grief to
have the predomination; telling him that tears were but in vain, since they
could not redeem that which was already lost, and promising to him if occasion
required, the assistance both of his purse and person; and using many other
good words, persuaded Dorilis to Suppe with him, which he condiscended unto;
so that Supper being ended, when he expected that he who had invited him would
have paid for his Supper, he upon the sudden found his friend departed (who
under pretense of going to make water had left him) and having long expected
his return in vain, his former losses made him jealous of his Cloak, which he
searching for found wanting: Now was his only hope in his chain of Gold; but
that being offered as a Gage for his expenses, was rejected as counterfeit:
then was he wholly oppressed with sorrow, but not without just cause, for he
on the morrow was constrained to exchange his rich apparel for far meaner,
thereby to discharge his former expenses, which made him (like the prodigal
son) to return home something wiser, but far poorer then when he forsook
his father.

CHAP. XV.
A strange Robbery of a Merchants Shop.
IN the Country of Burgoin there lived one named Rapigny, who from his youth
made a practice of Theeving, for which he had been often questioned: But this
interior appetite of Robbing had so possessed him, that he forsook his Country
of Burgundy to go unto Paris, where he thought he might with more safety
exercise his slights; during his abode there, he committed so many robberies,
that his name became dreadful to the citizens, and their whole discourse was
of his notorious deceits; few of the city had seen him, his common walks
being in the night, and those that did see him, did little think that he whom
they saw, was the man of whom they so much talked.

One day being desirous to put one of his inventions in practice, He being like
a Tradesman apparelled, came unto a rich Merchant named Syriander, and told him
that he understood that he returned much ware into the County of Burgundy to
one Master Vernon, a man with whom he was well acquainted; wherefore he
(having fained that he had a Trunk full of Commodities to send to the same
man) signified that he should be much obliged unto him, if he would be
pleased to convay his also thither, whereunto this Merchant (little mistrusting
his quality) condiscended.

Rapignus having thus far proceeded, caused a Trunk to be brought unto him
so cunningly contrived, that it might be easily unlocked by one within; he
therefore causes a little boy (an Apprentice in his theeving trade) to be put
within it, and having charged him upon his life not to speak or make any noise
in the Trunk, but about midnight to come forth, and having opened the shop
doors, to give entrance to his companions, he locked him therein; and having
so done, he caused this Trunk to be brought to the house of Syriander, who not
doubting of what was enclosed therein, received it, and placed it in his shop.

Evening was already past, and night, the favourer of thieves, had with her
black mantle overspread the earth, when this young Boy (perceiving by the
quietness of all things, that the household servants were long before retired,
and therefore in all likelihood in a deep sleep) gently opened the Trunk
wherein he was enclosed, but coming to the door found not the key therein as
he expected, at which being much perplexed, he was about to give over his
enterprise, and to retire into his shell; but he at length bethought himself of
opening the shop windows, which he performed with much dexterity, none awaking
at the noise; and having let in his companions, who there attended him, every
one furnished himself with a parcel of the best wares in the shop, and so
departed. The theft was soon found out, but it could not be known who the
Actours were till four years after, one of them being to be executed at the
Greave for some other robberies, confessed the fact, and discovered his
companions, who were served in the same kind.

CHAP. XVI.
The cunning escape of a Cheater out of prison.
IT is not long since a thief was brought into the Bishops Prison in Paris, who
had committed diverse robberies, among the rest, he had (but 15. days before)
stolen to the value of 100l. in jewels, from a Goldsmith, for the co^passing
whereof, he practiced this ensuing device.

He had formerly taken notice that there was in this Goldsmiths shop a small
casket of Rings, and Diamonds, which he much desired the fingering of, but
being barren a long time of any invention, whereby he might gain it, at last he
went unto a Joyner, to whom he gave directions for the making of a casket like
unto that which the Goldsmith had; which being made according to his mind, he
one day having perceived that there was at that time in the house but one
servant, and a little boy, son to the Goldsmith, entered into the shop carrying
this Box under his cloak; when he came in, he desired them to show him choice
of Rings, whereupon the pattern of this new casket was presently fetched, but he
perceiving that he could not easily bring to pass his intended project whilst
that both of them were in the shop, he delivered the boy a piece of gold to
change, and in the mean time causing the Box to be opened, he cheapened the
Rings; and seeming to mislike of the price, he desires the servant to show him
others, but whilst he turned his back to fetch them, this fellow taking his
opportunity, suddenly exchanged Boxes, putting his Box in the place of the
other; then faining that he could not tarry to look upon the other Rings, in
regard he promised to give a friend the meeting where he knew he was by that
time expected; he desired the Apprentice to keep the money (which the other was
not yet come with) till he came again, and so departed: But he joined not long
in this cheat, but within fifteen days after was taken, and had no doubt at
that time been executed, had he not had some extraordinary means to escape; as
thus, he sent a boy to one in the city, an Abettour of his stolen goods, to
entreat him that he would make for him an Hare-Pie, and accompany him at the
eating of it, which he (mindful of his former familiarity) performed; and
having brought it to the Jayle, where his friend was, did there sup with him
and the Jailer. Having supped, his friend called him aside, and told him that
the cause of bespeaking this Pie, was to prevent any mistrust which the Jayler
might have had, had he not seen this; he having so said, proceeded to a second
request, which was to work his delivery out of this place, by a plot which he
would suggest; whereunto this Citizen promising his best endeavor, he
signified unto him that the only way for his escape, was by sending unto him
another Pie made like the former, where in stead of flesh, should put a long
rope, and some Picklock instruments; which being made, and sent according to
his appointment, he opened it, and taking forth the things enclosed, made so
good use of them, that he the same night escaped; but having escaped, he was
the same night apprehended, for a robbery suddenly committed after his
departure out of prison, and being brought to the same place, was shortly
after, for this and his former robberies, executed.

CHAP. XVII.
A Thief caught in a trap.
A Certain Gentleman of Poictiers, named Morindor, came to Paris about the
dispatch of some business of importance, which he had at Court; and had brought
with him store of moneys, as well to discharge the expenses of his journey, as
also to disburse for other particular occasions, where being arrived, another
gentleman of his Country sent unto him, by an express messenger, to entreat
him that he would be very careful of a great suit which he had then depending
in the great Chamber.

Morindor, who would not disoblige his friend, took this cause in hand; and
although he were somewhat hindered by his own particular occasions, he
notwithstanding ceased not to solicit in his friends behalf: but whilst he
passed and repassed through the Palace, and that he thus solicited, both for
his own and friends right, he was perceived by two Cutpurses, who resolved
among themselves, upon the first opportunity, to show him a trick of their
activity; and to that end, they diverse times drew near him, but durst not
adventure, a hand into his pocket, by reason that he knowing that the Palace
was always frequented by such a base crew, was very circumspect to avoid all
such mischievous accidents: but the subtilty and sleight of these Cutpurses,
surpassing his care and diligence, he was at length surprised, for he being one
day in a throng in the great Chamber, was rudely thrust by these fellows, and
while he looked about to see whence that thrusting and violent motion
proceeded, one of them thrust his hand into his pocket, and stole thence his
purse, which he knew not till two hours after, when he (intending to have
paid for some books, which he had bought in the Gallerie of Booke-sellers)
missed it; but could not on the sudden guess at what time he was so robbed by
them, what in this case to do he knew not; nature had endued him with more
wit then to chafe and fume at that he could not remedy, or by impatience, for
loosing a little, to injure him who gave him all.

At last (he being well acquainted with the craftiness of the times) he
resolved to be revenged, wherefore he being willing to requite them, went to a
Smith, of whom he bespake a spring to put into his pocket which might shut of
it self, and suddenly catch whatsoever touched it: The Smith, being thoroughly
experienced in his Art, made him one of the fairest, and most ingenious pieces
that could be devised, and that with such Art and cunning, that it far exceeded
the manner of Morindors expression; who having contented the Smith, caused it
to be placed in the same pocket from whence his purse was stolen; and having
so done, he walked in the Palace four days, but on the fifth day, he viewing
the portraictures of the kings which are upon the Pillars in the Hall, was
perceived by the same cutpurse; who encouraged by the easiness of his first
purchase, he resolved to adventure again, then drawing near to him, and
watching his time when the people came thronging upon him out of the great
Chamber, he gently put his hand into his pocket, but it no sooner entered, but
this spring disbanded, so that where he thought to take, he was taken.

Morindor, who felt the spring disband, seemed not to take notice of the
Cutpurse, but began to take his walk from the one side of the Hall unto the
other, thence into the great Chamber, the Galleries of the Palace, and so
about; the Cutpurse (though unwilling) was forced to follow him foot by foot,
for he could not withdraw himself he was so straightly fastened in the
spring; sometime Morindor taking a short turn, would suddenly thrust away the
Cutpurse, as though he came too near him; then did the other, with an humble
countenance, entreat him not to disgrace him further, but to accept of some
indifferent satisfaction from him. To which Morindor seeming deaf, continued
on his walk, so that it was not long before that many of the Palace perceived
it, who gladly flocked together to see him led after that sort. At length,
Morindor having for a long time walked from place to place, and by the shortness
of his turns lengthened the pains of the Cutpurse: He turned himself, and
with a choleric visage said unto him, What makes you follow me step by step
Master Thief? It was you Sir that stole away my purse, and you shall deerly
answer it: At these words the other fell on his knees, and begging pardon,
faithfully promised to restore it, if he would release him; but Morindor would
not take words for deeds, but kept the Cutpurse thus shamefully imprisoned,
until his Purse was brought unto him by one of the thieves Comrades, who had
thither accompanied him: Thus was the deceiver deceived.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Story of Amboise la Forge a notable Cutpurse.
AMboise la Forge was brought up in Picardie, and as he increased in years, so
did he in wickedness; he began with Pins, and ended with Pounds, which had
weighed him down to hell, had not his present repentance, and temporal
punishment, by Gods mercy prevented the eternal, which we charitably conceive,
because as the one half of his life was spent in evil, so the the other half
was worn out in punishment; The one you shall see in the beginning, the other
in the end of this ensuing History.

This young fellow being past his childish tricks, as stealing Pins, Points,
and the like, begins his youthful pranks thus:

He goes one night to a Farmors house, and there (having formerly noted where
his Poultry usually roosted) steals a Turkey, two Capons, and four Pullets;
which he having conveyed away (by his Companion in evil) he the same night
breaks open a Bakers shop, furnishes himself with a sufficiency of Bread;
and afterward, passing by a Tavern, and perceiving the Grates of the Cellar
to be large, made shift to wreath himself in, where having found three or
four good Flaggons, he fills them with Wine, and having made himself frollike,
refills them: The next morning he goes early unto this Farmor, Baker, and
Vintner, and kindly invites them to dinner, they wonder at his free
entertainment, and wish each of them, that what they had lost the last night
had been there likewise, as more fitting for their bellies then for those
Rogues that stole it: On that condition, replied Amboise, you would (I believe)
forgive them their riot; whereunto they cheerfully answered, with all their
hearts; but (said one of them) farewell it, what we have lost there, we have
gained here: It Is true indeed (said Amboise) for what I stole from each of you,
your selves have among you eaten, which I wish may do you much good: at which
words, each of them took the more especial notice, of what they were
entertained with; and the Farmer found that he had the like Poultrie, as he
that night had lost, and the Baker the like bread, and the Vintner the like
wine served in in the like Pots; all which being considered, they found that
his words were in earnest, and so they took them; for they suddenly rising,
would have forsaken the room, in the heat of choler, but he persuades them that
they could not eat their meat in better company, imitating therein the young
Greek, who having perceived particular notice that his Citizens had lost the
battle, came into the marketplace, and proclaimed that they had got the
victory, upon which false rumor, he caused among the citizens a public joy for
three days, but when the pitiful news of their overthrow was brought by some
soldiers, fled from the battle, every one was ready to kill this false
messenger, who had caused them to be filled with joy, in a time when they had
just cause to be drowned in tears and sorrows: but he answered them, that they
had more cause to thank him, then to murmr against him, because that he had
changed their cause of discomfort, into comfort, and their mourning into a
public rejoicing.

But this first exploit of youth, was nothing in respect of what he did after,
for it was not long before he came to one of the fairest women of the Parish,
and sought earnestly to entice her to lewdness; but what he could not by fair
words effect, he at last obtained upon the promise of twenty Crowns, which he
(as then being not able to give) compassed by this means: He goes speedily to
a rich Churl of the Parish, and desired to know of him, whether he could help
him to five Crowns in Gold for Silver; whereunto he answered, That he had so
much, but was loath to part with it: whereupon la (...) promised him two
shillings on condition that he would bring it to his lodging, and let him have
it in exchange for as much Silver as it came unto: This Clown (thinking on the
gain which he should make by the exchange) condiscended to follow la Forge
unto his lodging, where the money being told out on a Table before two others
of la Forge his Society, he suddenly takes it up, and casts down an acquittance
of five Crowns in lieu of it, and having so done departed; The Country-fellow
followed him and demanded his money, but la Forge answered, That he owed him
long since that money, and that now paying it, he had given him an acquittance
for his discharge, and desired to know what he would have more. By this means
he got the five Crowns, and by those Crowns he attained even to the glutting
of his lustful desires, for it was not long before he grew willing to
surrender up that costly place to another; yet it vexed him that he had parted
with his money on so light terms; and bethinkes himself on a course how he
might regain his 5 crowns so ill bestowed; to that end, he comes to his Lemman,
and told her he was pursued (for a small debt) by a company of Sergeants, and
that he should be constrained, either to pawn, or sell, a cloak worth four
or five pounds, unless she would furnish him with five or six crowns; he
signifies, that if she would assist him, he would leave his cloak, and ever
rest indebted unto her: she conceiving that she could not possibly loose any
thing by the lending him the money, as long as she had so good a pawn; wished
him to bring his cloak, and he should not fail to receive the money, both
which was done accordingly. La Forge soon after had notice that this Gossip
had invited some of her friends, lately married, to a feast; thither he comes,
and desires the husband of this dainty dame, to help him to a cloak which his
wife had borrowed for him when he went to the wedding of his invited guests;
The good man of the house answered, he heard not of it, and for his part he
had no use of it if his wife had borrowed it: he therefore asks his wife
whether she had borrowed any such cloak for him, or not, which she (suspecting
that he meant to cheat her of her cloak and money) flatly denied even in his
presence, whereat la Forge being enraged, deeply swore that she had it, and
therefore desired him that he would be pleased to look in her trunk, and he
made no doubt, but that he should there find it: the good man being amazed at
the confidence of the thief, went and looked in her trunk according to his
desire, and there found to his great discontent, and her disgrace, what he
there looked for; the greatness of which discredit, in the presence of her
best friends, so grieved, that she pined away with extreme grief.

After this he goes toward Paris, and by the way overtaking a young Scholar
going thither to see his friends, he discoursed with him until he came to the
corner of a great wood; then he resolutely told him, that either he must part
with his suit of clothes or his life; the poor young man soon made his
choice, and quickly gave his clothes that he might after live to enjoy others;
so this our rascal entered into Paris all new, where he was not long, but by
reason of his many bold, and impudent prancks, he was thought fit to be chosen
Captain, or Ringleader of the infamously famous crew of Cutpurses, Cheaters,
and the like; the which place that he might the better seem to deserve, he
took upon him to cheat, or by some other way to surprise, one Messager, a
crafty fellow, who could never be circumvented by any; although that diverse of
his predecessors had endeavored with the hazard of their necks, and some with
their lives to have done it. He having heard of the wariness of this fellow,
began to consider with himself, that he was not to be surprised by any
ordinary way, wherefore setting his wits on the tenter-hookes, he at length
overreached him thus.

La Forge understanding that this Messager was accustostomed daily to go over
the new Bridge, he came thither very well apparelled, and long expected his
coming; at length he perceived him viewing the Samaritane, and the little
garden below it, whereupon he took occasion to give him the Bonjour, and to
entertain him with other discourses concerning the affairs of the time;
Messager nothing suspecting him, because of his rich apparel, as they were in
talk, there draws near unto them, one of la Forges companions, being very well
acoutred, and places himself on the other side of Messager. La Forge seeing his
companion come (without whom he hoped not to effect any thing) casts his eyes
down toward the river, and wishes them to take notice what a wondrous strong
Boat there was that did not sink with such an extreme weight of iron, his
companion who stood on the other side of Messager, said unto him, I pray pardon
me sir, if I say that you have a bad eyesight, for you mistake wood for iron,
that Boat is laden with Billets, and not with Iron; for it is impossible that
it should bear so much Iron and not sink: Sir (answered la Forge) I thank
God, my sight is very good, and I know that there are some Boats laden with
Faggots, Billets, or the like; but that Boat which I point at with my finger,
being the second Boat from the bank, is laden with Iron, and I dare lay a good
wager that that which I say is true.

Messager, who saw plainly that the Boat was laden with Wood, was silent, yet
smiled to himself at so great a mistake, little dreaming whereunto their
contestation tended.

At length their contention grew so hot, that they seemed like to have fallen
from words to blows; in the end it came to a wager of ten Crowns, which was
deposited into the hands of Messager, until it were decided by a nearer view;
They having so done, call unto them the Boat-man and enquire of him wherewith
his Boat was laden? he answers, with Wood: but la Forge, the better to cover
his intent, would not believe the Boat-man, but would pass from Boat to Boat
(the better to color his intent) by touching that which was the subject of his
wager; which having done, he confessed that he had lost, and seemed wonderfully
discontented at his so great mistake; the other laughing and winking on
Messager, told la Forge, that being he had won his money, he would bestow a
Breakfast on him if he pleased to accept of it: which motion being embraced by
la Forge, they both entreat Messager his company, in regard that he was
present at the Wager; which he at first refused, excusing himself by reason of
some business of importance that he had to dispatch in the City; but at last
they persuade him to go with them.

They then enter into one of the most noted Ordinaries, bespeake dinner, and
whiles it is preparing, drink healths at his cost that won the wager; at last,
toward the latter end of dinner, between the Pear and the Cheese, the other
Cheater began to challenge la Forge, to play with him three casts at dice for
the worth of another breakfast, but la Forge refused it, as having no great
skill in gaming, but wished Messager to have a bout with him, which he likewise
refused. This their plot not succeeding according to their expectation, la
Forge signifies unto Messager, that he was to go within two days toward
Lions, and was well provided of moneys for his journey, but that it was in
silver, which weighed heavily, and would prove troublesome in his journey; he
desired therefore to know whether he could change 10. or 12l. of silver into
gold, and offered him 2s. 6d. for the change; Messager considering the promised
gain, told him he should have his desire, and presently drew forth a little
bag which he had in his pocket, and begun to tell out his money at the end of
the table, whilst la Forge counts his at the other end; at length the ten
pounds being ready told, Messager came and told him that the money was ready
told, and desired his in exchange; la Forge tells the silver over again, to
see whether there was the full sum, or any overplus; and watching his
opportunity, draws together likewise the others gold, in the mean while that
the other Cheater heaps up his money, and draws three Dice out of his pocket,
saying, that he had won all; la Forge his companion cries out, by my faith
it was a brave cast; other Cheaters, who by la Forge his appointment were in
the next Chamber, inquire concerning the cast, and asked whether la Forge had
played, who presently protested, and fearfully swore, that he had gained ten
pounds at one cast; MESSAGER stands as mute as a Statue, and being much amazed
knew not what to say; but seeing them seize on his money, he began to cry out
that they were thieves; the Host hastened to the cry, but la Forge and his
companions tell him, that it is bootlesse to cry after he had lost his money,
for if that he had been afraid of loosing it, he should not have hazarded it;
thus would they have forced Messager to believe that he had lost his money at
dice, when it was at Noddie; neither could his words, or other means prevail,
for want of competent witness, what they had in possession could never be
recovered from them. This la Forge within one fortnight after this feat, was
taken by the Marshalls men, and for this, and other the like cheats and
robberies, was condemned for ever to the Galleys.

CHAP. XIX.
A Relation of the notable Cheats performed by one Mutio.
MVtio was borne in the Country of Chartres, who before that he attained unto
man's estate, did vainly forsake both his father, and fathers house, and came to
Paris; where he soon met with those who first brought him to poverty, and then
into sharking courses; in which he had not long continued, but that he chanced
to take notice of one Charles D' estampes, who dwelt in the University, and had
a brother in his country and town of Chartres, a married man, and very rich,
but without children. He (well knowing this brother of his, and as well the
very place where he dwelt, as the rest of the whole country) comes unto this
Charles D' estampes, and tells him that he came from Chartres to bring him both
good and bad news, the bad news consisting in the death of his brother
Francis, for whom he could not but grieve: the good, in that he had made him
his Heir and Overseer of his whole Will. The Merchant hearing this news was
much afflicted for the death of his brother, whom he dearly loved, and but
little comforted for the estate he left him, in respect that he had a
sufficiency before: but friend, said he to Mutio, Have you no letter for me?
How came you to hear this news? Sir (said Mutio) to tell you the truth, I
came late yesternight into the city, without as much as one cross or farthing,
being robbed within five miles of the city, and was constrained, for my
yesternights expenses, to pawn my doublet, wherein was sowed a Letter from one
of your Uncles, which I should have taken forth, but that mine Host finding my
Doublet to be hardly worth my expenses (which were somewhat the larger by
reason of my weary journey) hindered me that he might so be certain of his
pay; he names his father unto him, and answers him very discreetly any question
concerning his friends in those parts; which D' estampes considering, delivers
him five shil. to redeem his doublet; being very desirous to see the letter;
Mutio departs, and about an hour after returns, bringing with him a letter
with this superscription;

To my Worthy friend Master Charles D' estampes, Merchant, Dwelling in the
Harp-street in Paris, these deliver.

The Contents were these;

Good Cousin,
I Much grieve that I am ininforced (by this Bearer) to certify unto you the
too certain news of your Brother his sudden and unexpected death; he was not
above three hours sick, in which short time he (greatly mistrusting the
approach of death) by will settled his estate, and has made you his Heir and
Executour, I would therefore advise you to hasten into the Country, as soon
as conveniently you can, as well to settle your own affairs, occurring by
your late fallen inheritance, as also by your presence to lighten the hearts of
those that are much dejected for your Brothers departure: if in the mean time
you will write or send; you may safely do it by this Bearer, who is very
trusty in what he undertakes.

Your very loving Uncle D'estampes.


The Merchant having read this Letter, communicates it to his wife, who being
of a covetous disposition, although she were without children, conceived more
joy at the wealth fallen to her and her husband, then sorrow for her brothers
death; wherefore she kindly entertained him that brought the news, which made
Mutio hope well for a happy success of his enterprise: for he was resolved,
that if he were admitted to lodge in the house he would open the door unto his
companions, and so make them way to take thence what they thought fit, as he
afterward did: for he being entertained within the house, did in the night
open the shop window, and cast forth a good piece of cloth to his companions,
and having so done, did on the morrow hasten to be packing: but it happened,
that before he was either gone, or discovered, that the Merchants wife grew
very sick, which made Mutio quickly conceive, that this her sickness would
slacken her husbands voyage, he therefore returns to Chartres to use the same
cheat to the Merchants brother, as he had done to the Merchant himself,
whither being come, he wrote a Letter directed to Master D'estampes to this
effect;

Brother,
SInce the time that I had the opportunity of writing unto you last, Fortune
has taught me to what a depth of sorrow she could depresse a laguishing woman;
for death (envying the prosperity which I enjoyed, and the joy that I
possessed, by so loving a husband, has now bear aved me of him) by an accursed
Plurisie, which maliciously seized on him on the Wednesday, and killed him on
the Thursday; it is a kind of cruelty that I my self am constrained to write
the cause of my sorrow; but in respect that he has made you his Executour, and
has likewise in his Will disposed of one part of his estate for your childrens
good, I thought it a part of my duty, by giving sudden notice of it, to
express my dear affection to him, and love to you: I shall with you desire to
see my mother, and to enjoy hers and your company to my comfort. Hasten
therefore, for until your arrival, I shall account my self

Your forlorn sister, Eliz. D'estampes.


Mutio having penned this Letter, goes with it unto the brother of Master
D'estampes, and signifying that he was his brothers servant, presented him the
Letter; the contents whereof, being by him read, wonderfully grieved him, for
that he dearly loved this his brother, and for his sake kindly entertained this
his pretended servant: He and his mother prepare themselves mourning
apparel, and dispose and order their affairs at home, against their intended
journey to Paris, whither he and his mother are now resolved to go: in the
mean time Mutio is not idle, but watching his opportunity, (whiles most of the
house were at Church, and the rest not suspecting him) pilfereth two or three
rich Diamonds out of a small Casket, which he (being his Crafts-master) so
neately closed again, that it could not be suddenly discovered.

To conclude, he framed such a simple and harmless countenance, and thereto
used so natural a behavior in his demeanor, toward this younger brother,
that both he and his mother take their journeys toward Paris; the one to
prove the Will, the other to confort her disconsolate daughter: so that now
there are two several men parted from several places, and going to different
places about one and the same cause, both of them enjoying their perfect
health, both each by other thought to be dead, and both of them building
Castles in the air, with the conceited wealth left by the one unto the other:
neither of them as yet perceiving the cunning theft of Mutio.

It was not long after the departure of Mutio out of Paris, before the wife of
Charles Destampes, began to recover; her husband therefore begins his intended
journey toward Chartres, to settle his brothers affairs, whiles he likewise
was onward toward Paris: Now it happened, that he (being either better horsed,
or setting forth sooner then his brother) came with his mother unto an Inn
being in the midway between both places; and because they were very weary,
they there took up their lodging; and having supped, went into two several
beds in the same chamber; Charles on the other side coming from Paris somewhat
late into the same village, and inquiring for the best Inn, was directed to
the very same place; where he having supped, was brought into Chamber, through
which he (that had occasion to go to or fro through his brothers Chamber) must
of necessity pass.

It happened, that this man about midnight, heard his brother speak unto his
mother (for there was but a thin wainscot partition between them) so that it
was easy for him to hear what they said; the voice he heard, made him
apprehend that it was surely his brothers spirit; but afterward considering
that it might be some other that had the like voice, he blows out the candle,
and resolves to settle himself to sleep.

About an hour after, the younger brother who lay in the other Chamber, being
troubled with the Squertego, called up the Chamberlain to bring him a Candle,
which being come, he takes his Cloak and passes close by the bed where his
brother lay, talking by the way unto the Chamberlain; his brother awakes at
the noise, and began to be in a terrible fear, for now he thought he heard him
speak more distinctly, and saw a glimpse of his visage. The other holds on his
way, but in his return toward his Chamber, he became so curious, as with his
Candle to take a more full view of him that lay so near him, who opening his
eyes knew his countenance, and shrinkes under the cloths that he might no more
be troubled with his sight, for his whole body trembled by reason of his
extreme fear.

Young D'estampes being amazed to see his brother there whom he certainly
held for dead, let fall the Candle and ran away as fast as his legs could carry
him; he has the same conceit that his brother has, and thinks that he saw,
to be his Spirit, so that both of them were wonderfully troubled at their
strange visions: the young man tells his mother what he had seen; she being as
other women, of a weak spirit, confirmed his opinion by telling him, that he
had left some vow unperformed, which was the cause that his Spirit walked; so
that the extremity of fear presenting diverse objects to their thoughts, they
continued all night wakening in great perplexity; at length, day appearing, the
elder brother arises first, and dresseth himself in his mourning apparel,
the younger likewise forsakes his bed at the same time, being both dressed,
this man opens the door thinking to go down, and there to inquire of the Host
who it was that lay in the adjoining Chamber, but seeing his brother in his
mourning clothes, he amazedly retired; and the other, being no less afraid,
goes down, and having inquired who they were that lay in the inner Chamber, he
was answered, that they were of Chartres, and that they were one man and one
woman; then began he to take courage, thinking it might be that the news of
his brothers death was false; but then he wondered why (if it were his brother)
he should mourn: To conclude, the Host interposing between both parties, the
two brothers came and embraced each other, greatly wondering at so strange an
accident; Each of them relate unto the other the roguerie of Mutio, in
delivering fained letters: so having spent together some time in mirth, each
returned to his own home; where the one found that Mutio his fingers had bin
busy among his jewels, and the other among his best stuffes.

This fellow shortly after was taken in the company of some Cutpurses, and for
his villainies being found guilty; first burned with the Kings mark, and then
condemned to the Galleys at Marseilles.

CHAP. XIX.
A Facetious Relation, how one Maillard cheated a Goldsmith of a rich piece of
Plate, etc.
NEcessity is the mother of inventions, (said a Philosopher) not without good
reason, for when we are once fallen into this labyrinth, our own mishaps do
quicken our wits, and furnish us with some policy whereby to save our selves
(if it be possible) from the lowest degree of misery. An example whereof, we
will show in the notable exploits of Maillard, whose ill education increased
his natural prope^sion to wickedness, and whose present wants enforced him to
work his wits for a Remedy. The first action he did after his arrival at
Paris, was to enroll himself among the crew of cutpurses, and (with them to
frequent the new Bridge their Rendevous) he chiefly associated himself with two
of the most subtle of the troop; from thence he came to the Cordeliers,
where he insinuated himself into the acquaintance of one of the Friars of the
house that he might cause him to act a part in a Comedy.

Good Father (said he) I have a brother that within these few days has
conceived such grief and melancholy for the death of his wife (whom he loved
as his own soul) that it has almost distracted him; sometime he tells us
that he sees her Ghost, and that it talks unto him; wherefore I am come
purposely to entreat you to use your endeavor to draw him back into the good
way, and to settle his distracted senses; otherwise I fear that the Devil
(who still presents unto him a thousand fancies and Chimera's) will set him
wholly, and irrecoverably beside himself: tomorrow I will bring him unto you,
that you may give him admonitions, and withdraw those thick clouds of sorrow
which darken his understanding: Amidst his ravings, and idle talk, he cries
out, that he is robbed, and demands his Money, Plate, and other things to be
restored unto him; we have given him some Physic to purge these melancholy
humors from him, but to small purpose; how ever, I hope that your advice, and
holy admonitions, will more effectually work upon his understanding: You may
bring him hither (said the Friar) I will use my best endeavors to settle his
mind; this proceeds out of a dryness of the brain, caused by his vehement
and extreme grief: Upon these words Maillard returns, being very glad that
he had laid his nets so handsomely to catch the first Partridge: he therefore
returns unto his Comerades, and certifies them of his plot and purpose: the
next morning very early, he takes one of his companions with him, being clothed
in the habit of a Priest, goes unto the Exchange bridge, and there cheapeneth a
silver Chalice which was worth eight pounds: The Goldsmith doubted nothing of
the deceit, supposing that his companion being like a Priest should have paid
him for it; they having agreed upon the price, Maillard desires him to send it
by his man along with them to the Covent of Cordeliers, and that there he
should receive his money; they thence went strait to the Cordeliers, about nine
of the clock in the morning, and by the way entertained the Goldsmiths man
with so good discourse, that he never dreamed ought of the ensuing deceit:
Being come to the gate, Maillard seeming to be well acquainted with the house,
rang the Bell, and demanded to speak with such a Father; the Porter answered
that he was at Church with a Gentleman: Sir, then said he to the Goldsmith,
you may leave the Plate with the Porter, whilst we go hear Mass, and as
soon as it is done, you shall receive your money; to the which he being
willing, delivered it to Maillards companion, who gave it to the Porter; so
they went into the Vestry, where the Friar was putting on his Cope to say
Mass, Maillard taking his opportunity, steps unto him, and tells him that that
was his brother of whom he had spoken the day before.

The Friar dreaming nothing of the deceit, turns to the Goldsmith, my friend,
says he, have a little patience till Mass be ended, and I will satisfy you.

The Goldsmith imagining that he should certainly receive money after Mass,
was content to stay and take his place in the Chancell; whither Maillard and
his Comerade bare him company till the time of offering: But not being willing
to let go the present occasion, he whispered the Goldsmith in the ear, that
they would go before to the next Tavern (which they named) to drink a quart
of wine, and there they would expect his company: content (quoth the Goldsmith)
and so they parted. The Goldsmith yet doubted not of any deceit, or fraud, in
their discourse, or carriage, but thought it sufficient that he had the Friars
words for his satisfaction, and that he had seen the Plate delivered into the
hands of the Porter of the Covent.

Maillard (mean while) comes with his Comerade unto the Porter, and asks for
the Chalice which he had left with him, faining that he would go say Mass in
a Chapel near adjoining, at the request of some devout ones, as the manner is
in Paris: The Porter believing that according to the usual custom he would
go say Mass, delivered him the Chalice, who immediately departed, and being
out at the gate, you may conceive, they lost little time in going, for they
were not troubled with the Gout.

The Friar (the mean while) who knew nothing of the deceit, having said Mass,
came into the Vestrie, whither the Goldsmith followed him pricking his ears
like an Hare, and preparing his Bag and Gold-weights to receive money for his
Chalice, to whom the good Friar (drawing him aside) began this discourse.

My friend (says he) is it long since your wife died, and that you have been
troubled with this malady? for I must know the cause and beginning thereof,
that I may the better apply a Remedy.

What wife (said the Goldsmith) I am not married, this is not the matter that
brought me hither: I know well (said the Friar) that you are not married, for
then you would soon have forgot your former wife, and it is not likely, being
you bare her so great affection, that you would so soon seek a new one, but it
is good to know the time since she died, that I may the better ease you of your
grief.

But Sir (said the Goldsmith) I suppose you take me for some other, I have no
Wife, neither yet intend to have one; I come only for to receive money that is
due unto me: My friend, said the Friar, I knew very well you would demand
money, nevertheless I doubt not but to restore you to your perfect mind: Have
you been at Confession since you perceived your self troubled with this
disease? Have you purged your conscience from the evil deeds you have done, by
Confession and Repentance? for sometimes God does afflict us for our sins and
offenses; excuse me if I search so narrowly into your affairs, it is not but
for your good. Sir, replied the Goldsmith, excuse me if I must needs say one of
us wants his senses, and is not in his right mind; I have nothing to do with
your Tale of a Cock and a Bull, I demand eight pounds which you are to pay me,
or deliver my ware again, notwithstanding all these crafry shifts and mockeries.

Have patience my friend (said the Friar) I will do my best to give you
content, but what I say unto you is for your good, you ought not to be so
Choleric; and to tell you my mind in few words, I think it most necessary
that you first seek remedy for your Soul, and after, that you take Physic to
cure your Body; for all these violent passions proceed from an indisposition
and drynes of the Brain. You pay me fairly said the Goldsmith, Is this the
money that you mean to give me? Good Sir, either pay me my 8l which we agreed
for, or else restore unto me my Chalice; It is not reason that you should
detain my masters goods, and fobb me off with an idle discourse.

The Friar all this while not discerning any sign or token of distraction in
him, began to suspect some deceit; and to this, the absence of Maillard added
more cause of suspicion: Of what Chalice speak you, said he, have you given me
a Chalice? I demand money (answered the Goldsmith) for the Chalice, for which
you sent two Gentlemen to whom you spoke before Mass; the price agreed upon
was 8l we have left it with the Porter to deliver to you; if you desire a
further proof you may speak with the Porter himself, or send for those that
came with me, they are not far off, for they stay for me at the next Tavern,
where I promised to come unto them.

The Friar hearing this discourse, began to change his tune. It is true (said
he) that he which came half an hour ago unto me, came also unto me
yesterday, and certified me that he had a brother much troubled in mind,
because of the loss of his Wife, whom he so dearly loved, that he began
(through grief and melancholy) to be besides himself, often imagining that
he saw her and talked to her Ghost; and that I would do a work of Charity to
use my endeavor to settle him again in his right mind: Wherefore I crave
pardon for this my frivilous discourse, for I supposed you to be the man of
whom he spoke; but as for the Chalice of which you speak, I know nothing of
it, perhaps he took me for the Guardian of Compeigne who much resembles me;
you may do well to go to him, I will go along with you to him: Whither being
come, the Guardian answered that he knew nothing of the business, and that
for his part he had given no order to any to buy a Chalice.

The Goldsmith at this began to doubt of the deceit, and goes unto the Porter
to demand his Chalice; who answers him, that it was true they delivered one
unto him while they went to Mass, but the Priest who delivered it unto him,
had taken it to go say Mass, and that questionless he should find him in
some Chapel near thereabouts: Whereupon, all in a rage, he began to
threaten the Porter to sue him: but he told him, he could not any way hurt
him, for that he had delivered it to him that gave it into his hand: After many
angry words had past between them, the Goldsmith was constrained to go search
about in the Tavern and Chapels near adjoining, to find out either the
Priest or his Companion; but he might as well search for a needle in a bottle
of Hay, for at last he returns home without either Chalice or money.

Hereby may young Novices take warning to beware how they trust to outward
shows, lest they dearly pay for it in the end.

Thus Maillard came clear off with his Cup worth eight pounds, of whom you
shall yet hear related further examples of deceit; that being forewarned, you
may be armed against the like dangers to avoid them: whereof one is as
follows:

Maillard having shared his former prey, and soon spent his part, (according
to the vulgar proverb, Lightly come, lightly go,) was again driven to his
shifts, but resolved to play at small game rather then sit out. And having
learned that a Citizen of Saint Anthonies street had a Farm at a place called
Turon, not very far from Paris: he goes thither, and learnes diverse
particularities; as the name of the Farmer and his servants, etc. Now he
returns to Paris, and gives notice to his Companions, of his intended plot: and
having chosen his time, apparells himself in the habit of an husbandman, and
taking a Goad in his hand, as if he were some brave Carter in a leatherne
jacket, comes unto the Citizen, and after a clownish manner, salutes him with
these words; God give you good morrow, sir, I think your Worship does not know
me, it is but eight days since I came to live with your Farmer, Martin Clare,
at Turon: but alas, sir; a shrewd misfortune has befallen us: The Citizen and
his wife being much troubled with these words, began to fear that the house
was burnt, or the Farmer dead, or some bad accident had happened; and hastily
demands what was the matter: Sir, answered Maillard, a sad mischance happened
unto us; as your Farmer and my self were coming to Paris with a Cart laden with
Corn to sell, as ill hap would, because of the bad way, my Master got up upon
the Cart, but as we came to the end of the Town, beyond Saint Martins in the
suburbs, one of the wheels brake, so that my Master falling, has broke his
leg quite asunder; this accident has much troubled me; but making a virtue of
necessity, I was forced to take one of my horses, and to carry him to the
Bone-setters near St. Martins Cross, the whilst I got his son to look to
the Cart; and having given order to have two new wheels made, mean while my
master sent me hither to entreat your Worship that you would be pleased to
come unto him, for he is in great danger.

The Citizen hearing this sad news rose up, showing by his looks that he was
much grieved for this sorrowful mischance, his wife also seemed much troubled,
and would have been contented to have gone with her husband to see him; but he
was unwilling, and goes himself along with this supposed Carter, talking with
him (as he went) about his lands at the Farm, wherein Maillard so satisfied
him, that he thought him to be an honest and understanding fellow.

But as they came near to St. Martins, and were turning into St. Honor
street, Maillard began to give him just instructions where to find his Master,
and where the Bone-setter dwelt, telling him that he must return to his
horses, and haste to have the Wheels fitted to his Cart; saying, that he
wanted money, as ill hap was, to pay the Wheel-wright, wherefore desired him,
that if he had two or three and twenty shillings about him, to let him have it,
otherwise he should come too late to the market; saying withal, that he would
not make two mishaps of one, and that his Master would pay him again. The
Citizen without any difficulty delivers him 20s. saying that that was all he
had about him, and goes on his way with all speed supposing to find his Farmer
in great danger of death, and little misdoubting of the deceit, for Maillard
had named unto him his grounds, how and where they were seated, and what store
of Corn they were like to yield that year, and many other particulars, which
he had learned at the Farmers own house.

Maillard returns, and not contented with the twenty shillings he had cheated
of the Citizen, resolves to do the like to his wife: he therefore makes all
possible haste to the Citizens house, where he found the wife dressing her
self, and says unto her, Mistress, your husbands worship has sent me hither,
(he is now with the Bone-setter, who gives us good hope and assurance of the
recovery of my Master) he desires your worship to send him twenty shillings to
give the Chyrurgion in hand toward the Cure, my Master will pay you as soon as
his Corn is sold.

The good woman being glad to hear that the Farmer was in good hope of
recovery, makes no scruple, but delivers him twenty shillings; so he departs
the house, and goes to his companions, to whom he related his adventures; but
he did not long glory in his wickedness, for the Goldsmith, from whom he had
cheated the Chalice, chanced to epsy him in Saint Germains Fair, lying in
wait to entrap others, and by him was himself entrapped; and for that, and
other the like cheats and robberies, he was broken upon the wheel as he most
justly deserved; Divine Justice seldom suffering any long to escape, who so
unjustly lay hands on the goods of others, and lead their lives, as it were, in
deffiance of his Commandments, who has said, Thou shall not steal, but shall
love thy neighbor as self, and do unto others, as thou would be done
unto.

CHAP. XXI.
The multiplicity of Thieves.
THe antiquity of thieves I have already spoken of, I will now speak of the
modern, and those daily conversant among us.

The Tailor steals, demanding a third part of cloth more then needs to make a
suit; and when he that causes it to be made, suspecting his honesty, would
be present at the cutting of it out, he troubles him, and so dazles his sight,
with the often turning and winding the breadth and length of the piece, that he
makes his senses become dull, with his long attention; in the mean time, the
Tailor taking his opportunity, casts the cloth into a false pleat under the
sheares, and so cuts it out as single, when the piece is double, whereby he
makes a great gain; besides what he extracts out of silver or gold Lace,
Buttons, Silk and the like; of which, a good part he condemns to his Hell,
from whence there is no redemption.

The Weaver steals, in demanding more Warp then the cloth requires, weaving
fifty yards in stead of forty five, and with the abundance of diverse broken
threads, he makes one continued, which is worth unto him the eighth part of what
he robs.

The Shoemaker restores with his teeth that which he stole with his cutting
knife, biting, and stretching the Spanish Leather, to the end that out of what
is given him to make one pair of shoes, he might gain at least an upper
leather unto himself, and if the leather be his own, he puts therein a
scurvie sole, and sowes it with rotten thread, to the end that it may wear out
the sooner, and he gain the more from his either simple or prodigal Customer.

The Physician, and Surgeon steal, the one prescribing, and the other
applying medicines which may increase the disease, to the end, that prolonging
the time of Cure they may increase their fees.

The Apothecary robs with a Qui for a Quo, selling one Drug for another, and
taking that which is best cheap, without considering what humor it should
purge, or what virtue the drug has which he applies: by which he robs the
Physician of his reputation, and the patient of his life: and if by chance
there is asked of him an oil which he has not, he will not fail to give
some other instead of it, that he may not loose the credit of his shop.

The Merchant robs, in taking extraordinary use, and exceeding the just price
of his Commodity; and sometimes by writing down in his book a debt, which
has been already paid.

The Notarie and Clerk robs with an (etc.) a whole inheritance, for a little
money; will by false writing give away a man's life by a voluntary mistake,
writing guilty for not guilty.

The Lawyer and Attorney robs, selling an hundred lies to their poor Clients,
making them believe that their Cause is good, although they apparently see he
has no right to that he claims: And it often comes to pass, that one
Attorney agrees with another, to sell the right of the parties, and divide the
gain between themselves.

The Judge robs men of justice, becoming passionate on the behalf of that
man, who by some present, has beforehand corrupted him; and violently wresting
the text of Bartol. and Baldus for his own gain.

The Grocer, and such as sell by weight, rob; by nimbly touching with the
little finger, the tongue of the beam, whereby he turns the scale which way
he pleases, and so cheats the buyer of his weight.

The Booke-seller robs, by selling an imperfect Book, for one perfect; by
recommending a Book to his Customer for good, which he knows to be dull, and
lies heavy on his hand, and also by selling a Book of an old Edition in the
stead of a new.

The Vintner robs after diverse sorts, mingling and confounding one wine with
another, besides the water which he puts in it, and when the wine, being often
baptized, has lost his strength, he hangs in the vessel a little bag full of
Cloves, Pepper, Juniper, and other Drugs; with which he makes it yet seem
good and right.

The Butcher robbes, blowing the pieces of flesh with a quill to make them
seem a great deal fairer, and that they may yield more then they are worth.

The Perfumer robs, by sophisticating the perfumes, and by multiplying the
musk with the burnt liver of a Cow, the Amber with Soap and Sand, and Civet
with Butter.

The Scholar robs, stealing from Saint Augustine, and Aquinas, etc. the best of
their works, and utters their doctrine as his own, seeming an Inventour of
that he is not.

Thus you see all rob, and every Tradesman has his way and particular craft,
for the deceitful working of his own ends.

CHAP. XXII.
A Facetious Relation of a Parisian thief condemned to the Galleys at
Marseilles.
SIr, you may perhaps think that we live disorderly, without either Laws or
Discipline, but you are therein mistaken; for we have first our Captain or
Superior, who ordains and disposes what Thefts shall be committed, by whom
and how: under his Command are all sorts of Thieves, Highway Thieves,
Tirelaines, Skipjackes, Picklockes, Church-robbers, Cutpurses, Nightwalkers,
Boudgets, etc.

Highway Thieves rob on great Rodes, and Deserts, with great cruelty and
tyranny; for they seldom commit a Robbery without a murder, fearing to be
discovered to the Justice: The means and slights they use in their Exploits,
are diverse; for sometimes, as in a City, they dog a man for a fortnight
together, until he departs out of Town, and the better to entrap him, one of
the company goes disguised in the habit of a Merchant to lodge in the same
Inn, with cloake-bag or pack stuffed with old cloth, giving out, that he is
a strange Merchant, and that he is fearful to go on his intended journey
alone; with this his dissembling he discourses with the poor Merchant or
Passenger, and so drawing from him cunningly what he desires to know; as
whence he is, whither he goes, what sort of merchandise he carries, or what
other business brought him thither, and at what time he departs; thus he
gathers by his discourse, of the richness of his Booty: whereof he gives
notice to his Consorts, who attend him in some place fitting their purpose;
others hide themselves behind some well grown bushes, and when they perceive
afar off a Passenger coming, then they cast into the way a Purse, or a
Budget, or some such thing, to the end that when he alights and stays to take
it up* they may lay hands on him and all he has: Others keeping themselves a
little from the highway, feign a lamentable voice, by which they urge the
Passenger to stay and see what the matter is; and whiles the Plaintiff
dissemblingly relates unto him his grief, the Ambush breaks forth and strips
him to his shirt.

The Tirelaines take their names from the Theft they commit, which is to steal
Cloakes in the night; and these use no other subtilty then mere occasion. They
go always three and three, or four and four together, between nine and ten
in the night; and if they find occasion in the midday they will not lose it:
They go forth to steal Clokes, most commonly, in the darkest nights and most
rainie; and to those by places which are not much frequented, that the cries of
those they rob may not cause their apprehension: They are sometimes accustomed
to be clothed like Lackeys, and to enter where there is any Mask or great
Feast, faining that they seek for their Masters; and with this liberty they
find an heap of Cloakes (which the Gentlemen, or others leave in the Hall,
assuring themselves that no body would there offer to touch them) and so in the
sight of many they boldly take them away.

The Skipjacks take their names from Shipboyes, who mount nimbly, by Cords, to
the top of the highest Mast: Those who bear this name, rob by night, mounting
lightly by a Ladder of Cords, at the end whereof are fastened two little
nooses, or hooks of Iron, to the end that casting it to the window it may take
hold and fasten, and that they may easily get in and out of the house, and
carry away what ever comes to their hands, and having performed their exploit,
they readily fasten a small Cord to the very point of the two little hooks,
which being drawn, after their descent, raises up the hooks, so that the
Ladder falls without any trace or mark of theft.

Picklockes, are those that carry sundry kinds of Instruments with which they
open all sorts of doors.

Church-robbers, are those who lie lurking in some Pue when Evening Prayers are
ended, and the night following, having furnished themselves with what purchase
they can get, at last pick open the Church-doore, or break through one of the
windows and so depart.

Cutpurses are the commonest Thieves of our Common wealth, whose chiefest Art
consists either in neatly cutting, or nimbly, yet warily taking a Purse out of
ones Pocket, without either being perceived or suspected: these (most commonly)
frequent Churches, Sermons, Faires, and other public Assemblies, that in the
midst of the throng they may the safer act their feats of activitie; they are
accustomed to go well apparelled, to the end, that if they approach any
Gentleman of quality, they may have the less cause to suspect them: they for
the most part seek out strangers, such as are the High and Low Dutch, who are
accustomed to stand gaping and gazing with open mouth on some rarities, being
transported with such wonder and amazement, that in their study and trance,
their shirt might almost be taken away from them: They always go two to take
a Purse, and as soon as he that is appointed for the feat, has performed it,
he gives what he has taken to his companion, who stands by him; so that if he
be taken, he may more boldly deny the act, and justify his innocence before
the world.

I will tell you the industry which I once used; the last year there came unto
the City of Lions, a Merchant of Italy, rich, courteous, and of good carriage,
who being noted by our spies, I was commanded to undertake him. I arose early
that morning, that I might not loose any occasion, and having followed him
through diverse streets and Churches, (for he was very zealous) we came unto an
assembly of Merchants, which are accustomed to meet about eleven of the Clock;
I seeing him there alone approached him, and began to enter into a discourse
concerning a Traffic which might prove very commodious and profitable to him;
to which my discourse he attentively listened, and after much discourse, the
company greatly increasing, while my Companion seconded my discourse, and he
attentively hearkened unto him, not observing me, I softly put my fingers into
his pocket to search, or try, its depth and wideness, and quickly found that
it was capable of my whole hand, so that at the first adventure I got his
Purse, and at the second, a Silver Watch fastened to a small Chain of Gold;
with which I might have been well contented, if The every had any limits, but
be^ing resolved to adventure the third time, to try whether I could draw from
thence a dainty fine wrought Holland Handkercher (which I had seen him use but
a little before) but I could not be so dexterous in this third feate, nor my
Companion so sweetly eloquent in his discourse, but he felt me, and hastening
with his hand to his pocket could not but meet with mine; whereat being much
troubled, and finding his Purse and his Watch gone, he seized on my Collar, and
said I was a Thief: I now foreseeing the danger which might happen to me by my
rashness, gave my Purse and Watch to my Comerade under my cloak as soon as I
had stole them. Wherefore being assured that he could not find about me that
wherewith he charged me, I laughed at what he said, and gave him the lie a
thousand times: The Merchant notwithstanding, held me fast, demanding his
Purse with a loud voice, in so much that by reason of the noise, much people
were gathered about the place; but my Comerade tendering my honor and safety,
and fearing the danger I was in, hastened to a Crier, which he found not far
off, and procured him to cry, that if any one had lost a Purse and Watch, they
should come to such an Inn, and there they should hear of them, and upon a
reasonable recompense for the finding, and the marks told, he would deliver
them; scarce had this good Italian heard the cry, but he leaves me, entreating
me, with great humility, to pardon his rash censuring of me, which I did at
the entreaty of those that were by, and so left them: He as swift as a Roebucke
hastens to the Crier, tells him the making of his Purse and Watch, and makes
it appear that he lost them, but he who had caused him to make the Cry, was
not to be found: And thus I narrowly escaped the danger that I ran into.

The Night-walkers, are those who take their walk about the Town toward the
beginning of evening, and finding some door open, they softly enter, hiding
themselves in some obscure place, till midnight, when they cast out at the
windows whatsoever they find within the house. I once adventured to do the
like; but to my cost. It happened that on an Holyday, after Evening Prayer,
going to seek my fortune, it was my ill luck to spy a door half open,
through the which putting my head, I perceived that all my body might enter;
which having done, I went along a Ladder unto a great Chamber, very well
furnished, and being confident that I might lie safe under a bed which was
therein, until the household was all retired to their rests, I took that
course: after I had layen some four hours on the ground, I suddenly heard a
noise of people coming up toward the Chamber, and presently by the light of a
Candle, which they brought with them, I espied the feet of two or three
servants, who covered a table with a great deal of care, and (as I found
afterward to my cost) it was there the Master of the house intended to sup: The
Table being furnished with diverse sorts of meats, four or five persons sat
them down thereto, (besides Children that were in the house mingling their
supper with diverse Discourses: I was at that time so affrighted, that I verily
think (if the noise of them and their Childrens voices had not hindered it)
they might easily have heard the shaking of my thighs one against another: by
ill luck there was a little Dog in the house, which went up and down gnawing
those bones which were cast under the Table; and one of the Children casting
down a Bone, a Cat which watched at the end of the Table (being more diligent
then the Dog) took it and ran with it from the Dog under the Bed; the Dog runs
after the Cat, snarling at her, and endeavors to take away the bone; But the
Cat, by the help of her claws, so well defended her self, that having given
the Dog two or three scratches, so angered him that they made a fearful noise,
which made one of the Lackeys take up a Fire-shovell out of the Chimney, and
cast it so fiercely under the Bed, that if it had hit my nose with the edge,
(as it did my Breech with the handle) it had taken it away clean: but with
much ado he made the Cat go from under the Bed, yet did the Dog remain
behind, grumbling and barking, with such eagerness, that neither cheering him,
nor threatening could appease him; at which they who served at the Table, being
offended, began to beat him, and cast him almost into the fire, leaving me as
if I were breathing my last: The confusion that the Dog wrought being ended,
there was another that began to increase in my guts, with such violence (by
reason of the apprehension and fear that I was in) that being constrained to
sneeze thrice, I could not but offend my Breeches twice. These two noises
meeting, and by their conjunction augmenting, caused those at the Table to
arise and see what this was; so that I was taken with the present offense, and
was subject to the rigor of their vengeance; no Plea that I could make being
sufficient to defend me: They stripped me stark naked, and binding my hands and
my feet, began to scorch me with their Lights, not without a great deal of
laughter and scorn; and having satisfied their fury, they delivered me into
the hands of the Justice, from whom I parted signed and sealed.

The Budgets, are Thieves which run themselves into diverse inconveniences
and dangers, for they sometimes cause themselves to be enclosed in some Bale,
Hamper, or Trunk, as if they were some merchandise, and to be brought and
left in some rich man's house, to be convayed to some country Chapman to whom
they fain they would send it; to the end that in the night, every one being
asleep, he may with his knife or key make way out, and so rob the house;
which trick I once acted to my great disgrace; for a friend of mine faining
that he had four Bales which he desired to have conveyed into the country,
enclosed me within one of them; and having so done, convayed them to a
Goldsmiths shop to be there kept (as for a friend of the Goldsmiths whom he
had named to him) until the Carrier arrived: The Goldsmith little mistrusting
any roguery to be intentended, willingly received them into his house, in
regard that the time was not long that they were to trouble the house; but it
unfortunately happened that in the night, when I thought to have performed my
intended exploit, three or four Apprentices who had made a match to spend an
hour or two in mirth, entering the shop, settled themselves some on one Bale
and some on another; and that wherein I was enclosed, was not so free, but that
I soon felt a burden, yet not so great, but that I could indifferently well
bear it; but having drunk themselves merry, they at the last betook them to
their rest, which was no rest to me, for whereas they were severed before, they
now made choice of that Bale wherein I was enclosed, for their bed, and thereon
slept so profoundly, that a man might have drawn them a mile from their Couch
and not have wakened them: At length (being almost stifled with excessive
weight) I moved a little, and perceiving the immobility of that which was on
me, I verily thought that they had put on me another Bale: with which conceit,
and the extreme torment that I suffered, I drew my knife, and cut a hole
through that wherein I was enclosed, and made a large gash in the Buttocks of
him who lay upon me; whereupon he arose like Lightning, and cried out unto the
neighbors for help, thinking that one of his companions would have killed him:
the cry was so great, that it not only raised diverse of the neighbors, but
also hastened the Officer, who entering, found the poor fellow that was hurt,
and the rest in great perplexity; he examines the man that was hurt, without
taking notice of the Bale, thinking it needless to enquire in what part he had
received his wound, but to know the person that gave it. The Goldsmith,
considering the circumstances, began to think that the abundance of blood
which he had lost had surely spoiled the Stuffes; and approaching the Bale, he
found it open; and putting his finger therein, to feel in what case the Bale
was, he lighted on my Beard; I lay still, in hope that he would not guess
what it was: but he taking a Candle in his hand, drew near again, and holding
down the candle more narrowly to search what was in it, the scalding liquor of
the candle fell upon my face, which forced me to stir a little; whereupon he
suddenly cried out, thieves, thieves, so I was instantly apprehended, and at
length, after a sound whipping, condemned to serve in the Galleys for ten
years, and thus was I rewarded according to my misdeeds.

CHAP. XXIII.
The grateful thief.
AS I studied the Laws in the University of Orleance, I learned of a Scholar of
Touraine this ensuing History, he having formerly heard it from the mouth of
him to whom the chance happened.

A young man of Poictou, named Cyran, son of a Merchant was sent to Tours by
his father to dispatch some business which appertained to traffic. This
young man was naturally pitiful, and from his youth inclined to give alms
without distinction of persons. The honor of the King of glory which may be
much advanced by works, ought to be endeavored with judgment: for at length
discretion is the touchstone of humane actions, and it is not enough to do
good, a man must do it, and it must be done to purpose. Alms is one of the
most excellent and most acceptable actions which those to whom God has given
means can do, (for as the Divine Psalmist has sung; He that has
distributed, and given to the Poor, his justice shall remain from age to age,
and his horn, (that is to say) his power shall be exalted in glory) but it
must be performed with a judicious distribution, otherwise it will be a
confused scattering, rather then a charitable disposing: And it may be done to
such, as to whom to give were no better then to put a sword into a madmans
hand, or to give means to men to commit Riotous excess: it is true that
Virtue consists in a mean, equally distant from erroneous extremes: and as to
give inconsiderately, is rather a profuse prodigality then a true liberality;
so also to take heed of too many circumstances when one gives an Alms,
argues rather a pinching niggardliness then a good judgment: And likewise,
as we must not too narrowly sifte the qualities of those persons to whom we
show our Charity, so must we not be altogether blindefold in our gifts; And
among these uncertainties, we must so frame our intentions, as not to consider
only to whom we give, but also for whose sake, even for his sake who has
promised to require the least Alms given for the love of him. There are Iliades
of hard hearts which find fault with the greatest part of these poor
creatures who beg of them. This man (say they) is strong enough to gain his
living; that is a counterfeit, this not too old, that not too young, all are in
their judgments unworthy; and this is only to have in show a just pretense to
keep in their purse that metal (wherewith they make their Idol) without
purchasing the name of covetousness: There be others which have open hands,
and more for honor then for pity give, or through pity cast away indifferently
to all, without considering that it is to nourish the lasinesse of a great many
vagabonds, who stand more in need of a spiritual alms by a good rebuke, then
of a temporal, which they abuse in lewd and strange deboistnesse: But who can
have a spirit so truly discerning, sithence there is nothing in the world more
deceiving then outward appearance. For example, there run through the streets
of Townns, and through the Countries, a multitude of vagabonds, who under the
name of poor soldiers (that are going toward their own country) demand
alms, when often times such are notorious thieves, who in begging seek nothing
more then fair occasions to commit foul thefts, murders, pillage, and the
like; these men have God altogether in their mouths, and the Devil in their
hearts; and yet as God did heretofore draw fire out of the mud, when Ismael
returned from the Captivity of Babylon, so from among these Bandetti he retires
one good thief, as you may understand by that which ensues.

Cyran passing through the streets of Tours (which appears as a flower in the
midst of the garden of France) meets with a poor soldier, who though but
meanly apparelled, yet kept still a good countenance. This soldier demanded of
him an alms, with such a kind of disgraceful grace, that he found himself
inwardly excited to give him one; but being extraordinarily moved, he put his
hand into his pocket, and thinking to have taken thence once Sol, he lighted on
a piece of five, which he with a good will gave him, and with words of honor
and consolation, wishes him a good return into his country, and a better Art
then that of war, where there is ordinarily nothing to be gained but
knockes: The soldier after a modest and civil manner answered, Sir God give
me grace and power to do you some good service, conformable to the desire I
have thereunto: you have showed me your bounty in my pinching necessity, which
I never shall be unmindfull of, for therein you have done little less then
saved my life; after these words of Complement they parted. Some few days,
after the affairs which hindered this Poictevin at Tours, being finished, he
takes his leave, and thence returns toward his Country; but as he crossed a
Wood, behold there suddenly rushed out three Thieves, whereof the one seized on
the Bridle of his Horse, and another setting a sword to his throat, commanded
him to alight and to follow them into the thickest of the Wood; a rude
entertainment, and an imperious kind of command, yet such as must be
fulfilled; most commands presupposing a necessity of obeying. When they had
lead him into the most uncouth and obscure part of the Wood, they there rifled
him, and took from him all the Money that he had, which amounted to the sum
of one hundred Crowns, or thereabouts; and having likewise deprived him of his
Cloak and best Wares, they began to deliberate whether they should kill him, or
not? Let us said one of them, I know (by his language) that he is one of this
Country, and therefore may raise Hue and Cry after us, and so discover us:
It Is well said (answered another) if such men had killed him whom they stripped
in such a Forest, they would not now have made so many wry mouths upon a
Gibbet at poor wearied passengers. The third (who was the man to whom Cyran had
some few days before given the alms of five sols:) Companions said he, what
good will his life do us, his blood will cry louder against us for vengeance
then his voice: we shall have a Sermon, replied one of the others, those that
use the trade that we exercise, ought to stop their ears against these
considerations, which are good for none but old men and children; the dead bite
no more, neither do they speak a word, the voice of blood has no eyes, and
he will be well nigh rotten before any can possibly find him in this place.

Friends (replied the good Thief) I beg of you his life, for it I will
willingly forsake that part of the booty due unto me: I will tell you a very
good course to spare his life, and yet to provide for our own safety; let us
bind him to some tree, and so leave him unto Gods protection, so we shall not
be defiled with his blood. This advice was by his earnest persuasions
followed, and Cyran was bound to a tree with the headstall of his horse, and his
own garters, the thieves taking away his horse and furniture; but the good
Thief bowing himself toward Cyran, (as if he had been busied in tying him)
said softly unto him, Friend take courage, I will come this night to unbinde
thee, I have not forgot thine alms; Comfortable words, but proceeding from the
mouth of a Thief, therefore not greatly to be relied upon; yet he made a
virtue of necessity, and that he might not seem desperately ungrateful, he
thanks him for a benefit not yet received: thus he remains fast bound all the
rest of that day, trusting in the mercy and providence of God, and expecting
the uncertain event of the Purse-takers most certain promise: but at night he
entered into the horror of death, when in the duskenesse of the evening he
heard the yeelling and howling of the Wolves which were in that Forest; two of
them were so bold as to approach him, but having for a time viewed him, and
being somewhat distrustful of their strength they presently retired, but it
was not long before they returned with greater forces. This beast is not only
cruel, but also so subtle and cautelous, that even when men make curious
invented Gins to catch them, yet can they very seldom take, or entrap any of
them: This beast fears the stock of a Piece, he shunneth snares, he looks
about him, he hearkens, considers, and narrowly observes the least motions,
all which is mavelous to be found in a beast that has not reason. Poor Cyran
thinking himself to have now seen the last of his days, heartily recommended
himself to God, as a man that was at the point of yielding up his Ghost; for
they had long since sented him, and now at length began to assail him in
troops, endeavoring to make of him a Supper for themselves: but suddenly,
with most fearful yeelling, they sound a retreat, wherewith the whole Wood
resounded; and the Echoes multiplying, made Cyran think that there were a
whole Legion of Wolves which came to devour him: They had now perceived the
approach of him whose coming poor Cyran had long expected; surely if his
succors had been delayed but a very little longer, his coming had been too
late; and it is likely he should have found poor Cyran dismembered by the
Wolves. But God, who sends aid in tribulation, and whose assistance comes
always opportunely, sent him at an instant (when his long expectation was
turned almost into despair) to deliver Cyran not only from the fear of death,
but also from the death of fear; for already had terror seized on his heart,
and he thought there was no way but inevitable and present death: but behold
now the extremity of one passion turned into another; Grief and Despair
turned into Confidence and Joy, Cyran no sooner saw him, but he became
confident of his delivery; he had na sooner conceived this latter hope, but
he enjoyed his long desired liberty by this good Thief his willingly untying
those knots which he had before so unwillingly knit. I leave it to you to
judge, with what excessive words he testified his thankfulness to the good
Thief, who had in one day given him his life twice; first from retyring him
from the throat of those roaring lions the other Thieves, and secondly from the
ravening Wolves, who are Thieves living upon prey. Cyran was desirous to make
him some part of requital for this great benefit; and the better to express
his desire, he offers the Soldier to use him as his brother, if he would but
reside with him, and forsake that miserable kind of life, which could not but
lead him to a very shameful end, and would give him so much of his estate as
he should have just cause to be contented therewith. To leave this course of
Robbing (replied the Soldier) is my full resolution, I have long since
inwardly conceived such an earnest hatred thereof, that it continually seems
an hell unto me: My intent is to become religiously penitent for those many
mischiefs which I have wrought in following this accursed mystery: I never in
all my life killed any man, but have been present at diverse murders, I began
to Rob, being pressed thereunto by necessity; but continued in it through a kind
of wicked pleasure that there is in taking, although it served but to feed our
unlimitted deboistnesse: now finding no sure place of retreat in France, where
I am always in danger of the Law, I am resolved to pass into Italy, and having
visited Loretto and Rome, to cast my self into some religious house; and if I
cannot be there admitted, to retire my self into some Hermitage. I humbly
entreat you to pray unto God for me that he may continue in me his
inspiration, and give me grace to execute this good design. This poor Thief
thinking that the courtesy already done unto Cyran, had not extended unto a
full requital for his former Charity, labored to persuade him to accept of
his part of the hundred Crowns which was taken from him; freely offering unto
him a hundred Franks. But Cyran not only refused it, but freely forgiving him,
protested that if he would take the pains to accompany him to the next Town,
he would enlarge his bounty toward him.

The penitent Soldier (for I make it a matter of Conscience to call him Thief
after so godly a change) either mistrusting a subtilty in the Offer, or being
fully satisfied for what he had done, (refusing it) heartily thanked him, and
after their mutual imbracements having made a mixture of their tears: Cyran
took one way, and the Soldier the other, whom he never saw after. But the two
others he saw about two months after, being discovered by the Cloak and horse
of Cyran, and being accused of other Robberies, fell into the hands of the
Provost Marshall, who justly gave them a quick dispatch, they being fastened to
the Bough of an accursed tree, commonly called a Gibbet, where they never
descended but by the pendant.

The good success of Alms shines with such luster in this Relation, that if
there were no other motive to exercise liberality toward the needy, then that
centuple which is in the Scripture promised in this life, it were sufficient to
draw it from the hands of Covetousnes it self, sithence there is no usury so
excessive as to take a hundred for one: to which, if you add the infinite
worth of eternal life, who will be so hide bound as not to give with a free
will that NOTHING, or flitting toy of things transitory, to attain unto that
great ALL, and that one necessary thing, most blessed ETERNITY.

FINIS.

