NAVMACHIA, OR HOLLANDS SEA FIGHT.

Non equidem inuideo. depiction of ship

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Thomas Law, and William G^rat. An. Dom. 1622.

To the Right Honorable and Noble George Lord Gordon Son and Heir to the
Right Generous and Potent, the Marquess of Huntley.
RIGHT HONORABLE, etc. Although the obscurenes both of my self and merits,
may seem to breed some prejudice of boldness and presumption in me, daring thus
to present my self, and a small work of mine equal in merit to my self, to
you a Hero endued with no less Goodness, than greatness, of equal Virtue and
Honor, Of a like Courage and Courtesy, of as much Clemency as Valor,
Paralels that sieldome meet in one.

Yet Fame the blazer of good Actions, resounding from yours, to our Coasts, the
report of your Honorable Courtesy and love to good Endeauours, I have bin
emboldned by this small Present, to manifest the love, or rather service I owe
to your self and Honorable Name; a Name no less known and renowned Abroad,
than loved and honored at Home, as terrible to foes, as gtatefull and pleasing
unto friends. And although the Noblenes of your honorable and ancient Progeny
with the noble and Warlike actions of your Valorous and renowned Father and
Ancestors might yield to you, their generous Offspring, sufficient cause of
praise and glory; yet you knowing, that the good parts of body, or prosperous
casualties of good Fortune, can scarce be called or accounted our own; you I
say to these have added Virtue, the beauty and strength of mind, knowing that
Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. This has made you Non tibi sed toti
genetum te credere mundo Go on the^ generous Gordon, and by attaining the
height of Virtue, obtain the top of honor; Be you a Gem in the Union of Great
Britain, follow the footsteps of your renowned Father, and if it be possible
in virtue out go him; and according to your genererous disposition accept this
small Present of your humble wel-wisher, the gracious acceptance of which shall
stir me up to some greater endeavor whereby to eternize your Name and Virtues.

Solaque non norint haec monumenta mori.

Your Honors to be commanded, Abra: Holland.

NOBILISSMO, ET GEnerosissimo Domino Georgio, comiti Ingeiensi Anagramma.
Georgius Gordonius comes Ingeiensis,
Egregio dignus ensi, sic Musis honor ego.

CLare, Caledonios, Heroes aucture triumphos,
Et Scotico titulos exhibiture Polo:
Cuius et indomitos generosi pectoris ignes,
auxit, Hyperboreas, nix, populata plagas:
Teque, tuumque genus claris insigne Trophoeis,
norunt Arctophylax, plaustraque pigra gelu,
Plaustra per vndosos numquam subitura recessus,
dum videant vultus, sidera grata, tuos.
Tu long is lumen tenebris, et gente remota
Pierijs gratam das Helicona choris.
Te Phaebumque suum putat et Caledonia Martem,
qui fulges aeque Martis, et artis honor:
Ergo armis te bella canant; te carmine Musae,
qui potes et Musis et decus esse tubae:
Andraeas Scoticis, taceatque Georgius Anglis,
hinc Scoticis Numen, Gorgius alter erit.
Honoris tui devotissimus. Ab: Holl.

To the same Noble Earl, two Acrosticke Stanza's.
Glory in you is like the Sun, which gives
Eternal splendor, yet is often hid,
Ore-shadow'd in some clime, when yet he lives
Reviving still: the world cannot forbid
Glory her beams; but like fires hid in night
Express at last a more refulgent light.
Grace then the Muses, who can give you light,
Oblivion it self can never hide,
Respect those Sacrifices, by whose might,
Demigods soon are wholly Deifide:
Only give pardon to me, who can give
Nothing else yet, to make you longer live.
A. H.

In Honor of the Noble Marquess of Huntley, and his true Generous Son, the
Lord GORDON.
THE Royal Eagle Jove's own Bird, to try
As they report her true borne Progeny,
Ere she admit them for her own, or grace
Them to be called of the Eagles race
To Phoebus rays, and the sight-dazing sky
Sh' exposes all her vnfleg'd infancy:
And those that bear the bastard searching light
With eyes vndazled, and with nobler sight
Can brook the judging flame, these as sure-knowne
Indulgently she brings up for her own;
But those whose bastard eyes cannot endure
The piercing splendour of a light so pure,
These as false-got the Royal foul refuses,
And only those which she has tried, chooses.
Thus, Noble Lord your Father, whom of all
We truly may the Northern Eagle call,
So does he soar and still aspire above
The vulgar pitch; so for the truest Jove
Has he in cruel wars borne venfull thunder,
Bringing the barbarous High-land savage under:
Wherein you his true Son he made to try
The glorious sun of Magnanimity.
Which you with noble mind so well endured,
That hence your Father has been well assured
Of a true Son: So may both Sire and Son
Be tri'de at virtues never-setting Sun.
To my friend M. A H.
BY this one lim, my Holland, we may see
What thou in time at thy full growth may be,
Which wit, by her own Symetrie can take,
And thy proportion perfectly can make
At thy Ascendant: that when thou shall show
Thy self; who reads thee perfectly shall know
Those of the Muses by this little light
Saw before other where to take thy height.
Proceed, let not Apollo's stock decay,
Poets and Kings are not borne every day.
Michael Drayton.

To his loving friend M. Abra: Holland.
SEnd forth, young man, from Muses womb,
Thy other Royal births at home,
But slowly, slowly send them forth
Least for their number, and their worth
The envious hand of fates take hold,
And crop thee; for they will think thou art old,
Ed: Cory.

To my Brother A. H.
AS thy first Muse does wit and learning show,
So let true wisdom with thy learning grow.
Your Brother, Hen. Holl.

Amico suo Abrahamo Hollando, D. Philemonis F. in Naumachiam suam.
NAumachiam lustrando tuam, mihi flumine visus,
Ingenij placido deperijse tui:
Arma virum, tabulas, galeas, and scuta per vndas
Aspicio, and men's est Carmine mersa simul.
Emergo! and tabulas votivas dedico Musae,
Docte Hollande tua, quae been ficta canit.
El: Petl.

To my honest friend M. A. H.
That this small piece the world should hazard first,
Of other better work's, thy Muse has nursed;
To wonder I was forced, vnlesse't be done
As a small star does usher forth the Sun.
I. VV. I C.

A Caveat to his Muse.
WEll Minion you will be gadding forth then? go,
Go, have unto thy speedy overthrow:
And since thou will not take my warning: Hence,
Learn thy own ruin by experience.
Alas poor Maid (if so I her may call
Who itches to be prostitute to all
Adulterate censures) were it not for thee
Better, to live in sweet security
In my small cell, than flying rashly out,
Be whoop't, and hiss't, and gazed at all about
Like a day-owle: Faith Mistress you will be put
One of these days to serve some driveling slut,
To wrap her soap in, or at least be droven
To keep a Pie from scorching in the Oven;
Or else exposed a laughing stock to sots,
To cloak Tobacco, or stop Mustard pots,
Thou will be graced if so thou can but win
To infold Frankincense or Mackrills in,
You deem't forsooth a matter of high worth
To have a fame among'em: New come forth;
And think your chief felicity is marred
If you be not perch't up in Paul's Churchyard
Where men a far may know you in a trice,
By some newfangled, brasse-cut Frontispice.
Such book's indeed as now-dayes can pass
Had need to have their faces made of brass.
Is it not then sufficient for you
To stay at home among the residue
Of better sisters: where my dearest Will,
And other friends would praise and love thee still:
Him and my other harts-halfes I account
Entire assemblies, and think they surmount
A Globe of addle Gallants: I aver,
One judging Plato worth a Theater.
But you me thinks of all the rest should fear
The searching rays of censure, least you bleare
You tender fame: who can choose but disdain
The first Minerua of an idle brain.
Penned ere I well was past a boy, or down
With silken moss, my maiden chin did crown.
Black Lycophron redeemed of late by me
From the dark grave of deep obscurity,
And taught to stalk in English measures, dreads
The censure of the Beast with hundred Heads,
And keeps close home: like one from deep of night
That cannot quickly brook the dazzling light.
My labored Merlin, British Lycophron,
Still sits in his dreary delue alone,
And as yet wary Prophecies, that who
Leap into'th world too soon, themselves undo.
My devout Holy Days yet secret lurk,
And dare not frame themselves unto a work.
My merry Paradoxes, still laughing sit,
And dare not mock the world, in Public yet:
Yea my dear Syren-twins, keep still at home
Though almost fledged and ready now to rome
About the world: with hundred crotchets more,
My Patromonie, Portion, wealth and store,
Yea and these riches so contentfull, I
Would not forgo for all the Treasury
The Exchequer holds) will thou then of them all
Dare in these times distracted clutches fall?
Oh, it is a way that spoils things happily good
When itching youngsters crop themselves in the bud,
And so prove rotten before ripe, to win't,
That they may have their names but seen in print.
But seek not thou about the world to gad
Before thou have an Eagles trial had;
Then dare to Impe thy full fledged wings and fly
Nearer than other Muses to the sky.
Outface the Sun, and sing such notes as may
Approve that thou art worthy of the day.
Great glory sure they get and solid fame,
Who to obtain a Month-enduring Name
Make monstrous books, which did they fill the stalls,
Yea were they pil'd up to the top of Paul's
Would quickly vent, when for a month or two
One shall not pass but he shall hear ado
And fresh enquiries for the book; anon
Ye shall hear faintly, This, a year agon
Was a brave book, this was a book indeed.
Ah haples he who now is put to read
The jade-tir'd lines. Thus both such books and makers
Are both of same fame, and same fate partakers.
Live for a day, and flourish, but at night,
Like the short Roses, vanish with the light.
But care not thou whether vain fame do give
That thou do now, or may hereafter live.
And know that Poem's truly framed, rely
Not on the present but posterity.
And learned Poets think it sufficient gain
If that they after death may but obtain
Their Postume glories: nor think that these times
Can rightly judge of well deserving rimes,
We must expect another age, for this
Scarce knows whether prose or Poem it is.
For Poem's now admired, are only those
Change but the words a little they are prose
As plain as Holinshed, each feeble line,
As foot-pac't as this poor L'envoy of mine.
But tell me when thou into'th world art come
How will thou please the multitude, when some
Unless thou can outbaudy Martial,
Or loose-pen'd Arbiter, will stiffly call
Thee slight and witless: did but this clew lead thee,
The greatest Ladies then would daine to read thee
And in their perfumed bosoms would infold
Thee willinger, than Chains of Pearl and Gold,
Or Aristotle's Problems: great men would make thee
Their nere companion, and to Church would take thee.
Instead of Psalms (if so to Church they go,
God knows above whether they do or no.)
Others there are whose addle empty brains
Unless thou fill with loue-sicke-puling strains
Will prove stark made against thee: All in all
Would have this garb: the Prentice at his stall
Itching would buzze upon thee: and each maid
That feign would yet dare not profess the trade
Because sh' has been well brought up: Infinite
The number is will call thee Parasite
Because thou medlest not with any things
Touching the State, Ambassadors or Kings,
O such an one, say they: To these reply
So dear I will not my repentance buy,
Nor will I tread in such unequal measure,
As at my danger to procure you pleasure.
But what I can, will strive to blazon forth
My Countries honor and my Kings: the worth
Of any person who shall merit praise
For such I watch and bite the frantic bays
But the most part are such as those who vow
That Muse is dull and dry whose crabed brow
Skoul's not forth Satires: the Mere title seen
But of a scourge excell's the Faery Queen.
To these say thus: would you have me, a Muse
So rude and vnexperienc't to abuse
Her harmles quill? write satyrs? That Is the work
of brazen pens, with danger that dare ierke
And swear their Ink from blushing: which expert
In the bad world dare venture to insert
Particulars which makes the world to swear
They needs a part in wickedness must bear
They open it so naked: such their spirit
Caesar with them is Casar if he merit:
For me to satyrize from blow-point age
Cloistered in circuit of a college cage
where my experience of Ill nere flew
Beyond the lurching of a dish or two,
Where sophismes miss't were held crimes out of reason
And the not capping fellow's chiefest treason,
The greatest Libells there they hold of take
Some cowl-slaffe show or witty Almanaka.
And such faults as are punished by the Deanes
I know not what a states corruption means,
What bribery is; or what it is to wrack
The vulgar necks, or break the commons back
but satyrists stern quill must rip up faults
From womb of night whose acting makes the vaults
Of Heaven blush, which in a fearful brood
Are hatched by sin and nourtred by blood
Headlong revenge, Extortion, Orphans cry
Are fit for them, and fearful Leachery
But I a Muse that drink a milder Chalice
Shall I poor snake creep in and sting the malice
Of crimes more fit for Iuvenall, or him
That wrapped his lashes in obscure and dim
Clouds of revenge, ashamed to tell the crimes
Openly which were acted in those times.
To live in Court I nere so high could rise
How should I then begin to satyrize.
Nor am I yet so wicked as to be
Experienced in all iniquity
Which satyrists must scourge: I shall in time
May be unto the gall of satyrs climb
If this cannot content their quenit enquiry
Tell'em thou have a brazen pen, with fiery
Full fled'gd, heart-goring wings, a stubborn pen
Not to be spent on paper but on men
With ink steep't full of bitter gall. Now fly
Upon the wings of humble modesty
And thy self happy herein understand,
That thou must come to such a Heroes hand
Whose only name can free thee from the hate
Of vulgar prejudice, and vindicate
Thee from the Lethe of oblivion. Thus
Wishing to thee some lucky Genius
Farewell my Muse: and think it a shame to rush
Into the world and seen there once, to blush.
NAVMACHIA, Or the Poetical Description of a Bloody Sea Fight.
AS the Sun once lift up his burning Lamp
On top of hills, and fiery steeds began stamp
Along the blew-floor'd sky, the Charriotier
Made his firce horses run a full Carreir:
He whipped 'em on, so that their blood there shed,
Made the clear Balcon of the East look red.
He posted on as if he meant not stay
To make a Summer, but a winters day:
Or as if he had wager'd that his teame,
Sooner than wont should souze in western stream:
The steeds themselves with speed unusual fly,
As frighted at this sea-bred Prodigy.
There came along cutting deep Neptunes brow,
A misty mass, to called I know not how:
Whether a running Town, or wauing Wood,
Or moving Delos tumbling on the Flood,
Which seen a far scud on the watery way,
Prodigious Afric seemd, or Asia.
Who getting Neptunes Pas-port, came to see
Their Sister Europe in her bravery.
At whose approach the curled billows rore,
And as it comes fearfully roll before.
The oppressed tower-like Whales lie bellowing under,
That Neptune seems to usurp his brothers thunder.
The silent Fish presaging future blood,
Against their kind run frighted into the mud:
And had they wings, would from the Sea have broken,
And but for churlish nature would have spoken
To manifest their fear, yet what they might,
They fled apace to shun the dreadful sight.
And flying from the Sea in trembling shiuers,
With their thick sholes pestered the lesser rivers.
The Oceans King feeling such weight on's back,
With leaning on his Trident made it crack.
Had it not been immooveable, they say,
The earth this time would feign have fled away.
The amazed shore as the fleet near sounds,
Almost forgot to keep's ordained bounds.
The earth and shore so trembling, you would ha said,
Fear, not enclosed winds, this Earthquake made.
Fame with her feet on earth, and head in the spheres,
With wings plumed full of wonderment and fears,
Flies ore the land, and forth her rumors blazes,
And with increasing dire reports amazes.
The stoutest courages still as she goes,
Sh' augments the power and valor of the foes.
Tel's of strange engines, instruments, and whips,
Framed to act their cruelty, and ships
Prodigious big, vizards, and murdering Knives,
Butcherly malls for slaughter, Halters, Gives,
And all the men like Giants: Thus she flies
Increasing still the Terror, and with lies
Makes a true fear: and ere it was well spide,
She swears the fleet in such a place did ride.
And all the men were landed: such a town,
Was battered, and such a castle down.
Another City without doubt was taken,
And at the winning of it, more men slain
Then it contained: Thus monstrous Fame does range her,
And makes fear more fearful then the danger.
And thus as Fame her flying terror doubles,
Each diverse state is wract with d^uers troubles.
Great men do fear that they here-by shall fall,
Which the poor man does hope to rise withal.
The peaceable do hereby fear annoyment,
The needy Ding-thrift hereby hopes employment.
The Coward this way fears he shall die:
The valiant look for immor^ality.
The loving Wife does fear her Husbands life,
And he as much is troubled for his Wife.
Stout old men wish that they were young again,
Base young men wish that they in age were taken:
Women for fear weep out their tender eyes,
Dumpe Infants almost answer to their cries.
In all the disagreement, which is here,
They all agree in this, that all do fear.
The Beacons now were fired: as if the flame
Even here a contrarity did claim
Against the water, whose prodigious light,
Men feared on land, as in a stormy night
The Sailers fear Orion, which but seen,
Pronounces unto Mariners, the teene
Of angry clouds. And now those noble Spirits,
Whose only aim is by their haughty merits
To out-liue fate, and for their Countries good
Think it a glory to power forth their blood,
Meet all together, as deuote to give
Their own lives that their Countrymen may live.
Thus in all ages, and we still may try
Of life the worthi'st, readiest are to die.
Who hasting to their ships in speed, begin
To show the adverse party should not win
Without resistance, showing there were made
Men as well to defend as to invade.
Our Admiral breath's forth a stout All-arme,
The adverse fleet Ecchoed rebounding, Arm.
As when by sound of hollow brass, or tin
The scatterd bees, buzzing with murmurous din,
Throng in one heap, to some well-branched tree,
Leaving their sweet, and harmless the every;
And so by craft betrayed, are in a trice
Captived all in their narrow Edifice.
Thus at their Captains voice, the vulgar sort
To their assigned stations resort;
With quick confused have the tumult's led,
And speed, by too much speed, is hindered.
All to their charge with trembling boldness run,
With quaking hand one charges first his Gun,
Another girds his threatening sword on's side;
Some clasps their steely Helmets; sheilds are tied
On trembling arms apace, that one might then
Have thought the had been all moving Iron men.
And now the Martial steely-pointed staves
Were snatched in have: the heavy murdring Glaues:
Bows bent to slaughter: weighty Courtelaxe:
And Darts Death's Harbingers; the black bill, axe.
And other arms which before rusting stood,
But now are brought forth to be skour'd with blood.
Our saile-wing'd fleet launcheth fro' th'shore now eased
Of it is dread burden, nor was the earth more pleased
To see from her one hideous terror past,
That grieved to see another come as fast.
One might have thought the battle was begun
To see how Neptune first was thorough run,
How the stern brass his curled forehead tore,
And trembling waves were struck by cruel oar.
Each Fleet the Captains had divided soon,
Into the forms of the halfe-circled Moon;
But as their furious horns together met,
These two halfe-moones a full Moon did beget;
Which like to that in Heaven, as it did go,
Made the fleet waters strangely Ebb and Flow.
Now as with proud advance they nearer came,
Those beasts which gave the saile-rul'd vessels name,
With an aspect more grim than is their life,
As breathing naught but bate, and balefull strife,
Come fiercely forward all, as if from thence
They meant to move their painted Residence.
The Lion, Elephant, and savage Hog,
The Libard, Tygre, Ounce, and cruel Dog
Sternely affront each other, one might guess
In midst of Sea a savage Wilderness,
Wherein with admiration, one might see
So many a fierce wild beast, so many a Tree.
But now our valiant General traversing
About the fleet encouraged them, rehearsing
This speech, wherein he bravely did exhort
To the Fight, which ready cut the Oration short.
Courage brave friends, and that is all I pray,
Strength cannot want, where Courage leads the way,
But what need I th'vndaunted hearts excite,
Of them whose eyes me thinks already fight;
Look as ye do, and ye shall never need
Weapons, or hands to make your foes to bleed.
Your look's shall strike 'em dead, and warlike sight
Shall put your fearful enemies to flight.
What ere ye aim at, here before you lie,
Honor, Revenge, Spoil, Riches, Victory:
Which if they move not, see your Native Land,
Your Nurse, your Mother, see how she does stand
Afar to mark, which of you best shall render
The Meed of Nurture, who shall best defend her,
Them will she honor; bravely then drive back
This vast Sea Monster, which is come to rack
Your Nursses entrails, com't but once to Land,
The very Earth will be afraid to stand
It Is cruel brunt, whither if reach it can,
The blood and tears will make an Ocean
Deeper than this: I see'em now repair
(O let my Omen vanish into air.)
Unto our Land; see how like Wolves they rage
About the coasts, sparing nor sex, nor age.
See how they pull strong walls of Cities down,
Leaving the men as naked as the Town.
They raze your sacred Temples, and not leave
A hallowed place, where after ye may heave
Your hands for aid to heaven: Your Altars frames,
These wicked wretches, with profaned flames
Sacrifice to their anger; yea they dare
To open Ghostly Tomb's, and thence lay bare
Your Ancestors sad Coffins: whose dead ashes
Instead of tears, their Childrens blood be-dashes.
They dragge our ancient Parents unto slaughter,
Answering their dying groans with cruel laughter.
Our younger Wives and Sisters they deflour,
And basel^ make our nearest kinsmen, our
Most hated foes; our tender infants rawle
Scarce borne, being borne unto their funeral.
These things, which, heaven be thank't, I but suppose,
Unless ye help will once advance our foes.
Say that our Navy be far less than theirs,
Have not great ships, amids their swift carriers
Been staid by little Remoraes: Then on,
And let not this cold Element, whereon
We are to fight, quench those courageous flames
Which burn in every manly breast, that aims
At immortality, but strike so stern,
That the dumb fishes may hereafter learn
To speak your praises, and each wave report
Unto it is neighbor, in how valiant sort
Ye fought, till that the Oceans utmost bound,
And farthest Thule with your fame shall sound:
Yea that the Sun, when he at night shall press
This way, may go and tell th'Antipodes
What acts he saw; nor yet of aid despair,
The Sea it self, if need shall ask, will spare
A thousand of his streaming arm's for you,
All fish prove sword-fish to fight for our due.
Think for no refuge here to fly, your hand
Not feet must bring you back again to land:
No longer will the time with us dispense,
What my speech wants, my sword shall recompense.
Now 'twixt a thousand lives, a thousand death's
Of time one little winged minute breath's
The loud-mouthed Gun, only expects the fire,
At touch of which, as burnt, it should expire
It Is skrieking voice, groaning that so much death
Should be accomplished by the infectious breath
Of it is dire mouth; Darts ready are to part
To hide their heads in some ill fortuned heart.
Arrows, and Muskets leuel'd, seem to kill,
Before they can in act, in fiery will.
One might have thought viewing this fearful sight,
'Thad bin the picture of a Navall Fight.
But hark the amazing signs of battle sound,
Making the lands remote, and rocks rebound:
The shrill voic't Trumpet and courageous drum,
In barbarous language bid the foes to come.
Death's horrid vizar now begins to appear,
In their pale faces; terror, and ghastly fear
In their amazed hearts does panting rise,
And future blood bath's in their fiery eyes.
Stern Cruelty aduanceth in their lids,
With headlong fury stalking in the mids:
Apelles present here or one so skilled,
Might have made pictures hence that would have killed.
The thundering Ord'nance now began to rent
The amazed air, the flames before it sent,
Seem lightning, and as deadly bullets fly:
Prodigious hail seemed to power down the sky,
Smoke made a clowdy mist, and all together
Seem on the sea to make tempestuous weather.
To call for aid here, stands as much instead,
As in that place, when from a doubtful head.
The seauen-mouth'd Nilus, with a desperate shocke,
Headlong does tumble from the amazed rock;
Making the people on the neighboring shelues,
That hearing him, they cannot hear themselves;
Thus the fights noise made many a man to fall
In troublous death, a silent Funeral.
Alas those Elements which use to up hold
Our crazy lives, with their just heat, and cold,
Making compact our bodies constitution,
Strive now to cause it is utter dissolution
The quick and piercing fire, as it does burn
Their woeful carcasses, does freezing turn
Their minds to quaking fear, and chill despair,
The liquid, flitting, and all-searching air
Admitts remorsles shot, and murdring darts
Denying breath at last to cool their hearts.
The theevish water though it ran away
With subtle shifts, did notwithstanding slay
And swallow most, with a devouring flood,
Only poor earth, stark, still, astonished stood.
Who viewing this would not have thought a wonder
That without rain, wind, lightning, hail, or thunder
Or hidden shelues, or rocks sea-ambusht back
Or any temrest, ships should suffer wrack?
That one might here have termed it, choose you whether
A strong Calm, or calm tempestuous wether.
See winged arrows posting through the sky
How quick they have froth' battles rage to fly
The trembling spears, as soldiers do them shake,
Seem at their Masters dangrs that they quake:
The flashing swords, which sheathed once they ware,
Seem now to fear, being unarmed and bare.
But now each fleet, each ship with hope-full pride
Clash altogether, furious, side to side.
As when two winds in black tempestuous wether,
With boistrous wings impetuous meet together
With their untamed and resistles iustle,
Making high turrets shake, and cedars rustle,
Where in light shirmish they remain contending,
Till out of breath the are feign to make an ending
Now death's at hand, and night together keep
Clear life, and dreadful death's black iron sleep,
Fierce rage, sad grief, blind Fury now grow higher,
Good cause when sense of touch and hearing nigher
Men now with men contend, and ships with ships,
One body against another; here one skips
Into his enemies deck, but beaten back
He leaps to's own, of which if so he lack,
He falls in sea; much like a wave, whose head
By urging winds unto the shore is led,
And thence by breast of the oft-drowned shore
Taking a blunt repulse, for spite does rore,
And staggering runs back; and is this all
Ambition aims at, in the way to fall?
Their tired senses labored in such wise,
That they grew dull with too much exercise
Their troubled eyes, viewing such ghastly sights,
Wished that sad darkness cancelled all their hights:
That horrid noise the battle made, was such,
Hearing heard nothing, 'cavse it heard so much
Taste is of death, rank blod pollutes the smell,
What feeling felt they all did feel too well.
Such a confusion racks their senses here
The had Reason now to wish they senseless were.
Grim death in purple, stalks upon the hatches,
With pale and griesly looks see how he snatches
Hundreds a once unto him, till the dreary
Lean-face't ill-favord Death of death grew weary.
See on the sea how thousand Bodies float
From their great ships hasting to Charons Boat,
Which crabbed Skuller now might think it meet
His old-torne Boat should be new-chang'd a Fleet.
The tumults noise pierced the blew-arched sky
The crystal Air filled with a deadly cry,
Only in this was blessed, as blows abounded,
It could be ever cut, yet never wounded.
The silent Earth glad that she was debarred
From this sad Fight, yet inwardly was heard
The dreadful strokes rebounding loud, to moan
And Echo made her yield a hollow groan,
But this cause chiefly made her most to rave,
That to her due the sea should prove a grave.
Never did strong-breath't Aeolus disturb
The sea so much, When he can hardly curb
His madding pages, when they raging muster
To quarrel with the waves, or whistling bluster
Among the well-set trees, and branched bowgh's
Singing through chinks of some decayed house:
Nor stern Orion with his stormy light
Appalling shipmen, does so much affright
The soon moov'd sea, as did this battles noise,
Which Neptune answered with his bellowing voice,
Who as the Fleet's urged nearer to the strand
Which tumbling pace, ran frighted up the sand,
That had not bounds restrained his element,
His watery veil had clothed the Continent.
The fearful winds on the Ocean durst not rome,
But least they should be smothered kert at home.
And there sat sighing: Clouds their rane do keep,
Though ready at the battles sight to weep,
Least their pure drops with gore-blood should be staind
So that no winds blew, nor from heaven it rained;
Marvel not yet at tempests on the flood
So many tears streamed, and such streams of blood,
Nor without winds are waves to be admired,
So many groans and dyings brea'ths expired.
The Oceans skaly, silent wandering nation
Seeing pale armed troops invade the station
Of their vast kingdom, down the sanguine flood
Fearfully glide, fearing their future food.
The tender Nymph's who with their silver feet
Use on the plains of crisped Thetys meet,
Where tripping prettely the are wont to dance
Themselves, into a heavenly slwmbring trance
Of sweet repose, at these in humane shocks
With hair all torn creep into the hollow rocks
Where shrouded they to meditate began,
No rock so flinty as the heart of man,
The rocks though always struck by waters fury,
The rocks yet patient bear this injury;
Yea Thetis self whose woombe enriched bare
That fearful Thunder of the Trojan war
Stubborn Achilles, who in fight did win
Such glory, wished that warr's had never bin.
So she, with all her trembling watery peers
Augment the brinish sea, with brinish tears.
Ships now begin to burn, that one might see
Neptunes and Vulcans consangunity
Yea now these ships, which free from water stood,
Strangly begin to sink with humane blood,
Which as from thence with fearful gush it ran,
Filled up the wrinkles of the Ocean,
Making with purpose ghastly gored hue,
Of one Red sea which was before, now two:
Which sea so full of Dead, it hence might come
Well to be called, Mare Mortuum.
The quaking ships with murmuring guns are rent,
Whose wounded sides the gored streams do vent
Of dead and wounded men, who lay therein,
As if they had their Beeres or coffin's bin:
They lay therein and as the ships did go
Seemed bloody, bloodles, dead, and mooving too.
The furious fire with flames does undermine
The towering Mast, made of the lofty Pine,
So that same tree which often hight's Nuptiall's,
Now Cypresse-like does burn at Funerall's.
And eaten by the galling flames, at last
Falls down the huge, high, heavy weighted Mast,
And as great things are wont, fell not alone
Killing a troop nor of it is foes, but own.
The tacklings, sail's, and cables now do burn,
And fire casts Anchors, never to return.
About their ears the whistling bullets sung,
And wandering wildfire made the affrighted throng
Crowd into corners speedily, and they
That durst stand men, to sensles fire give way.
As when with in the fat Trinacriansoile,
Inflamed Aetna does begin to boil,
When nak't Pyracmon, with his round-ey'd fellows,
Sweatinh heave up their huge strong-breathed bellows,
Thundering upon their steeled Anviles top
To furnish armor for their smoaky shop;
Their pondrous hammers, and redoubling, makes
Enceladus belch out his sulph'ry flakes
Of veng-full wrath, then may you see blackesmoke
Vomiring out, wrapped, in a pitchy cloak,
And the hard bowels of the mountain, torn
By fettered fire, with a strange bounding borne
Up to the cloulds, whose fearful fall to shun,
The neighboring people with a maz'ment, run
To shroudin'g Dens, hiding them closely under,
Fearing from high, and from below a thunder.
Then did the inhumane battles fury rage,
Nor could the sea the increasing flames assuage.
And Mars himself, in Adamantine arms,
With a hoarse voice rores out against all-armes,
He that would now have travailed to hell,
Might have seen weary sweating Charon well
In fervent labor, with his mossy oars
Tugging pale shadows to the ore-swarmed shores;
Which on the bancks as they lamenting crept,
Wailing Cocytus in compassion wept.
Acheron flowed with grief, and as they say,
Lethe it self could never forget this day,
The Furies whin'd, by Plutoes Judgment cast,
Who swear their rage was far by men surpast,
One coming here might tired Clotho spy,
How she could fearse her weary arm's apply
To turn the wheel; and Lachesis repine
Who swear she could not threads of mortals twine
So fast as they were cut; you might have seen
Atropos raging with remorsles teene
And seeking each where for some greetty stone
To whet her sheeres, whose edge was dulled grown
With too much cutting of their fatal thread,
Whose haples lives this gastfull battle shed.
Fire now and water did not each contend,
But seem their power so mutually to lend,
That at this time there many a one became
Burned in the sea and drowned in the flame.
This one good hap to carcasses did fall,
The had fire to burn 'em at their funeral.
The mangled ships not fearing to be drencht,
Gladly take breaches, thereby to be quenched.
But now thou Tisiphonc, infernal Muse
Rouzing thy self from Stygian sleep, peruse
The various Images of dreary Fate
Happening in this sad Fight, and Intimate
Them to my mind, which well, I think, agree,
Not with a sweet, and heavenly Muse, but thee.
The Industrious Pilot sitting at the stern,
Where in a little card, he can discern
The vast uncertainty of Neptunes haunt
Ruling swift ships by powerful Adamant,
Here as he sits retired, and watchful minds
The frequent change of two and thirty winds
Comes an unruly shot, and him does force
To certain death, change his uncertain course,
So he that wont stern blasts in truce to bind,
Could not foresee when he should loose his wind,
From storms, and Mists of Death he could not free
Himself, who wont the Tempests curb, but he
Who bearding Neptune, used on the Ocean float,
Is now controlled in Charons little boat.
The Master ranging up and down the Deck,
And wounded mortally, to him does beck
His Mate, who hasting to his aid in vain
Is there together with the Master slain,
And at once ended with him his lives Date,
Proouing himself truly the Masters Mate.
The Trumpetter, with brave reviving sound
Quickening their dying hearts, is felled toth' ground,
And as in's mouth he still the brass did wield,
His dying breath made it a dead march yield,
And having lent his Trumpet so much breath
In's life, it turned him some again at's death.
The Drummer with his nimble hand repeating
His doubled blows, without compassion beating
His harmless drum, which seemed with groaning cry
To murmur at his Masters cruelty,
Suddenly two rash bullets rudely come
Tearing both skin of drumer, and the Drum,
Drummer of life, of sound the Drum's bereft:
So Drum, and Drummer both are speechles left.
The Gunner as with nimble have he runs
To fire his seldome-vaine-reporting Guns,
His head a leaden-winged bullet hits
And his hard braine-pan into pieces splits,
He of a thousand this alone might vaunt,
That of his death he was not ignorant,
And this true riddle might of him abide,
He lived once by's Death, by's life now did.
Here comes a Captain, with undaunted face,
Encouraging his soldiers to the Chase,
And being about to say, be brave and bold,
An untaught bullet rudely bids him hold,
And as death's mist in his dull eyes did wander,
Beseeching aid he left to be commander,
And he whose voice from fainting thought to call them,
By's dying groan does fearfully apall them:
This leader faithful to his utmost breath
Can only now lead them the way to Death.
See how to steal the wauing flagg, one climbs
Up by the cards, but being espied betimes
Tangled in the ropes, he is of life bereft,
And so is hanged for his intended Theft.
But the cords burnt wherein his legs were bound,
He gets a Pirates death both hanged and drowned.
Some under hatches closed, in despair
Mount up their foes with powder into the air,
Which done it seemed a strange prodigious sight
A troop of armed men to mask the light:
It seems yet that they no damage meant 'em,
Who the next way up into heaven sent 'em
Making them fly, beyond Dae dalian skill,
In the vast air, without a winged quill,
Giving to them a strange unwonted death,
Who having air too much yet wanted breath.
See see the lot of sad Mortality,
Our chiefest help's, help often to Misery,
Some men who came secure from future harms
Enrolled in well-proou'd steely clothed arms.
Fall by mischance into the sea's dire hand,
Whence being unarmed they might have sworn to land:
Their arms do sink, and without mercy end 'em
So killed by that which chiefly should defend 'em.
One with his Musket ready to give fire
Aims at another adverse Muskettier,
But his match missing fire, he is forced to die
By the others matches true fidelity,
By which he di'de, can scarc'ly well be known,
Whether by the others Musket or his own.
See there a Coward wanting heart to abide
The daunting face of the fierce adverse side,
Slinketh behind the next, not caring whither,
Comes a mad shot, and kill's 'em both together;
Praise him in this, for though his life outdar'd him
To equal the other, yet his death compared him.
Nevertheless if truly ye do mind him,
As in his life, in's death he came behind him.
One seeming now his side begin to fail
Shows them their colors, while himself looks pale,
Sure by this man some Omen ill was shown,
To keep their colors, who could loose his own.
Those men who chanced in the ships to fall
The cruel sea was made their buirall.
And into the waves without remorse were thrown,
Poor men, slain by their foes, drowned by their own.
A Fisherman who nigh them cut the Maine
Sitting in's boat was with a bullet slain,
And the bark fired wherein he dead did fall.
Which gratis, burnt, gave him his Funeral
True to thy Master, kind boat, who with him
Did often in life, and now in death do swim
With him alive in water that did tire
Thy waue-beat sides, dy'st now with him in fire.
Yet me thinks thou should not deserve this turn
Who so often plunged with him which should burn,
Yet sail with him to Elysium, sail the faster,
In Carons stead that thou may waft thy Master,
Strange Boat which thus we not amiss may call
His Life, Death, Charon and his Funeral.
A Noble man that was a Renegate,
While he against his King does boldly prate,
A shot takes off his head, as if twere reason
That he should be beheaded for his Treason.
A baser fellow while he dares complain
And rail against his once own Sovereign,
A true Liege-man, as he thus boldly brags,
Strikes him up, and his vile body drags
About the ship, and while he vainly begs,
Remosles cutteth off his arms and legs,
And thinking then to throw him in the tide
He Is caught upon an Anchor on the side,
That one beholding rightly might have sed,
He justly was hanged, drawn, and quartered.
Some fearing swords, into the sea do fly,
And so for fear of death, fear not to die.
Some fall into the Ocean stained with gore,
Which from their former wounds had gusht before,
Which killed not them, as it from them was spil'd,
But entering into them again, the are killed.
Heeres one about to strike, his foe does fall
Into the sea, before he can recall
His erring stroke, striking the sea to stay him,
The Ocean in revenge o'th blow does slay him.
One fearing death does feign to die and bleed,
And while he is in faining, dies indeed.
Another being about to strike his foe
Loses at once his arm and threatening blow:
His left arm shiuering, reaches at the other,
But cut atwaine, lies with it is equal Brother,
Both joined, though both divided, as in spite
Of Death, they meant to part their last goodnight,
By shaking hands: the miserable truncke
As loath to part, fainting upon them sunk.
One seeing them together thus, might say,
There a whole body, all in pieces lay.
See two with sturdy grapple, striving whether
Should overcome, both fall in sea together;
Embracing both till they have lost their breath,
And seem though foes in life, yet friends in death.
Two brothers slain, as they together stood,
One then might swear, they were allied in blood.
Other two, who so nigh resembling, were
A loved mistake unto the parents dear,
(Cruel death severed them) and that one left
Poor parents knew, of error now bereft:
He left eternal cause of grief renewes,
Who still alive, still his dead brother shows:
And yet to them this comfort still he gives,
The one cannot die, so long as the other lives.
The wounded soldiers, now that all else fails,
To stop their wounds, do tear their woeful sails:
Poor men who after they were overthrown
Had torn those wings, whereby they might have flown.
One with his bleeding ready to expire,
Thinks with his blood, to quench the ship on fire:
And so in mids of flames he bleeding stands,
Tearing new wounds with his kind cruel hands.
And grieved to see his blood so little profit,
He often adds tears to help the quenching of it.
Till at last fainting he is feign to fall,
Into the sea, which made his Funeral:
And bleeding in it from each mangled lim,
He quenched it, and it extinguish't him.
See a poor wretch with both arms cut asunder,
Distracted leapt into the water under
Meaning to swim, but see the woeful wretch
With how much toil he labors to stretch
His raw-veind stumps, which for his arms before
Gush nothing now, but streams of deadly gore:
Feign would he catch t'vphold his wavering life
Some kind remain o'th ship, but all his strife
Does make him sooner to be out of breath,
And wanting arms he yet embraces death.
One gets this, by having lost his eyes,
In that he cannot see his miseries,
Another legs are gone, that who him sees
Might think he did beg pardon on his knees.
What refuge now is left? when if they shun
The Approaching sword, into the fire they run:
Shunning the fire, they into waterfall,
So no way wants a certain Funeral.
Thus after strange unheard of sort they lie,
And death, by many deaths, makes one man die.
The mangled ships no longer can withstand
Th'intruding sea, and Mars his fiery brand;
But sinking downward one might then have thought
Them gone to help Charon to waft ore his fraught.
The conquered fleet pricked now with desperate stings
Of horror, wish their army did of wings
Only consist; but now as if it stood
Tied with fast anchors to the stubborn flood
Mooues not away, but void of all instruction,
Venture their own, to hasten the destruction
Of their once Masters, who into corners creep,
As among Wolves, a flock of trembling sheep.
Much like a silly Dove, whose broken wing
Has tried the Talons of the aerie King,
And lies panting on the bloody ground
Striving to fly from's enemies rebound.
Alas poor bird, it wants that winged oar
Which should it is wonted escape to it restore:
And so at length with silent patience crouching,
It Is made a prey to the fierce bird encroching.
Thus fleet and bird lie in the same woeful plight,
Whose only wish is to be put to flight.
The Sun no longer could endure to see
Amongst humane men such inhumanity:
Therefore his Horses, bathing in their foam,
With posting speed have to their watrie home.
Where yet a while they all amazed flood,
Finding in stead of Sea, a Sea of Blood.
FINIS.

