A Counter-snarle FOR Jshmael Rabshacheh, A Cecropidan Lycaonite.

BY Sr. EDWARD HOBY, Knight, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's
Priuie-Chamber.

Comitantur praelia praelum.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Butter, by the Authority of Superiors. 1613.

JOB 11. verse. 2.3. Should not the multitude of words be answered? or should a
great talker be justified?

Should men hold their peace at thy lies? and when thou mockest others, shall
none make thee ashamed?

TO THE HONORABLE, WORSHIPFVLL, AND WORTHY GENTLEMEN, The Students of the Law,
in his Majesty's Innes of COURT.

Thrice -- Worthy Gentlemen.
YOu are not to learn what Artibus impietas ingeniosa caret.
Artificial shadows Heresy has in all ages contrived, for the covering of
her Monstrum horrendum inform, ingens cui lumen ademptum.
ugly shape; neither are you unable to discern the counterfeit colors wherewith
she has varnished her Reuelabo pudenda tua, in facie tua. Nahum. 3.5
wrinkled deformities, for the alluring of the giddie world to her banefull
lust. The truth is, she has so long forged, and forced the countenance of
venerable Antiquity, by her impious positions, and whorish practices, that her
usurping impudence, and impudent usurpations, have now justly occasioned, not
only Churchmen to dispute, but even Laymen to doubt of the authority of that
Charter, wherewith their forefathers were so grossly deluded. Hence it comes
to pass that finding her self displumed of her wonted retinew, which she is
well-nigh out of hope to Jctus Piscator sapit.
regaine, and deprived of those natural supplies, wherewith her state was
supported, and her pomp maintained, she now flies abroad like a shrewish
distracted malecontent, in her frantique mood, Vel vi, vel fraud valebo.
pulling, haling, spurning, scratching, and tearing all that stand in her Aut
inuentam aut ficiam viam.
way: yea be they never so noble by descent, eminent in place, profound in
Judgment, skilful in tongues, famous for learning, virtue, or experience in
travails, if they Laesit qui non haesit.
refuse to dance a round in her Orgions antic, she will be sure they shall not
pass, without a broken head, or a black eye: witness so many scurrilos and
scandalous Pamphlets which have of late bin scatterd; wherein neither the
highness of sacred Majesty, the matchless governors of a well settled state,
nor the sincere professors of a spotless truth, have escaped without some vile
blurr, and maleuolous aspersion, from one or other her suborned Pandars and
whifling agents: Neither has their enraged malice, as yet vented all those
venomous crudities, wherewith their surfeited stomachs are surcharged, but as if
they meant to make work for a world of Galenists, and Paracelsians, they daily
corrupt our pure air, by casting out of that sulphurious pit, no small
quantity of their infectious dregs, and hellish druggs, Iras viuaces gerunt.
wherewith their vain hope is, to cast the ignorant, into a senceless sleep,
and the learned into causeless disgrace.

. 2.
AMong this Brethren in evil. Genesis 49. v 15 Vasa iniquitatis bellantia.
fraternity, there is a fresh vpstart, (unto whom I presume Pandoraes box was
entayled) desirous to be admitted. He is only known unto me by the mark
of I. R. but if I be not mistaken in the (...) Genesis 16 v. 15. (...) Esa. 30.1.
Hierogliphicks, his familiars may salute him by the name of Ishmael
Rabshacheh, he is so wholly compact of (...) Genesis 2^.^ v. 9.
mocking and railing, that he well seems to have the mixed quintessence of
them both. This Polypragmist, forsooth, to show his invincible courage, and
undaunted spirit, (which I must confess does many miles outstrip his leaden
art, and heauy-heeld learning) has undertaken the Combat with one of your Mr
VV. Crashaw.
Lecturers, and professes (as if his breast were the storehouse of
Aesculapius his medicinal receipts) the present cure of all those festered
wounds, which were by him discovered, in the diseased body of the Romish
Church; little remembering, that Roma iam ve^us est malum.
old flesh, and inueterate sores, require more then ordinary skill; and that it
must be a better tongue, then his mouth can yield, to lick them whole.
Notwithstanding, in this his presumptious heat, his swelling and pregnant wit,
having by the vvindie incursion of superior hopes, conceived the Idaea of an
ill propotioned Brat, wherewith for want of a good Mydwife he has been in
travail these five years, is now at length delivered of a little pretty
Pygmie: whom, as if it had descended of the stock of Hercules, he has
christened, The Nil nisi bella crepat, bella, horrida bella.
overthrow of the Protestants pulpet Bables: and has entered it into the
Church-booke, to be the work of I. R. Rudent, (I should say Student) in
divinity, Anno Domi. 1612. And, as if he had had the law on his side, he has
Preface dedicatory.
invited your worthy selves, the Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, to the
vpsitting. His hope, no doubt, is, that according to the law of Goshipping, you
will dandle the fathers none boy, and swear it is a jolly pretty ape. And so I
protest you may: your verdite herein will not be much amysse, for wot you
what? he has taught it, in less then three months, to know me better, then
ever I knew my self. You would wonder to hear how in the lisping language it
will name Page 7.
D. Jewel, Page 7. 149
D. Andrews. Page 137.
D. Morton, Page 8.
D. Field. Page 85. 91 303.
Sir Edwyn Sands, and among the rest Sir Edward Hoby, as if it had been
acquainted with either of us, twice seven years at the least. Nay more then
so, he has breathed into it such a Criticque, and discretiue spirit, that it
is able to control, the valor, sincerity, and learning of the best of us
all. But trust me truly, it has one property, which all this praemature
forwardness, is no ways able to counteruaile: you will find it the most
foule-mouthed Impe, that ever Cerberus bred or Tit. c. 1. v. 12
Crete saw. Yet must I not conceal the benefit, which I have in my own
particular reaped thereby, which is not much unlike, that which obliged Lib. 1.
c. 13
Gelon (of whom Aelian makes mention) to his yolping Curre,

. 3.
THis poor man, taking, (as it may seem) an after-noones nap, fell into a
very fearful dream, that his bowels were peirced with a thunder-bolte, the
soddain and ghastly apprehension whereof, so affrighted him, that he sent forth
most pitiful groans, in so much as his dog being not far off, and hearing the
noise, fell on barking, till at lengh he quit his Master, of his sleep and
fear. Right so fared it with me, who thinking to repose my superlatiue (...).
Vulnera vulneribus non addas plura receptis.
sorrow, (for the loss of one only Child, a virtuous and loving wife, a
broken arm, a burning fever, and weakness of eyes, all in one year
conglomerated) by the solace of a rural devoted Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
priuacy, fell, I know not how, to clyme the steep hills of certain craggy
studies, and unwonted speculations, and had not the belowing of this roaring
Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
Lycaonite, somewhat awakened me, it is twenty to one, I had bin no less
perplexed with (...) Printed at Venice. 1593.
Arca Noe, then Gelon with his dismal dream. Wherefore I should I much
degenerate from my self, if in leiw hereof, I would not vouchsafe a little
conference with him, whose call has freed my brain from so great a burden,
And seeing he refers him-self to the censure of your learned society, of whose
noble disposition, and renowned discretion, your nuptial reuells, and grave
pleadings have given sufficient testimony, to the admyring world, I cannot
repute it, the lest part of my hapines, that I am summoned to answer, at so
honorable abench, against those unjust Cauills and (...) est morsus figura^us,
qui sape, fraud, vel vrbanitate regitur vt aliud sonet, aliud intelligatur.
Macrob.
scommatizing imputations, which this falsefiing Ovid. Met. lib. 14.
Cecropidan has forged, against certain passages, in a short letter of mine,
which some few years since, past from my pen To Ma. T. H.
to the press. And here, before I enter the list, I must desire you, to be
informed, that my purpose is not to forestal (...)
M. Crashaws market, nor to put my sickle into his harvest, I doubt not but he
has store of strong powders to make him feel the smart of those wounds, which
by drawing over a fair skin, he seeks to hide, and his Quiver full of such
forked shaftes, for the entering of the weak sides, of the Romish cause, that
the best chirurgians, in the Jesuits Hospital, shall hardly with all the art
they have, be so hardy as to pluck them out. So far am I from usurping the
least part of his praise, that it grieus me to think, he should waste his forces
upon so inglorious a Hic cum victus erittecum certasse feretur
foe. The only strait that I am in, is, in respect of my self, how I should
wade through with your good opinion, being to suit my Apology to the Ishmalites
objections, whereof some are personal, and cannot be well answered by my self
Nec te collaudes nec te culpaueris ipse.
without appearance of vainglorious ostentation, and some so frivolous, that I
have little or no use of those my small readings, which in a more material
cause, I might with greater pleasure to my self, and perhaps content to you,
have employed; But because I am singled out, only to defend my self, I must
crave your forbearance in this, till my fitter opportunity inhable me to
repay your patience in a better kind.

. 4.
THe first Epithet with which it pleases this Hagueren to grace those my
cursory lines is, the friendly censure, of Preface dedicatory. page 22.
an unlearned letter, as if himself were Act. 8.9. Habet quenda acul^um
contumelia, quem pati prudentes as viri boni difficillime possunt.
(...), such a one as had by his laborious industry, climed the top of
Pernassus, and drunk the fountain of Helicon dry: the trial hereof I
refer, to the impartial reader.

Indeed I cannot but ingenuously confess, that I have lost many Hoescio, quod
nihil Scio
hours, which I would be glad with double pains, and greater price to redeem:
yet have I not been such a stranger to those sacred Sisters, but that I have
seen Aristotle's Well, and friendly conuersed with them all. And were it not
that Vide.. 3.
my infirmities did suppress the virility of my spirit, I could perhaps
readily show (absit inuidia verbo) as many of their favors, as this boasting
Ishmaelite, yea should he seek and search all the corners of his deske. Had
any approved Artist, laid ignorance to my charge, I should the sooner have
suspected my self; but when your wisdoms shall peruse the Si ego dignus hac
centumelia, tu indignus qui faceres tamen.
Solaecismes, crabbed phrases, and incongruities of this nibling Probationer, I
doubt not but the comparison will purchase my Nullitie, the title of Mediocria
firma.
Mediocritie. In the entrance of his preface, which may serve as a Perspectiue
to the rest, he casts a Figure, and rayseth such a number of iffs, that
Barbarism it self, would blush to read them. If (says he) many seduced
souls in our (in this respect,) unhappy nation. etc. If if, etc. Hear is a
iobbing Parenthesis, and a crabbed strain indeed.

In this my learned Magnificoe, shows what refined stuff we shall meet
withal, in sifting the sequel of his discourse: Many a good man's dog, has
broken his leg over a less style. Now if I should spell all his iffs
backwards, and turn them into so many Phi. nota faetoris.
fyes, I might cry, fie upon those Telas arane arum texuit.
Cobweb allusions, so often iterated, that the margent would not contain, the
particular Pages, wherein the Page 4.20.22. four times. 31 36.50.57.58.59.133.
Spyder or Fly is praedomina^t. Fie upon your accidental and genericall
christening of Page 246.
Bells and relative honor of Page 201.
Images. Fie upon the bird that defiles his own nest, terming his country an
Page 3.
unhappy kingdom, the Climat Page 36.
Clownish, and infamous, the air gross, and this Island an usurper of the
surname of Page 18.
Crete. Fie upon that blockish simplicity, that co^founds a rhethorical
acclamation, which the Prophet uses to the Esaias. 45. v. 8.
Clouds, and a theological invocation, which the Papists direct to the woden
Page 207.
Cross: not distinguishing between a Hyperbolicall exaggeration, and a
Superstitious obsecration.

The like art he uses under the privilege of a simple Metaphor, to divide the
kingdom between God, and The throne of mercy is hers by a Metaphor. page 168.
the Virgin. Deserves he not to have your voices for the Rhethoricke Lecture?
Thus might I stuff much paper, with many like unsavory P. 40.
Baberies, wherewith being P. 52
absorpt, in his P. 44.
extaticall contemplations, he perfumeth his il current and worse cadent lines.
So that he does well to enioine the reading of his imaginary refutation as a
P. 50.
penance to your judicious eyes; neither have you any reason to stop him with
a Nil minus, when in plain terms he confesses, P. 50. Ex ore tuo te iudico.
Factus sum insipiens, I am become a fool; under this color of affected
simplicity, his desire is to pass, for Tom tell troth, that so with his fools
boltes he might P. 14.
crack in pieces the credit of our English Church: But albeit he slauer my
poor letter, with his driueling terms, I will yet do him his right, since he
will needs be a fool, I dare undertake you shall find him a crafty fool.
When any of their own ancient Records are produced, he has a trick to turn
them often in a trice, blearing his Reader, that these are but P. 7 23.
worme-eaten sayings of an old gloss: when they are charged with lying
stories, painted in their Chapels, that fault he lays to the P. 15.
Paynters pensil, and when they are urged with idolatrous appeal, from God to
the Virgin, and the like absurdities, he shifts them off to the P. 37.
Picto^i^us atque Poetis.
Poets pen.

. 5.
THus does he with the long sided skirts of his fools coat, think shiftingly
to hide that, which he dares not doctrinally defend: between Poets and
Painters he challenges license for his Church, to teach and write what she
list, without check and control. Which idle conceit, has so fully possessed
them, that there are few, or none of their late VVriters, who have not been
free, of one, or both those (so largely privileged) companies. Their
boundless, and groundless fictions, bewray the most to be either Poets, or
Paynters; when their Church Hymns are confessed to be but figurative Poems, and
Poetical fancies, and their pictures but Paynters devices, you may guess of
the insolidity of the rest.

I fear Rabshachehs Fie upon a sloud of fools.
fools coat, will be well clawed by his Superiors, for telling of tales out
of schools, as also for discountenancing their highly esteemed P. 208.
Breuiaries, and P. 156.
Counsels: And he well deserves it, as being the most brazen faced intrudor,
that Fooliana ever harbored. You would wonder how he should lurk in the
Parliament house, to publish our (supposed) P. 59.
commands. Is it not strange, that a principal Earl of Salisbury.
Secretary of so great a state, should let fall to such an open mouthed
fellow, his dislike, and resolution to discarde P. 52
Master Crashawes Sermon, as our Cecropidan, peradventure, to raise some
sinister suspicion, pretends. Were he now alive to hear those new invented
fictions, I wonder what he would think of such poring spies, and hollow-harted
Intelligencers M. Tom. Dyrre.
Did a Courtier of my acquaintance, who is not far behind him for learning,
hear him as-certain so much, I smile to think how he would look. I presume
the aforesaid Councellor would soon cast a net to catch this fleeting
Gudgeon, that makes himself so privy to his inward thoughts: And yet (though
by all likelihood he is not Out of the current of his native streams
extra quatuor Maria) this would not easily be compassed, For if ever any
fellow were made of quicksilver, this is he, as I verily think. One while he
is in P. 322.
Virginia, and can tell you what pease-pottage (tawny) the Minister did eat,
whilst his fellows were fighting. An other while he is at an execution at
P. 106.
Oxford, and by and by he conuerseth with a P. 321. Credit Pisones.
Gentleman of Honor, who brings him nevves from my Lord De la Wars own
mouth: Nay, there can no sooner be an argument propounded at my table, but he
has it straight by the end. If he be now amongst the roaring Page 100.
Rakehile, in the College pumpe, he will in a moment be invisible, among the
Gossippes in P. 185. 245
Pemblico: It is not unlike he has met with Fortunatus his hat, his ears are
as quick, as his thought, and his pen so well feathered, that it follows him
close at the heels: whatsoever his Philautie presents, his heart crediteth,
and his hand publishes.

Among many other his imaginary discoueries, he would feign make us believe,
that he has been with (glorious) Page 104. Qui vbique nullibi
Q. Elizabeth's ghost, taking upon him to determine with what consorts she is
accompanied; and as if he had a privy key to the closet of your hearts, he is
so shamelesly audacious, as under color of rumor, to sound a false Alarm,
informing his Readers, that Page 5.
your general dislike, of Mr. Crashawes intemperancie in writing, and folly in
marrying, (being held no convenient quality for your Preacher) did praesage
his present discharge from his office. Is not this a dangerous mate, that has
such a number of Familiars, to send into every But Pick. hatch, Bedlam
Shorditch. Page 276.
coast? Can he be so careful of your Honors, as he pretends, that broacheth
out of his fustie brain, such musty scandales, for the vilifying of your
judgment, and traducing the constancy of your faith? No marvel if he tax
my learning, who lays so hard a censure upon the blessed soul, of so worthy
a Saint, charge a great Counselor of estate, and your venerable Society,
with these surmises; were that time bestowed in his theological studies, which
he spends in hunting after fabulous reports, he might with more probability,
have made a greater breach into our Fort, then he is now with his paper-shot
like to perform.

. 6.
YEt I cannot but commend him for his iugling, what he wants in real, he
supplies with personal imputations: I have eaten more then a bushel of salt
in France, the Lowe-Countries, Spain, Portugal, etc. in all which time I
cannot justly accuse my self of any military service, by sea or land which I
refused, or dishonorable disgrace which I pocquetted: Yet does this Lycaonite,
for want of better stuff, display me to be a Knight, Page 21.
more famous for my pen, then my sword.

It seems he grieves that I should sleep in a sound skin; the truth is, as I
was never forward in putting my self upon the pikes of needelesse dangers;
so did I never turn my back, where my adversary durst show his face. Sua
vulnera narrat.
Miles gloriosus, been long since a laughing stock, to the whole Theater: I
have ever held it more valor to let others feel, then for my self to make
boast of the sharpness of my sword. If I have not been famous for quarrels,
it has either been my happiness, which he seems to envy, or my heedinesse,
which he has reason to commend. Whether Mars or Mercury had the
praedominance in my Nativity, I am not so cunning Format enim natura prius
no^intus ad omnem fortunarum habitum.
a Starre-gazer to determine. It shall be my greatest content, to stand as a
Jsti adsimiles sunt abacorum calculis, qui and secucdum voluntatem Call
culatoris modo obolum aereum, modo, talentum valent J^a A^lici ad nutum
Principis, modo beati, modo miserifi un^.
Cipher, in what rank of employment my Masters favor shall be pleased to
place me: To whose honor, and service, I will never be daunted to sacrifice my
dearest blood. How this Rodomantado may vnderualew my worth, unless he were a
more competent Judge, the matter is not great.

. 7.
HIs next flurte is at my wit, which (says he) page 22.
Were it aunswerable to my name, or my learning, as high, as my own conceit
thereof, I were a soaring bird. Thus do his squibbes fly about to sindge my
feathers. By all means I would not have him lose this conceit. Mark the
allusion: were my wit aunswerable to my name, I were a soaring bird: Well
flowne Buzzard: I perceive he will fly far for a jest: would he not prove
(think you) a good Anagrammist, that can descant so well upon a name? Well I
am glad I had it for him, or else all this sport had been marred. To justify
my wit, were wit-lesse folly; Yet if an ambitious spirit, had that little in
keeping, I am persuaded he should have no great need, to borrow of this
indigent Artist: who would make us believe he was borne in the full moon, when
wit was a dealing. The fates, no doubt, were very partial, to empty all their
vyalls, into one caske; It cannot be but he must needs have a great skonce,
that has engrossed such a mass of wit. There is no question but this Brauo
will well perform the gybing task, unto which by the Ladies liberal purse --
promises (their former Spreta exolescuat, si irascare, aguita videntur. c.
Tacit.
Libels being turned into smoke) he stands engaged. If he miss his pay let
him sobbe for I. R. understands me, she was of the arting kinds.
her death, who having given first encouragement, did not long after, by Gods
great mercy, end her days in a far other manner, then he expected.

. 8.
THe conceit of my learning, wherewith my innocent thoughts are unjustly
vpbrayded, cannot be well removed by bare words; but had he a window into my
breast, to survaie the imaginations of my heart, his pen is not now so busy in
censuring, as his tongue would be diligent in reuoking. I am, God wot, too
privy to mine own defects, to give credit to any comparatiue attributes in
that kind. My desire has bin to hold conformity herein, to my first
breeding, and to keep pace, with men of my own rank. Wherein, if I have
gained so much as may serve for my own meditations, and my Countries affairs,
wherein I am interessed, I neither envy them that have more, nor disparrage
those which have less.

Whereupon this his surmize should grow, I cannot readily tell, unless he find
himself wrung with his own Obtrectator magis m^rbum suum quam mores alienos
prodit.
shoe. Had I as much learning as he wants, I could find good use for much
more. The Apostle long since taught me, and lent me a bridle, which may serve
as a curb, to subdue the like motions of his swelling pride: 1. Cor. 3 v. 2.
Si quis se existimat scire aliquid, nondum cognouit, quemadmodum oporteat eum
scire. The greatest Tympany has not always the best burden; where the hill
is highest, commonly, the grass is lowest; the deepest river runs with the
least noice, Sapere supra sobrietatem, O di pracocia ingenia.
has been as dangerous in the Church, as pernicious in the state. A great
Mast soon ouerturnes a little Bark, and he which brings a great Army into
the field, without victual or munition, is like to go by the worste.
Wherefore, how-soeuer I may be misconstrued, my course has ever been, by
comparing that which I do not know, with that little which I have attained, to
substract many ounces, from that ordinary opinion, which men of his profession
do in like case intertaine. It is for children to be proud of Peacocks
feathers, and for base aspiring spirits, to set out their painted butter-flies
with Eagles wings.

True generosity banisheth such base thoughts, if the Vino vendibili non o^us
haedera.
wine be good, no matter for a green bush. Wherefore I am well content to
bestow this Cavil upon the first Plaerique in id nati, vt neque ipsi
quiescant, nec alios sinant. Thucid.
founder, for his pains If his means may be bettered, or his credit more
current, by the stamp which it shall receuie, from the partial hand of his
ouerweening imagination, I shall not repine to see him make his best of such
ordinary commodities. The world will perhaps wonder at my charity, and the
rather for that he further taxes me for, Page 22.
fluttering in a web of weak s^unders, which is so vile a reproach, that
patience it self would shrink, if not sink, under the burden.

A man had need have the sheilde of Pallas to repel these poisoned darts:
but as long as they fly from so weak a hand, without the vantage of firmer
proofs, there is good hope they will neither fly flarre, nor pierce deep.

. 9.
WHat he should mean by these weak slanders, my dull brain cannot
conceive, unless he have reference to those three Falsifications, wherewith
his seditious treatise, would gladly persuade Saint Augustine to find
himself greiued. Page 134.
This (says he) is not only, gross ignorance, but also great impudency, etc.
Want of conscience, which I have bewraied, in framing sentences for Sainst
Augustine; which he neither wrote, nor so much as dreamed of. And therefore he
warnes Master Crashawe that, in proof of his assertion, he bring not such
testimony as the three alleged by me, out of that Father, to prove he rejected
the Machabees. Thus does this Spider-catcher trauaise his ground, with a goodly
flourish, as if he meant, with the weak Goddesses, to bind Jupiter: but if he
bring not some Briareus to assiste him, it will not be long ere he be Magn^is
tamen excidit ausis.
out of breath. Amongst all that I wrote in an 114, pages, he has only a
spite at one leaf, which lies in the heart of my letter; and that the world
may know he is a man of his hands, he puts every syllable to the sword. One
shall hardly find such an Examiner in a country. I beshrew his curiosity; He
is so nice, that he has made Me and my Printer almost fall out, about
setting Page 135. Grande piaculum.
Razis for Razias. The best satisfaction I could get from him was, that if
Master Ishmael be so strict for a letter, rather then he would stand in law
with him, he would willingly grant that last syllable, to Nunquam ego hominem
magis asinam vidi
him and his heirs for ever.

This is he by way of amends content to set down under his hand. And that you
may see he means no double dealing, he is well pleased, the whole world
should be witness: adding this protestation, that he is sorry he has withheld
his due so long. But to return to that Marble pillar, that glorious Saint,
that ever admired Augustine, I cannot but deplore my hard hap, that I should be
indicted for the least wrong, done to him, to whose heavenly Meditations, sweet
sayings, and learned discourses, I owe more then the half of my self. Would any
man believe, that I should father that book, de mirabilibus sacrae scripturae
upon him? Page 122. Varius ait, Scaurus negat.
Rabshacbeh auerres that. Indeed I cannot deny that finding it in their own
Coppies in equal rank, with those other books that go under the title of
Saint Augustine his works, and having no other certain, or known author,
under whose name I might cite it, I was loath to trouble the margent, with any
Circumloquution, co^tenting my self only to note where it might be found. And
this I did to a double end. First, to draw and extort from the adversary, an
open confession of the falsehood of their forefathers, in packing and placing
their bastardly brood, amongst the natural children, and true branches of
those Angelical Doctors. Which unjust dealing, has not been the least bane of
the Christian world. Secondly, to infer upon their own acknowledgement, and
discarding this book, that the testimony even of the most partial, that
vented their follies in those first declining years, will steed them but very
little, for authorizing the Machabees, from whence the foundation of their
prayer, and oblation for the dead was first derived. As near as I can
remember, I thus argued with my self: If they grant that Saint Augustines
pen do fever the Machabees from the divine Canon, then the matter will be
soon at an end: and if they deny that book to be his, then how will they
excuse the infidelity of their Church, who has in her time plaide many such
lewd prankes as this? Or how will they answer Antiquity, which
distinguished these books eight hundred and nine years; before either The
book de Mirabilibus, was written 627. vt. P. 133
Luther or Suinglius were borne.

So that my reply is this: If it be a book of no account, not sauouring of
Saint Augustines wit, learning, and style, then are they culpable either of
forging, or maintenance, or both; If it be not his, why was it entertained?
why is it continued in their own editions amongst his golden works? If they
print it under his name, they may give me leave so to note it, where they might
be sure to find it. Yea, but P. 3. q. 45. art. 3. ad 2.
test Tho. Aquinate, it has been long since pronounced discarded: By like it
will not serve the Popes turn; why then welfare their honest Index
expurgatorius, that will tell many tricks of the like cleanly conueiance. In
what an intricate age do we live? A man cannot, safely, read any their
fathers, but he must turn over Thomas Aquinas, before he can tell what works
are their own; and consequently, may catch a Snake, instead of an Eele, ere
he be aware.

. 10.
THus you well see (ingenuous Gentlemen) how I have quit my hands of the first
falsehood, my scope being not then to prove that book de mirabilibus to be
Saint Augustines, but first to euince them of forgerie, and then to shevve
what their own Antiquity did many hundred years ago think, of those
Apocriphall books. Had I bin indeed persuaded, that it had bin S. Augustines
own offspring, I should have held it needles to cumber the breuity of a
letter with more then one other proof of the same Father* But because I
foresaw, that by this bait I should bring the opposite party, to one of those
inevitable disaduantages formerly mentioned; I therefore added two several
testimonies, (which he cannot disauow) to confirm the same truth; in the
alleging whereof, he cries out, P. 134.
that I am a notorious falsefier. For trial vvherof my pen prostrates it self
to your censure.

The words by me cited are these; Mr. T. H. P. 60.
Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab Ecclesia, non inutiliter, si sobrie
legatur, vel auditatur, maxim propter istos Martyrs: vvhereupon my inference
was this, Ergo ob hanc causam in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset. Which
last clause I wonder how it should so pass my sight in the re-vievv: For,
perusing my first draught, I find go written short in another letter, to
distinguish my inference from his proof; It seems either my Manuaties haste,
or the Dominum De um^n^strum Papam, not his Phrase but ouer-sight in print. P.
149.
Printers misprision, has turned go into (sed) as if the same had been
continued, whereas my English reddition was plain. And that (consequently)
they are in the Canon of Manners, etc. which Aduerbe, their former error
caused them utterly to omit. Verstij Parasceue.
Such scapes oftentimes happen, when the Author himself cannot attend the
press. Now that you may perceive there is no such Trophey in this casual
addition, which no man of sense would willingly have suffered, when the
Authors are obuious to every eye; you shall see, I had S. Hieroms authority for
that inference, though I then did not quote him, whose words are these:

Jn praf. lib. Salomonis.
Judith, Tobiae, et Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eos inter
Canonicas Scriptur as non recepit: and he explaines himself how this should
be understood, Legate Ecclesia, (says he) ad aedificationem plebis, non ad
authoritatem dogmatum Ecclesiasticorum confirmandam; reckon all these together
you shall find them amount to no less sum, then that the books of Machabees
are in Canone morum, non fidei, censendi. Might it have pleased him to have
sifted Lyra, Brito, Rabanus, and Caietan, whom I there cited, this matter
would not have been such a beam in his eye.

How will he look when Mr. Crashaw shall make him fly to his Printer for
Sanctuary in greater extremities, then the mistaking of a word? Will you give
me leave to praesage what he will say? Admit this clause annexed be true in it
self; yet how can it be collected out of these former words, when as S.
Augustine, showing that the Jews do not admit the book of Machabees, as they
do the Law, Prophets, and Psalms, adds Sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non
inutiliter, si sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, maxim propter istos Martyrs
Machabaeos; How can you then conclude, ergo, it is not Canonical?

Nay rather, the consequence will be this, ergo the Christian Church does admit
the book of Machabees, as Canonical in that sense, that the Jews did refuse
them, to wit as the Law, Prophets, and Psalms, any of P. 135.
which may more hurt then profit, if the same be read in a drunken fit of a
wanton wit.

This inference I grant is in another letter indeed, his Printer has done him
right to set it in his own Character; for neither did Saint Augustine dream,
neither would any sober settled brain stumble upon such a sense. Does not he
make Saint Augustine speak that which he never meant, when he rackes his
words, enforcing him to say that Canonical Scripture is received of the
Church, with a Si, which is necessarily to be acknowledged, though it fall out
by default to be Sapor mortis ad mortem? or did he dream of such a drunken
Church, as theirs seems to be by their cloyning of the Scriptures from the
common people, least it should hurt them? Had his purpose bin to set these
books in the same throne imperial with the sacred Scriptures, to what end
does he instance in, those Machabees Martyrs? This specification (maxim
propter istos Martyrs Machabaeos) declares where the danger lies: implying,
if we sail well by these rocks, there is (though no necessity) some use of
the rest. So that the words, rightly poysed will bear that distinction,
which Saint Hierome, who was better acquainted with Saint Augustines
meaning, and the Churches custom, does resolutely maintain, that Canonical
Scripture must necessarily be received: as for other uncertain writings,
they may not unprofitably be read:

And whereas he confesses that the Jews, who were the best Surueyors of the
authority of their own Histories, did reject them; You may well think, he
held it small reason for after ages to intertaine them in the highest esteem,
as Judges of their faiths: though he saw many good things, for which the
Church, with a little caution, did approve them.

. 11.
THus for want of better sport, this trifling companion, is feign to play with
a feather, which when he has blown up as high as he can, falls down, and
sticks upon his own coat: I cannot blame you if your Angligena attollant
equites, peditesque cachinnum.
laughter somewhat pass modesty, when you consider how wittely he works,
upon that clause, Si sobrie legatur, turning the weakness of the judgment
(which Saint Augustine upon good probability feared) into that intemperance of
disordered affection, which was not by him intended. By this common acceptance
of the word Sobrie (in this place ridiculous) he glides to this needless
conclusion, Page 135.
that there is no story, nor miracle in the holy Bible, which some will not
deride, when they bibble, and take Faeda Tobacciseriquid vult contagio sum,
Prater inauditam perlus membre lu^m?
Tobacco, or when they read the Scripture, as Sir Edward Hoby does seem to do
Lypsius his book, of our Ladies miracles by the fire side, when men roast
crabs to drive a man out of a melancholy fit; To M. T. H. Page 102.
I presume you have read that discourse, so that I shall not need twice to
present you with the same dish. Never did your eyes behold such lewd lies, and
incredible false-hoods, as that Aliquando fit in Eclesia maxima deceptio populi
in miraculis sactis a Sacerdotibus propter lucrum L^^a. in. ca. 14. Daniel.
Miracle-monger sets to sale for sound truths. It is not unlike, that this
probationer has taken up some store of them upon trust, and because he cannot
now so cleanly put them to sale, but that they still he upon his hand, (the
dullest sent finding that they have taken too much wind,) he therefore takes
it in dudgeon that I should hinder his market by saying that Reddere personae
sci^ cenuenientia cuique.
Lypsius is worthy the reading by the fire side, when men roast crabbs. This
makes him as hot as a toste. This roasting of Crabbs settes his teeth on edge.

Do you see what a queasie stomach he has? His Et data Romany venia est in
digna poet^^.
Poets and Painters may lymme and feign, what ridiculous Chimaeras they please,
by virtue of his dispensation; But Sir Edward Hoby must be called in question,
if he chance to clap a Verbaque praeuisam rem non inuita sequuntur.
wild phrase upon a vile fiction: As if I were now to learn of such an
Hipodidascalian Paedagogue to Quo scribi possunt numero, quoue ordine dicam.
measure my phrase by his Sibi conuenientia fingit.
rule and line. Alas poor Nouice, I have lived a little too long to go to
school to such an Ignatius as he is, that cannot distinguish between a
Helmet, and a Couentry capp. I have ever held it art enough, for me to please
my Quem penes arbitrium est, et ius, et forma loquendi.
self; It is for such servile pens as his, to write in Mood and Figure: But
does he not (think you) deserve the wood of the Crabb, that is so angry with
the Crab of the wood? Can you deny that he flutters in a web of foolish
Baberies, when he bables of bibling and taking Nuga mea arguuntur, adeo
factorum innocens sum.
Tobacco. I am sure this is no mortal sin, though if it were, I have little
reason to travel to the Popes toe for a Pardon, no not if I were sure to have
the paring of his nail with the appurtenances for my pains. Shall I be so
bold as to make you my confessors? Then I confess in my time I have not been
an enemy to that Indian weed, and perhaps have spent somewhat that way, which
had bin better given to the poor. Yet my tennants cannot say, but that my
chimneys did ever smoke more then my nose. As for these late years, I do not
remember, that I had a pipe in my hand twice. So that the Informer may put up
this jest in his box; If he be as free from all his old vices, and drunken
conceits, as I am from this vanity, he shall not need any great penance.
You may see how gladly he would find a hole in my coat, who catches so at a
Et fumus et fimus.
vapor, which is long since flowne out of his reach.

12.
THe next flaw which he finds is Page 135.
an imperfect Allegation of the same Father, without any direction where he
might find it. In which he has showed himself a very kind Adversary, by
quoting the place, and adding the words which were wanting. I will not requite
him with the Proverb, that proffered service merits small thanks: but in lieu
of his labor, I will more fully advertise him of my scope, which he seems
wholly to mistake. My purpose was from a ground out of Saint Augustine, to
prove that the book of Machabees is not Canonical. My Major is S. Augustine,
as well known as the Beggar knows his dish, In libris Canonicis, nusquam
nobis praeceptum, permissumue, etc. In holy Canonical Scripture there is no
divine precept or permission to be found, that either to gain immortality or
to escape any peril we may make away with our selves: But Razias mentioned in
the Machabees, is commended for a fact of this kind: Ergo, These books are
not Canonical.

This Syllogism I had a desire to contract. Artis est artem dissimulare.
He is a simple Painter that is driven to write a Goose, or a VVoodcocke
ouer-head, that people may know what feature he has drawn underneath.
Neither do Rhethoricians use to distinguish their propositions by name,
leaueing work for the Logical Analysis, to set every part in the proper
place: Wherefore being then loath to be tedious to the Reader with long
Quotations, I held it best to abridge two Authorities in one, and did forbear
to note the places, because I was resolved to deliver the words by weight, and
not by tale.

The words by me delivered were these: In sanctis Canonicis libris nusquam
nobis diuinitus, praeceptum, permissumue reperiri potest, vt vel ipsius
adipiscendae immortalitatis, vel vllius Carendi, Cauendique mali causa nobis
ipsis necem inferamus. At Razias seipsum occidens laudatur. Page 135.
These four words (says he) are added to the Text, S. Augustine has them
not. Far was it from S. Augustines gravity, to say, that Razias was
therefore praised in the Machabees; For he says the contrary in express
terms, in the very same place against Gaudentius.

I will not be the man, that shall set S. Augustine at odds with S. Augustine.
I could gladly have concealed it, if there be any such contradiction. But
seeing he sues me to justify my Assumption, That Razias is therefore
commended in the Machabees, I must refer you to Lyra in 2 Match. 14.
Lyra, 2 Match. 14. Where having delivered two cases, wherein the Jews held it
not only lawful, but meritorious for a man to kill himself: as first, Ne
subditus fieret peccatoribus: Secondly, Ne in contemptum Dei Coeli, eius vita
in ludibrio haberetur: He concludes, Et vt dicunt aliqui, hoc modo
intelligendum est dictum Augustini, quod habetur hic in Glossa: and, as some
think, S. Augustines saying, which follows here in the Gloss, is thus to be
understood. O that I could meet with that saying of S. Augustine, which I
omitted to cite. Does Lyra say, it follows here in the Gloss? then will I
presume so far upon your patience, as to write it out. Lyra in Match. l. 2.
c. 14.
Vnde and Scriptura huius Libri, quae recepta est ab Ecclesia ad legendum pro
informatione morum, non videtur hic Raziam arguere, sed potius Mark Mr.
Rab^echeth.
commendare, de sui ipsius interfectione. Si autem praedicta non sufficient ad
eius excusationem, potest dici quod fecit hoc per spiritualem instinctum
Spiritus Sancti: Whereupon the Scripture of this Book, which is received by
the Church to be read, for the information of manners, does not seem here to
reprove Razias, but rather to commend him for killing of himself, etc.

Now whether S. Augustine were of this mind or no, let it lie upon Lyraes
report, who here relates, either the very words, or the received sense. Yet
does not this Sophister stick to say, It was far from his gravity, he read
not that Book with so little sobriety. Howsoever, it is not much material,
for having my Major out of S. Augustine, that in no Canonical Book there is
either Precept or Permission for a man to kill himself, it is sufficient for
me, to prove from the assent, even of the Rabbis, (albeit that Father had not
iumped in this point, as he seems to do,) that Razias is here commended: and
so may conclude, That they are not Canonical.

How would this dizzie brainde Ishmalite have insulted, had I noted S.
Augustine, de Ciuitate Dei, in the Margent, for the whole, which error a man
might easily have committed upon Lyraes warrant, that my Clause and Minor
Proposition, that Razias is therefore commended, was not only held by the
opinion of the Rabbis, but even of Saint Augustine himself: Wherefore as he
has found Saint Augustine for the first part, let him put Lyra to the last,
and then I will pass my word, the Conclusion shall be free from his supposed
collusion.

Did I doubt of the agilitie of your apprehension, I could be more prolixe in
the explication thereof, but because I have another Crow to pull with him, I
will no further enlarge my Apology in this point.

13.
THe last Page 318.
occasion which he pretends has given him just cause to carpe is, for that I
said To Mr. T.H. Page 92.
our English nation was not converted unto Christ by that proud and insolent
Augustine, their great Gregory's delegate: affirming that he taught us no more,
then we knew before, setting some friuilous Ceremonies aside. Whereupon he
enforces, that J never read that Master-worke of the three Conuersions of
England, wherein the testimony of Guildas, by me cited, is largely handled
and fully declared. Should I grant all, I cannot see what inconvenience will
ensue. Is there no better employment of my time, then the perusal of that
Arch-fugitiues lines? Or has none besides of their faction beaten this bush,
and harped on the same string? Or am I in conscience bound to put the seal of
my assent to whatsoever F. Parsons did write? I confess he acknowledges that
Saint Peter was here, he mentions also (perhaps upon greater probability)
the coming of Saint Paul, Simon Zelotes, Aristobulus, and Joseph of
Arimathaea. Where do I say, that they weary the World, and bob their
credulous Ladies, as if they never had heard of Gildas his Testimony? I never
named their Author, nor questioned that matter. Howsoever it please him to
join the pieces of two sentences together, which are almost a whole Page
distant; and to fetch his Marginall Note 92. Pages off.

Gildas his testimony (said I) has been urged that the Britains received
the Christian Faith from the beginning, and after many such like Instances, I
conclude that these particulars have been again and again renewed, without
any verified contradiction; so far was I from denying that their Author
mentions not these, whom I well know he has particularly cited. That which
I wondered at, was this, that notwithstanding the former instances by them not
denied, they should stand so much upon the Conversion of England, by Saint
Gregory's means; at which I only aimed, as if that original and primitive
Conversion, had been a matter which they never heard of before. When they
have made the best they can of it, it will prove at the most to be but a new
supply, and a further propagation of the Gospel formerly preached among the
Inhabitants of this Land. For, if Britain were many hundred years before that
time converted (as themselves confess,) then did not Augustine lay the
cornerstone himself, but built upon the Foundation of other men.

So that the particulars were not by me specified, as if they denied them, but
to prove from their own acknowledgement, that they had therefore little reason
so to magnify the entrance of that Delegate, with the glorious style of the
Conversion of this English Nation.

14.
NOw, whereas he further replieth, that the people of this Country (the
Britains being expelled) were then Heathen: I demand, whether he found not
in Britain, at his Arrival, amongst the English Saxons, seven Bishops, and
an Archbishop, who were not only Professors, but also Preachers of the
Christian Faith? Were there not at that in the Monastery of Bangor two
thousand Monks? Was not Bed. lib. 1. c. 25
Q. Aldiberga a good Christian before he came into Kent? or had the Bishop her
Chaplain no Faith at all? Will he not believe Bid, L. 1. c. 17.
who writes that before Augustines coming, the Britains were infected with
Arianisme and Pelagianisme? Perhaps this Cure deserved the name of a
Conversion: yea, but Augustine was not the Physician. The Frenchmen (says
Bid) at the request of the Britains, met in a Synod, and sent Germanus and
Lupus, by whom the Heretics were confuted, and the ancient Faith revived,
before that Monk set foot upon English ground. But because he is so
confident in the three Conuersions, as if that Mallet were able to strike all
dead, let him learn from his own Author, that which I believe he will be
scarce willing to hear, viz. Part. 1. c. 9. n. 1.
That from the time of K. Lucius, until the coming of Augustine, which was
four hundred year and more, they did not alter their Faith, but it remained
among them when he entered.

What is now become of this goodly Conversion? Dares he let his witness be
examined any further? That Faith (says he) which Augustine brought, and that
which the Britains had before, must needs be one and the selfsame in all
material and substantial Points. We shall not need to urge him with
further Interrogatories, the Iewrie sees he fails in this Issue, and
therefore their verdict will be, that It was only a superficial, and no
substantial Conversion. Has he not now brought his Hoggs to a fair Market?
Has he read the Book of the three Conuersions? The case is so clear now,
that his Mulier nihil scit, nisi quod ipsa cupit.
Ladies shall be able to conceive it.

But suppose it were a Conversion, I hope they presume so far upon Augustines
honesty, that he would not broach any other Faith, then that which his
Master, by whom he was sent, had given him in charge. If so, what will become
of the Popes Supremacy, Images, Merits of works, and the like trash; which
that Catholic appeal for Protestants. Way to the Chur. Sect. 49.
Gregory was so far from countenancing by his authority, that he
disclaimed by his Pen? So that if he were a Founder, yet was it not of that
Faith, which the B. of Romes Proctors do now so stiffly maintain: and
consequently this imaginary Supposition will bruise their own Pates. But how
shall I then escape his hands for wronging Augustine? He cannot endure to hear
him termed a proud and insolent Delegate: indeed, were my Malice the Mynter
of this contumelious reproach, I confess he had no reason to stand with his
finger in his mouth; but he might have done well before he had grown into
such a choler, to have taken Counsel of the Britain BB. L. 2. C. 2.
Bid would have informed him how Lordly he sat in his Chair, like a little
Pope, Vultus animi index.
neither arising nor bowing to the BB. when they came into the Synod, more
like a Lord, having dominion of their Faith, then a Conuerter, beseeching them
in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Those BB. were not so simple, but they could Ex
vngue Leonem.
discover his Pride, and therefore endeavored to ouer-thwart him in whatsoever
he proposed. Well did his Master perceive his ambitious spirit, when he gave
him this cooling Card touching the BB. of France; Greg. resp. ad inter. Aug.
Bed. l. 1. c. 27.
In Galliarum Episcopos, nullam tibi authoritatem tribuimus: We give you no
authority over them. All this notwithstanding, I must have my lips sealed, not
daring to say, that He was a proud insolent Delegate. I see no reason why
vitium and conuitium should be parted: seeing he deserved it, he is best
worthy to have it.

Were I now in his case, I should be in a pitiful fear least the Noble
Ladies, whom he has so grossly deluded, should like so many Hecubaes, seek
some violent revenge: what starting hole can there be possibly found, to hide
these his writing falsifications from their curious eyes? when they shall
perceive how he coniures my sentences together, to raise his own sense, he
may well think their Contributions will be soon shortened, and Exhibitions
revoked: far is it from their generous dispositions to give encouragement to
any such audacious Vassal, in the causlesse traducing of a Knight, to whom
their Honors is no less dear then his own.

15.
IF he have any Plea for himself, it will be this; that Page 133. 135 22.
218. etc.
he does not charge the Knight with these ignorant and impudent corruptions:
No, he thinks not so dishonorably of men of my calling; he aims only at
the Minister that suggested unto me these corrupted pieces of Saint Augustine.
His purpose was only to gall those Pedanties, Trencher-Schoole-Masters, and
humorizing Discoursers, that cast such Flies and follies upon my Trenchers: If
he have taxed me with ignorance, that is pardonable in a Knight: but as for
notorious falshoodes, he is so charitably persuaded of me, that he knows
some Trencher-Minister, or Mercenarie Lecturer, (yea, Mr. Crashawe himself,
who is great in my Book,) has cast them on my Trencher, to put into my Book:
and that these Ministers have made me print such stuff, either false, or
impertinent, with the loss of my Honor, which had I seen their Books I would
never have done against my Conscience and knowledge. Adding further, that what
J have written, it has been by their suggestions, as having my self not
read, nor known so much as the subject and Argument of the three Conuersions
of England, which I seem to speak against: and that these are the men that
made me fly hoodwinck'd to catch Flies. In fine, as for any thing that he
has written, it was to no other end, but that I might no longer trust my
Trencher-Schoole-Masters, but set such a frown upon them, that they might
vanish out of my sight for ever; not suffering my self to be thus troubled,
and my Credit blown up, but rather to lay the matter of the Pamphlet upon the
true Father, only chalenging to my self the Style and Phrase which may well
beseem a Knight, and is too rich and golden to clothe the foul Brat of a
Ministers Brain. Thus does he plead without his Fee, making the Salve worse
then the Cauda and capite mendacium grauiter ferit.
Sore: first, treading on my Toe, and then crying me mercy: but the best is, I
am not troubled with Corns, or if I were, I would soon cut them out. What
he strives to persuade the world with my disabilitie, I am not so Conuitia
hominum turpium lauds puta.
popular much to heed: neither can his Cani latranti praeda facile, elabitur.
snarling surmises abate one grain of my esteem. My eyes are not yet, I
thank God, so dim, but that I am able to read; nor my apprehension so dull,
but that I can understand, not only the Argument, but even the most
artificial conueyance of the best of their Works.

Upon my life he has been an old notorious Truant: Had he made Sic vos non
vobis.
his own Exercises when he went to School, he would never have been so
suspicious of my Pen. Is it not strange such a Dottrell, should so presume of
his own wit, as if he were able to woo me to divide mine own child? I
assure me, that all that know me, will undertake I was not from home when it
was begotten. How easily would I have believed him upon his word, that there
was no hand in the building of his Nec oleum, nec operam sapit.
Pinnace, but his own; yet will not he take my Ego credidi ancillae tuae, tu
non credis mihi ipsi?
hand for the naturalizing of my own Lines, which as I had strength to beget,
so doubt I not to find stock to maintain. Were I so happy to see him at my
(...).
Table, (which runs much in his mind) I presume I should so set his tongue
a-worke, that he should do me little harm with his teeth. He should perhaps
then find, that I am yet able to cite more then a piece of Augustine, without
a Prompter; and to cast such a Bone upon his Trencher, that with all the Dogs
teeth he has, he should hardly pick. I have seen in my time, as tall a
Logician as he, glad to scratch the best powle he had for an answer. As I
was ever different from their humor who love to eat their morsels Vbi
solitudo ibi solicitudo.
alone, so has it ever been my desire to converse with men of the Plenum
Theatrum est vir bonus, viro bono.
best parts, that so I might by their readings better my self. And if at any
time I met with a hard knot, he was the best welcome to me, that could help
me soonest to unloose it. Never did I trust so much to mine own Apprehension,
but that I was well content to have it either confirmed, or rectified by better
Judgments. If this be a fault, I wish from my heart it were the greatest my
adversaries knew by me, or I by my self.

16.
I Do not read in Gellius that there was any fault found in Gracchus, albeit
he came not at any time to make an Oration to the people without his
Minstrell, who by the sound of his Fistula Concionatoris.
Pipe, did set him a right and just Keye for the eleuating or depressing of his
voice. When I was an Eaton-Scholar, I learned out of Lucians Dialogues, that
Jupiter was feign to send for Vulcan and his hatchet, before Pallas could come
into the world: So that I cannot well discern what reason he has to debar
me of that conference at my Board, which their own Doctors have in their
Libraries. If happily I did move a Question, how S. Augustine was in such a
place to be understood, it did argue my Plus vident oculi quam oculus.
care in sounding the depth of the River, before I launched my Bark into the
Stream. I was ever of Demosthenes mind in this, that my writings should not
only smell of the Lucernam olet.
Lamp, but if it were possible, be engraven also in Atilan ok dunmes.
Marble. But that I ever suffered my Pen to be guided, or my course
ouer-ruled by any other Pilot then my own Genius, were he not a mere
stranger to my proceedings, he would never be so shameless as to auerre.
Though it be my error, yet I must needs say, I could never endure to let my
Clarke pass any Letter, but from my own mouth: And should the greatest
Architect in the Land, give me a plot for a building, I am verily persuaded, I
should in the end take a clean contrary course. When I can hardly please my
self, it will be a matter of more difficulty for others to give me content.
Every man (as I take it) has his proper Quot capita, tot (...).
vein: for my particular I dare say, it is impossible for the pallat of my
fancy, to be fitted by any other Cook then my self. Should I have either an
Adjutor, or Supervisor, in any work I undertake, I think it would prove
little better then the confusion of Babell: We should sooner fall together by
the ears, then bring the Treatise to an end.

The short is, I am Homo perpaucorum hominum, though seeming a VVidower, yet
contracted to Mris. Folly: I can gladly hear what others will say, yet when it
comes to the point, I love to do what (...).
likes my self best. Wherefore he has taken wrong course, to wound M.
Crashawe (a man with whom I never had the least domestique converse,) through
my sides.

17.
AND as for House- Pedantes, Trencher-Schoole-Masters, and Mercenary-Lecturers,
he that reads my bitter (yet just) To Mr. T. H. Page 24.
inuectiue against them, will think they have as little reason to assist me,
as I to trust them. Wherefore I cannot guess, why he should cast this foggy
mist of misprision before the eyes of the world: (ever and anon coming in
with A Minister of his own making,) unless it were covertly to vpbraid me,
for meddling in Theological affairs, as better beseeming a Minister then a
Knight. Herein though I could instance in persons of greater place, even in
former ages, who by publishing their labors in the like subject, were so far
from reproof, that they were much more honored by men of the Church: yet had
I rather repair for defense to my own Studies, which (setting some
fantastical years aside) has for the most part been spent in divine
Authors. My Ditescit cui Christus dulcescit.
Patrimony (God be thanked) being competent, I endeavored rather the search of
my content, then my profit. And what greater contentation can there be, then
the contemplation of (...).
heavenly things? If he say, I might have kept my Candle under my own Bushel,
I must answer that his opinion is no Oracle: for besides some other private
motives, I held it not inexpedient, even in this regard, that the truth might
be defended by persons whose pens could not be corrupted with ambitious hope
of Because (says he) they have no other means to live. Page 31.
spiritual promotions.

Further, the report of the Writer might happily induce the Ladies to
vouchsafe the reading thereof, whereas their Priests debars them the sight of
our Ministers Books. I was loath such rare creatures should be over gudgeoned
by so foul Popinians, by whom, when their treasure is once wasted, and their
younger years spent, they shall be no more esteemed, then so many Motheeaten
Glosses: which (albeit they have formerly stood them in stead) they are not now
ashamed to disclaim.

Other incitements I had then to write, which he has neither authority to
extort, nor I reason to declare. And because I then passed my word, to answer
any To Mr. T. H. Page 6.
Romefied Renegado, though I have small reason to defile my fingers with such a
Pezantique Fugitive, who is ashamed of his Les escrits iniurieux doiuent estre
mesprises quand les auteurs sont in cogneus. P. Mat.
Fathers name: yet least my silence might prejudice so warrantable a cause, I
have clapped my hand upon this Gnat, which keeps such an humming about my
ears. This I was not ignorant of before I took my pen in hand for this
combat, that I should gain no more by coping with a namelesse Foe, then the
Lord Chief Justice Not long after the Statute made for burning of rogues in
the ear.
Cataline got, when his Study was robbed, by the paper which was there left,
with this Inscription: If any ask who has been here,
Say it was I. R. Nomen and ^^en.
Jack Rogue late burnt in the ear.


. 18.
A Person not long since of eminent place, esteemed not least Political, after
he had been often (as himself says) vexed with their Quo tristis Erynnis,
quo fremitus vocat. Virg. 2. Aeneid.
Erynnicall Libels, (which are ordinarily addressed to persons of highest
rank) at last vouchsafed a brief An Answer to certain scandalous Papers,
printed 1606.
Apologeticall answer; but with this protestation, that he never intended
further Reply. Wherefore, as while he lived, Nature cast this lot upon me, to
be one of the nearest of his blood; so though he be dead, I will iumpe with
his discretion in this, that if either this Cat-sputtrer, or any other Hagaren
shall hereafter inter-lace my name in their Spiders Web, Periti bellatoris est,
non minus scire fugiendi artem quam pugnandi.
aut Dormitabo, aut Ridebo. Were not the darkness of my (...)
VVindowes a sufficient Supersedeas, yet shall I by this means turn their
Follies and frivolous Contumelies into the Trophies of my victorious Patience.
Whereas, Prou. 26.4.
By answering a fool according to his foolishness, J should also be held like
unto him. It is more then enough, that I have thus far yielded to Page 52.
bray him in this Mortar, with the Pestle of my Pen; if the juice be
unpleasing, you must attribute it to the venom of his cankered Complexion:
better things I could not extract from such an Aspe.

If you seriously observe his lame and goutie Arguments, his dangerous
intention, and slender prosecution, you shall find just ground to say of his
Treatise, as Populi Romani legationem, nec pedes, habere, nec caput, nec cor.
Cato merrily spoke of the three Ambassadors, who being named for Bithinia,
excused themselves; one by a cut in his head, another with a pain in his
feet, and the third with a gryping in his heart: neither whole head, good
feet, nor sound heart.

19.
IN his Preface Dedicatorie, he brags, that he has sent out his Book, as a
Pinnace, to fetch you into the Arc of the Catholic Church: But I fear by
that time Mr. Crashawe has searched his bottom, it will prove no better then
a leaking Friggot. His Sails are too great for a Vessel of so small burden,
and consequently most like to endanger the Passengers safety. If all those
Books, which he complains are not suffered to pass our Page 89.
Ports (except almost invisible) be like this Page 8
Dunghill of his, let it ever be registered in the Book of fame, amongst the
due Commendations of that famous, superlatiuely learned, and Noble Lo. Warden
of the Cincque Ports.
Councellor, to whose care this important charge is committed; that he has
herein testified his love to Religion, fidelity to his Prince, and loyalty to
the State: As his wisdom deserves to be admired, and his lenity applauded,
so does his sincerity herein merit high renown in the Gates of our Sion. For
should the infectious Manuels of these pestilent incrochers be passable in our
Coast, the contagion would be such, that true Piety could not long hold up
the head, nor due Alleagiance be able to stand upon her right feet. The
giddiness which Superstitio initium prabuit, and ortum impietati.
Superstition would breed, and the Disobedience which Papal Authority would
raise in the minds of the unlearned, whose Capacities are not able to reach
the future peril of Innovation, would be so dangerous to a Christian, and
well governed State, that it would ask the whole employment of the most
experienced Senators, to root out the weeds which those envious impes had
sown. All which will be prevented if at their first Arrival they be cast (...)
(...).

I shall not need any further to weary my self, or tire you, with the
repelling of those inuectiues which this Tenebrio has sharpened upon the
VVhetstone of his malice, to wound my reputation. This shall I hope suffice,
that I have as near as I could, solidly answered things of weight, dealing in
points of lesser import, as I thought their quality did require.

20.
THE due regard which I ever had of your judgments (having my self been
sometimes an unworthy member of the same Middle Temple.
Society) has made me desirous not only to send my Defense after his
accusations, but also to second it with a further manifestation of my Love.

May it then please you to take notice, that howsoever he seek to insinuate
himself by his charitable pretenses into the bosom of your favors, yet has
he not left his Loquitur mendacia versipellis. Page 12.
Scorpions sting at home: For notwithstanding he fathers his Dedication upon
the Page 22.
careful respect of your Salvation and Honor, yet does he make no other
reckoning of you, then of so many Page 81.
Parlamentarians, whose Religion is steared by the Helm of the State, as if
the Books of Statutes were the sole foundations of your Faith. Neither does
he stick to say that you make your Page 59.
Temples and Courts the places where silly Flies and fools are caught, by your
example as with a stale drawing others into the Snare. If this be the honor he
bestows upon his friends, I will never be importunate with him to grace me.
Do you remember what Gracchus said to a fellow that spoke in disgrace of the
virtuous Matron, his Mother Cornelia? Eras. Apoth.
Tune, inquit, Corneliam vituperare audes, que Tyberium peperit? Dare thou
(says he) traduce her, who brought so famous a Son as Tiberius? The like
answer might I retort in the teeth of this Thersites. Is he not past all hope
of future ingenuitie, that fastneth his taunt upon the venerable Mother of so
many honorable Sons, saying, Page 22.
That she is more full of Cobwebs then any other place? Did Scipio Nascica
ask one which had a tough and rough hand, Rogauit homine^, number manibus
ambularet.
whether he used to go upon his hands? then, should he have seen the brazen
forehead of this saucy Malapert, he might justly have demanded whether he
has not customarily crept upon his face. It is well known to the Christian
world, that these your famous Courts have brought forth, even in these latter
years, as many Tanquam eu Eque Treiane.
sage Counselors of State, religious Judges, gallant Courtiers, learned
Pleaders, and worthy Gentlemen, as the Sun ever saw. In which number I may
both for his merit, and my respect, name that truly Noble Peer the Lo.
Elmsmere, in whom it is hard to say, whether wisdom in the decision, or
integrity in the impartial execution of Justice have the prioritie. Well do
I assure my self, he would neither spare his authority, nor forbear his
best means to keep Spiders from breeding, and Cobwebs from growing in those
Courts, wherein himself has spent much time, and gained so great renown. So
that the Fan of truth which he offers to cleanse your Temples, may better be
reserved by him, either to keep off the Mothes from the old Glosses, or the
Flies from the Priests Post sumptos Calices oscula musca dabit.
lips: Herein you may do the Pope yeoman service indeed.

21.
A Greater Commendations there cannot be unto you that are Students, and
Professors of the Laws of the Realm, then to manifest the sincere affection
you bear to true Religion, by your liberal Contributions to such as may
instruct you in the Laws of God. The quarrel he pickes with you about this,
will more deeply imprint the Charecters of your praise. Should you pass the
presentation to him, who can tell what Lecturer he would nominate? No doubt
he would come in with, Ego Ishmael Rabsbacheh, Page 149.
Domino Deo nostro Papa a scandalis praesento vobis, dilectum commilitonem meum
I. R.
Ischarioth de Rubigine, quemscio Homilistam esse egregium, Bibulum
celeberrimum, Cantoremque non vulgarem, idque vobis mea, fide praesto, totique
contubernio. Yea marry, here is a fine Demilance for the nonce: here is one
that will be the foremost attendant upon my Lo. of the Revels; He will never
hold you a quarter after the glass is run. But can you guess what
Countriman he is? For his life he is not able to pronounce (...)
Shibboleth. Why then, you will none of him! O beware of a quare impedit. But
the best is, you have the Law in your hands. You have a purse privilege to be
your own Caruers. If the worse come that can, you may dismiss him to serve
the Cure at Pemblico: and so perhaps you may regaine your old choice.

Yea, but Mr. Crashawe has committed such an error, as deserves deprivation
ipso facto: VVot you what? in his Jesuits Gospel he makes Page 76.
Dux Cleri to be the Popes chiefest title: which (if we may believe our
Informer) was never given him by any Catholic, but rather belongs to the Lo.
of Canterbury. I will not be so curious to stand upon the number of 666.
thence collected; but, set that aside, I dare say; Crux Cleri had been the
better word for the Pope: and yet to meet with him at the rebound, I hold Dux
Cleri to be but a part of my Lo. Graces Title, who by the goodness of his
affable disposition, bounty in Hospitality, painfulnesse in preaching, and
dexterity in the dispach of all occurrences, has well deserved the Style of
Lux Cleri, as being such a light in Choro and Foro, that if a man should search
(like Diogenes) amongst all the Cardinals, he should miss of his match. So
that me thinks the matter need not be held so heinous, if he have taken
that part which my Lord might best spare, to pay the Pope more then his due. I
see there is then no great reason of complaint: what other Cauils they have
against him, I am neither so acquainted with the proceedings, nor interested in
the cause, to debate.

Touching my self, (all due reservation remembered) I conclude with him, whose
questionable authority has bred these broils: Match. l. 2. c. 15. v. 39.
If I have done well, and as the matter required, it is the thing that I
desired: but if I have written (...), slenderly and barely, it is that (which
on the sudden) I could. Howsoever, you must accept it, as dedicated to your
service.

From James Park, June 21. 1613. Edward Hoby.


