A LETTER TO Mr. T. H. LATE MINISTER: Now Fugitive: FROM SIR EDWARD HOBY
Knight.

IN ANSWER OF HIS first Motive.

HEBR. 3.12. Take heed, Brethren, lest at any time there be in any of you an
evil heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for Ed. Blount and W. Barret, and are to be sold
at the sign of the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

Romans 16. v. 17.18. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them diligently, which
cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine, which you have learned;
and avoid them.

For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies; and with fair speech, and flattering, deceive the hearts of the
simple.

TO ALL ROMISH COLLAPSED LADIES, of Great Britanie.
COmmiserable Ladies, this my Letter to M. T. H. lay a while upon my hands, for
want of a convenient messenger: at last, by conference with a Merchant of
Dunkerke, J understood there was no way sooner to convey it to S. Omers, then
by your Ladyships means, as having weekly news from the English house, which
will hardly admit any stranger, to co^fer with her new Proselytes, whom she
masketh under counterfeit names. Might J therefore be secured, by the
privilege of your favors, not to have it intercepted by any Jesuitical
superuisor, you shall give me just cause to pay you the tribute of my best
service.

J am the bolder to solicit you herein, for as much as I first came to the
view of his Motive, by one of your near followers, who gave me also to
understand, how great those Jesuits are in your books. Had I no other thing to
write, these tidings would yet have set my pen on work.

Jn sooth, my respective care of your welfare enforces me exceedingly to
grieve, that you, who have been baptized since the superstitious Romish Rites
were abolished; having seen this invincible faith now fully settled; being so
nobly descended; and religiously trained up, should so prostrate your selves
to that Antichristian beast, whose spotted skin, and alluring sent leads into
the den of destruction. I could wish his Seminaries had less subtlety, or you
more constancy. You may well think, were their grounds of such soundnes, as
they bear you in hand, they would not so busily swarm about your sex,
which, by reason of your less ability of judgment, is soonest inueigled with
their wiles. Your own Prateolus has given them an hint of the eagernes of your
affection, of the pitifulnes of your inclination, what fit instruments you are,
both for your sundry opportunities, and many intellige^ces, to serve their
turn: so that if they once win the night-crow, to sing their dittie, then make
they no doubt, but that the whole house will soon dance after their pipe.

Having once diued into your secrets, discontents, qualities, and affairs, it
cannot be long before they rule the roast: Scire volunt secreta Domus, atque
inde timeri: they will make you sure for slipping the colar, without some great
disadvantage. Jf they find in any of you quicknes of spirit, boldness of
stomach, or volubtiltie of speech, she shall be employed, as their Agent, (as
not long since some of you have been, though in vain, unto two noble
personages now deceased) to deal with such, whom either crosses have
distracted, or sickness weakened; where they themselves can have no access: by
which means their infection spreads it self on every side.

Hence it is, that thoroughly to possess themselves of your favor, they will
pretermit neither time, nor means; yea they will not stick to set out our
Ladies picture, (as one of your sprite-speakers did) with one of your best
faces, if that may gain your assent.

What will be the issue of this your blind and factious zeal, J refer me to
your selves. Js there any hope you should ever be better resolved, as long as
you must neither pollute your eyes with our books, defile your ears with our
Sermons, nor grace our Churches with your presence?

You much trouble your selves about the Antiquity of our Church, which you are
no less unable to conceive, then unwilling to believe. J would to God, you
would not be wise above that which is fit: Quid quod libelli Stoici inter
sericos iacere puluillos amant? S. Paul teaches you to ask (not to grieve)
your husbands at home. Solomon would have you give the portion to the household,
and the ordinary to the maids, to open your mouths with wisdom, and to have
the law of grace in your tongue: Then should your husbands be known in the
gates, when they sit amongst the Elders of the Land. Whereas now, being
kindled with those hellish Mercurialists, the flame of this your intemperate
zeal presageth, nay threatens the utter desolation of your whole stock.

Might it please you to consider the infinite expense, which these chargeable
encrochers, the Iesuitical drones, suck out of your estates; your monethlie
checker-payments; the danger of forfetting your ioyntures; the incapabilitie of
suing in any of his Majesty's Courts; the grief of your near Allies, and
dear friends, for the declining hopes of your ruinous posterity; or at the
least your own infamy, wherewith you are generally branded, your houses being
held as nurseries of poisonous weeds, and pestilent plants; your tenants, and
attendants promising no great safety to the King, nor peace to the State, nor
tranquillity to the Church: Might it, J say, please you to ponder these things
aright, it is impossible you should be so inconsiderate, as to buy a
fantastical, J will not say, a fanaticall humor, at so high a rate.

Why should you be so respectlesse of those worthy Gentlemen, your husbands,
as to cause their honors to be eclipsed, their loyalty suspected, and their
advancement hindered, by your recusancie? How do you think he should be reputed
wise, who can no better order his own house? How should he be held fit for
government in the State, who cannot bring those that are so near him to the
conformity of the Church?

How these things may affect you, J can not tell: happily as you generally
distaste all that is not of your own stamp, you will pass them over, with a
disdainefulleie, still staining your selves with your own works, and going a
whoring with your own inventions. Herein shall you more harm your selves,
then hurt me, who for my friendly advertisement desire no other be one, then
the delivery of this letter enclosed. Fare you well. From my house in the
Blackfriars. May 20. 1609.

Edward Hoby.

A LETTER TO Mr. T.H. LATE MINISTER, NOW FVGITIVE: FROM SIR EDWARD HOBY
Knight, in answer of his first Motive.
MAster Theophilus Higgons; Ecclesiast. cap. 12. v. 12.
Faciendi plures libros nullus est finis: There is none end in making many
books: and as Plures, so no age ever afforded tam inermes and inertes, as this
does: among which I lighted upon a book of yours, entitled, The first Motive
of T. H. Master of Arts, and lately Minister, etc. Wherein, had you not bin an
Lamiae domi caecae, foris oculatae.
over partial beholder of the offspring of your own fantastical wit, you could
not but have seen, that the deformity thereof, deserved rather to have it
trodden under the Proles viperea pedibus conculcanda, non manibus gestanda.
feet, then hatched, or harbored in the bosom of those (therein unfortunate)
Ladies, unto whom it was by your factious factors so cunningly vented. Such is
the misshapen Vnus in omnibus, nullus ^a singulis, rudis indigestaque moles.
disproportion thereof, that your former Imprinted at London 1608.
Scholasticall examination of man's iniquity and Gods justice, takes it in
foul scorn, to have it reputed for her sister. And indeed, of that, you may
say, with the Of his fair pictures, and foul children.
Painter, Luce pinxi; of this, Nocte finxi, there is such beauty in the one,
and blemish in the other.

For my own part, hardly could I be induced to believe, but that the namelesse
Printer did much wrong, in fathering it upon a man, borne of parents so
religious, in the reign of a Queen so pious, bred in an Oxford.
University of that fame, and graced by a Of London.
Bishop of that reverend esteem. But since your own claim does challenge it,
Peut. Heut. de lib. hom. Not.
Partus ventrem sequatur: you must look to maintain it, or else it will lie
upon the parish, of Romish Jesuits. To be sure to disburthen our selves, as
soon as it was brought before me, I dispatched this paper, as my Borsholder,
to convey it from text to text, from argument to argument, from Father to
Father, until it come to the first motive, where it was first farrowed.

And have you any reason to look for any further or extraordinary kindness at
my hands? Do you think, I can possibly forget, what sparks have flowen out
of that forge, where you now are become a needy Vulcanian apprentice? Can the
horror of that dismal project, that Gunpowder plot, Judgment of a Catholic
Eng. 1.
howsoever smoothed over with Parallels, (the eternal stain of your
murtherous profession) but still lively represent before me, even in my
dreams, and imprint in my most serious thoughts, that furious Vna dies dabit
exitio, mult^sque per annos sustentata ruet moles and machina regni. Lucret.
Blast, which my self, (my poor self) should have sensibly felt, or my good
friends at least bewailed?

No no (Mr. Theomisus,) for ill does E Paulo Saul.
Theophilus fit you, I should register it among my capital and dreadful
sins, if I do not my utmost with sword and pen to revenge it. Often have they
been employed in causes of less moment, and therefore seeing Velleius Paterc.
ineuitabilis fatorum vis, the divine providence of my God, has reserved me
from the Bedlome violence of your rage, I hold the little remainder of my
Pilgrimage most worthily spent in freeing all poor weak inueigled Ladies, and
other my dear countrymen from your Syrenicall deceit. Never can the most
superlatiue (Parliament) severity be accounted extremity in the prosecuting
or sharpest research of that viperous brood, those merciless helhounds, among
whom you are now matriculated; Quibus ipsa misericordia (me viuo) nunquam
ignosceret: whom mercy it self should be thought cruel ever to forgive.
Stulta est clementia, perituro parcere funi.
Execution in these cases were better then disputation. How gladly I would see
the one, may appear by my forward attempt of the other. And were it not that
Protestant charity gives a restraint to my pen, I would vow never to forgive
the immanitie of those matchless miscreants, (...).

Matthew. 12.32. id est:

Ante leaves ergo pascentur in aethere cerui etc.


until I hear their absolution pronounced by the mouth of the most supreme
Judge. Let him make the case his own, that censureth me of too much bitterness:
Satan himself could not deny Job. 2.4.
Pellem pro pelle, that all that ever a man has, he would give for his life.
I must confess, I did ever before suspect the carriage, but then did I begin
Nam quis iniquae tam patiens Romae, tam ferreus vt teneat se? Iuuen.
irreconciliablie to detest all the Incendiaries of your Romish forge.

Thus you see (Mr. Theomisus) vbi meus me calceus vrget. Judge you, if I have
not just cause to be an eternal opposite to all of your coat, I mean, to al
such English fugitives as have been borne since the blessed reign of our late
(and ever dear) Angelical Q. Elizabeth, and fallen from the Apostolical,
Catholic, Romans 1.8. As it the^ stood unpolluted by the Bishop of Rome.
Roman faith by her established. I am not (I confess) a Minister, nor S.
Dunstons London.
Lecturer, as you were; yet must I, according to the small measure of my
indowments, show my self a Etiam cum sanguine and sudore.
Christian, in withstanding the most insolent oppugners, of that faith, into
which I was Baptized, and whereof King James my most Dread Sovereign Lord and
Master is Defender. And albeit I am not in holy orders my self, yet will I do
my best to order you, and the rather, that you may no longer be a reproach to
Christ's Church, whereof you were once a member, in that famous University,
wherein by their undeserved favor, I was M. of Arts, and (absit inuidia verbo)
Senior of the Act, before your mothers womb did bear so monstrous a burden
as your self. In sum, my desire is to reclaim you, that you perish not, my
purpose is to confute you, or at least to discover you, that you seduce not,
and my readiness is always pressed to answer you, or any Fugitive Romified
Renegado whomsoever.

In this my discuss, albeit I can hardly stay my self, from encountering the
several particulars, and cutting off all the heads of your Hydra, yet because
there are many valerous and worthy Champions, Qui seuertores Musas colunt, D.
Morton Deane of Gloucester. D. Field.
whom it does nearer concern, as being yet alive, to answer for themselves,
whose learning is no whit appayled, nor courage daunted, to justify the
truth, and clear your pretended deprauations in their own writings, I will,
(omitting whatsoever concerns them,) confine my self within this list. My
whole discourse shall consist of six Paragraffes. In the first, The cause of
your Alienation shall be sifted. In the second, Your maine reason for
Purgatory disproued. In the third, your Prime father answered. In the fourth,
your Prime Protestant D. Humfrey defended. In the fifth, The contrary Position
maintained. And in the last, A friendly retreat sounded. So that by that time
I have done, obstinacy it self, shall I hope, confess that, our Psalm. 48.2.
Sion is fair in situation, the joy of the whole earth, and the city of the
great King: whom I humbly beseech upon the knees of my heart, for his dear Sons
sake, Vt praeueniat inspirando, adiuuet prosequendo, finiat benedicendo.

. 1.
THe Naturalistes, amongst many other obseruable relations, record this of the
Struthio camelus. Pererius in Genes. cap. 6. p. 329. n. 71. Bercor. Redus.
moral. 7. cap. 69. vide Plin.
Struthio, that having once put her head into the bush, albeit her whole body
be out, yet she thinks her self, close and safe, as if she were clean out
of sight. The like persuasion, as it seems, has bred the same witless
confidence in you. The cause of your revolt is covered over with such glorious
pretenses, weighty considerations, apparent detections of falsehoods in our
learned Protestants, that forsooth Page 96. and 97
Moral reason must assure us, you were not transported by any light or sudden
motion; that you would not strive unwisely against the benefits of fortune; or
unkindly against the duty of nature, unless some superior and more excellent
Consideration, did obtain a powerable authority in your soul. These furze
are, in your conceit, a sufficient shelter to keep your hypocrisy from being
descried. But, alas, howsoever you thrust your first Motive into this thicket,
the bushes, God wot, are too bare to cover so vast and monstrous untruths,
which lie open to the view of the world. Such is the weight of that lumpish
mass, that it is impossible for your Struthio's wings to soar out of our
reach. It is no new fallacy to come in, with a non causa vt causa; it was of
yore a logical axiom, Quaedam videntur and non sunt: you have now made it
practical: wherein you iumpe with your predecessors the glozing Pharisees, as
in opening of this your painted sepulcher will more fully appear. It stands
not with my nature, I confess, to blase your shame, neither is my profession
to be an historian to persons of your rank, yet rather than the integrity of
so well founded a Religion, (then which none better) should receive the least
blemish by your forged calumnies, it is fit the world should be better
acquainted with that malignant humor which has driven you into these frantic
fits. All diseases, by the verdite of the best Physicians, arise vel ex
repletione, vel ex inanitione, either from fullness, or emptiness: to the like
original we may also refer the distemperature of the mind. Plenty breeds
sensuality, and luxurious affections: want is the mother of heresy, and
schismatic defections. And no marvel, for they that fast much are usually
troubled with Vertigo, the swimming and giddiness of the brain. This was
Aerius his disease: whose empty stomach being disappointed of the fat Aug. de
here is. n. 53.
Bishopric, after which he did long gape, sent up such foggie mysts of
coffeehouse into his daseled head, that like the Mat 17.15.
Demoniake in the Gospel, he fell sometimes into the water, sometimes into
the fire, never ceasing to tumble down the hill of faith, until he fell flat
Arrian. Aspiring spirits, having their hopes defeated, grow turbulent, and
that, either to be revenged of those, whose favors have been more nigardly,
then their prodigal desires, or to raise a new fabric for their better
fortunes upon the vantage of Haec non successit, aliam ingrea^an ur viam.
opposition. It much grieueth me to read of any spice of this disease in men
of our nation, but more to see it in men of the Church, and most of all, that
they who are thus tainted, do rather lay the fault upon the infallible grounds
of a spotles religion, than upon the boundless appetite of their own endless
desires, making conscience the ladder of their climing ambition.

Do you ask me Quorsum haec? I will tell you, Mutato nomine de te narratur
fabula. When I speak of Aerius, I think of him whom indeed I am loath to name,
even of M. Theomisus: I might call you M. Plautus.
^surio: for so do the A^g. de here is. n. 69.
symptoms bewray your malladie, Si saturio fuisses, non Circumcellio fuisses.
Feign would I pluck back my pen, but that my eye tells me how you have
plaide the counterfeit, in ascribing your revolt to the insoliditie of our
religion, which was wholly hammered by your own ill balanced discretion. It is
twenty to one, but some of your Ladies will be pearing into this letter,
therefore will I write no more, then I am able to justify, nor will I put you
in mind of anything, whereunto your own knowledge shall not readily subscribe.
If any thing be omitted, it is not my ignorance, but my charity that
concealeth it. These things were not done in a Act. 26.26.
corner.

That famous College of Christ's Church in Oxford, which you have ill repaied,
for the sweet milk which you have sucked out of her breasts, has not yet
forgotten how you were ever stained with Puritanisme, how violently adverse you
were to all such, as were suspected to favor the Romish Sea. She does yet
smile to think, what pain you took, being Censor of the house, in putting your
hand to the sawing down of a poor harmless May Pole, because you thought it
came out of a Romish forest. When you were Lecturer at S. Dunstons, your
contributorie auditors thought your long prayer, and spitting pawles too short,
because the reverend Bishops (yea even your own Lord and Master) were ever left
out for wranglers and Antichristian Hierarchies, not worthy to be named in the
same day, with your holy Pastors and sanctisted Ministers. Thus have you ever
affected singularity.

But how comes it to pass, you should now fall into the opposite
contrariety? Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.

Incidit in Scillam etc.


Jn vitium ducit Culpae fuga, si caret art. Is there no means between
Niceness and Nastinesse? was the faith wherein you were so long trained, so
weak as that one Dissuendae non disc^candae sunt ami^itiae. Omnis subita
mutatio peri^.
blast has ouer-throwne it all? have you bin thus transported, by the In the
title.
detectio^ of falsehoods in our learned Protestants? Did you converse with them
for satisfaction, and they not able to resolve you? then would your Apology
pass more current.

You mention only their writings, wherein you play Canis ad Nilum, catching
and snatching here and there, for fragme^ts of sentences, which, like Artic.
12. sect. 6. applied by you, page 122.
Jewels Procustes, you stretch out to the length of your own fancy: plainly
bewraying your self, that either you were not so well grounded, or so
thoroughly affected to your Religion, as it became an instructor of others, or
that to magnify your self, and gain the more crede^ce with those, unto whose
harber you were driven by the tempestuous storm of your extremities, you did
pick these imaginary cauillations; which had they been real doubts indeed,
might with your greater credit and charity, have been decided in a more
private scene. He that has but half an eye may see there is a Pad in the
straw: happily you have done this, either wholly to escape, or to agree the
better with your creditors, that seeing your sudden alienation, their desperate
debts may be more easily compounded: happily having missed a former preferment,
you think by this means to be wooed by the State to return to your first
love: happily the yoke of wedlock being somewhat burdensome to your
shoulders, was an inducement to make you cast off the Luk 9.62. You have played
Ananias, fortune beheld you not with a benign and comfortable aspect, as you
pretend. page 97.
Plough. Surely not only some, but even all of these were the cords, that haled
on your First motive. Your debts were (the world knows) very clamorous: the
miss of your preferment was grievous: and the mariage-god Himenaeus was none
of your best friends. To ease your self of all these, which Atlas himself
could hardly undergo, you thought good to cast anchor in a new sea, and to fish
in troubled waters.

And for as much as you could not be well rid of your wife, creditors, and
other grieuances, as long as you held your profession, you chose rather with 1.
Tim. 1.20.
Himenaeus and Alexander, to make shipwreck of this, then to have your ship
ouercharged with those. The Jesuits, you knew, were no ordinary guls, and
therefore, if you meant to be Sanctuarised by them, it lay you in hand first,
Auaere aliquid carcere dignum, to ascertaine them by some audacious project, of
your future fidelity: as you have now done, by making your own pen a
crosse-barre of restraint, for any welcome return unto your old home. Into
what a pitiful straight (poor soul) were you then driven? was there no other
way to repair your ruinous fortunes, but by giving a bill of divorce unto that
faith, whereunto you were first united? it cannot, it cannot, howsoever you
pretend, but Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
grieve you to the heart, that you have with Esau, sold your birthright for a
mess of pottage, which many tears will hardly redeem. I cannot blame you,
Richard Etkins household Chaplain unto the now Lord Bishop of London.
if at the sight of Mr. R. E. your old fellow Chaplain and friend, you had
Peter's tears in your eyes, for the denial of your Master. I do easily believe,
upon his credible report, that at such time as he desired your company to
Bruxels, or to England, you smote your hand upon your heart, and in great
passion uttered these words, O that I might safely return, for that is my
desire. The small liking you have to the Romish Religion, you sufficiently
manifested, when as being reconciled to that Synagogue, by one Flud a Priest,
you did yet after your return out of Yorkshire, write a little Pamphlet of
venial and mortal sins, flat against the principles of that profession. And
were you not now in Hucksters hands, whose vigilent eyes have mewed you fast
up, in their idolatrous cage, I dare say you had been in England long since,
for so did you protest, as you hoped to have any part in the passion of our
Savior Christ, that within three weeks at the furthest, (if you lived so long)
you would be here after your fathers return: who, good man, took a tedious
journey to seek out his lost son, who never opened his mouth to ask him
blessing for his pains.

Was it not grief enough, trow you, to the old man, to see his son
Theophilus Higgons, turned into Thomas Foster, as if you had been ashamed to
answer to your fathers name? to see you so strangely habited, so barely
arrayed, so gastlie visaged, whom he had so carefully tendered? Was not this
grief enough, I say, but that you must deprive him also of that private duty,
which was due unto him? and contrary to his express commandment, and
request, and your own solemn promise made to him, make his presence known to
your Confessor, whereby he might have bin in danger, as much as in you lay, to
have lost, not only his unnatural son, but even his dearest life in a strange
Land? and that which is worst, make him a sorrowful witness of your periurous
vow? The like solemn oath did you take in the presence of him, by whom your
father was accompanied, that upon the Fides Jesuitica, fides Punica.
Faith of a Roman Catholic, and, as you hoped to be saved, this book of
yours, which you then showed him, should not be printed. This albeit it be no
strange news to your afflicted wife, and some of your deceived creditors, who
are thoroughly acquainted with many such your voluntary and intended periuries,
(as upon your next reply shall be more particularly specified, under whose
name soever you mean to cover it); yet is it a sufficient testimony, that not
the approbation of your Romish Religion, but the grimme aspect of your own
estate, has driven you to this exigent. It is not long since you have
complained, through impatient emulation and ambition, (both which do distract
the mind, and turn it over to hellish discontent) that if you might have been
then preferred, and not advised rather to return to the University, to
repair your wings; you would not have changed your copy so soon, nor made so
sorry a flight from us to Rome. This you know to be well known, and upon
further occasion may be better specified unto the world. Hinc illae lachrymae.
And yet as if D. Humfrey had made you fall out with your wife, country,
creditors and all, you are so impudently shameless, as to say, Page 172.
He that "was the snare of death unto many, began to "loose the snare wherein I
was entangled. Whereas you should more truly and tolerablie have said, of
your expected preferment, Quod alteri beneficium, mihi fuit maleficium, that
which was another man's bliss, was my Bane.

Let any man now judge, whether you be not infected with Aerius his disease.
Do you not now stand upon the like terms with our religion, as mony-mongers
do with their courted mistresses? Auge Dotem will make up the match. She that
has no portion, has little proportion in your eyes. Well may you liken your
self to the young Page 99.
Partridge, you are so Pragmaticall, that you would feign fly to advancement,
the shell yet upon your head. Had you loved our religion as well as Jacob did
his Rachel, you would not have thought much, to have served seven, and seven
years, for her sake. Put as if the Lord had no more blessings, then one, you
are like a reed shaken in the wind, impatient of delays, storming to wait the
good pleasure of his will: Flectere si nequeas superos, Acheronta mouebis:


If there be not a golden mine in heaven, you will try what you can find by
digging into the suburbs of hell. But be you well assured, Denarij
sepulchrales, Pluto's, (I should have said S. Peter's) Pence, will never pay
your debts, nor make up the remainder of your wives portion, the loss whereof
has made her miss of your love. You shall be kept, I dare warrant, as hungry
as a hawk, that they may have you still at their lure. Those golden
mountains, that Flud promised, will prove no better then mole-hils of dross:
which in the end your compulsarie imploiments must be feign to purchase, with
the expense of your best blood. What can your tongue or pen refuse to do for
the^, upon whom you must wholly depend? You have already, being but a Punie
in their School, made so desperate an assault, not only against our Church,
but even government of our State, that you cannot but be soon set a work,
about some more desperate and dangerous attempt. What will they not expect from
you, whose pen has already broched this traitorous and seditious assertion?
Page 163. and 164.
That in your secret thoughts you could not but acquit the Papists from the
crime of disobedience, and undutifulness to the State: for as much as they made
not themselves contrary to it, but it is made contrary to them; the Non
tellus cymbam, tellurem cymba relinquit.
change being in the State, which propounds a new faith, and not in them who
conserve the old. A grave and religious sentence. Hell it self could not have
belched out any more pestilent. But why should we take it unkindly at your
hands? You use our State no worse, then you did your father, nor our Church
more unkindly, then your own wife: having withheld your natural duty from
the one, and your loyal affection from the other. If these be the fruits of
your religion, I am so far from envying it, that my very soul abhors it.

If any man now say of you, Page 98.
as you put the case, He did run well, who did let him, that he obeyed not the
truth? He shall not need to run to Saint Omers for satisfaction, he may thus
resolve his own doubt, that you were a lover of your self, more then a 2.
Tim. 3.4.
Lover of God: that you were a James 1.8.
wavering minded man, and unconstant in all your ways: that you were in the
Act. 8.23.
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; and that, to return your
own Page 99.
phrase, you mask intolerable falsehood, disguised under the shape of
sincerity and truth.

For my own part, (and herein have I been seconded, with better and more noble
judgments) I could never persuade my self, that the multiplicitie of Schools,
needless Lecturers, and trencher Schoolmasters, would sort to any better
effect. For the first it is a natural experiment, that too many siences weaken
the state of the Tree: and some have thought, that the parochial endowments,
and collegiate preferment of this Land, are by the tenth part too little, to
afford sufficient joyce, to those infinite superficial students, who, were it
not for this vbiquitie of schools, might much more profitablie be brought up
in some other professions and trades. For the two other: Maxima haereticorum
pars nimis mature ex scholis ad pulpita aliosue gradus euocatur. Alan. Apol.
page 106.
were those men, continued in the Universities, till they had some competent
settled livings void for the^ abroad, they would no doubt be better grounded,
and more firmly minded. But when every nice dame must have a Pedante at
home, who must vanish at her frown, if my young master be somewhat, as she
thinks, over disciplined; and when every iching-eared congregation will,
besides their learned Nemo Propheta in patria sua.
Pastor, be served with an humorizing Discourser, whose divinity must spout,
as often as they turn the cock; as being more then seruillie obliged to their
voluntary exhibition, then are these distracted minds compelled to bethink
themselves what course they shall take, for their liuelihood, when either my
mistresses displeasure, or the approach of some new and more zealous Orator,
tells them that they must be put out of their stewardships: then will they
be glad to be entertained in foreign houses: they are for every coast, upon
which the wind drives them; or if they sit idle (nihil turbarum machinantes,)
it is because Nemo conduxit: No man hired them. This consideration, was that
motive which made you sit down and write, Like the unjust steward.
thirty for sixty, and fifty for an hundred, making what reckoning you
pleased of our religion, as if it were to be rated according to the valuation
of your partial pen: which, to currie favor for a new service, was now ready
to deliver whatsoever was suggested of the old.

. 2.
Having thus dismasked your hypocrisy, and uncased your mastership of your
Lions skin, I know no reason but that I may take heart of grace, and venture
upon your Maine reason for the proof of Purgatory. What said I? your Maine
reason? admit it were as Maine as it is Maimed, yet, I must deal truly with
you, had every bird his own Moueret cornicula risum.
feather, your Peacockes plumes would soon vanish. For indeed, it does rather
both for matter and manner appertain to Upon the same Scripture, Mat 12. and
Mark 3.
Maldonat, Upon the same Scripture, Mat 12. and Mark 3.
Iansenius, and Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 1. c. 4.
Bellarmine, Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora gerebat:


So is it by them propounded, so prosecuted. Wherein you secretly bewray the
inualiditie thereof: For why should you be so saucie, as to wrest this weapon
out of their hands, unless you meant to handle it better then they? indeed,
Multum refert quid a Dauus ne an herus?
quoque dicatur, and for ought I see, your thrust is as short as theirs;
wherefore you must be contented to have your old Venie put off, with an old
ward.

Sic disputas egregie Magister: Whosoever shall speak a word against the holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him in this world, nor in the world to come.
Ergo, Some sins are forgiven in the world to come. Ergo, Purgatory. Ergo, Each
implying other, this per modum signi, that per modum causae. page 19.
Prayer for the Dead. This is your Lactea Via, your Aurea Catena, with which
you are so fettered to the Romish sect. Well, be as proud of it as you will, I
dare auerre, it has but one good link, as for the rest, the test shall prove
them not so good as Virginian oar: affording not so much as a S. Nicholas
penie toward your Purgatory, nor a taper for your Dirge.

It was an old proverb when I went to school, Veritas non quaerit angulos: How
comes it to pass, that S. Mark his exposition is such a mote in your eye,
that it galleth you to the quick to have him decide this controversy? Did he
not write of the same matter? Was he not endued with the same spirit? it may
be truly said of them both, as the Psalmist Psalm. 41.8.
prophetically foretold, one Deep answers another. They were both prefigured
by the two Exodus 25.20.
Cherubins, one beholding the other. Matthew is excellently seconded by Mark,
Mark notably sampled by Matthew. Let the question be this: When shall he
that sins against the holy Ghost be forgiven? S. Mark makes answer, (...)
Ergo no simple gloss. page 2.
Never. Which is all one, as if he had said with S. Matthew, more
figuratiuelie, (...): Neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Implying
nothing else, but the perpetuity of the punishment, and including no
specificall distribution of sins, whereof some are to be remitted in this
world, and some in the world to come, as you suppose. For so S. Mark
explaineth himself, and his fellow Evangelist, altogether as largely as S.
Matthew in these words, Mark. 3.29.
(...): is culpable of eternal damnation: So that Matthewes partatiue, and
Marks collectiue do note one thing, viz. Eternity.

Were you, as you pretend, a true child of Antiquity, you would not be more
curious then Athanasius, Jerome, Hilarie, and Ambrose, who were content, as
often as they examined these words, to render them by Aeternum, not seeking any
further. Page 2.
This was no simple gloss in those days. The Greek Fathers dreamed not of
temporal punishment after death, but of eternal. And this accords with the
opinion of Calvin. Harm. Euang. in eum locum.
Calvin, who holds that the scope of the text concerns only the last
judgment, where there is no place for the remission of any sin, which was
not formerlie pardoned in this life. Now then, whether we ought to attribute
more faith to your affirmitiue collection, or to Saint Marks Identicall
narration, judge you. The syllogisticall examination of your argument, will make
the folly thereof more evident. Whosoever, etc. it shall not be forgiven him in
this world, nor in the world to come: Ergo (say you) Some sins are pardoned
in the world to come. That you may see how willing I am to give Sea-roome, for
fear of splitting your tender sided Foyst, I will grant all, and yet, Ne canas
ante victoriam. For your Purgatory should notwithstanding be very impudent
to intrude it self. What You may well say, what is this to Purgatory? page 19.
inconvenience should follow, if I should yield that some sins are pardoned in
the world to come? I dare avouch it, without any prejudice to the cause. Our
Savior speaking of the unbeliever, says, Ioh. 3.18.
He is condemned already, and yet you cannot deny, but that he must come to a
second 2. Cor. 5.10.
Doom. So is it with the belieuer: albeit he have full 1. Ioh. 2.12.
Remission granted, and his pardon sealed in this life, yet he must have the
same proclaimed at the General Gayole delivery in the world to come. In which
sense he may as truly be said, to have his sins then pardoned, as the other
his then condemned.

The words of your ground import as much, Non remittetur eis in hoc seculo:
viz. per Remissionis applicationem, nec in futuro, viz. per Remissionis
promulgationem. That is, they shall not have the spiritual assurance of
remission in this world, wherewith the elect of God have their consciences
Ephesians. 1.13.
sealed, neither shall they have the fruition thereof in the world to come,
into which the children of God are to be inducted. Nec hic Spem: Nec ibi Rem.
Neither present expectation, nor future possession. So that as some sins are
there punished, so also there are some there pardoned, and yet your Purgatory
clean excluded. If you say this exposition does either disagree with the scope
of the place, or analogy of faith, I would gladly be better informed, by
soliditie of reason, not superfluity of words. For as yet I cannot see, but
that it rather follows a contrario, thus: This remissible sin shall neither
be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, Ergo, This or that
remissible sin shall be forgiven, both in this world, and in the world to come:
the two latter being added as inseparable adherents to the former. And so the
sin is here exaggerated, by opposition to other sins, in the depriuatio^ of
that double benefit, whereof other sinners, that are penitent, are capable: unto
both which, he that sins against the holy Ghost can lay no claim.

I will not vie too fast, it may be you keep the Fiue-finger in your hand for
the last trick; when you come in with your, Ergo, some sins remissible, are
pardoned in the world to come, happily you have this mental reservation, viz.
which are not formerly forgiven in this world. I protest I thought as much. You
have turned up. Quae ligata manent in terris, ea postea non soluuntur. Matthew.
16.19.18.18. Ioh. 20.22.

In the place that the tree falls, there it shall be. Eccles. 11.3.


Nodie. But dic sodes, deal plainly with your friends. Came this card out of
the stock? Is there any such clause in the text? or any other express
Scripture, to justify this insertion? A young gamester may see that this is but
a bad sequel, The sin against the holy Ghost, shall neither be forgiven in
this world, nor in the world to come: Ergo, Some sins are pardoned in the world
to come, which are not forgiven in this world. Here is old packing, but I will
discover you. A Kentish Gentleman, not purposing to make his heir a great
Clerk, says thus: My eldest son shall never be student in Oxford, nor
Cambridge: were he not an excellent Artist, trow you, that should hence infer,
Ergo, some of his other sons shall go to Cambridge. In this there is no
necessity, the Gentleman's scope being, by this Negative distribution of the
English Academies, to show he meant to set his son in some other course, and
not particularly to determine, what he would do with the rest. Or if he should
say, (as he may well without Page 3.
ridiculous absurdity) My son shall neither be scholar of Eton, nor fellow of
Kings College: were he not out of his wits that would hence conclude, Ergo, A
man may be Being against the first foundation.
fellow of Kings College, that was never scholar of Eton? In this there is no
Possibility. I am sure it was a rule, when I first haunted An exercise in
Oxford Schoole-streets for young scholars, Logicians.
Paruies, Quod de vno negatur, non semper de diuersis affirmatur, and e contra.
My reason is this, Potest idem Praedicatum, de diuersis subiectis recte
Praedicari: as thus: This proposition is true, Eos qui foris sunt Deus
iudicabit: and this as true, Eos qui intus sunt iudicabit Deus, where Subiectum
does differ, the Praedicatum being all one: Neither may we argue thus, They
are to be judged by God, Ergo, not by the Magistrate: This were an
Anabaptistical heresy. Common sense will disprove it, and yet you stick not
to conclude, The sin against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven in this
world, "nor in the world to come, Ergo, Page 2.
Some sins "shall be forgiven in the world to come. It will put you to a foul
plunge, if I shall retort your own Paralogisme upon you: Thus, The sin against
the holy Ghost, shall neither be remitted, Quoad culpam, aut quoad poenam, in
this world, nor in the world to come; Ergo, Some sin shall be remitted, and
quoad culpam, and quoad poenam, in the world to come; which is repugnant to the
position of your own sect, recorded Tom. 4. did. 45.. 1. p. 557.
by Suares, Contingit peccata mortalia remitti in seculo futuro, quod non
potest intelligi de Remissione quoad culpam, Ergo necessario intelligendum est
quoad poenam. It happens that mortal sins be forgiven in the world to
come, which cannot be understood of the forgiveness of guilt, therefore
necessarily to be understood of punishment. Which you dare not allow in respect
of Guilt, and yet the text does as equally intend Remission of guilt, as of
punishment. Which your Caietan confesses, saying, Caietan. in cum locum.
De peccato asseritur, non remittetur in hoc seculo, vt intelligamus
comprehendi non solum remissionem poenae sed culpae: Peccatum enim nomen est
culpae. Thus are you hampered in your own snare; Misere perit, qui suis armis
perit.

But I fear I am somewhat too quick with Turpe est vrgere iacentem.
you: it seems by this your wrested collection, you are yet to learn the
rule of Nazianzen, Jn Con. de fill.
In certis quibusdam generibus negationum, vbi quid de vna quadam re negatur,
non mox diuersum affirmatur, et si talem quandam speciem prae seferat. You must
not always gather an affirmative out of a Negative, though at the first sight
it may seem to be implied. As if I should say, Christ was delivered to death,
not for his own, but our sins, were he now any better then a cauelling
Sophister, who would hence gather, Ergo Christus habuit peccata? Therefore
Christ had sins of his own, because it was said, not for his own? The Apostle
writing to Titus, says, Chap. 3. v. 3.
Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his
own mercy he saved us: neither does he intimate, howsoever the phrase may
seem to bear it, that we of our selves had done any works of righteousness
at all. And so here, Simpliciter negat: Nihil ponit; by a figurative, and
distributive partition of the two parts of Eternity, he exaggerateth their
punishment, who sin against the holy Ghost, saying, That they shall not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come: and does not, as appears by
the rule of Nazianzen, affirmatively determine the contrary of other mortal
sins.

But alas poor soul, how can I blame your weakness, when your learned master,
Bellarm. is grauelled in the same sands? When Peter Martyr obiecteth, it is no
good Logic to argue affirmatiuelie from a Negative, as thus: Philip King of
Spain, is not King of the Venetians, Ergo, there is a King of the Venetians,
he is driven to this shameful shift, Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 4..
Respond^, non. etc.
Respondeo, non sequi secundum Regulas Dialecticorum, and tamen sequi secundum
Regulas Prudentiae, quia alioquin faceremus Dominum ineptissime loquutum: It
follows not (says he) according to the rules of Logic, but according to
the rules of You would feign be Bellarmines Ape. page 3.
Prudencie, for otherwise there must needs be an absurdity in the Lords
speech. As if that could by any wise man be allowed for Necessary, which by
Logical consequence is not Necessarily deducted out of the Premises.

And why should the speech, uttered by way of exaggeration, seem so absurd
and improbable as you term it? Shall your own Maldonat be an arbitrator
between us? Scholying upon these words of Matthew. 19.14. It shall be easier for
a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man, etc. Maldonat.
super Matthew. 19.14.
Haec oration hominibus absurda videtur qui non intelligunt, etc. This speech
seems absurd to those which understand it not, etc. so that the absurdity in
the popular understanding, does not diminish the truth, or authority thereof.
Why then should this prouerbiall amplification sound so vncouthly in your
ears? You would be loath I should serve you with a Non intelligis, under
Maldonats seal. What if I should say, I would not allow Theomisus to be my
schoolmasters, either quick or dead? Do I therefore intend that you can read
me a schismatic lecture, when I am in my grave? No, but my meaning by this
hyperbolicall exaggeration is, that I would never admit you to that office,
albeit, it were possible that I could be capable of your Romish charms. So
that it is now needless to debate, whether your own instance of the Page 2.
barren woman, (which may emphatically be spoken, secundum morem vulgi) be more
ridiculous, or the idle author thereof frivolous.

This one thing I will yet add, if the like coniecturall collections should be
urged against you, we should surely hear of injurious dealing. There is no
one place more familiar among you, then this of Joseph, Matthew. 1.25.
But he knew her not until she had brought forth her first borne Son. If
out of this we should come upon Non ouum ouo similius.
you, Ergo, he knew her after she had borne him, or, Ergo, she had more
sons, you would think that blessed and holy Virgin to be most
irrecompensably Vt Antidicomaritanae. Elench. haer. p. 133. 6. vel Heluidij
blasphemia. Aug. de Ecclesiast. dogmat. ca. 68.
disparaged: and yet (...), until, seems to imply the first, and (...) the
first borne, to import the second. To open my self, I confess freely my
reverend esteem of that sacred Virgin is such, that I should stop my ears, if
such disputants would not stop their mouths. Among other things, this seems
to me very strange, that glorying so much in the authority, and Page 4.
commending the indifferency of the Fathers, you have omitted Origens opinion,
whose antiquity would have greatly steaded you in this case. Then had you
stricken the nail on the head, there had been no further question: we should
have bin glad to compound. I confess freely, he gathers the same note out of
these words of your ground, Esse in altero seculo Hoc est contra Origenem, qui
dicit omnes veniam consequuturos post universal iudicium, tra^sactis multis
seculis.

Hug. Cardin. in Mat. fol. 42. b.


remissionem, etc. And that this might be thought a venial encrochment upon
the text, he goes further, breaking down all the Lords fences, that the
Devils and damned spirits might enter common in this after-pardon, entituling
them to that Remission, which shall be granted in the world to come. Here is
good stuff. Qui semel verecundiae fines transierit, eum gnauiter esse
impudentem oportet. Over shoes over boots. If the Christian world should give
you Origens inch, a whole ell of absurdities would not serve your turn. We
should every day have Posts out of Purgatory, and such store of
Graue-miracles, that it would make a Yea Bellarmines devout mare. Lib. 3.
Eucha. cap. 8.
horse to break his halter to see them.

Far more Analogicall is Saint Chrysostoms exposition, It shall not be forgiven
in this world, nor in the world to come, that is, says he, In Matthew. 12.
Non effugient poenam: They shall be surely punished in this world, and in the
world to come. And this stands with very good Non remittetur hic vel alibi,
sed and hic and alibi punietur. Theoph. in Matthew.
reason: as himself proves by this induction: Some sinners are punished only
in this life, as that incestuous 1. Cor. 5.5.
Corinthian, that his spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus: some
only in the life to come, as the rich Luke 16.19.
Glutton, who while he was alive had the world at will: and some were sinners
in grain, (as I may term them,) and are both tortured in this life, and
tormented in the life to come, as the Sodomites who had here ignem Genesis 19.24.
sulfureum, and have there ignem infernalem. So that when our Savior here,
denouncing against these Capital malefactors, tells them that their sins
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, it is as
much as if he should say, they shall both smart for it in this world, and rue
it in the world to come. Whereof, (not to speak of Judas, patronised by De
Justif. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Bellarmine) we have a lively, though fearful, president in the miserable end
of that cursed Apostata Vicisti Galilae.
Julianus.

I would now gladly see, what fault you can find with this wholesome exposition:
it tends to godliness, in setting out the horror of that fearful sin,
which our Savior here labors to beat down in the blasphemous
Pharasaicall Scribes, and the truth thereof is evident by the former instance:
whereas your illatiue sets open a wide gap to carnal liberty, our Maxima
peccandi illecebra impunitatis spes.
nature being so prone to defer the time of our conversion, upon the least hope
of future remedy. Neither is it backed by any express testimony of holy writ,
nor any exemplary proof, besides your Hobgoblins, Rawheads, Bloodie-bones, and
Night-ghosts, which the world has now for many years since forgotten to
believe.

You will be tried by the Fathers, you say. A good motion. My reason teaches
me to reverence them, my religion forbids me to adore them: my leisure will
not serve to search or cite them all. Can you except against Athanasius? Let
him be the Vmpire, he has written a whole Tract of this subject, which will
put all out of doubt. If you can find one line in him for this your exposition,
My eye shall enter an action against my understanding. Nay I will yet go
further, there is not one of the ancient Fathers, Vbi been nemo melius, vbi
male nemo peius.
( Origin excepted) unto Augustines time, who ever made any such gloss. As for
Hilarie, Jerome, Chrysostom, Theophylact, and my arbitrator Athanasius, they
will not I am sure, lend you one such syllable to save your life. No marvel
then, if by the validity of this text, you were so powerfully led to the Page
11.
approbation of this doctrine. These you will say are but my words, and
therefore for your better information peruse them.

By this you may see, (if the muffler of Superstition, has not clean
hoodwinked your eyes) the weakness of your first ground: Well, when you have
spent all your forces in the maintenance of this fort, it will prove but (...),
strife about words, which the 1. Tim. 6.4.
Apostle appropriateth to such as account gain (I will not say Purgatory) to
be godliness. No doubt, your talent and time might much more profitablie be
spent, (...); in doctrine according to godliness.

. 3.
THat you may perceive how willing I am to satisfy you to the full, I will do
my best endeavor to remove that scruple, which the authority of that great
Father, and worthy Divine S. Augustine seems to have first fastened in your
wavering thoughts: wherein I shall find the less difficulty, for as much as
your self confess of all those of his rank, that Page 6.
Though they were men of admirable value, yet they were not exempt from the
errors of infirmity Spero te minime moriturum Episcopum. Epiph. Chrysostomo.
Spero te in patriam minime rediturum. Chrysostom. Epiphanio. Socrat. lib. 6. cap.
13.
attending upon the condition of mankind: and, That they may err Page 4.
Secundum Analogiam loci. Which, were I captious, might bring this with the
rest of your testimonies, being mere expositions upon your former ground, into
some doubt. For when he said, Page 4.
The prayer of the Church is heard for some men deceased out of the world; lest
he might be urged with a Proba, he gives this reason, For it could not be
said truly of some men, that their sins should not be forgiven in this world,
nor in the world to come, unless there should be some men, who though they are
not pardoned in this world, yet they should be pardoned in the world to come.
What is this with those other of Gregory, Jsidore, Beda, and Bernard, by you
cited, but expositions upon the same place? wherein you confess they may err.
And indeed I wonder you will be so friendly, as to grant that they may miss
the cushion in the Analogy of the place. Little do you think what may be
thence inferred. I would feign know what is the ground of faith? Is it not the
word? This word has diverse parcels: now if they mistake in the Analogy of one
place, (as you grant) why not then as well in another? and so you covertly
contradict your self by implying, They may err, Secundum Analogiam Fidei, in
the Analogy of faith. Thus have you made those blessed Fathers much beholding
unto you.

But that I may merit to be kalendred "by you among those that are of a Page 22.
more "candide and honorable disposition, I will not press you so near. God
knows, I have no pleasure to diminish the venerable esteem of their sacred
pens. Wherefore for the place cited out of the Page 28.
incomparable work, of that holy S. Augustine, with whom you first consulted,
give me leave, I pray you, to put you in mind of what your own Viues has
formerly told you, writing upon these words, which you have here alleged, he
says thus: Super Aug. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 24.
In antiquis libris Brugensi, and Coloniensi, non leguntur isti december aut
duodecim qui sequuntur versus, neque in exemplaribus Friburgi excusis. And it
is true he says, They are not in any our known Copies to be found. Thus has
your own man Viues tripped up the heels of your grand authority, and laid
your first Motive in the dust. But I must do you no wrong, he goes a step
further, and says, Forsan non desunt in alijs: Perhaps other impressions have
them. And so your Ponderous resolution, both for this interpretation of S.
Augustine, as also for the said Fathers judgment concerning Purgatory, hangs
upon a weak thread, upon a Forsan, Perhaps, which is as good as a new nothing to
hang upon your sleeue. Thus as you have but one Ground, and that wrested, so it
appears your Prime father may be supposed to be forged. Which may give us
just cause to mistrust the like double dealing with the rest.

Having hitherto busied my pen, in sounding the depth of your hypocrisy: in
clearing your first scripture from your Sophistry: in defending your Prime
Father from your forgerie: I must now show my self a dead-mans Champion, in
freeing your Prime Protestant Doctor from your Calumny.

. 4.
EGregiam vero laudem, and spolia amplatulisti, Tuque liberque tuus. Alas what
will become of our Religion? our poor Church must needs totter, the Page 168.
and 140.
Pillars thereof being so miserably shaken. Had you the Jaw Bone of an Ass in
your hand, who were able to stand before you, our best worthies being so deadly
wounded with your Goose-quill? Amongst the rest, Barbam vellis Leoni Mortuo.
You trample upon dead D. Humfrey, as if you would crush him to pieces. They
that survive had need to look to themselves, your fury is so enraged toward
the dead. And is it possible, that that holy man should spend so many years,
diue into so many learned Authors, read so many memorable Lectures, and now
come to be taxed by an obscure Neoterique of Vide ad Lector. and page 38 82.
168. 169. 172.
1 malignitie,2 artificial collusion, 3 insolent madness, 4 egregious
falsehoods, 5 Rhetorical florishes, 6 unprofitable Rhetorique, 7 unfaithful
courses, 8 obscure and uncertain oracles, for 9 delusion in his ambiguities,
10 unfaithfulness in his relations, 11 digressions from his matter, 12 and
general imbecillitie in his discourse. Bona verba quaeso. You must not think
to carry it away with your big looks. If your currish pen be so shameless as
to dare Mingere in patrios cineres, be you assured the good fathers demerits
will not permit any true Oxonian to leave his Orphane works to the wild world.
Let others do as they shall see cause. Far is it from my thoughts, that this my
short and rude Letter should suppress any other more solid supply. As he did
benefit many being alive, so is it fit he should be defended by many being
dead. It is fit, I say, that the debt, which the Church owes to his reverend
memory, should be paid by men of the Church. Neither yet are private men to
bury his particular favors, with his breathless corpse in one same Grave. It
is usually seen amongst base minds, Cum quis Domo effertur, aufertur Gratia.
But still shall he lie intombed in my best thoughts, who ripened the buds of my
younger studies, with the gladsome rays of his best encouragements. Or shall I
be so meale-mouthed, as to suffer any railing Rabshekah to sooth himself in
his disgrace? Then might my worthy, learned, and religious Elizab. La. Russell
Dowager.

(...). Euripid.


Mother think my time and her cost altogether misspent, if in all that time I
did not learn to maintain his repute, by whom she understood I was so much
honored. And if your superstition teach you to pray for the dead, you cannot, I
hope, blame my generous disposition, to patronize the Eccle. 7.37. Mortuo non
prohibeas gratiam.
Dead. Full well may I undertake this combat, without any fear of the foil.
I have perused his book, examined his assertions, and weighed his arguments,
upon which view I find you must be driven to offer a pair of golden eyes to
the Lady of Sichem, or Hal is nearer S. Omers.
Loretto, that you may recover your sight, which you have so weakened with
ouerstudying your self, in the seeking out of Purgatory, that you cannot see
the VVood for trees. You cry out, let him be condemned for delusion,
deprauation, etc. yea but first, by your leave, Mr. Theomisus, there must be
inquiry, Quid mali fecit? What evil has he done? Upon this trial, I doubt
not but this sentence will be given by an indifferent Judge, J find no fault in
the man, of these things whereof he is here accused.

The first grieuance taken against this worthy Doctor (which is made your
first warrant, for the trial of your cause by the Fathers) is this, that he
draws his answer to Campian, to a conclusion with this sentence, Page 12.
Trasilaus in a mad humor, took all the ships which he beheld in the Attique
haven to be his own, though he possessed not any vessel: Such is the frencie
of the Romanists, yea greater also, because they see, and yet seeing they
dissemble, that they are destitute of all defense from the Fathers. This you
term a vast and a notable untruth. If your words might pass for oracles, it
were so indeed. But is it possible you should so soon forget, what issued from
your own pen, not four leaves before? How did you there play Trasilaus,
vaunting like a second Thraso, of S. Aug. authority in the exposition of your
ground? Well, what was the issue? Did not D. Humfrey prophecy right? your own
Viues, as I showed you, blows all away with a Non leguntur. Where is now the
ship you challenged for your own? It has but a Forsan, a very thin planke
to keep you from sinking. If you a Nouice have learned this trick already,
what shall we think of those, that have been seven, nay twice seven years
apprentises to the trade? By that time you have been so long a Practitioner,
you will have twenty such iugling tricks at your fingers ends. It is
unpleasing to you, I dare say, to see your self taken in the manner, wherefore
I will return in a word to the justifying of D. H. assertion.

It will be very tedious to set before you, the whole sum of that pithie
answer, to Campians fifth reason De patribus, Ab ouo vsque ad mala. Which if
you iudiciallie peruse, you shall see he had good reason, after so great
promises, and small performances on his adversaries part, to conclude as he
did. In the entrance of that subject, Campian would feign make the world
believe, that our Church had quite deposed the most ancient Fathers, and
doctors, and that if we would make trial by them, our cause were instantly
gone. Omnes nostri sunt, (says he in effect) All the ships on the Attique
shore, all the Fathers are ours: The day is ours. Unto this challenge, our D.
returns this answer, Nos horum patrum auctoritatem solummodo veneramur, nos
ad horum Synedrion sacro sanctum prouocamus. They alone shall be our Judges,
we will appeal to them. And again, Vere ac proprie nostros patres in terris
vocamus Prophetas, and Apostolos, patres non a patre patrato, sed a patre
patrum delectos. We account them our fathers, whom the Father of heaven has
set over us. All the exception he makes against the challenge is this: Jncipit
(says he) ab aureae aetatis heroibus, and a patribus maiorum gentium, sed mox
ad alios vel aenei vel ferrei seculi homines descendit, quos in vnum quasi
globum sine vllo discrimine coniungit. This is our D. resolution; he is
willing to stand to the judgment of the Prophets, Apostles, and Primitive
fathers, adding only this, that he makes a difference between those of the
Jnter patres. and paterculos.
golden age, and those which succeed in the brazen and iron age of the world,
which the leaven and leprosy of Romish superstition has sowred and infected.
Now how far your Challengers right comes short of his claim, the
conference of both their writings will more fully declare, then the brevity
of a letter will permit. And in this behalf I had rather refer you to a
known Printed at London 1608.
Sermon, (yet so far as I can learn unanswered) that was preached at Paul's
Cross, Febr. 13. 1607: wherein it will appear, at least in twenty points,
how little countenance you have from those holy fathers, with whose names your
frothie discourses are so stuffed, and your controversies bombasted. I am not
now an opponent, to urge the particulars, wherein you prove destitute of those
Fathers, who are still at your pens end: I shall hold it sufficient, if I can
at this time assoile that worthy father from your wrongful imputations.

First for his evasion: Campian had objected, The inuisibilitie of our Church,
and that we stood only at the reuersion of Aerius, Vigilantius, etc. for some
pestiferous fragments: Now D. H. not knowing how to wind himself out of this
difficulty, is driven (as you say) to slip collar thus. Wherein Aerius did
err, we reject it; wherein he held any thing agreeable to the Scripture, we
receive it. And consequently in this point of prayer for the dead, we and our
Church will not digress from Aerius. I would wish none of my friends to open
his mouth against the least Retainer to Purgatory. Beelzebub himself shall
find more favor at your hands then such a man. What? Because the Devils Mark.
3.13.
confessed, that Jesus was the Son of God, will you therefore abjure it, and
blot it out of your Creed? If Aerius (howsoever otherwise erroneous) do join
with the Primitive Church, in nullifying oblations for the dead, will you
therefore have our Church so nice, as in a stomach to maintain the contrary?
Had D. H. said Aerius disliked them, Ergo, we will not entertain them: then
had he given the question to his adversary, in the debate of our Churches
Antiquity, this had bin indeed to pick the crumbs that had fallen from his
table. But because Aerius an Heretic was of this opinion, that therefore it is
a new coined doctrine, and a disgrace for our church to hold it, our D. thought
it no good consequence. In matters of this kind we are not to consider Quis,
but Quid: not Who, it is, or by whom, this or that point is professed, but
Quid, what it is that is held. If the person be an Galath. 1.8.
Angel, we have our warrant to refuse him, if he bring (...) or (...), any
thing besides that which the word warranteth: on the contrary, if the doctrine
be, (...), that which is written, or (...), agreeable to that which we have
received, though the person be an infernal spirit that utters it, yet he is
not to be refused. What were this, but with the Page 76.
Anabaptists, and Brownists (as you say) to frequent no Church, because there
is some blemish in every Church? were he not a wise minter that refuses gold,
because there is much dross? though there be much chafe in the heap, yet
will not the husbandman forsake his wheat; shall the Arian heresy of Aerius
make those other truths which he held, to be of less esteem? By this
reason, we should not have had one article of our faith left many hundred
years ago, if, because of men's errors in some points, we should therefore
dissent from them in all. What cause is there then, why I should not highly
extol this worthy saying of that Venerable man? We are not ashamed to join
with Aerius, (says he) where Aerius joins with the Scriptures. Observe this,
I pray you, he believes it, not because Aerius says it is true, but because
that is true which Aerius says, therefore he believes it. Yea should a
hundred Councels of Romish Pharasaicall Scribes condemn him as an Heretic,
yet were he no whit less to be followed, in that wherein he follows the
Word. Call you this an Evasion, to hold that which is agreeable to the written
word? Indeed whatsoever distasteth your quaint humors, is an evasion. Well, all
the advantage you get by such euasions, you may put into your eye, and see
never a whit the worse.

Neither is the Collusion, with which he is charged, of any more moment then
the former: the words of our D. are these: Non improbamus nos quod sensit
Aerius and Augustinus retulit, non oportere nos orare, vel oblationem offerre
pro mortuis, quia nullo Scripturae dicto continetur: quod and Aug. significare
videtur quando hanc commendationem mortuorum dicit, veterem esse ecclesiae
consuetudinem: We do not disprove that which Aerius taught, and Augustine has
related, that we ought not to pray nor offer oblation for the dead, because
this is not contained in any precept of the Scripture: which Augustine also
does seem to signify, when he says that this commendation of the dead was an
ancient custom of the Church. This you take to be a subtle Collusion. For
whereas our D. pretends, that S. Augustine had only Custom to maintain it,
yet you find that he alleges Scripture in defense thereof, For we read
(says he) in the book of the Machabes, that Sacrifice was offered for the
dead. If this be the Scripture you build upon, our D. may say again, Nullo
Scripturae dicto continetur: it is not contained in any precept of Scripture.
As having formerly proved out of Rat. pr. page 28.
Aquinas, Antoninus, and Jerome, that those books of Machabees are not
Canonical. Neither is it our D. surmise, that August. seems to signify as
much, who elsewhere does plainly and determinablie conclude, that they are not
Diuini Canonis. Aug. de mirab. lib. 2. c. 34.
Jn Machabaeorum libris, etsi aliquid mirabilium numero inserendum
conuenientius ordini fuisse inueniatur, de hoc tamen nulla cura fatigabimur,
quia tantum agere proposuimus, vt de diuini Canonis mirabilibus exiguam
historicam expositionem tangeremus. Where he confesses, that albeit he might
well have produced somewhat for his purpose out of the Machabees, yet because he
meant to deal only with such mirables as were of the Divine Canon, he would
not trouble himself with those, as thinking them unfit to stand cheek by
ioule with the other.

The same Father writing against Gaudent. Epist. says thus, Contra Gaud.
Epist. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobrie
legatur, vel audiatur, maxim propter istos Martyrs; sed ob hanc causam in
Canone morum, non Fidei censeri posset. Showing that there must great sobriety
be used, in the hearing and reading of those books, and that they are in the
Canon of Manners, and not of faith. And again, Jn sanctis Canonicis libris,
nusquam nobis diuinitus praeceptum, permissumue reperiri potest, vt velipsius
adipiscendae immortalitatis, vel vllius carendi cauendiue mali, causa, vt 2.
Machab. 14.42.
Razis seipsum occidens laudatur. In the holy Canonical books, there is no
divine precept, or permission to be found, that we may, either to gain
immortality, or to escape any peril, make away with our selves, as Razis did,
and is therefore commended in the Machabees. Where is now the Collusion? Does
not S. Augustine seem to signify as much? Lyra is as liable to the censure of
Collusion, who auerreth Praefat. in Tob. as he is cited by our Lubbertus, lib.
1. cap. 13. de Princip. dogm.
that they are received of the Church, to be read for the information of
manners. Brito is also of the same mind, Jn prolog. Machab. cited by Lubbert.
ibid.
Libri Machabaeorum non sunt in Canone, and tamen leguntur in Ecclesia, per
constitutionem Romanae ecclesiae. The books of Machabees are not in the Canon,
and yet they are read by the constitution of the Roman Church. I might cite Ad
reg. Ludouicum. Lubbert. ibid.
Rabanus, and diverse others, but Jn fine Comment. ad hist. vet. Test. as he is
cited by our Lubbertus quo supra. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Caietan shall serve for all: Ne turberis, Nouitie, si alicubi reperias libros
istos inter Canonicos supputari, vel in sacris Concilijs, vel in sacris
Doctoribus: Non autem sunt Canonici, id est, Regulares ad firmandum ea quae
sunt Fidei. Possunt tamen Canonici, id est, Regulares dici, ad aedificationem
fidelium, vtpote in Canone Bibliae ad hoc recepti. Cum hac distinctione poteris
discernere dicta Augustini, and scripta in Concilio prouinciali Carthaginensi.
Trouble not thy self, if thou find those books, either in the sacred Councels,
or holy Fathers, to be reckoned among those that are Canonical, for they are
not Canonical, that is, Regular, to ground those things that appertain to
faith, albeit they may be termed Regular and Canonical, for the edification
of the faithful, for which end they are received into the Canon of the Bible.
With this Distinction, that which is spoken by Saint Augustine, and written by
the Provincial Council of Carthage must be understood.

The Council of Carthage, Page 170.
whereupon you so much rely, no doubt will now stand you in great stead.
Caietan takes away your objection with this distinction. Besides, by your
leave, it may seem, these books were not so acknowledged by that Council. For
how then could 19. Mor. 13.
S. Gregory long after have doubted of these books, calling them Libros non
Canonicos, Books that were not Canonical? Your own Locis Theol. lib. 2. cap.
11.. Ad quartum.
Canus confesses, that if they had been so ratified, it had been neither for
Gregory, nor any other to have afterward made any doubt of them. Why should
you then style it an Page 169.
Artificial Collusion, if our D. say that S. Augustine seems to signify,
that there is no place of Scripture for prayer for the dead, when besides the
Custom of the Church, he alleges only that one out of the Machabees, which
books are not properly Canonical?

You take all things, I see, with the left hand; you would feign find a mote in
D. H. his eye, and yet you will not see the beam in your own illatiue.
Higgons. page 170.
S. Augustine, you say, makes mention of the old Scripture, Ergo, he intimates
that in the new Testament, some relief for the dead, is either plainly
expressed, or sufficiently deduced from thence. In sadness I should be glad to
see a Logique of your making: you have such passing skill to conclude, Quid
libet ex Quolibet. S. Augustines words are these, De cura pro mort. cap. 1.
If this were read no where in the old Scripture, yet there is no small
authority of the universal Church, etc. He makes a negative supposition of
the old testament, from whence you infer an affirmative position, that there is
proof in the new Testament. Fallacia ab insufficiente diuisione.
A good Consequent: all one, as if a man should say, M. Theomisus is not in the
Churchyard: Ergo, he is in the Church. Had there been any such place there to
be found, S. Augustine was not such a stranger unto it, but that he could have
produced it Doctus scriba prosert de thesauro suo noua and vetera.
with a wet finger. Neither was he tam imperitus rerum aestimator, as to think
that the custom of the Church would pass more current, then that protection,
unto which the Lord has set his hand and seal. Wherefore wi^h far more
probability, might you have argued thus; S. Augustine mentions only the old,
which is not undoubtedly Scripture: Ergo, he did not find any Canonical
Scripture to confirm it. Yea, but Plus vident oculi quam oculus: happily your
Jesuiticall society (as having the advantage of a later, more learned, and
experienced age) has dug so far into that sacred mine, that they have now
found the Gemme, which S. Augustines age never saw. And why not? Were there no
more simples then Galen discovered, we should have but simple Physicians. Time
has bred more maturitie in all Arts, which did but blossom in the former age:
and well might it be as heavy an imputation to our unthrifty days, as it was
to that servant, who returned his Talent without increase, if we should
purchase no more then our fathers bequeathed us. Well, if you have it, what
need you be so dainty, to keep it under lock and key from the view of the
world? If this proof out of the new Testament were once known, it would make
your Purgatory-boxe richer by many thousands. I know no man so respectlesse of
himself, but would willingly part with one moytie of his means, for his
future relief. Empti estis pretio.
But until you bring Scripture affirmatiuelie to prove it, you must give D.
Hum. leave, (especially in the answerers place) to pretend, nay to plead Jn
lege quid scriptum est? quomodo legis? Luke 10.26.
Scripture negatiuely against it, your former ground being formerlie answered.

It were well, you would say, if we could plead so to the authority of our
Church, Page 170.
Her Sovereignty is impeachaable, without any other proof forceable, from
whence it is not only insolency, but madness to decline. Pulchre dictum: This
is your Ladies first A. B. C. The Church is as much beholding to you, for
maintaining her right, as S. Bernard, Page 6.
for your secret and peculiar affection. Nay, as Pythagoras was to his
scholars, instead of ipse dixit, you will have ipsa dixit. Me thinks I see you
playing Demetrius, your craft is going to decay, and therefore you are feign to
cry, Act. 19.34.
Magna Diana Ephesiorum, or (which is in effect as much) Magna Ecclesia
Romanorum. For when you speak of the Church, I take it, you have reference to
your former Page 14.
assertion, That your Roman Church is of more powerful principality, then
the rest. Indeed had the Scriptures, Creeds, and four first general Councels
been derived from thence, it might have been more tolerablie auerred: But we
should do the Greek Church much wrong, to deck your Romish, with her Plumes,
having received no foundation of faith from you at all. Of the true Church, who
is he that says not with S. Augustine, Non parua ecclesiae auctoritas? Well
does her Modesty, well does her Fidelity deserve honorable esteem. She
takes not upon her to control the holy Scripture her mother, from whom she
drew her first breath: she opens not her mouth, til her mother have delivered
her mind; she comes not of her own head with any sleeuelesse arrend: No
other message does she bring, to the servants of the Lords house, then that
which her mother has given her in charge. But of the place of her former
residence, and how many painted Antichristian Harlots, have ietted up and down
in her attire, and usurped her Apocal. 17.3.
Chair of State; it would ask a long treatise to declare. And indeed my
patience can hardly endure, that our dead Doctor should lie so long at the
mercy of your merciless pen. As I have disburthened him of the imposed
Collusion, so will I now bestow a few lines to shroud him from the supposed
Page 171.
Delusion.

The Delusion with which he is charged, is ambiguitie of speech: for Page 171.
whereas the commendation, whereof S. Augustine speaks, is referred to the
souls of the Dead, D. Humfrey, in his Rhetorical florishes, does pretend,
that we in our Colleges retain the ancient commendation of the Dead; by which
he would make the credulous Reader believe, that Saint Augustine himself does
conuell the use of prayer for the dead, maintaining it no otherwise, then we
now do. Page 172.
The Credulous Reader? Nay he were a sottish Reader, that should gather any
such belief out of D. Humfreies words, who has not any one sentence to that
purpose. Where does he deny that S. Augustine did not allow prayer for the
Dead? this had been a Delusion, a notable Figment, an eminent Deprauation; nay
he plainly confesses it, citing S. Aug. own words, That this commendation of
the dead, is an ancient custom of the Church, in that place which you have
formerly mentioned. And yet by the way it is not amiss, to put you in mind,
what S. Augustine elsewhere does confess, viz. many to have erred in their
devotion toward the dead August. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 67.
Ex humana beneuolentia: and so we find also that the entire love of his
mother Monica, and other his dear friends made him somewhat too forward in this
point. And why may not this be one of those things of which he speaks ad
Januarium? Aug. ad Ianuarium.
Multa huiusmodi, propter nonnullarum vel sanctarum vel turbulentarum
personarum scandala deuitanda, liberius improbare non audeo. There are many
things, which, because I would not offend, the consciences of those that are
otherwise well minded, nor prove the^ that are turbulentlie affected, I dare
not reprove as I would. Not to divert you with these oppositions, that which
our doctor concludes out of S. Aug. is, that he has no Scripture for prayer
for the dead. Cont. Camp. page 262. pars 2.
No^ oportere nos orare pro mortuis si Scripturae praecepta respiciamus, which
is as much he asks. Nay he alleges S. Augustinus own words, Veteremesse
consuetudinem: that the commendation of the dead is ratified by custom. Now
because commendation of the dead signifies both the prayer of supplication (as
you superstitiouslie abuse it) and of thanksgiving, (as it is now in our
colleges for the liberality of the founders respectively used) D. Hum.
assuming this part says, We retain the commendation, etc. and does not
therefore absolutely deny the other, that S. Augustins Humana beneuolentia was
somewhat inclined to that part. Neither see I any reason, why he should strive
to make the world believe that S. Augustine does Page 172.
conuel the use of prayer" for the dead, as if our faith were to be" pinned
upon S. Augustines sleeue.

And yet let me tell you this, for ought that ever I could read, there is no
such great difference, between our practice, and S. Augustines custom, as you
surmise. For besides the pious custom of our Colleges, which celebrate the
memory of the dead, with commemoration of their liberality, besides their
Christian burial, and the dole bestowed upon the poor, (which are rather
solatia Viuorum quam subsidia mortuor.) we pray even in our Churches, for the
faithful departed, that God would hasten their joyful (...). Apocal. 23.20.
resurrection, and the full accomplishment of their happiness, both for the
body and the soul, by which they are not a little relieved. This is as much
as the Scripture will warrant: and further, bare custom backed only with that
place of the Machabees must not lead us.

This is that which D. Humfrey without any delusion professes, when he says,
Cont. Camp. pars 2. p. 262.
Quae haec stupida impietas, vt homines defuncti a viuentium meritis, a
monachorum cucullis and ocreis, a sacerdotum missis and precibus, ab amicorum
teiunijs alijsque operibus dependeant? What blockish impiety is it, that men
departed should depend upon the merits of those that are alive, upon the cowles
and buskins of Monks, upon the Masses and prayers of the Priests, upon the
fasts, Dirges, and such like works of their friends? What Delusion can there
be in so plain words? Augustine (says he) pleades custom, but he implies
that there is no Scripture to maintain this oblation. So that, that which he
looked for from his adversaries was this, not that they should Page 38.
propound the difference between our commendation and theirs, but that they
should produce Scripture, to justify their Altar, their holy Sacrifice, their
superstitious intention, wherein they dissent from us: and wherein S. Augustine
bids them trust to their own proof, as having no other shelter, but Custom
for them at all.

How can you recompense this worthy Saint, for those many cauils, wherewith
you have sought to blast his reputation, blazing indeed your own shame? I hope
you will now give him leave to borrow the saying of S. Paul, Galath. 6.17.
De caetero nemo sit mihi molestus: he now rests in peace, having left behind
him, not only the happy memory of a blessed life, but also so many obliged
friends, who will never suffer any of his elaborate lines to be blurred with
wrongful disgrace, especially by those, who with a Catalogue of great names,
with Ponderations, and Considerations think to beard the truth. 1. Esd. 4.41.
Magna est veritas and praeualet. It is not one strained Scripture that can
support the declining weight of decayed Purgatory; it will ask more
reparations, then the book of God will willingly bestow upon it. Purgatory,
you say, is the issue unto which your thoughts do finally incline, and
therefore having already laid flat your weaker defenses, I will plant my
battery to your strongest Bulwark.

. 5.
ANd for as much as M. Caluins censure of Purgatory, is held by you as Page 53.
a specious venditation, though I will give you leave to make your best of his
Eldership, which whilome was your adored Saint, yet will I (maugre your
colorable meditations) make good the truth of this his assertion. That
Purgatory is a pernicious fiction of Satan: disgraceful unto the great mercy
of God: euacuating the cross of Christ: dissipating and perverting our faith.
You think to blow him up with a Page 131.
Syllogism: Now then have at your Page 154.
Point-deuice. Purgatory is a Satanical figment: I prove it thus: 1 That place
which neither God made; 2 nor Christ mentioned; 3 nor the Apostles believed; 4
nor the Primitive Church embraced; 5 nor the first four general Councels
confirmed; is a mere figment of Satan: But such a place is purgatory: Ergo, A
mere figment of Satan. For the first, God made nothing in vain nor
superfluous: But Purgatory is vain and superfluous: Ergo. My Minor is proved
thus: Whatsoever is in the Lords field, is either Matthew. 13.8. and 25.
Corn or Tares; But Purgatory serves for neither of these: (there being a
Barn provided for the one, and an unquenchable fire for the other) Ergo, Mayor
vis in negatione, qua^ in affirmatione.
There being no third sort of Persons, this third imaginary place is
superfluous.

For the second, Had Christ delivered a Doctrine so material, it would have
been expressly Accepi a D^mino. 1. Cor. 11.23.
recorded: But there is no such record, either registered by the Evangelists, or
alleged by your selves. Ergo, never mentioned.

For the third: Had the Apostles believed it, they had been injurious to the
distressed souls, to have continued their pains by their uncharitable
Concealment, especially giving written instructions of Praeceptum domini non
habeo, consilium autem do. 1. Cor. 7.25.
less moment: But in all their aduertisements, touching those that sleep, it
is suppressed: Ergo, not believed.

For the fourth: Jf Purgatory were embraced by the Primitive Church, then was
it, as an Apostolical Tradition: (there being no express Scripture to ratify
it,) But not as an Apostolical tradition: Ergo, Not at all embraced. That it
was not held by them as an Apostolical Tradition, I prove thus: As it was held
by the Primitive Church, so was it derived to posterity: But it was not
derived to posterity, as an Apostolical tradition: Ergo, not so embraced by
the Primitive Church. The Minor I prove thus: Every Apostolical tradition is
known by these two Aug. cont. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 24.
marks; First it must be held ab vniuersa Ecclesia, there is the Generality;
Secondly, Semper, there is the Perpetuity: But neither had Purgatory general
approbation, nor perpetual succession: Ergo, no Apostolical tradition. The
Minor is confirmed by the testimony of Polydore, De invent. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Aliquandiu incognitum fuit, and sero cognitum vniuersae ecclesiae. It was a
great while before Purgatory was heard of, and but of late known to the
universal Church. Sero cutteth off the Perpetuity, and the emphasis of
Vniuersae, intimates no Generality.

If successively it was derived from the Primitive Church, then undoubtedly it
could be no stranger to the Greek Church: But, to put you out of all hope of
this, your Articulo 18. cont. Luth.
Roffensis is content to bring you this heavy news: Vsque ad hunc diem
Graecis non est cognitum Purgatorium: The Greeks know not Purgatory unto this
day Nay he further explaineth himself, propounding this challenge, Legate qui
velit Grecorum veterum co^mentarios, and nullum, quantum opinor, aut quam
rarissimum de Purgatorio sermonem inueniet: Read he that list the ancient
Greek Commentaries, and he shall find either little, or no mention at all of
Purgatory. Where is now your continued Perpetuity? He serves your
Generality with the same sauce: Sed neque Latini simul omnes, at sensim huius
rei veritatem conceperunt: Neither did all of the Latin Church receive it at
once, (there was some struggling in Rebeccaes womb) and by degrees they
received this truth. So that it was long before they received it, Ergo, no
Perpetuity: they received it not all at once; (there was belike some
opposition) Ergo no Generality: and then the latter must yield unto the
former, by your own Page 3.
rule.

Now for the fifth and last member of my proposition, If it were confirmed by
the first four general Councels, or any of them, then it will appear by
their Canons: But Jnsta.
no one Canon can be thence produced: Ergo not all confirmed. And so
consequently a mere Satanicall figment. Thus does your Page 39.
Dagon fall down before the Arc. Had it not been for your grand Patriarchs, S.
Homer, S. Plato, and S. Virgil, you would never have known how to have set
your compass, for the discovery of this new found world. And yet, if a man
should ask the best nauigator of you all, in what degree, and how many leagues
Purgatory is from the Jnfernall Cape, I think he would be put to his trumpes.
Only Beda his ghost comes somewhat near the mark in his Card (which
places Purgatory under the earth in the suburbs of Hell) by which whosoever
is led, may happily make but a sorry voyage. Neither see I any reason, why you
should not as well believe Alcuinus, who peremtorilie maintains, that it is
situate in the Somnium Scipioner.
air. But if one be sent unto you from the As true as S. Bernards miracle.
page 71.
dead, (wherein you are more happy then Dives his brethren,) I cannot much
blame you, if you hear him. Well, Quod vbique est, nullibi est, it is in so
many places, that indeed it is in no place. But it proceeds from a just
judgment of God, that such Genesis 11.9.
Babylonians should have their language divided: the world is now grown weary
of such Alcumists, who have exhausted our treasures with long expectation of
this Philosophers stone, which yet could never be found.

The next point, wherein I am to insist, is, that it disgraceth the mercy of
God, euacuateth the cross of Christ, and (consequently) peruerteth our faith.
The truth whereof is so evidently apparent, that I shall not make any long
demonstration. S. Augustine gives us an infallible rule, how to order our
opinions in this case; Cont. Crescon. lib. 20. ca. 31.
Secundum libros certos prophetarum and Apostolorum, de caeteris libris, vel
fidelium, vel infidelium libere iudicemus: we may freely judge of all other
writings, and consequently of al traditions, according to their agreements, or
disagreements, with the certain Prophetical and Apostolical writ. So that if
I can now prove that Purgatory in the forenamed respects, is repugnant to the
written word, I shall also with one and the same labor, prove it no
Apostolical tradition, upon which you wholly Page 11.
rely. There is no one point, which the Scripture more urges, then that the
Lord will have no partner to rob him of his glory; Apoc. 4.11. 5.12.
Tibi honor and gloria, say the elders. This glory, as it did shine in the
creation of man, so is the luster thereof as bright in his redemption. As we
lay no claim to have been any helper in the creation, so can we not part
stakes in our redemption. 1. John 1.7.
The blood of Christ purges us from all sins: if sins be purged, then the
punishment is remitted: the cause being taken away, the effect cease: if from
all sins, then as well mortal, as venial, as you term them. Neither does
the Lord say, He that is so many years in Purgatory, but Romans 10.9.
he that believes shall be saved. My argument the^ stands thus: The souls
in Purgatory, are either punished for those sins, which Christ's blood has
wholly purged; or for those which he has not wholly purged: if for those
which Christ has wholly purged, then must there needs be injustice in God to
imprison them whose debts are fully discharged: if for sins that he has not
wholly purged, then it follows, either that he is not John 1.29.
the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, leaving some part
behind, or that the works of God, nay his mercy, Psalm. 144.9.
which passes al his works, is imperfect: or that man's satisfaction must go
hand in hand with Christ's merit, by making that good which wants in his
passion; with which surmise the Lord will not suffer his glory to be ecclipsed.

And surely if Apelles leave his picture imperfect, it is in vain for any
other of his craft to take it in hand; Neither can I understand, why the blood
of Christ, apprehended by faith in this life, should be of less force, then
when it is applied by Baals priest, when we are dead, to free us from that
doom. Your own writers are not ashamed to say, that a Reuelat. Brigittae.
lib. 4. cap. 13.
Bishop of Rome his prayers did deliver Traian a Heathen Emperor from hell,
who had been dead many hundred of years before: and yet you think much, nay
you say that we insist in the steps of the Page 53.
Nouatians, Nestorians, and the like, when we profess that the Col. 2.14.
handwriting, which was against us, being fastened to the cross of Christ, and
the bond being cancelled, we are no longer liable to the penalty thereof;
albeit the Scripture says, that Heb. 9.26.
he appeared once to put away sin: how? by meriting, that the penal
satisfaction of Purgatory might make us clean? No such matter, but by the
sacrifice of himself.

And again, Heb. 1.3.
Christ has purged our sins, not by us, as making us our own Sauiors, but
by himself. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. If the
Leprosy of 4. King. 5.12.
Naaman be cleansed by the water of Jordan, what stands he in need of Abanah,
or Pharphar? Christ was offered for the sins of many, and yet, as if he had
but taken a longer day of payment, the unbloody sacrifice must be daily
renewed; as if the sheading of his precious blood upon the cross, were less
effectual then your breaden idol in a shauelings hand, whom blind
superstition holds to be able to rid them from that doleful place; wherein,
notwithstanding that one Heb. 7.27.
oblation of himself once offered, they are for further purgation to be
enthralled. If the Lord has assigned them that place, how can your Romish
indulgences set them at liberty? where is your commission? if you will loose
the^ at all, it must be while they are on the earth: it is appointed to all
men, Heb. 9.27.
That they must die, and after death comes judgment: Eccles. 9.5.
Mortui nihil nouerunt amplius, nec habent vltra mercedem: The dead know
nothing at all: As the Jbid. cap. 11.3.
Tree falls, so must it lie: Cyprian. de mortal.
Qualem te inuenit Deus cum de hoc mundo euocat, talem te iudicat: As God
finds thee at thy death, so will he judge thee. If the Lord have assigned no
such place to them, as is plain by the premises, then are you cruel
comforters, who for your own gain do terrify the departing soul of him,
whom Christ has dearly bought, with such spectricall delusions, and induce
those that are carnally minded, to trust to that after-reliefe, which they
shall never find. If this be not, I cannot conceive what is, a Doctrine of
devils.

Saint Paul describes faith to be Hebr. 11.1.
Rerum sperandarum (...), the ground of things that are to be hoped for from
Christ: but you will have it thus, Fides est rerum ferendarum (...), making it
the ground of those things that are to be suffered by our selves. For without
your Purgatory pains, you take little hold of any hope of future joy. No men
talk more of the Cross of Christ then you, none derogate from it so much as
you, by joining your own pains as a suppleme^t to his sufferings. S. Paul
thought it enough to 1. Cor. 2.2.
know Christ, and him crucified: but he is a dullard in your school, that
knows not Purgatory, and how he must be there purged. Is this any better
then to lessen the measurelesse mercy of God, to pare the cross of Christ,
and alter the nature of faith? As if the Lords sommer-liuerie of everlasting
life were given us only in the broad-cloth, in the general merit of Christ,
with this prouiso, that unless we play the Tailors our selves, and make it up
by our own purgations, it must never come on our backs. Whereas he gives it
unto us, ready made with his own hands: for as the Apostle says, Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is eternal life. How do you then say, that we must be first
infernallie purged? What, Matthew. 16.18.
shall not the gates of Hell prevail against us, and shall the muddie wall of
Purgatory hedge us in? Has his Ephesians. 4.9.
soul gone down to the nethermost hell, and yet made no passage through the
suburbs of hell? Has he bound the Matt. 12.29
strong man, that he should not harm us, and will he now torment us himself,
or set we know not whom to do it?

Let us argue the case a little more seriously. You all grant with one
consent, that the souls of those, that are in Purgatory, are such as have
died in the faith, howsoever otherwise tainted with sin: Now they that died
in the faith, died in the Lord: They that died in the Lord, rest from their
Apoc. 14.13.
Labors: They that rest from their labors, are so far from being worse, that
they are in much better plight then they were. Ioh. 6.47.
He that believes in him that sent me, (says our Savior) does pass from
death, (not to Purgatory, but) to life. Again, they that die in the faith,
have Romans 5.1.
peace toward God; They that have peace toward God, are justified by Christ;
They that are justified by Christ are free from the Law, and being free from
the Law, Romans 8.33.
Quis accusabit? Who shall lay any thing to their charge? Yea but they have
some dross to be purged. Indeed S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.11.
Haec fuistis: but he adds, sed abluti estis, etc. But you are washed, but
you are sanctified, but you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. And being so, the Wise man's sentence must be applied,
Wisd. 3.1.
Iustorum animae in manu Dei sunt: The souls of the righteous are in the hand
of God. What torment can then touch them?

Has not the Lord here the fire of afflictions, to melt our hearts, and cast
them into a new mould? Has he not here the fire of his Spirit, to purge our
consciences from dead works? If these will do no good, what purification can
we expect from your temporal fire of Purgatory? Without doubt, said Jn Leuit.
lib. 9. apud Cyril.
Origin, we shall feel the unquenchable fire, unless we now entreat the Lord
to send down from heaven a Purgatory fire, whereby worldly desires may be
utterly consumed in our minds. They which are dead (says Lib. 3. in Es.
Cyril) can add nothing to the things which they have done, but shall remain
as they were left, and wait for the time of the last judgment. The reason is
assigned by the Spirit, Apoc. 14.13.
Opera eorum sequuntur eos: Their works follow them, even at the heels. Why
would you then have us now live in greater darkness, then they which lived under
the Leuiticall law? Who, albeit they offered sundry sacrifices, for sundry
sorts of persons, and different sins, yet read we not, that ever they offered
any for the dead. So that this doctrine of Purgatory cannot more truly be
fathered upon any, then such Pagans, who being converted to the faith, were of
opinion, Can. pars 3. fol. 103. a.
that Christian religion should not derogate any thing from their wonted
kindness to their deceased friends.

But alas what boon can we expect from such sacrifices? Chrysostom. de Lazaro.
Qui in praesenti vita peccata non abluit, postea nullam consolationem
inueniet. Our sins must be here purged, else shall not our souls be
hereafter comforted. Cyprian. cont. Demet.
Quando istinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam poenitentiae locus, nullus
satisfactionis effectus; hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur. When we are once
hence departed, there is no place left for repentance, no room for
satisfaction; salvation is won or lost while we are here. Were there any one
precept, practice or promise in the Scripture (which Petrus a Soto utterly
denies) to give but some shadow of allowa^ce to such Paganism, your defense
were far more colorable. Besides, if I be not deceived, it were worth the
while to debate, what shall be done with those of the middle rank of
offenders, who shall survive at the coming of Christ; when Purgatory shall be
clean extinct. If you say, they shall be saved without further purgation,
then either there must be partiality in the Judge, to afford them more
favor, then those who daily depart this life; or else you must grant, that
there is no such necessity of Purgatory, as you pretend: if you say they
shall be damned, then do you tax the Lord of injustice, in denying that
means of Purgation to them, which he has always afforded to those that were
of their rank. Thus does one absurdity draw on another.

I have been somewhat the more copious in this point of Purgatory, for as much
as I well perceive, it is the groundworke of most of your Schismatical Lema
malorum.

All these I am prepared to prove used, practiced and justified by the
Antichristian Bishops of Rome.


positions, 1 your merits, 2 satisfactions, 3 perfections, 4 supererogations, 5
Masses, 6 Vigils, 7 superaltaries, 8 noonday lamps, 9 Dirges, 10 Christning
and burial tapers, 11 oblations, 12 Roods, 13 Jmages, 14 croscreepings, 15
Beads, 16 Crucifixes, 17 pictures, 18 grains, 19 Jncense, 20 hallowed
Cemeteries, 21 Holy water, 22 oil, 23 salt, 24 spittle, 25 Couents, 26
Processions, 27 Pilgrimages, 28 Relics, 29 Stewish Pardons, 30 Jndulgences,
and such rifraffe, iugling trash, and Babies sports, have not only mutual
reference, but fundamental dependence upon this. Which being thus shaken, will,
I hope, no longer Si caecus caecum ducat, ambo in foueam. Luke 6.39.
support and patronage the rest. But why should I hope to satisfy you in this?
as if I could urge that, which has not been long since propounded to this
purpose. What is it that can gain assent in those, who are wilfully perverse?

To give you one instance for all, how often has it been demonstratiuely
proved, that setting some frivolous Ceremonies aside, our Country of Britanie
was no whit beholding to proud and insolent Beda. Ec. hist. lib. 2. ca. 2.
Augustine, your great Gregory's delegat, for any matter of faith? Anno 580.
Polyd. praefat. ad Ton stal. praefixa Gildae. Aug. came in Anno 597.
Gildas his testimony has been urged, (who lived before Augustines coming)
that the Britons received the Christian faith from the beginning: An 58. n 51.
Baronius has told you, that S. Peter was here: De curand. Graec. affect. l. 9.
Theodoret, that S. Paul: L. 2. c. 40.
Nicephorus, that Simon Zelotes: and some, Baron. an. 39. n. 5.
that Joseph de Arimathea did plant the faith amongst us. Many forceable
inducements have been produced, that even in the Primitive Church,
Christianity harbored in this Isle. These instances, and many more, have been
again and again renewed, without any verified contradiction: and yet, as if
it had been a matter which you never heard of before, you would (as in all your
other points,) make us in this follow you up and down, wearying the world with
a circular discuss, bobbing your credulous Ladies with these Syrenicall
insinuations. As long as you are thus partially minded, arguments will be no
inducements: the world will be sooner ended then this matter decided: your
Romish practice being nothing else, but to guild old weather-beaten objections
with new glistering words. Let us bring never so many writs of error, you
will still reduce your self to your old plaint. From a new Convert, I expected
new proofs.

. 6.
THat you may know from what affection these my former lines have issued, I
have reserved yet one corner of my letter for a more friendly conference,
whereby you shall perceive, that as you are Romish, I have bent those forces
that were next at hand to supplant your error: as you are my Countriman, in
whom I resolve there is some hope, my best means shall not be wanting for
your behoof. Let me then say to M. Theophilus Hyggons, as he that sat in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, said unto the Angel of Ephesus, Apoc.
2.5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works.
The country wherein you were borne, is not unnaturally to be despised: the
friends, by whom you were bred, are not unkindly to be contemned: neither is
the faith, whereinto you were baptized, if you rightly judge, so
inconsideratelie to be forsaken. Psalm. 44.14.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within; howsoever the Babylonian harlot may
be more gaudie without. Why should you think our written word of less value,
then your headge-creeping traditions? why should Christ's merits be lessened by
your own satisfactions? why should the debt be again exacted, which Christ's
blood has once for all fully paid? Had we 1 an idolatrous, heathenish, or
superstitious religion; were we 2 worshippers of images; 3 impugners of holy
marriage; 4 rebelliouslie affected to the higher powers; 5 concealers of the
word, imprisoning it in an unknown tongue; 6 maintainers of stews; 7 did we
keep back the cup from the Laity, which the Lord has allotted them; 8 did
we hearten men in their sins, by granting future indulgences; or 9 by
putting them in hope, to have that done for them by others after they are dead,
which they have not done for themselves whilst they were alive; if we sought
to seduce poor souls by lying 10 Legends, and deceiueble 11 wonders: then
might you mistrust that we belong to the kingdom of Antichrist, and so leave
us, having an Apoc. 18.4.
Exite under the Lords seal. But if we preach Christ Jesus, and him
crucified, if our faith be wholly directed to his merits, our hope to his
mercies, our charity to his deputies, the Saints upon earth, if we maintain
that word, and retain only those Sacraments, which Christ's holy institution
has warranted, then, Quis vos fascinauit? O ye bransicke and foolish
fugitives, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? Are you
so foolish, that after you have begun in the spirit, you will now end in the
flesh?

What has withdrawn you? is it our novelty that disliketh you? Can you
desire any greater Antiquity, then a just conformity of all our Principles
with the first original? Would you have any better president, then the pattern
of Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Church? What if our sun were for a
while eclipsed by the interposition of Antichristian policy? was it therefore
no sun? What if the good seed were ouertopped with tares, that it could
hardly be discerned, as in the days of Elias and our Savior Christ? (the
greater number discountena^cing the better part) yet can you not hence infer,
that there was no corn. It is a mere sophistical Paralogisme, to argue a non
videri, ad non esse: as thus; Eucleo has no gold, because no man does see his
gold. Man often takes his mark amiss; it is God that knows who are his. He
that has the fan in his hand, has now in the fullness of time purged his
floor, blown away the chafe of idolatrous superstition, and laid the
wholesome grain of his truth on heaps, in the garner of his Church.

But such has been his providence, in all times, that no age has been
destitute of some faithful witness of this faith which we now profess, as
does appear by those many answers of our learned Protestants, to your false
and frivolous calumniations. I call them false, as being contradicted, even by
the testimony of the Ecclesiastical historians: I term them also frivolous;
for what consequence is it; their names are not registered, therefore there were
none until Luthers time thus affected? Surely most absurd; as if their being
did depend upon other men's writing. Multi Papae inuenti sunt apostatae. Nico.
Lyra in 16. cap. Mat.
Had not Syluester been a Necromanticke; Honorius an heretical Monothelite;
and Marcellinus, an open Idolater; albeit they had escaped the records, and been
let slip, without the brand of any man's pen? had they not been thus detected to
posterity, would you therefore say, they were not all infected with these or
those crimes? That which is written may (according to the credit of the author)
be supposed to be done, but there are many things done, which (through the
injury and partiality of times) are not written at al, which yet a man
cannot, without presumptuous folly, peremtorilie deny. I shall not need to
harp any longer upon this string, there are so many instances to be alleged,
as some affirm, for Vide, The way to the true Church. digr 48. page 336. yet
unanswered.
800. years after Christ, which may put those that are indifferent, clean out
of doubt, even of the visible succession of our Church; which, were it less
apparent, were yet no such advantage to your cause as you suppose.

Yea but we come short of you in your Miracles. Herein alone we yield you the
bucklers: our whole Church is not able to compare (not with When he made his
oration to the Earl of Lecester.
Leydens, but) with Louans Lipsius his little Virgo Hal. Antuerp. 1604. excus.
pa^phlet. He lays on such load of our Lady of Hal, who has done so many
miracles (if her cha^pion may be credited) that she has left none in store for
them that come after Cap. 8. p. 25.
O quam vary, and quam multis in animo, in corpore, in periculis, in
calamitatibus, in languoribus, in ipsa morte? O how many ways (says he) and
to how many persons has our Lady of Hal stood close at a pinch? Once upon a
time Cap. 8. p. 25.
a Noblemans falknor had either by chance or negligence let go his Lords
falcon, which for her extraordinary high pitch, was a Jewel of high esteem.
No sooner was she missed, but the poor falkenor is charged to have made money
of her: with which suspicion his Lord was so enraged, that he swore by no
beggars, unless she were found by such a day, he would make him look through
a halter. Well, the day came; he could hear no tidings of his hawke: and
therefore he hears (that which his masters intemperate choler gave him cause
to fear) even his own doom. As he was going to his gear, the executioner
being advanced, his eyes muffled, and now ready to be turned off the ladder,
he remembers what a kind wench our feined Lady of Hal was, how good she had
ever been at a dead lift; and therefore with hearty sighs implores her help.
No sooner did he think of this blessed Lady, but (mark you me now) the
noise of a hawks bells began to gingle in the air; a sweet melody, you must
think, to a drooping heart: he is an earnest suitor to have his face
uncovered, that he might yet once, in his last oraisons, lift up his eyes to
heaven: this being accordingly granted, he doubleth his prayers to the same
Ladies shrine, and behold that which is most strange, notwithstanding the
multitude of the standers by, the falcon came sowsing out of the air, and
without any lure, did in the sight of them al, light upon his shoulder, who for
her escape was now tied to a new perch.

Here is a miracle of the maker. Do you stand amazed? tush, this is nothing to
what that Lady has done: she has Cap. 11. p. 29.
driven out evil spirits; Cap. 13. p. 31.
assuaged terrible tempests; Cap. 10. p. 28.
fetched a child, that was found stark dead, with his heels upwards in a
muddie ditch: Cap. 16. p. 33.
another that was drowned: Cap. 17. p. 34.
another that was strangled: Cap. 19. p. 37.
nay a stil-borne child, three days buried, to life again. I cannot stand to
tell you how she made Cap. 7. p. 23.
John Swickius lose the best nose in his face: nor how Cap. 30. p. 60.
Philip Cluuius filed his chains asunder with an oxe-bone. I cannot recite the
particular miracles, wherewith Lipsius has canonised this saint; he would be
angry if you should say, he deserves the whetstone: yet ca^ you not deny, but
that he is summus simula^di Artifex. Now if every one of your Saints had a
Lipsius, the world would not contain the numberless miracles, that should be
then written. But the truth is, we have too many of these already, unless
they were better; and yet I will not say, but that Lipsius is worth the reading
by the fireside, when men roste crabs, to drive a man out of a melancholy
fit. For I think sobriety it self could not choose but change countenance to
hear him tell these ridiculous jests so seriously, as if he did verily
believe them to be true. For our parts, we are not ashamed to confess, that
we have no other miracles, then those which were wrought by Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles: of these we say, as the Apostle speaks in another
sense, Omnia nostra sunt: they are all ours, being eiusdem fidei signacula,
seals of the very same faith which we hold. Let those, who have no other
warrant for their doctrines, seek to countenance themselves by imposition of
miracles; it can be no disparagement to our religion, that we come behind you
in these, wherein we would think it our greatest shame to come near you.

We will willingly give you leave to brag of your specious and speculatiue
wonders; it is enough for us to wonder, that so many of our late books are yet
unanswered. I do not mean the royal writings of Monarchs, too transce^dent
for any traitorous fugitives, or malapert Chaplanes to snarle at. I find there
are very many other, which either your pride scorneth, or your partiality
spares, or your policy fears to encounter: albeit the Bishop of Romes
slipper has been lately so rent, as it has no sound sole, whereon his triple
crowned supremacy may tread. This your delay is not without just cause: for
besides the distrust you have in your selves, grounded upon an impossibility of
long withstanding the truth, it does more nearly concern you to bestow some
time in ending your Watsons Quodlibets.
Domestique differences, and reconciling your Bellum Jesuiticum.
objected contradictions, then to betake your selves unto foreign controversies.
As for our Formalists, and Presbyterians, (as you term them) howsoever they be
somewhat different in habit, yet are they united in heart, ready at all times
to join in battle against any uncircumcised Philistine, that dares contest
against the Uniformity of their faith. And yet little should they need to set
their pens about this task, so palpable is the grosenesse of your Theatricall
religion, that, had the eyes of all my countrie-men been partakers of my little
experience, the very sight of your absurd mummeries would, without any learned
man's confutation, breed a perpetual and loathing detestation in their minds. It
is an old saying, Malum non vitatur, nisi cognitum.

Had I not been an eie-witnes of your idolatrous trumperies, I should not so
co^passionatelie bewail the estate whereunto you are now fallen. I was, I well
remember, in my younger years a near servant unto a mighty Francis only
brother to Henry 3. of France.

Records of the Parl. of Paris, about Salcedo, etc.


Prince, (of worthy memory) whose Diadem (had not the Leaguers practices
immaturely prevented our hope) would have been inferior to none. During which
my attendance, I was often, upon 4. King. 5.19
necessary duties, both in field and in Court, a present spectator of those
Romish Rites, to which he was then formerly addicted. Yet, whether it were my
parents education, or the government of our State, or the wandering humor of
youth, I cannot well tell, but well I wot, my considerations did more
superficially slide over those toies, then of late years they have done. When
as being commanded by the King my Master, to wait upon a most Noble Edward
Earl of Hertford. 1605.
Personage, (whose religious, worthy, and bountiful carriage has enriched our
country with his eternal fame) in his embassy, to a most puissant, prudent,
and pious Arch D.D.
Princess, (Cuius idaea Valesia mihi semper sacra) I was careful to make that
journey as beneficial to my experience, as the time would permit. Amongst many
other occurrences, as the view of the bleeding VVafer-cake, etc. I did not omit
to inform my judgment with sight of many your Masses, both private and
public, wherein my eyes discovered more anticke and iugling tricks, then my
ears had ever heard, or my heart could otherwise have believed. In so much
that (as two of my selected Antony Bright, Edmond Lanksion.
people, still present can yet witness) my ears glowed. Such hallowed
perfumes, as if the Priest or his idol had been scarce sweet, such Leave your
ducks and your tuckes, and your apish to^es, and serve God in spirit and truth.
facings, such knockings, such adorings, yea and such eleuating, as never was,
nor yet is in the Greek mother Church, until this day.

I am bold to make my own experience an inducement to bring you (unfortunate
Countriman) to the consideration of that, which otherwise, by reason of your
corrupted affection, you would happily not so carefully observe. I will yet
go one step further, that you may the better perceive what comfort you are
like to find, at your last gasp, by that religion. That dear Prince my first
Master, (of whom I am glad to make so worthy mention) having been trained from
his infancy in the tract of his forefathers, though in some For, Viue la Mess.
temerarie enterprises in his young years (that never told thirty) by trust of
his enough aged, but humorous, counselors, seduced, did yet, through the
whole course of his life, find such weakness in those grounds, which you now
hold, that at his death at Chaterthyerrie, when there was no longer dallying,
he would admit neither Priest, nor Confessor into his presence, making public
profession before those that were then present, that he had sufficiently
confessed to God, and that he had placed the whole hope of his salvation upon
Jesus Christ the Redeemer and Savior of the world. The like did that
thrice-excellent and renowned Princess, (now in glory) Marie Queen of
Scotland, and Dowager of France, make at her last end, that She hoped to be
saved by the merits of Christ alone. And if present Agents of Princes may be
credited, it was even so with that ouer-blindly devout Hen. 3. whom your
diabolical Friar, for the poor Kings love to Friars, massacred, I will not
say, martyrized. This was also the acknowledgement of Stephen Gardener (a man
of Nephew to a Queen of England, and Cousin German to a King a latre.
higher descent, then commonly reputed) when a reverend Bishop told him that
he must look to be saved by Christ alone: Yea my Lord, quoth he, it is so
indeed; but if you open that gap to the people, it will go wrong with the
Church. Long were the three forenamed Worthies grounded in the Romish school,
and of as deep judgment, as most of their Ancestors; and yet you see when
they had cast up all their accounts, there was neither Purgatory, nor works of
supererogation would do any good; the summa totalis in their books was Christ
Jesus. As for all other your superstitious trash, it will be as the morning
deaw, in the heat of that last conflict; all your other helps and hopes will
be blown away like a spiders web.

Now, were it not an indecorum to descend from a consideration of so great
moment; which (if your heart be not sealed, I should say, seared, with a hot
iron, out of Satan's forge) cannot but be very forceable in your relenting
thoughts? I would also willingly acquaint you, what small encourageme^ts are
like to attend your temporal life. And the rather, because it was this ignis
fatuus, which led you into those bogs, wherein you are now bemired. What your
entertainment has hitherto been, I find Page 96.
you have no great cause to make any great boast. What it will be in these
days of peace, your grand Superintendents wanting work for themselves, you
may easily judge. Policy will teach the^, not to repose too much trust in
him, who Proditionem, non Proditore^.
has defiled his own nest: Common sense will inform them, that he, whom
misery has drawn to them, will serve them the like slipperie trick, and by
equivalent discontents be soon driven from them: Reason likewise may tell you,
they will never hold him a fit Churchman, whom they know to be a Vir vxorius.
woman's man. Were there no other rub but this, yet me thinks your marriage
should lay an impossibility to the charge of your groundless hopes. Did I say
your marriage? nay your experience, which can inform you of few or none of
your Apostaticall forerunners, whose age did reap the harvest, which their
youthful years had sown. After they had once served Spem pretio non emas.
Antichrists turn, to stop their mouths, from any cofer-demaunds, they were
set in the forefront of the battle, as mercenarie soldiers, and kept at such
a bay, as that Tyrants vassals, who, at every beck, tumbled themselves down
from the top of a tower, to show their obedience. You must have more skill then
your predecessors, if you will fetch sweet water out of so salt a sea, or
grapes from thorns, or figs from such thistles. You may flatter your self
as you please, but Res tibi ad Restim redibit planissime: In stead of a Prelate
of their Church, they will make you a martyr in their red Non equidem inuideo.
Calendar. Thus shall you be feign to close up a miserable life, with a
despicable and dismal end.

My earnest and hearty desire of your recovery, from this your Lethargy, has
made me somewhat more prolixe, then the bounds of a letter will well endure The
short is, I have cast my pen as Protogenes did his pencell: If it has fallen
right, it is well; howsoever, I am Inuitum qui seruat, idem facit occidenti
resolute. My scope has been to put you in remembrance, from 1 whence, 2
whither, and 3 how you are fallen: so that you may repent, and do the first
works. Your error in time reclaimed will be venial: your obstinacy will not
only be dangerous, but damnable, if Errare humanum, perseuerare diabolicum.
perpetual. That you have fallen, the truth attributes it to your outward
grieuances: That you return, it will be acknowledged to come from your inward,
and more deliberate judgment. Neither will we doubt, but that the broken bone
being well set, will be much stronger then before. It is now in your own
choice, whether you will be Si quis curet opem far, and dimittere fuuem, non
vis seruari?
healed or no. Now is the time either to raise, or ruinate not only your
fortunes, but even the final estate, both of body and soul. The benefit you
may (perhaps) bring to your Country, by the discovery of that which your
travel has made known unto you, may make some satisfaction for your former
revolt: upon your true and loyal submission, I am in good hope his Majesty
will reach out the scepter of his mercy, unto which his royal nature is so
inclinable, that his Court of Parliament has (in my own knowledge) bin
sundry times an humble and earnest Petitioner, to his Highness, for the
actual execution of those necessary laws, which were enacted long before he
was invested in this imperial Crown, against malefactors of this nature.

You think, I am sure, your pen was very prodigal, in wishing him the
happiness of Page 51.
Constantine: but let me speak it without flattery, (from which I was ever
known to be naturally estranged) whether you respect the gifts of nature or
grace; the quicknes of apprehension; the deepenesse of judgment; the
moderation of affections; the weight of well seasoned speech, in common
discourse, and scholasticall dispute; the government of State; or the fatherly
care in promoting the good of the Church; he is, if not many degrees before,
yet not one jot behind that worthy Constantine: whose either politic neglect,
or fatal misfortune was such, that he was not i^itiated in that Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. lib. 4. ca. 62. Theodor. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. ca. 32.
holy Sacrament of Baptism, until a very little before his death. And I am
verily persuaded, that in the matter of faith, wherein you desire a parallel
imitation, he is so far from learning of Constantine, that he is able in
single conference to gravel his best B B. were they now alive to be his
opposites; and therefore not to take president of any of the weaker sex, with
whom you covertly vpbraide him. It is not my meaning to enlarge the lists of
this comparison any further: that which I would have you know is this, that as
he is the vicegerent of the great King, so is his throne supported as well by
the pillar of Dolet, quoties cogitur esse serox.
Mercy, as of Justice. I speak not this to hire your return, (God be
thanked) our land having great plenty of more skillful warriers, who daily
fight the Lords battle; nor that we fear the venom of your poisonous pen,
which will be soon beaten back into your own bowels; but that your soul
may not perish in the day of the Lord: when (if you thus persist) the
inexpiable crimes of blaspheming the true faith, and drawing others into the
same snare of death, will be more heavy, then millions of milstones about your
neck. Which fearful judgment, that by timely reconciliation you may escape,
these hasty lines shall be seconded with my hearty Prayers. From Queeneburrow
Castle, Festo S. Philip. and Jacobi. 1609.

Edward Hoby.

THE PRINTER TO the Reader.
AS J had near ended the Printing of the two former Letters, J received a
third from Sir Edward Hoby (the original now remaining with himself) directed
unto him from the father of the said T. H. which he is desirous to insert, for
the better satisfaction of any vnpreiudicate Reader.

Faults escaped.
Page 32. lin. 15. read, turned up. page 47. lin. 9. read, Forsan aut desunt,
etc. which is more aduantagious. page 70. lin. 21. read, as much as he. page
71. lin. vlt. read, mortuorum)

TO THE HON. SIR EDWARD HOBY Knight.
IT may please you to be advertised, that my unhappy son Theophilus Higgons
(within some four years, or thereabouts, after he was Master of Arts) would
needs forgo the University, to go with my Lord of London, that now is, being
then Elect Bishop of Gloucester. And in regard of his young years, I thought it
very unfit; persuaded him, and commanded him to stay in the house, till he
were better read in Divinity, and his judgment therein, and in other things,
better rectified, which I found to be very defective. My Lord, for his part,
very honorably told me, that he had persuaded him thereto, and would be as
careful to do him good, as if his time were spent in his house, and after some
two or three years would receive him. No perswasio^s might serve, but he
importuned my Lord; so as from Oxford he went: though I had told him before M.
Ireland Schoolmasters of Westminster, and M. Isles the Proctor, that (if he
would not be ruled by me, and stay at Oxford) my hope of his well doing was at
an end. When he had been less then two years with my Lord of London, (then
Bishop of Gloucester) he withdrew himself from his Lordship, and made suite
for the Lecture at S. Dunstons: which I hearing of, persuaded him from, by my
letters, in the best manner I could, for the reasons before mentioned, and the
rather, because I knew the Auditorie there to be very learned and judicious:
no persuasion might draw him back to his Lord and Master, though his Lordship
wrote diverse letters to him, to recall him to his place.

Afterward a friend of mine told me, that he thought he was in hand to marry:
whereupon I wrote unto him what I heard, and my counsel, advice, and charge
withal. His answer by Letter was, that he was abused by the reporter, and
protested that as he desired Gods blessing and mine, he never would marry with
any woman, before I had knowledge of his liking that way, and should give
approbation thereto: this was about Michaelmas, and he was married in a
clandestine manner before Christmas following, whereof I never knew till after
Midsommer term following: and he understanding that I had knowledge of it, and
much grieved thereat, eloyned himself from his wife, and kept in the
North-parts till near Hollontide. When he returned to London (but not to his
wife) there he published a small book in print, flatly against the absurdities
he now so strongly seems to maintain: and within twenty days after, at the
most, got him beyond the Seas, leaving his wife in great distress, sorrow and
grief. Before his going he borrowed diverse sums of money, with purpose (I am
persuaded) never to repay them: and amongst the rest, abused my self for ten
pound. In May last past, I traveled to Saint Omers, with a good friend of
mine, to seek him out: where finding him, I labored earnestly to bring him
back with me, assured him of safety, etc. He promised, swore and protested
his coming after me to my Lord of London, within three weeks after my coming
away; though I think he never meant it. Being in S. Omers, I willed and
charged him, not to reveal my being there; notwithstanding he made it known
the same night to a Popish Priest, as upon examination he confessed to me the
next morning: which made us presently to come away, fearing our lives to be in
danger amongst such a company of helhounds, as that town is stuffed withal.
Sir, I assure my self, and all men that well knew him may be persuaded, that
his Popery came from the coffeehouse, by his unhappy marriage, wherein he
dealt so perfidiously; and so it has pleased God to punish that sin with
many other sins. How carefully I brought him up, and what means I used for his
trayning up in the truth of religion, and in good institution of manners, God
knows, and the world can witness with me. If I had had ability to have
answered his leaud book, I would gladly and speedily have undertaken it; but I
am glad that one so Honorable, learned, worthy and wise, has vouchsafed it.
For my hope is, that the whole rabble of Papists shall understand so much, by
you, of the cause of his coming to their hotchpotch religion, that they will
be ashamed any longer to patronize him, if they be not past all shame.

So having troubled your Worship with a long, tedious relation, which comes
from a grieved heart (and the rather for that the unhappy young man's courses
have occasioned the death of his loving mother, my late dear wife) I crave
pardon, and leave the man and the matter to your wisdom, censure, and
pleasure, and will ever rest,

Your Worships to be commanded, ROBERT HIGGONS.
Chilton, 28. May. 1609.

