The assault of the sacrament of the Altar containyng as well six several
assaults made from time to time against the said blessed sacrament: as also
the names and opinions of all the heretical captains of the same assaults:
Written in the year of our Lord 1549. by Miles Huggarde, and dedicated to the
Queen's most excellent majesty, being then lady Marie: in which time
(heresy then reigning) it could take no place. Now newly imprynted this
present year. 1554.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the reader.
Seldom is seen matters of weight
Rudelye in ryme to be set out,
Yet make I not this thing so sleyght,
Although in ryme I go about,
To make this work, the which no doubt,
Much higher matter does contain,
Then ought in ryme to be made plain.
But Yet because saint Paul does say,
That God his gifts gives diversely,
The which each man ought here always,
After his gift him to apply,
Thereby other to edify,
For each man shall when it is spent,
Render account of his talent.
Which thing when I consider well,
Seeing of men many a score,
Which in Gods gifts do far excel
Many other which were before
Their days, and yet never the more
I se set forth, for the which I
Do my slacknes much less set by.
For none is there that aught can do,
That in such things can less then I.
Therefore my coumpte less shall come to,
Then those that has Gods gifts more hye,
But yet the least I fear truly,
Shall be more then they well may bear,
Which does make me my coumpte to feere.
The cause wherefore that I do make,
This treatise small, only is this,
Because men may example take,
Of those which did stray far amiss,
Assaulting faith, that most true is:
The chief of whom as they shall se,
Did not among them selves agree.
Of which my simple enterprise,
Pardon of all men I do crave,
For my rude style my wit here tryse,
Such wit such terms always will have,
Therefore if fautes, ye do persceiue,
Do them correct as ye cause see,
Just cause can no thing displease me.
Finis.
WHen Sagittary had dominion,
The nights the^ being very long and cold
I mused on the strange opinion,
the which diverse me^ did diversely hold
Against our saviors own words plainly told
Which troubled me so, that as it did chance,
With the same study, I fell in a trance,
Then with that I had a wonderful dream,
In the which me thought Morpheus drue near
And took me by the hand and with strength extreme
He drue me forth, and bade me nothing fear,
But go with him, and as we going were,
Let not my coming quod he the displease,
For thou shall find, it shall be for thine ease.
I know that thou do sore trouble thy mind
With the fondnes of men which thou do see,
Against Christ's words cauillation to find,
The which in the scripture so plain written be,
And how one with an other do not agree:
Is not this thy trouble, I pray the tell true,
It is truth quod I, even as thou do show,
Well quod he, I shall show the more anon,
Then came we in to an hall long and wide,
The like before I never looked upon,
Most gorgiously hounge it was on each side,
With noble stories which I will not hide,
Wrought in fine arrase, with pure silk and gold,
It rauishte my wit this hall to behold.
Then did I look upon the left hand,
^^od xxv and ^vii. (...) ix. ^^od. xvi.
There saw I the Ark of God purely wrought
Of fine gold as it orderly does stand
In the bible, which seeing I me be thought,
(...) of the (...).
Of the stories there, which to my mind brought,
What the Arc, and all the rest did signifye,
Which on the lift side of this hall did lie.
^ene ^liii. ^he second fi^^^e of Mel^^izedech.
First there I saw Melchizedech the King
Meting Abraham the great Patriarche
From slaughter of the. iiii. kings, for which thing
He offered to God in a mystery dark,
Bread and wine, the which thing as I did mark,
A hand in the clouds wrote this him before:
Thou art a priest it said for ever more.
^sal. cx.
The^ stood there king David ready with his pen,
And wrote it in the spirit of prophecy,
Pointing to that priest which should save al men,
Saying thou art a priest eternally,
After Melchizedeches order truly:
The which when I saw, I burnt in desire,
To se all the rest my heart was on fire.
^xod. ^ii. ^he third fi^ure of the pas^^al lamb.
There I saw how that the Jews also
Did eat the paschall lamb as God commanded,
When he did save them from wicked Pharao,
Which with all his army was there confounded
In the read Sea, where he delivered,
His people dry foot, to show his power great,
In remembrance whereof, the lamb they did eat.
Next to this story I saw rychely wrought,
How that Manna from above did discende, Exodus xvi. The fourth figure of Manna.

To feed those who^ god out of thral had brought
Thus God his goodness to them did extend:
King David stood by and this truly pende,
Prophesieng thereby a mystery great,
Saying, man the bread of Angels has eat,
A goodly table then saw I there spread,
By the which the high priests stood honorably, Leui. xxiiii. The fifthe
figure of the ^hewe bread.

And did set thereon the holy show bread,
Of the which none might eat but they only,
Then in that place also I did espy,
Where king David did writ this sentence clear:
God gives meat to those that him truly fear. Psalm. cxi.

The^ as I stood musing these things to sca^ne
I could not with all my wits them define,
Then came there to me an ancient man,
Which seemed to be some noble divine,
He bad me mine ears to him incline,
And he would open to me by and by,
What all these things did truly signify.
Of that I was glad, and gave attendaunce,
To here how he would these figures discuss,
Which he did truly with noble vtteraunce,
And first of the Arc his saying was thus.
The Arc quod he which is so glorious,
Does signifye Christ his church be thou sure,
Which has in it the sweet Manna most pure.
This Manna is the holy sacrament,
Of the blessed body and blood of our Lord,
Which he left here to be permanent,
As a pledge most sure of our souls comford:
Aarons rod also does signify his word,
By the which his church is governed here,
But by Manna is figurde his body most nere.
Secondly where Melchizedech the king,
Brought forth bread and wine before Abraham,
That did signify Christ's holy offryng,
Which he offered when he to his maundy came,
Christ's order of priesthod consists in the same,
Since Melchizedeches order in his sacrafice,
Was none other but that, scripture plain trise,
And where he says, thou art a priest for ever,
Did not only signify Christ's eternitee,
But also his order which end shall never,
Which he ordained, here at his maundie,
Fulfylling Melchizedeches order truly,
Yet is he the priest which does work this thing
In his ministers, daily ministering.
Christ is not (...) now too me^it a ne^d, ^s he did by h^s passed, for tha^
wa^ (...) do^e on^^ for all, but we do desire that this sacrifice offered in
reme^bra^nce
Stay there sir quod I, by your patience,
Did Melchizedeches order only consyst,
In these two things, me think of congruence,
It does extend farther or else I have mist,
Ye for soth quod he who will that resyst,
For when Christ offered him self by his passion
He became for ever our propiciation.
In consideration whereof we do here, of his death may be a mea^ to apply the
merit of tha^ his death (...) us.

Offer to the father this sweet sacrifice,
Of his blessed son, to him most dear,
Whose death for mercy for us daily cries,
For works have we none, that before his eyes,
Are worthy of mercy, therefore we do all,
In that same death for mercy daily call.
The next figure quod he to this agrees well, Exodus xii.

Where as the Jews the paschal lamb did eat
In the remembrance as scripture does tell,
Of their deliverance by miracle great,
Out of Egypt, Exodus xiiii.
of which figure to entreat,
It will require a long circumstaunce,
But let not the time to the be greuaunce,
Egypt the darkness of sin does signify,
In the which man was after his fall,
And by Pharao is figured the devil truly,
Under whom man was both subject and thral,
And Moses in figure Christ I may call,
Which Moses led the children of Israel,
Through the red sea from Pharao cruel.
Even so our Moses Christ our savior,
Delivered his people through his red blood,
From Pharao the devil and all his hole power,
Under whom man then in great danger stood:
Now when God by Moses, was to man thus good
He wild man yearly for a memorial,
To eat a lamb which they named the paschall.
Then for as much as our lord did fore se,
How the nature of man was corrupted
With forgetfulness, for the which he,
For men's co^moditee this ordained,
That they should eat a male lamb unspotted,
In a remembrance how they delivered were
From wicked Pharao as ye before did here.
In like manner our savior Christ Jesus,
Ordained for a perpetual memory
A lamb to be eaten our minds to renew
In daily remembrance of his mercy,
Which he procured by his death truly,
The lamb that he left was himself in deed,
As in the Evangelists plain we do read.
That christ is the la^be it does plain appear.
Joan. i.
Behold the lamb of God, saint John does say,
That takes away the sins of the world clear
Which he did truly by his death that day,
That his flesh was broken, none can this denay.
Now then to Christ's maundy let us resort,
And se there what weight his words does importe.
Christ at his last supper took bread in his hand:
Math. xxvi.
He blessed it, and brake it, and those words said,
This is my body, thus does his words stand,
The which for you, says he, shall be betrayed.
These were his words it can not be denaied.
But he spoke thus, quod I, only in figure,
That does not, quod he, agree with scripture.
Thou must needs grant, quod he, that christ came here
The figures of the old law to fulfill,
Cheifely all such as of his coming were,
And that not with figures, to think so were ill,
Whosoever affirms that, can little skyll
In the scripture, i. Cor. ^.
for thus writteth saint Paul,
That the law to the Jews was in figures al.
And yet this same sacrament is a figure,
But not only of Christ's body natural,
For yt it contains, but this we read in scripture,
That the form of bred, which we se material,
Is a figure of Christ's body mystical,
As to the Corynthes we do plainly read,
To recite the words I think shall not need.
But now to note christ's words how they were spoken
These is my body, that given for you shall be,
Which the next day on the cross was broken
For the sins of all men, this by faith we se.
Now that christ is truth, needs we must agree,
Well the^, of the bread, truth these words did say.
Which truly was true, if he died the next day.
Thus is Christ the lamb that continuallye
Is eaten of us in his memorial,
Because we should not forget his mercy,
Which by his death he purchased for us all.
This to his coming truly continue shall.
The Jews then eat the lamb in figure only,
But we eat the true la^be, the scripture does try.
The Manna also which came from above,
Exo. xvi.
To feed Gods people in the wilderness,
Does signify this great token of love,
With which Christ does feed his people doubtless
As ye Prophets saying, here plain does express
The bread of Angels, man has eat, says he,
And christ this same bread, names himself to be.
Joan. vi.
I am the bread of life says our savior,
Which from heaven above did truly descend,
To give life to man does pass man's power,
I am the true bread, which does to that exte^de:
Manna from hounger, did man only defend,
but who yt eats of this bread, sure of life shall be
And the bread that I will give, is my flesh says he.
Came his flesh from heaven quod I, that would I here
For I believe of truth, he took it of Marye,
And yet by your words, me think it does appear
That ye bread was his flesh which came from a hie
I think this saying true ye can not try,
For if ye can so, my faith I will forsake,
For I do believe his flesh he did here take.
Loo, here thy ignorance thou do show to me,
Did not christ like case, say these words plainly: truly,
Joan. iii.
No man ascends to heaven but only he,
Which came down from heaven, the son of man
Which is in heaven, mark what these words does try
the son of man which is i^ heaven, and yet he,
Was in his manhood here, as all men might se.
To discuss that quod I does far pass my wit,
Why will thou the^ quod he, in thy faith dispute,
Thou would dig a pit, and thy self fall into it,
As many other does, them selves to confute,
But do not thou like case from thy faith tra^smute,
And now to show the I will take in hand,
How these two places true together stand.
But first one text I will note to the more:
What will ye say says Christ, Joan. vi.
when ye shall see,
The son of man ascend where he was before,
Does not this text now express unto thee,
His manhood in heaven before that to be,
May not I say than, his flesh is that bread,
Which came from heaven, wherwt our souls be fed.
Then took he no flesh here that I perceive well,
Yes forsooth quod he this does not that disprove,
For why, s. John does writ in his gospel,
That the word was made flesh, even Gods son above
By eternal generation, Joan. ^.
none can that remove,
So God and man was knyt, always to remain,
But one in personage, though in natures twain:
Now sith our nature unto God is knyt,
Being one in person as I before did say,
To know how this should be, does pass al men's wit
Yet that this is true, no man can denay,
But that man is God, and God is man always:
Now then Christ's holy flesh by this unity,
May truly be said always in heaven to be.
Now this heavenly bred under which christ is here
The bread of Angels the prophet well may call,
For the food of Angels is the glory clear
Of the blessed godhead most celestial,
With the which godhead Christ was ever equal.
So then where christ is, the godhead is always,
Then the bread of Angels we eat, we may say.
Leui. xxiiii.
Then, quod he, here the show bread is set out
Whereof none but the priests alone might eat,
The which does signify, no christen man will dout
This most blessed bred, which is of virtue great,
The show bread was used as an heavenly meat:
For none but the priests God did thereto admit,
And all the people did reverence to it.
This most heavenly meat of christ's flesh and blood,
Being, as I said, the perfitte verity,
Figured by this show bread, by which ye priests stood,
Only of priests also eaten here must be:
Of priests made by order, nay so take not me,
i. Pet. ii.
But both priests and kings, as Peter does us call,
Which offreth to god the sacrifice spiritual.
How we are kings, and priests thou must understand:
We are not all priests in ministracion,
No more then we are kings governing a land:
Yet kings we are by Peter's nominacion,
And so are we priests by Paul's probacion.
Make your bodies, says he, a lively sacrifice.
Roma. ii.
By this mean and such other al me^ priests he tries.
He may be called a king, learned me does say,
Which does his carnal affections subdue,
But if he do not that as much as he may,
He is in this case, neither king nor priest true:
But if he be a king thus then will ensue,
He is a worthy priest so spiritually,
Whose godly works then God does accept hye.
Now this kingly priesthod whosoever does attain,
Without the fear of God it can never be,
The^ ye prophets promise, here does follow plain:
God gives meat to those, that fear hi^ says he:
Gives he meat to none else? yis forsooth, we se
By his gift infidelles have their sustenaunce,
The^ does he mean meat, of an higher substance.
And what that meat is, christ does plain declare:
My flesh, says he is very meat in deed,
And my blood is drink, this is no figure bare,
These words are plain, the gospel you may read:
now thou seist to what end this figure does led
To the faithful christ his flesh and blod does give:
Then they eat it not, quod I, that beastly do live.
Nay I say not so, thou do me mistake,
For even the wicked receives Christ's body,
Or else our receite should it his body make,
And if I so meant, I should mean wickedlye,
For Paul says, who that eats it unworthily,
Eats his own judgment, because no difference
He makes of christ's body, this is plain evidence.
They say quod I that S. Austen does say,
That wicked me^ eath not Christ's flesh and blood,
Tho they eat the sacrament every day,
Upon which they conclude that none but the good
Only eats christ's flesh, this with stout mood
They do defend and say, this does try,
That it is not Christ, but to the good only.
Thou must understand, quod he, that this word Jesus
Is as much to say as a savior true,
And to all men Christ's will is to be thus,
Yet is he not so, the scripture do show,
But why, because they follow not virtue,
By which they loose the benefit of that name,
Yet Jesus is a savior thou will grant the same.
Blessed are those says christ which are not hurt by me
Who can be hurt by Christ, who is all goodness,
Truly such as wicked and unfaithful be,
Which receives him not after his worthiness,
Whose judgment, as I said, s. Paul does express
Now like as Christ was with the Jews present
So is he with us in the sacrament.
Christ is not quod I* with us now present,
As he was with the Jews, I mean not so quod he
That he so should be, is not conueniente,
For with them he walked in his humanitee,
Fulfylling all things that fulfyld should be,
Which done up to heaven he did ascend,
And from thence shall come again at the last end.
Than can he not be here, quod I, by your own tale.
That canning, quod he, will not be let by me:
For if I said, as thou say, we should both fail,
But the tale that I tell, if it mine should be,
My canning could never prove unto the,
How his body could be both here and above,
But loking who spoke it, faith will how remove.
Now where saint Austen says yt the wicked here
Eats not Christ's flesh, but the good only,
Means not, but that Christ is eaten eueriwhere,
Both of good and ill, him self does plain try:
The evil does eat it, and not eat it truly:
Sacramentally they eat Christ's flesh and blood,
Though not to their soul health, as does all the good.
Now those that do not eat it to that effect,
Are counted then not to eat it at all,
As he that with any sickness is infecte,
And digesteth not his meat, it norisheth but small
For which as not eaten be counted it shall.
Eue^ so he that eats Christ with a faith untrue,
Is counted not to eat, because hurt does ensue.
Christ must be Jesus, to those that him receive,
Or else to their hurt, they receive him, we se,
As did the evil Jews, by this thou may perceive
That for to eat Christ's flesh, in such sort must be.
To nourishe his soul in Christ, or else he,
Eats not a savior, though it be Christ in deed,
But greater judgment, i. Cor. ^^.
as in S. Paul we read.
By this thou may perceive, s. Austens mind,
Is not to deny Christ in the sacrament,
For yt truth i^ his works most plain you may fide,
Therefore nothing less then thou say he meant,
As unto the I have proved euidente.
I like your proffe, quod I, I will no more contend.
Then for this time, quod he, I have made an end.
Now when he had all these figures declared,
Suddenly he vanished fro me a way.
Then when I saw that, I me self prepared
To se more in this hall, and then with out stay,
I looked on my right hand, on the which side lay
But two stories of the new testament,
Which were the verites that the figures mente.
The first was the solemn supper of our lord,
At the which his body he did consecrate,
^rasm. in his ^araphrases ^o^ the.xxiiii. Luc. ^ebr. i^.
Plasing a new sacrifice for the comforde,
Of his new church, which shall not consu^mate,
Untyll he come again her to congregate,
To reign with him: which sacrifice he did ordain,
In place of all the old, till than to remain.
Next unto this was very rychly wrought,
How Christ on the cross suffered passion,
Whereby all mankind with his blood he bought,
Procuring thereby eternal redemption,
Leuing on his part, scripture does mention,
Not one jot concerning his death and suffraunce,
Therefore he is not now offered, but i^ remembrance.
For there remains no sacrifice for sin,
By any shedding of blood or death suffering:
For Christ ones by death Gods favor so did win,
He needs to dye no more: for that one offering
Was sufficient, which death as remembering,
We offer to God, as was told me before,
As our chief mean of mercy to him evermore.
Then between these stories stood David ye king,
With a scrole in his hand all alonge spreed,
And indifferently to these stories pointing,
This verse he had written, which I thereon read:
Thou art a priest for evermore, Psalm ^^. Hebr. ^^^.
it fed,
After Melchizedeches, order then in fine
I thought of the word told me by the divine.
This done even sodainlye I did espy,
A goodly lady of beauty excellent,
Decte with gold and stone wondrous costly,
Which glistred like the sterres in the firmament:
Then the Evangelists I saw ready bente,
Her to defend with the apostell saint Paul,
And also there was the ancient doctors all,
This lady on a three cornerde stoue did stand,
In the which, Christus was graven very well,
And an host consecrate she held in her hand,
With much more reverence then I can tell,
Then stood the Eua^gelistes each with his gospel
And S. Paul also, each showing evident
The place where they defend this holy sacrament.
Then all the doctors, took of the^ for their defense,
Each of them a sword sharp and durable,
And faith took them targattes of noble science,
By which to withstand, al men they were able.
Thus they stood stoutly like men firm and stable,
Always ready with these wepones to fight,
Against all that would not lady faith use right.
Then saw I on their targattes written plain
Scutum fidei, and farthermore like case,
Upon their swords uerbum dei certain,
Thus orderly they stood each in his place,
This lady to defend assisted with grace,
Which had on her breest, in letters of gold,
Fides catholica, most goodly to behold.
Then I seeing all this, with great reverence,
On my knees to Christ I kneled by and by,
And with divine honor as God in one assence,
With the father and the holy ghost truly,
ca^on rebelth against ^eth.
I did him there worship in that mystery.
Then reason in a corner spied me right soon,
And calde me Idolater, for that I had done.
Then, quod I to him, why do thou reprove me
For giving of honor, where honor is due*
I would agree, quod he, if I that could se,
But til then, I will not think it to be true.
I se but very bread, therefore does ensewe,
It is but bread, which is not honor worthy,
For which I call it plain Idolatry.
Thou may se here, quod I, that scripture does hold
That under the form of bread is christ's body,
Which here is defended by the doctors old:
Do not all these prove the a very nody?
To dispute this, quod he, I will not stody:
For why of me self my power is but small,
But being joined with man then dispute I shall.
Thou know, quod he, that I am but a power,
Given by god to man's soul, to know good and ill,
I have no gross body, though at this hour
I appear to the thus, because thou can no skill,
Of a gift as I am, but this say I will.
In that I am a gift in man's soul to dwell,
The number of my dwellinges no tongue can tell.
Therefore now seeing that I can not attain
How Christ's body under form of bread ca^ be
Some men I will sure, earnestly constrain
To assault this faith, which I here do se.
For in no case, I will thereto agrree.
Therefore in to some heads such blastes I will blow,
That I trust anon her clean to overthrow.
Then in a great fume he vanished away,
Which seeing, toward faith I turned my face.
O man quod she now in me thy heart stay,
And let not reason out of thy heart race
This holy sacrament, called good grace,
For the great profit, that to man it does bring,
If he it receive with faith according.
The first assault of the sacrament, by Berengarius.
Then with that suddenly came rushing in
Reason with a sta^derde, which would not bow,
Faring as though all the feelde he would win,
Crying thou false faith defend thy self now.
And on his sta^dard was written, how how how.
His captains name thero^ also was written thus
The noble archedeacon Berengarius.
Then when I saw this I was abashed,
Chiefly to se them come for such intent.
Aside for a time then I reculed:
But not fro the sight of the sacrament,
Nor out of the reach of faith I never went,
But joined my self unto the doctors old,
Which to defend faith did still together hold.
Then vewing these warriors of wicked mind.
I meene Berengarius, with his retenue,
Their wepons were such, that I mused to find
Any such, except it were of a turk or Jew,
Which are the enemies that does faith pursue.
Turkey bows they bare all, on which I did se
This word plainly written incredulity.
Then each of them had an arowe in his hand,
The which had heads very sharp, named error,
Fetherd with scripture falsely understand,
Because to perse hearts they should have ye more power
Than began they all to shote a great scowre:
And gave a sore assault with an out cry.
Hocest, quod they, this is, does signify.
Then the old doctors hering this out cry,
Made by christen men, thought it monstrous.
And they saw the arrows of error fly
To distroy this sacrament most glorious,
then they with their targetes, like men virtuous
Bare of their great shoot, and then again,
With their swords they cut al these arrows in twain,
Then soberly each man did say his sentence,
According as the Evangelists does tell,
Affirminge the truth in the litterall sense,
Alowing no gloss that truth to repel,
But to be taken, as it stands in the gospel:
Which is, hoc est corpus meum, to be meant,
That Christ left his own body in ye sacrament.
Then as Berengarius was preparing,
More arrows against the sacrament to shote,
A number of doctors was ready, not sparyng
Their studies to spend his error to root
Out of his heart, so that he could not boot
Any more against the sacrament to strive,
Then with their swords to the ground they did him drive.
Then with that reason did let his sta^dard fall,
And at the foot of faith he fell prostrate. This Berengarius recanted thrice.

Then Berengarius for Gods grace did call,
And forsook his error so contaminate,
Doing penance therefore after such rate,
That God was pleased, and his penance did take,
As he does of all those that does sin forsake.
Then this assault for that time finished,
And faith stood constaunt as she did before,
Holding the sacrament nothing diminished,
But stood in honor as it did evermore.
Then of people I saw there many a score,
Which gave to the sacrament honor divine,
Without any check therefro to recline.
Thus lady faith quietly stood a great while,
Till satan the devil thereat had envy,
Which sought busely some men to begyle,
As he had done before full deceitfully.
The which came to pass experience did try*
For anon I hard a great trumpet blow,
The^ some enemies was nigh, by that I did know
The second assault of the sacrament, by wyk^leiffe an^ his fellows. Hierome
of Prage, Hus and zuinglius* etc.
Then came in reason with a standard new,
Which had thereon the same superscription,
That the other had, which did faith persewe,
Changing but only in one condition
There captains names, which had the tuicion,
Of that wicked host, the^ was John Wyikcleffe,
Hierom of Prage and Husse workers of mischief.
All their weapones were of the same sort
As the other were, saving as I did here
Their out cry was so terrible and short,
As though lady faith they would clean over ^ere.
Their arrows flew so thick, my flesh shoke for fere.
the^ al their chief cry as these arrows ca^e
Joan. vi.
Was these words, caro non prodest quicquam.
Then the doctors all their targets forth did hold,
From their cruel shot faith for to defend,
And with their swerdes like warriors most bold,
They stroke at them sore, but yet they would not bend,
But arroga^tly much time they did spend
Against lady faith, but nothing prevailing,
The doctors so well withstode their assailyng.
Who all with one voice did wholly agree,
That this text, the flesh does profit nothing.
Was in this sense only taken to be,
Nothing it profits after the Jews meaning,
For they understood a carnal eating,
As though they should eat it in gobbets dedde,
As we do eat flesh wherewith we are fed.
Which error to remove, Christ before says:
The spirit it is that quickneth, as he would say,
To eat this flesh of mine as your judgments has
Conceived, so would profit you no way,
But because thereby profit have ye may,
Joined with the holy spirit ye shall have it plain,
By which to give life, the flesh shall attain.
Think ye that I mean that ye my flesh shall eat
In this form, as I stand here before you all
Mangled out in pieces, as ye do other meat?
Nay, that ye are deceived well perceive ye shall.
For this body ye shall se by power potencial,
Ascend where it came fro. What will ye say than?
Then shall ye well know I am more then a man.
Thus the doctors all did affirm and say,
That of Christ's words this was the profit sense,
Proving that Christ these words to the Jews did lay
Because of his godhead they should have intelligence,
And then to his words to have given crede^ce.
But yet they would not believe more then they saw,
Which was his ma^hod, his godhod they would not know.
Needs would they know how they his flesh should eat,
Or else they would not believe him at all.
Plainly he told them of this heavenly meat,
But in contention with Christ they would fall,
the time they would not tarry, but still on Christ call
With a doubtful how, which Christ knew full well,
Therefore how they should eat it, Christ would not tell.
But afterward to those that would not contend,
But with humble silence Christ's words did believe,
At the time which he before did intend*
He gave them his flesh their souls to releue,
Under such a form, that it did not grieve
Their stomakes, for under ye form of bread it lay
With which their bodies were fed every day.
Yet these enemies of Christ hearing all this,
Would not in any case thereunto agree:
But cried that all they had said amys,
And that in their sense taken it must be:
Which was, that Christ's flesh could profit in no degree
To be eaten: and then y^ doctors this seeing
With their swords drove them away, they had there no being.
Thus when with their words they had ouerthrown
This wicked host, which against Christ did strive,
That long after they were neither seen nor known,
Till that the devil another drift did drive
Against faith, the which plainly to discriue:
When faith a great while had stand at a stay,
New trumpettes I heard blow, and great horses bray.
Now as my duty was, and as I did before,
I worshipped Christ there with honor divine.
In came reason, The third assault of yt sacrament, by Luther and his fellows
and with him many a score,
And at this my deed they did sore repyne,
Saying, an idol I made of bread and wine.
Then saw I their standards, which were in number three
Their names I will tell you as I did them se.
The first sta^dard had thereon Martine Luther,
Which of that wicked host was chief captain,
He gave his assault like a wicked tuter,
With great gunshot, but yet for to be plain,
He shot not so sore as did the other twain.
For in their cry, but a sign they did it make.
But Luther and his the litteral sense did take,
Which was, that hoc est, must literally
Be taken as it stands, as Christ had it told,
But yet because bread remained to his eye,
That it was bread still, styfly he did hold,
And yet Christ's body, that by Judas was sold.
But they were sore withstand by the doctors stout.
Then with that Luther on saint Paul cried out
I will says Luther take witness here of Paul,
Which I am sure spoke by the holy ghost.
For even as it is, bread he does it call:
And you master doctors in each place almost,
Where ye treat of this matter this I dare bost,
You call it bread also, defend this and ye can,
Then to honor bread God has forbidden man.
Then one of the doctors hearing this reason,
In person of all began to dispute.
Error quod he with the is not geason.
Why doste thou thy self madly confute
With saint Paul, and us after the same suit?
Nay quod Luther, your own words against you I lay,
For I am sure you call it bread, as I say.
Saint Paul quod ye doctor does call it bread,
Not meaning it is so, but does so appear:
Because it so was, our judgments is led,
To call it bread still, as though it bread were,
The which kind of speech ye scripture does bear,
Which says that ye rods of Aaron did devour,
The rods of the Egyptians made by the devils power.
Yet were they no rods, but serpents alive,
But because they were rods, rods they be called.
Joan. ii.
Also when Christ in Galile by prerogative
Turned water to wine, and then commanded
To give it to ye bridegroom, which anon they did
When he had tasted of the water, says S. John:
Here he calde it water, when it was wine alone.
Even so saint Paul and all these doctors here
Calth the sacrament bread, because bread we se,
which proves it no more bread, then the serpents rods were
Nor ye wine water in Cana Galile:
But here now one thing objected may be. Objection

The serpents were seen serpents natural,
And the wine tasted wine material.
So here was two of the senses satisfied,
Therefore that this was true, reason must agree,
But now how can this be verified
In the sacrament, where we no change do se,
In sight nor in taste that perceived can be?
Where the senses cannot reach, faith does attain*
This for our souls health, Answer.
Christ has left us plain.
For him self unto saint Thomas did say,
Thou beleuest, says he, because thou do se:
But I say to the, blessed be all they,
That though they se not, yet will believe in me.
To believe in Christ what iudgest thou to be?
Is it not to believe all that Christ does teach
In mysteries of faith above reasons reach?
Of the which among all that Christ has left here,
This sacrament does all other excel:
First, because Christ is there and yet seen no where
But by faith, which in this does reason down fell,
Which with all our senses against it does rebel,
And yet faith does bid us it to defend,
Which we intend to do unto our lives end.
Now while this doctor and Luther talked thus,
In came a standard all abroad displayed,
^he fourth ^ault of ye ^^^rament, (...) Decola^^^dius and (...) fellows
Under which came in Oecolampadius,
Faring as though he would make the^ all afraid,
And against the sacrament like a beast he brayde,
And as did Beringarius, so did he it assail,
But the doctors defeded it, he could not preuail.
Then Decolampadius in his assaultyng
Heard Luther defend Christ's presence bodily
To be under the sacrament, and not withstanding
The substance of bread to bide with the body,
For the which he did reprove Luthers folly,
Saying that no learned man would agree,
Two substances in one body to be.
Christ was promised quod he to be incarnate,
So that God and man one substance should be,
But who ever re^ he should be unpanate,
And take the nature of bread in unity
Of person, and so make his natures three,
Thou shall (...) to see ^rruption. ^sai. xxv.
Of the which, one will corrupt we spy,
And then shall be false, the prophets prophecy.
These inconveniences with diverse other mo,
Decolampadius plainly declared,
With the doctors all confirmed to be so:
But then to speak more he him self prepared*
For to be mistaken very sore he feared,
All inconveniences clean to put away,
It was but only a sign of Christ he did say.
Thus Luther and he began to contend,
Though they both did err, yet did they not agree,
Of the which debate or they had made an end.
Carolstadius cummyng anon I did see, The fifth assault of the sacrament, by
Carolstadius and his fellows

His assault before Luther gave he,
But hearing them new gloses to invent,
To lose his fame so, he was not content.
First he hearing Luther defend so stoutly
That hoc est corpus meum, must be understand,
That with bread was Christ's own very body,
And then on the other side how he was withstand
By Decolampaduis which that text scand,
That hoc est must needs be, this does signify,
And stepping between, he swear they both did lie
Than of proud Ne^broth I though at that hour
Whom God prevented with all his company,
At buildyng of the Babilonical tower.
By confusion of tongues God let their folly,
And so did he theirs, experience did try,
For when they thought lady faith to ouerrunne,
They were as nigh as when they first begun.
For when the other twain as I before say,
Had these words of Christ so interpretate,
He affirmed plain that they took the wrong way,
And that the spirit of truth did his heart inflate:
The sense of these words says he, are in this rate
To be understand, not est for signify,
But est, for is, even as the text does lie.
So then, this is my body, Christ did say plain.
But to what pointed he, when he did so say,
To the bread? nay there deceived are ye twain:
He pointed to him self sitting there that day,
Not meaning of the bread by any way,
But that they should eat it in the remembrance,
Both of his great love, and also his sufferance.
Then each of them affirmed his own sense
To be the very truth, although contrary
They were each to other, they stood in defense
Of their sayings, and so began to vary.
Yet, though each showde him self adversary
Unto lady faith, yet at the last they fell,
Through pride one against another to rebel.
But when the doctors hard Carolstadius
Of christ's plain words, so false a gloss to take:
O wicked man, quod they, harken unto us,
what scriptur hail you that for thy part does make?
For what cause took Christ bread and these words spoke:
Take, eat, this is my body, mark this thing well,
And to what thing Christ did point this will the tell.
Christ's taking of the bread in his holy hand,
His giving of thanks, blessing and breaking
And bidding them eat, can no way be scande,
But that his act did co^curre with his speaking,
Saying, this is my body, what playner thing
Ca^ there be, to prove that that which they did eat
Was his own body, that most heavenly meat?
Of all foolish gloses, that is most mad,
To say that of the bread Christ meant not at all,
And if that should be true, then the Jews had
A better repast in eating their paschall,
That was flesh and blood, and had life natural,
Then with christ in figure they were truly fed,
But we have not so much, if Christ meant not of the bread.
When he had this said, these wretches all
Began against faieth to be more vehement, Every kingdom divided in it self
shall be desolate. Math. xii.

But then because in to sects, they did fall,
Having among them no kind of agreement,
Conserning the right faieth in the sacrament,
Each against other his fancye did defend,
Thus brauling with the^ selves this assault did end.
Then like brainles beasts they fell in decay,
Like those that had sought their own confusion,
Leuing lady faieth in her old godly stay,
To whom all the doctors in conclucion,
Submitted them selves with out abusion,
And unto Christ there in the sacrament,
They kneled down with devotion reverent.
Then stood lady faieth quietly in rest,
Holding the sacrament honorably,
Yet some now and then would have her oppressed, Mean scolderd F^ythe. Lambert,
Ty^d^ll etc.

Which were soldiers of wicked heresye,
Assaulting her often very cruelly,
Whom for to hurt when they saw they lacked power,
They fled back all to the tente of error.
Wherein they did rest, I saw them no more,
Then kneled I down doing reverence,
Unto Christ there as I had done before,
Suppossing the deuilles deadly diligence,
Had been debarde by the doughty defense,
Of all the doctors, and as I there stood,
I hard horses bray as they had been wood.
The.vi. assault against the sacrament here in England.
Then began my heart for great fear to quake
Me thought all the world against faith was bent,
But then faith bad me a good heart to take,
For this assault, quod she, will be fervent,
But look that fro me thou be not absent,
The target of faith and the sword of the word of God.
And take here, quod she, this target and sword,
Glad was I then of her to hear that word.
Then as I took these my self to defend,
In came reason which a standard did bear,
Upon the which in black letters was pende.
The names of al those which his captains were.
Who^ when I beheld like bishops did apppere,
Which in my mind was a strange sight to se,
Bishops on that sort disgysed to be.
The first was two Archbyshops who^ I did know,
The third Rydley, which on the queen did rail,
The fourth was Hoper, the fifte was Barlowe,
The syxt was Poinet, and the seventh was Bale,
The eight was Brown, and the ninth Couerdale,
Farrer and Tailor made twelve with Skory,
To se them in this case my heart was sorry.
Their foot me^ they had which by the^ did ro^ne
As Rogers, Rose, Horn, Sau^ders and Harlay,
Cardmarker, Becon Crouley, and Sampson,
Peter Heart, Carter, and old Bylney,
Tomson, Kyrkame, Douglas, Knokes, and Makbray
Bradforde, old Steuens and young Samuel,
With the two Turners, and mo then I can tell.
For whom I did then most hartly pray,
That our lord in time would turn their hearts all,
For by their ill doctrine many a day,
They have caused many from faieth to fall,
But God grant that his church Catholicall,
They may learn to know and to her to come,
Then shall they reign with her in his kingdom.
In armor as black as any ynke they were,
And on the creast of their helmetes on hye,
A woman's foresleue each of them did bear,
The which as I took it, did signifye,
That for women's loves their manhoodes they would try,
Turkey bows each of them had ready bent,
To shote out thereof their errors pestilent.
Then saw I the chief bishop of them all, Cranmer*

Rushe to the doctors irreverently,
And rent out of their books in gobetes small,
Pieces for his purpose, which peruersly,
He chewde with his teeth, and then spitefully,
Shot them at lady faieth in pellet wise,
And beastly did the sacrament despise.
Then certain bishops on lady faithes part
Catholyke by^oppes. Dinchester. ^ondon. Dorcestor. ^he ^hester and ^ucesine.
Began against him her stoutly to defend,
Which when I saw did comfort my heart.
But then or this their debate had an end,
The devil new soldiers against faith did se^de,
Which came under the standerd of ignorance,
Of whom self will had the chief governance.
By help of these the bishops effeminate,
The byshopes above named.
Against lady faith did so much prevail,
That certain of her men to them was captiuate,
And for her sake was laid fast in gayle,
The daily oblation was taken away.
Then before her was drawn such a veil,
That she was so hid, few men could her se,
Till God saw time, that seen she should be.
For the which as I a long time did pray,
The coming in of queen Mary.
I hard trompetes blow very sweet and hye,
Then did my heart rejoice putting care away,
Me thought the sound was of some victory,
With that coming in I saw suddenly,
A noble standard all of white and grene,
Imbrodred with roses royally beseene.
After the which standard did enter in,
One tryumphantly as the chief captain,
Which was a crowned queen and vyrgin,
Who seeing lady faieth so had in disdain,
The daily of^^^ng set up a^^ine.
Drue back the veil that I might se plain,
Lady faieth still holding the sacrament,
To the which the queen did knele continent.
Giving to our lord hearty lauds and praise,
Which had given to her so great a victory,
Against her enemies in so few days,
With out blood shede most miraculously,
Commanding straight to set at liberty, The prisoners deliuerd which suff^ed
for lady faiethes sake*

All these which imprisonment did take,
And were punished for lady faiethes sake.
Which done even suddenly as I there stood,
All that I had seen vanished fro my sight,
The which sudden change made me change my mood
But the^ Morpheus came again to me right,
And bade me fear nothing, the^ fast as he might
He brought me to my bed, and with that I did wake,
Then to write this vision some pains I did take.
Finis.
The book speaks.
Needs must I speak, though I be do^me,
Some men's malice for to prevent,
In whose hands when I chance to come
Be sure I shall of evil judgment,
Because mine aucthour does invent,
My matter in a dream to se,
As a man's dream they will count me.
For the which here as wisdom is,
Who that in ieste does me so call,
For an answer let them take this.
Some words written by James and Paul,
In Luthers books plain find ye shall,
Called their dream because he knew,
That his errors they ouerthrewe.
In like manner I do not doubt,
But that because I do inuay,
Against all such as went about,
The perfect faieth for to decay,
Some men which now favor that way,
Happily my matter to defame,
Will say that I have a meet name.
But since as I do say before,
That James and Paul they do deny,
And by Christ's words to pass no more,
Then they do now, no cause se I,
To marvel though they say I lie,
And only dream all that I tell,
Though first and last, they know full well.
Cheiflye they know which learned be,
That these assaults has truly been,
As for the last, all we did see,
Till God did send our noble queen,
Which now will have as has been seen,
The christen faieth truly confessed,
As Gods word has it plain expressed.
Therefore I say, for to conclude,
What they do say I do not pass,
And mine author though they delude,
Yet will I show plain who he was,
Because no law I will trespass,
Miles Hogarde, men do call his name,
Who to this end did me first frame.
Finis:
Imprinted at London by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the graye Freets, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital

The.xx. day of September 1554.


