A true rehersall of the Honorable and Tryu^phant Victory: which the defenders
of the Truth have had against the tyranical and blood thirsty heap of ye
Albanists.

Which came to pass withoute^ the worthy Cyttie of Harlam in Holland. the
xxv. day of March. 1573.

Translated out of Dutch into English, the third day of Apryll: the which Copy
in Dutch, was Printed at Delft, the xxvii. day of March last paste.

PRINTED BY RICHARD JONES the.vj. day of Apryll. 1573.

Of such things as are come to pass at the siege of Harlam in Holland: the
xxv. day of March. 1573.
Although all things (well-beloved and christian Reader) which by the grace of
God, are come to pass wtin the renowned City of Harlam in Holand, are
worthy, not by pieces, but from the beginning unto the end to be rehearsed,
and set before the eyes of all men: that the wonderful and worthy works of God
thereby may be known, and his name for ever magnified and praised.
Notwithstanding, (I thought it good) before the whole Discourse and rehearsal
of all these things (peradventure) shall be given unto all Nations and people
to be red, here shortly to noate (and that with truth,) unto all such as are
lovers of the same, a notable work of God, and such a deed of the most
highest, that even with out eyes, we may see and perceive that which he
worthily has brought to pass, the.xxv. Day of March. 1573. by them of the
same City.

For, when as that worthy and before named City, had now ben besieged of the
Spanish and Albanisshe power more then three Months, and in great distress:
howbeit, the enemies having their head twice mightily bruised and their
worthyest and stoutest oulde Souldyers, yea and manlyest Captains we are
lost: so that their weakness and fear suffered them not any more to give any
assault: Besides that, shame and need forced them still to abide: For shame,
they durst not go away, because that thus long they had always prospered very
well: and being now come to this City, which was the simplest and weakest
in all Holland, and at the first, worste of all provided: either of Armor,
Souldyers, or Vittayle, amongste the rest, that was to be found: And therefore,
not able (as it wear) to to do any thing. And for that cause, (as they
supposed) should it be counted unto them, an ever lasting ignomynie and shame,
with a perpetual Dishonor.

And for need, they durst not depart, (for fear) least by the way, they
should be met with at home, meaning therefore with a contynual Siege, and
privy practices and treason: like as before they had recovered other Cities
again, meant in like case to catch this within their Claws also. But at the
last, when they of the Cyttie began to be greened therewith, and were certain,
that God did manifestly understand their cause, and that he was the only
Defender of the same, (as he is in deed, to all innocents which wholly put
their trust in him:) they have often and diverse times gone about with su^drie
assaults and Skyrmyssbes, for to trappe (not only theirs but also Gods
Enemies,) in the same pittes, which for their Destruction, their Enemies, had
redye dygged and provided. And although, that they never have attempted any
thing, but that they have thereby gotten both Honor and praise: yet
nevertheless, when God at their great pride and intolerable Cirrannie and
cruelty: and to be short, at all the wrongs which they had used day by day,
began at length to begreued, with the ungodly behavior of these Bloodhounds
so that their Houreglasse at last is run out and ended:

For then, the good and merciful Lord has delivered them into the hands of
his people, to be taken in ye same snares which they had prepared for the other.

For, they of the Cyttie about ten of the Clock before Noone, with a small
company were gone out of the City to skirmish with the.xvi. Ensigns of
Dutchmen, and the.xv. Ensigns of Wallons, which did lie before in the wood at
the South end of the City, from the which place, they had purposed from that
time forth to batter the Cyttie with shot.

And thus, they being without in the forenoone, brought specially nothing
to pass: but marchynge up and down a certain space, and when they saw their
time to retire, entered into the Cyttie again.

When the Ennemie saw this, and supposing it too be good, and all danger to
be paste, and all things ended for that day: (after a while) gave him self
to rest, and set his heart on soft ground. Then (in the mean time,) our
men making them selves cheereful and courageous, and having respect unto
their time and purpose, (and chieflye) unto their just quarrel: So that of
Wallones, Dutchmen, French men, and Englishmen: about.ix. or a x. hundredth men,
about two of the Clock in the afternoon, issued out of the Cyttie again,
and without any stop or fear, and without any noise making, ran straight
unto their Trenches. The Enemy, seeing that he was taken unawares, and his
Enemies vnlookte for, suddenly fallen upon him, at the first defended himself
very little: And at last seeing him self enclosed and ouerrunne, by and by
sought means, which way best for to escape. Our men (to the contrary,) with
burning and unspeakable boldness, fell upon them, and so raised them out
of their Nestes and chased them, that they ran through and through the wood,
hither and thither: that of all the Dutchmen, which (in deed) best kept their
standing, but sewe escaped: And of the Wallones which first took the flight,
there are some run away, some: slain with shot, and some drowned: being
al bereft of their Weapon: and as the most part say, about two thousand men
were slain. And it is said also, of one Monseur de Luckes, General of the
Wallons, with other Captains should there be slain also at that present. This
being done, they have ouertourned their Tents and Trenches, and set them on
fire, pursuynge them to the last man: And then returnyng with great Triumph
and Joy, brought with them into the Cyttie, five Brazen Pieces, with other
Munytion: as Headpeeces, Harness, Pikes, Dagges, Swords and Rapiers, with
vittayle and Money, which was sent from DALBA, to pay them: and also great
store and much abundance of Apparel. For at their retyryng to the City was
heard.viii. of their Dro^mes herefully soundyng, with ten ^nsignes
displaying, bryngyng ^ith them great spoils of Mo^ey, Iewelles and Armor, and
^ll kind of things, wherewith ^uery one being laden: with great Joy, came all
clustryng into the City. When the Cytizyns, with all them yt feared the Lord,
saw ^ow that they had obtained the ^ictorie, and had put their Foes (...)
flight, with one consent gave ^artie thanks and praises unto God, that so
mercifullye of his goodness, had brought the same ^o pass. This also, has
mo^^d me and reioysed my heart and ^aynde that I (even of gladness) ^oulde not
leave, but participate this unto the gentle Reader and ^o make manifest and set
before the eyes of all such as from their hearts do hate the intolerable yoke
of bondage and Spanysh t^rannie: and with body and goods seek to withstand
them. The Lord open the eyes of them that are yet remayni^g, that they may
acknowledge their unjust dealyngs and return from their eui^ and turn unto
the living God, against whom (even as Giants) they have waged Battle: tha^ they
with us and all faithful^ People may live in peace and unity from this time
forth for evermore: the which God, defend us, and all sorrowful an^ sighinge
hearts. Amen.

Written in haste to all the faithful^ through love. From Delft the 27 day of
March. 1573.
FINIS.

